page 1 

VOL. XXXIV JANUARY 1 No. 1 
A. D. 1913-A. M. 6041 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 3 

This Wonderful Period 3 

Foregleams of Messiah's Kingdom 5 

A Text Suggested for 1913 6 

The Harvest Work World-wide 6 

Our Lord's Knowledge of His Pre-Existence 8 

His Knowledge at the Age of Thirty 8 

His Illumination of Mind 9 

The Year Before Us (Poem) 10 

How Righteous Character Is Produced 10 

Conscientiousness Gives Strength 10 

The Deluge Effect 11 

No Rain on the Earth 1 1 

"Thy Word Is Truth" 11 

The Cause of the Deluge 12 

God's Rainbow Covenant 13 

Fire, the Next Calamity 14 

Interesting Questions 14 

Interesting Letters 14 

Berean Questions in Scripture Studies 15 

R5152 : page 2 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



BROTHER RUSSELL'S WEEKLY SERMONS 

We remind all the dear friends afresh of the weekly sermons 
published in the newspapers. We recommend that you 
continue to encourage the publishers of these sermons by 
subscribing to the papers. Take as many as you can afford 
to purchase, especially the cheaper-priced papers— more 
especially those which publish the three-column sermons. Use 
these as tracts, marking sermon with blue pencil; give or 
send to such as you believe would be interested. 

A NEW ARRANGEMENT 

Some of the dear friends use the sermons as a part of 
their weekly service. At their Sunday meetings one of their 
number, who has a good voice and who is in every way 
qualified, reads the sermon to them— having first studied it 
over to comprehend it and to know how to read it— where 
to lay the emphasis, etc. 

We have made arrangements with the Lecture Bureau 
that the weekly sermons may be published in advance for 
all classes who have elected Brother Russell as their Pastor 
and who write to us, indicating their desire to use the sermons 
as above. But we expect them also to assure us that 
this sending of the copy for class readings will not interfere 
with their patronage of the newspapers which publish 
the sermons. Secretaries requesting these advance copies 
will please ascertain from the classes how many different 
newspapers publishing the sermons are being taken by the 
class regularly. 

NEW POEMS OF DAWN 

Our attention was called to the fact that many of our readers do 
not know that the Book of POEMS OF DAWN recently published is quite 
different from the old edition. It does, indeed, contain the choicest 
poems from the old edition, but it includes many entirely new. We 
believe that every WATCH TOWER reader would be desirous of having 
this new edition if thoroughly aware of the contents. Its beautiful 
verses are very restful and helpful, well adapted to the various experiences 
of the Lord's people. As a part of His staff for His weary 
ones to lean upon they are a present help in time of need. The prices 
are extremely low and include postage— cloth-bound, 25c; Karatol-bound, 
35c; India paper, leather-bound, 50c 

page 2 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR FEBRUARY 



After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
February follow: (1) 44; (2) 130; (3) 305; (4) 310; (5) 299; 
(6) 314; (7) 248; (8) 281; (9) Vow; (10) 273; (11) 270; (12) 
105; (13) 267; (14) 4; (15) 320; (16) 238; (17) 109; (18) 
110; (19) 95; (20) 112; (21) 286; (22) 108; (23) 249; (24) 
151; (25) 115; (26) 268; (27) 160; (28) 19. 



R5153 : page 3 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 

THIS WONDERFUL PERIOD 

THERE never was such a wonderful period! 
We never before knew so much or could do 
so much. We never experienced an age of 
equal comfort. No part of yesterday was as 
glorious as this hour. 

The hundred years behind us are jammed 
and crammed with achievements that out-balance 
the sum total of progress since the 
signing of the Magna Charta. 

The average mechanic enjoys luxuries 
that Midas, with all his wealth, could not command. The 
college freshman has more real information in his little 
finger than the erudition of the foremost scholar of the 
Renaissance. We have done more to put existence on a 
sane, logical and definite basis than the sum total of 
our ancestors. 

A mere hundred years ago even the scientist thought 
that the atmosphere was simply space— that gas was 
only a smell. 

The first microbe hadn't disclosed his identity. 

Metchnikoffs announcement of battling hosts in every 
drop of human blood would have earned him a padded cell. 

The best illumination George Washington could secure 
came from tallow dips, lighted by striking a spark 
from flint and steel. 

Every piece of fabric was woven by hand. 

The only horse-power was four-legged and wore a tail. 

The steamboat was still building on the ways of Fulton's 
brain, and the wheels of the steam engine had only 
moved in Stephenson's head. 

It took Benjamin Franklin two weeks to send a letter 
from Boston and get a reply from Baltimore. 

Abraham Lincoln's angular frame never reposed in a 
Pullman berth. 

Garfield called a 20-day "liner" an "ocean greyhound." 

It is hardly a year since the father of antiseptic 
surgery was gathered to his fathers. 

Electric light, trolley cars, bicycles, automobiles, department 
stores, skyscrapers, 10-cent collars, tinned salmon, 



airships, penny newspapers, appendicitis and power 
cranes are infant ideas still toddling in their diapers. 

Thirty years ago electricity had never been hitched 
to a wheel; gunpowder was the most powerful explosive; 
subways weren't considered within range of possibility. 

"Impossibility" is now an old-fashioned word with a 
definition, but not a meaning. Almost every dream of 
the past is a reality today. 

The magic cities and the fairy kingdoms of your 
grandmother aren't half so wonderful as the world in 
which you live.— The Cincinnati Post. 



PRESENT DAY INVENTIONS FOREGLEAMS OF 
MESSIAH'S KINGDOM 

The above surely is not exaggeration! What thanks 
should be rising from all our hearts to God, the Giver of 
every good and perfect gift! How energetic we all should 
be to rightly use present blessings and opportunities for 
our own good, for the good of our families and neighbors 
—all men! 

Thinking people cannot help wondering why so many 
blessings have been crowded into our day. There is but 
one answer, and remarkably few seem to realize it. Some 
are disposed to say that all of these blessings come as 
a result of another onward step of evolution! Is this 
reasonable? Do we see signs of excessive wisdom in 
ourselves or others? How many people do any of us 
know personally who have ever invented any great, wonderful 
or useful article of the many which go to make up 
our wonderful day? 

Examining carefully the personality and history of 
individuals through whom present day blessings come, 
we may well be astonished. We find that very few of 
them have been men of great education, and many of 
them are by no means great men in any sense of the 
word, except in the one particular of their invention. 
It is by no means sure that the prodigies of today are any 
more numerous than those of previous periods, but our 
facilities for knowing about them have increased a 
thousand-fold. 

Through the printed page the knowledge of an invention, 
carried before the civilized world, becomes a stimulant 
to others, furnishing, perhaps a connecting link for 
another invention. Many of our great inventors tell us 
that they merely stumbled on their invention. Our successful 
air-brake patent, for instance, is merely the development 
of the cruder thought that water, hydraulic power, 
could be used to operate brakes. A still brighter mind 
caught the thought, and realized that air would serve 
the purpose better. 

As an illustration of the fact that mental illumination 
may be along some one particular line, we remind our 
readers of "Blind Tom." He was noted for his wonderful 



skill in playing any tune that he might hear. He had no 
education; in fact, he was almost idiotic, incapable of 
receiving an education. But he had an ear for music 

R5153 : page 4 

which made him famous. Can we claim that we or 
others of our day stand so high intellectually as to be able 
to look down upon some of the bright minds of the past? 
Have we many Shakespeares, many Byrons, many St. 
Pauls, many Ciceros? Have we many Solomons? or are 
there many who could compare with Moses? 

THE MILLENNIUM HAS COME! 

We must look in another direction, if we would rightly 
understand and properly appreciate the meaning of the 
wonderful inventions of our day. They are coming to 
us because we are living in the dawning of a New Dispensation! 
They are the foregleams of an Epoch so 
wonderful as to be beyond our most vivid imagination. 
Evidently God has been gradually lifting the veil of 
ignorance from the eyes of human understanding. 
Gradually He has allowed us to see the power of steam 
—gradually to learn how to apply it. Later He lifted 
the veil in respect to electricity. Now its marvels are 
enlightening the world. 

Shortly chemistry will be accomplishing wonders for 
us— no doubt making unnecessary the mining of coal. 
From the air that we breathe and the water that we drink 
we shall doubtless shortly know how to separate the elements 
necessary to furnish us the light and the heat indispensable 
to the world's progress. Everything is getting 
ready for the Millennium! Not only is it coming, but it is 
here! We are not, indeed, enjoying its full blessings yet; 
but what we are enjoying is a foretaste of them. 

All of our hearts should be attracted more and more 
to the Lord in thankfulness for His wonderful mercies. 
More and more we should be studying His Divine Word, 
the Bible. From it we should be coming daily to a clearer 
understanding of the Divine Character and Plan. This 
alone will chase away our ignorance and superstition, 
and bring us love, joy, and peace. 

The blessings of God now coming to the world will 
center in Christ's sacrifice at Calvary. During the past 
eighteen centuries, His redemptive work has been the 
gathering of the Church, and now it is to mean the blessing 

R5154 : page 4 

of all the families of the earth, as the Scriptures have 
promised. Yea, the Scriptures clearly show that these 
blessings are intended for those who are in their graves, 
as well as for the living. 



IS THERE A LACK OF CONFIDENCE IN THE MINISTRY? 

Rev. Chas. E. Newlin addressed the regular monthly 
meeting of Methodist preachers in Atlanta some days ago, 
and in the course of his address Mr. Newlin used the 
words: "I can prove by 99 per cent, of the business men 
of Atlanta that they lack confidence in the real, true manhood 
of the preachers of the city." 

The Rev. B. Frank White, in leaving the pastorate 
of the First Presbyterian church, of Connellsville, Pa., 
is quoted as saying: "A man can't be honest in the 
ministry and hold his job." As Mr. White expects to 
remain in the ministry, although seeking another field, 
the inference is that he prefers a station where he can 
preach the word in a style more in keeping with his conscientious 
scruples. 

The writer is inclined to believe that both of the assertions 
above quoted are rather broad, if not more or less 
exaggerated. We believe that the great majority of 
ministers are honest and are doing all in their power to 
advance the cause of religion here on earth; we also 
believe that there are some in the pulpit who have no right 
to be there. The vision they saw in the clouds, "G. P. C," 
meant not to "Go Preach Christ," as they imagined, but 
to "Go Pick Cotton."— South Georgia Progress. 

WHY MINISTERS DESERVE SYMPATHY 

Christian ministers deserve considerable sympathy. 
They are at the present time in a very trying position. 
It is the conscientious ones who are in trouble. Behind 
them are the creeds and theories of the Dark Ages, to 
which they are chained: 

(1) By the vows which they took at their ordination. 

(2) By the honor of their position in the sight of 
their friends and neighbors. 

(3) By their financial necessities and those of their 
families. 

Ministers possessed of an education know not only 
that the creeds of the past are in conflict with each other 
and with reason, but also that those creeds are in conflict 
with the Bible. Better translations and older MSS. have 
shown us the fallacy of deductions made by our forefathers. 
Every educated minister now knows that the 
Hebrew word translated "hell" in the Old Testament 
Scriptures, means the tomb— the state of death— the only 
hell that was known for four thousand years. They 
know that in our Common Version of the Bible this 
word Sheol is translated grave and pit more times than 
it is translated hell. They know that it never means and 
never did mean, anywhere, a place of fire and torture. 

Baptist ministers have gotten out a new Bible, in 
which they go to the trouble of translating this word 
Sheol by three English words, "the under-world." This 
hides the truth from the average mind about as much as 



the mistranslation hell does. But it helps our Baptist 
friends a little in dealing with Sheol, for of course, in 
the grave, in the tomb, is in "the under-world." Of course 
nobody thinks there is another world of living people in 
the center of the earth. It is only the dead that are 
in the under-world— in the tomb. 

All educated ministers know further that the word 
Hades, in the New Testament translated hell, is the 
Greek equivalent of the Hebrew word Sheol, and likewise 
means the under-world, the tomb, the state of death or 
condition of death. The trouble with these ministers is 
that they know that their congregations are not generally 
aware of the truth on the subject, and they fear to tell 
those truths lest they should be accused of having practiced 
deception in the past, when as a matter of fact they 
had simply taken from theologians of the Dark Ages 
what they in turn gave to the people, without examining 
the Scripture proof. 

HONESTY TO GOD AND RELIGION MOST COMMENDABLE 

Another difficulty confronting these ministers is this: 
For the past twenty years the colleges of the United 
States, Great Britain, Germany, etc., have been teaching 
the Evolution Theory— that man was not created in God's 
image, that he was not in God's sight "very good," and 
that he did not fall down from Divine favor. It teaches, 
on the contrary, that he was an evolution from the ape, 
and instead of falling has been rising in the scale of intelligence 
and getting nearer to God's image every year, 
all the time. 

Following the Evolutionists came the Higher Critics, 
declaring that the Bible is really old wives' fables and 
not at all inspired. Nearly all graduates of colleges and 
seminaries for the past twenty years have gone into 
pulpits, consecrated to the preaching of God's Truth 
from the Bible standpoint, in violation of whatever conscience 
they have. 

These generally are the great and popular preachers 
of all denominations. They consider not the vows of 
their ordination, but practically say, "We do not hide 
our unbelief to any great extent. We answer questions 

R5154 : page 5 

of the people with a measure of candor, dodging occasionally; 
and if they know anything about the Bible 
themselves, they know that we do not believe in its inspiration. 
If they wish to continue us as their preachers 
and to honor us and to pay our salaries, we will continue 
to serve them. By and by we will get their faith in the 
Bible thoroughly undermined; and then we will come 
out into the open. Then we will tell them that we falsified 
a little for their good, as a mother would tell her babe 
some fairy story for its entertainment." 
The preachers who are in trouble are the conscientious 



ones who believe the Bible to be true and who have 
not yet gotten their bearings. They cannot long believe 
in an eternity of torture, yet are afraid to follow the 
course of the International Bible Students Association 
in a thorough Bible Study which ignores the creeds. 
These poor men know not what to believe, and are in 
great trepidation when a question is asked them by the 
people who pay them for religious advice. They cannot 
dig. To beg they are ashamed. And to tell the whole truth 
about what they know and what they do not know respecting 
the Bible they are afraid. They have our sympathy. 

Our advice to all such is, "Tell the truth and shame 
the Devil!" Take your stand for what truth you see, and 
seek for more light upon God's Word in this glorious 
dawning of the New Era, in which God declares that 
He is pleased to give an increase of light on things Divine. 
"The wise shall understand, but none of the wicked [or 
hypocrites] shall understand."— Daniel 12:10. 

It would appear as if we are living in the time of 
special testing so clearly foretold by the Lord. Everything 
hidden would be uncovered, He said. He will bring 
to light the hidden things of darkness. (I Cor. 4:5.) 
If we would not be put to shame before Him, we must 
be honest. Who can doubt that honesty, especially in respect 
to God and religion, is most estimable from the 
Divine standpoint? None of us have anything whereof 
to boast. But if we are honest with our God, we can 
look up to Him, by faith realizing that we are acceptable 
through Jesus Christ our Lord. 



THE REMEDY FOR INEQUALITY OF CONDITIONS 

"The struggle under the competitive system is not 
worth the effort," wrote the publisher at Girard, Kan., 
of a widely circulated Socialistic newspaper, just before 
he committed suicide. Could there be a more mistaken 
reason for a Socialist's self-destruction? 

This man's peculiar creed had been accepted within a 
few days of his death by a million of his countrymen. 
A new political party that subscribed to many of his 
beliefs had polled 4,000,000 votes. If Socialism is a true 
remedy for political and industrial ills, those who preach 
it should be filled with confidence and hope. 

It is to be feared that it is not a true remedy. Human 
nature is competitive. No matter how it may be governed, 
it will not be radically changed.— N.Y. World. 



We agree with the Editor of the World, that four 
millions of American voters and as many millions abroad 
are Socialists from the conviction that Socialism is the 
proper remedy for the world's difficulties. We agree with 
the Editor of the World, also, that these well-meaning 



men are deceiving themselves. The only remedy for the 
inequality of human conditions is the one which God 
has declared He will provide. Selfishness is so ingrained 
in humanity that apparently none can be absolutely just 
when self-interest is in the opposite balance. 

God purposes to settle the whole matter for rich and 
poor in His own way— and His way must be the best 
way. He purposes to change the hearts of men. In the 
Bible He tells us that He will take away the stony heart 
and give a heart of flesh. (Ezek. 36:26.) This signifies 
that He will make mankind more tender-hearted, more 
sympathetic. He will restore that condition of things 
which existed at the beginning, when Father Adam and 
Mother Eve were created in the Divine likeness, and 
declared to be very good and acceptable in God's sight. 
—Genesis 1:26,31. 

The fall drove our first parents from Eden and necessitated 
the battle for daily bread, against thorns and 
thistles, etc. Under this influence selfishness has developed 
and now, after six thousand years, is deep-seated. 
What a blessing it will mean for God to take away this 
stony heart and to give the heart of flesh! When that time 
shall come and that change shall have been effected, 
Socialism will be a success and surely will prevail 
throughout the whole earth. 

But, you ask, by what mighty miracle can this change 
of heart be accomplished? How can the whole world be 
thus converted? The Bible answers that it will be done, 
not by sudden conversion, but by a gradual one, which will 

R5155 : page 5 

require nearly a thousand years for its accomplishment. 
Are we asked, What power could intervene and force 
this change of heart upon humanity? The Bible answers 
that it will be Divine Power represented in Messiah's glorious 
Kingdom. The Second Coming of Christ, once supposed 
to mean the destruction of the world, Bible students 
now see to mean the very reverse— the blessing of earth, 
the taking away of the curse, the lifting of the fallen 
race to all that was lost in Eden, and the destruction of 
the finally impenitent. 

FOREGLEAMS OF MESSIAH'S KINGDOM 

We are not to look into the sky to see Messiah come, 
but rather to remember that His resurrection exalted Him 
to the glory which He had with the Father before He 
became a man. He will at that time indeed empower 
earthly representatives, to whom the world will look 
for guidance and instruction; but Messiah and His glorified 
Church, His Bride, will be invisible to men— on the 
spirit plane. 

Many of our readers will be surprised to know that the 
glorious blessings of Messiah's Kingdom will steal over 
the world gradually, coming through human channels— 



entirely unaware of being used of the Lord. Bible students 

are so interpreting the wonderful things of our 

day. They are foregleams or early dawning of Messiah's 

Thousand-Year-Day, during which He will roll away the 

curse and shed forth Divine blessings. Whoever can 

see the matter from this standpoint must be deeply interested 

in every fresh advance of invention. In another 

column we refer to some of these present-day wonders 

which have come in during the last century. 

If it be true, as we hold, that these blessings are the 
foregleams of Divine favor through Messiah's Kingdom, 
with what patience should all exercise themselves to 
wait upon the Lord, and not to seek to disturb too radically 
any present condition which is at all bearable! Who will 
dispute that everybody today is much better off than his 
grandparents were— even fifty years ago? St. Paul by 
inspiration declares that "Godliness with contentment is 
great gain." We commend this thought to Socialists and 
every one else. 

We do not claim that even-handed justice prevails, 
nor do we admit that it would be possible under present 
conditions. People of superior brain power will not use 
that power for the public good solely. All still have a 

R5155 : page 6 

sufficiency of selfishness to claim that their superior qualities 
justly entitle them to superior conditions. Why may 
we not concede this point, rejoice in the blessings we 
have, be thankful to God for them, and wait patiently for 
His Kingdom? 

Under present (selfish) conditions each workman demands 
wages according to his skill. Why quarrel with 
the wealthy, learned, more capables on that score? What 
great advantages have come to the world thus! Why stop 
it before God's providence brings us a better rule— the 
Golden Rule. "Have patience, brethren," and be ye peacemakers 
not strife-breeders. 



R5155 : page 6 

1913-A TEXT SUGGESTED FOR-1913 

WE SUGGEST to all THE WATCH TOWER 

readers as a special text for the year the 

words of the Psalmist, "What shall I render 

unto the Lord for all His benefits 

toward me? I will take the cup of salvation 

and call upon the name of the Lord. 

I will pay my vows unto the Lord now in 

the presence of the assembly of His people." 

-Psalm 116:12-14. 

The Editor for some months has been 
trying the plan of calling this text before his mind as his 



waking thought. He has found it very helpful, and now 
suggests it to all the readers of this journal. 

How appropriate that each day should begin with the 
inquiry as to what are the possibilities of our service or 
sacrifices in the Lord's Cause! What is more appropriate 
than that we should remember the benefits which we have 
received, as well as those which we hope yet to receive 
from our gracious Heavenly Father? What could be 
more appropriate than that we should resolve afresh 
every morning to take the cup of salvation, remembering 
that the cup of salvation is the cup of suffering, the cup 
of trial— His cup— the cup of communion, or fellowship, 
in the sufferings of Christ? As the Master said, so 
should we each say, daily, "The cup which My Father 
hath poured for Me, shall I not drink it?" 

What is more appropriate than that we each should 
take pleasure in following our Master, being made partakers 
of the sufferings of Christ, that we may also be 
sharers in His glory? What could be more appropriate 
than that our waking thoughts should recall the Vow 
which we have made to the Lord, and that those thoughts 
shall be open to all the congregation of the Lord's people? 
We will not keep secret the matter of our Vow, nor the 
matter of our obedience, but we will stimulate one another 
in the good way. 

Furthermore, we call upon the name of the Lord for 
help, assistance, that the words of our mouths and the 
meditations of our hearts and the conduct of our life 
throughout the day may be pleasing and acceptable in 
the sight of our Lord. The day thus begun will surely be 
a happy day to those who have taken the vows of full consecration 
to the Lord. And what a happifying thought we 
have in this connection; namely, that so many of the dear 
brethren and sisters may at the same time be lifting their 
hearts in thanksgiving and making resolutions afresh. 



R5155 : page 6 

THE HARVEST WORK WORLD-WIDE 

THE INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION 

THIS ASSOCIATION sprang up spontaneously 

and gradually during the past thirty 

years, but particularly during the past ten 

years. It is composed of thinking Christian 

people of various ages who are studying 

the Bible reverently and profitably. There 

are no limitations as to membership, except 

such as could be properly applied to any 

true Christian: (1) Faith in God as the 

great Creator and Heavenly Father; (2) 

Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ as the world's Redeemer; 

(3) Faith in the Bible— that it is the inspired Message 



of God, respecting His will and purposes in connection 
with mankind; (4) A clean and honorable life. 

Our Association finds this platform broad enough for 
all true Christians, regardless of all denominational lines, 
quirks and frills. We have no bondage, and any one is as 
free to leave the classes as to enter them. Indeed, following 
the example of the early Church in this as well 
as in other matters, we avoid any special manner of joining 
these classes, or any special enrollment, or any special 
commitment as to faith and practise other than the broad 
principles already mentioned. 

The INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION 
has classes in nearly every city in many countries, and 
you may also desire to know about these and their relationship 
to each other and to the Association. 

Each class of the INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS 
ASSOCIATION is independent, manages its own affairs, conducts 
its own meetings, and provides for its own expenses. 
The Association provides public instructors and ministers 
to lecture on the Bible, and to give suggestions as to the 
methods of the primitive Church, and as to the best means 
of conducting Berean Bible Classes. No Class is obliged 
to have these lectures, nor to have the literature which 
the Association publishes for their assistance. They all 
do, however, find it very convenient to avail themselves 
of these helps to Bible study; and when requested, the 
Association provides the assistance to the extent of their 
ability— subject to the limitations and the accessibility of 
the classes, and the condition of its treasury funds. 

As for the personnel of the classes, they are from all 
walks of life— laborers and physicians, pupils and teachers, 
housewives and society people. They are mostly thoughtful, 
but have been dissatisfied for years, and have been 
feeling after God, and seeking to satisfy their hungry 
souls. They are from all denominations— Baptists, Presbyterians, 
Catholics, Episcopalians, Jews; and a large percentage 
were once agnostics. These include all nationalities, 
also: English, Scotch, Irish, French, Italians, 
Chinese, Japanese, etc. Indeed, we find that all over the 
world there is an intelligent class who hunger after God, 
righteousness and Truth, and who have nothing satisfactory 
in any of the creeds, but are now finding a soul-satisfying 
portion in the Bible itself. 

Here, as elsewhere, we are asked if these classes are 
confined to America. We say, "No, indeed!" 

Throughout Great Britain, France, Germany, Ireland, 
Italy, Greece, Norway, Sweden, Denmark, India, China, 
Japan, Australia, South Africa, these classes are to be 
found, as well as in Canada and the United States. Indeed, 
the original charter of the Association was a British 
one, the office being in London. The international character 
of the work is the reason for that feature of the 
Association's name. 

R5156 : page 7 



It is well understood that many of these Bible Students 
were unsatisfied when they studied the Bible from various 
denominational standpoints, and that they are now satisfied, 
and we are asked how we account for this. Do we 
use the same Bible? or how comes it that Presbyterians, 
Baptists, Methodists, etc., can gain a clearer light in the 
INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION Studies 
than in their own denominational lines and classes? 

There is a difference. Each denomination seeks to 
uphold its own traditions of the past, some of which are 
true and some false. But in our methods all denominational 
predilections are ignored. We pause not to inquire 
what Brother Calvin or Brother Wesley taught, nor 
what others taught before them or since. We go back 
to the teachings of Christ and the Apostles and Prophets, 
and ignore every other teaching. True, all denominations 
claim more or less to do this, but they are more or less 
handicapped by their traditions and creeds. They look 
through colored spectacles. We ignore all those and 
strive to view the Words of Inspiration in the light of 
the context only, or in the reflected light from other 
passages of Scripture. 

There is another reason why our position is blessed 
of God— the time mentioned in the Scriptures when the 
wise ones of God's people are to understand is here. 
The Scriptures show what all people are beginning to 
realize clearly— that we are in the dawn of the New 
Dispensation. All the wonderful inventions of the last 
eighty years corroborate the testimony that these are the 
foregleams of a New Dispensation; and that now, when 
these earthly blessings are increasing, is the time when 
God promised that He would give special enlightenment 
respecting His Word and Plan, which He declares He 
purposely kept under a veil, a partial mystery. The 
Mystery of God is to be finished, completed, and the full 
Plan of God is to be revealed in this New Dispensation 
already dawning. 

We are also asked, "Is the INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS 
ASSOCIATION affiliated with any of the regular 
organizations or creeds?" 

It is not. We purposely avoid all such trammels of 
thought. Nevertheless, we are sympathetic with all Christian 
people of every creed. We are realizing that the 
various denominations were organized, not for the purpose 
of dividing and distracting the Lord's Flock, but each 
with an endeavor to find the light and Truth. We urge 
Christians to ignore all sectarian fetters and fancies, and 
point out that there is but one Church, and that there is 
but one Head of the Church. 

Our public meetings are preferably held in large auditoriums, 
opera houses, etc., for these prove to be common 
meeting places for people of all faiths, and those without 
any denominational bias— all who are Truth seekers, not 
satisfied with the husks upon which they have been 
endeavoring for some time to feed. 

We are often told that considerable interest and comment 



attaches to the fact that our Association uniformly 
advertises its meetings with "Seats free and no collections." 
This has become quite a trade-mark with our 
Association, because it is so different from the usual 
practise; and an explanation was requested as to the object 
of this, and as to how we get along without money, 
or how money is raised to meet the expenses, which are 
often quite large. 

As thinking people, we have for years noticed that the 
money question has been the burning question in nearly 
all religious meetings. The Church members are usually 
assessed up to the extent of their willingness, or more, 
and the public collections are specially taken to "milk the 
goats"— to get money from the worldly. We do not find 
this method to have Scriptural sanction, and we are seeking 
to follow the teachings and example of Jesus and the 
Apostles. 

The work started along the lines of these examples 
thirty years ago seems to commend itself to all Bible 
students. They received help freely; they are glad to 
extend assistance to others without money, without price, 
without collections. Nor are collections found to be necessary. 
The Association receives whatever contributions 
are sent in to it for the carrying on of the work. Such 
moneys are not put up as Foundation Funds, nor consumed 
in expensive buildings, but are used promptly, freely, in 
the dissemination of free literature and in providing free 
public meetings. The Association is content to spend what 
the Lord thus sends to it, and does not go into debt, or 
make appeals for more money. 

Each local class, in arranging for public meetings, 
follows the same course. Nevertheless, in the case of the 
new classes, or those financially weak, the general Association 
helps with the expenses. All meetings conducted 
by the Association's representative speakers, and under its 
auspices, are strictly free. 

"Since you are not gathering people into different 
denominations, and since your INTERNATIONAL BIBLE 
STUDENTS ASSOCIATION has no creed but the Bible, what 
would you say that your Association aims to gather the 
people into, and what reply would you make if one should 
charge you with trying to build up a new denomination at 
the expense of others?" may be asked. 

Our Association endeavors to bring all Christian people 
into relationship with the Lord Jesus Christ, as His 
members. We recognize that the different denominations 
contain true people of God, and we are in full sympathy 
with such, and are glad to co-operate with them in any 
manner, for the furtherance of the Lord's work in harmony 
with the Scriptures. Our only opposition to sectarianism 
is that it attempts to divide God's people, insists 
upon the theories of the Dark Ages, and refuses to recognize 
the Bible as paramount in authority. We urge Christian 
people to stand for the Divine Character, Plan and 
Word, even though this should mean opposition and persecution 
from those of the sectarian spirit. 



The INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION 
labors specially for Christian unity, on the Bible basis, in 
harmony with the words of the Apostle, that "By one 
Spirit we are all baptized into one Body."— I Cor. 12:13. 

THE PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 

This is an affiliated association organized to conduct 
the interests and affairs of the Household of Faith in 
New York State, and from that centre, according to the 
requirement of the laws of that State. It guides the interests 
of the Bible Students as respects the holding of Public 
Meetings, supplying speakers and literature freely. 

THE WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

Is the PARENT organization, through which the moneys 
for all parts of the work are supplied. To it all voluntary 
donations for the work should be made. 

Brother CHARLES TAZE RUSSELL is President of all 
three of these organizations. Newspapers and the public 
frequently refer to him by the titles "Reverend," "Mr." 
and "Doctor"; but he prefers to be known as "Brother" 
or "Pastor," because these are Bible terms. 



There are great truths that pitch their shining tents 
Outside our walls, and though but dimly seen 
In the gray dawn, they will be manifest 
When the light widens into perfect day. 



R5156 : page 8 

OUR LORD'S KNOWLEDGE OF HIS PRE-EXISTENCE 

"By His knowledge shall My righteous Servant justify 
many; for He shall bear their iniquities."— Isa. 53:11. 

THIS STATEMENT implies that our Lord's 

knowledge had some very important relationship 

to His work. Without this knowledge, 

although He had made His consecration, 

He might not have been able to withstand 

the attacks of Satan, and the misinterpretations 

of the Scriptures which the 

Adversary used to try to turn Him aside 

from that consecration. The knowledge 

which our Lord had at thirty years of age, 

a perfect man, was that of His miraculous birth, that in 

some manner Jehovah was His Father, and that in some 

manner He was to fulfil the Old Testament Scriptures. 

This was information enough to lead Him up to the point 

of consecration. With the larger knowledge which came 



to Him later, came testings to prove His loyalty. From 
the beginning He was loyal in His intention and thought; 
but we may infer from the Scriptures that there was, at 
least, a possibility that without the knowledge which He 
had, He might not have been competent to meet the 
besetments of the way. 

This experience is similar to our own. When we 
consecrate ourselves, we have a sufficiency of knowledge 
for that step. As we proceed, we are guided into the 
knowledge of the Truth, which constitutes part of the 
grace of God to assist us in making our calling and election 
sure. As the Lord said, "The Holy Spirit will guide 
you into all truth and will show you things to come." 
(John 16:13.) So apparently the Holy Spirit guided 
Jesus Himself and showed Him both of the future and 
of the past— made the Plan of God as plain to Him as it 
now is to us. He understood it better, however, because 
His mind was perfect, while our minds are imperfect. 

HIS LIFE PRINCIPLE TRANSFERRED TO A LOWER PLANE 

When considering the question as to how and when 
our Lord Jesus, the Man Christ Jesus, came to an appreciation 
of His pre-human condition, we struggle with a 
question respecting which we have no direct revelation. 
We are, therefore, left to deductions, and different minds 
might draw different deductions from the facts and circumstances 
of the narrative. Of one thing we are assured, 
namely, that during our Lord's ministry He had 
a clear knowledge of the heavenly things, as His words 
indicate. He said to Nicodemus, "If I have told you 
earthly things, and ye believe not, how shall you believe 
if I tell you of heavenly things?" (John 3:12.) Again, 
He said to His disciples, "What and if ye shall see the 
Son of Man ascend up where He was before?" (John 6:62.) 
On the night of His betrayal He said to the 
Heavenly Father, "Glorify Thou Me with Thine own 
self, with the glory which I had with Thee before the 

R5157 : page 8 

world was" (John 17:5), showing that He had knowledge 
of His pre-human existence. We question then, 
How and when did He obtain this knowledge? 

Reasoning on this subject we see in the Scriptures 
nothing that says that the Logos, who was with the 
Father from the beginning, entered into the body of 
Jesus, and thus used the flesh of Jesus as a veil or covering. 
On the contrary, the record is that the Logos was 
made flesh, not that He got into flesh. Hence, we disagree 
with the theory of the incarnation; it is from a 
deranged theology. The Bible tells us that the Logos 
was made flesh and that He became the Man Christ 
Jesus, that He humbled Himself and took a bondman's 
form and was found in fashion as a man. (Phil. 2:5-8.) 
The Bible says that He laid aside the dignity and honor 



which He once had; that He became poor— not that He 
posed as poor while in the flesh, but that He who was 
rich became poor for our sakes. (2 Cor. 8:9.) The 
necessity of this procedure we see in the Bible arrangement 
that, "Since by man came death, by man came also 
the resurrection of the dead." (I Cor. 15:21.) He came 
to be a corresponding price for the first man's life and 
life-rights. 

From these Scriptures we are led to the conclusion 
that the spark of life previously vivifying the Logos was 
transferred from the spirit plane to the human plane— 
from the higher plane or nature to a lower plane or 
nature. This glorious being was begotten of the Holy 
Spirit and ultimately born a human being. The same 
spark of life, we believe, was maintained. The very fact 
that His spark of life could not come from the condemned 
Adamic race, assures us that the same spark of life was 
transferred to the womb of the Virgin Mary. This child 
that was born, then, was born like other human children, 
only that He was perfect, because of the perfect germ 
of life from which He was developed. He would certainly 
be a very peculiar boy, and wiser than other boys. We 
read further that he not only grew in stature, but in wisdom 
and in favor with God and man. (Luke 2:52.) 
Humanity perceived that He was different from others. 
The whole matter was pleasing to God, to whom Jesus 
became more and more pleasing as He neared maturity. 

DEVELOPMENT OF HIS SENSE OF RESPONSIBILITY 

When He was twelve, Jesus had, apparently, much 
knowledge. He knew, probably from His mother, that 
He was miraculously born and that He was different 
from others. He had also His mother's explanation that 
He was to be the "Son of the Highest" and fulfil the 
predictions respecting the Messiah. (Luke 1:32,33,55.) 
At this time He began to inquire— not by way of showing 
His precocity, but in sincerity and in truth— whether 
or not this was the time when He should begin His 
ministry. He began to consider at what time a man 
should become a priest— thinking of His responsibilities 
as a priest. The doctors of the Law must have marveled 
that a child of twelve should think of such questions. 
We may suppose that a dialogue took place, the results 
of which satisfied His mind that this was not the time 
when He should begin His ministry. He did not have 
this knowledge by any inductive process, but obtained it 
by inquiry of the Scriptures and of those who were best 
versed in the Scriptures. The decision was that there was 
nothing for Him to do until He was thirty years of age. 

Then we read that He returned home with His 
mother and her husband Joseph, and was subject to 
them. He did not then enter upon His work of ministry. 
He treated Himself as a minor, subject to those who had 
charge over Him. This was His condition until He 
came to John at Jordan. There is not a suggestion anywhere 



that He had previously manifested any teaching 
powers. He was a learner, not a teacher. Every Sabbath 
day He was in the synagogue to hear the Word of 
God read, to meditate upon it and to know the Divine 
requirements respecting Messiah and the wonderful 
things prophesied of Him. Evidently he was perplexed 
in the same manner that the Jewish nation was. But He 
had a different cast of mind from theirs. They wondered 
and queried as to His knowledge. 

HIS KNOWLEDGE AT THE AGE OF THIRTY 

At thirty years of age our Lord certainly must have 
had much knowledge which Adam did not possess when 
he was on trial. Jesus had a knowledge of what sin is 

R5157 : page 9 

and what the penalty for sin is; of the fact that God 
arranged for the redemption of mankind, to be accomplished 
through the great Mediator of the New 
Covenant— a Savior, a Redeemer, a Deliverer. He knew 
of the Divine Law written in the Decalogue; of the inability 
of others to keep the Law and of His ability to 
keep it. His mother had told Him of His miraculous 
birth, of the message that had come through Gabriel 
and of the prophecies of Anna and Simeon. This amount 
of knowledge would be very valuable to Him. He had 
also in mind the prophecy respecting the future of the 
great Messiah that was to come and deliver the world. 

But what He evidently lacked was the knowledge of 
the deeper things of the Scriptures. He evidently found 
perplexities in the Bible. While He had not received the 
Holy Spirit, yet He was much better qualified to understand 
the Scriptures than was the fallen race. But the 
Apostle says that "the natural man receiveth not the 
things of the Spirit of God. ..because they are 
spiritually discerned." (I Cor. 2: 14.) Jesus had not 
been begotten of the Holy Spirit, therefore He did not 
have the understanding of the prophecies and of the 
types of the Law. 

But our Lord did not begin to teach until after He 
was anointed, when He invited His disciples to join Him. 
They were to proclaim the message without understanding 
the matter at all, that the Kingdom of Heaven was 
at hand and that Israel should try to get near to God, 
to be prepared for this Kingdom when it should be revealed. 
Our Lord put His power upon them so that they 
cast out demons; for they had no power of the Holy 
Spirit until after Pentecost. 

Similarly, now we see that no one is competent to be 
a teacher in the Church of Christ as an Elder except He 
be fully consecrated, except he come under the terms 
and conditions necessary to the begetting of the Holy 
Spirit. Apparently the people knew of our Lord's consecration. 
When our Lord had received the begetting 



of the Holy Spirit at His consecration at Jordan, John 
the Baptist both saw the descent of the Holy Spirit and 
heard Jehovah's testimony, and afterward said that he 
"saw and bare record." If the multitude had seen and 
heard, he would not have needed to bear record that 
Jesus was the anointed of God.— John 1:32-34. 

HIS ILLUMINATION OF MIND AFTER SPIRIT-BEGETTING 

After His baptism Jesus Himself became conscious of 
some great change in His own condition and in His 
relationship to the Father and to spiritual things; for we 
read that at the time when John saw the Holy Spirit 
descend upon Him, "the heavens were opened unto Him." 
(Matt. 3:16.) By "heavens" here is meant, not that 
Jesus was given a telescopic view of things beyond the 
sky, but that the higher things were opened to Him— 
the things which as a natural man He could not receive. 
No matter how perfect a man may be, he cannot receive 
spiritual things. As St. Paul says, "The natural man 
receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God; for they 
are foolishness [meaningless] unto him; neither can he 
know them, because they are spiritually discerned."— 
I Cor. 2:14. 

We assume that at the very moment when our Lord 
received the Holy Spirit an impression was made upon 
the convolutions of His brain which would give Him 
those very recollections of His pre-human condition 
which otherwise the natural brain could not have. In 
the natural man, every impression of the mind is recorded 
in the convolutions of the brain. We can see 
how the convolutions of our Lord's brain could have 
been so impressed that they would reproduce the experiences, 
the knowledge and the very thoughts which 
He had prior to His being made flesh. We know that 
that very moment marked the time of our Lord's spirit 
begetting, and we believe that He then received special 
knowledge of heavenly things. 

Instead of beginning the ministry for which He had 
prepared for thirty years, He turned aside into the wilderness 
and studied the Scriptures for forty days. He 
had already had many times forty days to think over these 
Scriptures, and if He had had the same power of 
understanding before His consecration that He afterwards 
had, He would not have needed those forty days 
for study, but would have given them for service in His 
ministry. Very evidently, then, all the years of His life 
on the human plane had brought Him no such perception 
as He now had through this glow and illumination 
of mind, received when He came up out of the water. 
He began to have the full scope and appreciation of the 
mission upon which He had entered, and everything written 
in the Scriptures respecting Messiah. 

As He now studied the Law and the Prophets, He 
saw the terms of the Covenant of sacrifice in the light 
of this illumination; He saw the hitherto hidden meaning 



of the various types. He began to see that if Messiah 

would reign it would be by a manifestation of loyalty 

to God and to righteousness. As soon as He was illuminated, 

He saw the things pertaining to the suffering 

through which He afterwards learned obedience in the 

fullest sense possible. Thus He received the illumination 

which was so powerful to Him— just as it is a great 

illumination for us to see the terms and conditions of 

our calling— that we must walk in His steps if we would 

reign with Him. The Scriptures act as an enlightening 

power to those who are taught of God. Only those begotten 

of the Spirit can understand the real depth of 

God's Word. 

In bewilderment our Lord saw the meaning of the 
Atonement Day sacrifices and of all the things written 
in the Book— the things which He had covenanted to do 
when He entered into consecration. He had already 

R5158 : page 9 

pledged Himself to do "everything written in the Book." 
But now He was finding out what this really meant— 
death, even the death of the cross! 

HIS FURTHER ILLUMINATION AFTER SPIRIT-BIRTH 

We see that when our Lord was raised from the dead 
a spirit being an equally miraculous work must have 
taken place; for again He received a change of nature. 
The One that was raised from the dead was the Spirit-begotten 
New Creature, who had all the record of His 
previous experiences, on both the spirit and the human 
plane. 

How, then, did the Father raise our Lord from the 
dead a spirit being, and how could this spirit being have 
any knowledge of the things experienced in the flesh 
and also of the things of His previous existence before 
He was made flesh? We answer that this is impossible 
to understand, except that it is done by Divine Power. 
Whatever may have been the operation, after reaching 
the spirit plane His mind must have been stamped by 
Divine Power with recollections of both the earthly and 
the pre-human experiences. Otherwise all of our Lord's 
human and pre-human experiences would be valueless. 

We see this also respecting the Church. We also are 
embryo spirit beings. And when we shall be raised in His 
likeness in the resurrection, we shall not have our fleshly 
brains for recollection, and we therefore shall be dependent 
upon the Divine Power for the memory of all 

R5158 :page 10 

the experiences of the present time. So when we read, 
"So also is the resurrection of the dead; it is sown in 
corruption, it is raised in incorruption; it is sown in 
dishonor, it is raised in glory; it is sown in weakness, it 



is raised in power; it is sown a natural body, it is raised 
a spiritual body" (I Cor. 15:42-44), we have this 
thought, that the Divine Power will impress this spirit 
body with the knowledge of all the blessed experiences 
of the present time, so that these experiences shall not 
be fruitless, but profitable to us, making us better qualified 
and more able for the Divine service, as well as for 
the carrying on of the work of the New Covenant. 

OUR LORD "THE BRIGHTNESS OF JEHOVAH'S GLORY" 

If our Lord had not been found perfect, loyal, faithful, 
in His pre-human condition, He would never have 
had the privilege of becoming a man in order to redeem 
man. He never showed any defects of character to be 
rectified, therefore, He did not need any of the experiences 
which aid in making character. His experiences 
as a man with adverse conditions were given to test His 
loyalty and obedience to the utmost. 

Our Lord was faithful under all the favorable conditions 
of His pre-existent condition; He was faithful 
as a man; and having been glorified to the Divine nature 
He is still faithful. We may conclude, therefore, that 
His experiences on these three planes have all cooperated 
to demonstrate His character to the very highest 
degree— "the express image" of Jehovah.— Heb. 1:3. 



THE YEAR BEFORE US 

Standing at the portal of the opening year, 
Words of comfort meet us, hushing every fear; 
Spoken through the silence by our Father's voice, 
Tender, strong and faithful, making us rejoice. 
Onward, then, and fear not, children of the Day; 
For His Word shall never, never pass away. 

"I, the Lord, am with thee, be thou not afraid; 
I will help and strengthen, be thou not dismayed. 
Yea, I will uphold thee with Mine own right hand; 
Thou art called and chosen in My sight to stand." 
Onward, then, and fear not, children of the Day; 
For His Word shall never, never pass away. 

For the year before us, oh, what rich supplies! 
For the poor and needy, living streams shall rise; 
For the sad and mournful, shall His grace abound; 
For the faint and feeble, perfect strength be found. 
Onward, then, and fear not, children of the Day; 
For His Word shall never, never pass away. 

He will never fail us, He will not forsake; 
His eternal covenant He will never break; 
Resting on His promise, what have we to fear? 
God is all-sufficient for the coming year. 



Onward, then, and fear not, children of the Day; 
For His Word shall never, never pass away. 



R5158 :page 10 

HOW RIGHTEOUS CHARACTER IS PRODUCED 

OUR WILL REPRESENTS our choice, but 

our choice is made up largely of our impressions 

and our judgment— or mis-judgment 

—of things surrounding us. As a 

child will reach for a finely polished razor 

or for a light and be cut or burned, so our 

wills sometimes grasp for things that are 

not good for us. From the time that we 

first heard the Lord's voice, therefore, the 

education of our wills has progressed; for 

all are defective in their choice, in their views of matters, 

and in their manner of thinking. 

Our soundness of mind increases with our knowledge 
of the Divine Plan and of the character of our Lord. 
When we think of His perfection as the Logos and as 
the Man Christ Jesus, we are enabled to realize somewhat 
our own imperfection, and we thenceforth seek to eliminate 
those things which belong to our imperfect judgment. 
We recall that He was "holy, harmless, undefiled and 
separate from sinners"— that He was perfect; and we 
realize, that having a consecrated mind, He entered the 
"narrow way" with a right will and a balanced mind, 
which would be accentuated by His experiences in life. 
With His perfect example before us, we seek daily to 
train our wills in harmony with the Divine will. 

The will is the result of a certain combination of 
mental qualities, or faculties. We may, therefore, change 
our wills in various ways by having divers combinations 
of the mental qualities; for instance, one quality of the 
mind is called acquisitiveness— a desire to get, to control. 
Another quality of the mind has respect to justice, another 
to music, another to art, and so on. 

If the quality of justice be small or if it be dormant, 
a person of large acquisitiveness might be led to steal. 
He would have no quality of justice to tell him that this 
act is wrong. Some one might be tempted to take money, 
or one might be willing to do something dishonorable 
to gratify love for music or what not. On the contrary, 
if one has a large organ of justice, it would control him. 
If this faculty were thoroughly awakened and brought 
into exercise, he would say, "No, it is wrong to steal. 
In this matter there are principles to be regarded." Thus 
his desire is not gratified at the expense of principle. 

One's will is made up of the organs which control his 
conduct. If the selfish propensities rule, he will be selfish. 
In some people the organ of conscientiousness seems to 



be dormant. Along some lines these people act just as an 
animal would— without thought as to either their own 
motives or the effect that their actions will have upon 
others. If such people should at any time give their 
hearts to the Lord in consecration, their attention is sure 
to be called, sooner or later, to their manner of living. 
If they consult the Word of God for instruction, the 
Scriptures tell them that God is not pleased with their 
conduct. As a result of this information, they begin to 
learn to scrutinize their thoughts and words and doings, 
and in due time to change their ways. 

CONSCIENTIOUSNESS GIVES STRENGTH OF CHARACTER 

A person who has large veneration, large spirituality 
and large conscientiousness has great advantage over one 
who has small veneration, or small spirituality or small 
conscientiousness, for as different matters come up, these 
three faculties naturally agree and say, "This is right" 
(or wrong, as the case may be). When the thing seems 
right, judgment would say, "This is a proper thing." 
This kind of people can be martyrs for anything that 
they believe is right, for they are strong in three qualities 
of the mind which give them a force of character for 
righteousness. 

A person who has less conscientiousness would have 
less of this strength of character. Strong will exerted 
in any direction produces strong character; bad will, bad 
character; good will, good character. We are to some 
extent what we are by birth. After our consecration God 
instructs us and we are so transformed by the renewing 

R5158 :page 11 

of our minds that we have our minds made up to do 
right instead of wrong. This making up of the mind is 
the formation of will. 

We should strive to have strong will, strong character, 
and should put away everything that would be likely to 
weaken our character. One who builds strong character 
reasons out what he thinks is God's will— what he thinks 
is the right thing to do. Then he determines to do that 
thing and resolves to let nothing interfere with the accomplishment 
of his purpose. Whoever has a good, 
strong will has something to help him over every trial 
and difficulty in life. 



R5159 :page 11 

THE DELUGE EFFECT 
-FEBRUARY 2.-GENESIS 6:9-22; 7:11-24.- 
"For the wages of sin is death; but the gift of God is 



eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord."— Romans 6:23. 

SCIENTIFIC BIBLE students are rapidly 
reaching the conclusion that we are fully 
justified in laughing at the so-called scientists 
who have denied the Bible story of 
the Deluge. The Bible is corroborated by 
Geology, Astronomy and History. The oldest 
records of Babylonia tell the story of 
the Deluge— of Noah and his ark. 

To discredit the Bible, these archaeologists 
declare that the Genesis account was 

merely copied from the Babylonian records. How foolish! 
Who does not know that there were no records of 
ancient times that will at all compare with our Genesis 
account! None other even professes to give a connected 
history of the human family, a chronological line of 1656 
years from Adam to the Flood, or a definite record, as the 
Bible does, of just how long it rained, just how high the 
floods rose and just how long was the period required for 
the waters to drain off. 

"Blind unbelief is sure to err 
And scan" God's Book in vain. 

But, says one, the theory of a deluge, whose waters 
would cover the hills and the mountains, might be thinkable 
if the earth were flat; but how could it possibly be 
true since we know that the earth is a sphere? 

Geology comes to the rescue of the Bible student and 
points out distinctly that there have been several great 
deluges. It shows us great beds of sandstone, clay, shale, 
etc., all of which Science declares must have been placed 
where they are as the settlings of great floods. Some 
of these deposits are hundreds of feet below the surface. 

When we ask where such floods could come from, 
Astronomy answers us, pointing us to Saturn and Jupiter, 
with their "rings." Scientists declare that these rings 
consist of minerals and water thrown far off in a gaseous 
state when the planets were at white heat. They subsequently 
cooled and formed into various strata or rings. 
Because of their great distance from the planets their 
motions are different, and they are held in suspense by 
the same laws which hold the planets themselves in space. 
Nevertheless, the superior weight of the planets draws 
them nearer and nearer. 

The ring nearest the planet, and approaching it, is 
still held off by the "firmament" of circumambient air. 
The rotation of the planets on their axis gives least resistance 
at the poles; and these rings, after spreading out 
as great envelopes, gradually thin at the center, or equator, 
and thicken at the poles, until the weight at the 
poles becomes so great as to overcome the power or the 
strength of the firmament, and then breaking through 
from both poles, causes deluges. 

NO RAIN ON THE EARTH 



The astonishing statement that, prior to the Deluge, 
there had been no rain on the earth (Genesis 2:5), is in 
full agreement with what we have seen from the foregoing. 
The earth once had similar "belts" or "rings." 
These were precipitated, as we have described, one after 
the other, at long intervals during the Six Creative Days 
mentioned in the first lesson of the year. By means of 
these deluges, our minerals were deposited and our coal 
beds buried. 

God, foreknowing all things, foreknew the necessity 
of the Noachian Deluge, and hence so timed the features 
of His Plan that the last of earth's "rings" was still unbroken 
when man was created. But it was no longer in 
the form of a ring. The waters above had approached 
the earth and formed a great watery canopy or veil, 
merely held off by the "firmament." 

There could be neither rain nor storm under such 
conditions. The temperature of the whole earth was 
equable, the sun's rays acting upon the watery canopy as 
they do upon the white glass of a hot-house. The temperature 
was the same at the poles as at the equator. 
This accounts for the remains of tropical animals and 
of plant life found imbedded under hundreds of feet of 
ice in the polar regions. 

WHY THE POLAR ICE? 

Geology testifies to a Glacial Period, when great icebergs, 
carried by floods of water, rushed from the poles 
toward the equator. Geologists have traced great valleys 
cut by these icebergs. On their findings they base the 
theory that the earth was once ice-covered. Instead of 
attributing the ice to the period of the Deluge, 4,400 years 
ago, they add a handful of naughts; and the more they 
add, the prouder they feel of their achievements, because 
they think that they are getting away from the Bible and 
discrediting it. 

But scientific Bible students are having their faith in 
God's Word established more and more. Without affecting 
the torrid zone, the warmer temperature is now extending 
itself into the frigid zone quite rapidly. "Greenland's 
Icy Mountains" will soon be things of the past. The 
poles are warming up. The ice caps are dissolving. Last 
winter was called the "straw hat season" of Alaska, because 
of the higher temperature than ever before known. 

"THY WORD IS TRUTH" 

The fitting of these facts to the Bible narrative is not 
only intensely interesting, but conducive to faith in God, 
in His providences, and in the Bible, and very conducive 
to a disregard of the wild guesses of "professors," who 
have no faith in the Bible and are seeking to discredit it. 

The sudden break of the canopy of water would not 
only cause a deluge to come down at both poles, and the 
flow of great tidal waves toward the equator, as geologists 



show was the case, but it would also produce a 
sudden and intense cold at the poles. The water froze 
so rapidly that out of the solid ice animals have in recent 
years been dug, which have grass between their teeth. 
We have only to put two and two together to have a 
chain of evidence linking us to the Bible. For instance, 
is it asked why it was colder at the poles then than now? 
The reply is: The more direct rays of the sun then, as 
now, fell on the equator; but the torrid zone was hotter 
than now, until the trade winds sprung up, which carried 

R5159 :page 12 

the heat and distributed it all over the earth. And the 
waters of the equator must have been hotter then, as 
the poles were colder, until the ocean currents set in— 
which, like the Gulf Stream, carry the water from the 
equator and distribute it along the shores of America 
and Europe— and the Japan and other currents, which in 
the Pacific carry their water warmed at the equator to 
the poles. 

These processes, going on for 4,400 years, are gradually 
thawing out the polar regions, as all scientists 
agree; and this it is that has recently been causing larger 
numbers of icebergs from the glaciers of the polar region 
to break loose and float down, to the distress of mariners. 

Still there remains the question, Why was not Noah's 
ark carried off by this swift current toward the equator? 
Why did it apparently remain not far from the place 
where it was built and come to rest on the top of Mount 
Ararat? Professor George Frederick Wright has dropped 
the suggestion which fits well with the Bible narrative. 
As we understand the professor, the geological evidences 
are that the swift currents of water, laden with icebergs 
and rolling rocks, visited various parts of Europe and 
America, and perhaps Asia, but seemingly avoided the 
vicinity of Mount Ararat. There, alluvial deposits are 
of extraordinary depth. The geologists say that while 
there was a commotion round about, there was an eddy 
and back water in that particular vicinity. 

Is it too much for the child of God to believe that 
the Great Creator, who intended to preserve alive Noah 
and his family to begin afresh the population of the 
earth, was fully competent to regulate the currents of 
that Deluge? 

"Faith can firmly trust Him, 
Come what may." 
It is pleasing to us, additionally, to note that the time 
required for the draining off of the waters (Genesis 8:1-14) 
is reasonable and in harmony with the scientific 
investigation conducted from the Bible standpoint. 

THE CAUSE OF THE DELUGE 

We have already seen that physical causes led up to 
the Deluge. Next let us inquire, Why did Divine Providence 



decree the obliteration of man, except Noah and 
his family? Why did He who knew "the end from the 
beginning" purposely allow that last canopy to remain 
to cause the Flood, instead of precipitating it before 
man was created? 

The answer is that God foreknew the rebellion of 
Satan and his attempt to become the "Prince of this 
world." God also foreknew that His human son, Adam, 
would fall before the temptation which would come upon 
him. He permitted the temptation and the fall solely 
because He foresaw a way by which, ultimately, good 
would be accomplished thereby and valuable, instructive 
lessons be given both to angels and to men. These lessons 
test the love and loyalty of every creature in Heaven 
and on earth, and when rightly learned, will serve their 
purposes to all eternity. 

All of God's dealings with His intelligent creatures 
are along the lines of absolute Justice, guided by Love 
Divine. But while Love can guide Divine Justice, Justice 
must rule, as we read: "Justice is the foundation 
of Thy Throne." (Psalm 89:14.) The Bible record is 
that at the time of the Flood wickedness had become so 
great that the conduct of mankind and the thoughts of 
their hearts were "only evil continually."— Genesis 6:5. 

This great increase of wickedness for 1600 years is 
explained to have come, not merely from human depravity, 

R5160 :page 12 

but by the connivance of some of the angels. 
These, although created holy, perfect, became enamored 
of sin through humanity, until they became disobedient 
to God, and by their greater intelligence led humanity 
into depths of iniquity. 

The Bible cites many instances in which holy angels 
have materialized, assuming human bodies and clothing. 
Thus three spirit beings, naturally invisible, appeared to 
Abraham as men and did eat and talk with Abraham; and 
he knew not that they were angels, until afterward. This 
power appears to have been possessed by all the holy 
angels before the Flood. It was then that some of them, 
becoming enamored of the beautiful daughters of men, 
took to themselves wives, and lived in their materialized 
bodies, preferring to live as human beings. 

The Apostle Jude declares that thus they "left their 
own habitation," or condition as spirit beings, in violation 
of the Divine Law. Thus, instead of using their permission 
to appear as men to help and instruct mankind, they 
used this power to still more rapidly degrade humanity. 
Moreover, the children born of those angelic sons of 
God by human mothers were human beings of a new 
order— different from Adam's family. We read that 
they were giants— physical and mental— "men of renown." 

The fact that they grew to manhood and became 
renowned proves that this improper relationship between 
angels and humanity continued for centuries, because in 



that primitive time full manhood was not reached in less 
than a hundred years. Those giant sons of the angels, 
begotten in lust and in violation of the Divine Law, 
would not, naturally, be renowned for their virtues or 
holiness, but the reverse. Therefore, it does not surprise 
us to read further that those sons of the angels tyrannized 
over humanity, and that the whole earth was filled 
with violence. 

The time had come when God's displeasure with those 
conditions should be manifested— not by sending those 
angels and their giant-renowned sons and the depraved 
antediluvians of Adam's race to a hell of torture, but by 
merely overwhelming them in the Deluge. God thus set 
an example of His opposition to sin and His determination 
that, eventually, it should be fully stamped out. But 
neither in this, nor in anything else, did God ever suggest 
any thought of torturing sinners, or anybody, throughout 
eternity. 

On the contrary, all those antediluvian sinners of 
Adam's race were as much redeemed by Christ's sacrifice 
as other sinners of the race at any time. They belonged 
to the great mass of mankind, with whom Messiah will 
deal during His Millennial Reign of righteousness. They 
will all be brought to an accurate knowledge of the 
Truth, like the remainder of the race. The object in so 
doing will be that after lessons of chastisement for any 
wilful disobedience, they may be, if they will, fully recovered 
from sin and death, and brought back to all that 
was lost— human perfection and everlasting life in an 
earthly Paradise restored— world-wide— at Jesus' cost. 

As for the sons of the angels by human mothers, there 
is no hope for them. Their begetting and birth were not 
authorized of God. They were cut off in death. They 
were not redeemed. They will never be awakened nor 
resurrected. 

As for the fallen angels themselves: The Bible tells 
us that for these 4,400 years they have been exiles from 
God, restrained "in chains of darkness," "until the Judgment 
of the Great Day."— Jude 6; 2 Peter 2:4. 

We will supply a full treatise of this subject to our 
readers free, on receipt of a postcard request, addressed to 
Brooklyn Tabernacle, Brooklyn, N.Y. 



R5160 :page 13 

GOD'S RAINBOW COVENANT 

-FEBRUARY 9.-GENESIS 8:1-9:17.- 

"I do set My bow in the cloud, and it shall be for a token 
of a covenant between Me and the earth."— Genesis 9:13. 

THE HIGHER CRITICS refer us to recently 
excavated clay tablets found in Babylonia 



as the earliest record of the Deluge of 

Noah's day. These tablets, in coarse outline, 

represent Noah and a boat. A few 

words descriptive of the Flood follow. And 

we are asked to accept this as a superior 

account to the one given us in Genesis, of 

which today's lesson is a part! We are 

amazed! and recall to mind the prophecy 

of Scripture which discusses our day, saying, "The wisdom 

of their wise men shall perish and the understanding 

of their learned men shall not be apparent."— Isaiah 29:14. 

Only the reputation of these men for learning saves 
them from ridicule; and we, of course, concede to them 
the right of their opinion. '"Each has a right to his 
choice,' as the old lady said when she kissed the cow." 
As for our part, the logical statements of Genesis respecting 
the particular time when the Flood began, the 
number of days that it rained, and the increase of the 
waters, seem reasonable, as does the further account of 
the cessation of the rain, and of the length of time in 
which the waters gradually receded, and the length of 
time in which the surface gradually dried and vegetation 
manifested itself. Thus the Genesis account of the 
Deluge is stamped trustworthy— a hundred times more 
trustworthy than the crude record of the Babylonian! 
To us it seems evident that Divine Wisdom guided in the 
Genesis account, but not in the other. 

Naturally Noah and his family might dread another 
Deluge, not clearly understanding the origin of the Flood 
which had overwhelmed the world. Very appropriately 
God called their attention to the rainbow, when He assured 
them that never again would the whole earth be 
overwhelmed in water. We can see the philosophy of 
this, whereas Noah and his family merely had the matter 
by faith, not discerning the philosophy. We can see that 
when the last of earth's "rings" had come down there 
could not be another deluge, because there were no 
waters above the firmament to be precipitated. Since the 
Flood, we merely have the moderate supply of moisture, 
in the form of clouds in our firmament, and none in the 
form of a great envelope beyond the firmament. 

Now we may see how it was that Noah had never 
seen a rainbow; because prior to the Flood, when the 
sun shone through the watery envelope as merely a great 
ball of fire, its rays did not strike directly through, and 
hence no rainbow was possible. But since the watery 
envelope broke, the fine vapors in the direct line of the 
sun's rays cause, naturally, the rainbow effect. And, as 
God declares, so long as there is a rainbow, there can 
never be a flood. God's words and ways are not less 
reasonable when we come to see their grand philosophy. 
On the contrary, the more we understand the Divine methods 
and operations the more we appreciate their wisdom. 

THE TOWER OF BABEL 



Generations afterward, when the family of Noah had 
multiplied, the meaning of the rainbow as a covenant 
between God and man— the guarantee against another 
deluge— was forgotten. The worldly-wise of that time 
were foolish enough to undertake the building of a great 
tower, to whose top they could go in the event of another 
deluge. Since they had neglected the Lord's message 
and disregarded His promise, He let them alone to make 
manifest their own folly in labor and sweat of face, 
which could prove of no avail. 

Finally, however, when they were measurably wearied 
with their herculean task, and when they had, to some 
extent at least, learned a valuable lesson, the Lord confounded 
their language so that they could not understand 
each other, nor co-operate with each other in any such 
vast enterprise. Separated in tongue and in interest, 
they scattered. Their interests became diverse, and gradually 
manners and customs and color of skin, during the 
centuries, became more and more dissimilar. Thus the 
various races with their peculiarities of temperament and 
language had their start. 

St. Paul tells us all this was a premeditated plan on 
God's part, as being to the best interests of humanity 
and most favorable for the outworking of the Divine 
purposes. He says, God "hath made of one blood all 
nations of men, for to dwell on all the face of the earth, 
and hath determined the times before appointed, and the 
bounds of their habitation, that they should seek the Lord, 
if haply they might feel after Him and find Him."— 
Acts 17:26,27. 

How one part of God's Word sheds light upon another! 
Thus we are enabled to see how Divine Wisdom 
has had a supervision of the ultimate interests of humanity. 
Even though God has allowed man in his ignorance 
to become the servant of Satan, He still has protected 
him in a measure, and shaped his affairs for his ultimate 
good. That good, as we have seen, is to be fully attained 
by the world in general at the Second Coming of Jesus 
and the establishment then of His Messianic Kingdom, 
which will bind Satan and scatter the power of darkness 
and sin. It will shine forth as the Sun of Righteousness, 
to heal and bless and uplift the willing and obedient of 
mankind. 

But the matter of separating the human family into 
different nationalities has been specially useful during 
the dark time preceding Messiah's Second Coming. More 

R5161 :page 13 

or less the nations have been occupied in watching each 
other and guarding themselves against each other. The 
barrier of language for centuries served to keep apart 
peoples living in close proximity, to hinder the running 
to and fro which has been going on, particularly within 
the last seventy years, since steam power became effective 
for transportation. 



The commingling of all nations within the last sixty 
years is breaking down the national barriers wonderfully. 
It is fulfilling the word of prophecy, "My determination 
is to gather the nations, that I may assemble the kingdoms." 
(Zephaniah 3:8.) The world of mankind is being 
brought into close touch, barriers of language are breaking 
down; and the breaking down of these barriers is 
favorable to human co-operation, either for good or for 
evil. Since mankind are sinners by nature, their co-operation 
is most likely to be along selfish lines, and 
therefore most likely to be evil. 

So we find today that rich corporations are building 
together a great Tower of Babel for their protection 
against every kind of calamity which could come upon 
their riches. The laboring classes are doing likewise. 
The mechanics are building up a great Tower of Babel 
of Unionism, which they trust will deliver them from all 
adversity and in which they hope to be safe forever. 
Had it not been for the dispersion and for the language-barriers, 
no doubt these world-wide organizations of 
Capital and Labor would have developed long ago and 
the final great catastrophe or conflict between these great 
giants would have come so much the sooner, precipitating 
all its terrible anguish and disaster on humanity— 

R5161 :page 14 

"a time of trouble, such as never was since there was 
a nation."— Daniel 12:1. 

FIRE, THE NEXT CALAMITY 

St. Peter divides the history of mankind into three 
great Epochs, called "worlds" in our common version 
Bible, but more properly designated three great Epochs. 
The first Epoch of earth's experience ended with the 
Flood, and then the present Epoch began, styled by St. 
Paul "this present evil world," or Epoch, because during 
this time evil holds preponderance of power amongst men, 
even though they do their best. 

The first Epoch, or order of things, was overwhelmed 
and brought to an end by a deluge of water; and St. 
Peter tells us that the present "world," or order of things, 
is to be brought to a conclusion by a deluge of "fire." 
But following the fire, there will be a new "world" or 
new Epoch, or order of things, much better than anything 
yet experienced by mankind. "The world to come 
whereof we speak" will be an Epoch of righteousness, 
because it will be under the direct rule and supervision 
of Messiah's Kingdom."— 2 Peter 3:10-13. 

At first many Bible students were inclined to understand 
St. Peter's words to signify that the fire which will 
terminate the present order of things and usher in the 
New Age would be a literal fire, which would consume 
the physical earth and the heavens. However, closer 
study reveals the fact that the fire is of symbolic kind, 



which will merely consume present institutions— everything 
of the present time that is contrary to the Divine 
will— everything that is unjust, inequitable. 

The "elements" which "will melt with fervent heat" 
will be the capitalistic and labor elements, and the strife 
between these, the friction, is already great. A little 
more and it will burst into a flame, as St. Peter prophesied. 
The "heavens" that will be involved will not be 
the Heavens of God's residence, but the ecclesiastical 
heavens— the church institutions. These will become involved 
in the strife between Capital and Labor, and they 
also will perish in that trouble time. But, thank God! 
the New Dispensation will, in the midst of the trouble, 
intervene; and it will prove to be as prophesied: "The 
desire of all nations."— Haggai 2:7. 

As Noah and his family were the only ones spared 
from the physical wreck of the old order of things before 
the Flood, so St. Peter intimates that Christ Jesus is the 
Ark of Safety now for all who will be saved out of the 
present order of things. Christ's faithful followers of 
all denominations and nations will become, with Him, the 
Royal Priesthood of the future— the "new heavens"— 
the spiritual ruling power of the New Dispensation, or 
Messiah's Kingdom. Under their supervision, speedily 
a "new earth"— a new social order— will be inaugurated, 
in which selfishness will be wholly eliminated, and in 
which righteousness will prevail. Of this new order of 
things we read: "We look for a new heavens and a new 
earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness."— 2 Peter 3:13. 

Although, doubtless, many human lives will be lost 
in that greatest trouble the world has ever known, with 
which this Age will end, nevertheless the great mass of 
humanity will still remain. But all their ingenious arrangements 
of the present time, social, financial and 
ecclesiastical, will have perished, and everything will 
have been put upon a new basis by the Great Messiah. 

The Lord, in the prophecy of Zephaniah, describes the 
time of trouble that is coming, as a fire to consume; and 
then tells us that following the fiery baptism of trouble, 
He will send to mankind "a pure Message, that they may 
all call upon the name of the Lord to serve Him with 
one consent." (Zephaniah 3:9.) This teaches that mankind 
will not be wholly destroyed by the fiery trouble of 
that Day, but it teaches that the confusion of doctrines 
given forth in the name of the Lord will all terminate 
with this present Age. The Message of Divine grace 
and Truth which will be promulgated in the future will 
be pure, and the blessing to all who will receive it will 
be great. 



R5161 :page 14 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS 



PROPER COURSE FOR PILGRIMS 

Question.— Is it wise or proper for a Pilgrim en-journey 
to be entertained by those who are out of sympathy 
with the Vow and with the work of the Society in 
general, even though he be an Elder of the Class? 

Answer.— Most decidedly not. Furthermore the Pilgrims 
should make clear to the Class that they had greatly 
erred in selecting such a one for an Elder, and should 
help them to rectify the matter as quickly as possible. 

If the Class likes that Elder who is out of accord 
with the Society's work, it should not make a request for 
Pilgrim service. Some of the Lord's dear sheep are very 
stupid. Meekness and gentleness are commendable; but 
there are times when they would mean disloyalty to God. 



MEANING OF VOICE OF JEHOVAH 

Question.— It is said of Adam and Eve, "And they 
heard the Voice of Jehovah." What is meant by the 
"Voice" of Jehovah? 

Answer.— We suppose that it refers to our Lord Jesus 
in His pre-human condition. The Logos was a god. The 
Logos, Word, Voice, of God, communicated with man, as 
the Representative of God. 



R5161 :page 14 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I am a stranger to you, having come into a knowledge 
of Present Truth only last spring; but as I had for long 
been Truth-hungry, I accepted all of the SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
with the avidity and zeal only known to those who have 
for long been starving for the Bread of Life. 

I have consecrated, taken the Vow, and symbolized both 
by immersion. 

At the time I came into the Truth, I was talking to a class 
(of women only) on Sociology, having previously given a 
course of lectures on History, Philosophy and philanthropic 
subjects. Indeed, for the past twenty-five years I have given 
the most of my time to giving talks on subjects in the line of 
humanitarianism, to women. 

As I am very deaf, and as the only one talent I have is the 
gift to make clear the subject I am talking on, my friends 
have believed that my work has been useful and uplifting. 
Now, at the advice of our dear Sister Calkins, I wish to ask 
your advice upon a problem I have now for solution. Immediately 
upon my consecration I testified to my class as to the 
marvelous light that had come into the darkness of my life, 
and that as I considered the "Kingdom of God" was the one 



and only solution to the problems of present-day questions, 
hereafter I could not talk upon any other subject than that 
of the Kingdom. 

In pursuance of this plan I invited some of the sisters "in 
the Truth" to come to my house for a study hour, thinking that 
gradually I would invite those outside who might manifest 
an interest in our subject. Then, learning of the Scriptural 
teaching regarding woman's sphere in the Church, I felt that 
I should like your advice as to my future work. 

As I was perfectly willing to consecrate all, I had in this 

R5162:page 15 

also meant my only gift, or talent— but I could not keep still 
—every one I met I talked to— I gave the "Divine Plan" into 
the hands of no less than twenty women; and many people 
formerly in utter darkness are coming to see the light. 

And now, the women of my class of last winter and the 
winter before are begging me to talk to them again. I may 
choose my own subject, and I want to give some "Talks on 
the Bible." I have consulted a dear brother and sister here, 
and they advise me to give the talks— they think it is a wonderful 
opportunity. But we finally decided we would submit 
the question to you. 

The situation is, I know, unusual, and as I told Sister C, 
it is so difficult to make the situation understood in all its 
details. But I think I have stated the main facts. Of course, 
my whole object will be to endeavor to have those who listen 
to me read the SCRIPTURE STUDIES for themselves. 

I know, dear brother, you are a busy man, and I am sorry 
to trespass so much upon your valuable time, but I am so 
anxious to do whatever work I can at this time; for "the 
night cometh in which no man can work." And at the same 
time I do not wish to be disorderly or bring any reproach 
upon the Ecclesia. Now, will you please tell me what I 
ought to do? 

If you would like to have me, I will give you a list of my 
subjects and a little synopsis of each. 

I am praying only to be guided in this and in all things 
by the Spirit of Truth. Your sister in Christ, 

CHARLOTTE C. HEINEMAN.-Cal. 

REPLY 

DEAR SISTER IN CHRIST:- 

Yours of recent date is at hand and contents are noted. 
We rejoice with you in the fact that the Lord has found you 
worthy of receiving a knowledge of the Truth. May His 
continued guidance and blessing be with you, enabling you 
to profit by every experience which comes to you. 

My thought would be that the Lord would be pleased to 
have you use the talent you possess. Apparently He has 
given you a constituency in which you can work and regarding 
which you have responsibilities toward Him. I would 
recommend, therefore, that after you have thoroughly 
familiarized yourself with the Truth, you resume your lectures 



to women, discussing nothing but the Truth, and stick 
close to the teachings in the volumes of STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES. The restriction that St. Paul makes regarding 
women's teaching refers to meetings of the Church, and these 
usually include both men and women. The meetings such as 
you would have would not be meetings of the Ecclesia, and 
to my understanding you would not in any wise come under 
the restriction mentioned by St. Paul. In such a case, even 
if some men should take upon themselves the position of 
women and attend one of your lectures, this would bring you 
under no condemnation. 

Not only would it be proper for you to resume your lectures, 
but if your finances would permit, and the way should 
open for you to again meet and address women in other cities, 
whom you had formerly served, or whom you could reach, 
I would recommend that you extend your work accordingly. 

Praying for you the Lord's guidance, wisdom and richest 
blessing in your endeavors to glorify His name, I remain, 
Your brother and servant in the Lord. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

As an encouragement to some who may grow weary in 
well-doing, we report the instance of a man who said he got 
PEOPLES PULPITS stuffed into his pockets nearly everywhere he 
went. We solicited him for STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES in 
his work-place and got his order for six volumes immediately, 
he saying on sight of the titles that he was just 
reading a paper about them Sunday. He commended us to 
three others of his shop-mates with the result of an order 
for six volumes each. They in turn gave us the names of 
others yet to be called on, which we trust will likewise result 
in further sales. 

Again, on the train Sunday returning from Bainbridge, 
we handed out "BRIMSTONE" PULPITS to the conductor and 
others, having given out 1,000 or more at the above town. 
When we left the train the conductor was still eagerly 
reading in a corner beyond interruption. 

Trusting the multitude of your labors are continually 
sweetened by reason of the approval from above, and sending 
Christian love and Thanksgiving-day greetings, 
Yours in the Master's Vineyard, 
J. G. Ohio. 



page 15 

BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 

Series VI., Study XIII. -Parental 
Obligations of the New Creation. 

FEBRUARY 2 



Read P. 524, par. 1, to P. 526, par. 2. 

"TRAIN UP A CHILD IN THE WAY HE SHOULD GO." 

(7) How should the homes of New Creatures be ruled, 

and when and how should the rod be administered, if necessary? 
P. 524, par. 1,2. 

(8) Define order, which has been called "Heaven's first 
law," and show how rewards and punishments are necessary 
accompaniments of the Law of Love in the ideal home. 

P. 525, par. 1,2. 

(9) How should parents guard themselves in correcting 
their children, either by word or action? P. 526, par. 1. 

(10) How should Christian parents reason with their 
children and help them to understand the Divine requirements 
and necessity for discipline? P. 526, par. 2. 

FEBRUARY 9 

Read P. 527, par. 1, to P. 530, par. 2. 

(11) At how early an age may a child appreciate the 
principles of righteousness, and when should the parent begin 
the work of character-building in a child? P. 527, par. 1. 

(12) What is the all-important thing to be remembered 
in the training of a child? P. 528, par. 1. 

(13) What will be the loss, as well as the bitter experiences 
of parents who fail to properly train their children? 

P. 528, par. 2. 

(14) What element should chiefly characterize the 
atmosphere of the home, however humble it may be? P. 
529, par. 1. 

(15) What may be expected of a properly trained child 
as respects consecration to the Lord? P. 529, par. 2. 

(16) How does the evil influence of a home in which 
selfishness is the law manifest itself in parents and children? 
P. 530, par. 1,2. 

FEBRUARY 16 

Read P. 531, par. 1, to P. 536, par. 1. 

CHILDREN BORN IN JUSTIFICATION. 

(17) Explain how the children born of consecrated parents 
are justified. P. 531, par. 1. 

(18) What is the provision of Divine Grace as respects 
children, only one of whose parents is a believer? P. 532, par. 1, 2. 

(19) In the foregoing case, upon which parent does the 
headship devolve, if the wife be a New Creature? P. 532, par. 3. 

(20) In a case where the husband is the New Creature, what 
should be his course with respect to the family? P. 533, par. 1. 

(21) In cases where the children have not been properly 
trained in earlier years, what encouragement and suggestions 
may be offered to the parents? P. 534, par. 1, to P. 535, par. 2. 



(22) What two principles should especially guide parents 
in training their children? P. 536, par. 1. 

FEBRUARY 23 

Read P. 536, par. 2, to P. 540, par. 2. 

(23) How should the rights of maturity in a child be 
recognized and justly considered by parents? P. 536, par. 2. 

(24) How should the education of a child be considered, 
especially with respect to a collegiate course? P. 537, par. 1; 
P. 538, par. 1. 

(25) What kind of education should be regarded as far 
superior in every respect to that obtained in the schools of 
the world? P. 538, par. 2. 

(26) What would be a reasonable business schooling? And 
why is such preferable now to a collegiate course? P. 539, par. 1. 

(27) As for play: What are the advantages of proper 
exercise, and the deteriorating influence of useless and idle 
pleasures? P. 539, par. 2. 

(28) How may children be taught to take pleasure in 
useful, helpful occupations? P. 540, par. 1. 

(29) Why should economy of time, as well as of means, 
be inculcated in youthful minds? P. 540, par. 2. 



page 17 

VOL. XXXI JANUARY 15 No. 2 
A. D. 1913-A. M. 6041 



CONTENTS 

Covenant Relationship with God Essential 

to Life Everlasting 19 

Israel's Covenant Relationship Actual 19 

The Covenant of Sacrifice 20 

Distinction between Keeping and Fulfilling 

the Law 22 

That Feature Fulfilled by Christ's Death 23 

Death and the Resurrection 23 

Adamic Death Scrip turally Called Sleep 24 

Earthly Phase of the Resurrection 25 

Quietly Minding One's Own Business 26 

Busybodying an Evidence of Unbelief 26 

"Yet There is Room" 27 

Abraham and the Hebrews 28 

God's Call to Abraham 28 

Children of Abraham 29 

Abraham Was Very Rich 29 

Riches Often Bring Trouble 30 

God's Blessing Makes Rich 30 

Interesting Letters 30 



page 18 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



R5170 :page 18 

1913-OUR YEAR'S TEXT-1913 

We have gotten out a motto card bearing this year's text, 
with a pretty design of grapes, the cup and the loaf, and with 
our text, "What shall I render unto the Lord for all His benefits 
toward me? I will take the cup of salvation, and will 
call upon the name of the Lord. I will pay my vows unto the 
Most high." 

We believe that nearly all of our readers will want one or 
two copies of this motto for their own use. Some will want 
a copy in each room. We suggest that so far as possible, 
Classes order these together, thus saving packing and carrying 
charges. The price singly will be 5c, by the dozen 30c, 
postpaid. 



R5165 :page 18 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S MORNING RESOLVE 



MY EARLIEST THOUGHT I DESIRE SHALL BE: 

"What shall I render unto the Lord for all His benefits toward 
me? I will take the cup of salvation and call upon the 
name of the Lord [for grace to help]. I will pay my Vows 
unto the Most High. "-Psa. 116:12-14. 

Remembering the Divine call, "Gather My saints together 
unto Me; those that have made a covenant with Me by sacrifice" 
(Psa. 50:5), I resolve that by the Lord's assisting grace 
I will today, as a saint of God, fulfil my Vows, continuing 
the work of sacrificing the flesh and its interests, that I may 
attain unto the Heavenly inheritance in joint-heirship with 
my Redeemer. 

I will strive to be simple and sincere toward all. 

I will seek not to please and honor self, but the Lord. 

I will be careful to honor the Lord with my lips, that my 
words may be unctuous and blessed to all. 

I will seek to be faithful to the Lord, the Truth, the 
brethren and all with whom I have to do, not only in great 
matters, but also in the little things of life. 

Trusting myself to Divine care and the Providential overruling 
of all my interests for my highest welfare, I will seek 
not only to be pure in heart, but to repel all anxiety, all discontent, 
all discouragement. 

I will neither murmur nor repine at what the Lord's providence 
may permit, because 

"Faith can firmly trust Him, 
Come what may." 



R5162:page 19 

COVENANT RELATIONSHIP WITH GOD ESSENTIAL 
TO LIFE EVERLASTING 

GOD IS NOT in covenant relationship with the 
brute creation; for to them He has made no 
promises, although He has made a general 
provision for their needs. But we may understand 
that with all His intelligent creation 
He has a covenant, or agreement, to the 
effect that so long as they will do His will 
they shall possess life. Because of violation 
of that arrangement, the fallen angels were 
cast off, "reserved in chains of darkness 
unto the judgment of the Great Day" (Jude 6), to receive 
their final punishment. When Adam and Eve were disobedient, 
they violated this covenant, and came under the 
sentence of death. "They like men [Heb. Adam], have 
transgressed the covenant; there have they dealt treacherously 
against Me."— Hos. 6:7, margin. 
Because of Adam's transgression, the world is not in 



covenant relationship with God in any sense of the word. 
On the contrary, they are aliens, strangers, foreigners. 
(Eph. 2:11-13.) To some extent God brought Abraham 
back into covenant relationship, but not fully so. To the 
nation of Israel He made certain promises in the form of 
a Law Covenant, to the effect that whoever kept that 
Covenant would thereby demonstrate his worthiness to 
receive God's blessing promised to Abraham— that through 
him should all the families of the earth be blessed.— 
Gen. 12:3. 

The Law Covenant was given to the Jewish nation; 
Moses was the mediator, for it was impossible to make 
the Covenant with Israel directly. Although they were 
unable to keep that Covenant because of inherited weaknesses 
of the flesh, yet it brought them a measure of blessing, 
as St. Paul points out. (Rom. 7:7.) While it lifted 
Israel above the degradation into which the Gentiles were 
falling, nevertheless it did not bring the blessing for 
which they longed. It did not remove the death penalty 
—it did not give them life. 

In the clear light now shining for the people of God, 
we see that the Law Covenant was only a type of a better 
Covenant to be made with Israel after the Church of 
Christ has been glorified; that Moses himself was only 
a type of a better Mediator; that the sacrifices of the Law 
were only types of the "better sacrifices" mentioned in 
Heb. 9:23, and that their priesthood was a type of the 
Royal Priesthood of the Gospel Age.— Heb. 7:27. 

In the Scriptures, the words covenant and promise are 
used synonymously. The children of Israel were under 
the Abrahamic Covenant long before they entered into the 
Law Covenant. They are still under those Covenants. 
St. Paul says, "God hath not cast away His people whom 
He foreknew." (Rom. 11:2.) Then he proceeds to say 
that after the Elect Church has been gathered from 
among the Gentiles, the favor of God will return to Israel; 
for they are still beloved for the father's sake. The 
fathers of Israel are the patriarchs Abraham, Isaac and 
Jacob. The Jews are, therefore, under the Abrahamic 
Covenant— Rom. 11:25-28. 

ISRAEL'S COVENANT RELATIONSHIP ACTUAL 

An actual covenant relationship is one that is fully 
established— not merely suggested, or proposed, but accomplished. 
As Israel approached Mt. Sinai, God proposed 
to make a covenant with them. When all was in 
readiness, the Covenant was made through Moses as the 
mediator. The work of mediation was twofold; the first 
part was the sprinkling of the Law, representing the satisfaction 
of Justice; the second part was the sprinkling of 
the people, representing the bringing of the people into 
covenant relationship with God. That Covenant was then 
fully made, and has remained in operation ever since.— 
Exod. 24:3-8. 

With the Israelites, God was making a covenant which 



was to last for centuries. It was good for only one year 

at a time, however. For the first year the people were in 

harmony with God, but at the end of that time the cancellation 

of sins ceased; for the blood of bulls and of goats 

cannot take away sin. The whole arrangement was only 

a type. At the end of that first year, the Day of Atonement 

was inaugurated, and sacrifices were made for another 

year. The fact that the Atonement Day sacrifices 

were repeated year by year shows that they were efficacious 

for only a year at a time, and so never really took 

away sin.— Heb. 10:1-4. 

After the Day of Atonement, the people made various 
kinds of offerings. Some of these seem to typify the presentation 
of the worshiper himself to God, as an indication 
that he wished to do the will of Jehovah. Others were 
for sin-offerings, indicating that the worshiper realized 
that there had been a measure of wilfulness in his conduct. 
So rigid are the requirements of the Law Covenant that 
only one Jew, the Lord Jesus Christ, was able to keep 
them. This He could do because He was perfect, and the 
Law is the measure of a perfect man's full ability. 

That the Israelites were in covenant relationship with 
God through Moses, the mediator of their Covenant, is 
demonstrated by the fact that Moses said, "He hath declared 

R5163 : page 20 

unto you His Covenant, which He commanded you 
to perform, even the ten commandments." (Deut. 4:13.) 
Therefore the Jew is bound by the Law so long as he 
lives. (Rom. 7:1.) Although the Law Covenant is not 
intended to be an everlasting arrangement with the Jew, 
yet the only ones who have been able to get from under 
it are those who have come into Christ; the remainder 
cannot rid themselves of it. But the days draw nigh 
when the Lord God will make a New Covenant with them 
through a new Mediator, The Christ, who will assist them 
to keep the Law satisfactorily and thus to be delivered 
from the evil features of their Covenant. 

At the close of the Babylonish Captivity, the Prophet 
Daniel asked the Lord for an explanation of the 
prophecies relating to his people. The answer to his 
prayer is given in detail. "Seventy weeks are determined 
upon thy people and upon thy holy city, to finish the 
transgression, and to make an end of sins, and to make 
reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting 
righteousness, and to seal up the vision and prophecy and 
to anoint the Most Holy. "-Dan. 9:24-27. 

For an elucidation of this prophecy, the reader is referred 
to STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, Vol. II, Study III. 
All these things were to be done in those seventy weeks. 
Of this period of time, we find that the seventieth week 
was the most critical, for it was the week during which 
Messiah was to confirm the Covenant. In our Study III, 
we show that this week began October, A.D. 29 and closed 
October, A.D. 36— from the beginning of our Lord's 



ministry until the conversion of Cornelius, the first Gentile 
to receive the Holy Spirit. 

THE COVENANT CONFIRMED FOR ONE WEEK 

During that period of seven years, God bestowed special 
favor upon the Jews. At the beginning of that week 
of years, our Lord, who was then thirty years of age, 
presented Himself to God as a sacrifice. This presentation 
was the first feature of the antitypical Atonement 
Day work, and corresponded to the sacrifice of the bullock 
in the type. Our Lord began the antitypical sacrifices; 
as St. Paul says, "Then said He, Lo, I come to do Thy 
will, O God.' He taketh away the first, that He may 
establish the second." (Heb. 10:9.) Our Lord there began 
to take away the type and to establish the antitype. 
It was necessary not only to begin the work with the 
antitypical bullock, but to complete it and to take His 
place as the antitypical Moses, so to speak. This He did 
not accomplish until after His death on the cross. 

Many other features of that antitypical Atonement 
Day work are not yet completed. It was a part of the 
Atonement for the High Priest to offer the Lord's goat 
and to take its blood into the Most Holy and to sprinkle 
it there. It was also a part of the Atonement Day work 
for him to come out and confess the sins of the people on 
the scape-goat, and a still further part for him to bless the 
people. During our Lord's ministry, He fulfilled various 
features of the types. At Calvary His work of sacrificing 
Himself was finished, and the Divine acceptance of that 
sacrifice was manifested. 

The Prophet's statement that in the midst of the week 
Messiah would cause the sacrifice and the oblation to 
cease, implies that our Lord would there terminate the 
efficacy of the typical work for Israel as a people, and 
that they were rejected from Divine favor at the time 
that they crucified Him. A few days before His death, 
our Lord had said, "Behold, your house is left unto you 
desolate." (Matt. 23:38.) This rejection seems to have 
been symbolized when the veil of the temple was rent in 
twain from the top to the bottom, an indication of a breaking 
down, rather than of an opening up. 

This rejection of the Jewish nation does not indicate 
the end of their Law Covenant. To the Church of Christ, 
who have been given the privilege of understanding the 
deep things of the Spirit of God, it appears that the 
efficacy of the typical sacrifices, which were offered year 
by year continually, ceased at the death of our Lord; and 
that since that time, as a nation they have had no Divine 
favor; but that the only ones who have had favor since 
then are those who have come out of Moses into Christ. 
The typical sacrifices continued until the time when Christ 
died, for the reason that Jesus Himself was under the 
Law, a part of which He fulfilled, and no feature of which 
can pass away until all has been fulfilled.— Matt. 5:17,18. 

After our Lord's ascension, it was possible for greater 



work to be done than ever before. Under the Lord's 
blessing, thousands of Jews were gathered into the Gospel 
garner within comparatively a few days. The work of 
our Lord was cut short nationally, but it increased the 
opportunity of the Jews individually. There were only 
five hundred Jews who believed on Jesus until after 
His death, when there were thousands added to 
the number. (1 Cor. 15:6; Acts 2:41.) During the three 
and a half years following our Lord's death, God did not 
recognize the Gentiles, for He had said that He would 
give seventy weeks to the Jews, and therefore He allowed 
no favor to go to the Gentiles until that period had expired. 

After the expiration of the seventy weeks of years 
set apart for Israel, the Gospel began to go to the Gentiles, 
to gather from among them "a people for His name." 
(Acts 15:13-18.) During this Gospel Age, the antitypical 
Atonement work has been progressing. Our Lord has 
already offered the antitypical bullock in the sacrifice of 
Himself. Since Pentecost, He has been offering the antitypical 
goat— the Church class. This work has been in 
progress for more than eighteen hundred years. As soon 
as it shall have been finished, the blood will be taken into 
the Most Holy, to sprinkle the Mercy-Seat and to "make 
atonement for all the people," as in the type. 

THE COVENANT OF SACRIFICE 

The Abrahamic Covenant, as it was given to Abraham, 
is a complete covenant, whose provisions include all mankind; 
for it reads, "In thee and in thy Seed shall all the 
families of the earth be blessed." (Gen. 12:3; 28:14.) 
Its promise is to THE SEED: (1) Jesus; (2) The Christ, 
Head and Body; (3) the earthly seed through them. Its 
provisions extend to all who have the faith of Abraham. 
The promise of God was that a blessing shall come to all 
the families of the earth. This promise was confirmed 
by an oath on the part of God, so that by two immutable 
things— the oath and the promise of God— the heirs of the 
promise may be sure of its fulfilment— Heb. 6:13-18. 

The Seed of Abraham, which is to bless all the families 
of the earth, was intended to be a Spiritual Seed. 
Since Abraham and his posterity were natural men, the 
only way by which they could become the Spiritual Seed 
was by the sacrifice of the earthly nature and the attaining 
to the spirit nature. The opportunity for making this 
sacrifice was first given to our Lord Jesus. By carrying 
out His covenant of sacrifice, He became the Head of the 
Seed which is to bring the blessing.— Psa. 50:5; 40:7-10. 

During the Gospel Age, Jehovah has been selecting the 
members of this Spiritual Seed, that they may lay down 
their human life and earthly interests in order to attain 
to the spirit nature. The selection of this Seed has been 
the work of the Gospel Age. Soon the Seed will be all 
gathered; then the work of blessing the natural seed will 
begin, and through them the blessing will subsequently 
spread to all nations, as these shall accept the Divine favor. 



The Church will always be in covenant relationship 

R5163 : page 21 

with the Father. The fact that He calls them sons implies 
that they are bound to Him. (John 1:12.) Every 
father is in covenant relationship with his children, and 
they with him. Every child has a responsibility to its 
father, and the father to the child. The fact that God 
has received the Lord Jesus and the Church as sons (Heb. 3:6) 
signifies that they are in covenant relationship with 
Him. St. Paul says, "We are the children of God; and 
if children, then heirs." (Rom. 8:16,17.) His statement 
not only implies that relationship, but proves it; for the 
sons have a right to the things which the father has 
provided for his children. 

All who hunger and thirst after righteousness (Matt. 5:6), 
all whose souls long for God "as the hart pants after 
the water brook" (Psa. 42:1), and who, having found 
Him, have consecrated themselves to Him— these have 
received the anointing of the Holy Spirit, witnessing with 
their spirit that they are sons of God. (Rom. 8:14-16.) 
As anointed sons these can discover in themselves the 
worthy traits of true sons— loyalty, zeal, energy, discretion, 
faithfulness, obedience. 

There are, however, conditions attached to this covenant 
of sacrifice; there are certain requirements which 
must be fulfilled. All must become partakers of the sufferings 
of Christ, if they would participate with Him in 
the glories to follow. But the arrangements for keeping 
our contract are complete in Christ. Therefore if we put 
ourselves under His care, this covenant will be everlasting 
with us, and we shall have "the sure mercies of David."— 
Isa. 55:3. 

COVENANT RELATIONSHIP TO BE RE-ESTABLISHED WITH 
HUMANITY 

In Jer. 31:31-33, we read, "I will make a New Covenant 
with the House of Israel and with the house of 
Judah... after those days." The expression, "those 
days," we understand to refer to Israel's "seven times" of 
punishment, promised by the Lord for the violation of 
their Law Covenant. This New Covenant is to be made 
with Israel alone; for God never purposed to make a 
covenant with the Gentiles. The New Covenant will 
properly be so called because it will take the place of the 
old Law Covenant, which God made with Israel and which 

R5164 : page 21 

was broken by them. After Israel shall have been fully 
established under their New Covenant, all other nations 
will be privileged to come into this relationship after the 
manner set forth in the Law. All the world will eventually 
be blessed thereby. 



The New Covenant, then, is to be made with such of 
Abraham's descendants as are able to receive it. Since 
the people are not worthy to enter directly into relationship 
with God, that Covenant must have a Mediator. The 
Mediator is the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Church, His 
Body. The Scriptures indicate that the Mediator is nearly 
completed. 

The Word of God distinguishes between a covenant 
and its mediator. A covenant does not go into operation 
until after it has been fully mediated. When Moses 
mediated the Law Covenant, he first offered sacrifices; 
then he took the blood of the animals and, dividing it 
into two parts, sprinkled both the Book of the Law and 
the people. (Exod. 24:4-8; Heb. 9:19-24.) After he had 
done this, the Law Covenant was in force; and it will continue 
until superseded by its antitype, the New Covenant. 

The Mediator of the New Covenant will be The Christ. 
For more than eighteen hundred years, our Lord has been 
offering the great antitypical sacrifices of Himself and His 
Church. As soon as He will have finished making application 
of the blood, He will have made satisfaction for 
the sins of the world. This act will correspond to the 
sprinkling of the Book by Moses. Divine Justice having 
accepted this arrangement, the Mediator will antitypically 
sprinkle the people; that is, he will show them how to 
come back into full accord with God. 

The New Covenant will begin to swallow up the old 
Law Covenant as soon as the Kingdom is established. 
The Scriptures indicate that the first to receive it will be 
the Ancient Worthies. Raised from the dead to human 
perfection, they will form the nucleus of the new arrangement 
in the earth. Next in order will be those who have 
been known as Christians, but who have not been consecrated 
to death, and Jews who have been consecrated to 
the Law, but who have been blinded. Gradually the light 
will come to all who love righteousness and hate iniquity. 
Sprinkled from all sympathy with evil, they will make 
their declaration of full loyalty to God. In due time this 
light will spread to all kindreds and tongues and nations. 

CHANGE OF HEART IN THE MILLENNIUM 

The Prophet Jeremiah, speaking of the New Covenant 
(31:34), says, "They shall know Me, from the least of 
them unto the greatest of them, saith the Lord; for I will 
forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no 
more." The sins and iniquities of Israel will no longer 
be remembered against them. Christ will have appeared 
on their behalf and made satisfaction for their sins. They 
will then be as free from original sin as the Gospel Church 
are. The Atonement of the Lord Jesus Christ is the 
sufficiency for all. — I John 2:2. 

The Prophet Ezekiel tells us that during the next Age 
the hearts of mankind will be changed. He says, "Thus 
saith the Lord God;. ..A new heart also will I give 
you, and a new spirit will I put within you; and I will 



take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will 
give you an heart of flesh." (Ezek. 36:22-27.) This 
change of heart is entirely aside from the making of the 
New Covenant. It will take a thousand years to remove 
the stoniness out of the hearts of mankind and to make 
them stand without a Mediator. Those who receive everlasting 
life must attain this condition; for all of God's creatures 
who would live forever must keep His Law perfectly. 

During the Millennium, God will not recognize the 
people, because of their imperfection, their weakness; but 
all of their dealings will be through the Mediator, until 
they shall have been brought up to perfection. At the 
end of the thousand years, they will be delivered up to 
the Father, unblamable before Him. (I Cor. 15:24.) 
God will then receive them as sons, heirs of the earthly 
blessings which He has provided for mankind— the things 
given to Adam. The very moment when the merit of 
Christ is applied for the world is the same moment when 
they will be turned over to the Mediator. Then they will 
be in covenant relationship with God, but only through 
the Mediator, until they shall have reached human perfection 
and shall enter into this relationship directly with 
the Father. 

The New Covenant will continue everlastingly; and 
as it is proper to say that Moses mediated the Law Covenant, 
so we may say that Christ will mediate the New 
Covenant. But it would not be proper to say that Moses 
is now the Mediator of the Law Covenant; for a covenant 
does not need a mediator after it has been mediated. So 
the New Covenant will need no Mediator after the thousand 
years. But the title "Mediator" may belong to 
Christ to all eternity, just as one who has been a judge, 
ever after receives the title of "Judge." 

At the end of the thousand years, when the Messiah 

R5164 : page 22 

will have accomplished His work of Restitution, He will 

cease to act as Mediator. But the Covenant will continue 

to stand; for if that relationship with God were to 

be removed from the people, they would have no blessing 

of everlasting life. That blessing depends upon covenant 

relationship with God. Under the favorable conditions 

of the New Covenant, whosoever will may have an opportunity 

to become the children of The Christ, the Seed 

of Abraham. 

At the conclusion of the thousand years, the willing 
and the obedient receive the commendation, "Well done," 
and will be accepted as fit for the condition of everlasting 
life on the human plane. Those who prove to be unworthy 
of life will be destroyed in the Second Death. 



R5164 : page 22 



DISTINCTION BETWEEN KEEPING AND FULFILLING THE LAW 

THE QUESTION, Did the keeping of the 

Law Covenant require the death of Christ? 

is a peculiar and very deep one. On one 

side it might be argued that the death of 

Christ was sacrificial, that no law would 

be just which would require the death of 

an innocent person; that since God's Law is 

just, it did not require the death of an 

innocent man, and that therefore it was not 

necessary for Jesus to die in order to fulfil 

the Law. But this is only one side of the question. 

The other side of the argument is that our Lord 
Jesus, who loved His God with all His heart, soul, mind 
and strength, and who had consecrated His life to do the 
Father's will, must do that will and avoid everything 
contrary to it, in order to live in harmony with His 
consecration. As soon, therefore, as He learned that it 
was God's will that a redemption price of a perfect human 
life should be paid for Adam and the world of mankind, 
He would present Himself in consecration and faithfully 
carry out all that is implied in that consecration, because 
He loved God with all His heart, soul, mind and strength. 

It would be reasonable, also, to expect that if our 
Lord knew that the hundreds of millions to whom He 
had become "neighbor" by becoming human were in great 
difficulty and could be delivered only by a sacrifice on 
His part, He would, if He loved His neighbor as Himself, 
want to do something for their relief. This desire would 
lead Him to make the sacrifice. 

If to this we add the thought that God would not 
permit our Lord to perish, but would restore Him to life 
and glory, and that Jesus had in mind the promise that 
He would not be suffered to remain in death, we at once 
perceive that He would be willing to die for His unjust 
neighbor, because He loved His neighbor as Himself. 

These two views, so directly opposite, nevertheless 
coincide in that it was left open for our Lord to will what 
He would do. The Father gave Him an opportunity 
and set before Him a great reward; the Father did not 
entrap our Lord into an engagement from which He could 
not draw back. When we come to view the subject 
from this standpoint, we see the reasonableness of the 
whole arrangement. 

In His consecration at baptism our Lord had said, 
"Lo, I come.. .to do Thy will, O God" (Heb. 10:7); 
I will keep nothing back that You require. Such obedience 
would have been as much as the Law could require 
of any one. On the other hand, Justice would not require 
a sacrifice, for Justice could not demand it. Willingness 
to do anything that Justice would demand constituted His 
keeping of the Law. This point is so fine that it is almost 
impossible to explain it in language. We can know, however, 
that the Father set before Jesus the great reward, 
and that for the joy set before Him He endured the 



cross and despised the shame.— Heb. 12:1,2. 

GOD'S WILL EXPRESSED IN THE TYPES 

There is a distinction between fulfilling the Law and 
keeping the Law. The Jews did neither. They partially 
kept the Law and endeavored to do still further than they 
were able to do. But they could not fulfil the Law; for it 
is so great that it is beyond the power of man to fulfil 
all of its requirements. 

The Law consists of two different parts. The one is 
a regulation of the morals— the duty of all toward God 
and toward fellow-men. In this sense of the word, the 
Law stands for justice— for what is right. The Jews endeavored 
to do right and thus to keep the Law, but were 
unable to do so on account of hereditary weaknesses. 

Our Lord Jesus, however, kept the Law in this sense. 
By so doing He earned the right to everlasting life on 

R5165 : page 22 

the human plane. This the world will do in the next Age. 
They will be enabled to keep the Law and will get everlasting 
life, the reward of obedience to the Law. But 
Jesus did more than keep the Law of Justice. He also 
fulfilled that part of the Law which was applicable to 
Him, and He is still fulfilling the Law. 

The other part of the Law consists of the ceremonial 
features, which constitute the types and shadows mentioned 
by St. Paul. (Heb. 10:1.) These prophetic features 
of the Law represent the Divine will in respect to 
the means by which mankind will be restored from the 
plane of degradation, sin and death to Divine favor. This 
prophetical fulfilling of the Law consisted in the carrying 
out in antitype of one important feature— the Passover 
institution. The killing of the lamb, the sprinkling of 
the blood and the eating of the flesh, were prophetical- 
typical. 

Jesus fulfilled His part of the type when He was put 
to death. It was only by virtue of His sacrifice of His 
will entirely to the Divine will that He was able to fulfil 
the prophecies, for these were not commands to mankind 
in general. In these was a suggestion of things which 
were not commanded, but which God desired to have accomplished 
at some time through some one, and through 
which the Redemption of the human race and the Restitution 
of all things lost by Adam would be effected. 

In the performance of the Atonement Day sacrifices 
the blood was taken into the Most Holy and typically 
made satisfaction for sin. Jesus accomplished a part of 
this work. Since then He has ascended on High and 
made satisfaction for us, the Church class, by means of 
which we may walk in His footsteps by consecration. 
(Heb. 9:24.) All down through the Gospel Age He has 
been accepting this class, and eventually will accomplish 
their sacrifice. This was typified by the killing of the 



Lord's goat. 

Jesus, we see, has been fulfilling the Law during these 
eighteen hundred years, as well as during His ministry. 
This work will not be finished until the end of the Age. 
Jesus said that He came not to destroy, but to fulfil the 
things of the Law (Matt. 5:17); and He will continue 
the fulfilment of the types of the Law during the thousand 
years, until all is fulfilled at the close of the Millennial 
Age. Some of these things are future; such as the 
sprinkling of the blood of the antitypical Lord's goat, the 
sending away of the antitypical scape-goat, and the appearance 

R5165 : page 23 

of the antitypical High Priest to bless the people. 
It will take the entire thousand years of Christ's reign to 
get back all that was lost through Adam's disobedience 
and that is to be restored to mankind through the merit 
of Christ. 

THAT FEATURE OF THE LAW FULFILLED BY CHRIST'S 
DEATH 

The moral Law— the Ten Commandments— and the 
Covenant, of which it is a part, promised life to those 
who would keep its requirements. Jesus could have had 
that everlasting life by doing everything that the Law 
required, for the Law demands no more than justice. He 
could have obeyed every command of the Law without 
sacrificing any of His rights. But the prophetic features 
of the Law could not have been fulfilled unless some one 
had sacrificed his life, and the one who would do this must 
be the equivalent of the one who had sinned. Since the 
one who had sinned was perfect, in the image 
of God, the one who would be a corresponding price to 
fulfil the Law and to bring out all those blessings to the 
world that the Law prophesies, must be one who could 
fully keep the Law. Only such a person would be competent 
to make the sacrifice and thus to fulfil the prophetic 
features of the Law. 

This requirement was fully met by Jesus, who was 
"holy, harmless, undefiled and separate from sinners"— 
everything that Justice could expect. He gladly kept the 
Law, and did even more. He proposed to do everything 
written in the Book; for He had said, "Lo, I come to do 
Thy will, O God" (Psa. 40:8)— everything that had been 
written. His consecration went beyond the moral Law 
and embraced everything that God had written prophetically. 
All this He fulfilled. As a result He is the Savior, 
"able to save to the uttermost" all that come to the Father 
through Him.-Heb. 7:25. 

We cannot think that God would be offended with any 
one who came up to the requirements of the Law, but who 
did not go beyond. Since God had said, "If any one 
keep all this Law, I will do My part and give him everlasting 
life," Justice could ask no more. If such a one should 



not go forward to sacrifice, Justice could not be offended, 
for it could not demand that he do so. 

In fact, the Father does not require the righteous of 
this Age to sacrifice, nor will He expect the world to do 
so in coming to the plane of human perfection. But if 
God should set before any of the human family an opportunity 
to offer their lives in doing the Divine will, they 
should esteem this a privilege. The Father would not 
consign one to death, however, who should fail to do 
this. But every one who loves the Lord should think, 
"Here is my opportunity to show my trust, my loyalty to 
God." In this respect the example of Jesus will stand out 
for all eternity to angels and to men, so that if ever God 
gave even a hint of what His will would be, they would 
hasten to do that will and not hesitate for any 
consideration. 

There is a lesson also of love in the matter. We are 
not to content ourselves with saying, "I did not lie; I 
did not steal; I did unto my neighbor as I would wish 
done unto myself." We are not to stop with this as a 
sufficiency; no one will get life on any plane if he does 
no more than this. Our privilege is to anticipate God's 
will through watching the types of the Law and the words 
of our Lord and Head. We are to count all things as 
loss and dross in comparison with this opportunity which 
we have. Nothing else should be counted so great a 
privilege as that of following in the footsteps of Jesus. 



FOR CHILDREN OF BELIEVERS 
MORNING PRAYER 

Dear Father, hear a little child 

Who offers thanks to Thee; 
Through all the darkness Thou hast kept 

A watch-care over me. 
O Father, keep me through this day, 

I would to Thee belong; 
May love control my little hands, 

May kindness rule my tongue. 
Thy Kingdom come, Thy will be done 

Upon this earth again; 
Dear Father, hear my little prayer 

For Jesus' sake. Amen. 

EVENING PRAYER 

Dear Lord, before sweet slumber comes 

To close my weary eyes, 
Up to Thy Throne of Heavenly grace 

My voice in prayer would rise. 
For all the blessings of this day 

I give Thee thanks and praise. 
Forgive me, Lord, for Jesus' sake, 



For all my naughty ways; 
And as I lay me down to sleep 

Do Thou an angel send 
To watch beside me all the night 

For Jesus' sake. Amen.— Rebecca F. Doney. 



R5166 : page 23 

DEATH AND THE RESURRECTION 

DEATH IS NOT a sleep; it is destruction. 

Dead bodies decay because the work of destruction 

is progressing in them. We say 

that mortification sets in; that is, the destruction 

of the tissues goes on until everything 

that had life in that body has perished. This 

process of decay is common to both man and 

beast, and also goes on in the vegetable 

world. As the Scriptures say, "That which 

befalleth the sons of men befalleth the 

beasts; even one thing befalleth them; as the one dieth, 

so dieth the other; yea, they have all one breath; so that 

a man hath no pre-eminence above a beast. ..All go 

unto one place; all are of the dust, and all turn to dust 

again."— Eccl. 3:19,20. 

Very few people seem to realize what is meant by the 
term "soul." The Scriptural teaching is that man IS a 
soul, not that he HAS a soul. In Gen. 2:7 we read, "And 
the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and 
breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man BECAME 
a LIVING SOUL." The Word of God speaks of 
both man and beast as souls. (See Num. 31:28.) Body, 
soul and spirit are in combination in a living organism. 

A dog has a body; a dog has a life— a vitalizing principle; 
and aside from this life-principle and organism, a 
dog has a personality. One dog differs from another; 
one may be a bulldog, another, a lap-dog in a fashionable 
family. Each animal has his own joys and sorrows; but 
whatever he is, these things go to make up the experiences 
by which a dog would recognize himself. 

So it is with a human being. There is a body and a 
life principle, the union of which makes the soul. His experiences 

R5166 : page 24 

—his home-life, his education, his environment, 

his travels, his finances, his private affairs— all go to make 

up his personality. It is not his body, but his soul that has 

these experiences. As two dogs under different experiences 

would have very different personalities, so with 

human beings. All the different experiences of life 

help to make them happy or unhappy, learned or ignorant, 

wise or unwise. 



IN DEATH WHAT PRE-EMINENCE HATH A MAN? 

What is the difference between a brute soul and a 
human soul? The human soul has a higher organization 
of body and brain, which constitutes him an individual of 
a higher order; and not only has he a better brain by 
Divine appointment, but he was not made like the brute 
beast to die after a brief period of years. Man was made 
to live forever. 

In Eden, man came under the sentence of death, as the 
penalty for disobedience. The entire race has been 
born in a dying condition. Each human being receives 
a spark of life from his parents, without which the 
body would return to dust. When man dies, his personality, 
which is the result of his hereditary and prenatal 
influences combined with his experiences, perishes; for it 
cannot exist without a body. As the Scriptures declare, 
"In that day his THOUGHTS perish"; for "the dead 
know not anything"; "There is no work, nor device, nor 
knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave whither thou goest." 
-Psa. 146:4; Eccl. 9:5,10. 

The question then arises, Does man die in the same 
sense that the brute creation does? We answer that so 
far as man himself is concerned, he would be as dead as 
is the beast, if God had not made an arrangement by 
which humanity will have a future life. God intends to 
restore to life, not the body, but the soul that died. The 
soul that went into death is the soul that was redeemed by 
Jesus. --Psa. 49:15. 

Through the resurrection, God has arranged to show 
His love for the world. It is written, "When the fulness 
of time was come, God sent forth His Son" (Gal. 4:4); 
"Who gave Himself a Ransom for all" (I Tim. 2:6)— 
"for every man." (Heb. 2:9.) Every man has gone into 
death or is going there; and unless a redemption had been 
provided, there could be no resurrection. So the Apostle 
Paul explains that, "since by man came death, by man 
came also the resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam 
all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive. But every 
man in his own order."— I Cor. 15:21-23. 

This making alive will be the resurrection of the dead 
—not of those particles of matter which have gone to 
fertilize a tree and then through its fruit become a part of 
another organism, but the resurrection of the being— the 
soul. In the resurrection, "God giveth it a body as it hath 
pleased Him." (I Cor. 15:38.) To the individual, it does 
not matter what particles compose his new body. What 
he is interested in is the resurrection of his soul— his being 
—his personality. That restoration is the all-important 
part of the resurrection. 

God has given the assurance that He is able to restore 
mankind; and we who believe His Word do not think of 
man as dead in the same sense as is the brute. On the 
contrary, we allow the beast to pass into oblivion, but we 
think of man. For our dead we raise a memorial, remembrance, 
of the body which represented the personality 



dear to us. Our faith assures us that the personality is not 
extinct, but that it will have a resurrection. The respect 
which we show to our friends and loved ones in their 
sepulchers indicates our faith in their future life through 
a resurrection of the dead. 

ADAMIC DEATH SCRIPTURALLY CALLED SLEEP 

In the Scriptures, God sets forth the thought that the 
dead are asleep. Since He is the One who has the Power 
and the Purpose to raise the dead, He can speak of them 
in this way. Their bodies have indeed gone to dust, but 
they as individuals are known to God. To raise men from 
the dead and to give them back the very thoughts which 
they had before death will be a stupendous work, which 
only the Wisdom and Power of the Almighty God can 
accomplish. Those alone who have confidence in the 
promises of God can speak of their loved ones as asleep 
in death. 

The Scriptures speak of the Ancient Worthies as 
asleep. We read that "David slept with his fathers." (I Kings 2:10.) 
The same statement is made of all of the 
kings of Israel, whether good or bad. St. Stephen, stoned 
to death, "fell asleep." (Acts 7:60.) St. Paul says, 
"Them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with 
Him. ...We which are alive and remain unto the coming 
of the Lord shall not prevent [precede— go before] 
them which sleep... and the dead in Christ shall rise 
first."— I Thess. 4:14-16. 

In the morning of that glorious Day when the Sun of 
Righteousness shall rise with healing in His beams, all 
that God has promised for that blessed time will come to 
pass. (Mai. 4:2.) Meantime, the dead are awaiting that 
Day during which "all that are in the graves shall hear 
His voice [the voice of the Son of Man] and shall come 
forth." (John 5:28,29.) In this sense of the word, therefore, 
we speak of the dead as asleep. Our Lord Himself 
used this word in speaking of Lazarus. He said, "Lazarus 
sleepeth." When by their reply the disciples showed that 
they did not understand, Jesus said unto them plainly, 
"Lazarus is dead."— John 11:11-14. 

HEAVENLY PHASE OF THE RESURRECTION 

From one standpoint, all mankind fall asleep to wait 
for the morning of the great Millennial Day, when the 
Sun of Righteousness shall arise. The resurrection will 
come to every member of the human race; but as no two 
individuals have been in the same degree of degradation, 
some will rise more rapidly than will others. The Scriptures 
seem to indicate that there will be several classes 
in the resurrection. One of these is designated the "First 
Resurrection," that is, the chief, or most important; and 
it will consist of those who are to be associated with our 
Lord in His Throne. "Blessed and holy is he that hath 
part in the First Resurrection; on such the Second Death 



hath no power, but they shall be Priests of God and of 
Christ, and shall reign with Him a thousand years."— 
Rev. 20:6. 

This description excludes the Great Company and applies 
merely to the Little Flock, "partakers of the Divine 
nature." (2 Pet. 1:4.) Other Scriptures seem to show 
us that the Great Company class will attain to spirit perfection 
in their resurrection; and therefore we might 
think of theirs as a second resurrection— second in order, 
in glory and in preference. These two classes compose 
the "Church of the First-borns, which are written in 
Heaven." (Heb. 12:23.) The difference between them 
is merely that the Little Flock were zealous to go forward 
and perform what duties and privileges they saw, while 
the Great Company were less zealous and less loyal in 
sacrifice, although they would suffer death rather than 
deny the Lord or His Truth. 

This distinction is set forth in the typical arrangement 
of the Law Covenant. As the tribe of Levi was called 

R5166 : page 25 

out from among Israel for a special work, so the Church 
of the First-borns are called out from among mankind, as 
the antitypical Levites. The priestly tribe of Israel was 
divided into two classes, the priests and the Levites, and 
likewise the Church is composed of two classes. Of these, 
only the "more than conquerors" (Rom. 8:37.) will become 
"partakers of the Divine nature" and have the preeminence. 
The Great Company will not attain to this 
honor. 

We are not able to distinguish who are the "more than 
conquerors." The Great Company are identified with the 
Little Flock both here on earth and also in Heaven. Both 
classes are of the "First-borns." As the Apostle James 
says, we are "a kind of first-fruits of His creatures." 
(James 1:18.) To illustrate this thought, let us consider 
a bed of strawberries: These berries are among the first 
fruits of the season, yet even among them we find that 
some berries ripen sooner than the rest of the crop. These 
early-ripe berries may be said to be the first-fruit of the 
first-fruits. So with the Little Flock. 

R5167 : page 25 

EARTHLY PHASE OF THE RESURRECTION 

In the Scriptures, a third class of faithful servants of 
God are mentioned. Many of these are called by name 
in the Epistle to the Hebrews. We refer to the Ancient 
Worthies, who lived and were found faithful before the 
coming of our Savior. These did not have the opportunity 
of walking in the footsteps of our Lord and so did not 
have the "high calling." These are said to receive "a better 
resurrection" than will the rest of mankind (Heb. 11:35) 
—better, not in the sense of belonging to the spirit 



plane, but in that it will be an instantaneous raising to 
human perfection, whereas the remainder of the race will 
require a thousand years during which to come back 
gradually to the original condition lost by Adam. 

At the beginning of the reign of Christ, the Ancient 
Worthies will come forth perfect human beings— mentally 
and physically— that their bodies may correspond with 
their moral development. If they had scars, these will be 
theirs no longer; if they had blemishes, these will have 
disappeared. It is not easy for us to picture to ourselves 
a perfect man, for we have never seen one, and all around 
us are various degrees of imperfection. But we know 
that a perfect human being will be perfect in form, feature, 
voice, sight, hearing, taste, and in all other organs, 
as well as in mind. 

Last of all, "the residue of men" will come forth, 
"every man in his own order." (I Cor. 15:23.) Their 
awakening will merely bring them forth from the tomb 
in the condition in which they entered it; for in the grave, 
"there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom." 
(Eccl. 9:10.) This awakening is not the resurrection, 
but merely the preliminary step toward it. The 
Greek word rendered "resurrection" is anastasis, and 
means literally "a standing up again." Adam fell, and 
ever since "the whole world lieth in wickedness"— literally, 
"in the wicked one." (I John 5:19.) The standing up 
again is, therefore, a return to the perfection lost in Eden; 
for the world of mankind the resurrection is the Restitution. 
-Acts 3:19-21. 

During the thousand years of Messiah's reign, the 
resurrection of the world will be in progress. The work 
will not be done by the Father directly, but will be committed 
to the Lord Jesus (John 5:28,29), and will require 
the whole thousand years for its completion. At the end 
of that Millennial reign the world of mankind will be 
perfect, as was Adam in his creation. All God's work is 
perfect. -Deut. 32:4; Gen. 1:31. 

As previously stated, the Ancient Worthies, as a reward 
for their faith in God, will come forth to a better 
resurrection than will other men. The remainder of the 
race will come forth in practically the same condition in 
which they went into death. They will know nothing 
more, nothing less than when they died; their personality 
will be the same. As for their bodies, we cannot suppose 
that these will be perfect, for if mankind were thus 
brought back from death, they would not know each other. 
If all should be brought forth of one color, or if all should 
have the same style of features, they would not be recognized. 
On the other hand, they will come forth, neither 
gasping for breath, nor in fragments, as if blown to pieces 
by an explosion or eaten by an animal, but in what 
formerly was their usual health. 

Mankind recognize each other by certain physical traits 
as well as by mental and moral characteristics. If in the 
awakening a man were given a perfect form or a properly 
balanced brain, he would not know himself on coming 



forth from the tomb. His very thoughts would be different; 
there would be nothing by which memory could 
identify him. Humanity will be raised from the tomb in 
the condition suggested by our Lord when He said to the 
man with a withered hand, '"Stretch forth thine hand!' 
And he did so; and his hand was restored whole as the 
other" (Luke 6: 10)— complete— not in the full sense of the 
word, but enough so to have a new start in the new life. 

SHAME AND CONTEMPT WILL BE PURGED AWAY DURING 
THE MILLENNIUM 

The Savior makes an atonement for the sins of mankind 
for the very purpose of giving them a trial for life, 
an opportunity to demonstrate whether, under the favorable 
conditions of the Messianic Kingdom, they will 
choose righteousness and life or unrighteousness and 
everlasting death. The Scriptures seem to imply that 
there will be a great deal of shame and contempt properly 
attaching to those who will not have come into full accord 
with God.— Dan. 12:2. 

During the thousand years of trial, very many will 
purge themselves of this shame and contempt. Thus we 
may suppose that, as the years go by, the shame will 
gradually cease and the contempt will die away. We see 
this point illustrated in the case of Saul of Tarsus. When 
he learned that he was fighting against God, he was very 
much ashamed of the course which he had taken. As 
gradually he manifested his loyalty to God, he purged 
himself of this shame and contempt. St. Paul's valor and 
zeal in the service of the Lord offset the things which he 
did ignorantly as Saul of Tarsus. His shame, therefore, 
has passed away. 

The world will awake from the dead in this condition 
of shame and contempt. But gradually the obedient will 
arise from this state to the original perfection of the 
image of God. The wilfully disobedient, on the contrary, 
will not rise. They will sink lower, until finally they will 
go into everlasting destruction, or as St. Peter says, "As 
natural brute beasts. ..shall utterly perish in their 
own corruption."— 2 Pet. 2:12. 

At the First Advent our Lord did most of His healing 
on the Sabbath Day, thus foreshadowing the work of healing 
which He will do for the world in the great antitypical 
Sabbath— the Millennium. Mankind will come 
forth from the tomb free from their previous condemnation, 
with human bodies in proper condition, so that their 
friends will recognize them as formerly; but they will 
have weaknesses— physical, mental and moral. 

God has provided everything necessary for the resurrection 
of mankind— not only the Ransom-price, but also 

R5167 : page 26 

Christ's Mediatorial Kingdom. The uplifting influences of 
the incoming Age will be open to every member of the 



race, whether great or small, rich or poor. But their 
acceptance or rejection and the rapidity of their progress 
will depend upon their personal interest in the matter. 
Those who refuse to advance and who show no desire for 
their own development, will be cut off in Second Death. 

There is no reason why those who will not make progress 
should be allowed to live on indefinitely. The same 
Justice which declares that only those who are in perfect 
accord with God shall have everlasting life, will not permit 
those to live forever who continue to be imperfect. 
Such will indicate by their attitude that they are not in 
harmony with righteousness, and will be justly classed as 
wicked. Of these it is written, "All the wicked will He 
destroy. "--Psa. 145:20. 



R5167 : page 26 

QUIETLY MINDING ONE'S OWN BUSINESS 

"But we beseech you, brethren.... that ye study to be 
quiet, and to do your own business."— I Thess. 4:10,11. 

THERE IS A quietness that appertains to 

sloth and indolence; but this evidently is 

not what the Apostle means in our text; 

for elsewhere he urges us to be "not slothful 

in business." (Rom. 12:11.) There is 

another quietness that appertains to peace— 

a composure which is the opposite of 

nervousness, giddiness and childishness. 

This condition we believe to be that which 

the Apostle has in mind. The Lord's people 

are to study to have a mind that is well balanced. 

This composure is not natural to the majority of people 

and is, therefore, something to be studied and attained. 

We are in the school of Christ to learn such lessons. 

This desirable quietness represents the graces of the 
Holy Spirit— meekness, gentleness, patience and brotherly 
kindness. While we are to be "fervent in spirit, 
serving the Lord" (Rom. 12:11,) we are also to be obedient 
to the instructions of the Holy Spirit, in meekness, 
quietness and love. We are to endeavor to take a proper 
estimate of the affairs of life, and not to allow trivial 
things to excite us. This course, if faithfully pursued, 
tends to produce a quietness of spirit. 

To mind one's own business is a very important lesson 
to learn. Surely every Christian has observed that 
much of the trouble in the world results from interference 
one with another. In every difficulty, one or both of the 
persons involved failed to mind his own business. Some 
people are always seeking to find fault with others, 
and seem to think they are commissioned to correct the 
whole world. We find no authority given in the Bible 
for such a course. 



A busybody is a person who meddles with the affairs 
of others with which he properly has nothing whatever 
to do. Sometimes he fancies that it is his duty to advise, 
criticise, investigate, chide and reprove others. The 
Golden Rule will prove a great help in deciding what is 
one's duty in any case. This commandment of the Lord 
prohibits everything akin to busybodying. Each member 
of the New Creation should educate his conscience to 
discriminate between brotherly-love and busybodying, 
and should learn to apply the rules of justice and love to 
every act, word and thought, so far as in him lies. 

Where a matter is one in which we are personally 
concerned, however, we shall not be meddling with other 

R5168 : page 26 

people's affairs, but minding our own business, when we 
give it proper attention. There are times, places and 
circumstances which the Bible points out as proper for 
correction, reproof, etc. A parent may correct a child; 
a teacher, a pupil. It is not meddling for a parent to 
have knowledge and direction of all that is going on in 
the house, nor for the teacher to be in touch with the 
affairs of the school. The personal rights of the members 
of a family or of a school should never be lost sight of, 
however. A householder and those who are serving a 
house come under the same rule as do parent and child, 
teacher and pupil. 

One of the greatest lessons of life is to learn that one 
who spends considerable time in correcting others, even 
though it be properly done and well, is prone to forget 
himself. One's first duty is to bring himself into harmony 
with the Divine arrangement and to keep himself there. 

BUSYBODYING AN EVIDENCE OF UNBELIEF 

To keep ourselves in the Love of God, we should cultivate 
the fruits and the graces of the Holy Spirit. There 
are not a few who can discourse learnedly on those qualities, 
but who seem not to be able properly to apply their 
knowledge to the affairs of every-day life. They seem 
to be unable to realize where meekness, gentleness and 
love should be shown in their own experiences. There are 
some things which we can teach others better by example 
than by precept. If we show in the little things of life 
that we are governed by the principles of justice and 
love, and if when under trial we exhibit meekness, gentleness 
and other fruits of the Spirit, our influence for good 
will be greatly increased. 

Observation in life leads one to believe that fully one-half 
of the world are meddle-some busybodies, and that 
many of their trials result from this weakness. It would 
appear that in nearly every family there is some one, 
perhaps a husband, perhaps a wife, perhaps a child, who 
takes advantage of the kindness and generosity of the 
others and rules the house. Usually in such cases there 



is much injustice done. Those who take this position 
often attempt to justify their course by saying, "If I did 
not take the reins in hand, things would not run properly." 
Such do not perceive that they are busybodies. 

This course of conduct demonstrates a lack of faith in 
God. We should do our duty and leave the rest to the 
Lord. There are people who in the future will find that 
they have lost much because they have not been subject 
to the Divine arrangements. Any one of the Lord's 
people who thus practises injustice is not making progress 
as a New Creature. Whether it be the husband, the wife 
or the child who rides rough-shod over the rights of 
others, this course is contrary to the Divine Law and the 
spirit of Love. Some day these will realize that they 
made a grave mistake.— Col. 3:18-21. 

The head of a house and of a family has a responsibility 
which he should recognize and which it is his duty 
to exercise. But he should do so with loving interest, 
looking out for the welfare and the preference of those 
whom he directs. The responsibility of a husband in his 
home, therefore, means the obligation which the Divine 
Law has laid upon him and which often requires the 
sacrifice of his own time and preferences in the interest 
of his family. It is his duty to discharge this responsibility. 
-Eph. 5:25-33; 6:4. 

The Scriptures also describe the proper place for the 

R5168 : page 27 

mother in the family. This position is a noble one. But 
every woman who usurps the place of the head of the 
household is surely doing injury to herself and the best 
interests of her family, even though she may seem for a 
time to prosper in her wrong course.— I Pet. 3:1-6. 

There are many who are impatient and unkind in their 
dealings with the members of their own family, but who 
to outsiders seem to be models of deportment. It is hard 
to see how they justify their course, especially when we 
recall that they have a particular responsibility toward 
their family for mental, as well as physical sustenance. 
It behooves each one who would have the approval of 
God to study his conduct, not only toward the world and 
the brethren, but also toward the members of his own 
family, that he may be sure that he is minding his own 
business in every sense of the word. 



R5168 : page 27 

"YET THERE IS ROOM" 

"Hold that fast which thou hast, that 
no man take thy crown."— Rev. 3:11. 

THE QUESTION is sometimes asked whether 



it is possible for one to consecrate himself 

and to be accepted at this late hour in the 

Gospel Age, unless there is a crown reserved 

for such a one. Certainly it would be 

possible for one to consecrate himself. 

Consecration is always proper. Long before 

the Gospel Age began, Abraham and 

the Prophets made consecration of their 

lives. St. Paul informs us that these Ancient 

Worthies showed that their lives were consecrated 

to God and righteousness; for they suffered— many of 

them— painful and ignominious deaths for His sake. Thus 

they demonstrated that the world was unworthy of them. 

-Heb. 11:33-38. 

The fact that a person has offered himself in consecration 
does not, however, obligate the Almighty to accept 
the offering. While it is true that "God is no respecter 
of persons" (Acts 10:34,) yet His favor was 
given first to the Jews and then to the Gentiles. This 
favor is the most wonderful ever offered to beings on 
any plane of existence— that all who will accept the terms 
may come into the Church, which is the mystical Body of 
Christ, until a sufficient number shall have been found, 
until the fore-ordained number shall have made consecration 
and shall have made their calling and election sure. 

While the Scriptures indicate clearly that we are living 
at the very close of the Gospel Age, yet it is not for 
us to know when the full number shall have consecrated 
themselves. It is our belief that in a general way the outward 
call ceased in 1881, A. D. 

Our thought is that in 1878 there were a great many 
consecrated persons who had not passed their trial in 
full; and that there were in the nominal churches many 
thousands who had made full consecration to walk in the 
footsteps of Jesus. From 1874 to 1881, there was a great 
number of evangelists preaching both in this country and 
abroad. Of these, Evangelist Moody was perhaps the 
best known. He seemed to make a great many converts; 
and his preaching seemed to be very different from that 
of the majority of evangelists. He preached forgiveness 
through the precious blood of Christ, and full consecration 
to God. 

During that revival period, many made a full consecration, 
had their names tentatively written in Heaven, 
and filled up the number required. But when the testings 
came, many were found unworthy of a higher reward 
than that of the Great Company. Others took the places 
of the failures and were also tested and sifted. Vacancies 
occurred; and still others came in for an opportunity. 
We see evidences that this work has been going on for 
the past thirty years; and we believe that it is true that 
some names are now being listed and that there are 
crowns awaiting such. 

OUR REASON FOR THIS THOUGHT 



People who have not been interested in religion and 
who have not heretofore consecrated themselves unto 
God, have quite recently made full consecration of themselves 
and have received that evidence which seems to 
indicate that God has accepted them. Not only have the 
eyes of their understanding been opened so that they can 
see the spiritual, or deep things of God, but they are 
given opportunities to sacrifice. While we make a covenant 
that we will sacrifice (Psa. 50:5), yet it is for the 
Lord to give us the opportunity to do so. The fact that 
some of the recently consecrated are receiving and using 
opportunities to sacrifice, implies that when they made 
their consecration there was a place open and that they 
are filling it. 

The fact also that so many have been thus accepted 
since 1878 seems to imply that there has been a considerable 
vacancy in the list of the Elect, and that it is 
gradually filling up. It is not for us to say how much of 
a vacancy remains, or just when it will be filled. We 
fully believe, however, that it will be filled before the 
close of "the Times of the Gentiles," which we think will 
end with October, 1914. 

As for others who have not yet consecrated themselves, 
we can say with St. Paul, "I beseech you,. ..brethren, 
by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living 
sacrifice." (Rom. 12:1.) Do your best. Itmaybe 
that there is an opening and you may get in. Consecrate 
your time, your talents, all that you have, to the service 
of God. He is a good Paymaster; whatever reward He 
may give you will be a prize. 

We realize, however, that all who will be accepted as 
members of the Body of Christ must have trials both of 
faith and of loyalty before being assigned to a definite 
place in the Kingdom. Those who become reprobates 
will constitute the Second Death class. Others may be 
assigned to the Great Company. All such will be counted 
out of membership in the Royal Priesthood. As each is 
put out as unworthy, his former place becomes vacant and 

R5169 : page 27 

his crown released. Such vacancies, we understand, are 
now being filled from among those who offer themselves. 

This condition has obtained since 1881, when, we 
believe— as before stated— the general call ceased. When 
a vacancy occurs, it is reasonable to believe that from 
among those who are in a waiting attitude the one would 
be chosen who is the most highly developed and most fully 
in harmony with the Lord. 



"The Lord be with you ! " steals the benediction 
With solemn splendor like a falling star; 

In morns of joy and midnights of affliction, 
It breathes its echoed sweetness near and far. 



"The Lord be with you!" when the shadows hold you; 

And prove His loving power to soothe and bless; 
When dangers darken and when fears enfold you, 

"The Lord be with you!" in His tenderness. 



R5169 : page 28 

ABRAHAM AND THE HEBREWS 

--FEBRUARY 16.-GENESIS 12:1-9.- 

"I will bless thee, and make thy name great; 
and thou shalt be a blessing."— Genesis 12:2. 

"FATHER of the Faithful" is one of Abraham's 

titles in the Bible. He is one of the greatest 

characters in history. The most enlightened 

peoples of the earth look back to him as the 

Divinely-appointed channel through whom 

all their religious hopes and prospects have 

been received— Jews, Christians and Mohammedans. 

God's promises made to Abraham 

constitute the foundation of faith for 

all these peoples, although many of them 

are not aware of the fact. 

The Jews are Abraham's natural descendants through 
Isaac and Jacob, while the Mohammedans represent specially 
the Ishmaelite and Esau branches of Abraham's 
family. Christians profess that they have become heirs 
to the chiefest blessings promised to Abraham's Seed, by 
becoming associates and joint-heirs with Christ Jesus, 
whom they consider the antitype of Isaac and the Heir 
to all things.— Galatians 3:29. 

The New Testament claim is that the Church of Christ 
—partly from the Jews and partly from the Gentiles- 
is the antitype of Rebecca, Isaac's wife and joint-heir. 
As such, the Church is to be the Bride and Joint-heir of 
Messiah in His Kingdom. In this picture Abraham typified 
Jehovah God, Isaac typified Jesus Christ, and Rebecca 
typified the Church. The New Testament claim is 
that this Spiritual Seed of Abraham is yet to be God's 
agency in blessing Natural Israel and all the nations. 
But, alas, much of the New Testament teaching was lost 
in the darkness of medieval times. 

Christians forgot their high calling, forgot that they 
were to be joint-heirs in Messiah's Kingdom, forgot that 
that Kingdom was yet to bless all the families of the 
earth. Instead, they got the narrow view that merely 
the saintly Elect would be saved at all, and that they to 
all eternity would look over the battlements of Heaven 
and see all others of mankind in torture, and to all eternity 
hear their groans. Only now are Bible students 
gradually getting freed from the creeds and back to the 



teachings of God's Word. Only now are we learning the 
true import of St. Paul's words to the Church, "If ye be 
Christ's, then are ye Abraham's Seed, and heirs according 
to the promise [made to him]."— Gal. 3:29. 

One would think that under such circumstances every 
Jew, every Christian, every Mohammedan, would have 
absolute confidence in the fact that Abraham once lived. 
Indeed, it has been merely their confidence in the promises 
of God made to Abraham that has held the Jews together 
as a nation and that has gathered Christians from 
all nations to be heirs of that same promise. Yet, strange 
to say, the learned Jews and Christians of our day are 
turning Higher Critics. They are rejecting Abraham and 
the promises of God made to him as merely mythical 
legends. How strange that they do not recognize the 
inconsistency of their position! It is like the tail of a 
dog disowning its head. 

What excuse would Jews have, living in every nation 
and speaking fifty different languages, for still keeping 
themselves Jews at all, if they repudiate the peculiar 
promises of God which relate to them as a people and 
which caused them originally to remain separate from 
every other nation, according to Divine instructions, and 
in hope of a blessing ultimately? The Jew or the 
Christian who repudiates Abraham simply makes himself 
foolish in the eyes of all intelligent thinkers. Such would 
do themselves credit to renounce all claim to Judaism 
and to Christianity, and thereby they would benefit those 
whom they would leave. 

GOD'S CALL TO ABRAHAM 

The name Abraham signifies Father of a multitude. It 
was given to him after he had responded to God's call 
and showed his faith and obedience. Originally, his name 
was Abram, which signifies exalted faith. The name 
Abraham occurs in the New Testament seventy-four 
times. Jesus referred to him nineteen times. The promises 
of God made to Abraham constitute the foundation 
for all the theology of the New Testament, as expressed 
by the Lord Jesus, by St. Paul, by St. Stephen, St. Peter 
and others. 

Abraham's birthplace was Ur of the Chaldees, one 
hundred and twenty miles to the north of the Persian 
Gulf, and was known as the richest portion of Asia. His 
father, Terah, was a heathen. Polytheism prevailed— the 
worshiping of many gods. Jewish legends respecting 
Abraham tell that as a boy he loathed the vices with 
which he was surrounded. When only fourteen years 
old, he refused to join with the family in idol-worship, 
and on one occasion destroyed seventy-two costly idols. 

From Ur the family migrated to Haran, about five hundred 
miles northwest and in the direction of Palestine. 
There Abraham remained until his father Terah's death. 
Then he removed to the land of Canaan. God's dealing 
with Abraham, according to St. Stephen's account (Acts 7:2,3), 



began while he was still in Ur. God called him 

out of the midst of the evil surroundings to be the founder 

of a new nation that would be holy and obedient to God. 

The words of the call are not fully given, nor are we informed 

of the manner in which it was conveyed. It is 

sufficient for us that Abraham recognized the message as 

from the Lord, and that he obeyed Him. 

Evidently the Lord fixed no earlier date than the death 
of Terah for Abraham's going to Canaan. Otherwise 
Abraham would not have been justified in delaying the 
matter. Doubtless Abraham had something to do with 
the migration from Ur to Haran. It took them away 
from the idolatrous scenes of the metropolis to the quieter 
conditions of pastoral life, and would be recognized by 
Abraham as a step in the right direction— toward Canaan, 
so that, on the death of his father, he could be prepared 
to quickly enter upon the Divine arrangement. 

SEPARATE YOURSELVES FROM IDOLATERS 

A portion of the call is stated: "Get thee out of thy 
country and from thy kindred, and from thy father's 
house, unto a land that I will show thee; and I will make 
of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee, and make thy 
name great; and thou shalt be a blessing; and I will bless 
them that bless thee, and curse him that curseth (injureth) 
thee; and in thee shall all the families of the earth be 
blessed."— Genesis 12:1-3. 

It was in harmony with this Divine call that Abraham, 
seventy-five years old, at the death of his father Terah, 
took up his journey to the land of Canaan. There were 
no landed estates then. The Henry George idea of free 
land prevailed. Sometime before this, Abraham's elder 
brother, Nahor, had married and set up an establishment 
of his own. His brother Haran had died, and Terah. 
Abraham, with the remnant of the family— and his half-sister 
Sarah (princess), who became his wife, and his 
nephew Lot, the son of his elder brother Haran— took 
their flocks and herds to Canaan, so called because inhabited 
by sons of Canaan.— Genesis 10:18. 

R5169 : page 29 

ABRAHAM'S GREAT FAITH IN GOD 

The Bible makes a clear distinction between faith and 
credulity. Abraham was not credulous, in the evil sense 
of that word, but he was full of faith. This feature of 
his character specially endeared him to the Almighty, who, 
because of it, styled him His friend. As St. Paul writes, 
"Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him for 
righteousness." (Galatians 3:6.) It is not claimed in the 
Bible that Abraham was perfect, nor that any man is 
perfect. The reverse of this is declared: "There is none 
righteous (perfect), no, not one." "All come short of the 
glory of God." (Romans 3:10,23.) None measure up to 



the glorious image of God, as first it was represented in 
Father Adam. 

Neither was Abraham the friend of God because of his 
great education, nor because of any wonderful intellectual 
powers. None of his attainments are held up to us as a 
basis of his special favor from God and relationship to 
Him. Nevertheless, we see that he had intellectual powers. 
The fact that he was very rich indicates that he was 
a good manager. His skill as a leader of men and as 
a general was shown at the time that Lot and all the 
wealthy Sodomites and their possessions were taken captive 
by King Chedorlaomer and his associates. In the 

R5170 : page 29 

most commonplace language we read that Abraham 
promptly armed 3 18 of his own servants, pursued the victors, 
by strategy routed them and recovered the spoils. 

But it was not for his skill as a general, nor for his 
generosity in dealing with the spoils, nor for his generosity 
on other occasions, that God loved Abraham. The 
special quality that God esteemed in him is repeatedly 
mentioned in the Bible as having been Abraham's faith. 
"Abraham believed God." He did not believe his own 
imaginations, nor the imaginations or dreams of other men. 

CHILDREN OF ABRAHAM 

Abraham's children, from God's standpoint, include only 
those who have faith in God. The original evidence of 
this faith and obedience was circumcision of the flesh, 
which figuratively represented a turning away from sin, 
to be obedient to God, and to be inheritors with Abraham 
of the promise made to Abraham and his seed. Circumcision 
has become largely a ceremony to the Jews— a ceremony 
in which they have little or no faith. Such faithless 
circumcision entitles them to no special favors of 
the Almighty. But all Jews who still trust in Abraham 
and the promises made to Abraham are subject to Divine 
favor and, to our understanding of the Bible, will 
soon be recipients of marked evidences of Divine blessing 
at the hands of the glorious Messiah, who soon is to 
set up God's Kingdom. 

St. Paul explains that all true Christians, coming 
either from the Jews or from the Gentiles, become the 
Spiritual Seed of Abraham— heirs of certain spiritual 
promises, as the natural seed are heirs of certain earthly 
promises not yet fulfilled. But St. Paul tells us that as 
the natural seed must maintain their faith in circumcision 
to mark their separateness from the Gentiles, so the 
Spiritual Seed of Abraham must have an antitypical circumcision 
of the heart— still more effective, separating 
them from the world and from sin— marking them off as 
God's peculiar people zealous of good works. 

We exhort both Jews and Christians to honesty 
and faithfulness— to obedience to God: the one class, that 



they may inherit the Heavenly promises; the other class, 
that they may be ready for the inheritance of the earthly 
promises, which will be theirs as soon as the Heavenly, 
Spiritual Seed of Abraham shall have been completed by 
the "change" of the First Resurrection. 



R5170 : page 29 

ABRAHAM WAS VERY RICH 

--FEBRUARY 23. -GENESIS 13:1-18.— 

"The blessing of Jehovah, it maketh rich, and He 
addeth no sorrow therewith."— Proverbs 10:22.— R.V. 

THE BIBLE declares that there are not many 

rich, not many wise, not many learned, who 

enjoy God's special favor, but chiefly the 

poor of this world, who are rich in faith. 

But whoever concludes from this that God 

is prejudiced against the rich, or that all 

the rich are iniquitous and have gained 

their wealth through fraud, errs grievously. 

What it does teach is that God is no respecter 

of persons. Whether one be rich 

or poor, learned or ignorant, God's estimation of him is 

from the standpoint of the heart. There are both good 

and bad rich men, just as there are both good and bad 

poor men. 

Abraham, though the youngest son of the family, at 
the death of his father Terah doubtless inherited all that 
remained of his possessions, including the share of Sarah, 
his wife, who was his half-sister. The chronology of the 
narrative agrees with this; but some have erred in the 
study of it. Abraham is mentioned first amongst his 
brethren because of his greater prominence, and not because 
he was the elder. 

Added to Abraham's rich inheritance was the blessing 
of the Lord upon him. After he had accepted the Divine 
call and left his homeland to become a wandering 
shepherd and herdsman in Canaan, his flocks and herds 
increased greatly. He was, under God's blessing, very 
rich. Others also of God's servants in the past were 
greatly blessed with riches— for instance, Job. We are 
not, however, to apply our Golden Text in this way at 
the present time. The blessing of the Lord very rarely 
makes wealthy His saintly people during this Gospel Age. 
Jesus and the Apostles and the specially saintly all down 
through the Age and today are poor in this world's 
goods. 

It may be asked, Why this change in God's dealings? 
The reply of the Scriptures is, that in the past, up to the 
time of Christ, God's blessings were to men as men; but 
since the time of Christ, God's saints are "New Creatures 



in Christ." The terms of discipleship are that they exchange 
all earthly favors, riches and blessings, and sacrifice 
their claims to these in order that they may become 
heirs of God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, their 
Lord, to the Heavenly inheritance— and share in the 
Messianic Kingdom and its glory, honor and immortality. 

God dealt with Abraham as a friend and gave him 
earthly blessings and promised him earthly blessing in 
the future life. Jesus and His followers God accepts not 
as friends, but as sons. His promises to these are not 
earthly, but Heavenly, spiritual privileges and hopes in 
the present life, and spiritual glory and immortality— far 
above angels— in the life to come. God's favor to this 
House of Sons, of whom Jesus is the Head (Hebrews 3:6), 
is manifested often in the trials, difficulties, chastisements 
and earthly losses and afflictions which they experience, 
all of which are designed to work out for them 
"a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory." The 
beauty and harmony of the Bible can be understood only 

R5170 : page 30 

by those who thus "rightly divide the Word of Truth" and 
differentiate between the blessings and promises to the 
Ancient Worthies as distinct from those which appertain 
to the followers of Jesus. 

ABRAHAM'S FRIENDS NOT JOINT-HEIRS 

Lot was a man of nearly Abraham's age, his nephew, 
the son of his brother Haran. They were friends and 
companions. God did not call Lot, nor any other of 
Abraham's relatives, but merely himself, to be the recipient 
of the promises— the channel through whom they 
would be fulfilled. This did not hinder Lot from being 
with his uncle, but indeed permitted him to share the 
blessings of Divine Providence, which guided Abraham's 
affairs. God's Covenant and promises were not made 
with Lot, but with Abraham only. Similarly the spiritual 
children of Abraham alone are the heirs of the Abrahamic 
promise, and not their friends or relatives, although 
the latter may share a reflex blessing of spiritual influence 
through association with them. 

These spiritual children of Abraham, Christ and His 
consecrated followers, are particularly specified as the 
heirs of the Abrahamic promise by St. Paul. (Galatians 3:29.) 
"They all have a faith similar to that of Abraham, 
and a spirit of obedience similar to his. Jesus is their 
Head, Captain and Leader, as well as their Redeemer, and 
they become His disciples by a covenant of sacrifice similar 
to His own. His promise to them is, "To him that 
overcometh will I grant to sit with Me in My Throne"— 
the Kingdom which is to fulfil all the gracious promises 
which God made to Abraham— to Jews and Gentiles. 

RICHES OFTEN BRING TROUBLES 



God's blessing upon Abraham, shared by Lot, led on 
to more or less of ambition and strife, not between the two 
men themselves, but between their servants. Abraham 
loved peace, and perceived that it would be wise that the 
two families should part company. Lot assented. Abraham 
gave him his choice as to the section of country; 
and Lot chose the most fertile— the plain of Sodom, in the 
Valley of Jordan, and the Plain of Sodom, afterward devastated 
as a judgment from the Lord, is now the Valley 
of the Dead Sea. 

Lot made his home in Sodom while his herds and 
flocks were pastured in the fertile regions surrounding. 
Doubtless Lot's wife had to do with the choice. She loved 
a beautiful home. To her the surroundings of Sodom 
were very attractive. The family lived there three years, 
although the riches of the country had a debasing effect 
upon the people. Lot's righteous soul was vexed, more 
than offsetting the charm of the country which his wife 
so loved. Looking back with longing heart at the time 
of its destruction, she was overtaken in the catastrophe 
which her husband and daughters escaped. 

R5171 : page 30 

Abraham, on the contrary, fixed his heart and hopes 
upon the gracious promises of God, which appertained less 
to the present and more to the future life. Sarah, his 
wife, was a real helpmate, who shared her husband's 
hopes and desired to co-labor with him faithfully for their 
accomplishment. In these two families, both well-intentioned, 
we see illustrated the difference between seeking 
chiefly the Divine approval and seeking chiefly earthly 
welfare and ease. 

Many Christian people today make similar mistakes 
to that which Lot made. They allow conflicting earthly 
interests to separate them from the blessings of God's 
greater favor. They thus involve themselves and their 
families in the snare of the wicked, while at heart preferring 
righteousness. 

The Master's advice should be remembered, "Seek ye 
first the Kingdom of God and His Righteousness." Do 
that which is in harmony with that aspiration and leave 
to God the oversight and care of earthly interests, that 
He may give you the lessons and experiences most helpful 
for you. Those who follow His advice find peace 
and joy which the world can neither give nor take away— 
"the peace of God, which passeth all understanding." 

GOD'S BLESSING MAKES RICH 

Whoever has the Lord's blessing is rich indeed, regardless 
of the amount of this world's goods which he 
possesses. Of what value is all the wealth of a Croesus if 
it bring not peace, joy and happiness? Wherever we go 
we find all— rich and poor— seeking pleasure, seeking the 



springs of joy; but how few of these seekers ever find it! 
Alas! it seems impossible for the world to understand the 
great fact that the blessing of the Lord constitutes the 
true fund of riches and pleasures forevermore— more 
than the life that now is, and the coming one! 

Those whom the Lord makes rich with His promises 
and His favor, His guidance and His blessing, have the 
joy which others are vainly seeking. These true riches 
during this Gospel Age are obtainable by all who have 
the "hearing ear," and who learn of God's favor in 
Christ. In Christ are hidden all the treasures of Divine 
Wisdom, Love and Power. 

The only ones who obtain a share of these blessings 
at the present time are such as become followers of Jesus 
through faith and consecration of their lives to His service. 
Nevertheless, in Him are also restitution blessings 
for the world of mankind, which will be dispensed during 
the thousand years of His reign, which will begin at His 
Second Coming. St. Peter tells us of this, and points 
us to the fact that it has been "foretold by all the Holy 
Prophets since the world began."— Acts 3:19-21. 

God's Covenant with Abraham is several times repeated 
in slightly different form. One of these presentations 
is a part of today's study; but as this will be the 
topic of our study next week, we will here merely allude 
to it and ask the reader to note that it was not a Heavenly 
promise, but an earthly one— "all the land which thou 
seest"; and that it was to an earthly people— "I will make 
thy seed as the dust of the earth." These are wholly different 
promises from those which appertain to the Spiritual 
Seed of Abraham, as our lesson of next week will 
show. 



R5171 : page 30 

INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL: - 

Just about eighteen months ago I wrote to thank you 
for the great happiness your books had brought to my husband 
and self. Today I write to tell you that he finished 
his course— on September 25. 

It was truly as St. Paul says, "In the twinkling of an 
eye." He had been out, and was telling me something he 
had seen— and stopped in the middle of a sentence. 

In your answer to my last letter you said you noticed we 
were anxious to spread the Truth, and that perhaps we 
should be given more opportunity. He was. He became 
mate on the ferry here, and as it is quite a big thing, he 
had many opportunities of talking to people, and I don't 
think he ever missed one. 

Last year people used to laugh, but this year they were 
either annoyed or said, "Well, we can all see there's something 
coming, and perhaps you're right— hope you are!" 



Several, I know, thanked him for telling them of your 
books, and said they were just what they were wanting. He 
always said he wasn't nearly good enough for the "little 
flock," but it seems to me he was just the sort you describe 
in Vol. V, page 237. He hated the thought of the "Great 

R5171 : page 31 

Company," as he did anything that was half and half; and 
he certainly never turned his back on the Truth. 

His death was a great shock to everybody in the town, 
for he was considered one of its healthiest inhabitants, and 
he was only forty-three. As he lay there, I said to the doctor 
(who did not know him personally), "He never played 
a mean trick on anybody in all his life," and the doctor said, 
"You've only to look at his face to see that, Mrs. Childe." 

People who knew him always said he was the most absolutely 
honest man (very often to his own detriment) they 
had ever met. His deck hands have told me he was the 
nicest man they ever worked for— so fair and just, and 
always ready to stand up for them if anyone else tried to 
down them; and I would rather have that than a good word 
from the King— one doesn't put on company manners for 
one's deck hands. 

It may interest you to know that my husband tried twice 
(before we heard the Truth, and principally for the protection 
of myself and the children) to join a secret order. 
Each time— in different towns— the same men black-balled 
him. They had injured him, and so hated him. Since he 
knew the Truth, he has been asked to join (which is much 
against their rules, I believe), not only that order, but several 
others. They said it would make things so much easier! 
Of course, he stood clear, and was not in any "bundle" 
whatsoever. 

We were left with almost no money— had lost all we had 
a few years ago. I have three children— 1 1 and 9 years and 
10 months old. I hadn't a relative nearer than 2,000 miles 
away. I left it all with God, knowing "our bread and water 
were sure," anyway. And now we are provided for, for at 
least two years! There was no appeal made— just everybody 
wanted to help. Ah! — 

"I read from the past that my future shall be 
Far better than all my fears!" 

They all respected my husband for his character, though 
many thought he had "queer views." I should so value a 
word from you at this time. I don't know what I should 
do without the Truth now; I should be despairing. But now 
every newspaper I take up tells me I shall soon see him 
again! Thank God! I can say— 

"The billows that guarded my sea-girt path 
Carried my Lord on their crest!" 

He has been as good as all His promises. 

With many thanks for the comfort (under God) you 
have given me in this, my greatest trouble, I remain, 
Yours sincerely, 

ELEANOR I. CHILDE.-B. C, Can. 



page 3 1 

DEARLY BELOVED BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

Your letter to colporteurs I have received, and I wish to 
express my great appreciation of its words of encouragement 
and counsel. I also wish to thank you for the offered gift — 
I chose a "Heavenly Manna"— as my other one is wearing out. 
I could not live without these words of Truth each day, as 
they give needed strength in trials, and are a source of great 
blessings. 

The WATCH TOWER, too, is eagerly waited for. Each issue 
is most precious. When I saw the last report, I felt so glad 
that I had been permitted a very small share in the work. Oh! 
the joy of service. I wish to briefly tell a little experience 
regarding our newspaper here, The Piqua Leader-Dispatch, 
which gives us the sermon each Monday. 

Quite recently I was in the office on business, and being 
well known to the editor and others of their force, they called 
me in to inform me that a local minister had just been in to 
request the discontinuance of our sermon feature. They inquired 
of me the "why." 

I knew at once what brought this on, for we were that 
week putting out our recent "Hell" tracts. This was the 
result. I carefully, wisely (I trust) chose my words in 
answer. I also stated that I had worked this city for a year 
or so in the interest of the Bible Society, and knew of many 
who were much helped by the reading of the sermons. I said 
that all great men have enemies, but ours is a Christian cause, 
and a great success, too. 

Their reply was that personally they considered it very 
"small" for any minister to take such a stand. 

A week or so later this same minister publicly announced 
that he would expose "Pastor Russell," our society, Bible 
Students, etc. And he did— to a moderate audience. But the 
wrath of men must praise God; for he spoke of our untiring 
zeal, of the wonderful scope of the work, but couldn't understand 
where the money came from ! 

Then he related how he had requested The Leader-Dispatch 
to discontinue the sermons. Their answer had been, however, 
that "they were too valuable!" "Then," he added, "if they 
will put them before us, we can at least refuse to read them." 

I think this a good advertisement, don't you? But I found 
Catholics and Protestants, Christians, Jews and non-professors, 
who read them. Thanks be to God! How glad we are 
that in "due time" all shall know, even the least. We pray 
richest blessings upon you, dear brother, in the coming year. 

Yours by His Grace, MRS. GEO. H. KELLER. 



R5171 : page 31 
MR. EDITOR:- 



Enclosed herewith please find clipping from the Gospel 
Messenger, December 14, 1912 issue, containing an article 
entitled "Hell and Damnation," by B. E. Kesler, River Bend, 
Colo. This paper is a Dunkard paper, or more properly is 
the mouthpiece of "The Church of the Brethren." 

You will note that Mr. Kesler makes the charge that 
Pastor Russell makes all kinds of fanciful translations of the 
Scriptures in order to sustain what he designates your 
"theories." It is another case of "throwing dust" into the 
eyes of the people. I don't understand how any one can write 
such an article without knowing that he is misrepresenting 
the facts, and in proof note what he says respecting 2 Peter 2:4. 
Here he makes you say that God cast the angels that 
sinned down to the fires of Gehenna, whereas you plainly show 
in the pamphlet, which he evidently read, that the Greek word 
here is not "Gehenna," but "Tartaroo." This I find is what 
the Emphatic Diaglott, as well as Strong's Exhaustive Concordance 
of the Scriptures, reveals it to be. 

Is it not now time in the Lord's providence to answer the 
charge, "It is a peculiarity of his writings, generally, that he 
doesn't seem to find his theories taught in any of the commonly 
accepted translations of the Bible, and so he makes 
bold to make his own translation as he goes, and in this way 
tries to cover up his assumed prerogative, to condemn as 
'heretics' and 'hypocrites' all who do not bow at his shrine 
and accept his theories"? 

I will not now take the time to call attention to other 
discrepancies in this article of nonsense, but will leave it to 
your judgment of the Lord's will in the matter. Surely now 
is the separating time; and all who are professing to be the 
Lord's people are most surely now taking their stand for 
either Truth or Error, as never before. 

We surely can never appreciate the Present Truth enough, 
nor render unto the Lord sufficient praise or thanks for the 
anointing of our eyes with the "eye salve" of Truth through 
your faithful ministry. 

Yours in the Beloved, M. L. WOLF 



Thanks, dear friend! It is saddening to find religious 
teachers striving to throw "dust" in the mental eyes of their 

R5 172: page 31 

followers. Some are "blind leaders of the blind," while others 
apparently are "willingly ignorant." Like the Pharisees of 
old, some have taken away from their too trustful followers 
the "key of knowledge," and are grieved that the people are 
now being taught better. However, the result is that some 
are getting awake and learning to think, and to study the 
Bible for themselves, who otherwise might have slept on. It 
is God's "due time" for His faithful to be awakened and to 
come to a knowledge of the Truth; and for aught we know 
He is using the wrath of man to praise Himself. 
A still more despicable course is followed by some claiming 



to be ministers of Christ. Unable to controvert Pastor 
Russell's teachings they slander him shamefully. Professing 
to be Christians, they insinuate and come as close as possible 
to infracting the lowest standards of human law respecting 
slander and libel. They that preach the Golden Rule and 
profess to believe that everybody who breaks it is going to 
everlasting torture, do they forget the words of St. John that 
their course is in the sight of our Lord really "murder"?— 
1 John 3:15. 



page 3 1 

MY DEAR PASTOR:- 

Received the last WATCH TOWER for 1912 yesterday; and 
oh, how much good it has done me already! The article which 
appeals to me specially now is one entitled: "The Philosophy 
of Our Daily Experiences." It is meat in due season for me; 
and I thank the Lord for such strengthening food, as I am 
now undergoing some "training." By His grace and help 
assisting, I would like to come to the place where I will delight 
to do His will. 

God bless you and keep you till the end. 

MINNIE J. WILSON. 



page 33 

VOL. XXXIV FEBRUARY 1 No. 3 
A. D. 1913-A. M. 6041 



CONTENTS 

The Cost of Discipleship 35 

Fidelity to the Truth a Cause of 
Persecution 36 

The Golden Rule a Test 36 

The Burning Outside the Camp 37 

Reports from Foreign Branches for 1912 37 

Abraham's Age on Entering Canaan 42 

The Oath-Bound Covenant 42 

Abraham's Three Wives Typical 43 

Abraham's All Given to Isaac 43 

As the Stars and as the Sand 43 

God's Oath to Abraham 43 

Hope for the Sodomites 44 

The Wickedness of Sodom Great 44 

The First Resurrection 45 

Abraham's Faith Tested 45 

"If We Suffer With Him" 46 

The Ram in the Thicket 46 

Some Interesting Letters 47 

Berean Questions in Scripture Studies 47 

page 34 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



R5173 : page 34 

1913-MEMORIAL SUPPER- 19 13 

The proper date for the celebration of the Memorial 
Supper this year will be Thursday evening, March 20, after 
6 p.m. This is the beginning of the 14th of Nisan of the 
Jewish Calendar. The 15th of Nisan marks the full of the 
moon following the Spring Equinoxes. The moon symbolized 
the favor granted to Israel. It was at its full the day Jesus 
died— thereafter it began to wane, symbolical of the Jewish 
favor having ended at that time. 

We commend to all of the Lord's people the celebration 
of our Savior's death, in harmony with His request, "As oft 
as ye shall do this, do it in remembrance of Me." We understand 
this to be an injunction to an annual celebration, and 
that the appropriate time is the anniversary of the first 
celebration. We give notice thus early because subscribers 
to this Journal as far away as Alaska, Japan, Australia, China 
and India are interested with us in this precious memorial 
of our Master's sacrifice for the sins of the whole world. 
It is to us a remembrance also of our covenant to share with 
Him in His sufferings and of His promise that the faithful 
shall also be partakers of His coming glory in the Kingdom. 



page 34 

"IN THE GARDEN OF THE LORD" 

This is the title of a very beautiful little poem from the 
pen of Sister G. W. Seibert. It has been published in booklet 
form with sixteen illustrations, twenty-four pages, paper. It 
was our hope that we should have had these in time for the 
use of the friends, as holiday souvenirs, but they arrived just 
too late for announcement. They are useful at all times, however. 
We suggest that the various Classes of Bible Students 
desiring these order them together. The convenience of making 
larger shipments will permit us to make a proportionately 
lower price— 6c. each, 65c. per dozen, postpaid by us. 



MID-WINTER SOUTHERN CONVENTIONS 

Further particulars respecting these Conventions may be expected in 
our next issue. We merely now announce that Brother Russell may be 
expected to meet with the friends at Jacksonville, Sunday, February 16 
and Monday, the 17th; at Kingston and vicinity, February 24-26; at 
Tampa, March 5; at Pensacola, March 6; returning to Washington 



Temple, March 9. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR MARCH 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
March follow: (1) 7; (2) 102; (3) 47; (4) 208; (5) 191; 
(6) 87; (7) 160; (8) 43; (9) 299; (10) 105; (11) 116; (12) 255; 
(13) 22; (14) 72; (15) 307; (16) 259; (17) 243; (18) 114; 
(19) Vow; (20) 106; (21) 39; (22) 273; (23) 332; (24) 240; 
(25) 203; (26) 101; (27) 235; (28) 331; (29) 8; (30) 305; 
(31)303. 



R5172:page35 

THE COST OF DISCIPLESHIP 

"Being reviled, we bless; being 
persecuted, we suffer it."— 1 Cor. 4:12. 

SINCE GOD HIMSELF is Love, the very 

highest ideal of perfection which He has 

given to His people is the standard of Love. 

We cannot imagine a higher standard 

than this, nor one more difficult to attain. 

It is the special characteristic without 

which none will get the prize of the high 

calling of God in Christ Jesus. This mark 

of perfection was stamped on our Lord. 

He delighted to do the Father's will in all 

respects, even to the extent of laying down His life for 

those who, on account of Adam's sin, were under the 

sentence of death. 

Our Lord did not, however, need to run toward this 
mark of perfect love; for He was always perfect— "holy, 
harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners." (Heb. 7:26.) 
The Church, on the contrary, are naturally imperfect and 
fallen by heredity; but we have been washed from all 
stain of guilt in the blood of the Lamb. The mark of 
perfect love we attain gradually. We first reach perfection 
of heart intention, and then we pass through experiences 
which crystallize our characters in righteousness. 
In all of these trials and difficulties, we must demonstrate 
that, if our physical organism were perfect, we would 
always do God's holy will. 

As we see this quality of love in our Lord Jesus, we 
appreciate it, even though we realize that we are not up 
to the standard which God requires. Nevertheless, our 
great desire is that we have perfect love for everything 
in harmony with the will of God. After we have reached 
perfection of heart intention, the test is no longer upon 



us of attaining the mark, but of pressing down upon that 
mark until our character has been crystallized. As the 
Apostle Paul says, "Having done all, stand." (Eph. 6:13.) 
We do not progress beyond perfect love; for no 
one can do more than to have a full desire that God's will 
be done in him. He could do no more, whether he lived five 
years longer or fifty years. Perfect love is the mark toward 
which he pressed, and he can attain no higher standard. 
While one stands at the mark of Love, the tests grow 
stronger. We pass through experiences— often trivial 
enough— which tempt us to malice, envy, anger and strife. 
If we are overcome by these tests, and fall away from 
the condition of perfect love, we shall lose the prize for 
which we are running. (Phil. 3:14.) One who thus falls 
away may get into the Great Company for development; 
but if he were to lose all love, he would go into the Second 
Death. In either of these cases, the person has 
moved away from the mark of perfect Love, the only 
standard for those who desire to be in the Kingdom and 
to participate in the glorious things which God has in 
store for those who love Him supremely. 

GENEROSITY AND BENEVOLENCE CHARACTERISTIC OF 
GOD'S PEOPLE 

Our Lord desires to see in His followers the disposition 
to overcome the weaknesses and tendencies of the 
fallen condition and to follow in His footsteps. Of Him 
it is written, "Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an 
example, that ye should follow in His steps;. ..who, 
when He was reviled, reviled not again; when He suffered, 
He threatened not." (I Peter 2:21-23.) To be 
reviled is to be made to appear vile, to be evil spoken of, 
slandered. The natural tendency of all is to resent injustice, 
to render evil for evil, to give as good as we get— 
and a little more if possible. This is the natural inclination 
because we are in the fallen condition, unbalanced in 
our minds. 

Our Lord's teaching is all the opposite of the spirit 
of reviling. No matter how much we are reviled, we 
are not to revile in return; no matter how much we are 
persecuted, we are not to persecute in return. This is 
the Law of the New Creation. Instead of reviling again, 
we are to bless. This does not mean that when one has 
said a slanderous thing of us, we are to say, "God bless 
you"; but that if the person is in difficulty and needs help, 
we are to overlook altogether what he has done to us, 
and be just as ready to help him as any other person. 

This spirit of generosity and benevolence should be 
the spirit of the Lord's people. We are to bless those who 
revile and persecute us by doing them good and by explaining 
to them, if possible, the situation, which evidently 
they have misunderstood. We are to bless them by helping 
them, if opportunity offers, out of darkness into light. 

Our faith is greatly strengthened by considering the 
course of our Lord and noting the similarity between His 



experiences and ours. Both He and His Apostles were 
persecuted by the Jewish household of faith. The whole 
Jewish nation professed to be God's people; and our 
Lord recognized them as His own, as it is written. (John 1:11.) 
Yet when "He came unto His own," they received 
Him not, but persecuted Him and even crucified Him. 
Later, they persecuted His Apostles and their followers. 
Apparently the household of faith has had a monopoly 
of persecutions. All down the Gospel Age, those who 
have professed to be God's people have persecuted others. 

R5172:page36 

Both Catholics and Protestants have persecuted each 
other and the Jews, God's chosen people. The majority 
of persecutions have been by those who professed to be the 
people of God, many of whom really thought they were. 

The persecutions of today are of the same kind. They 
come from those who profess to be the Lord's people. In 
harmony with this fact is the Scripture which says, "Your 
brethren that hated you, that cast you out for My Name's 
sake, said, Let the Lord be glorified: but He shall appear 
to your joy, and they shall be ashamed." (Isa. 66:5.) 
This statement applies also to the members of our own 
families, who are not in sympathy with the Truth; that 
is to say, any persecutions coming from the members of 
our families are usually from those who profess to be 
Christians. As a rule, their opposition is not for personal 
reasons, but on account of some doctrinal point, which 
they do not see in the same light as do those whom they 
persecute. 

It behooves the Lord's people to look with great sympathy 
upon those who may be their persecutors. We recall 
instances where persecution has been carried on with 
the thought that the persecutors were doing the will of 
God. Those who persecuted the Lord Jesus were to some 
degree ignorant of who He was. In Acts 3:17, St. Peter 
says, "And now, brethren, I wot that through ignorance 
ye did it, as did also your rulers." St. Paul says, "Had 
they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of 
glory." (I Cor. 2:8.) When Saul of Tarsus persecuted 
St. Stephen and others of the early Church, he verily 
thought that he did God service, as he himself afterwards 
tells us. --Acts 26:9-11. 

FIDELITY TO THE TRUTH A CAUSE OF PERSECUTION 

All down through the Gospel Age, those who have 
been faithful to the Truth of God have been put "out of 
the synagogue." The creeds of men have been barriers 
to keep out those who understood the Word of God. 
There was a time when many were excommunicated as 
heretics because of conscience. One of these was Michael 
Servetus, a brother Christian, whose horrible death at 
the stake was brought about by John Calvin. This course 
of conduct literally fulfilled the Scripture which says, 



"They shall put you out of the synagogues: yea, the time 
cometh, that whosoever killeth you will think that he 
doeth God service."— John 16:2. 

Those who had charge of the synagogues were not 
always bad people, but they were mistaken, as was Saul 
of Tarsus when he haled men and women to prison. 
(Acts 8:3.) The same conditions exist today. The darkness 
hateth the light. When any become enlightened in 
the Word of God, they are told, "If you stay with us, 
you must not present these matters." Those who are 
loyal to God are in this way forced out of the synagogues. 

Our day has a peculiarity, however, that other days 
have not had. The Divine Plan is so beautiful that by its 
light we see that others are in darkness. The voice of 
God, the voice of conscience, of enlightenment, calls the 

R5173 : page 36 

people of God out of Babylon, which is misrepresenting 
God's character, Plan and Word. Instead of feeling like 
bringing vengeance upon our enemies, we should feel 
sympathy for them— not with them, but for them. We 
should realize that with them it is very much as it was 
with the Jews of our Lord's day, who, had they known 
what they were doing, would have been very much 
ashamed of their course. 

The persecutions of today are different from those of 
any other period of history. Many faithful followers of 
the Lord are reproved and slandered for their loyalty to 
the Word of God. Our Lord's words, however, warrant 
us in expecting that those who are faithful to Him will 
be evil spoken of, even as He was. With His words before 
our minds, we should not be surprised at false 
charges and false insinuations made against His true 
followers in proportion to their prominence as His 
servants. 

Our Lord's warning that men "shall say all manner of 
evil against you falsely for My sake" (Matt. 5:11), does 
not imply that those who malign the true Christian will 
say, "We do this to you for Christ's sake, because you 
are one of His followers." We have never heard of any 
one who was thus persecuted, and therefore such a course 
cannot be what our Lord meant. Evidently His meaning 
was that His followers, honorable, moderate, truthful, 
honest, virtuous, possessing the spirit of a sound mind, 
like Himself, would be highly esteemed amongst the nominally 
religious, were it not for their loyalty to the Word 
of God. Because of faithfully pointing out popular 
errors, because of fidelity to the Truth, they are hated by 
those prominent in Churchianity. 

THE GOLDEN RULE A TEST TO CHRISTIANS 

These conditions are testing the adherents of Churchianity 
along the lines of the Golden Rule; and when they 
speak evil through malice, hatred, strife and opposition, 



they are condemning themselves under that rale; for well 
do they know that they do not wish others to speak evil 
of them— either through hearsay or through concocted 
lies or through malice. 

These conditions are also a test to the Lord's people, 
to prove whether they are willing to endure these persecutions 
and oppositions cheerfully, as a part of the cost 
of being disciples of Christ. If under the pressure they 
revile in return and slander and backbite, they are thus 
demonstrating their unfitness to have a place in the Kingdom. 
If, on the other hand, they receive these lessons 
with patience and long-suffering, they will develop more 
of the character-likeness of their Redeemer and thus become 
more worthy of a share with Him in the future glory. 

Our Lord's declaration, "Ye are the salt of the earth," 
may very properly be applied to those of the followers of 
the Lord who give heed to His teachings and who cultivate 
His character-likeness. As salt is useful in arresting 
decomposition, so the influence of these faithful ones 
is preservative. At the time of the First Advent, the world 
was in a condition in which it would probably have hastened 
to degeneracy and decay, but for the introduction of 
the preservative influence extending from the members of 
the Body of Christ. That influence is still manifest in 
so-called Christendom. 

Even today, although the truly consecrated believers 
in the great Redeemer are confessedly few in number, yet 
the saltness from the teachings of the Savior has a wide 
influence upon the world. Without it, doubtless, corruption 
and a complete collapse would have come long ago. 
In spite of it, we see very corrupting and corrupt influences 
at work everywhere; and the wider our horizon, 
the more general our information, the more we realize 
the truth of this statement. When the last member of 
the Body of Christ shall have passed beyond the veil, the 
salt will be gone. Then corruption will take hold swiftly, 
and the result will be the great time of trouble such as never 
was since there was a nation.— Matt. 24:21; Dan. 12:1. 

The Scriptures point out the fact that the Lord's consecrated 
people belong so completely to Him that in all 
their afflictions He is afflicted. (Isa. 63:9.) When Saul 
of Tarsus was persecuting the early Church, our Lord 
called out to him on the way to Damascus, and said, 
"Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou ME? And he said, 

R5173 : page 37 

Who are Thou, Lord? And the Lord said, I am Jesus, 

whom thou persecutest." (Acts 9:4,5.) Saul was not 

persecuting the glorified Savior directly, but he was persecuting 

the followers of Jesus— not the New Creatures, 

but the flesh. Since, then, our Lord adopts the flesh of His 

followers as His, the Church is said to be filling up that 

which is behind of the afflictions of Christ.— Col. 1:24. 

Throughout the Gospel Age, the world has been blind 
to the fact that it has persecuted the Church of Christ— 



those whom God has chosen to be joint-heirs with our 
Lord Jesus Christ. (Rom. 8:17.) When later the eyes 
of mankind shall have been opened, they will realize 
what they have done, and will be very much ashamed of 
their conduct. After Saul of Tarsus saw that he had been 
fighting against God, his whole course of life was changed. 

THE ANTITYPICAL BURNING OUTSIDE THE CAMP 

As our Lord suffered in the flesh, so will also those 
who are members of the Church, which is His Body. 
(Eph. 1:22,23.) St. Peter admonishes us to expect this, 
saying, "Forasmuch then as Christ hath suffered for us 
in the flesh, arm yourselves with the same mind." (I Peter 4:1.) 
It is the flesh, not the New Creature, that 
suffers. While we are suffering in the flesh, we are also 
being developed in the spirit. 

In Psalm 44:22, we read, "For Thy sake we are killed 
all the Day long; we are counted as sheep for the slaughter." 
St. Paul shows that this statement is a prophecy 
applicable to the entire membership of Christ, of whom 
our Lord Jesus is the Head. (Rom. 8:36.) The day to 
which reference is made is the Gospel Age (2 Cor. 6:2), 
the antitypical Day of Atonement. As on the typical 
Atonement Day the typical sacrifices were offered, so all 
down the Gospel Age the antitypical "better sacrifices" 
have been made. (Heb. 9:23; 13:11-13.) These "better 
sacrifices" began with our Lord and continue with His 
Body, which is the Church. 

The antitypical sacrificing began at the time of our 
Lord's consecration, which was His full surrender of His 
life to God, to be used in any way that the Father saw fit 
and that His providences might direct. The Church follows 
in His steps. Our consecration is our death to the 
world, to earthly hopes, aims and ambitions. In our 
Lord's case, we see that His sacrificial death not only 
meant the giving away of His physical strength in healing, 
teaching, etc., but included also the suffering resulting 
from the opposition of those about Him. Even from 
members of His own family He experienced ostracism. 
So Jesus died daily. 

In proportion as we are faithful to our Heavenly Father 
and to the terms of our consecration, we shall have 
similar experiences. Faithfulness to our covenant of 
sacrifice will bring upon us opposition from the world, 
the flesh and the Devil. Particularly will our persecution 
come from those Christians who are not developed sufficiently 
to appreciate matters from the proper standpoint. 

St. Paul, in speaking of his own case, says that he 
was dying daily. (I Cor. 15:31.) This statement applies 
to all who are laying down their lives in the Lord's service. 
Sometimes it is by the expenditure of physical 
strength; sometimes it is by a stab from some one who 
has hurt us, wounded us, injured us with his tongue. In 
the type, this kind of experience is represented by the 
burning of the flesh outside the camp, a place which typifies 



the outcast condition. 

The faithful servants of the Lord will be ostracised 
by the world, as our Lord foretold. (Matt. 24:9; John 16:1-3.) 
Their attitude of full consecration to do the 
Father's will is not appreciated; for to the world it seems 
to be foolish. It is a reproof. As our Lord said, "For 
every one that doeth evil hateth the light, neither cometh 
to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved."— John 3:20. 

To be faithful unto death is a part of the covenant of 
sacrifice. In some instances, death may come early; in 
others, it may come late. St. Stephen was faithful unto 
death, which came early in his Christian experience; St. 
Peter was also faithful, but met his death after a long 
lifetime. The promise to the overcomer is, "Be thou 
faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of 
life." (Rev. 2:10.) "If we suffer, we shall also reign with 
Him."— 2 Tim. 2:12. 



R5174:page37 

REPORTS FROM FOREIGN BRANCHES FOR 1912 
BRITISH BRANCH REPORT FOR 1912 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

The figures giving the British Branch Report for the 
year ending October 3 1 have been sent to the Office. We 
trust they duly reached you. 

It has been a year of progress in all directions. The 
chief factor is the devotion of the Colporteurs. In nearly 
all cases they have considerably increased their sales; and 
the numbers of the Colporteurs have also increased, 
through the encouragement they are now getting. We believe 
there is more work possible in this part of the 
field than ever. Record sales are being effected. And it 
is still the case that in places colporteured once or twice 
the books are as salable as ever. The Volunteer literature 
has gone out at a rather lower rate than last year, but 
the Class Extension work has absorbed a good deal of 
Volunteering energy. 

The Class Extension work is proving a great blessing 
to the brethren as well as to those who have ears to hear. 
In London both the Tabernacle Congregation and the Forest 
Gate Church have met with much encouragement. The 
Class Extension Committee of the Tabernacle report 18 
new week-night classes formed during the year through 
this work, and two existing classes greatly augmented, 
out of twenty-one series of meetings held— results which 
are gratifying. These results, we believe, are largely due 
to a careful following out of the suggestions given in the 
pamphlet. Other classes also report progress, some good, 
some not so good, but it is noticeable that the best results 
follow when the suggestions given are accepted and adhered 
to. After three Chart Talks and three lectures, 



with the same brother as chairman through all the meetings, 
the people are generally found willing to form a 
class for further study. 

The Pilgrim service has been greater this year than 
any previous year. The visits of the Pilgrims are much 
appreciated by the classes, who, everywhere, show a desire 
to use the occasion for a public witness. These meetings, 
with the Class Extension work, have of necessity proved 
a considerable tax upon the finances of the brethren, yet 
the donations to the Tract Fund show an increase. The 
book-loaning, which has been tried by some classes, has 
not made much advance during the year. It has been a 
blessing to those who have engaged in it, and has been 
used of the Lord in some instances to bring some into the 
light of the Truth. Especially is this the case in Forest 
Gate, London. Altogether the outlook is good. People, 
aroused by the "present distress," felt both in the Churches 

R5174:page38 

and in domestic life and politics, are paying more heed 
to the message of the Truth; they are more ready to 
listen and to read. The general spreading of our literature 
and the publication of the sermons are having an 
effect upon the country, and the evidences are that there 
are many "open doors" for service awaiting us all. We 
believe there are splendid opportunities for Colporteur 
work and Class Extension work awaiting those who have 
liberty and grace to work while it is yet day. The spiritual 
health of the classes is good, though, we regret, some of 
the dear brethren are allowing themselves to be tried by 
dissensions sowed by the enemy. 

We are rejoicing in the privilege of service, and daily 
we pray for the Lord's continued blessing upon all the 
work, both here and abroad, and also upon your own. 

Yours in His grace and service, 

BRITISH BRANCH, 
Executive Committee. 

OUTPUT OF STUDIES, BOOKS AND BOOKLETS 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES in cloth 96,922 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES in Karatol, leather, 

India, and foreign tongues 3,955 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, Vol. I in magazine 
form 5,220 

Total 106,097 

Books (Manna, Poems, Manual and Hymnal) 3,224 

Booklets 13,592 

Grand Total 122,913 

This shows an increase over the output of last year 
in STUDIES of 32,338 volumes; in books, of 1,286; 
whereas there is a loss in the numbers of booklets 



and Volume I in magazine form. 

Circulation of PEOPLES PULPIT and EVERYBODY'S 

PAPER 7,356,869 

Tracts 316,000 

WATCH TOWERS on Hell 53,115 

Total 7,725,984 

This represents, figured in the usual tract pages, 
117,709,904, 1,912,000, and 3,399,360, a total of 123,021,264. 
Practically a million more copies of PEOPLES 
PULPIT and EVERYBODY'S PAPER were distributed this 
year than last. 

SUMMARY OF CORRESPONDENCE 

Letters and cards received 19,639 

Letters and cards sent out 19,501 



REPORT OF AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH FOR 1912 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We are glad to think that the Report which we have 
now the pleasure of sending along for the year past will 
be pleasing to you. We continually realize that what is 
done is "not by power nor by might, but by My Spirit, 
saith the Lord," and that what has been accomplished is 
through the Lord's Spirit in His people, energizing them 
to more and more earnest zeal in His service, and with 
desire that every grain shall be garnered in this part of 
the Harvest field. 

While we are rejoicing that many have been brought 
to a knowledge of the Truth during the year, there is still 
the more pleasing feature, if that is possible, that those 
who have been longer associated with the Harvest Message 
have certainly increased their joy in the Lord, their 
love for the Truth and their appreciation of the means 
which the Lord has particularly used for bringing these 
matters to the household of faith. A corresponding increase 
of zeal is manifest all along the line, and you will 
notice that the donations to the Tract Fund by way of 
Good Hopes, etc., have greatly increased, as though the 
friends had made up their minds to try to meet the expense 
of the work in this field if possible. 

When one thinks of the 724,000 PEOPLES PULPIT and 
EVERYBODY'S PAPER that have been sent out, mostly by 
mail, it represents a beautiful amount of patient, steady 
plodding by those who have been able to do it. Some 
have written the wrappers by the thousands and sent them 
to us; while others have been able to wrap the papers for 
the post; and so the work has gone on. We cannot but 
think that the Lord will be pleased with the diligent 
efforts, specially of some, in this matter. 



The Colporteurs have had a good year, and there is an 
increase in the output of volumes over last year of about 
33-1/3 per cent.; and although the ground had all been 
previously gone over, the prospects are still good, and we 
are glad that some others are endeavoring to so arrange 
matters as to be able to enter the work even at the eleventh 
hour. Some of the workers have had specially interesting 
times and wonderful evidences of the Lord's favor and 
guidance and blessing. 

We think that it is just possible that some may not 
be realizing opportunities in this service. Though unable 
to give all their time, they may be able to spend a few 
hours a week. There must still be some that need the 
sealing in their foreheads, for the winds are surely to be 
let loose when this work is finished. And it always seems 
to me that it is a wonderful joy to take the Water of 
Truth to the thirsty soul, to search out the Nathanaels, 
and get them to "come and see" and realize the presence 
of Messiah. 

Brother Nelson will report on his travels; he seems 
specially to have been a means of assistance and blessing 
to the Sydney Class, who undertook to pay his expenses 
and also co-labored with him in the Extension Work. 
Their hard work in circulating the numbers of EVERYBODY'S 
PAPER has been rewarded, not only by blessing on 
themselves, but by a nice addition of new members to their 
class. 

We believe that the Convention that was held there 
last Easter was the beginning of better conditions for the 
Church in Sydney. The Convention at Melbourne takes 
place at Christmas, and we are looking forward for the 
best one yet. We hope to be able to report it so. Certainly 
it was a good one on the last occasion. 

There are evidences that the prosperity of this country, 
which has been so pronounced for the past year or two, 
has reached its zenith. Among the thoughtful, whether 
religious or not, there is a general impression that some 
sort of crisis is being approached and that things cannot 
continue as they are very long. 

We are still hoping that you may come over and help 
us. The friends have had so much disappointment twice 
in regard to yourself, and then also in respect to Brother 
Hollister. We hope that when you do come it will not be 
for too short a time. We are sure that much good would 
result, not only in stimulating the friends, but also in 
appealing to the Christian community generally. While 
still hoping along this line, we desire that you will join 
with us and all the dear friends in these parts that the 
spirit of love and zeal may dwell richly with us all, that 
the work may go forward to the glory of God. 

With Christian love, yours in the service of Christ, 
R. E. B. NICHOLSON. 

PUBLICATIONS CIRCULATED 

Copies of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 12,388 



in magazine 

form 666 

Copies of booklets 1,800 

Total 14,854 

R5175 : page 39 

FREE LITERATURE 

PEOPLES PULPIT and EVERYBODY'S PAPER 724,323 

Sample WATCH TOWERS, debates, etc 14,369 

Low estimate of sermons in newspapers 3,532,233 



Total 4,270,925 

These, represented in the usual tract pages, would 
be about 17,386,176; 1,162,776; 12,144,700 and 30,693,652 
respectively. 

CORRESPONDENCE 

Letters and cards received 3,096 

Letters and cards dispatched 4,486 



REPORT OF WORK IN GERMANY FOR 1912 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Enclosed please find the Report for the last quarter of 
our fiscal year and the trial balance sheet for the year. 
I had the pleasure to be at the Hamburg Convention and 
took part most of the time— Sister Koetitz accompanying 
me. The friends enjoyed themselves very much and confessed 
to having received a great blessing. About seventy 
took part, half of which number was from a distance. 
We had a nice hall and sent invitations to the addresses 
we had received through Colporteurs. There was also a 
notice in the paper. The result was that on the first and 
last days of the Convention (being Sunday and a holiday, 
respectively), more than a hundred strangers attended, 
and quite a number of these showed considerable interest. 

At the first Hamburg meeting after the Convention, 
eighteen new friends attended. The Convention remembered 
you kindly and passed a resolution to send you heartfelt 
greetings and best wishes in the Lord. These Conventions 
are certainly a great blessing. 

Having heard of the resolution on Hell passed by the 
Washington Convention, the Hamburg Convention wished 
to go on record, and unanimously adopted it in German 
translation, voting that it might be sent to the German 
newspapers and clergy of the Continent. The Hamburger 
Fremdenblatt reported the matter on the second day following. 
And other newspapers later. 

Now let me give a brief report of the work during 



the past year. I would mention first the circulation of 
literature, as follows: 

Volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 1 1,056 

Volume I in TOWER form 1 1,230 

Various booklets 35,555 

Regular issue of the German WATCH TOWER 

(12 numbers) 43,200 

Sample copies of German WATCH TOWER 

(12 numbers) 24,000 

"Hell" TOWERS 8,842 

PEOPLES PULPIT, EVERYBODY'S PAPER, Yiddish 

papers and Old Theology tracts 2,919,050 

The last item, of free literature, together with the 
above-mentioned sample TOWERS and TOWERS on Hell, 
represent in tract pages 83,817,600. 

These figures include the circulation of nine hundred 
volumes in the Hollandish, Polish and Hungarian 
languages, some Polish and Hungarian P. P., and 500,000 
Hollandish P. P., sent to Holland, South Africa and 
America. 

Comparing these figures with those of last year, you 
will find a considerable increase in the number of volumes 
and booklets circulated. We received 5,886 letters and 
cards, answering 3,977. About 200 friends were immersed 
during the year. 

As for the general spirit of the friends in the Truth, 
I consider that it is very good, although it seems that we 
do not come up to the standard of freedom (from earthly 
cares), liveliness and success set us by our American 
brethren in the Harvest Work. However, the Lord knows 
our hearts and makes allowance for different conditions 
and circumstances in this country. I feel that the friends 
may be credited with having done about all that they 
could, and I am surprised that the net results are so large. 
And I rejoice, praising the Lord for His blessings which 
have crowned the efforts of the dear German friends— of 
Germany, Switzerland, and part of Austria and Russia— 
with such success. I should mention also with appreciation 
the encouragement given and the assistance rendered 
by the German friends in America who have written to 
us and obtained literature from here. 

Your visits in this country were a great inspiration to 
all who had an opportunity to see and hear you, and we 
look forward to seeing you soon again if the Lord will. 
We have entered the new year of our labors, with political 
and social disturbances upon us and ahead of us, as you 
are aware from the newspapers. We must gird up the 
loins of our minds, as the Lord and the Apostles suggest, 
and be sober and hope to the end, daily, for the favor to 
be brought unto us finally. 

With these brief remarks let me close my this year's 
Report, with the happiest greetings to yourself and the 
Brooklyn Bethel Family, and to all who are in Christ 
Jesus and one with us in the same hope, from the German 



Bible House Family, and from your humble brother and 
fellow-servant in Christ, O. A. KOETITZ. 

SUISSE-GERMAN DEPT. REPORT FOR 1912 
(Included in the Foregoing) 

DISTRIBUTION OF LITERATURE 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES and MANNAS 1,602 

" ' Vol. I, in magazine 

form 1,391 

Booklets 2,303 

Copies of WATCH TOWER 6,000 

EVERYBODY'S PAPER and Tracts 94,000 



REPORT OF WORK IN SWEDEN-- 19 12 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

By the Lord's grace we have passed another year in 
His blessed service, and are now so much the nearer to 
the end of this Harvest period; and by His favor it is my 
privilege to send you the Report of the Swedish work for 
the last fiscal year. 

As the following figures will show, the work has been 
richly blessed of the Lord, and a considerable general increase 
also is shown this year, although not in every 
branch, as we would have wished to have it. We have 
also the very best reasons for our still greater expectations 
for the year before us. The friends over here realize 
more and more the importance of the present privileges 
opened up for us by the present Chief Reaper, and a large 
part of the "common people" seem to be hungering and 
thirsting for the Truth as never before. Indeed, we can 
see how "the field [still] is ripe unto the Harvest"— and 
more so now than ever. 

Our hearts rejoice, while we at the same time feel 
greatly humbled when we realize some of the mercies 
shown us in connection with this wonderful time of 
preparation for the setting up of the Kingdom; and we 
are most earnestly decided, by the Lord's help, to be faithful 
to Him and to His special channel, until the end, using 
every remaining opportunity in the best way possible. 

One of the most remarkable increases is shown in the 
number of books sold, which is not very far from twice 
as large as the corresponding figure the preceding year, 

R5175 : page 40 

depending, we believe, to a large extent upon the publishing 
of the new-styled, revised Swedish versions of all the 
different volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, which 
also has been done here during the year. The large editions 
(of 30,000 copies altogether) of the first three 
volumes published in June this year, have during these 



few months melted down to such a degree that we have 
found it wise to already begin the printing of new editions 
in the same quantities. More than thirty dear brethren 
and sisters have labored as Colporteurs during the year. 
A few of these have just recently received the Truth, and 
have joined in the work with great zeal. 

The free distribution of tracts has also increased, as 
you will see. A large part of the issue of "Eko fran 
talarstolen"— PEOPLES PULPIT— of which we now regularly 
print about 150,000 copies every month— has been used in 
connection with the advertising of public meetings in 
various parts of the country. 

The regular Pilgrim service has been richly blessed and 
used of the Lord. We have had two General Conventions 
(the first in Orebro with not less than 500 Truth 
friends present, and the second in Stockholm— when we 
had the joy of having you— yourself— in our midst, and 
had the privilege of listening to your helpful and loving 
words to us), and a large number of well attended and 
profitable local Conventions in nearly all parts of the 
land. Besides this, 81 extra public meetings— of which 
many were in places where we have never before had any 
meeting— have been held by myself all over the land during 
the year. 

These extra meetings have had a total attendance of 
31,150 adults, which as a rule have given the very closest 
attention to our presentation of the good Message for 
fully two hours and more each time. At the close of 
these meetings, we have sold between two and three thousand 
volumes of the STUDIES, etc., and we have also in 
connection with them distributed nearly one-half million 
"Eko fran talarstolen." 417,500 of that number have been 
put in the homes of the people before the meetings, advertising 
the same, by brethren who voluntarily have given 

R5176 : page 40 

their time in this way to serve the Cause we all love so 
dearly. 

The number of subscribers to the Swedish WATCH 
TOWER has increased by only 142, but we hope it will increase 
more during the year before us. The voluntary 
donations to the Tract Fund show again a considerable 
increase, which is specially remarkable when one considers 
the limited financial conditions in which most of 
the friends here live, as well as the fact that a large part 
of their savings has been used in connection with the 
hundreds of meetings held all over the country, and of 
which the expenses have not been reported to us. 

We daily commend you, our beloved Pastor, and all 
your faithful co-laborers everywhere, to the Lord's grace, 
and are glad to know that we also are remembered by you. 

With much Christian love from ourself, and on behalf 
of the Swedish Brethren, 

Yours in the service of our Redeemer, 

AUGUST LUNDBORG. 



SUMMARY OF THE WORK 

Copies STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES circulated 27,780 

Vol. 1 in Magazine edition, sold at cost 12,650 



Total 40,430 

Various other books and booklets, MANNA, 
TABERNACLE SHADOWS, etc 25,557 



Total 65,987 

Eko fran talarstolen (PEOPLES PULPIT), 

issued free 753,000 

Other free tracts and sample TOWERS 126,036 

Total 879,036 

Expressed in usual form of tract pages 14,124,128 

Number of subscribers to the Swedish 

WATCH TOWER 1,881 

Old sets Swedish TOWER, cloth-bound and 

unbound 700 

Bibles sold 109 

Number of meetings held under the auspices 

of the Society 1,395 

Number of miles traveled in preaching 

tours 73,571 

Letters and cards sent out 5,320 

Letters and cards received 4,118 

Total number of various sendings, by mail 

and by railroad 27,567 



REPORT FROM THE NORWEGIAN BRANCH FOR 1912 

SUMMARY OF THE WORK 

Number of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES and 

MANNAS sold 2,179 

Number of booklets sold 2,069 

Total 4,248 

Tracts and Norwegian PEOPLES PULPIT 

distributed 123,625 

These estimated as tract pages 1,978,000 

Subscriptions to the Norweg. PEOPLES PULPIT 1,066 

Subscriptions to the Dano. -Norweg. WATCH 

TOWER 265 

Letters and cards received 1,502 

Letters and cards sent out 1,214 

Parcels sent out 11,598 

Number of public meetings 42 

Number of parlor meetings 148 



Number of attendants, approximately 14,500 



ANNUAL REPORT OF DANISH BRANCH FOR 1912 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I hereby submit the Report of the work done in this 
country, in our endeavor to spread the good tidings of the 
Kingdom so near at hand. Although the figures are small, 
yet in one or two branches the work has widened somewhat. 
More tracts have been distributed than formerly, 
and although no regular Pilgrim service has been taken 
up, more work has been done in that line than previously, 
and both public and private meetings have been held in 
different parts of the country. Lately we have taken up 
a work on Sundays, in different towns and places, from 
which we have been able to get back to Copenhagen the 
same day. Early on Sunday mornings, some twenty of 
the friends of the Class here have started out for some 
such place, and throughout the morning and forenoon they 
have distributed tracts announcing a public meeting held 
in the afternoon. These meetings have also been announced 
in the local papers, and have been well attended. 
A number of the books have been sold at the close of the 
meetings, to those who had become interested through the 
tracts or the meeting. In various places we see indications 
of spiritual growth amongst the friends, and great joy in 
the Lord, and in His wonderful Message. We trust that 
through the Lord's grace we shall be able to do more in all 
branches during the next year, and we are very grateful 
for our privileges in connection with the work. 

With Christian love, and best wishes, 
Yours in our dear Redeemer, 

CARL LUTTICHAU. --Copenhagen. 

R5176 : page 41 

SUMMARY OF THE WORK 

Output of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 2,938 

Output of various booklets 1,927 



Total 4,865 

Tracts free 234,400 

Letters and cards received 1,125 

Letters, cards and parcels sent out 1,125 

Copies of Danish WATCH TOWER sent out 
monthly 876 



REPORT OF JAMAICA BRANCH FOR 1912 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 



It is our privilege and pleasure to report to you the 
work as it progresses in this part of the Harvest Field, 
and our many blessings while sharing in its labors, which 
are of much value to us in our Christian development and 
also highly appreciated. 

Nearly all our efforts during the past twelve months 
have met with success, and we believe the dear Lord has 
signally directed all our services, the dear friends in the 
main being of one heart and one mind throughout the 
Island. And in our experiences with the various ecclesias 
we find them loyal to the Truth and to its source. 

There are many becoming interested at this time, and 
as a whole the Truth is being well established in the 
Island, although we are putting out more literature in 
other parts (other islands) at present. Owing to a drouth 
which has continued in Jamaica for several months, causing 
a financial strain, and also owing to the fact that the 
Island has been thoroughly canvassed in the past two 
years, there is less literature being circulated here; but 
other points seem to have some virgin soil and additional 
opportunities for the blessed Truth to spread. 

The Colporteurs labor under many difficulties in the 
West Indies, Colon, etc., and some find it very difficult to 
meet expenses; however, they are doing good work. As 
you will observe by the Annual Report, there has been a 
large number of volumes placed in the hands of readers 
within the past year, which will undoubtedly serve their 
purpose in due time. 

With much Christian love, I am, 
Your brother and fellow-servant in Christ, 
ROBT. R. PRICE. 

SUMMARY OF THE WORK 

Total number STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES sold 6,944 

" " " " " " magazine 

form 525 

Total number other books sold 1,250 

" " booklets sold 1,012 

" " PEOPLES PULPIT and EVERYBODY'S 

PAPER 315,000 

Estimated in tract pages 5,040,000 

Public lectures 27 

Estimated total attendance 9,449 

Average attendance 350 

Semi-public talks and Class Lessons 159 

Total attendance 5,467 

Average attendance 35 

Letters and cards received 887 

Letters and cards sent 1,805 



THE GOSPEL IN SOUTH INDIA 
MY BELOVED BROTHER RUSSELL:- 



I have been anxiously waiting to hear from you. We 
praise the Lord for the blessed privilege of laying down 
our lives for the Lord's cause. The work is spreading 
rapidly and there are wider scopes for extending the work 
in different places. In all we have about fifty-odd congregations 
or Bible Study Classes now, and we must have 
some teachers in each of these places. Then only will 
the message of the hour reach those of the surrounding 
places. 

If we may spend monthly at an average of five Rupees 
on each class, the work will have greater effect. No matter 
how deeply the poor friends are interested in a place, 
without our frequent visits all the wolves and foxes gather 
and howl and tear them to pieces. Really, it is a hard 
thing to keep them away, without some one on the spot. 
When we start a class in a place, immediately the sectarian 
people go there and say all manner of evil things about 
you, and all the workers, falsely, and try their best to 
discourage the poor people. It seems we have to take a 
paternal care over these poor friends until they are well 
grounded in the Truth and strengthened in spirit and in 

R5177 : page 41 

faith. "They were grieved that the people were taught." 
--Acts 4:2. 

Brother Carmichael is the one who spends his entire 
time distributing tracts now. Other friends also do it, 
but they give only part of their time. Brother Joseph is 
in North Travancore starting classes. He also finds much 
opposition in those parts. 

Here in almost all the vernacular missionary papers 
there is some slanderous report about me and the work- 
almost every issue. They call me Anti-Christ, dog, devil, 
and I know not what all. I don't have time to look or 
listen, as the pressure of the Lord's work is heavy and 
the time is so short. 

The latest development is that some of the literature 
of the enemies of the Truth in America has found its way 
to Travancore, and some sectarians are glorying over it 
and are translating and publishing it in the vernacular 
languages. 

At the instigation of so-called "Christians," we are 
drawn into Court, not for committing any crime, but for 
putting up sheds and teaching the people the Gospel Truth. 
The reason is that there is a law here that no shrine or 
temple shall be built by anybody without the permission 
of the Government. These people know well that it is not 
at all our purpose to put up shrines and temples, and yet 
they want to scare the poor people and put us to unnecessary 
trouble and expense. 

There is a case pending at Quilon in which I am one 
of twelve accused. The accusation against us is that we 
have violated the law of the State in building a Christian 
church. This is the place where Brother Pyles and Dr. 
Jones went for the night meeting, when you and Brother 



Hall and myself went to the English school at Nellykakuzy, 
where Dr. William lives. We all, the twelve accused, 
went to Quilon for the case, and some of the witnesses 
did not appear; hence it is posted for next Friday. 
Of course it will not amount to anything, yet there is 
trouble and unnecessary expense in connection with it, and 
loss of time. These are the things our enemies delight in. 
Such is the spirit of the missionaries, who have come to 
the heathen to preach about Christ. 

The tract, "Problem of the Ages," is translated and 
printed in Malayalam and Tamil, in small quantities of 
25,000. As the funds are not sufficient, I am waiting for 
your instructions in the matter. 

Friends in Royapuram want me to go and spend some 
time with them, and there are many places that could be 
worked for the glory of the Lord. The Federated Malay 
States constitute a very good field, as there are many 
educated Indians there who already show some interest 
through the tracts I have been sending through the mail. 

If I could travel for two months visiting some of these 
places, I am quite sure there would be much interest 
aroused in those parts. I only make this suggestion. I 
think about 500 or 600 Rupees would be enough for the 
entire trip. 

R5177 : page 42 

I could go from here to Madras, and after spending 
a few days there, go to Burmah, and then to Penang, and 
to the Malay States. There are many Tamil and 
Malayalam people in those places. I think until I come 
back Brothers Theophilus and James may be able to go on 
with the work here. 

Herewith I enclose the monthly statements and the 
receipts of the 53 catechists and teachers, for the help 
they have received. 

Dear Brother, I know it is hard for you to spare even 
a few moments for me, yet I beg of you to drop a few 
lines to encourage and cheer me up and direct me with 
your counsel, at least once a month. 

I die daily, not only for the cause of the Master, but 
also for the servant of the Lord. You know that whatever 
arrow is shot at you by enemies, first pierces me 
through my heart. May the Lord give you, dear brother, 
more strength, more courage, more wisdom and love, every 
passing day. 

With love and prayers, your brother and fellow-sufferer 
for the cause of the Lord. 

S. P. DAVEY. 

REPORT OF WORK IN SOUTH AFRICA FOR 1912 

Volumes STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 

circulated 1,409 

Other books 185 

Booklets 1,818 



English PEOPLES PULPITS 28,808 

English EVERYBODY'S PAPER 30,000 

Dutch PEOPLES PULPITS 3,000 

(These last three items figured in tract pages are 
equivalent, respectively, to 460,928, 480,000 and 
48,000.) 

Mail dispatched 1,716 

Meetings held 309 



WORK FOR THE BLIND 

During the year 1912 the efforts of the Gould Free Library 
for the Blind show as follows:— 

Books loaned out, postage free 876 

Tracts sent out, free 2,698 

Representing in tract pages 37,044 

Letters received 652 

Letters dispatched 483 

Your Brother in Christ, 

F. B. GOULD. 



R5177 : page 42 

ABRAHAM'S AGE ON ENTERING CANAAN 

WE ARE in receipt of a number of letters, calling 
attention to what seems to the writers 
an error in the Chronology given in STUDIES 
IN THE SCRIPTURES, Vol. II, relative to the 
date of Abraham's birth, his entrance into 
Canaan, etc. For the sake of these, as well 
as others who may have the same difficulty, 
we here enlarge upon what is stated in Vol. 
II, pages 44-47. 

Gen. 1 1:32 says that at his death Terah's 
age was two hundred and five years. Acts 7:4 says that 
then Abraham removed into Canaan. And Gen. 12:4 
states that Abraham was seventy-five years old when he 
departed out of Haran. Hence Terah's age at Abraham's 
birth must have been one hundred and thirty years. 

But is not this out of harmony with Gen. 1 1:26, which 
says, "And Terah lived seventy years and begat Abram, 
Nahor and Haran"? We answer, No. The point of 
confusion is in the fact that Haran, the eldest, is mentioned 
last, while Abram, the youngest, is mentioned first 
—possibly because of his greater prominence in the narrative, 
or possibly, as a little stumbling-block to hinder us 
from seeing the facts except as guided by the Lord, in 
His due time. 

That Haran was the eldest of the sons of Terah is 
quite evident from the recorded facts. His son Lot was 



old enough to be the companion of his uncle Abraham. 
Lot and Abraham were probably nearly of the same age, 
as each had his own flocks and herds and herdsmen. 
When Sodom was destroyed Lot had two daughters of 
marriageable age and others already married. This was 
before Isaac was born, Abraham being then ninety-nine 
years old.-Gen. 17:24; 18:1,16; 19:8,14. 

Again, notice the likelihood of Haran's being much the 
oldest of Terah's sons, and Nahor the second, thus: Nahor 
married one of his brother Haran's daughters, Milcah 
(see Gen. 24:15), whose grand-daughter, Rebecca, became 
the wife of Abraham's son, Isaac— Gen. 24:67. 

Our reckoning as given in the STUDIES is, therefore, 
sustained by all the known facts, as well as by the exact 
statements of Scripture. 



R5177 : page 42 

THE OATH-BOUND COVENANT 

-MARCH 2.-GENESIS 15:5-18.- 

"He is faithful that promised."— Hebrews 10:23. 

IN VARIOUS TERMS the Lord eight times 

repeated to Abraham His Covenant. Today's 

Study directs our attention to God's 

oath, whereby that Covenant was confirmed 

to Abraham. And St. Paul calls our attention 

to the fact that these numerous repetitions 

and specifications of the Covenant, as 

well as God's oath attesting, were intended 

specially for us— for Spiritual Israel— "that 

who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set 

before us [in the Gospel]; which hope [expressed in the 

Covenant made with Abraham and confirmed with an 

oath] we have as an anchor of the soul, both sure and 

steadfast, and which entereth into that within the veil."— 

Hebrews 6:18,19. 

Thus the Apostle declares that this Covenant has not 
yet been fulfilled and that Christians, no less than the 
Jews and the whole world of mankind, are vitally interested 
in its fulfilment. We may have wondered, Why did 
God repeat the Promise so frequently to Abraham, and 
then confirm it to Isaac and to Jacob, etc.? But when we 
see that this Promise, as a nutshell, contains the entire 
Plan of God for human Redemption and Restitution, as 
an acorn contains an oak tree, this explains to us the 
Divine particularity. It explains to us also why this 
Promise made to Abraham is continually referred to by 
the Apostles in their presentation of the hope for the 
Church and for the world. 

The Promise primarily was to Abraham himself— 
"Lift up now thine eyes,...to the north, and to the 



south, and to the west, and to the east; all the land which 

R5178 : page 43 

thou seest, to thee will I give it, and thy seed after thee." 

Although God's providence led the children of Israel into 

that land, and although it was given to them by Joshua 

to be their inheritance, this did not fulfil the conditions of 

the Promise. The Israelites did not have permanent possession 

of the land. Time and again it passed under the 

rule of the Philistines, the Egyptians, Assyrians, Babylonians, 

etc.; and now for many centuries it has been 

under the rule of the Turks. 

The Jews have now no more right to that land than 
had the Canaanites, Amalekites and others whom they 
drove out, except through this great Oath-bound Covenant 
made to Abraham. How foolish, therefore, do those intellectual 
Jews appear who disclaim Abraham as a mythical 
character, and who wholly distrust God and the 
promises that He made to Abraham, and who, nevertheless, 
claim the Land of Promise! It is not their Land 
of Promise, and never will belong to any except those 
who hold to the Promise.— Romans 4:11-14. 

ABRAHAM'S THREE WIVES TYPICAL 

While Abraham and his wives were all real personages, 
their affairs were so supervised by the Almighty 
that they became types. Thus Abraham was a type of 
God, and Isaac a type of Messiah. Isaac's wife, Rebecca, 
typified the Church, the Elect Little Flock of this Gospel 
Age, for whom God has provided joint-heirship with the 
Redeemer in His great Kingdom, and through whom, as 
the Seed of Abraham, all the families of the earth will 
be blessed.— Galatians 3:29. 

As Abraham was a type of the Almighty, so his wives 
were types of God's three great Covenants, through which 
all of His blessings will come by and by. St. Paul explains 
that, as Sarah was barren, so the primary, or chief, 
Covenant of God was barren for a long time— until Jesus 
came. Meantime, Hagar representatively became the 
wife, and attempted to bring forth the heir of promise, 
but failed. St. Paul declares that in this Hagar typified 
the Covenant made with Israel at Sinai, which failed to 
bring forth the real Seed of Abraham, competent to bless 
all the families of the earth. 

As Hagar was a bond-maid, she typified the bondage 
of the Law Covenant; and her child Ishmael, Inspiration 
points out, typified the Jewish people. They were indeed 
related to God, but as children of a Covenant of bondage. 
As later on, the barren Sarah brought forth the son of 
promise, so, St. Paul explains, God's original Covenant in 
due time brought forth the true Heir, Jesus— Messiah. 

In one figure, all the followers of Jesus are reckoned 
as His members, under Him as their Head, as the Apostle 
says, "We brethren, as Isaac was, are the children of 



promise." In another figure, Jesus is pictured as a 
Bridegroom, and His followers a Bride company. This 
picture is shown in Rebecca, who became Isaac's wife, 
and joint-heir with him to the riches of Abraham 
and the promises to his seed. In the type Sarah 
died prior to the time that Isaac married, which signifies 
that this primary Covenant of God, made with Abraham, 
will reach its fulfilment in the bringing forth of the completed 
Messiah, Head and Body, Bridegroom and Bride. 
These will be the Seed of Abraham, through whom all 
nations will be blessed. 

ABRAHAM'S ALL GIVEN TO ISAAC 

In the type Abraham gave all that he had to Isaac, 
through him making provision for Ishmael and for his other 
children by his third wife, Keturah. In the antitype God 
bestows all His fulness upon Christ, The Messiah, and 
through Him makes provision for the Natural Israelites 
and for all the families of the earth— all who are to be 
blessed through the antitypical Isaac— The Christ. 

The inspired interpretation is that Hagar and Sarah 
were types of the Law Covenant and of our covenant 
of this Gospel Age, which gives us assurance that 
Abraham's third wife, who was taken after the death 
of Sarah and who bore him many children, typified 
the New Covenant, which the Bible declares will 
soon be inaugurated— at the close of this Gospel Age. 
Under that New Covenant and at the hands of the 
Spiritual Seed of Abraham, The Christ, during the thousand 
years of the Messianic reign, all the families of the 
earth will be blessed. Such is the length, the breadth, 
the height and depth of God's Love for humanity, and 
His provision for their future! 

Thus seen, God's Promise to Abraham had only a partial 
beginning at Mount Moriah, and the development of 
the real Seed of Abraham had only its start in Jesus, and 
the real Seed which is to bless the world, according to 
His Promise, is not yet complete. Our hope is that this 
Spiritual Seed will soon be completed by the First Resurrection. 
Then, the secondary part of the Promise, which 
relates to the natural man— the world in general— will 
begin to be fulfilled; because then the Messiah class, the 
Spiritual Seed of Abraham, in power and great glory 
beyond the veil, will set up a Kingdom— begin to exercise 
Messianic power and authority and thus begin to 
bless the world. 

Messiah's reign, according to the Scriptures, is to last 
a thousand years. Its effect will be the binding of Satan, 
the restraining of sin, the scattering of ignorance and 
superstition, and the general enlightenment of mankind. 
Under that enlightening influence, the "knowledge of God 
will fill the whole earth as the waters cover the great 
deep," until none shall need to teach his neighbor, because 
all will know, understand and appreciate the Divine arrangement 
and the privileges then possible to them. 



Under that reign, not only the living will be blessed 
and led back to health, perfection and everlasting life, 
but all that are in their graves will be awakened and come 
forth to similar knowledge, privileges and opportunities. 
Only thus could those families of the earth be blessed 
who died, before Abraham's time and since, in utter ignorance 
of God and His glorious arrangements. 

AS THE STARS AND AS THE SAND 

Only of late have Bible students discerned that Abraham 
is to have two seeds, exclusive of the Ishmaelites of the 
Law, or Hagar Covenant. "Thy Seed shall be as the 
stars of heaven, and as the sands of the seashore." The 
stars of heaven fitly picture to us a glorified Christ and 
His Church, the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, changed 
from human nature to Divine nature, from earthly conditions 
to heavenly conditions. These are the heirs of Galatians 3:29, 
and are referred to by St. Paul again when 
he says, "As star differeth from star in glory, so is the 
resurrection of THE dead."— 1 Corinthians 15:41,42. 

But God's glorious Plan will only begin its accomplishment 
in the glorification of the Church. All the families 
of the earth, like the sands of the seashore, will be privileged 
to come into relationship with God under Messiah's 
Kingdom. All who will then knowingly and wilfully reject 
the Divine arrangement will be cut off in the Second 
Death. But all who then will accept the terms of Messiah's 
Kingdom and become obedient thereto will be gradually 
brought to perfection, and because of faith and 
obedience become identified with God and become the 
earthly, or human seed of Abraham, blessed with human 
perfection and everlasting life in an earthly Eden. 

GOD'S OATH TO ABRAHAM 

Professor Dods has ably pointed out that the procedure 
of cutting animals in two parts and passing between 

R5178 : page 44 

them was an ancient form of solemn obligation or contract 
—an oath. Thus God adopted the strongest possible 
symbolism for assuring Abraham and all his posterity that 
His Covenant to bless Abraham and his Seed will never 
be broken. Incidentally, a prophecy was made, showing 
that it would be four hundred years before Abraham's 
posterity would have even a semblance of Divine favor, 
and that meantime they would be under the yoke of bondage 
to Egypt, and then would be brought forth. 

St. Stephen, evidently voicing the sentiment of all the 
Apostles, noted the fact that God's promise to Abraham 
had not been fulfilled up to that time, even though the 
Israelites had possessed Canaan off and on for centuries. 
The promise reads that the land shall come to Abraham 
and to his seed after him. St. Stephen noted the fact that 



Abraham never owned enough of Canaan to set his foot 
upon. His reasoning is that after Messiah and His Bride 
shall be glorified as the Kingdom, then Abraham will 
come forth from the dead to inherit the land and bestow 
it upon his posterity. But the antitype, we have seen, will 
be larger; for the whole earth shall be the Paradise of 
God, and the Land of Canaan, to all who shall return to 
harmony with God, and through faith and obedience be 
accepted as the seed of Abraham. 



R5178 : page 44 

HOPE FOR THE SODOMITES 

--MARCH 9.-GENESIS 19:12-17,23-29.- 

"Come ye out from among them, and be ye separate, saith the 
Lord, and touch no unclean thing."— 2 Corinthians 6:17. (R.V.) 

WHEN ABRAHAM was ninety-nine years old 
—about the year 1900 B.C.— his encampment 
was at Hebron. There the Lord and two 
angels appeared to him as men. He knew 
them not, but entertained them, and they 
did eat and talk with Abraham. St. Paul, 
noting this, urges that the Lord's people 
should be hospitable to strangers, and reminds 
us of how Abraham entertained 
angels unawares.— Hebrews 13:2. 
The one in this case called the Lord was doubtless the 

R5179 : page 44 

Logos, chief Messenger of Jehovah, who subsequently 
was made flesh that He might be man's Redeemer and 
Restorer. The Lord on this occasion told Abraham that 
Ishmael would not be the heir of the Promise, but that 
very shortly Sarah would have a son, notwithstanding 
her advanced age. Isaac was born the next year. 

It was as Abraham walked with his angelic visitors a 
little distance that he learned who they really were, and 
that the destruction of Sodom was imminent. Nobly and 
generously the heir of the Promises petitioned God's 
Mercy on the Sodomites, to spare them from destruction 
if there were fifty, forty, twenty or even ten amongst 
them doing as well as they knew how. The Lord gave 
assurance that if there were ten in the city thus righteous 
it would be spared. 

THE WICKEDNESS OF SODOM GREAT 

God's policy has been to allow mankind during this 
reign of sin and death to try their hand at self-government, 
etc. He has interf erred to cut off with destruction 



only those whose iniquity became very pronounced and 
whose fond enjoyment of life's privileges would be injurious 
to themselves and others. Thus of the Sodomites 
and the antediluvians God made illustrations of the great 
lesson, "All the wicked will He destroy." 

We are to remember, however, that these are not illustrations 
of eternal torment, but illustrations of destruction. 
We are to remember, also, that these merely passed 
into destruction a few years sooner than they would 
ordinarily have done. We are to remember, further, that 
the death sentence was upon all of Adam's race from 
the time when he was cast out of Eden. 

We are to remember, further, that Christ Jesus, by 
the grace of God, tasted death for every man; and that 
in Him all the families of the earth will be blessed. This 
means that all of Adam's children, under the reign of sin 
and death and the weaknesses of heredity, will 
eventually come forth from the tomb through the merit 
of Christ's sacrifice. And that sacrifice included the 
Sodomites as truly as it includes any of us, as this 
lesson will show. 

"AND DELIVERED RIGHTEOUS LOT" 

The Apostle Peter informs us that Lot was not in sympathy 
with the evils of Sodom, in the midst of which he 
lived. (2 Peter 2:7,8.) His family apparently had been 
all girls. These, except two, had intermarried with the 
Sodomites. Quite possibly it was the thought of marrying 
the daughters to prosperous husbands that, under the 
guidance of the mother, induced the family to settle in 
Sodom. How many others like Lot and his wife have 
made the serious mistake of claiming more for the physical 
and temporal interests of their families than for their 
intellectual and moral welfare! The story of the flight 
of Lot, his wife and two unmarried daughters is simply 
told in our lesson. 

Geologists declare that the region of the Dead Sea, 
the former site of Sodom and Gomorrah, was a gas and 
oil and asphalt deposit, with a deep crevice which led 
down to subterranean fires; and that the connection established 
between these by an earthquake or by a lightning 
bolt would have resulted in the manner described as the 
experiences of Sodom. The gas, throwing burning oil 
and asphalt into the air, would have produced a rain of 
fire and brimstone— a death-dealing terror. But had 
there been no such reservoir of inflammables, the Lord 
would have been quite able to accomplish the same results 
by other means, or in such a case perhaps accomplished 
the destruction in another way. 

The intimation of the 29th verse is that God's Mercy 
toward Lot was because of his relationship to Abraham. 
This view is consistent with all the Bible statements. 
Adam's entire race was condemned to death because of 
his disobedience. Hence Divine Justice owed nothing 
to any of them. Divine Mercy entered into a special 



Covenant of favor with Abraham, after he had demonstrated 
his faith, loyalty and obedience; but the Covenant 
did not extend to any others except to his seed. There 
was therefore no reason why Lot should be considered 
more than others except as stated— that God would show 
favor to him because of his relationship to Abraham. 

"THERE'S A WIDENESS IN GOD'S MERCY" 

This does not signify that God is merciless to our race, 
but merely that, having provided a way, or channel, 
through which He will exercise His Mercy, He will but 
rarely exercise it outside of that foreordained channel. 

The channel of all of God's Mercy is Christ Jesus, 
who declared, "No man cometh unto the Father but by 
Me." Of Him also St. Peter said, "Neither is there 
salvation in any other, for there is none other name under 
Heaven given amongst men, whereby we must be saved." 
(Acts 4:12.) Since no one could be saved except through 
Jesus, it follows that no one was saved before Jesus came. 
To some this may at first seem astounding, until they 

R5179 : page 45 

perceive that it is the clear teaching of the Bible, and the 
key which unlocks the wonders of God's grace. 

In proof of this, note St. Paul's words respecting the 
salvation which God has sent to mankind through Jesus. 
He says, "Which salvation began to be preached by our 
Lord and was confirmed unto us by those who heard 
Him." (Hebrews 2:3.) Again, we read that Jesus "brought 
life and immortality to light through the Gospel."— 
2 Timothy 1:10. 

Abraham and all the Hebrews had the intimation of 
coming blessing through the promises made to Abraham; 
but an intimation is one thing, and the blessing itself 
another. The Promise said that the people's blessing would 
come through Abraham's Seed. (Galatians 3:16,29.) 
Hence it could not come before. We should rid our 
minds of the thought that Abraham, Moses, David and 
others of the holy ones of the past went to Heaven, and 
the remainder of mankind to eternal torture. The Bible 
most distinctly declares that the ancients, good and bad, 
were gathered to their fathers and slept with their fathers. 
They are sleeping still, waiting for the time when 
Abraham's Seed will be complete, and will set up God's 
Kingdom in the earth, overthrow all the powers of sin 
and death, and deliver all the captives from the prison-house 
of the tomb. 

THE FIRST, OR CHIEF RESURRECTION 

The First Resurrection began with our Lord Jesus 
and is not yet completed, because all of the faithful Elect 
Bride class are called to share in His sacrificial death, 
and to share also in His glorious Resurrection to the 



Divine nature. All sharing in that First Resurrection, 
the Bible declares, will reign with Christ a thousand 
years, and as the Seed of Abraham, fully empowered, will 
bless all those redeemed by the precious blood of Calvary. 
-Rev. 20:4. 

St. Paul emphasizes this point in Hebrews 1 1:38-40, 
declaring that, while Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and all 
the holy ones of the past received indications of God's 
favor, nevertheless that favor can come only through 
Christ. Consequently they cannot reach perfection in the 
flesh and everlasting life until the Body of Christ, the 
Spiritual Seed of Abraham, shall be completed— "that 
they, without us, should not be made perfect." Jesus also 
attested that the Ancient Worthies had not gone to 
Heaven, saying, "No man hath ascended up to Heaven." 
(John 3:13.) St. Peter specializes in the Prophet David's 
case, and declares, "David is not ascended into the 
Heavens."— Acts 2:34. 

HOPE FOR THE SODOMITES 

The hope for the Sodomites is exactly the same as the 
hope for all the remainder of Adam's race, except a few 
who, during this Gospel Age, have come into relationship 
with Christ as members of the Spiritual Seed. The hope 
of all the world is the Messianic Kingdom, and the deliverance 
from the power of sin and death which it will 
effect. With the setting up of that Kingdom the work 
of salvation will begin, so far as the world is concerned, 
for the salvation of the Church to a Heavenly condition 
is a separate salvation from that which God has provided 
for the world in general. The sacrifice at Calvary, however, 
is one sacrifice for all— the basis of all our hopes. We 
were all condemned to death through Adam; and justification 
to life can come to none except through the Redeemer. 

Jesus tells us that it will be more tolerable for the 
people of Sodom and Gomorrah in the Day of Judgment 
(the thousand years of His Messianic reign) than for the 
people of His day who heard His Message and rejected 
it— the people of Capernaum, Bethsaida, Chorazin. 
(Matthew 11:20-24.) It will not be intolerable for the 
people who rejected Jesus; but it will be more tolerable, 
the Master said, for the Sodomites, because, He explains, 
"If the mighty works had been done in Sodom and 
Gomorrah, they would have repented," and would not 
have been overwhelmed. 

This shows us clearly that the eternal fate of the 
Sodomites is not sealed. When we turn to the Word of 
the Lord through Ezekiel the Prophet, 16:46-63, we have 
abundant testimony that the Sodomites will not only be 
awakened from the sleep of death, but when awakened 
will be brought to a knowledge of God and to an opportunity 
of obtaining everlasting life, through The Messiah, 
by willing obedience. 



R5180 : page 45 

ABRAHAM'S FAITH TESTED 

--MARCH 16. -GENESIS 22:1-13.- 

"I desired mercy, and not sacrifice; and the knowledge 
of God more than burnt offerings."— Hosea 6:6. 

TODAY'S STUDY tells us of one of the reasons 

why Abraham has been styled the 

"Father of the Faithful." His entire life 

history, as sketched in the Bible, was a life 

of faith, a life of trust in God, reliance upon 

the Divine promises. But the final test, 

which we study today, was terribly severe 

and marked the tested one as very high, according 

to any and every standard— Divine 

and human. Evidently Abraham's faith 

grew stronger and stronger as the years of his acquaintance 

with God multiplied. The faith recorded in our 

lesson is so colossal as to amaze us. Only a person very 

intimately acquainted with the Almighty, very sympathetic 

and trustful, could possibly have endured such a test. 

This test came through the Divine command that 
Abraham should take his son, his only son, Isaac, in whom 
was centered the promises, and should offer him a sacrifice 
to God on Mount Moriah. To appreciate the situation, we 
must remember that Abraham at this time was 125 years 
old, and that Isaac was the son whom the Lord had indicated 
would be the channel for all the blessings promised. 

We must go back of this, and remember the long years 
before Isaac's birth, when for fourteen years Abraham 
had been thinking that possibly Ishmael might be the 
channel of God's blessings. We must go still further 
back, and remember the long period before Ishmael's 
birth, in which Abraham wandered as a stranger and 
waited for the fulfilment of God's Promise, only to realize 
that his wife was absolutely sterile, barren. Now after 
half a century of waiting and trusting, could it be that 
God wished him to sacrifice all this to demonstrate his 
loyalty, his faith? It was so. He had positive assurance 
of the command. It was no imagination. It was no whispering 
of witches or wizards. It was no dream. 

To one of Abraham's character, the Divine command 
meant prompt obedience. Forthwith he started. "Whatsoever 
He saith unto you, do it." Forthwith he made 
ready for the journey, accompanied part of the way by 
his servants. Then leaving them, Abraham and Isaac 
journeyed to the top of Mt. Moriah, which long centuries 
afterward, in the time of Solomon, was the site of the 
Temple. The very rock upon which Isaac is supposed 
to have been bound, became the very location for the 
Brazen Altar. 

We looked with great interest upon this rock recently, 



R5180 : page 46 

when visiting Jerusalem. We thought of the Wisdom of 
God manifested in the sending of Abraham to the very 
spot which He had foreordained should be the Temple 
site. The rock is surrounded by an iron fence; and it 
may be seen, but not touched. In its center is a hole, 
which, tradition says, was a drainway for the surplus 
blood of the sacrifices, carrying the blood away. 

Well we remember how the features of today's Study 
came before our mind! The grand old man, Abraham, 
accompanied by his loyal son, the heir of the promises, 
and well acquainted with them, came to this spot. There 
the wood was placed; and then the father, with faltering 
lips, but determined heart, told his son of the Divine command. 
There he offered up his son, even though the knife 
did not strike the fatal blow. The offering was complete 
in the sight of Heaven, and the hand was stayed opportunely 
and, as the Apostle explains, "Abraham received 
his son from the dead, in a figure."— Hebrews 11:19. 

THE ANTITYPE OF ALL THIS 

These incidents of olden time had their own effect 
upon the actors; but to God's people, enlightened by the 
Holy Spirit, they have still further meaning. We have 
already seen that Abraham serves as a type of the Almighty, 
and that Isaac serves as a type of The Christ- 
Head and Body. Here then we have the antitype. The 
Heavenly Father freely offered up His Son on our behalf, 
for the sins of the whole world. "God sent not His Son 
into the world to condemn the world, but that the world 
through Him might be saved." "God gave His only Begotten 
Son, that whosoever believeth on Him might not 
perish, but have everlasting life"— that in Him all the 
families of the earth might be blessed. 

God's great sacrifice of His Son did not mean His 
eternal death— His destruction. It meant merely that 
Christ should die to earthly interests, hopes, aims and 
ambitions, but should be begotten by the Holy Spirit to 
new hopes, to new aims, to new ambitions and to new conditions 
—beyond the veil. 

So God left not His Son in death when He freely 
offered Him up for us all, nor did He leave Him in the 
human condition of sacrifice. He raised our Lord from 
the dead, on the third day, to the glory that he had with 
the Father before the world was— yes, with and to an 
added glory, "far above angels, principalities and powers 
and every name." Here we have the antitype of Abraham's 
offering up Isaac. 

"IF WE SUFFER WITH HIM" 

But there is more to the antitype. In God's providence 
He arranged that Jesus should be the Head to the 



Church, which is His Body. Hence the sufferings of 
Christ, accomplished by Jesus the Head, which ended 
nearly nineteen centuries ago, were only a part of the 
sufferings of the antitype of Isaac. Here the Apostle 
declares, "We, brethren, as Isaac was, are the children 
of promise."— Galatians 4:28. 

The Church which God has been calling out of the 
world since the day of Pentecost is required to prove her 
loyalty and faithfulness and worthiness of sharing in the 
First Resurrection, by being made conformable to Christ's 
death. "If we suffer with Him"— as His members— "we 
shall also reign with Him"— as His members. The cup 
which the Father gave to Him of suffering and ignominy 
was a test to prove His faithfulness and loyalty. The 
same cup He has passed on to His followers, saying, 
"Drink ye all of it," following My example in demonstrating 
your love and loyalty to God and for His cause, 
even unto death. 

That the Lord Jesus guards His sheep is distinctly 
stated by Himself. When He reproved Saul of Tarsus 
for the death of St. Stephen and for troubling the Church, 
He declared, "Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou Me? 
Tarsus never saw Jesus personally in the flesh to persecute 
Him, but whatsoever was done to the least of His disciples 
was done to Jesus. This still is true, and will continue 
to be true until the Body of Christ, which is the 
Church Elect, shall have been completed and glorified. 
Meantime, he that harms one of the least of the Lord's 
little ones, and he that gives a cup of cold water to one 
of the least of these, does it to the Lord of Glory Himself. 

THE RAM IN THE THICKET 

When God through the angel stayed the hand of 
Abraham from accomplishing the sacrifice of his son's 
life, a ram caught in the thicket was provided as a sacrifice 
instead. Thus a ram in sacrifice became a symbol of the 
Seed of Abraham, and an indication of a part of the 
process by which reconciliation of Divine Justice will be 
made on behalf of all the families of the earth, to permit 
of their being blessed by the Messianic Kingdom. 

We are to remember that this same thought was kept 
up in God's subsequent dealings with Israel. Thus the 
Passover Lamb was slain, and its blood, sprinkled figuratively, 
typically, foretold the fact that there could be no 
Church of the First-born saved during this Gospel Age, 
except through the slain Lamb, "the Lamb of God which 
taketh away the sin of the world." Similarly, the sin-offerings 
and burnt-offerings of Israel spoke of the necessity 
for a redemptive work to be accomplished before 
any blessings could come to Israel, or through them to 
other nations, peoples, kindreds and tongues. 

Amongst the many lessons which Christians may learn 
from the testing of Abraham's faith are these: 

(1) The necessity for the death of the One through 
whom the blessing will eventually come to all mankind. 



If Jesus had not died for our sins, there would have been 
no remission of them. Hence there would have been no 
resurrection from the dead, and in that event death 
would have been more than a sleep. It would have 
meant extinction. 

(2) Let us be sure that if Jesus had not faithfully 
consummated His part of the agreement and laid down 

His life, neither would He have shared in the grand consummation 
and exaltation to the Divine nature. St. Paul 
declares this, saying that He was faithful unto death, 
"even the death of the cross, wherefore [on this account] 
God also hath highly exalted Him."— Philippians 2:8,9. 

(3) We are to remember that the same rule applies 

to all of the Church. It is not sufficient that we consecrate 
our lives. We must show our loyalty and faithfulness by 
laying them down, by taking up the cross, by drinking of 
His cup, by being immersed into His death. Only these 
will share Messiah's Throne of Glory. "If we suffer with 
Him, we shall also reign with Him; if we be dead with 
Him, we shall also live with Him." 



Time was when I did think that with 
Abundant strength my rest from wily foe 
And subtle enemy would be assured; but 
I am undeceived. The light of Truth has 
Shone into my mind, and shown that He 
In whom doth lie my "perfect strength" shall 
"Teach my hands to war, my fingers how 
To fight"; and so I learn that powers 
Of ill are round about me as the air, 
Needing a constant watch; and I have constant 
Need that both my hands be free, and that 
My fingers, where the power to grasp the 
Sword lies hid, be taught of Him to wage 
The conflict whensoe'r the hour may be. 
C. BECKETT 



R5181 : page 47 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I am writing you a few lines to tell you I am one happy 
man now. 

My wife bought the first three volumes of STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES and read them and proved them to be Bible Truth. 
She wanted to read them to me, but I would not listen to it. 
I had been converted, but had lost all faith in so-called preachers, 
that claimed to be called of God, and I believed you to 
be a false prophet. The Light had almost gone out of my 
heart, and I told my wife I did not want your stuff in my 
house. 



As the time went on I was like a mad man. At last I went 
with my wife to the class, still believing they were deceived 
and deceiving us; but they told me you were just pointing 
out the Bible Truths to us. I had persecuted them, but God 
soon melted my hard heart and I repented of my past sins 
and made it right with my brethren. Now we are dwelling 
together in unity and Love. 

I feel I have also persecuted you, for which I am very 
sorry and ask your pardon. When "one member suffers all 
suffer with it"; and, "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one 
of these, ye have done it unto Me," says our Lord. So this 
has troubled me, and I want to stand clear before God. I 
may never see you in the flesh, but expect to meet you when 
we pass beyond the veil. 

Will close, waiting at the Bar for Pardon. May God's 
Love and blessing be with you now and forever. 

Ever your brother and co-laborer in the Harvest Work, 
JOHN WELCH. -Mich. 



DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

I cannot hope to express much of my gratitude to the 
Lord or much of my regard for you, as the channel through 
which He has so wonderfully blessed me, with light and knowledge 
and peace such as I never thought to possess. 

For ten years an officer in the Salvation Army, engaged 
in "Rescue" work, my heart has been terribly burdened, not 
only with my own inability to live up to the Divine standard, 
but also with the apparently hopeless condition of others less 
favored than myself. 

Dissatisfied for a long time, and having lost almost all faith 
in God and in the Bible, I did not know what to do or what 
to believe. In my extremity I continued to pray like this: 
"O God (if there is any God) help me! Help me now! Send 
me a little light (if there is any light). Let me know what 
is the truth— the truth (if anything is true)." And in His infinite 
Love, He answered that prayer, by sending me the 
STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. Since that time the language of 
my heart is expressed exactly in the words of the hymn, beginning 
—"My life flows on, in endless song." 

I made the Vow my own some months ago. How glad I 
am of anything that helps me to carry out my consecration 
vows. Your sister by His Grace, M. STROUD. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We think it proper to write you, to tell you we have taken 
the Vow, and to tell you of the many blessings we enjoy as a 
result of your labors as the Lord's honored servant. 

Three years ago, by the Lord's arrangement, we commenced 
reading Vol. I, STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, finding it 
gave us a view of God's character and Plan that enabled us 
to "comprehend with all saints the height and depth and length 
and breadth of the Love of God." We were attracted and 



drawn onward to feast more and more on the Truth. 

Before then we were Socialists, full of discontent. How 
thankful we are that we were unable to buy the books that 
we then so much desired, for these very writings would no 
doubt have only ensnared us more, by leading into Evolution, 
Higher Criticism, etc. 

We pray the Lord's continued blessing upon you and all 
the dear friends, having much comfort because of our share 
of interest in the prayers of all the Lord's people. 
Yours, 

FRED AND LIZZIE MYERS.-Okla. 



page 47 

BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 

Series VI., Study XIII. --Parental 
Obligations of the New Creation. 

MARCH 2 

Read P. 541, par. 1, to P. 554, par. 3 

PROPER EXERCISE OF THE CHILD-MIND 

(30) How should a child be taught to discriminate in 
his choice of reading matter? P. 541, par. 1. 

(31) How serious and lasting is the influence of evil suggestions? 
P. 541, par. 2. 

(32) Who should be the child's tutor in religious training? 
And why is it unjust as well as inexpedient to attempt 
religious instruction in the public schools? P. 542, par. 1; 
P. 543, par. 1,2. 

THE INFLUENCE OF SUNDAY SCHOOLS 

(33) From what viewpoint may the Sunday School be 
considered beneficial? P. 544, par. 1. 

(34) How have Sunday Schools been injurious to Christian 
parents? P. 544, par. 2. 

(35) Why is the Sunday School a disadvantage to the 
children of believers? P. 544, par. 3. 

MARCH 9 

Read P. 545, par. 1, 2, to P. 547, par. 2. 

(36) How is the Sunday School reacting to the disadvantage 
of both parents and children? P. 545, par. 1, 2. 

(37) Point out the decided advantage both to child and 
parent in the Scriptural arrangement for the child's religious 
training. P. 545, par. 3; P. 546, par. 1. 

(38) How is the Sunday School arrangement naturally 
in line with sectarianism? P. 546, par. 2. 



(39) What is the history of the Sunday School? P. 546, par. 3. 

(40) How may the New Creation rectify their mistakes 

of the past as respects the religious training of their children? 
P. 547, par. 1. 

THE CONFIDENCE OF CHILDREN 

(41) What should be the basis of a child's confidence in 
its parents? P. 547, par. 2. 

MARCH 16 

Read P. 548, par. 1, to P. 550, par. 1 

(42) How should a child's confidential questions be encouraged 
and answered by the parent? P. 548, par. 1. 

(43) How will a properly trained child regard a parent's 
word or command? And what three elements of character 
must combine in the parent in order to make his power and 
authority valuable in the home? P. 548, par. 2. 

THE POWER OF SUGGESTION IN CHILD -TRAINING 

(44) What is the importance of the human will, and how 
is a child's mind influenced by suggestion? P. 549, par. 1. 

(45) How is this principle illustrated in the Bible and in 
all proper preaching? P. 549, par. 2. 

(46) Explain the secret of a successful parent in respect 
to this suggestive method. P. 550, par. 1. 

MARCH 23 

Read P. 550, par. 2, to P. 554, par. 1 

(47) How may a mother's wise suggestions anticipate a 
child's disappointment over a rainy day? And how are such 
suggestions helpful also to the parent? P. 550, par. 2, and 
foot note. 

(48) Explain how the suggestive method may be applied 
with advantage to the child's dietary? P. 551, par. 1. 

(49) May suggestion be equally potent in teaching moral 
lessons to the child? P. 552, par. 1. 

(50) From what standpoint should reproofs be administered 
in case of disobedience on the part of the child? P. 553, par. 1. 

(5 1) What should be the standard in all suggestions? 
P. 554, par. 1. 

MARCH 30 

Read P. 554, par. 2, to P. 556, par. 2 

OUR CHILDREN IN THE TIME OF TROUBLE 

(52) Could the New Creation reasonably expect a miraculous 
protection for their children in the world-wide time of 
trouble? P. 554, par. 2. 



(53) What Scriptural promise would seem to apply to 
children as well as all lovers of righteousness? P. 555, par. 1. 

(54) What is the natural anxiety of parents for their 
children during this period, and how should it be overcome? 
P. 555, par. 2. 

(55) Explain the best possible provision the New Creation 
can make for the protection of their children in the time of 
trouble. P. 556, par. 1. 

PROPER AMUSEMENTS 

(56) What should be the attitude of the New Creation 
toward amusements for their children? P. 556, par. 2. 



page 49 

VOL. XXXIV FEBRUARY 15 No. 4 
A. D. 1913-A. M. 6041 



CONTENTS 

A General View of The Messianic Kingdom 5 1 

The Seat of Divine Government 5 1 

Future Sufferings of Ancient Worthies 52 

Future Reward of the Faithful Princes 52 

Future Work of The Christ 53 

The Arch-Enemy of The People of God 54 

Proper Method of Resistance 54 

The Lesson of Confidence in God 55 

St. Peter's Exhortation to the Elders 56 

Danger Involved in the Eldership 56 

Humility an Element of True Courage 57 

Humility Precedes Exaltation 58 

Wisdom of this World Foolishness 58 

Decorum in the House of God 58 

Consideration of Others 59 

A Peculiar Marriage 59 

Rebecca at the Well 59 

The Ancient Worthies 60 

Abraham Looked for a City 61 

"As Deceivers and Yet True" 62 

page 50 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 



Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



R5190 : page 50 

VOLUNTEER MATTER FOR 1913 

This year's Volunteer literature (PEOPLES PULPIT) is now 
in course of preparation, and we hope to begin making shipments 
soon. We doubt not that this issue will be more far-reaching 
in its effect than any other previous edition. It is 
for you to say whether our expectations shall prove true. 

The year 1912 witnessed the publication and distribution of 
thirty-five million copies of PEOPLES PULPIT and EVERYBODY'S 
PAPER, or totaling more than one hundred million sermons 
preached by the dear Volunteers in a most effective manner. 
Shall we endeavor to double these figures for 1913? 

We suggest that orders be sent in at once, to enable us to 
calculate as to the quantity to be printed. 



page 50 

"IN THE GARDEN OF THE LORD" 

This is the title of a very beautiful little poem from the 
pen of Sister G. W. Seibert. It has been published in booklet 
form with sixteen illustrations, twenty-four pages, paper. It 
was our hope that we should have had these in time for the 
use of the friends, as holiday souvenirs, but they arrived just 
too late for announcement. They are useful at all times, however. 
We suggest that the various Classes of Bible Students 
desiring these order them together. The convenience of making 
larger shipments will permit us to make a proportionately 
lower price— 6c. each, 65c. per dozen, postpaid by us. 



R5181 : page 51 

A GENERAL VIEW OF THE MESSIANIC KINGDOM 

"And I John saw the Holy City, New Jerusalem, 
coming down from God out of Heaven."— Rev. 21:2. 

THROUGH the Prophet Daniel and others, 

the Divine promise was given to Israel that 

at some future time the God of Heaven 

would set up a Kingdom on the earth; that 

this Kingdom would be world-wide— "under 

the whole heaven"; and that it would last 

forever. (Dan. 2:44; 7:27; Isa. 2:2-4; etc.) 

This Messianic Kingdom is to be established 

to meet the exigencies of the case of fallen 

humanity and to bring mankind back into 

harmony with the Divine arrangements. This Kingdom 

will intervene between the Divine Government and mankind, 

because the fallen race of Adam in its weak condition 

is unable to meet the requirements of the Divine Law. 

The great Emperor of the Universe, Jehovah, has given 
the Messianic Kingdom to our Lord Jesus, who was 
the first representative of that Kingdom. While on earth, 
our Lord was treated with violence and ignominy. All 
down the Gospel Age, His disciples have been used in a 
similar manner. Yet the Kingdom which they represent 
will surely be established. Already the Father has appointed 
our Lord as King (Psa. 2:6), and will soon deliver 
to Him the power and glory of His office. 

The object and purpose of this Kingdom is clearly 
set forth in the Scriptures. When it shall have been established, 
some of its subjects will be asleep in death and 
others will be awake. At that time none of the fallen 
race will be recognized of God as having any life whatever. 
The control of the whole world will be in the 
hands of our Lord, as the One who purchased it with 
His own precious blood, and who is competent to bless 
it, according to the promise made four thousand years ago 
to Abraham, that in him and in his Seed shall all the 
families of the earth be blessed.— Gen. 12:3; 22:18; 
Gal. 3:8,16,29. 

The Kingdom of Heaven, as foretold by our Lord, will 
come about without manifestation— outward show. (Luke 17:20, 
margin.) But with all these suggestions, let us not 
suppose that the Kingdom is to be an earthly government. 
On the contrary, the Scriptures instruct us that 
those who inherit it must become spirit beings before they 
can enter into it. (I Cor. 15:50-52.) The living members 
will all be changed in a moment, in the twinkling of 
an eye, and the dead members must be raised to receive 
their change before they can be forever with the Lord. 

The Lord and the glorified Church will all be spirit 
beings, fully able to administer the world's affairs and 
yet be unseen by mankind. They will be manifest in the 



rewards, punishments and judgments of that Day. The 
difference between the King and the Kingdom is, that 
the King is the person who has authority; but the Kingdom 
includes both His dominion and His associates. In 
this case the latter are the Church, who will sit with Him 
in His Throne. 

The Church will always be in the heavenly condition. 
Nothing in the Scriptures indicates that she will be restricted 
to one place rather than to another. The intimation 
is that after the Church has experienced her 
change, she will be absent from the earth for a while 
and will be brought into the presence of Jehovah, the great 
King. She will be arrayed in glorious clothing of wrought 
gold— "in raiment of needlework." (Psa. 45:13-15.) These 
statements are figurative expressions indicative of the 
beautiful character wrought out in all who become actual 
members of the Body of Christ. 

THE SEAT OF DIVINE GOVERNMENT 

Whether the New Creation are afar off or on the 
earth, they will ever be of the spirit nature. Their particular 
place is on the Divine plane. The various orders 
of spirit beings have each its own sphere, but the Church 
of Christ has no place among them. She is invited to occupy 
a position next to her Lord, who is on the right 
hand of the Majesty on High (Heb. 1:3)— higher than 
all other planes of spirit being. 

At the time of the First Advent, this place had not 
been prepared for the Church, although the Father evidently 
had it in mind. Our Lord ascended on High in 
order to prepare that place. (John 14:2,3.) This He did 
by making an imputation of His merit on behalf of the 
Church, thereby permitting them to become participators 
with Him in the sufferings of the present Age, that they 
may also become sharers with Him in the glories to follow. 
Thus He has prepared the way for the Church to 
enter the highest of all planes. 

We are not sufficiently informed respecting the spirit 
condition to know just how possible it will be for the 
Lord and the Church to remain in the Father's presence 
and at the same time maintain the government of the 
earth. While this may be possible, yet perhaps it may not 
be a wise arrangement. Perhaps it will be necessary for 
them to be absent from the immediate presence of the 
Father, and approximate the earth. 

Our thought is that The Christ will be very closely associated 
with the earth, just as Satan's kingdom is. 
Satan's seat of government is in Tartarus— the atmosphere. 

R5182:page52 

He and his associates, the fallen angels, are near 
the earth, whither they were cast down, separated from 
their own plane because of sin. They are invisible to 
mankind, however, amongst whom they have done an evil 



work. Satan has also his human agents— wicked men 
and women, who are under his control, sometimes through 
ignorance and superstition, and sometimes through mesmeric 
influence. The Scriptures inform us, however, that 
shortly Satan is to be bound for a thousand years; and 
the place which he has occupied will then be vacant- 
Rev. 20:1-3. 

St. Paul informs us that the Church is to be caught 
up to meet the Lord in the air, during the time of His 
Second Advent. (I Thess. 4:15-17.) This does not necessarily 
mean, however, that they will occupy Tartarus. 
We are told that they will be forever with the Lord; 
wherever He is, there the Church will be also, in harmony 
with the Divine will and executing the Divine 
purposes. Men will not see the Lord and the Church, 
even as they do not see Satan and the fallen angels. The 
Christ will be very closely associated with the earth— as 
before intimated— though invisible to mortal eyes. They 
will be doing a good work, a powerful work on the spirit 
plane. They will be kings and priests unto our God, and 
they shall reign on the earth.— Rev. 5:10. 

With The Christ will be various agencies. The Great 
Company will undoubtedly be associated with them. Then 
there will be the earthly agents, just as Satan has his 
assistants. These agents of The Christ will be the faithful 
Ancient Worthies, who will render intelligent and 
willing service in the Kingdom of Messiah. 

FUTURE SUFFERINGS OF THE ANCIENT WORTHIES 

In Isaiah 1 1 :9, the statement is made: "They shall not 
hurt nor destroy in all My holy Mountain." Comparing 
Daniel 2:35 with verses 44 and 45 of the same chapter, 
we perceive that in prophecy a mountain is the symbol 
for a kingdom. Isaiah's statement, therefore, seems to imply 
that under the Messianic Kingdom there will be a restraint 
placed upon all who do wrong. At the same time 
we are to remember Daniel's statement that the Kingdom 
is to grow. The prophecy is that the stone became a great 
Mountain and filled the whole earth. Many years will 
doubtless pass before the prophecy will be fulfilled. 

As soon as the Kingdom shall have been set up in 
power, the Ancient Worthies will be raised from the dead 
as perfect human beings. Psa. 45:16 evidently refers to 
these faithful servants of God, who are to be princes in 
all the earth. Presumably they will have a great work 
of instruction to do for the rest of humanity. While they 
will have this service to perform, nevertheless they will 
have great honor in doing it; for it is always an honor to 
serve the Lord. 

The service which the Ancient Worthies will be given 
will be more than God would ordinarily entrust to a 
perfect human being. It will be a part of this service 
to deal with the imperfect, fallen creatures and to help 
them up out of sin and imperfection. While in one sense 
of the word this work is desirable, yet it is not what a 



perfect human being would prefer. These Ancient Worthies 

will come forth from the tomb perfect; but during 

the entire Millennium, they will be amidst imperfect surroundings. 

The world of mankind will be imperfect then 

as now, although gradually these imperfections will come 

to an end. 

Adam was created perfect. After he had sinned, he 
was cast out of Eden to delve in the imperfect earth, 
and to struggle with the thorns and thistles until he 
returned to the dust, whence he was taken. Surely he 
must have suffered because of his surroundings. Our 
Lord Jesus was perfect. Not only did He leave the 
Heavenly glory, but for thirty-three and a half years He 
was amidst imperfect surroundings, constantly witnessing 
the pain and sorrow of the fallen race. To be in such 
surroundings must have comprised a large share of His 
sacrifice; for the fact that He was perfect would increase 
His sufferings. 

In the case of the Ancient Worthies, who, as perfect 
human beings, will be in an imperfect environment for a 
thousand years, it would seem as if they will undergo much 
suffering. Knowing what we do of our Heavenly Father, 
we are inclined to believe that, if they are faithful in 
serving the Almighty, He will abundantly reward them, 
more than they could have asked. Should any one inquire, 
What reward will the Father give them, if they 
maintain their obedience? we answer, During the Millennium 
they will receive no special reward for their service, 
so far as we can see; but we think that from God's 
standpoint, theirs will be a meritorious service which He 
will be pleased to reward. This seems to be His method 
of dealing with His faithful servants. Although our 
Lord Jesus delighted to do the Father's will, yet God 
rewarded Him. Our God is gracious! 

We cannot think of any greater reward than to bestow 
the spirit nature upon these faithful Ancient 
Worthies. Long ago they proved their loyalty by choosing 
to suffer rather than to indulge in sin. There is 
nothing in the Scriptures, however, which says distinctly 
that they will ever be made spirit beings. Whatever 
we may suggest on this subject is purely inferential. 

FUTURE REWARD OF THE FAITHFUL PRINCES 

A part of the evidence leading to the deduction that 
the Ancient Worthies will be made sharers of the spirit 
nature and become members of the Great Company class 
is built upon the fact that they seem to be represented 
typically by the tribe of Levi. The fact that this tribe 
had no inheritance in the land seems to imply that the 
Ancient Worthies will have no earthly inheritance. We 
might think that their exaltation to be princes in all the 
earth (Psa. 45:16) would be an abundant reward; but 
inasmuch as God will give the spirit nature to the Great 
Company, who passed through no more severe experiences 
than did the Ancient Worthies, and inasmuch as the 



lowest form of life on the spirit plane is higher than the 
highest form on the human plane, it follows that the 
Great Company would receive at the hands of the Lord a 
greater blessing than would the Ancient Worthies. 

Since the Heavenly Father has been pleased to arrange 
for the Great Company a place on the spirit plane, 
and since He is operating according to some general 
principles of righteousness, we are inclined to think that 
He may have something more for the Ancient Worthies 
than will come to the remainder of mankind. So far 
as we can perceive, the Great Company have not demonstrated 
that they are any more loyal to Him than were 
the faithful Ancient Worthies. When Abraham was called 
upon to offer up his son Isaac, he exhibited a degree of 
loyalty greater than the Great Company will be called 
upon to manifest. 

Furthermore, in Gen. 17:8, God said unto Abraham, 
"And I will give unto thee and to thy seed after thee, the 
land wherein thou art a stranger, all the land of Canaan, 
for an everlasting possession; and I will be their God." 
Two thousand years later, St. Stephen said that God never 
gave Abraham so much as a foot of the promised land 
(Acts 7:5); but he implied that Abraham will yet receive 
that land and afterward leave it to his posterity. If the 
land is to be given to Abraham and his coadjutors, and 
then to be left to his seed and mankind in general, the 

R5182:page53 

thought would seem to be implied that the Ancient 
Worthies will pass to the spirit nature. 

This same thought seems to be pictured in the Revelation. 
At the end of the thousand years, Satan will be 
loosed, that he may go forward to test the people that 
are on the earth, to manifest to what extent their hearts 
are loyal to God and to the principles of righteousness. 
The result of this test will be that some will fall away.— 
Rev. 20:7-10. 

We read, "And they went up on the breadth of the 
earth, and compassed the camp of the saints about, and 
the beloved city; and fire came down from God out of 
Heaven, and devoured them." (Rev. 20:9.) The "beloved 
city" is the New Jerusalem, the Church in glory, not 
the Church in the flesh. The rebellion incited by Satan 
will be not only against the earthly princes, but also 
against The Christ. 

By that time having reached perfection of organism 
and powers, the people will assert themselves in thus 
going up to encompass the camp of the saints. That 
the Church cannot be meant is evident from the fact 
that human beings could not attack an unseen force of 
spirit beings, as the Church will then be. Just as in 
Great Britain, the people have gone to Parliament to 
protest, so the rebellious faction of mankind will protest 
against their faithful princes. We fancy that we 
hear them say, "It is time that this government was 



turned over to us. We protest against your remaining 
in power any longer." In rebelling against the earthly 
phase of Messiah's Kingdom, however, they are rebelling 
against the Lord. Consequently Divine judgment will 
overtake them— "fire from Heaven." 

Since this rebellion is to occur at the close of the Millennial 
Age, and since mankind will at that time have 
reached perfection, therefore, this separation of the 
Ancient Worthies from the rest of the world seems to imply 
that God has some special purpose in respect to them. 
The term camp itself implies that theirs is only a temporary 
condition or arrangement, and that God has some 
better thing in store for them. 

If our surmise that the Ancient Worthies will some 
day attain the spirit nature be true, we can readily see 
that it will not be necessary for them to die in order to 

R5183 : page 53 

attain that plane of existence. If those members of the 
Body of Christ, who are living in the time of His Second 
Presence can be changed "in a moment, in the twinkling 
of an eye," so could the Ancient Worthies have their 
change. If they were thus changed from the human plane 
to the spirit plane, they would be exchanging a perfect 
human nature for a perfect spirit nature as a reward for 
faithfulness in the service of the Lord. 

THE GLORY OF THE LORD THE LAUDABLE AMBITION IN 
THE KINGDOM 

Under the beneficent rule of the Kingdom, we may 
be very sure that the Lord's arrangement will be an 
equitable one— a fair chance for every one of the human 
race. It is reasonable to suppose that the general line laid 
down in the Scriptures will be followed respecting the 
earth. It is written, "The earth hath He given to the 
children of men." (Psa. 115:16.) The race as a whole will 
have possession of the earth. God has not made any allotments. 
Every man will have a share in the 
commonwealth. 

The changes will come about gradually. There will 
be inequalities of brain and muscle; but the Kingdom will 
even up these differences. There will always be some 
kind of incentive to energy. Either there will be an impetus 
of some sort, or else there will be some sort of punishment 
to help people along. The Lord will hold out certain 
inducements to those who are willing to co-operate 
along the line of advancement, and will impose stripes, 
punishments, to assist those who will not be induced otherwise. 
Both rewards and punishments will be in operation 
during the Millennium. 

Looking back over the history of the world, we see 
that selfishness has been a great evil; yet at the same 
time it has worked wonders. If it were not for ambition 
and acquisitiveness, man would not be much above the 



animals. We are, therefore, to consider these qualities 
to be great blessings, when rightly exercised. Under the 
rule of the Kingdom, all possible blessings of mind and 
body will be held out to the obedient, so that the trend of 
selfishness will be offset by a more laudable ambition than 
at present; and as mind and body develop, the standards 
of humanity will rise higher, and selfishness will be more 
and more seen to be contemptible. When perfection is 
attained, everything will be done for the glory of the 
Lord rather than for earthly name and fame. 

Gradually all mankind will come into fellowship with 
the Kingdom, and indirectly become associated with the 
Kingdom itself. Just as any good man helps the government, 
so all mankind will be blessed in proportion as they 
approve and uphold the Divine arrangements. Thus the 
Kingdom will be spreading for the thousand years, not 
only from one individual to another, but gradually back 
to full perfection. We read that "of the increase of His 
government and peace there shall be no end." (Isa. 9:7.) 
It will conquer everything before it; nothing shall stop 
it. After every evil thing has been destroyed, every creature 
in Heaven and in earth will be heard praising God. 
(Rev. 5:13.) Every knee shall bow and every tongue 
confess (Phil. 2:10,11), and His Kingdom shall be without 
an opponent "from the river unto the ends of the 
earth. "-Psa. 72:8. 

FUTURE WORK OF THE CHRIST 

After the thousand years shall have been finished, the 
Kingdom will cease in the sense that Christ will deliver 
the authority over to the Father. (I Cor. 15:24.) This 
will not mean, however, that law and order will be disregarded 
as they have been during the reign of sin and 
death. The Messianic Kingdom will by that time have 
helped mankind out of their fallen condition; and therefore 
it is the Divine purpose that Messiah relinquish this 
subordinate Kingdom, in order that it may merge into 
the Empire of the Great Jehovah, of which it will ever 
after be a part. 

Justice then will operate. Mercy will no longer be required; 
and the Heavenly Father will not then be pictured 
as a merciful King to His creatures. They will by that 
time be perfect so that they will need no mercy; and they 
will be glad to meet all the requirements of the Divine 
Government, and in so doing will be blessed. 

Having terminated this work of the restitution of 
mankind to the plane of human perfection, our Lord and 
the Church will not be left without an occupation. Our 
Lord will continue, according to the Scriptures, to be at 
the right hand of the Majesty on High— next to the Father. 
After He has relinquished the oversight of earthly 
affairs, He will assume once more the position of Associate 
Administrator of the Universe, in connection with 
the Heavenly Father. 

We are not to suppose, however, that the Father and 



the Lord will be kept busy hearing and deciding cases and 
in administering justice. Nothing of the kind will be 
necessary. The equilibrium will be such that there will 
be no necessity for deciding cases. The government of 
the Universe will go on so smoothly as to be practically 
without a head, and yet there will be the Head— Jehovah 

R5183 : page 54 

Himself. Next in authority to the Father will be the 
Son, and next to the Son will be the Church. What 
work will thenceforth progress is not revealed to us, 
except in a very indefinite manner. 

Through the aid of the telescope, we understand that 
the fixed stars are suns, each of which seems to have its 
own planetary system. It is only reasonable for us to 
infer that, if God made this earth a planet to be inhabited, 
all other planets will sometime be inhabited also; 
and that they will be under obligation to the Heavenly 
Father as a part of His wonderful Universe. So far 
as we can understand, the power of Jehovah is boundless. 
When we consider the hundreds of millions of suns and 
planets beyond the power of human mind to comprehend, 
than it is reasonable to assume that the work of The 
Christ will be limitless; and that some such work for 
creatures yet unborn will be their blessed privilege to all 
eternity. We wonder in amazement at the magnitude of 
God's goodness to us, who has lifted us up from our low 
condition and who will exalt to future glories interminable 
those faithful ones who make sure their calling and 
election to glory, honor and immortality. 



R5183 : page 54 

THE ARCH-ENEMY OF THE PEOPLE OF GOD 

"Your Adversary the Devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, 
seeking whom he may devour: whom resist steadfast in the 
faith."- 1 Peter 5:8,9. 

THE Authorized Version of the New Testament 

makes frequent use of the word devil, 

and leaves the impression that there are 

many devils; but this thought is not borne 

out by the Scriptures in general. In the 

New Testament two Greek words are thus 

translated, daimonion and diabolos. Of 

these two words, the first should be properly 

rendered "demon"; and the second "devil." 

The demons are the unclean spirits, the 

familiar spirits, the fallen angels; while the Devil is 

Satan. The term Satan signifies adversary, opponent; 

for the Devil is the opponent of righteousness and of 

Jehovah. 



Whoever has failed to discern that there is a Devil 
is all the more liable to come under the influence of this 
great, malevolent being, who is portrayed in the Scriptures 
as the greatest foe to God, to men and to righteousness. 
St. Paul speaks of the "wiles of the Devil" 
and warns the Church that her warfare is with "wicked 
spirits in the heavenlies." (Eph. 6:11,12, margin.) He 
also mentions "the prince of the power of the air" (Eph. 2:2), 
and intimates that it would be impossible for us 
really to contend with him; for he is too wily, 
too wise for us. 

There is an evil influence constantly exerted in the 
world, operating against truth, righteousness and purity, 
and therefore operating against God. The Scriptures inform 
us that this influence is exerted by the Devil, Satan, 
who was once a holy angel. It was by permitting pride 
and ambition to gain control of his heart, that Satan 
became an opponent of God and of righteousness.— 
I John 3:8; I Tim. 3:6; Isa. 14:12-14. 

Although mankind cannot see Satan, yet he can see 
them, and by means of mental suggestion can gain control 
of them. He has a variety of ways by which he exercises 
his influence. The most potent way is through 
human agents— using one person against another. His 
favorite method of operating is by putting darkness for 
light. This he does by making the good appear evil, the 
true, false, and the right, wrong. 

St. Peter tells us in our text that Satan goes about as 
a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour. The lion 
has a very stealthy walk. On his feet are soft cushions, 
which enable him to come very near to his prey before 
his approach is recognized. It is said that, at this point, 
when the beast is about to spring upon his prey, he roars 
so loudly that the victim is paralyzed with fear and thus 
is easily caught. 

Satan, the Adversary of the Church, is strong and 
lion-like, vigilant and fully awake. As the Apostle Paul 
declares, he seeks to use every opportunity against us. 
He lies in wait, seeking to devour us. Although he is 
alert, yet he never approaches us with a roar, but creeps 
stealthily upon us in some unlooked for place or time, to 
devour us, to overcome us, to crush out our spiritual life, 
and particularly to destroy our faith in God. As those 
whose ears are trained to detect the footfalls of the lion 
will hear his steps, while those who are unfamiliar with 

R5184:page54 

his habits will not hear the slightest sound, so may we, 

whose ears the Lord has opened, and whose eyes have 

been anointed with the eyesalve of consecration and submission 

to the Lord's will, be of quick perception to recognize 

the approach of our arch-enemy and to resist him. 

Let us stand, clad in the full armor which the Word of 

God supplies, and in His strength wielding the Sword of 

the Spirit. 



St. Paul shows that the most subtle attacks of the Adversary 
are to be expected through human agencies. 
Satan works in the hearts of the children of disobedience; 
and the more honorable they are, and the more closely 
identified with the Lord and His people these children of 
disobedience may be, the greater service they may render 
to the Adversary. For this reason, Satan presents himself 
as an angel of light, and not as a messenger of darkness; 
for well he knows that error and sin will repel the 
children of light. ~Eph. 2:2; 2 Cor. 4:4; 11:14,15; 
Eph. 6:11,12. 

Satan uses various methods against those whom God 
is seeking and calling. As an angel of light, he has done 
much harm. His constant endeavor is to lead the people 
of God astray from the Lord and from their covenant 
of sacrifice. While we know that God is able so to succor 
His people that the Adversary could not touch them, yet 
His providences inform us that this is not His way. He 
permits Satan seemingly to gain a great triumph over 
the Lord and His people; but in no way does this seeming 
interruption affect the Divine Plan of the Ages. 

By this we do not mean that God is co-operating with 
Satan and his evil work. God is testing His people, by 
permitting those conditions that make the way so narrow 
that only the faithful will walk perseveringly to the very 
end. All others will sooner or later fall out of the way. 

PROPER METHOD OF RESISTANCE 

The Christian's warfare is a fight of faith. St. James' 
statement, "Resist the Devil and he will flee from you" 
(James 4:7), does not mean that we are to battle with 
him in order to confound him. Whoever thinks that he 
is able to battle alone with Satan surely must possess 
great self-conceit, or else must overestimate his own 
ability and underestimate that of the Adversary. In any 
contention, Satan would surely gain the victory. 

Malice, envy, hatred and strife, the Apostle says, are 

R5184:page55 

the kind of works which Satan supports and into which 

he endeavors to lead mankind. (Gal. 5:19-21; I John 3:8.) 

His methods are deceptive. His suggestions come 

along the line of pride and self-conceit. The mental suggestion, 

"You can do it; you are a person of great ability; 

do not be afraid; show people what is in you," has led to 

the downfall of many. 

In order to deceive the children of light, Satan transforms 
himself into an angel [messenger] of light; for 
well he knows that he would not deceive them, if he were 
to present himself as a representative of sin. Ever since 
the fall of Adam, the Devil has sought to entrap mankind. 
Particularly for the past eighteen centuries, he 
has been endeavoring to introduce error into the Church, 
in order to produce false Christians— Christians who 



would be a detriment to the cause of Christ. Evidently 
he has had much to do with formulating the creeds of 
Christendom. 

The Lord's people are to resist the Devil by not allowing 
his seductive arguments to have weight with us. 
We have the sure word of prophecy and the instructions 
of our Lord and of His Apostles; and if we love the 
Word of the Lord, we shall seek to be guided by it. "He 
that is begotten of God keepeth himself, and that Wicked 
One toucheth him not."— I John 5:18. 

The experience of our Lord in the Wilderness affords 
a good example for all the people of God to follow. He 
did not seek to keep up the controversy, the discussion 
with the Adversary; but when the evil thought was presented, 
He promptly resisted it. Satan was well versed 
in the Scriptures, portions of which he presented with a 
view to misleading our Lord into taking a wrong course. 
Jesus did not say to the Devil, "Merely because that is a 
Scripture, I yield to your argument." On the contrary, 
He immediately thought of the principle involved, and 
showed the Adversary wherein he was mistaken. When 
prophecies were quoted out of order, our Lord made very 
positive statements to that effect. 

This course is a very good one for us to follow. If 
one of the Lord's people should be drawn by Satan into 
a discussion about some Scriptural text, and if he should 
recall, or if another brother should suggest, a text which 
would answer right to the point of discussion, he should 
decide, "The Scripture which tells me to 'resist the 
Devil' is the proper guide to my course of action. I will 
not stop to discuss what I do not understand." Thus he 
would "resist," and at the same time rebuke the Adversary. 

St. Paul urges the Lord's people to put on the whole 
armor of God, that they may be able to withstand the 
wiles of the Devil. His statement seems to imply that 
none will be able to withstand Satan without Divine aid. 
The Apostle points out the fact that these are the days 
when the whole armor of God will be necessary. (Eph. 6:13-18; 
Rev. 3:10.) The question may be asked whether 
those only who are furnished with the whole armor will 
be able to stand. The answer is that the Lord is supervising 
the affairs of His people and that He will see that 
all who are putting their trust in Him shall have opportunities 
for putting on the whole armor of God. 

Many devote to frivolity the time which they could 
employ in putting on the armor which God has provided 
for His people. The Lord is so arranging the matter 
that such will not be able to withstand the darts of the 
Adversary; for He wishes none to stand in this evil day 
except those who are thoroughly consecrated to His will. 
To these He will render assistance, so that all things shall 
work together for good to them. His grace is sufficient to 
carry all through who have come to a knowledge of Him 
and have made a consecration to Him. This grace may 
be supplied through the Scriptures, through reading 
matter, through a service or through a hymn; but the 



protection will be along the lines of the Truth. When we 
lose the Sword of the Spirit, we lose our only protection 
against error. 

THE LESSON OF CONFIDENCE IN GOD'S WISDOM AND 
LOVE 

The Adversary's method of attack is well illustrated in 
the fall of our first parents. Mother Eve should have 
resisted the suggestion which came to her through the 
serpent— that God had forbidden that which was for their 
highest interest in life. She should have said, "I will not 
entertain such a thought; for to do so would be disloyal 
to my Creator." When the suggestion to eat came to 
Father Adam, apparently the thought came also, "You 
may as well join with her in the partaking of the food. 
It will be better to die together, for there will be no 
pleasure in life without her." Adam stopped to reason on 
the matter, but he did not have a sufficiency of knowledge 
to permit him to do so successfully. He should have said, 
"God knows; He arranged it. What He has said is 
enough for me. I will be true to Him, and trust the results 
to His Wisdom and Love." 

Obedience is the lesson for us to learn from the experience 
of Adam and Eve. We have not a sufficiency of 
knowledge with which to reason on some subjects, even 
if our reasoning faculties were fully developed. Consequently 
when a suggestion of evil of any kind is made, 
our only proper course is to say, "No! The Lord our 
God has said that we must not touch it, lest we die." 
Mother Eve allowed reasoning to come in and thus was 
persuaded. We should profit by her mistake. A proper 
confidence in God and a recognition of our own lack of 
wisdom should decide us immediately. There should be 
no controversy. We should say, No! 

Evidently God is seeking those who are in this attitude 
of mind. Christ and the Church have been called 
for this very work of bringing mankind back to perfection 
of character. Many times the Divine Plan may not seem 
to us to be the wisest course; and if we should not learn 
the lesson of absolute trust in the Divine Wisdom, Justice, 
Love and Power, we could not trust God in everything. 
The Father seeketh such to worship Him as will do so 
in spirit and in truth, and who have perfect confidence in 
Him as the One who is all-wise and all-loving to direct 
and guide their affairs. Those who do not learn this 
lesson of trust, will not be fit for the responsibilities to be 
put upon the glorified Church. Let us learn this lesson 
and be very positive in our endeavors to be in harmony 
with God. 

Faithfulness in trial will develop the overcomers. The 
Lord does not wish to have in the Little Flock any who 
are disloyal in any sense of the word. They may be weak 
in many of the essentials of character, but they are all 
loyal to God. The Lord is seeking those who will remain 
loyal under trials and difficulties, and thus develop characters 



pleasing to Him. These are not alarmed at Satan's 
onslaughts, which are seen to be an occasion for an increase 
of faith; for greater is He that is on our part than 
are all that are against us! 

In Pilgrim's Progress this inability of the Wicked 
One to touch the faithful people of God is very beautifully 
pictured. While walking in the narrow way, Christian 
beheld two lions; and for a moment he was terror-stricken. 
Christian studied the situation and decided to 
go forward. When he came near the lions, he found 
that they were chained. So it is with our adversaries. 
They can do no harm to the children of God. Although 

R5185 : page 56 

they may roar, yet they cannot injure the New Creature. 

The New Creature may develop even when the outer 
man is perishing. Satan succeeded in having the chief 
priests and Pharisees cause the death of our Lord; but 
this was the very means by which He entered into glory. 
In His dealings with our Lord the Father has given us an 
illustration of His dealings with us. So we may know 
that even if Satan should appear to get the victory over 
us, these "light afflictions" will, as we are told, "work out 
for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory." 
-2 Cor. 4:17. 

We know that we have no power with which to oppose 
Satan. None is sufficient for these things except the 
Lord. But He is greater than are Satan and all his 
angels. We are looking forward with the eye of faith 
to the things that are unseen. So it behooves us to be 
steadfast, immovable, full of faith, and therefore able to 
meet whatever the Father permits to come upon us. 



R5185 : page 56 

ST. PETER'S EXHORTATION TO THE ELDERS 

"Humble yourselves. ..under the mighty hand of God, 
that He may exalt you in due time."— 1 Peter 5:6. 

AS THOSE who have received Divine grace 
and the knowledge of the Divine purpose, the 
Lord's people have certain ambitions which 
are right and proper, and which should be 
rightly exercised, regulated and governed. 
No one should be without a laudable ambition. 
We cannot imagine God to be without 
ambition. Those who have little or 
none pass through life in a kind of maze, 
accomplishing very little for themselves or 
others, and usually fail in all they undertake. 

There are, however, noble and ignoble ambitions. 
Some people are ambitious to become great, renowned; 



others are ambitious to rale; still others are ambitious 
for wealth, for social distinction, or for titles and honor 
amongst men. These are all selfish ambitions, yet they 
are the power that moves the world today— in business, 
social, political and even religious circles. These are all 
wrong ambitions; and though they may not all result in 
evil, yet they are all selfish, and tend toward evil. Many 
are seduced by selfish ambitions into doing those things 
of which their consciences do not approve. 

The Christian has set before him the most noble ambition 
possible. God is calling from the world a people 
for His Name. Before these He sets the loftiest ambition. 
These are invited to become joint-heirs with Jesus 
Christ our Lord. This is an ambition which inspires them 
to develop all the higher qualities of mind and character, 
in order to prepare themselves for the society, friendship 
and fellowship of the Heavenly Father and the Lord. 
Let us have this high ambition ever before us, as an incentive 
to the most earnest endeavor to heed the Word 
of the Lord. 

Those who take this course are very pleasing to the 
Father. He has a great work to be done, and is seeking 
a people who will do it. Christ Jesus is the Head of this 
great work, and His Kingdom is to rule and bless the 
world, that in the ages to come, God may show the exceeding 
riches of His grace in His kindness toward us. 
(Eph. 2:7.) Those who appreciate this high calling wish 
to be where God has invited them to be. Those who do not 
care for what God has offered or who do not wish to 
conform to the terms should not enter the race for the 
prize. 

Those who have the heavenly ambition should not forget 
that they have the treasure of the new nature in 
earthen vessels. To this class it becomes a laudable ambition 
to serve one another and to build one another up in 
the most holy faith. The Bride is to make herself ready. 
(Rev. 19:7.) So these should seek to get ready themselves 
and to help others of the dear family of God. 

DANGER INVOLVED IN THE ELDERSHIP 

To desire the office of a bishop, a shepherd, is a good 
ambition. (I Tim. 3:1.) If one properly attends to the 
shepherding of the flock, he will not have time for other 
interests. Those who have been called to the position of 
Eldership amongst the Lord's people should consider 
this an honor and a privilege from the Lord; and they 
should be very careful to seek it, not for filthy lucre's sake, 
but with a ready mind. (I Peter 5:1-4.) But in seeking 
this position let each one remember that there is danger 
of the development of pride and the assumption of power. 

Those who have the high privilege of serving as an 
Elder Brother should watch themselves to see that they 
do not lord it over God's heritage. They should remember 
that they are not the Chief Shepherd, but only under-shepherds. 
If any should lord it over the flock, he would 



bring injury to himself as well as to the Church; for in 
thus doing he would be cultivating a spirit of pride. 

St. Peter tells us that "God resisteth the proud and 
giveth grace to the humble." (I Peter 5:5.) Therefore 
if in the Lord's service one is humble, his course not only 
inures to the benefit of the Class, but it is the only way 
by which anyone will gain a position in the Kingdom. 
The Eldership is an honorable office which not only has 
great privileges attached to it, but has also great temptation 
and great danger. St. James says, "My brethren, be 
not many [of you] masters [teachers], knowing that we 
shall receive the greater condemnation."— James 3:1. 

The Apostle exhorts those that are Elders doing a 
work that is necessary to be done, "Humble yourselves 
therefore under the mighty hand of God." Everything 
is being done by the mighty power of God, by which He 
is causing all things to work together for good. We cannot 
interfere with the Divine will. We might permit 
pride or fond desire to hinder our own progress, but we 
cannot hinder the Plan of God. 

We all desire to seek the best way to serve others and 
yet to gain the great reward. St. Peter shows us that 
way— "Humble yourselves." As the poet has expressed it, 

"I am afraid to touch 

Things that involve so much." 

This spirit will make us very fearful of developing any 
pride or bombast or desire of lording it over others. So, 
then, we humble ourselves and remember that God will 
especially bless those who are more lowly, more trustful 
in the Lord, and in due time will exalt them— at the 
Second Coming of our Lord. 

Sometimes, indeed, the humble-minded of the Lord's 
people may be less esteemed in the Church than are some 
who lack this important quality of character. There is 
in mankind a general tendency toward brow-beating. 
They would rather have some one who will ride rough-shod 
over them than one who is gentle and moderate. 
Therefore they may not like us. But we are not to seek 
what they would like best in us. Rather we are to remember 
that we are to serve the Lord in His way, and 
that our chief responsibility in the Lord's sight is for 
ourselves. We are to humble ourselves under the mighty 
hand of God that He may exalt us in due time. 

R5185 : page 57 

PRIDE IN KNOWLEDGE OF TRUTH INJURIOUS 

All these matters show us that our proper attitude 
is that of humility. The sentiment of our hearts should 
not be that of pride, but of meekness, humility, 
faithfulness. 

Pride is selfishness gone to seed. The selfish spirit 
greedily gathers to itself as much as possible of all that it 



esteems good and valuable— wealth, learning, honor, fame 
and distinction among men. A measure of success in the 
acquisition of these treasures leads the selfish soul to a 
feeling of complacency, independence and indifference 
to the well-being of others. This spirit, gradually, but 
rapidly developing into arrogance, self-assertive pride, 
will continue to ripen with every gleam of the sunlight 
of temporal prosperity. As selfishness continues to ripen, 
it swells itself to ridiculous proportions and delights to 
vaunt itself, and gloats over its imagined importance and 
worthiness of honor and praise. 

How much easier and how much wiser is the course of 
humility! The humble spirit seeketh not its own, is not 
puffed up, does not attempt to speculate upon inflated 
values, does not think of itself more highly than it ought 
to think, but thinks soberly— neither overrating nor underrating 
its own acquirements or achievements. Humility 
strives always to do business on a solid basis, though it 
contends lawfully to acquire a real worthiness and to 
achieve the true glory of the Divine commendation and 
favor. 

There is a disposition on the part of many to be rather 
boastful on account of the Truth, as though we had originated 
the Truth. How foolish this is! We have made 
no truth. We have merely gotten rid of some of the 
errors that formerly blinded our eyes. The Truth is 
God's. He has allowed us to see out of the darkness of 
ignorance and superstition into the Truth of His Plan. 
If a man who had seen a beautiful picture should then 
boast as though he had painted it, we would say, "Foolish 
man! You did not make that picture. You merely 
looked at it. You have nothing to boast of concerning it." 

We did not make any part of God's Plan of the Ages. 
If we had attempted to do so, we would have made a 
failure of it. Our attitude of mind, then, should be, 
"Come, we will show you what God has arranged, what 
God has pictured." Thus we would glorify God and be 
helpful to others; for to whatever extent we manifest pride 
or self-consciousness in the Truth, to that extent we do 
injury to ourselves and to others. The world would say, 
"We have just as able Doctors of Divinity in our denominations 
as you have— just as wise to teach us the Truth." 

Our proper course, therefore, is to make it plain at 
the very beginning that we are of the right spirit— the 

R5186 : page 57 

meek, humble spirit of the Master. God is permitting us 
to see things in His Word, concerning which it is His 
due time to turn on the light. The picture was there all 
along, but the clouds and darkness made it so dim that 
we were not able to discern its beauties. Now the light 
is being turned on, and, as the poet has expressed it, 

"Wonderful things in the Bible we see." 



Instead of self-confidence, wisdom dictates a distrustfulness 
of self, remembering its weaknesses and imperfections, 
and correspondingly the greater reverence for 
God and reliance upon Him, which more than anything 
else will strengthen us and enable us to depart from the 
evil of our fallen estate. 

It is indeed no easy matter to tread the pathway of 
humility, to continually check the human aspirations, and 
to keep the sacrifice on the altar until it is fully consumed. 
But thus it is that we are to work out our own 
salvation to the Divine nature with fear and trembling, 
lest we come short of worthiness for the prize promised 
to the faithful overcomers who tread closely in the footsteps 
of our blessed Forerunner, who was meek and lowly 
of heart-Phil. 2:8,12. 

It is when we are thus humble and faithful that the 
Lord makes us His chosen vessels to bear His name to 
others. Thus, emptied of self and filled with His Spirit, 
and with His Truth, we can go forth, strong in the Lord 
of Hosts and in His mighty Power do valiant service as 
soldiers of the Cross. 



R5186 : page 57 

HUMILITY AN ELEMENT OF TRUE COURAGE 

"Be not wise in thine own eyes: fear the 
Lord and depart from evil."— Prov. 3:7. 

NOTHING is more dangerous to the child of 

God than self-conceit; it hinders reformation 

of heart, as well as true usefulness to 

others, and especially usefulness in God's 

service; for the Word declares, "God resisteth 

the proud, but giveth grace unto the 

humble." (James 4:6.) The Scriptures 

everywhere make prominent the fact that 

those who would be in harmony with God 

must be humble. The Lord bestows blessings 

upon the humble, the meek, the teachable. Jesus said, 

"Blessed are the meek." (Matt. 5:5.) The Apostle exhorts, 

"Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty 

hand of God, that He may exalt you in due time."— 

I Pet. 5:6. 

The Word of God points to the fact that Jesus was 
meek and lowly. (Matt. 11:29,30.) This humility of 
mind and heart was, in many respects, the secret of His 
success. If He had not been humble, He would not have 
attained to the glorious station to which He was exalted. 

There is a marked contrast between Jesus and Satan. 
The one thought to exalt himself, and the Other to 
humble Himself. (Isa. 14:13,14; Phil. 2:8.) Satan said, 
"I will elevate myself above the other angels; I will be 
like the Most High, and exert such a power as He does. 



I could show the angels very great wisdom if I were in 
control of affairs." Inspired by this wrong spirit, Satan 
became ambitious to make an exhibition of what he 
could do. 

The Scriptures give us to understand that Satan's inordinate 
desire to gain distinction was the secret of his 
fall. Ambition is good, but only when it is based upon 
humility. Any spirit that does not respect God's Wisdom 
is indeed foolish. 

Satan's spirit was one of ambition and pride. Already 
highly favored of God as one of the highest rank of 
angels, he was not content with his great honors and 
blessings, but was desirous of attaining still greater influence 
and power than God had been pleased to grant 
him. This unlawful aspiration to obtain control led him 
not only to rebel against the Divine Government, but also 
to become the "murderer" (John 8:44) of our first 
parents, that he might gain control over them— the object 
of his ambition. 

How short-sighted was the Adversary, that he should 
think to out-general Jehovah, and to exalt himself and 
erect a rival Kingdom! Soon Satan's folly will be manifested. 
When the Lord's due time shall come, the One 
who humbled Himself in obedience to the Father's will 
shall be exalted to kingly power and authority, to the 

R5186 : page 58 

position at the Father's right hand in the Kingdom of 
the Universe; but the one who attempted the usurpation 
shall be bound and utterly destroyed. 

HUMILITY PRECEDES EXALTATION 

Our Lord Jesus took a different course from that of 
Satan. Instead of trying to exercise power He had 
supreme reverence for Jehovah. He said, "I delight to 
do Thy will, O My God." (Psa. 40:8.) Following this 
course of humility in the presence of the great Eternal 
One, Jesus was led of the Father as He would not have 
been if He had had a self-sufficient spirit. Under the 
Father's guidance He was humiliated. He "learned 
obedience by the things which He suffered" (Heb. 5:8.); 
and after His death and resurrection He received the 
reward of the Divine nature. He became Heir of all the 
gracious promises of God's Word, "Heir of all things."— 
Hebrews 1:2. 

These two great examples afford us an impressive 
lesson. They show us that if we copy the ambitious and 
self-wise attitude of Satan, it will estrange us from God. 
We should realize the Wisdom of God and submit ourselves 
fully to His will. If we walk obediently in the 
footsteps of the Master, we shall attain glory and honor 
with our Lord. 

The Wisdom of God is foolishness with men. The 
people of this world are leaning to their own understanding. 



People sometimes boast along this very line, saying, 
"I have some ideas of my own." We all find that what 
we know is but very little and generally very incorrect. 
Experience is an excellent teacher. 

The lessons that we have learned in the School of 
Christ are to a great extent those of humility, a great 
deal of which is required of pupils in that School. The 
path of life is so narrow that those who love the broad 
garish way would not think of walking in the narrow one. 
The Lord is allowing those who are self-conceited to turn 
aside. Even though they started out to walk in His way, 
they are permitted to go after their own foolish misunderstandings. 
If they continue in this course it will lead 
to their destruction. 

WISDOM OF THIS WORLD FOOLISHNESS WITH GOD 

As for the world, whether they live in Christian or 
in heathen lands, all shall come to a knowledge of the 
Truth. (I Tim. 2:3,4.) This knowledge will not be 
theoretical, for mankind will be brought to it through 
practical experience. In fact the whole world is getting 
a great lesson now. When the New Dispensation is ushered 
in and the Truth is made plain, mankind will perceive 
how very foolish they have been. They will see the unwisdom 
of the greater part of their course. "For the 
wisdom of their wise men shall perish."— Isa. 29:14. 

It will be a hard experience for mankind to realize 
what clumsy efforts they have made along different lines. 
If scientists and philosophers, when asked as to God, had 
said, "We do not know," they could have been respected 
for their honesty. But they have boasted about geology, 
evolution, etc., and have pretended to know all the secrets 
of the Universe. What shame will be theirs when confronted 
with the facts! It will be a severe chastisement 
for them to perceive how foolish they have been and to 
know that others are aware of their folly. 

The truly noble soul feels humbled upon the borders of 
the vast unknown, thankfully accepts the Divine Revelation 
as to his nature, origin, destiny, etc., and patiently 
awaits the Lord's good time for a fuller understanding of 
all the mysteries of His wondrous grace. 

We may well fancy that some of the great theologians 
who have taught with such positiveness what they do 
not know and what is contrary to the Bible, will feel 
very strange when they learn the Truth. Already this is 
true to some extent. They are ashamed of the teachings 
of Calvin and of many of the theories of the past. Yet 
they still hold on to the creeds of nominal Christianity, 
but cover these up; accordingly, with such an attitude of 
heart, they make very little progress. 



R5186 : page 58 



DECORUM IN THE HOUSE OF GOD 

"Keep thy foot when thou goest to the House of God, and be 
more ready to hear, than to give the sacrifice of fools: for 
they consider not that they do evil."— Ecclesiastes 5:1. 

THE WISE MAN was undoubtedly not talking 
about literal feet or literal steps, but giving 
some wise counsel, which his hearers might 
appropriate, just as we do. They understood 
him to mean that they must be circumspect 
in their daily lives. 

"Keep thy foot." Notice where you 
are going. Do not go to the House of God 
as you would go to the market-place or to 
some place of amusement. Go as to the 
place where God will meet with His people. The wise 
man goes on to assume what would be heard in the House 
of God. Be not ready "to give the sacrifice of fools." 
This would seem to refer to laughter, levity, foolish talk 
and jesting. 

This Scripture is one which may very properly be 
taken to heart by all of God's people at the present time. 
Reverence is very becoming. We have lost the fear that 
God will cast us into eternal torment. We know our 

R5187 : page 58 

Heavenly Father better than to suppose that He would 
have any such evil intention toward any of His creatures. 
But we should not go to the House of God as we would go 
to the market-place. Many of the Lord's people do not 
appreciate the fact that decorum is necessary in every 
place where God is worshiped. 

REVERENTIAL CONDUCT TO BE CULTIVATED 

It is for us to realize that we have God in the Church 
today in a sense that He never was in the typical temple. 
Wherever there is a meeting of the members of the 
Church, the Lord has declared that He will be there. The 
living stones constituting the Temple of God should be as 
fully reverenced as temples made of literal stones. 

Whether we meet in a parlor or in a church or in an 
opera house, the fact that God's people are there, makes 
that building, whatever it may be, a holy place. Therefore 
whoever approaches it should do so with a watchfulness 
of his feet. When he arrives, he should be appreciative 
of the place where he is, and should be ready to 
"hear"— listen— not full of mirth. All conversation should 
be of a kind that would edify— build up— along spiritual 
lines. If we cannot talk along such lines, it would be better 
for us to hear the discourse, join in the singing, and 
then withdraw. 

Whatever conversation be carried on, it should be with 
reverence, not merely for the place, but for the occasion. 



There should be no turning about and saying, "Here comes 
Brother So-and-so, Sister So-and-so. We shall hear them 
sing." Such conduct is very improper. 

We do not know any lesson the Lord's people need to 
learn more than that of reverence. The Lord will not 

R5187 : page 59 

call any one devoid of reverence, and He wants that quality 
to grow strong. But when fear is banished, the tendency 
is to less reverence. Special care in this respect is 
to be observed when we go to the House of God, or to any 
place where Divine service is to be held. 

CONSIDERATION OF THE RIGHTS OF OTHERS 

Not only should we watch our feet in going to the 
House of God, but we should watch what we take with us. 
We should see that we go there clean; that we take no 
vermin in our clothing; that we have no bad odors about 
us. We should also see that we do not take children who 
are not properly trained. Thus we shall not be in danger 
of annoying others. 

There may be occasions when children may be left 
alone at home. When this is impossible, it would be better 
for the parents to take turns in coming to the meetings. 
No one has a right to take children to the meeting, when 
their presence would be detrimental to the spiritual interests 
of others. We believe, however, that a way could be 
devised whereby the child could be left at home until of 
such an age as not to disturb the Class. The majority of 
parents become so accustomed to the ways of their children 
that they do not realize that others are being annoyed 
—when probably every motion of the child is disturbing 
others. The others have their own trials to tax 
their patience. 

PUNCTUALITY A MARK OF CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT 

It would seem that some need to watch, not only their 
feet, but also their watches. To come into the meeting 
late is out of harmony with the principles of both 
justice and love. All who attend ought, in justice to 
others, to see that they arrive in time. They ought so to 
arrange their affairs that they can be at the meeting 
promptly at the hour. 

Doubtless the Lord would view our efforts to be punctual 
and not to annoy others as marks of Christian character-development, 
which would have His approval, and 
which would help to prepare us for the Kingdom. He 
who is indifferent to the rights of others manifests that 
he is lacking in the spirit of love, the spirit of Christ. 
And whoever has not the spirit of Christ, well developed, 
will not have a place in the Kingdom. 

Hence these matters— unruly children, tardiness at 
meeting, etc., will have to do with our fitness for a place 



in the Kingdom. By this we do not mean that we are 
being judged according to our work, or that we have any 
right to judge others according to their work. The Lord 
said, "Judge not." We should show that our endeavors 
to do the Lord's will are equal to the desires of our hearts. 
If we exercise determination in trying to live up to these, 
we shall be glad when we experience our change in the 
Resurrection. 



R5187 : page 59 

A PECULIAR MARRIAGE 

--MARCH 23. -GENESIS 24:58-67.- 

"In all thy ways acknowledge Him, and 
He shall direct thy paths."— Proverbs 3:6. 

WHEN ABRAHAM was 140 years old and his 

wife Sarah had been dead three years, his 

son Isaac was forty years old. This heir 

of the most wonderful of the Divine promises 

did not go to seek a wife for himself, 

probably because too bashful. Then 

Abraham called Eliezer, the steward of his 

household, and directed that he take ten 

camels and go a distance of about 500 miles 

to the vicinity in which Abraham was born, 

and where his brother Nahor and family still lived. 

Eliezer went under the general direction that he should 

find a wife suitable for Isaac and bring her to him. 

The entire story is told with a beautiful simplicity 
quite convincing to the unprejudiced. The characters 
described by the historian were not savages, much less 
cousins of monkeys, as evolutionists would have us think. 
And the story itself is peculiar enough in its setting to 
assure us of its truth. A fabricator of such a narrative 
will scarcely picture his hero as obtaining a wife under 
the circumstances here set forth, nor was this the custom 
of that time nor of any time, nor of any people, so far 
as we have knowledge. The procedure was in every 
way unique. 

Only recently have Bible Students learned why the 
matter was so arranged. It was evidently to illustrate to 
us a great spiritual design, which has been more than 
eighteen centuries in process of accomplishment. The type 
fits to its antitype in a manner not to be misunderstood. 

Abraham typified the Heavenly Father, Isaac typified 
the Lord Jesus (his forty years typified in due time), and 
Eliezer typified the Holy Spirit. In due time, the Father 
sent the Holy Spirit to gather the Elect Company which 
will constitute the Bride, the Lamb's Wife. As in the 
type Abraham did not take a wife for his son from 
amongst the heathen, so in the antitype God did not select 



the Bride of Christ from the heathen. As Eliezer went 
to those who were related to Abraham, and believers in 
God, so the Holy Spirit was sent only to believers, to 
select from them the Bride class. 

THE BRIDE CLASS ORIGINALLY JEWISH 

The Jews were in fellowship with God under their 
Law Covenant, and to them only the Holy Spirit originally 
went. Later, in God's providence, the door was 
opened to the Gentiles. This was not in the sense of 
accepting all Gentiles to the Bride class, but merely of 
permitting them to hear the Gospel, in order that such 
as heard and responded might as believers draw nigh to 
God, and be permitted to join the Bride class when they 
fully consecrated themselves to God— the antitypical 
Rebecca enduring the trials and perils of the journey to 
the antitypical Isaac. From this standpoint, today's Study 
is not only beautiful and interesting, but highly instructive. 

REBECCA AT THE WELL 

Abraham's servant, loyal to his commission, faithful 
both to the father and to the son, sought earnestly the 
proper person of Abraham's desire, assured that Isaac, 
the heir of such precious promises, should have a suitable 
companion and helpmate. When he came to the place 
appointed, the city of Abraham's brother, Nahor, he was 
alert. He found Rebecca, the daughter of Bethuel, the 
grand-daughter of Nahor, at the well, caring for the 
sheep. This is interpreted to signify that those approached 
by the Holy Spirit with the suggestion of becoming joint-heirs 
with Christ are usually found in some way connected 
with the service of God's sheep— God's people— giving 
them water from the well, which symbolically would 
mean giving refreshment from the Bible and its words 
of life— "water of life." 

The first test put to the maiden was in respect to her 
willingness to give of the water. Eliezer asked for a 
drink. Rebecca replied, "Drink, and I will give thy 

R5187 : page 60 

camels to drink also." Here was manifested the spirit of 
generosity— of service— just as the Holy Spirit indicates 
that those who constitute the Bride of Christ must have 
meekness and humility as primary qualifications for acceptance 
with the Lord to the high calling. 

Immediately Eliezer hastened to put upon Rebecca 
some jewels, symbolic of spiritual blessings, which come 
to those who first hearken to the Spirit of the Lord and 
show a willingness and humility. Eliezer was received 
into the home. The friends of Rebecca received the 
blessings of the spirit which she had received; and they all, 
representing the Household of Faith, rejoiced with her. 

Eliezer promptly made known his business. He was 



there on a special mission, and this he set forth. He explained 
that Abraham was very rich, and that he had 
made Isaac heir of all that he had, and had sent him, his 
servant, to find a suitable bride for Isaac. Under the 
guidance of Divine providence, he had met Rebecca and 
believed her to be the Lord's choice for his Master's son. 
The question now was, Would she accept the offer, or 

R5188 : page 60 

would she reject it, and should he seek another? The 
question was put to Rebecca herself: Would she go into 
a far country under the guidance of Eliezer, and become 
the wife of Isaac? Her prompt answer was, "I will go." 

All this well represents the question which comes before 
those called to be of the Bride of Christ. They hear 
that He is "the Only Begotten of the Father, full of grace 
and truth." They hear that He is Lord of all, the Inheritor 
of the "exceeding great and precious promises." 
They learn that union with Him will mean the pleasures 
of His fellowship forevermore and participation with Him 
in all His great and wonderful future. Such as are rightly 
exercised answer, "I will go," as Rebecca did, with 
great promptness. 

It meant something to Rebecca to leave her father's 
house, her own people, her own country with which she 
was familiar; and so it means considerable for all those 
who accept the Father's call through the Holy Spirit and 
become members of the Bride of Christ. The Prophet 
addresses these, saying: "Forget also thine own people, 
and thy father's house; so shall the King greatly 
desire thy beauty; for He is thy Lord; and worship 
thou Him." 

Only a whole-hearted love for the Lord and a well-grounded 
faith in the "exceeding great and precious promises" 
will carry us through to the end of the journey, joyful 
in anticipation to be finally accepted into glory with 
our Beloved, the King of Glory. We are to remember 
that during this Gospel Age millions have heard of the 
Message of the Holy Spirit, inviting to membership in the 
Bride class; but not all have promptly said, "Yes, I will 
go." Rebecca types only the successful ones, who will 
finally make their calling and election sure, and become 
members of the Bride, the Lamb's Wife. 

MORE JEWELS FOR REBECCA 

Another part of the record tells us that, when Rebecca 
decided to accept the offer of marriage with Isaac, Eliezer 
opened his treasures and gave her still further jewels of 
adornment. How beautiful a figure! The Bride class 
receive an early blessing of the Holy Spirit, and a later 
one. The latter comes to those who have made a full 
decision to be the Lord's at any and every cost— "to follow 
the Lamb whithersoever He goeth." The graces of the 
Holy Spirit come more and more to them. As the Apostle 



suggests, we add to our faith fortitude, knowledge, patience, 
experience, hope, joy, love. And each of these 
jewels of character, in proportion as we put them on, 
enhances our beauty of character. 

Up hill and down, through sunshine and shadow, the 
camels finally brought Rebecca to her journey's end. So 
with the antitypical Rebecca. They start in the pathway 
of obedience and self-denial, leaving their father Adam's 
house. After they accept the Holy Spirit's suggestions 
and decide to go to Christ, they begin promptly to take 
up their cross and follow Him. Through sunshine and 
shade— trials and difficulties of the journey— they travel 
down through the centuries of this Gospel Age. 

As Eliezer brought Rebecca and her maids safe to the 
end of their journey to the presence of Isaac at Lahai-roi, 
so the Holy Spirit will guide the Church to the end of 
the journey to the presence, parousia, of Christ. The 
camels which bore the treasures and jewels to Rebecca's 
home, and which afterward brought her and her maidens 
and Eliezer back to Isaac's home, would seemingly represent 
well the Holy Scriptures, by which the faithful are 
borne along— the agencies sent by the Father and the Son 
for the comfort and assistance of the prospective Bride 
on her journey. 

As Eliezer met Rebecca at the well and handled the 
water, symbolical of Truth, so on the return journey 
Rebecca met Isaac at the well Lahai-roi. 

Following the custom of the time, she put on a veil 
and alighted from the camel to meet Isaac. So the Scriptures 
tell us that the Church must pass beyond the Veil 
before she will be fully received by the antitypical Isaac 
into all the holy associations foretold. 

Rebecca's maidens doubtless typified the blessings of 
the consecrated class, now following with the Bride class, 
but not living up to their full privileges and opportunities. 
The blessing pronounced upon Rebecca, "Be thou the 
mother of thousands of millions," represents the future 
of the Church; for as the Redeemer will, during His 
Messianic Kingdom, become the Father or Life-giver to 
thousands of millions of Adam's race, bought with His 
precious blood, so the Church, His Bride, will become 
the mother of those same thousands of millions of humanity, 
in the sense that she will be their care-taker and 
supervisor, to assist them forward to full perfection. 



R5188 : page 60 

THE ANCIENT WORTHIES 

-MARCH 30.-HEBREWS 11:1-19.- 

"Our fathers trusted in Thee; they trusted, 
and Thou didst deliver them."— Psalm 22:4. 



ST. PAUL in this lesson throws upon the 

screen vivid pictures of the wonders 

wrought by faith in ancient times, and then 

he gives a partial roll-call of the heroes of 

those faith-battles, and a hasty word-painting 

of the nature of their triumphs. The 

broad foundation for his dissertation is 

found in the first verse of this study— "Now 

faith is the substance of things hoped for, 

the evidence of things not seen." As water 

is not a solid upon which our feet can travel, except it 

be congealed in the form of ice, so likewise belief, in the 

ordinary sense of the word, is not sufficient as a foundation 

for our trust and onward progress, unless that belief 

be congealed, solidified, into a substantial faith. 

Thus we should always clearly differentiate between 
credulity and faith— credulity, which is reprehensible, and 
faith, which is commendable. A crystallized faith, such 
as will carry us safely over the quicksands of ignorance 
and superstition, and bring us safely to the goal which 
God has marked out for us, needs more than human assurances, 
more than our own or other men's imaginations. 

R5188 : page 61 

True faith seeks for a positive Message from the Lord. 
It requires diligence in its endeavor to find that Message. 
Then it becomes an evidence, or proof, of things invisible. 

By such a faith in God and His promise to give Israel 
the land of Canaan, the two elders sent to spy out the 
land brought back a good report. Their companions, lacking 
that faith, looked merely to the strength of the 
Canaanites, and brought back an unfavorable report. By 
faith we believe in the Divine Power which created the 
planets, and the Divine Power which has ordered the 
ages and dispensations of human affairs, and which will 
bring out of these, results which were not at first apparent, 
except by the eye of faith. 

ABRAHAM, ENOCH AND NOAH 

By faith Abel offered to the Lord a more excellent 
sacrifice than Cain, and obtained the witness of his approval 
by God's acceptance of his offering. His acceptance 
still speaks to us in Abel's favor, although he is dead. 
Abel's faith, no doubt, was the result of an endeavor to 
draw nearer to God— to appreciate what sin is and why 
the death penalty had come. From this standpoint of 
faith, he was led to offer sacrificially animals which typified 
the better sacrifices by which reconciliation will eventually 
be effected between God and humanity. 

On account of faith Enoch was translated that he 
should not see death. He "walked with God, and... 
God took him." The story of Enoch's translation is 
vouched for more than once; and by faith we may accept 
it. There is no record as to where he was taken, except 



that he was not taken to Heaven. (John 3:13.) For 
aught we know to the contrary, God may have protected 
his life through all these centuries as an illustration of 
how human life could have been prolonged by Divine 
Power, if God had not placed the curse of death upon 
the race. Indeed, Enoch could be no exception to that 
curse. He is under the death sentence and could come 
to full perfection and Divine justification to life only 
through the merit of the Redeemer, even as others. 

Noah's faith manifested itself by his obedience in the 
building of an ark, at a time when there was no apparent 
excuse for such a building, since not a drop of rain had 
fallen from the time of man's creation until that time. 
(Genesis 2:5.) God blessed his faith, and made him a 
channel of blessing to his family. 

THE FAITHLESS NOT ACCEPTABLE NOW 

St. Paul makes a sweeping statement— "Without faith 
it is impossible to please God." On the basis of this statement 
we may say, then, that a person is pleasing to God 
in proportion as he has faith, and displeasing in proportion 
as he lacks faith. Surely here we have an incentive 
to growth in faith, since all of God's people desire to be 
pleasing in His sight. 

But faith is not alike easy with all mankind. Some 
can crystallize their faith in God and His promises into 
what is the same to them as an absolute knowledge, and 
on this faith-knowledge they can dare and do anything, 
and increasingly so. But this is not true of all. Many 
have less faith and are still children of God, and must 
needs pray, "Lord, increase our faith," and must seek 
to emulate the faith of others, and to be encouraged by 
the rewards of faith given to them. There are still others, 
however, to whom faith seems to be absolutely impossible. 
They cannot believe anything beyond their own five 

R5189 : page 61 

senses. They have never developed the sixth sense— of 
faith, confidence in the Lord. 

What shall we say of these? Are they by this natural 
effect of heredity debarred from Divine favor to all 
eternity, because they do not please God— because "without 
faith it is impossible to please" Him? This is not 
the teaching of the Scriptures. They teach that a time is 
coming, under Messiah's gracious Kingdom, when the 
"knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole earth," reaching 
all classes. It will not be dependent upon faith, nor 
be merely for those who can exercise faith. The way 
will be made so clear and so plain that even a wayfaring 
man and a simpleton need not err in his endeavor to find 
and to know and to appreciate the Truth. 

But in the present time faith is an indispensable matter 
according to Divine arrangement, because the Father is 
seeking a special class to be the associates, the Bride and 



Joint-heir of His Son. Since these will thus be ushered 
into positions of great trust, as well as great honor and 
great service, they must needs be tempted, tested, in all 
points. Their faith in the Almighty must be implicit. 
Similarly, as we shall see, God has provided a special 
work for the Ancient Worthies mentioned in today's 
Study; and hence He has recognized as worthy for that 
work only such as could manifest great faith in Him 
and in His Word. 

ABRAHAM LOOKED FOR A CITY 

Coming to Abraham, St. Paul recounts the different 
steps of his faith-demonstration. He responded to the 
call and came into Canaan, not knowing the particulars 
respecting it beforehand. By faith he sojourned in the 
Land of Promise as a stranger, and dwelt in tents, as did 
also Isaac and Jacob, who were his associates in the 
Promise, and heirs through him. Sarah also exercised 
faith. The Apostle declares that she was thus assisted 
in becoming the mother of Isaac, and became identified 
with that Promise, which declares that Abraham's 
seed, through her, shall yet be as the sands of the seashore 
—innumerable. 

Summing up (v. 13), St. Paul declares that all these 
noble characters died in faith, without receiving the 
things that had been promised to them. Their rejoicing 
was in the faith-view which they had from afar. So 
strong was their faith that they were content to be pilgrims 
and strangers— nomads. Their traveling up and 
down showed that none of the cities or countries through 
which they passed from time to time were wholly satisfactory 
to them. Yet they were not discontented in the 
sense that they wished to return to their former homeland, 
Haran. They were merely seeking a better country, 
a heavenly country, for they "looked for a city which hath 
foundations, whose Builder and Maker is God." 

At first glance, there is room for difference of opinion 
as respects the Apostle's meaning by these words. Did 
he mean that Abraham, Isaac and Jacob were wanting 
to go to a heavenly country? Did he mean that they 
were looking for a place in the New Jerusalem, as 
the Bride, the Lamb's Wife, is looking for that City- 
Messiah's Kingdom? 

Such is not our thought. They had no Heavenly promises 
to think about. They had no Word of God to even 
suggest to them a change of nature from human to spirit 
being. All of their promises were of the earth, earthy— 
"All the land that thou seest, to thee will I give it and 
to thy seed after thee," etc. To our understanding the 
country they looked for is the Paradise of the now near 
future, when "the wilderness shall blossom as the rose 
and the solitary places shall be glad," and "streams shall 
break forth in the desert," and the blessing of the Lord 
shall supplant the curse of sin and death. This is the country 
which God purposes shall be the inheritance of humanity 



in general, when brought back into harmony with the 
Divine will, during Messiah's reign of righteousness. 

R5189 : page 62 

When we read that Abraham sought "a city which 
hath foundations, whose Builder and Maker is God," our 
minds naturally go to the New Jerusalem, the City of 
God, which is eventually to come down from God to earth. 
But that will not be a literal city. The entire passage 
is symbolical. The New Jerusalem will be the Messianic 
Kingdom. It will be the Capital, or center of Government, 
for the reorganized social order of earth. From it will 
go forth the Law of God, the knowledge of God, the 
blessing of God. From it will emanate power and authority, 
which for a thousand years will rule the world in 
righteousness, overthrow sin, death and all who are in 
sympathy with sin, and uplift all who love righteousness 
and Truth. 

The New Jerusalem primarily will be the Church in 
glory, on the spirit plane, the Kingdom or rule of God, 
emanating from Messiah. But it will have its earthly 
representatives, too. The very ones to whom St. Paul here 
refers, found faithful in their time— Abraham, Isaac and 
Jacob and the Prophets and all the Ancient Worthies- 
will be princes in the earth, representatives of the invisible 
Messiah and His Bride, backed by their full power 
and authority.— Psalm 45:16. 

Of these Jesus spoke, saying, "Ye shall see Abraham, 
Isaac and Jacob and all the holy Prophets in the Kingdom." 
But He Himself has said, "Yet a little while and 
the world seeth Me no more." Of the Church the Apostle 
declares, "We shall be like Him." We all must be 
changed. Flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom 
of Heaven, on the spirit plane. 

In substance, then, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and all 
the faithful of the past, waited for the promised resurrection 
of the dead, to be accomplished under the administration 
of Messiah's Government— a government being 
symbolically represented by a city, as St. Petersburg represents 
Russia; Paris represents France; London represents 
Great Britain; Berlin, Germany; and Washington, 
the United States. 



R5189 : page 62 

"AS DECEIVERS AND YET TRUE" 

MY SUIT against The Eagle for slanderous 

defamation of reputation has been decided 

in its favor. A Jury of twelve men have 

decided that The Eagle was justified in 

making its vicious onslaughts upon me, notwithstanding 

the Judge's Charge that, according 



to the law, the cartoon, at least, was 
a slanderous, vicious libel in fact. I am urged 
by my attorneys and petitioned by friends 
to take the case to the Court of Appeals. 

I quite agree with Justice Kelby, who said, "The case 
was presented fairly and squarely to the Jury." The rulings 
of His Honor seem to me equitable. I very highly 
appreciate the ability and energy of my attorneys, Mr. 
Sparks and Mr. Rutherford. I have no complaint, nor 
murmuring against the Divine providences which permitted 
what I consider to be a very unjust verdict. In appealing 
our Case to the Court we have followed the example 
of the Master, who inquired why He was smitten 
contrary to Law. (John 18:23.) Likewise St. Paul appealed 
for such justice as the Law provided. (Acts 25:10.) 
So I have done; and I, like them, have been refused the 
Law's protection. I murmur not. I am in good company. 

I remember, on the other hand, that it has been a part 
of the Divine will throughout this Gospel Age to allow 
His faithful servants to suffer reproaches and losses. 
This was so in the Master's case: "Being reviled, He 
reviled not again." When it pleased the Father to bruise 
Him and put Him to shame, He declared, "The cup which 
My Father hath poured for Me, shall I not drink it?"— 
"Not My will, but Thine be done."-I Peter 2:23; John 18:11; 
Luke 22:42. 

It was so with the Apostles, who wrote, "As He was, 
so are we in this world"— "As deceivers and yet true; as 
poor, yet making many rich"; "I bear about in my body 
the marks of the Lord Jesus"— evidences that I am His 
servant and His follower. As St. Paul said, so we see fulfilled 
all through the Age, "Whosoever will live godly in 
Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution." The Master said, 
"Marvel not if the world hate you. Ye know that it 
hated Me before it hated you; if ye were of the world, 
the world would love its own."— I John 4:17; 2 Cor. 6:8-10; 
Gal. 6:17; 2 Tim. 3:12; John 15:18,19. 

THE CASE BRIEFLY REVIEWED 

I am interested in everything progressive and tending 
to prove that we are entering the great Thousand Years 
of earth's blessings under Messiah. In the columns of 
THE WATCH TOWER I have noted the coming of Divine 
blessings in fulfilment of the prediction that "The wilderness 
shall blossom as the rose," "The earth shall yield 
her increase," etc. Five years ago we quoted in THE WATCH 
TOWER columns reports respecting "Miracle Wheat." We 
gave the name and address (Mr. Stoner) of the farmer 
who discovered this new wheat and his reports of its remarkable 
qualities. We published also the report of Mr. 
Miller, the Government expert, who thoroughly investigated 
it and pronounced upon its superior qualities. 

Some of our readers purchased seed from Mr. Stoner 
at $1.25 per pound and approved it. In 1910 one of the 
friends of our Society, who had raised some of this wheat, 



sold it for seed at $ 1 .00 per pound, and donated the proceeds 
to our Society. In 1911 the same friend, having 
raised more seed, asked that THE WATCH TOWER give the 
benefit of this to its readers at $1.00 a pound post-paid, 
and appropriate the net results to the furtherance of its 
work. Another friend, who had some of the same seed, 
also donated similarly, the total amount being twenty 
bushels. 

For the accommodation of our readers, we allowed 
this seed-wheat to be put up in pound packages and mailed 
from THE WATCH TOWER Office, just as the U.S. Government 

R5190 : page 62 

handles such seeds at Washington. We did the 
business at the request of others and in their interest, and 
credited them on our books with the results, setting aside 
to them proportionately voting shares in our Society. We 
made no claim for the wheat on our own knowledge. We 
merely gave the report of the Government expert, of the 
originator, and of our friends who had tried the wheat. 
We merely acted as intermediary. 

Nevertheless, everything that was said respecting the 
wheat was fully proven at this trial by expert witnesses, 
interested and disinterested, and their testimony was not 
shaken. It was also shown that farmer Stoner and his 
business partner, Mr. Knight, made no sales of this wheat 
under $1.25 per pound until September, 1911; and that 
they had a written contract between them that none of the 
wheat was to be sold at any price until the following 
year— 1912. Suddenly in September, 1911, they changed 
their plans, considering that they had wheat enough accumulated, 
put the price down to $5.00 per bushel, about the 
time that THE WATCH TOWER wheat was all sold at a 
dollar a pound. This The Eagle's attorney claimed was 
proof of fraud on the part of THE WATCH TOWER-sufficient 

R5190 : page 63 

excuse for the slanderous assaults of The Eagle 
upon me. 

It was in vain that my attorney sought to show the 
Jury The Eagle's malice— that it really was attacking me 
along religious grounds; that it had set itself as the champion 
of certain clerical enemies of mine, and was seeking 
to destroy my influence and, if possible, to drive me from 
Brooklyn. In the court-room sat about twenty-five of my 
friends, who had come long distances at their own expense 
to have an opportunity to speak a word in my 
behalf. Through some intricacies of the Law respecting 
evidence, these were unable to be heard in my behalf. 

Instead, the Law gave The Eagle's attorney the privilege 
of saying all manner of evil against me falsely— for 
the sake of the Doctrines of Christ, which I hold and 
teach. He was allowed to picture me, as The Eagle had 
done in its cartoon— as a thief and robber, masquerading 



in the garb of a minister of Christ. He was allowed to 
ridicule the "Miracle Wheat," although I had nothing 
whatever to do with it, nor with the naming of it; and 
notwithstanding the fact that its superiority was proven. 

He was allowed to inveigh against the fact as criminal, 
that I hold the office of President of the Watch Tower 
Bible and Tract Society, and to claim that I hold the 
office in some corrupt or unlawful manner, and that I 
misuse the Society's income in some unexplained way to 
my own advantage. Meantime, scores present in the courtroom 
and thousands all over the land, would have been 
glad to testify that their donations have come to the Society 
because they have the utmost confidence in my integrity 
and management of its affairs as its Executive 
Officer, and that had anybody else been President their 
donations would have been smaller or none at all. 

Presumably because there were seven Catholics on the 
Jury, The Eagle's attorney was prompted to refer to the 
Sisters of Charity and their noble work as nurses in the 
hospitals, without referring to the fact that those nurses 
are well paid, and that the hospitals in large measure are 
supported by State taxation. 

The Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society was 
held up to scorn because it did not have any hospital 
work nor draw any revenue from taxation, and because 
the female members of the Society do not visit 
the workshops of the land weekly or monthly on pay-day, 
and exact donations to its work. Our society was held up 
to scorn also because we do not send a wagon around the 
city collecting groceries and provisions for the up-keep 
of our work; because we do not take up collections even 
on Sunday; because we have never solicited a penny or a 
dollar from anybody; and because we never have fairs, 
grab-bags, "chances" or "raffles." Our Society was held 
up to scorn and ridicule because it offers its literature free 
to the poor, while other similar Societies charge both rich 
and poor for their tracts and other publications. The 
Eagle was pictured by its attorney as a dove, a bird of 
Paradise. For defending it the Protestants on the Jury 
were led to hope for escape from eternal torment through 
"the pearly gates" of heaven, welcomed with the words, 
"Well done!" for giving The Eagle the verdict. Neither 
I nor my attorneys could offer such inducements 
conscientiously. 

Our home, "Bethel," where some of our Society's 
workers reside, was held up to scorn— likened to a harem, 
etc. This surely did cut me deeply to the heart. I am 
quite willing to suffer, if need be, for my faithfulness to 
the Lord and His Word; but it gave me great pain that 
the arrows intended for me did not all center upon myself 
—that the more than a hundred saintly, earnest men, 
women and children, co-laborers with me in the Lord's 
work, should thus be made to unjustly suffer. I can only 
urge them to apply to themselves the words of the 
Apostle, "Cast not away, therefore, your confidence, 
which hath great recompense of reward"; "For ye have 



need of patience that, after ye have done the will of God, 
ye shall receive the promise"; "Ye endured a great fight 
of afflictions; partly, whilst ye were made a gazingstock, 
and partly whilst ye became companions of them that 
were so used."-Heb. 10:35,36,32,33. 

NO COMPLAINT AGAINST THE LAW 

I have no complaint to make against the Laws of our 
land, nor against the Jury System, not against the particular 
twelve men who, in my judgment, gave an unjust 
verdict. I esteem our Laws to be most wonderfully just. 
I have often marveled that imperfect, fallen men have 
succeeded in the erection of such excellent barriers against 
sin and injustice. I cannot see that a more fair method 
than our Jury System of trying a case could be arranged 
by imperfect men. Neither do I believe that the average 
jury desires to pervert justice. The miscarriage of justice 
I attribute rather to the imperfection of human 
knowledge. Suspicion and evil-surmising are weeds which 
seem to grow prolifically in every mind. They spring 
spontaneously in the degraded heart. There is such a disposition 
to judge others by one's self, and such a realization 
of sinful impulses that the average man naturally 
enough imputes evil, on every occasion when it is suggested 
to him. 

St. Paul enunciated this principle, saying, "The natural 
man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God;... 
neither can he know [understand] them; for they are 
spiritually discerned." (I Cor. 2:14.) Our Society and 
its work, our Lord's work and the work of the Apostles 
and the regenerate since, are so far beyond the concept 
of the unregenerate as to be "Foolishness unto them" 
—hypocrisies, frauds, impositions. If Jesus and the 
Apostles and the faithful saints of eighteen centuries 
have all belonged to this class, I will be of good courage 
and not be ashamed to belong to the same. 

I am the more encouraged because I realize that the 
great Day of Blessing, the great Thousand- Year Day of 
Messiah's Kingdom, is near at hand— is dawning now. 
Soon Satan, the "Prince of Darkness," will be bound for 
a thousand years, to deceive the nations no more. (Revelation 20:2,3,6.) 
No longer will Darkness be permitted 
to masquerade as Light, and the Light be slandered as 
Darkness. All the blind eyes will be opened; all the deaf 
ears will be unstopped. That glorious period, as the 
Prophet has declared, shall be "the desire of all nations." 
(Haggai 2:7.) Then not only the Church will see eye to 
eye, and understand God's providences at the present time, 
but the whole world will see in the light of that happy 
time for which we pray, "Thy Kingdom come; Thy will 
be done on earth as in Heaven." 

Sincerely, and undismayed, I remain a servant of God. 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL. 
Brooklyn, January 29, 1913. 



Judge not the Lord by feeble sense, 
But trust Him for His grace; 

Behind a frowning providence 
He hides a smiling face. 

Ye fearful saints, fresh courage take; 

The clouds ye so much dread 
Are big with mercy and shall break 

In blessings on your head. 

His purposes will ripen fast, 

Unfolding every hour; 
The bud may have a bitter taste, 

But sweet will be the flower. 



page 65 

VOL. XXXIV MARCH 1 No. 5 
A. D. 1913-A. M. 6041 



CONTENTS 

The Coming Memorial Supper 67 

Ye Do Shew Forth the Lord's Death 68 

"Till He Come" 69 

Who May Partake? 70 

How to Partake 72 

The Sacrificial Loaf and Cup (Poem) 73 

The Church's Part in the Sin-Offering 73 

Holy Spirit Evidence of Acceptance 74 

Sacrifice of Earthly Rights 74 

The Work of The Advocate 75 

Blemishes, Spots and Wrinkles Defined 75 

Necessity of a Tender Conscience 75 

The Sale of a Birthright 76 

Earthly Loss Spiritual Gain 77 

The Lesson of the Lost Birthright 77 

The Gate of Heaven 77 

Jacob Have I Loved 78 

Neither a Jew nor a Christian 78 

What the Dream Meant 78 

Berean Questions in Scripture Studies 79 

page 66 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



R5200 : page 66 

THE HARVEST IS GREAT 

The Master said, "The Harvest truly is great, but the 
laborers are few: pray ye therefore the Lord of the Harvest 
that He would send forth laborers into His Harvest." (Luke 10:2.) 
These words, applicable nearly nineteen centuries ago, 
seem very applicable today also. We have more opportunities 
for using unencumbered brethren filled with the Spirit than 
ever before. If any such brethren believe themselves reasonably 
well developed in meekness, gentleness, long-suffering, 
brotherly-kindness, love; and if, in addition, they have had 
some considerable experience with Present Truth and are 
fully consecrated to the Lord, we should like to hear from 
them. 

Such desiring to co-labor under the Society's auspices might 
give us a brief history of their life-work thus far, and send 
their photograph. Let them tell us also to what extent they 
have had and used opportunities for presenting the Truth in 
public, and to what extent God has blessed their efforts in 
bringing others into a fulness of consecration and mental 
enlightenment. 

Or if their talents run more toward stenography than toward 
public speaking, we should be pleased to know of that. 
But do not mention stenography to us unless you are thorough-going 
in it, as a poor stenographer is a hindrance rather 
than an aid. 

page 66 

MEMORIAL CELEBRATION APRIL 20th 

In our issue of February 1st the Memorial Celebration 
was noted for March 20th, after 6 P.M. This was an error. 
It should have been April 20th. The March date would have 
been right according to the Episcopalian and Catholic reckonings 
of the first full moon after the Spring Equinox marking 
the Passover. However, it has been our custom to follow the 
Jewish reckoning, which makes it, this year, Sunday evening, 
April 20th, after 6 P.M. If any thereby memorialized a month 
in advance they will have a good opportunity to celebrate a 
second time, if they choose. 

An additional typographical error appeared in the Sunday 
School Lesson of March 9th, stating, "When Abraham was 
ninety-nine years old— about the year 1900 B.C.," when it 
should have read, "When Abraham was ninety-nine years old 
-in the year 2021 B.C." 

MILLENNIAL COTTON PLANT 



The finest specimen of cotton plant we have ever seen has come 
into our possession. It is a little tree, an inch in diameter a foot from 
the ground, and seven feet high. It contains about three hundred bolls. 
This seems to be a specially thrifty and prolific new variety. We have 
no knowledge respecting its pedigree or the kind of soil on which it 
grew. It is our thought that such phenomenal plants should be specially 
cared for and their seed kept carefully separate from other seed, with 
a view to improving the general yield. Apparently this cotton should be 
grown one stalk to the hill, with the hills two feet apart. 

If any WATCH TOWER readers are cotton-growers, we shall be pleased 
to send them samples of this special seed for special planting separate 
from all other seeds. We will supply the seed free, on condition that 
the seed from one-half the crop shall be kept for us and be at our 
disposal when picked and ginned. The other half would be for the 
experimenter in extending his acreage next year. 

POEMS OF DAWN 

This book of 286 pages contains nearly three hundred beautiful poems 
of consecration and encouragement for Christians. It makes an excellent 
gift for any friend or relative not in the Truth, although most 
appreciated by the saintly. It is topically arranged, but you could not 
open at random and read without being refreshed, comforted, drawn 
nearer to God. The Karatol-bound edition is exhausted, but we still 
have a good supply on hand of the cloth-bound edition, 25c, and the 
India paper, leather bound, 50c. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR APRIL 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. 
At the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns 
for April follow: (1) 239; (2) 120; (3) 47; (4) 274; (5) 208; 
(6) Vow; (7) 332; (8) 168; (9) 78; (10) 160; (11) 38; (12) 
175; (13) 293; (14) 56; (15) 58; (16) 166; (17) 12; (18) 130; 
(19) 110; (20) 313; (21) 260; (22) 75; (23) 229; (24) 107; 
(25) 108; (26) 103; (27) 251; (28) 94; (29) 279; (30) 109. 



R5191 : page 67 

THE COMING MEMORIAL SUPPER 

"This do in remembrance of 
Me."-lCor. 11:24,25. 

THE SUPPER which our Lord instituted as a 
remembrancer of His great sacrifice for our 
sins, and not for ours only, but also for the 
sins of the whole world, is striking in its 
appropriateness and its simplicity. The 
world's great men have always sought very 
different means of perpetuating their memories. 



In whatever way they would remind 
their followers of their merits and their 
greatness, it surely has not been by a reminder 
and commemoration of their death— especially 
if, as in our Lord's case, it was a death of ignominy and 
shame, a death as a malefactor and criminal. Another, 
more probably, would have left instructions for medals to 
be struck commemorating some of his mighty works- 
such, for instance, as the awakening of Lazarus, or the 
stilling of the tempest on the sea, or the triumphal entry 
into Jerusalem, while the multitude strewed the way with 
palm branches, and cried, Hosanna to the King ! 

But our Lord chose as His remembrancer that which 
represented what was, in His and in God's estimation, 
His mightiest work— His Sin-Offering on our behalf; 
and that which His real followers, and they alone, would 
appreciate more than any other feature of His mission. 
True, His followers would have appreciated something 
commemorative of His wonderful words or works, 
but the worldly also could have appreciated those things. 
But not so the value of His death as our Ransom-Sacrifice, 
the basis of our reconciliation and at-one-ment, which 
has never yet been fully apprehended by any but the 
consecrated Little Flock— the Elect. And it was for these 
that the remembrancer was arranged and instituted. And 
though a Judas was present, he was given a sop, and 
went out from the others before the supper was ended; 
thus no doubt representing that in the close of this Age, 
before the Little Flock will have finished their part of 
having fellowship with their Lord in His sufferings, the 
sop of Truth will have become so strong as to drive 
forth from the company and communion of the faithful 
all who do not rightly appreciate and value the Ransom 
accomplished by the Lamb of God for the taking away of 
the sins of the world.— I John 2: 19. 

DATE OF THE PASCHAL SUPPER 

The date of the Paschal Supper at which the Jews 
ate a lamb, commemorative of their deliverance from 
Egyptian bondage and of the sparing of their first-born 
at that time, was of course calculated by the Jewish 
method of reckoning time, viz., lunar time. (Exod. 12:2-14.) 
Instead of dividing the months as we do, they 
allowed the new moon to mark the beginning of a new 
month; and the difference between the sun time (solar 
time) and moon time (lunar time) was equalized 
by always beginning the new year with the appearing 
of the new moon about the Spring Equinox. In celebrating 
their religious festivals the Jews still maintain 
this method of reckoning. And since our Lord, the Apostles 
and the early Church followed this same rule for determining 
the date for the annual celebration of our 
Lord's Last Supper, we also follow it. 

The first new moon after the vernal Equinox is 
reckoned in Hebrew almanacs this year (1913) as being 



April 8th— probably Jerusalem observation. At 6 p.m. the 
day before begins the first day of the Jewish month Nisan, 
the first month of the Jewish sacred year. Beginning 
with the 1 st of Nisan the Hebrews counted, and on the 
tenth day the Paschal lamb was chosen or selected from 
the flock. On the fourteenth day (the full of the moon*) 
"between evenings" (at any time between 6 p.m. of the 
13th and 6 p.m. of the 14th of Nisan) the lamb was to 
be killed and eaten. On the fifteenth day their Passover 
Feast began, lasting seven days, the first and the seventh 
days being observed as specially holy, as Sabbath days, or 
"high" days. (Exod. 12:16.) On the sixteenth day, the 
omer of the first-fruits of the barley harvest was offered 
to the Lord, and fifty days after (Pentecost Day) they 
offered before the Lord two wave loaves.— Lev. 23:17. 

These things done by the Jews every year were, as 
we have already seen, types of greater and grander occurrences. 
The choosing of the lamb on the tenth day 
typified how, if Israel would be blessed and recognized 
as the Church of the First-born in the antitypical Passover, 
they must accept Jesus then, five days before that Passover 
Feast, and four days before His crucifixion. And it 
evidently was on that very date that our Lord offered Himself 
finally to that nation— when, as their King, He rode 
into the city on the colt. (Compare John 12:12-16.) They, 



*As the Sun is a symbol of Christ's kingdom, so the Moon symbolized 
Israel as a nation. (Rev. 12:1.) The 12 and sometimes 13 
lunations symbolize the tribes of that nation. The moon was at its 
full at the time of Christ's crucifixion. There it immediately began to 
wane and waned for as long as it had previously increased. So Christ's 
death was the turning point between the two equal parts of Israel's 
history. See STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, VOL. II., p. 218. 

As those Jews who were unclean, and hence could not keep the 
Passover properly in its proper season, were permitted to do so on 
the 14th of the second month (at the full of the next moon— Num. 9:8-13), 
the lesson taught seems to be that all prevented (by ignorance) 
from accepting Messiah as their Redeemer, when offered to them, will 
have an opportunity of doing so when, in the Times of Restitution of 
all things, their nation (moon) shall again be full of blessings, in the 
latter Harvest. 

R5191 : page 68 

however, neglected to receive the Lamb of God, were at 
once rejected, and ceased from being the typical first-born. 

The 14th day (which this year [1913] will begin at 6 
o'clock on the evening of Sunday, April 20th, and last 
until 6 p.m. of the 21st) was the day in which the 
Paschal lamb was to be killed and eaten; and the Hebrew 
counting of time (doubtless Divinely arranged for this 
very purpose) permitted the eating of the "Last Supper" 
upon the same day that the Lord was crucified. The 
Passover supper of lamb and herbs and unleavened bread 



(fulfilling the Law, which was not ended until the cross) 
was eaten shortly after 6 p.m. Then followed the institution 
of the Memorial Supper of bread and wine, 
representative of the body and blood of the antitypical 
Lamb. This thereafter, as often as the occasion returned 
(yearly), was to be observed by His followers instead 
of the eating of the literal lamb— as the commemoration 
of the antitypical Lamb and the greater passing-over of 
the antitypical First-born, which His blood effects. 

The waving of the barley sheaf of first-fruits, on 
the 16th of Nisan ("the morrow after the Sabbath" or 
Passover Feast of the 15th— Lev. 23:5,6,11,15-17), typified 
the resurrection of Christ our Lord, as "the first-fruits 
of them that slept."*-I Cor. 15:20. 

The two wave loaves offered on the fiftieth day, Pentecost, 
represented the presenting of the Church before God 
and its acceptance through the merit of the great High 
Priest, indicated by the anointing of the Holy Spirit at 
Pentecost. The Church really is but "one loaf" (I Cor. 10:17), 
the two loaves representing the same thing as the 
two goats presented on the Day of Atonement. It indicated 
that although all presented were acceptable to God 
through Christ Jesus, He yet knew that all presented 
would not come up to the condition of faithfulness to the 
end. The two loaves represented, therefore, the two 
classes of the consecrated— the overcoming Little Flock, 
and the Great Company of the consecrated servants of 
God who do not make the "high calling" theirs, by overcoming 
the world as they might and should do. 

The method of calculating the date for Good Friday 
and Easter Sunday in vogue among Episcopalians and 
Roman Catholics differs from the foregoing in this: They 
celebrate as Easter Sunday the first Sunday following the 
first full moon after the Spring Equinox, and the preceding 
Friday is recognized as Good Friday. This method 
of counting was instituted by the Council of Nice, A.D. 
325, as instead of the Jewish method which we recognize. 
But the name "Passover" continued to be used (not 
Eastern- Sunday) for a long time; it was after Papacy 
had become established in political influence, and the ignorant 
pagans began to flock to the system which enjoyed 
the favor of the Government, that the name "Easter" 
was substituted for "Passover," because about the same 
time as the Passover the pagans had been in the habit of 
celebrating the festival of their Easter goddess (Germanic 

R5 192: page 68 

Ostara)— Estera— goddess of Spring. This was 

one of the many methods adopted by an ambitious "clergy" 

for gaining numbers and influence. 

Sometimes the two methods of counting, Jewish and 
Roman Catholic, indicate the same days, but not often; 
occasionally their results are nearly a moon or month apart. 

The Jews will celebrate the Passover week as a 
"feast" beginning April 22nd (at 6 o'clock p.m., April 



21st), the 15th of Nisan. We in the Memorial Supper 
do not celebrate the feast-week, but the day previous, 
the 14th of Nisan, beginning on the evening of 
April 20th, 1913, which is the anniversary of the 
proper date for killing and eating the Paschal lamb— 
the anniversary of the death of our Lord Jesus, the true 
Lamb of God, because of whose sacrifice the "Church of 
the First-born" passes from death unto life— to be completed 
in the First Resurrection. The antitype of the Passover 
Feast-week is found in the rejoicing of heart of all 
the First-born of true Israel— the seven days signifying the 
perfection or completeness of the joy and the salvation. 

We have given the details as to the counting as 
a general answer to many questions on this subject, and 
not because of any weighty importance or bondage attaching 
to the exact anniversary day. We recognize no such 
bondage upon those made free by Christ. For though 
desirous of observing the Memorial Supper properly, upon 
its proper anniversary, as intended by our Lord when 
He said, "This do ye [every time you celebrate this 
yearly memorial] in remembrance [lit, for commemoration] 
of Me," we esteem it more as a privilege than as a 
duty; and if we should err in the matter of selecting the 
day, through ignorance or misunderstanding, we believe 
the Lord would accept our good intentions and forgive 
the error and grant His blessing. Indeed, we believe that 
the Lord owns and accepts the good intentions of many 
of His children who, because of erroneous teachings and 
human traditions, select various other times and seasons 
for celebrating this memorial of His death, instead of its 
anniversary, which He designated. Similarly we would 
sympathize with the patriotic intentions of the man who 
should "celebrate" the independence of the United States 
three, four, or fifty times a year, forgetful of the date, or 
ignorant of the fact that the Fourth of July is the anniversary 
of the event, and was appointed as the appropriate 
date for celebrating it. 

This, like other truths long buried under the rubbish 
of the Dark Ages, God is now making clear to His people. 
And all who are truly His people are anxious for the 
truth and the right upon this, as upon all other subjects 
revealed in God's Word. 

YE DO SHEW FORTH THE LORD'S DEATH 

"For I received from the Lord what I also delivered 
to you— that the Lord on the night in which He was delivered 
up took a loaf, and having given thanks, broke it 
and said, This is that body of Mine, which is broken on 
your behalf; this do ye in My remembrance.' In like 
manner also, the cup, after the supper, saying, 'This cup 
is the New Covenant in My blood; this do ye, as often 
as ye may drink, for My remembrance.' For as often as 
you may eat this bread or drink this cup you declare the 
death of the Lord till He come." -I Cor. 11:24-26. 

There is no necessity for discussing with honest minds 



what is and what is not meant by the expression— the 
Lord's death. Some, in an anxiety to get away from the 
doctrine of the Ransom, or rather, in their anxiety to get 



*Here is the strongest possible confirmation of the correctness of 
the position taken in STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, VOL. IL-that our 
Lord was not three full 24-hour days in the tomb, but only parts of 
the three days and nights; that He was crucified on the day corresponding 
to our Friday afternoon, and arose on what corresponded to our 
Sunday morning. The showing of this type, that the Paschal lamb 
was to be killed sometime during the 14th of Nisan, and the wave-offering 
of the sheaf of first-fruits was to occur on the 16th, should settle 
the matter for all. It agrees with the repeated statement (1 Cor. 15:4; 
Luke 24:46) that our Lord rose on "the third day, according to the 
Scriptures." This Scripture concerning the first-fruits is the only type 
which we recall as in any way pointing out the time of our Lord's 
resurrection. Then, too, the fact that history, as represented in the 
traditions and customs, points out Good Friday and Easter Sunday as 
celebrations of our Lord's death and resurrection, should have some 
weight on so trivial a matter, unless some motive or reason for misstating 
the dates can be assigned. The only Scripture seeming to 
oppose all these facts is the declaration that our Lord would be three 
days and three nights in the earth; and the only explanation that can 
be offered to this is, that the expression is used in a general and not 
in a specific manner, the nights being mentioned to preclude the idea 
of any cessation of death until the third day. Thus understood, the 
expression would signify that during portions of three days and nights 
our Lord would be in the tomb. At all events the evidence is overwhelming 
that He died on the 14th of Nisan, and rose on the 16th— 
the third day after. 

+The use of the word Easter in Acts 12:4 is a mistranslation; it 
should be rendered Passover.— See Revised Version. 

R5192:page69 

away from the logical deductions associated with the doctrine 

of the Ransom, are claiming, regardless of all Scripture 

to the contrary, that our Lord Jesus had two deaths, 

one when He came into the world, and the other at Calvary; 

and that the death of "The Man Christ Jesus, who 

gave Himself a Ransom for all," at Calvary, was of small 

importance as compared with the other. They seem willingly 

ignorant of the fact that the Scriptures declare, 

"In that He died, He died unto sin once"; and that that 

one death, and the only one ever referred to by our Lord 

or His Apostles, was the death at Calvary. 

The Apostles declare that He spoke of the death 
which He should accomplish at Jerusalem. This one and 
only death of our Redeemer is what is symbolized by this 
remembrancer— His body, His flesh, broken for us, and of 
its merits and life all who would have life everlasting must 
partake. "Let no man deceive you by any means," on this 
important question. 

But as water-baptism is not the important baptism, 



but only the symbol representing the real, so partaking 
of the emblematic bread and wine is only the symbol of 
the more important feast— our appropriation of the merit 
of Christ, which secures to us eternal life through His 
broken body and shed blood. Thus by faith accepting His 
finished sacrifice, and by similar faith, as instructed by 
Him, appropriating to ourselves all the merits and perfections 
and rights which The Man Christ Jesus possessed 
and laid down in death for us, we really feed our hearts 
upon the Bread of everlasting Life, the Bread which God 
sent to us from Heaven. This is the true Bread, the eating 
of which gives everlasting life. This is, primarily, 
what the literal bread symbolizes and signifies to all who 
partake of it rightly and intelligently. It is a memorial 
of the ransom of Adam and his family from the bondage 
of sin and death. 

THE BREAD AND THE CUP 

Another thought: the bread was unleavened. Leaven 
is corruption, an element of decay, hence a type of sin, 
and the decay and death which sin works in mankind. So, 
then, this symbol declares that our Lord Jesus was free 
from sin, a Lamb without spot or blemish, "holy, harmless, 
undefiled." Had He been of Adamic stock, had He 
received His life in the usual way from any earthly father, 
He, too, would have been leavened with Adamic sin, as 
are all other men; but His life came unblemished from a 
higher, Heavenly nature, changed to earthly conditions; 
hence He is called "the Bread from Heaven." (John 6:41.) 
Let us then appreciate the pure, unleavened, undefiled 
Bread which God has provided, and so let us eat 
of Him— by eating and digesting the Truth, and especially 
His Truth— appropriating to ourselves, by faith, His 
Righteousness; and let us recognize Him as both the Way 
and the Life. 

The Apostle, by Divine revelation, communicates to 
us a further meaning in this remembrancer. He shows 
that not only did the loaf represent our Lord Jesus, individually, 
but that after we have thus partaken of Him 

(after we have been justified by appropriating His righteousness), 
we, by consecration, become associated with 
Him as part of the one, broken Loaf— food for the world. 
(I Cor. 10:16.) This suggests the thought of our privilege 
as justified believers to share now in the sufferings 
and death of Christ, the condition upon which we may become 
joint-heirs with Him of future glories, and associates 
in the great work of blessing and giving life to all 
the families of the earth. 

This same thought is expressed by the Apostle repeatedly 
and under various figures, but none of them more 
forceful than this, that the Church (which is Christ's 
Body, see Col. 1:24), with their Head, is the "one Loaf," 
being broken, during the Gospel Age. It is a striking 
illustration of our union and fellowship with our Head. 

We quote: "Because there is one loaf we, the many 



[persons], are one body; for we all partake of the one 
loaf." "The loaf which we break, is it not the participation 
of the body of the Anointed One?"-I Cor. 10:16,17. 
-Diaglott. 

The "fruit of the vine" represents the sacrificed life 
given by our Lord. "This is My blood [symbol of life 
given up in death] of the New Covenant, shed for many, 
FOR THE REMISSION of sins." "Drink ye all of it."~ 
Matt. 26:27,28. 

It was by the giving up of His life as a Ransom for the 
life of the Adamic race, which sin had forfeited, that a 
right to LIFE may come to men through faith and obedience, 
under the New Covenant. (Rom. 5:18,19.) The 
shed blood was the "Ransom [price] for ALL," which was 
paid for all by our Redeemer Himself; but His act of 
handing the cup to the disciples, and asking them to drink 
of it, was an invitation to them to become partakers of 
His sufferings, or as St. Paul expresses it, to "fill up that 
which is behind of the afflictions of Christ." (Col. 1:24.) 
It was the offer to us that if we, after being justified by 
faith, voluntarily partake of the sufferings of Christ, by 
espousing His cause, we will be esteemed by God members 
of the Body of Christ, as well as sharers in the sufferings 
of Jesus. (2 Tim. 2:12; Acts 9:1-5.) "The cup of blessing, 
for which we bless God, is it not a participation of the 
blood [shed blood-death] of the Anointed One?" (I Cor. 10:16. 
—Diaglott.) Would that we all might realize 
the value of the "cup," and could bless God for an opportunity 
of sharing with Christ His "cup" of sufferings and 
shame! All such may be assured that they will be glorified 
together with Him.— Rom. 8:17. 

Our Lord also attached this significance to the "cup," 
indicating that it signified our participation in His dishonor, 
our share in His sacrifice— the death of our humanity. 
For instance, when asked by two of His disciples 
for a promise of future glory in His Throne, He answered 
them: "Ye know not what ye ask. Are ye able to 
drink of the cup that I shall drink of?" On their hearty 
avowal He answered, "Ye shall indeed drink of My cup." 
The juice of the grape not only speaks of the crushing of 
the grape till blood comes forth, but it also speaks of 
an after refreshment; and so we who now share the "sufferings 
of Christ" shall shortly share also His glories, 
honors and immortality— when we drink the new wine 
with Him in the Kingdom. 

"TILL HE COME" 

What is the full significance of this expression? 
Since our Lord who instituted the Memorial Supper 
placed no limit upon its observance, this expression by 

R5193 : page 69 

the Apostle is not to be understood as limiting the length 
of time in which it will be appropriate to commemorate 



the death of our Lord Jesus, our Ransom-Sacrifice, and 

our consecration with Him to sacrifice. Rather, he is 

showing that it was not to be considered a limited arrangement, 

for a few years, but was to be continually observed 

until the Lord's Second Coming. Looking down 

to and speaking of the Second Coming of our Lord, the 

Apostle includes in his expression the gathering and exaltation 

with Christ of His Church, or Kingdom, to rule 

and bless the world. This is even yet a common and 

proper way of speaking of matters so closely identified 

and so dependent one upon the other. The Christ, Head 

and Body, is coming, to rule the world in power and great 

glory. The presence of the Lord or Head is necessary 

first; then comes the change of the sleeping members of 

R5193 : page 70 

His Body, the sifting of the living members, and their 
gradual gathering together unto Him. 

Even though the Kingdom may be considered as begun 
from the time the King began the exercise of His 
great power (Rev. 11:17) in 1878, it will not be "set up," 
in the full sense of the word, until the last member of the 
Kingdom has been changed or glorified— until the breaking 
of the Loaf, The Christ, Head and Body, is completed. 
While one member suffers, the Body suffers; while one 
member is unglorified, the Kingdom is not fully come into 
power and dominion. 

It is the Coming of Christ, as including the full exaltation 
of His Church or Kingdom, that the Apostle 
evidently meant when he said, "As often as you may eat 
this [Passover] bread and drink this cup, you declare the 
death of the Lord [as your hope and confidence] till He 
come." The same thought of the Kingdom glory being 
the end of the symbol may be gathered from our Lord's 
own words on the occasion of the institution of the Memorial 
—"I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the 
vine, until that Day when I drink it new with you in My 
Father's Kingdom. "-Matt. 26:29. 

And surely, if it were ever proper and expedient for 
those who believe that our Lord's death was the Ransom-Price 
to confess it— to show it forth as the basis of all 
their hopes— it is now, when this foundation doctrine of 
God's Word is being traduced and misrepresented. 

APPRECIATING THE PRIVILEGE 

We urge that none neglect this annual privilege, for 
any reason. There is a special blessing in its observance. 
If you incline to feel discouraged, go partake of the broken 
loaf, asking the Lord for a fresh realization of your 
justification, and a fresh appreciation of your consecration 
to be broken (sacrificed) with Him, as members of the one 
Loaf— His Church, His Body. 

Let us not forget that the Memorial is meaningless or 
worse unless thus accepted and appreciated. But let 



nothing hinder us— neither sins, nor coldness, nor feelings 
of unworthiness. Go to the Lord and make a clean breast 
of all your shortcomings. Go to your brethren, or any 
whom you have wronged— make full acknowledgment, 
whether they acknowledge faults toward you or not. Get 
yourself right with your Lord, and so far as possible with 
every man, and then eat— yea, feast upon the rich provision 
the Lord has made for all who accept, now or in a 
later "due time." 

Such a heart-searching and cleansing, we remember, 
was shown in the Passover type given to the Jews. Before 
they gathered to eat their Passover lamb they 
searched everywhere throughout their habitations, for 
anything containing leaven or putrefaction, bones, crusts, 
everything. These all were burned— destroyed. So must 
we fulfil the antitype, and "put away the old leaven" of 
anger, malice, hatred, strife.— I Cor. 5:7,8. 

But remember that this kind of leaven of sin cannot 
be thoroughly put away unless it be burned; and only love 
can burn it out— Heavenly love, the Love of God. If we 
have that love shed abroad in our hearts, it will consume 
everything of the opposite character— jealousy, hatred, 
evil speaking, etc. Put off all these, urges the Apostle, 
and put on Christ and be filled with His Spirit. Do not 
be discouraged. But learn the lesson and start again with 
fresh resolutions and increased appreciation of the fact 
that of yourself, without the Master's aid, you could never 
gain the prize. He knows this better than do we, and 
says, "Without Me, ye can do nothing." It was because 
of our need that the Father thus arranged for us. "Be 
of good courage!" is the Master's word to all who are 
longing and striving to be of the class called "conquerors." 

YOUR ADVERSARY THE DEVIL 

Temptations seem to be specially permitted at this season 
of the year. "Roots of bitterness" seem to sprout and 
grow always, but at this season with ten-fold vigor. Let 
us remember that Love, not Knowledge, is the final test 
of our discipleship. "A new commandment I give unto 
you, that ye love one another." It was because the Apostles 
had not enough love for one another that they disputed 
as to which should be the greatest in the Kingdom, 
and were so determined not to stoop to one another that 
they neglected also to wash the Master's feet, and gave 
Him the opportunity even in menial things to be servant 
of all. It was this wrong spirit— this lack of the Lord's 
Spirit— that made them susceptible to the Adversary's 
power, and led Judas to betray, and Peter to deny the 
Lord's Anointed. 

Let us then take heed to ourselves, and watch and 
pray and be very humble and very loving, lest we fall into 
temptation. Not since that time, probably, has our great 
Adversary been more alive than now to do injury, or to 
entrap or to stumble the followers of Jesus. 

Let all who hold fast the confidence of faith in His 



precious blood [His sacrificed life] as the Propitiation 
[satisfaction] for our sins, and not for ours only, but 
also for the sins of the whole world, be more zealous 
and fervent than ever before in confessing this great 
truth; "for even Christ our Passover [Sacrifice] is slain; 
therefore, let us keep the feast." None of the nominal 
first-born shall be passed over and become members of 
the Church of the First-born in glory, none except those 
who, during this night, abide under the blood, and partake 
of the merits of the Lamb of God which taketh 
away the sin of the world— just as in the type. 

WHO MAY PARTAKE? 

The Lord's Supper is not for the world, not for merely 
nominal believers, but only for those who, (1) accepting 
of Christ as their Redeemer and Sin-Bearer, are (2) 
consecrated to Him and His service. But it is not for us 
—nor for any man or set of men— to decide who may and 
who may not partake. It is our duty to point out from the 
Word of the Lord what are the proper qualifications for 
participation in the "cup" and in the "loaf," and then to 
say as did the Apostle, Let every man examine himself, and 
then, if he think proper, let him partake.— I Cor. 1 1:28. 

Now that God's people are emerging from the errors 
of the Dark Ages, when this Memorial can be more clearly 
understood, the judging or examining of one's self can be 
more thorough than ever before. Let each ask himself:— 

(1) Do I believe the Scripture teaching that I, as a 
member of the human family, was under that condemnation 
to death which passed upon all because of original sin? 

(2) Do I believe that my only hope of escape from 

that condemnation of sin and death was through the Ransom-Sacrifice 
of The Man Christ Jesus, my Lord? 

(3) Do I believe He gave Himself— His flesh and 
blood, His humanity— as my Ransom-Price, pouring out 

His soul unto death, making His soul a Sin-Offering (Isa. 53:10,12) 
on our behalf? 

(4) Do I see that the consecration to death, made 

at Jordan when He was baptized, was fulfilled by His sacrifice 
of Himself for mankind, which, beginning there, 
was finished on the cross when He died? 

(5) Do I see that the rights under the Law, which 
He secured by obedience to it (the right of lasting life 
and the dominion of earth), were what He through that 
same sacrifice bequeathed to the fallen, dying race— to as 
many as shall ultimately accept the blessings under the 
conditions of the New Covenant? 

(6) Do I see that His flesh and blood, thus sacrificed, 

R5193 : page 71 

stood for, represented, those blessings and favors which 
they purchased? 

(7) Do I see that the partaking of the bread and 

wine, symbols of His flesh and blood, signifies my acceptance 



of those favors and blessings which the flesh and 
blood of my Lord bought for me and for all? 

(8) And if I do thus heartily accept the Ransom 
thus memorialized, do I consecrate my entire being— my 
flesh and blood, justified through faith in that Ransom 
—to the Lord, to be broken with Him, to suffer with Him, 
to be dead with Him? 

If we can answer these questions affirmatively, we 
clearly or fully discern the Lord's body, give credit to 
His meritorious Sacrifice, and may eat— should eat— "Eat 
ye all of it." 

Those, however, that deny that a Ransom for sin and 
sinners was required and given, who feel that they need 
not to partake of Christ's merit, who deny that the merit 
of one can be imputed to another, who have cast off the 
Wedding-Garment of Christ's Righteousness, who feel 
"happier" and "freer" in the filthy rags of their own 
righteousness, and who now consider the precious blood 
wherewith they were once sanctified a not-holy, or an 
ordinary thing— such we advise to stay away from memorializing 
that in which they no longer believe; for they 
would merely be adding hypocrisy to unbelief. For such 
to partake, is to add condemnation to themselves and their 
no-ransom theories. 

R5194:page71 

THE WORD OF GOD, THE TRUTH 

But, better still, let us advise all who have merely 
been entrapped into this error, by the sophistries promulgated 
through various channels by the great Adversary, 
to reject all vain human philosophies, and to receive again 
the simple Word of God, the truths therein set forth— 
that all are fallen, and that the only way open for our 
reconciliation and restitution consistent with the Divine 
Law and sentence was the giving of the full and exact corresponding 
Price or Ransom for our sins; that in no 
other way could He be just and yet justify sinners. Let 
them recognize the fact that our Lord Jesus, as the Lamb 
of God, bore the full penalty for our sins in His own 
body on the tree— that He gave a full Ransom for all. 

The philosophy is very plain, but if some cannot grasp 
it, at least let such grasp the fact that God declares it to 
be so, and let them return unto the Lord, and He will 
abundantly pardon. Let them ask for the guidance of the 
Spirit, and the anointing of the eyes, that they may be able 
to comprehend, with all saints, this, the Foundation of all 
the Grace of our God in Christ. Thus in true acceptance 
of the broken body and the shed blood— realizing that the 
Sacrifice was for their sins, and that the blood shed [life 
given] seals the pardon for all— let them commemorate 
the greatest event of history, the shedding of the precious 
blood, the sacrifice of the precious life of God's dear Son 
for our sins. Nevertheless, we know from God's Word 
that these words or any words will not succeed in turning 



back to the Way, the Truth and the Life those who have 
wilfully and knowingly gone out from under the "blood 
of sprinkling." There will be no pass-over for them. "It 
is impossible to renew them again unto repentance." 
(Heb. 6:4-10; 10:26-30.) We well know that even these 
words of loving admonition and these faithful references 
to the words of Inspiration will be attributed to hatred, 
malice, envy and every wicked feeling on our part, instead 
of to the real motive— a desire to serve the Lord and the 
Truth, and any brethren or sisters unwittingly stumbling. 
Many in the past have partaken of the emblems of the 
Lord's body and blood without fully appreciating the 
philosophy of the Ransom, who nevertheless did so with 
reverent appreciation of the fact that the death of our 
Redeemer had purged us from our guilt and relieved us 
from its penalty. Such discerned the real significance of 
the Memorial, though, because of gross errors associated 
with the Truth, they did not discern its simple philosophy 
as many of us may now do. 

ONLY THE BAPTIZED 

But some Baptist brother will perhaps remark: You 
have forgotten to mention baptism as a necessary qualification 
to partaking of the Memorial Supper. 

No, we have not forgotten baptism. We agree with 
you that the baptism is necessary— that the Memorial 
Supper is only for the Church; and that baptism is necessary 
before one can belong to the Church. But we differ 
with you as to what the Church is. We hold that the Baptist 
church is not the Church. Like all other churches 
organized and governed by fallen men, the Baptist church 
contains "tares" as well as "wheat"; but the Church contains 
wheat only. Surely no one will claim for any sect 
of Christendom that his sect contains all the "wheat" and 
no "tares." But the Church, "whose names are written in 
Heaven," includes all the "wheat," and has not a "tare" 
on its roll. This is the one Church which our Lord established, 
and of which all the Elect must become members— 
the Church passed-over— "The Church of the First-born 
ones, whose names are written in Heaven."— Heb. 12:23. 

Nor can we admit your claim with reference to baptism. 
The Scriptural view is still more exclusive than 
yours. You have in the membership of the Baptist church 
some who would be far from acceptable as members of 
the "Church of the First-borns." They passed your test 
of water-baptism, but they have not passed the test of the 
greater baptism which is required of all members of the 
Church whose names are written in Heaven. The real 
baptism is a baptism into Christ's Body— the Church— by 
a baptism or immersion into Christ's death, and a resurrection 
therefrom in His likeness. Water immersion is a 
beautiful symbol of the real immersion of the human 
will into the will of Christ, a beautiful illustration of a full 
sacrifice even unto death; but it is only an illustration or 
symbol— just as the bread and wine of the Supper are not 



the real life-giving elements of our Lord's sacrifice of 
which we are to eat, but merely their symbols. 

We agree, therefore, that none but the Church, the 
immersed, should partake of the Supper; but we recognize 
as really immersed all whose wills are dead and buried in 
the will of Christ, and who, as New Creatures in Him, are 
risen to walk in newness of life, while waiting for the 
consummation of their course in literal death, and their 
awakening as actual new beings in the First Resurrection. 
All such, whoever and wherever they may be, are the 
real members of Christ's Body, the Church, whether they 
have performed the enjoined water-symbol or not. Of 
course, when such consecrated ones, dead to their own 
wills and alive only to the will of Christ, come to see that 
our Lord's admonitions include the symbol of water immersion 
or burial, as well as the burial of their wills, they 
will be glad to follow and to obey their Head and Lord in 
all things— especially when as infants they were not "believers," 
and they now know that a drop of water could 
not in any degree symbolize burial and resurrection. Such 
as see the value and beauty of this injunction of God's 
Word should, if possible, be buried in water also (as our 
Lord and His Apostles showed us) before partaking of the 
Memorial Supper. See STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, Vol. 
VI, Study X, "The Baptism of the New Creation." 

Of course, we cannot hope that only true "wheat" will 
present themselves at the Lord's table; we expect that 
some "tares" will come also, as Judas was present at the 

R5194:page72 

first gathering. But since we cannot judge the heart, nor 
separate the "wheat" from the "tares," we fulfil the whole 
duty when we "declare the whole counsel of God" as 
revealed in His Word on this subject, and should leave the 
decision as to whether or not he partake to each individual 
who professes faith in the atoning blood and consecration 
to the Redeemer. 

HOW TO PARTAKE 

If there are in your neighborhood others of God's consecrated 
people besides yourself, you should know it. 
Your faithful love for them and for the Truth should 
have led you to seek them out to bless them with the 
Truth shortly after you yourself received it. If there are 
such with whom you can have communion and fellowship, 
invite them to join you in the Memorial, but not if you 
know them to be deniers of the Ransom, lest you assist in 
bringing additional condemnation upon them. 

Meet with few or many, as circumstances will permit, 
but better far with a few who can enter with you into the 
spirit of the Memorial, than with a throng devoid of that 
spirit of fellowship and union in Christ. 

Provide for the occasion, if possible, unleavened bread 
(or crackers), such as the Lord used, and such as Hebrews 



now use; because the pure, sweet, unleavened bread best 
symbolizes the sinless flesh of the Lamb of God, who 
knew no sin (of which leaven is a symbol), who was holy, 
harmless, undefiled and separate from the race of sinners. 
Provide some drink from "the fruit of the vine," as the 
Lord directed. Undoubtedly He and the disciples used 
light wines, and we regard wine as unquestionably the 
more appropriate symbol. But since our Lord did not 
stipulate wine, but merely the "fruit of the vine," we can 
conceive no objection that can be urged against the 
strained juice of boiled raisins, which are dried grapes. 
And surely this would be "the fruit of the vine" as really 
as wine is. 

We do not urge this raisin-liquor upon any who feel 
a conscientious desire to use wine; we merely remind 
all that our circumstances, climate, habits, etc., differ 
greatly from those of the early Church, and we very much 
doubt if our Lord would have us symbolize His blood 
with many of the intoxicating wines of our day— especially 
in view of the fact that some of the saints may have 
inherited weakness of the flesh, which one taste might 
re-enkindle into a great temptation. "Let each judge not 
to cast a stumbling-block before his brother." If wine is 
conscientiously preferred, choose a light wine, or mix a 
little wine with the raisin-juice. 

The Memorial service should be very simple— it is 
chiefly a season of communion. Have a table in the midst 
of the assembly for the bread and wine. After the singing 
of a hymn, one of the brethren should, in a few 
chosen words, express the object of the service and read 
a few verses from the Scriptures on the subject. Another 
might then give thanks for the Bread of Life, the 
broken body of our Lord; after which the unleavened 
bread (or soda biscuit if more convenient) should be 
passed to all the communicants. An opportunity for remarks 
on the Bread of Life might here be given, or an 
extract from STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, Vol. VI, Study 
XL Then a prayer of thanks for the "cup," and for the 
precious blood symbolized in it, should be offered, and the 
cup of "fruit of the vine" passed. Here an opportunity 
might be given for remarks on the precious blood. But 
avoid discussions at this meeting. However appropriate 
to contend earnestly for the faith on other occasions, this 
is not such an occasion. This is a meeting for fellowship 
and communion with the Lord, our Redeemer and present 
King. If any seem contentious, let him have his say, and 
let the others refrain from discussion, that the holy moments 
of special communion with Himself, which the Master 

R5195 : page 72 

appointed for our blessing, be not marred. 

Those who celebrate the Memorial with guileless, 
earnest hearts receive a great and refreshing blessing, 
and for this it is well to have seasons of quiet in the 
midst of the service, when no one will be speaking audibly 



and when the hearts of all can come very close to the 
Master in communion— in realization of His love, past 
and present, in renewing the pledge made to be His faithful 
follower even unto death, in considering how that 
pledge has been kept or violated during the year preceding, 
and in resolving afresh to run with patience the race 
for the prize of joint-heirship with our Lord, to which we 
are invited. 

A beautifully appropriate hymn for closing the Memorial 
is No. 276 in our hymn-book. And it will surely add to 
our joy to realize that some of like precious faith in all 
parts of the world are celebrating the same great Sacrifice, 
thinking of the same gracious Lord, being comforted and 
encouraged by the same exceeding great and precious 
promises, resolving by the grace of the same gracious King 
to do greater service and to make greater sacrifices in His 
service and in the service of His people thenceforth, and 
closing with the same song of praise and worship. 

"Sweet the moments, rich in blessing, 

Thus before the cross we'll spend; 
Life and health and peace possessing 

From the sinner's risen Friend." 

Of the first Supper it is written: "They sang a hymn 
and went out." Let us do the same. Let each go to his 
home with his heart full. We suggest the omission on 
this occasion of the usual, general and proper after-meeting 
greetings, and all commonplace remarks and thoughts. 
Thus we may prolong our communion and fellowship with 
the Master. Keep within sight of Him throughout the 
next day. Hear the clamor of the people against the 
guileless One. See them incited by the clergy of Jerusalem. 
See Him before Herod and his soldiers. See Him 
arrayed in robes of mock -royalty and crowned with 
thorns, then buffeted and spat upon. 

See Him crucified as a criminal, and taunted with the 
very gracious deeds which He had performed— "He saved 
others, Himself He cannot save." Remember that He 
could have saved Himself; that He could have asked for 
and would have received, "more than twelve legions of 
angels," to deliver and protect Him; that He could have 
destroyed His enemies and vilifiers, instead of dying for 
them; and that our hope of a resurrection and everlasting 
life depended upon His willing offering of Himself as our 
Ransom-Price. Considering His love for us and for all, 
it will surely strengthen us as His followers to endure 
more and more hardness as good soldiers of the cross. 
Aye, let us consider Him who endured such contradiction 
of sinners against Himself, lest we become weary and faint 
in our minds, under the light afflictions now permitted for 
our trial and discipline, which, if faithfully endured, will 
work out a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. 

THE CELEBRATION AT BROOKLYN, N.Y. 



As usual, the Church at Brooklyn will celebrate "Christ 
our Passover slain for us." The service will be in the 
Brooklyn Academy of Music (Lafayette avenue, near 
subway and all car lines), because Brooklyn Tabernacle is 
not of sufficient capacity. The services will begin at 8 
p.m. sharp, Sunday, April 20. 

All devoted believers in Jesus' great Sin-Atonement are 
cordially invited to meet with us and partake of this Memorial 

R5195 : page 73 

—no matter how baptized, and no matter to which 
denomination they are attached, or whether free from all. 
The Lord's Table is for all who are His. 

Disabled or sick brethren can be supplied with the 
emblems at their homes by sending post-card request to 
the Brooklyn Tabernacle. 



THE SACRIFICIAL LOAF AND CUP 

A broken loaf— a cup of crimson wine, 

On snowy table laid, 
Ah! emblems these of wondrous sacrifice— 

The costly price, He paid! 
That precious body, broken once for me, 

That precious blood once spilt — 
For me, that I through Him might be made free, 

Aye, free— from death and guilt! 

And has this broken loaf, this crimson wine, 

A further meaning still? 
Ah, yes! thro' grace I am a part of Him, 

His sufferings to fulfil. 
My body to be broken with my Lord, 

My blood with His be shed, 
And as I die with Him, with Him I live, 

My ever glorious Head! 

O wondrous mystery! O glorious thought! 

Thro' death with Him I rise! 
Suffering with Him, I with Him too shall reign, 

Triumphant in the skies ! 
Yet on this night— before this snowy board, 

Spread with this bread and wine, 
Canst thou say truly, O my soul, my soul, 

"These promises are mine"? 

Is all thy will completely blent with His, 

Whate'er may be that will? 
Art willing to be crushed, that thy life's wine 

May thus flow out to fill 
And bless and nourish other lives than thine, 

That they may bud and flower? 
Art glad and thankful that thy broken life 



Shall have vicarious power? 

And canst thou to His precious will say "Yes," 

E'en tho' with tear-dimmed eyes 
And quivering lips of pain and throbbing heart? 

And when His love denies 
What thy poor heart had thought its very own, 

And brings to thee instead 
Experiences thou canst not understand— 

A pathway hard to tread- 
Wilt thou still say "Amen," and trust Him still, 

And wait in patient love, 
Till He shall say, "It is enough, My child, 

Come to thy Home above"? 
And when His Truth is ridiculed and scorned, 

And His dear "Servant," like his blessed Lord, 
Is spat upon, and crowned with thorns, dost thou 

REJOICE yet more to own His Word? 

"Yes, yes!" my glad heart answers, "I REJOICE 

This privilege sweet to own! 
And I will kiss my cross, and wait Thy time, 

Dear Lord, to share Thy Throne." 
Then, oh my soul, these emblems are for thee— 

This broken loaf, this wine— 
And thou may'st claim His precious promises, 

For they are truly thine. 

The hour is late— the end is drawing nigh— 

And as we gather here, 
Brethren beloved, to share this holy feast, 

We know the time is near 
When all His loved ones shall be gathered Home, 

Our tears all wiped away, 
And all the shadows that oppress us here 

Shall yield to perfect day. 
Then with rejoicing let us now partake, 

Our journey's almost o'er; 
The light is breaking o'er the Heavenly hills! 

Our King is at the door! 

ALICE G. JAMES. 



R5195 : page 73 

THE CHURCH'S PART IN THE SIN-OFFERING 

"Christ also suffered for you, leaving you an example, that 
ye should follow His steps."— 1 Pet. 2:21. R.V. 

HUMANITY is imperfect, unsatisfactory to 
God, condemned to death. In one sense of 
the word, therefore, it has not merit; for 
God would not condemn that which has 



value. In another sense, however, God must 

perceive something in the fallen race which 

can be made acceptable to Himself, else He 

would not have made provision for the redemption 

of mankind. The very fact that 

He has provided a Redeemer for the human 

race is a proof that mankind are not totally depraved, although 

R5196 : page 73 

there is not a sufficiency of good qualities to make 
any one of them worthy of everlasting life. But each one 
has a little merit of his own, and this God intends to preserve 
and make valuable. 

The process of making valuable what little of the 
original perfection any human being may have retained, 
is called justification. In God's Plan of the Ages, a thousand 
years are apportioned to the work of bringing mankind 
up to perfection, so that God can accept them and 
give them everlasting life. This period is the Millennium. 
Meantime, during the Gospel Age, a certain class called 
out from the world have a different provision made for 
them, by which they are now reckoned perfect through the 
imputation of the merit of Christ. 

Even an unjustified person has some inherent merit. 
It would seem that the quality which God values most is 
an honest heart. Indeed we may say that one's worthiness 
is in proportion to his honesty, his truthfulness. Whenever 
an honest-hearted person begins to realize his sinful 
condition and to long for reconciliation with God, he will 
find that the Word of God directs all such to look to the 
Savior of mankind. 

The Lord Jesus does not spurn sinners who evince a 
desire to forsake sin and to approach Him. By their 
measure of faith and obedience all such are justified to fellowship 
with Him; as it is written, "No man cometh unto 
the Father, but by Me." (John 14:6.) He invites sinners 
to have confidence in Him as a Burden-bearer, saying, 
"Come unto Me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, 
and I will give you rest. Take My yoke upon you and 
learn of Me. "-Matt. 11:28,29. 

All thus approaching God have a measure of peace and 
justification, but neither in full; so they may be said to be 
tentatively justified; that is, justified for a purpose. To 
all such God says, "If you will believe this message of My 
grace to the extent that you will consecrate whatever of 
the original perfection you possess, I will deal with you 
as if you had the full amount of human perfection. If 
you by faith will present your body a living sacrifice 
(Rom. 12:1,2), even if that body is not worth more than 
one-third or one-half the full value of human perfection, 
nevertheless, I will impute enough of Christ's merit to 
supply your deficiency. Thus you may be counted as possessing 
the whole— as if you actually had one hundred per 
cent, of perfection." 

Only during the Gospel Age is this wonderful offer 



made. The amount of merit necessary to bring the believer 

up to the standard of justification, or righteousness, 

where he will be acceptable to God, is exactly in proportion 

R5196 : page 74 

to his deficiency. If the one presenting himself in 
sacrifice possesses but thirty per cent, our Lord will impute 
to him seventy per cent, to make up one hundred per 
cent, which represents perfection. If he has sixty-five or 
forty-five per cent., there will be imputed thirty-five or 
fifty-five per cent., as may be required to bring him up to 
the full standard of righteousness. 

In other words, when one enters into a contract that 
he will lay down his life in sacrifice, our Lord indorses 
him to the extent of his inability, or imputes to him enough 
of His merit to make up his deficiency, that his offering 
may be acceptable. This deficiency is not made up actually, 
but reckonedly, for the purpose of enabling him to 
present his sacrifice and of permitting Justice to accept it. 
Our Lord, who now has become the Advocate, makes up 
to each of the Church what he lacks of being a perfect 
human being. 

THE HOLY SPIRIT THE EVIDENCE OF ACCEPTANCE 

Complete peace and justification are obtainable only 
when the tentatively justified enter into a definite contract, 
or covenant, with God and present their bodies as 
living sacrifices. Of each who resolves to do thus, Divine 
Justice says, "That person is imperfect and therefore incompetent 
to enter into a contract of this kind; but if the 
Lord Jesus Christ will indorse him, the contract may be 
made." "Very well," says the Lord, "I indorse his note. 
If he does not die voluntarily, according to his agreement, 
I guarantee that he shall nevertheless die; for I will see 
that the contract is carried out. If he resists the enforced 
destruction of his flesh, and thus proves his unworthiness 
of life, he will go into the Second Death." 

As each consecrated believer presents himself for sacrifice, 
the great Redeemer imputes to him the merit of His 
own sacrifice, in order to make him acceptable to the 
Father. After the Father has accepted the offering, He 
immediately imparts to him the Holy Spirit, by which he 
is begotten to a new nature. This impartation of the Holy 
Spirit is the evidence that the sacrifice has been accepted. 

Thus the merit of Christ is imputed to every one who 
presents himself in full consecration during the "acceptable 
time"— the Gospel Age. Those who offer themselves 
through the great Redeemer are not, however, accepted in 
the full sense of the word, until they reach the end of the 
journey of life; for they may fail to make their calling 
and election sure. Their standing, therefore, is one of faith, 
not of works. Whatever there is of good in them is acceptable 
to God through the merit of Christ, their Advocate. 

The basis of this reconciliation arranged by God is the 



death of our Lord Jesus Christ as a Ransom— a corresponding 
price— for Adam, who forfeited his life through 
disobedience. This price our Lord has already placed in 
the hands of Justice to be applied for the world in due 
time. Meanwhile this merit, which is to bring Restitution 
to the world eventually, is now imputed to the Church, to 
cover our imperfections and shortcomings and thus to 
permit us to get rid of the earthly nature and to come into 
the Heavenly nature. 

In this transaction our Lord accepts us as New Creatures, 
members of His Body, and our flesh as His flesh. 
Therefore the sacrifice of the flesh of the Church is a 
continuation of that of His own flesh. As human beings 
we have to give up our wills altogether; and under this 
arrangement we are henceforth members of His Body. 
From this standpoint He counts our blood, our death, as 
a part of His own, and associates us with Him in the glorious 
promises. 

Let us get the thought well established in our minds 
that while no sacrifice on our part is necessary to the salvation 
of the world, as all the merit is in our Lord Jesus, 
yet according to the Divine Plan, which the Lord is working 
out, the Church is permitted to share with her Lord 
in the sacrifices of the present time— not as individuals, 
not in a personal sense, but as members of His Body. All 
the while, however, it is our Lord's own merit which 
makes the Church acceptable. 

THE CHURCH'S SHARE IN THE SIN-OFFERING 

The question may be asked, What has the Church to 
do with the Sin-Offering? We reply that we would not 
know what part they have if God had not shown us by 
making a picture in the Atonement Day sacrifices. Israel's 
Atonement Day prefigured typically the work to be 
done by The Messiah— the reconciliation of God and mankind. 
The Day of Atonement had various features. It 
began with the sacrifice of a bullock, which typified the 
offering of the Lord Jesus Christ on behalf of the Church. 
The blood of the bullock was sprinkled on the Mercy Seat 
for the priest and his house, typifying the entire Household 
of Faith. 

Then the Household of Faith was represented by two 
goats. One of these goats went through experiences exactly 
similar to those of the bullock. This goat represented 
that class of believers who daily follow in the footsteps 
of the Lord, who are sharers with Him in His sufferings 
and who will also partake of the glories to follow. 
-Rom. 12:1,2; Heb. 13:11-13. 

The other goat represented that class of consecrated 
believers who do not go voluntarily to death, but who, 
without turning to sin, fail to make a willing sacrifice. 
Therefore this class is treated as the scape-goat and driven 
into the wilderness condition for tribulation experiences. 
St. Paul seems to refer to this class when he says that 
some are thus dealt with that the spirit may be saved in 



the Day of the Lord Jesus.— I Cor. 5:5. 

Because the Scriptures picture the Lord and the Church 
as the Sin-Offering, therefore we believe it. St. Paul 
addresses the Church as the antitypical goat class when he 
says, "The bodies of those beasts, whose blood is brought 
into the Sanctuary by the high priest for sin, are burned 
without the camp. Wherefore Jesus also, that He might 
sanctify the people with His own blood, suffered without 
the gate. Let us go forth, therefore, unto Him without the 
camp, bearing His reproach."— Heb. 13:11-13. 

What beasts were thus treated? Only the bullock and 
the Lord's goat. The Apostle plainly states that Jesus was 
typified by one of these beasts, and urges the Church— 
the "Us" class— to go forth unto Him without the camp, 
thus antityping the Lord's goat. Let us then go forth; 
let us walk in His footsteps, bearing His reproach with 
Him; for "if we suffer [with Him] we shall also reign 
with Him"— shall be glorified together.— 2 Tim. 2:11,12. 

THE CHURCH'S SACRIFICE OF EARTHLY RIGHTS 

The merit of our Lord's sacrifice resides in the fact 
that, having maintained His righteous standard throughout 
His earthly ministry, and having sacrificially given up 
His life, He has that right to life on the human plane at 
His disposal. That right He has given into the hands of 
Justice, to constitute the basis of the imputation to the 
Church of whatever each member may need to make up 
for his deficiency. As soon as the Church has completed 
her sacrifice, and has passed beyond the veil, this merit will 
be released for application on behalf of the world. 

The Church's part in the Sin-Offering, therefore, is 
that she receives, as a reward for her faith and obedience, 
the privilege of sacrificing with her Lord. Her share is 
thus accomplished when she presents herself a living 
sacrifice. The Lord's part begins when He accepts the 

R5197 : page 75 

offering. He stands sponsor for His Church and, as the 
Advocate, becomes responsible for those under His care. 

Those who are called the Church are privileged to participate 
in the sacrifices of the present and in the glorious 
work of the future. A part of that future work will be 
the sealing of the New Covenant. The Church will have 
a share in this sealing in the same sense in which she has 
a share with her Lord in His glory. The entire merit is 
in the Lord; and by His grace we are what we are and 
have part in the glorious work. By virtue of membership 
in the Body of Christ in glory, the Church have part in 
the Sin-Offering and are sharers of all that is Christ's, including 
the work which He will accomplish. 

When we present ourselves as living sacrifices, we 
make consecration unto death and consequently, if accepted, 
lose forever all right to life on the human plane. 
We present our bodies that we may become priests of the 



new order, or profession, under the great High Priest, to 
whom we have given our lives. If He accepts them, we 
have nothing more to do with them. He has all title to our 
earthly rights. We do not hold over those rights. In 
other words, we cease to be; we are beheaded, so far as all 
earthly hopes or aims are concerned. By virtue of His 
perfection, our Lord has a right to everlasting life. We 
never had a right to everlasting life, but are enabled to 
present ourselves because of His acceptance of our sacrifices 
as His own. 

Our thought, then, in presenting ourselves must be 
that we are presented for sacrifice— not that we can compel 
the Lord to accept our sacrifice, but that we are willing, 
desirous, that He should accept it. It does not follow, 
however, that He must accept it, nor that we have 
anything to do with the ultimate results. We do not set 
ourselves apart merely to serve righteousness— to do right 
and to deal justly with our neighbor. This is true of 
the Jew, whose Law Covenant binds him to do this. But 
it is not so with us; for "flesh and blood cannot inherit 
the Kingdom of God." (I Cor. 15:50.) Therefore we 
purpose that by the assisting grace in Christ we will present 
our bodies sacrifices even unto death, that according 
to His covenant with us, He may exalt us in due time. 
(I Pet. 5:6.) We do not merely forsake sin, but give up 
that to which we have a right in earthly interests. 

THE WORK OF THE ADVOCATE 

It may be said that the Lord Jesus becomes the Sympathizer 
to those who believe in Him, even before they 
present themselves in consecration. But this sympathy is 
a very different matter from the Advocacy, a term which 
bears the thought of rendering assistance from the store 
of grace to enable the individual to come into the spirit 
begotten condition and to maintain his standing there. 

The term Advocate signifies a friendly and competent 
representative. If we employ an attorney, he goes into 
court for us and puts himself down as our advocate, to 
appear for us in any case that might come up against us. 
If we should need his assistance, we would cause word 
to be sent to him, as our attorney. 

Our Lord's work as Advocate for the Church began 
when He appeared in the presence of God and made application 
of His precious blood on behalf of all those who 
come unto the Father by Him throughout the Gospel Age. 
(Heb. 9:24.) Individually, He becomes our Advocate 
when we come into the acceptable condition by presenting 
ourselves as living sacrifices. This matter of the imputation 
of the merit of Christ to us and of our demerit to 
Him is, strictly speaking, one with which we have nothing 
to do. It is the Father's arrangement. God does not 
recognize us at all; for we are by nature sinners. He 
could not accept our sacrifices except as He imputes to us 
merit which we do not possess, but which our Head has 
provided. In this sense, our Lord's merit is said to be imputed 



to us and our demerit to Him. 

If A pays something on B's account, B's account is 
credited with the amount and A's is debited. Whatever 
is imputed to one in the way of merit is counted to the 
other by way of demerit. The merit of our Lord, which is 
to go ultimately to the world, is to this extent temporarily 
charged with our shortcomings, and will not be released 
until we shall have fulfilled our part of the covenant. 

BLEMISHES, SPOTS AND WRINKLES DEFINED 

The Robe of Christ's Righteousness, otherwise termed 
the Wedding Garment, is a very beautiful figure of speech 
illustrative of a certain great truth. Since only the New 
Creatures, only those begotten of the Holy Spirit, are 
granted this Robe, and since these are not under condemnation 
and are not reckoned according to the flesh, it 
would not be an improper form of statement to say that 
they have no sin. "Whosoever is begotten of God doeth 
no sin. "--I John 3:9. R.V. 

If the New Creature were to sin, the penalty of death 
would be incurred. Sin on the part of the New Creature 
would signify a change of will, a change of mind; and the 
New Creature would cease to be. The Robe of Christ's 
Righteousness does not cover the imperfections of the 
New Creature; for the New Creature never had any imperfection. 
In God's sight the New Creature has a standing, 
and is pure, spotless. The flesh is not the New Creature, 
but the old, which is reckoned dead, and then, as 
St. Paul says, is also reckoned alive as revived or quickened. 
-Eph. 2:1-7; Col. 2:13; Rom. 6:4. 

Our quickened flesh, then, by the grace of God is represented 
as pure, desirable in His sight, and in proper 
condition for the marriage— the union with Christ. Whatever 
spots might appear on this Robe would, of course, be 
as figurative as the Robe itself, and would represent blemishes. 
These would not be ours as New Creatures, but 
would result from the fact that for the time being the 
New Creature must tabernacle in the flesh, until it is 
given its new body. 

Blemishes are the weaknesses and imperfections of the 
flesh. Spots are not those wrong-doings of which we are 
unconscious, but those which we seem to recognize as 
contrary to the will of God. These spots may be of different 
sizes, representing discrepancies, or various degrees 
of imperfection. In addition to these weaknesses, 
failings, faults and mistakes, there may be some little 
carelessness, indolence, neglect of using an opportunity. 
These may be considered, not as blemishes or spots, but as 
wrinkles on the Robe of Christ's Righteousness. 

St. Paul seems to wish to give us the thought of the 
absolute purity of the class that will ultimately be presented 
to the Father by our Lord, when he says that the 
Church will not have a spot or wrinkle or any such thing, 
but will be "holy and without blemish." (Eph. 5:27.) 
This figure, of course, represents perfection of mind; for 



our bodies cannot be brought to that condition, because of 
the fall of Adam. All mankind are born in sin and shapen 
in iniquity.— Psa. 51:5. 

THE NECESSITY OF POSSESSING A TENDER CONSCIENCE 

It is the duty of the New Creature to detect the imperfections, 
errors and shortcomings of the flesh, and to go 
immediately to the Throne of the Heavenly Grace with 
them, to obtain mercy and forgiveness. Only those with 
tender consciences will keep their garments unspotted. 
The failure to do this seems to be the reason why many 

R5197 : page 76 

fail to make their "calling and election sure." They are 
not particular about these little things; they are careless 
of opportunities, etc. Thus their robes become spotted and 
quite unfit for the marriage ceremony. 

The Scriptures show us that this class will go through 
a time of great trouble, during which they will do what 
they failed to do at the proper time— "wash their robes and 
make them white in the blood of the Lamb." (Rev. 7:14.) 
By this process of purification, they will come up and will 
bear palm branches instead of wearing crowns of glory. 
Instead of being members of the Temple class, they will 
be servants in the Temple. 

The Robe of Christ's Righteousness, the figurative expression 
which means the imputation of the merit of 
Christ to those who are accepted as members of His Body, 
is not only styled "the Wedding Garment" (Matt. 22:11-14), 
but is also beautifully pictured as the Bridal Robe. 
(Psa. 45:13,14.) There we read that the Bride will be 
brought before the great King in garments of needlework. 
Thus we get the thought that while this Robe is 
provided for us when first we become members of the 
family of God and of the prospective Bride of Christ, 
nevertheless, there is an individual work for each to 
accomplish. 

This special work is represented as embroidery. The 
design we as Christians are to trace with painstaking zeal; 
for it requires great skill, close attention. This Robe of 
Christ's Righteousness, which is represented as being ours 
in the sight of God, will continue to be ours throughout 
the everlasting future. It will no longer be ours by imputation, 
but by right of possession. By that time we 
shall have made our characters, by the grace and assistance 
of the Lord, copies of the character of God's 
dear Son, our Redeemer. Then we shall no longer need 
the imputation of Christ's merit to cover our blemishes; 
for the new body which we shall receive in the Resurrection 
will be without spot or wrinkle— without blemish. 
It will be perfect. 



R5198 : page 76 

THE SALE OF A BIRTHRIGHT 

--APRIL 6.-GENESIS 27:22-34.- 

"Esau...for one morsel of meat sold his birthright. For 

ye know how that afterward, when he would have inherited 

the blessing, he was rejected."— Hebrews 12:16,17. 

IN OLDEN TIMES, and still in some countries, 
the birthright belonged to the firstborn 
son. At the father's death the oldest son 
took his place at the head of the family; 
and the property, usually consisting of flocks 
and herds, became his possession. But today's 
lesson introduces us to a birthright 
which included much more than the earthly 
possessions. It included the inheritance of 
certain great Divine promises. 

Abraham's estate went to Isaac, the others of the family 
receiving portions of it of and through him. Abraham 
was very rich, but the possession which he prized more 
than all earthly things was the Divine Promise, or Covenant, 
made with him— that the blessing of the Lord would 
specially be upon his seed, his posterity; and that eventually 
all nations of the earth would be blessed and favored 
of God through them. 

This great promise Isaac had inherited. At the time of 
our lesson he was more than a hundred years old, and 
blind. He realized that the time had come for him to 
give his blessing to his heir, which blessing served as instead 
of a written will— the custom of today. He therefore 
instructed Esau, the hunter, to prepare him a special 
dinner of venison; thus to prepare to receive his blessing. 

Isaac had two sons, Esau and Jacob— twins, Esau being 
the elder by a few moments only. But these twins, contrary 
to what is usual, were very dissimilar. Esau was 
hairy and ruddy, full of vigor, athletic, a hunter. Jacob 
was the reverse of this— smooth-skinned, dark-complexioned, 
a tent-man, or home-keeper, as in contrast with a 
hunter. Jacob seems to have inherited the qualities of his 
father, Esau more the vivacity of his mother. As temperamental 
opposites agree best, Isaac loved Esau most; while 
Rebecca, the mother, loved Jacob best. 

The quiet, studious Jacob thought frequently of the 
great blessing God had promised to his grandfather Abraham, 
a share in which he apparently had missed by an 
accident of birth— by a few minutes only. The more he 
studied, the more he realized the value of that great 
Promise. Esau, on the contrary, full of animal spirit, 
thought more of the pleasures of the present life, and 
considered the Divine Promise as quite secondary and 
rather visionary. 

These two men had passed thirty years of age, we 
know not how much. Esau was looking forward to his inheritance 



of the bulk of his father's property. Jacob, humiliated 
by his misfortune of birth, was downcast. He 
was fond of lentil soup, and had made some for himself. 
Just as he was about to partake, his brother Esau arrived 
on the scene hungry, having just returned from a chase, 
and begged to have Jacob's soup. 

Then Jacob said to Esau, in substance, "You have 
every advantage. I have nothing but this soup. If you 
are willing, we will change places. You can have the 
soup and I will take the advantages." Esau replied, "I am 
tired to death, anyway. Give me the soup." Jacob answered, 
"I mean it, though, solemnly. If you swear that you 
will transfer the birthright to me, we will settle this matter; 
and the soup will be yours." Careless Esau swore away 
his birthright for a mess of pottage, and thus signified that 
he had no particular faith in God or in His promises. 

Time passed. Esau married heathen wives when he 
was forty, and his father Isaac a hundred years old. A 
little later than this came the denouement— the imparting 
of the blessing to the one who bought, to the chagrin 
and anger of the one who most solemnly sold it. 

Rebecca, the mother, had heard Isaac's instruction to 
Esau, and remembered that the birthright had been sold 
under oath to Jacob, her favorite. She explained the situation 
to Jacob and assured him, as his mother, that he 
would be right in personifying his brother Esau and receiving 
the blessing as his proxy or representative. She 
prepared the kind of stew which Isaac preferred, using 
the skins of kids to cover Jacob's neck and hands, that 
thus his father might mistake him for Esau. As he had 
bought all of Esau's rights, she thought it not improper 
to clothe him with Esau's garments, and instructed him 
that any blame coming from the deception would be hers. 
She took the entire responsibility. Jacob carried out the 
program and got the chief blessing. 

Esau came in later with his venison stew, prepared to 
violate his contract made under oath, and was greatly disappointed 
to learn that the blessing was gone. It seemed 
more valuable then than when he had sold it. Although 
he received an inferior blessing from his father, he had the 
spirit of murder toward his brother for carrying out the 
terms and conditions incident to the birthright sale. 

R5198 : page 77 

EARTHLY LOSS SPIRITUAL GAIN 

The account shows that Jacob's interest in the birthright 
blessing was not in the temporal or earthly inheritance, 
but in the spiritual Promise with which he was 
connected. He left his home and all the property to which 
he was heir, and went penniless to work for his uncle. 
Esau might have all the earthly possessions. Jacob carried 
with him, wherever he went, the birthright privilege 
of the Promise made to Abraham. This could not be 
alienated from him. With this he was rich. 



St. Paul calls our attention to the fact that all these 
results were foreknown to God; and that at the birth of 
these two men it had been specifically declared that the 
elder should serve the younger. (Romans 9:10-13.) No 
doubt this Divine prophecy guided Rebecca in opposing 
and thwarting Isaac's love for Esau, which impelled him 
to give the blessing to the elder son, notwithstanding the 
Divine prophecy to the contrary.— Genesis 25:23. 

JACOB LOVED-ESAU LOVED LESS 

It is not for us to defend Jacob and his mother in their 
misrepresentation of the facts— in the deception of Isaac. 
It is not for us to recommend any others to follow his 
course. Nevertheless, it is proper that we should notice 
that the Bible distinctly tells us that God's loving favor 
was with Jacob. "Jacob have I loved." He was loved 
because of his reverential love for God and the great 
Oath-bound Promise. 

Not a word of condemnation is given to Jacob anywhere 
in respect to this matter. No teacher in the name 
of the Lord, therefore, has the right to be wiser than what 
is written in God's Word. On the contrary, Esau is 
roundly denounced, and is called profane and wicked, because 
he would sell his birthright for a mess of pottage, 
or any other consideration. The love of Jacob for the 
birthright is held up for our emulation. Esau's carelessness 
is held up as a warning that if any of us are careless 
of our birthright, we shall not only lose it, but lose the 
favor of God.— Hebrews 12:15-17. 

THE LESSON OF THE LOST BIRTHRIGHT 

The Apostle calls our attention to the fact that the experiences 
of these two men in the long ago were designed 
of the Lord to be typical. Abraham's natural seed is indeed 
to have a blessing, represented by Esau's blessing; 
but Abraham's Spiritual Seed is to have the greater blessing, 
typified by Jacob's inheritance. The earthly seed 
inherit the earthly blessings. The Spiritual Seed give up 
all their earthly rights, that they may be possessors of the 
spiritual promises, which the natural man cares not for. 

The Apostle points out that this does not apply merely 
to the Natural Israelite, but to all who, after having had 
the privileges and opportunities of becoming joint-heirs 
with Christ in His Messianic Kingdom, love the pleasures 
of this world. These are represented as selling their 
birthright on the spirit plane for a mess of pottage- 
earthly advantage. 

The Abrahamic Promise is still the one, and the only 
one, held out by the Almighty. Messiah is the Seed of 
Abraham, through whom all of God's blessings must come. 
Jesus is the Head and the Church are the members of the 
Body, as St. Paul points out: "If ye be Christ's, then are 
ye Abraham's Seed, and heirs according to the [Abrahamic] 
Promise."— Gal. 3:29. 



To the Jew first, came the opportunity for constituting 
this Spiritual Seed; but the vast majority loved and 
trusted more the things of the present life. The few loved 
and trusted Jesus and became His followers. Since the 
door to this "high calling" has been thrown open to the 
Gentiles, the results have been the same; the majority 
have loved the present life; the few have appreciated the 
things unseen as yet. 

To the saintly few represented by Jacob, the obtaining 
of this life-right means self-sacrifice, the loss of earthly 
favors— the surrender of these to others who love the 
present world. To others it means the getting of a mess 
of pottage— earthly advantages of the present time— and 
the losing of a great prize, which Jesus likened to a 
"pearl of great price," to obtain which we should be willing 
to sell all we possess— to obtain a share in Messiah's 
Kingdom, which shortly is to bless Israel and all the world. 

No one can sell his birthright until he has a birthright. 
Hence the application of this in antitype is merely to the 
consecrated people of God. Only those who have been 
begotten of the Holy Spirit have a birthright in the 
highest sense. And only these could sell it for the mess 
of pottage. The world may strive for its various prizes 
and pearls, and is measurably justified in so doing, because 
it has nothing else. 

But the spirit-begotten heirs of the Divine Promise 
became such by promising absolute loyalty to the Lord and 

R5199 : page 77 

to the principles of Justice and Mercy. These must self-sacrificingly 

continue to walk in the Master's footsteps; 

else they cannot share with Him the glorious outcome. 

Only those who attain a share in the Kingdom will have 

a share in its wonderful work of blessing and uplifting 

humanity. Let us, then, as the Apostle exhorts, lay aside 

every weight and every besetting sin, and run with 

patience the race set before us in the Gospel, looking unto 

Jesus, the Author of our faith, until He shall become the 

Finisher of it.— Hebrews 12:1-3. 



R5199 : page 77 

THE GATE OF HEAVEN 

-APRIL 13.-GENESIS 28:10-22.- 

"I am with thee and will keep thee, 
whithersoever thou goest."— V.15. 

OUR LESSON relates to the Patriarch Jacob. 
He was something over forty years of age 
at the time he left home, forsaking all the 
family possessions which belonged to his 



purchased birthright. He counted all earthly 

possessions as insignificant in value 

compared with the great Promise made to 

Abraham, of which he had become heir. 

That his brother Esau cared nothing for the 

spiritual Promise and was quite content to get possession 

of the earthly inheritance of Isaac, is manifest from the 

subsequent story. 

In his journey toward Haran, Jacob lighted upon the 
little town of Luz. Following the custom of many in Palestine 
today, he did not ask for lodgings, but merely placed 
a stone for his pillow, wrapped himself in his outer mantle, 
and lay down in a quiet place to sleep. He had always 
been the home boy, the philosopher, his mother's pet; and 
although he was now a man in years, we are to remember 
that the race was longer-lived at that time and slower 
of maturity, by about one-half. Practically he was just 
entering manhood's estate. His deep religious convictions, 
his faith in the God of his father and his grandfather, 
his desire for a share of the Divine blessing, had 
made him an outcast. Doubtless he felt lonesome and 
heart-sick. He was leaving the only friends he had in the 
world, and going forth practically penniless, to find some 
kind of service. 

R5199 : page 78 

"JACOB HAVE I LOVED" 

This is the Scriptural statement and is borne out by the 
Lord's dealings with Jacob. He had shown his courage, 
his devotion, his faith. God would reward him. At this 
time he was needing encouragement, and therefore was 
given a dream of beautiful import. In the dream he saw 
a ladder extending from his side clear up into Heaven. 
It was crowded with angels going and coming. 

At its further end, in his mind he saw the God of 
Glory and heard Him speak; and the words were wonderful 
—full of interest and encouragement. God here gave 
Jacob the assurance that not only had he secured his 
father Isaac's blessing, but that God recognized the transfer 
—recognized him as the legal heir to the great Abrahamic 
Promise, which is the basis of all hopes, Jewish and 
Christian, for themselves and all the kindreds of the earth. 

God's message was: "I am the Lord God of Abraham 
and the God of Isaac, thy father; the land whereon thou 
liest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed; and thy seed 
shall be as the dust of the earth, and thou shalt spread 
abroad to the east, and to the west, and to the north, and 
to the south; and in thee and in thy Seed shall all the 
families of the earth be blessed. And behold, I am with 
thee, and will keep thee in all places whither thou goest, 
and will bring thee again into this land; for I will not 
leave thee, until I have done that which I have spoken." 

This phraseology is much the same that was given to 
Abraham and was confirmed to Isaac. Now it was confirmed 



to Jacob. He was thenceforth in Covenant relationship 

to God. Better than he knew, all his efforts would 

be so supervised as to work together for his highest welfare. 

NEITHER A JEW NOR A CHRISTIAN 

Jacob was not a Christian; and we are not to think 
for a moment of the Lord's providences over him as being 
of the same kind as those of the Church of this Gospel 
Age. He was not invited to be a sharer of the "high calling." 
He was not promised a change of nature to 
Heavenly condition by resurrection, or in any other way. 
All of the promises to him were earthly, as were those 
made to Abraham. 

Neither was Jacob a Jew. There were no Jews yet. 
The nation subsequently called Israel and afterwards 
known as the people of the Jews were Jacob's children; 
but they were not yet born. They became a distinctive 
people and nation not merely by being Jacob's children, 
but by being brought into Covenant relationship with God 
through Moses and the Law Covenant of Sinai. 

Thus we see that the patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac and 
Jacob, not under the Law Covenant, and not under the 
Gospel arrangement, constituted a class by themselves. 
To them especially (and in conjunction with them some 
of the noble Prophets and worthies of the Jewish Age) 
belonged certain great promises of God in respect to the 
land of Canaan and the blessing of the world. Not being 
a part of the spirit-begotten Church of this Gospel Age, 
they can have no share with Messiah in His Spiritual 
Kingdom, which shortly is to bind Satan, overthrow sin, 
scatter darkness and superstition and flood the world 
with a knowledge of God. They were not invited to share 
this "high calling." 

However, a special call, or invitation, or promise, was 
made to them, not made to any others. In fulfilment of 
that Promise, these patriarchs are to be granted human 
perfection in the resurrection; and being made superior 
to the remainder of humanity, they will be qualified to be 
the princes or rulers of all the earth, representatives of the 
Spiritual, Heavenly, invisible Kingdom of Messiah. 

Thus instead of any longer being recognized as the 
fathers, or patriarchs, they will by and by be recognized 
as the first children of Messiah, as the first ones to whom 
He will give the perfection of earthly life. Thus reads 
the prophecy: "Instead of Thy [Messiah's] fathers, shall 
be Thy [Messiah's] children, whom Thou mayest make 
princes [rulers] in all the earth."— Psalm 45:16. 

It will be noted that Jesus, speaking of His glorious 
Kingdom to come, said, "The Kingdom of God cometh not 
with observation" [outward display]. (Luke 17:20.) 
He also said to the disciples, "Yet a little while and the 
world seeth Me no more." (John 14:19.) And when 
describing what would be seen and recognized at His 
Second Advent and the establishment of His Kingdom, 
Jesus said not one word about any one seeing Himself or 



any one of the Apostles in Kingdom glory. But He did 
say, "Ye shall see Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and all the 
Prophets. "--Luke 13:28,29. 

Jesus and His Bride Class— the Apostles and saints of 
this Age, from every nation and denomination— will indeed 
be the real Kingdom and have the real supervision 
and power; but they will be invisible, as the Scriptures 
declare. All these will "be changed in a moment, in the 
twinkling of an eye," by the First Resurrection power. 
No longer earthly beings, they will be spirit beings, the 
Elect, being "made partakers of the Divine Nature." (2 Peter 1:4.) 
As St. Paul again declares, the Resurrection 
change must come before the Church can enter the Kingdom 
glory; for "Flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom 
of God."— I Corinthians 15:50. 

WHAT THE DREAM MEANT 

In order to rightly appreciate this dream or any part of 
the Gospel Message, it must be remembered that man, 
originally in covenant relationship with God, was cut off 
therefrom by disobedience in Eden. The covenant of 
everlasting life could not stand with any who were sinners. 
"The soul that sinneth, it shall die." 

But God had planned from the beginning a redemption 
of Adam and his race from this death sentence, 
this curse of destruction. He could not take Abraham 
back into His family, having purposely so arranged the 
condemnation that it could be set aside only by the work 
of a Redeemer. The Covenant made with Abraham, confirmed 
to Isaac, and now to Jacob, was merely a promise 
that God in due time would through their posterity send 
the Redeemer, the Deliverer, and through these bless all 
the families of the earth with the privilege of return to 
harmony and fellowship with God, as sons of God. 

The ladder represents this thought of direct fellowship 
between Heaven and earth, between God and man. The 
foot of this ladder was close to Jacob. Through his Seed 
this great work of opening up relationship with God and 
men would be accomplished. The vision of God at the 
further end and His encouraging words were to stimulate 
Jacob to faithfulness and appreciation of this great Promise 
as a pearl of great value— worth much more than the 
mess of pottage which he gave for it; yea, worth much 
more than home and its comforts. The dream had 
its intended effect. Jacob was encouraged, not only for 
that time, but through the remainder of his days. More 
than this, that dream has been a comfort and refreshment 
to all of God's people made aware of it through the Bible. 

And this lesson applies to Christians of today also. 
With the fuller light of the Apostolic teaching and the 
guidance of the Holy Spirit we understand that before 
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and the Holy Prophets of the past 
can bless the world as the honored seed of Abraham in 
the flesh, another work must be done. That other work 
will be done by our Lord Jesus. The death of the holy, 



harmless, undefiled Lamb of God constituted the entire 

R5200 : page 79 

foundation for the complete outworking of the Plan of 
God's Mercy for our race. 

During this Gospel Age a secondary feature has operated; 
an elect, select company, a Bride class of joint-heirs 
with the Master, has been called out of the world from 
Jews and Gentiles, to constitute the Spiritual Seed of 
Abraham. If this ladder of intercourse and communion 
came down to Jacob, still more does it come down to and 
center in The Christ, of which Jesus Christ is the Head and 
the Church His faithful members. 

When Jacob awakened, he felt overwhelmed. To have 
the Almighty thus indicate His care and blessing and 
approval, and to assure him of His protecting care in the 
future, seemed wonderful to the friendless man. He said, 
Surely this place may be called God's House and the Gate 
of Heaven! And so ever since, the Church has delighted 
to be known as the House of God— Bethel. By and by 
as the great Temple of God, composed of living stones, 
Jesus Himself being the Chief Corner Stone, this Bethel 
will be the Gate of Heaven, through which will come to 
mankind all the glorious things which God has promised- 
Restitution, perfection, Paradise— for all the willing and 
obedient. 

Jacob took the stone he had used for a pillow, set 
it up as a monument and poured oil upon it, as signifying 
its sacredness to God. His example since has been imitated 
by the Egyptians, in setting up great columns pointing 
heavenward, and also imitated by the Babylonian 
steeples, and by Christians in the cathedral steeples and 
church spires. All of these, however, unwittingly point to 
Heaven, and prefigure the fact that there is by and by to 
be a ladder, a communication between Heaven and earth. 
That ladder will be the Messianic Kingdom. 

Tradition tells us that subsequently Jacob's stone was 
taken to Jerusalem, and there used in conjunction with the 
crowning of the Jewish kings. Tradition says that that 
stone was taken by Jeremiah when the Babylonians overthrew 
Jerusalem. Tradition further says that it was carried 
to Ireland and for a time used there for crowning 
their kings. It says also that this same stone is now in 
Westminster Abbey, and forms the seat of the throne on 
which the British sovereigns are crowned. 



page 79 

BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 

Series VI., Study XIII. —Parental Obligations of the New 
Creation. 



APRIL 6 
Read p. 557, par. 1, to p. 559, par. 1. 
MARRIAGE OF THE CHILDREN OF THE NEW CREATION. 

(57) Does the Apostolic advice to the New Creation 
concerning marriage apply to their unconsecrated children? 
P. 557, par. 1. 

(58) How do many of the New Creation err in this 
respect? P. 557, par. 2, 3, 4. 

(59) At what ages respectively would it seem best for 
natural men and women to marry? P. 558, par. 1. 

(60) How may wise parents assist their children in 
mating properly? P. 558, par. 2. 

STEWARDSHIP OF OUR CHILDREN'S HEALTH 

(61) What is the close relationship between clean and 
healthy minds and bodies? P. 559, par. 1. 

APRIL 13 



Read p. 559, par. 2, to p. 562, par. 1. 



(62) To this end, how should ventilation, clean surroundings 
and proper physical and mental exercise receive 

careful inspection by the parent? P. 559, par. 2. 

(63) Into what three classes may foods be divided? 
And what is the proper proportion of each to be partaken 
of during the day? P. 560, par. 1 to 4. 

(64) How may a purely vegetable dietary be satisfactorily 
arranged, if necessary for economy? P. 561, par. 1. 

(65) Explain the injurious results of an uneven balancing 
of foods, especially of starchy variety? P. 561, par. 2. 

(66) Should we be careful not to make diet "a fad"? 
P. 561, par. 3. 

(67) Why is cheerful and profitable conversation a 
desirable accompaniment of the family table? P. 562, par. 1. 

Series VI., Study XIV.— Sundry Earthly Obligations of the 
New Creation. 

APRIL 20 



Read p. 563, par. 1, to p. 565, par. 2. 



(1) Does the transforming of their minds release the 
New Creation from responsibility toward their fellowmen? 
P. 563, par. 1. 

(2) Why should New Creatures be much more alert 

than others to recognize the principle of justice? P. 563, par. 2. 

(3) What is the Divine injunction with respect to indebtedness, 
as expressed by the Apostle in Romans 13:8? 

P. 564, par. 1. 

(4) What should be the rule for every member of the 



New Creation as respects money matters? P. 564, par. 2. 

(5) Why should all New Creatures aim to keep their 
expenses below their income? P. 565, par. 1. 

(6) If we have in the past unwisely contracted debts, 
what should be our course? P. 565, par. 2. 

APRIL 27 

Read p. 566, par. 1, to p. 568, par. 1, last half. 

(7) What Scriptural precedent may be found for taking 
advantage of modern bankruptcy provisions? P. 566, par. 1. 

(8) If the debt were an obligation of friendship and 

not a business one, how should it be considered by a New 
Creature? P. 566, par. 2. 

(9) Are widows and orphans responsible for debts of 
the former head of the family? P. 567, par. 1 . 

(10) How should we consider the matter of borrowing 
and lending, as between "brethren"? P. 567, par. 2. 

(11) If a brother be so situated that he could give no 
security for a loan, how should the tender of it consider 
the matter? P. 568, par. 1, first half. 

(12) In case the brother wished a loan with the intention 
of making profit, would it be proper to take security 

and require interest? P. 568, par. 1, last half. 



page 81 

VOL. XXXIV MARCH 15 No. 6 
A. D. 1913-A. M. 6041 



CONTENTS 

The Privilege and Necessity of Prayer 83 

Access to Throne of Grace a Privilege 83 

A Privilege of the Household of Faith 84 

Watching Unto Prayer Commended 85 

Praying for Temporal Things 85 

Proper Subjects for Prayer 86 

The Atmosphere of Prayer 87 

For Whom May We Now Pray? 88 

Formal Prayer (Poem) 89 

Making Friends With Mammon 90 

Giving All for God's Favor 90 

Set Your Affections Above 91 

The Different Steps in Justification 92 

Faith the Essence of Righteousness 92 

Tentative Justification Not Consecration 92 

Vitalized Justification 93 

Sanctification a Gradual Process 93 

Gethsemane (Poem) 94 

Southern Convention Tour 94 



Interesting Letters 95 

page 82 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



1913-MOTTO TEXT CARDS-1913 

The beautiful motto cards bearing this year's text, "What 
shall I render unto the Lord for all His benefits toward me? 
I will take the cup of salvation, and will call upon the name 
of the Lord. I will pay my vows unto the Most High," are 
temporarily out of stock. We are expecting a second consignment 
from abroad by the latter part of April. At that 
time we will be ready to fill orders— singly at 5c, by the 
dozen 50c, postpaid. On account of heavy import duty we 
cannot supply any more at the former rate of 30c per dozen. 



POST-CARDS 

We carry in stock an excellent assortment of Scripture 
post-cards of our own selection, both Birthday and for general 
use. The price for all of these cards has been reduced to 15c 
per dozen, in any quantities. 



1913-VOLUNTEER MATTER-1913 

The topics of Ordination and Foreign Missions are considered 
in a manner very interesting, we believe, to all, in 
PEOPLES PULPIT, Vol. V., No. 1, which is to be used as this 
year's regular Volunteer matter. 

Although a little delayed by our printers, we hope to begin 
making shipments of the above by March 15. You will 
be duly notified when your shipment is made. If papers are 
not received within ten days after notification, kindly advise 
us fully and promptly. When received, please acknowledge 
whether full number of papers we mention in notification 
reach you in good condition, fully prepaid. 



R5200 : page 83 

THE PRIVILEGE AND THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER 

"Let us. ..come boldly unto the Throne of Grace, that we 
may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need."— 
Hebrews 4:16. 

PRAYER is a general term for all manner of 
petitions— whether a request, a hymn, or an 
expression of thanksgiving and praise. The 
word supplication seems to carry with it the 
thought of a continuous request, a repeated 
prayer, a longing desire, a waiting for the 
Lord to grant our petitions. 

Well has the poet said, 
"Prayer is the soul's sincere desire, 
Uttered or unexpressed." 

The first intimation of approach to God on the part of 
humanity is that in connection with the sacrifices offered 
by Cain and Abel. They did not come, however, with a 
petition to a Father, but with sacrifices, thus acknowledging 
sin. The one who brought a sacrifice symbolically 
representing a sin-offering God accepted; the other, He 
declined to accept in any sense of the word. 

Two thousand years later, God made choice of Abraham 
as the person through whom the vague promise made 
to Eve should be fulfilled; and to him He made the very 
definite promise that in him and his Seed all the families 
of the earth should be blessed. With Abraham God made 
a Covenant, which He renewed to Abraham's posterity— 
to Isaac, but not to Ishmael; to Jacob, but not to Esau. 
These men were privileged to pray, because by their faith 
they were justified to fellowship with God. 

Eventually these blessings of Divine favor and grace 
extended to Israel as a nation; and they entered into these 
privileges in the full sense of the word, under the Covenant 
of the Law, of which Moses was the mediator. From 
that time on they had the same opportunities to appeal to 
God as had Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. Indeed, in some 



respects, they had a preferred condition. They had a typical 
Atonement Day, on which they were typically cleansed; 
and because of this typical cleansing, they were permitted 
to come to God, as did David, Hezekiah and others. 

The temple at Jerusalem was called the House of God, 
and the people went up to the temple to pray. Apparently 
it was generally understood that they might not pray anywhere 
and everywhere. This is indicated by our Lord's 
conversation with the woman of Samaria. Suppliants 
were heard only when they went to the temple to pray. 
The Samaritans claimed that the proper place to pray was 
on Gerizim, the mountain of Samaria. When the woman 
asked our Lord in regard to this matter, He intimated that 
the Jews were right in claiming that Jerusalem was the 
place where men ought to worship.— John 4:20-24. 

The Jewish nation, by means of their Law Covenant 
made with God, were in covenant relationship to Him, and 
were, therefore, permitted to pray to Him. God does not 
regard all prayers, but only those offered by persons in a 
particular attitude of mind, and in a certain covenant relationship. 
Those outside— even sincere, honest Gentiles 
—did not have the privilege which Israel possessed. 

ACCESS TO THRONE OF GRACE A SPECIAL PRIVILEGE 

During the Gospel Dispensation, all who have made 
full consecration to God have become spiritual sons of God 
and may ask of Him as their Father, may come boldly, 
confidently, to the Throne of Grace in prayer. Those who 
have not made a consecration to God have no Advocate 
through whom to approach Him. Those who come in the 
spirit of prayer and with a real desire for those blessings 
which God has promised to give, will see that prayer is a 
privilege restricted to a certain class. Those who do not 
esteem it a privilege may as well not come; for God has 
not as yet made any proposition to the world. Prayer is 
the privilege of God's children. 

Cornelius was a man who sought harmony with God. 
Although he prayed for years and gave much alms, yet his 
prayers and alms did not come up before God until an appropriate 
time— not until Jesus had died and ascended up 
on High, there to appear in the presence of God for us. 
(Acts 10:1,2,4; Heb. 9:24.) Three and a half years after 
the Cross, at the end of the time of special favor to the 
Jews, this man's prayers and alms came up before God as 
a memorial. But even then he must send men to Joppa to 
invite St. Peter to come to his home and instruct him how 
to receive the blessing of God in Christ. When Cornelius 
accepted Christ, our Lord became his Advocate, and the 
Holy Spirit came upon him. Thereafter he had the privilege 
of access to the Father at the Throne of Grace. 

So is it with humanity today. There is but one way 
for any to avail himself of the privilege of prayer. Each 
must recognize the fact that he is a sinner, and that there 
is no access to God except through Christ. In an earthly 
court, etiquette demands that one who desires to be presented 



to the king must first receive an invitation to appear 
in the king's presence, then at a set time he must 
appear, dressed in a certain kind of clothes. It is the same 
at the Heavenly Court. No man can come to God except 

R5201 : page 84 

through Christ Jesus. After he has accepted our Lord 
as his Redeemer, and has offered himself in consecration, 
our Lord, as his Advocate, must cover his imperfections 
with the Robe of His own Righteousness, and present him 
to the Father. Then he will be accepted and given the 
privilege of prayer. 

POSSESSORS OF PARTICULAR QUALITIES OF MIND NATURALLY 
DRAWN TO GOD 

The question then arises, If the world cannot approach 
God in prayer, what is the method by which He draws 
men? The Scriptures say that no man can come unto 
Christ except the Father draw him. (John 6:44.) The 
answer is that the drawing cannot be done through the 
Holy Spirit; for the world has not yet received that 
Spirit. The drawing power which the Almighty exercises 
over humanity is in different degrees. Some have 
a strong desire to worship God, others have a weak desire, 
and others have no desire at all. This difference is 
due to the shape of the brain. Mankind are born with 
differences in this respect.— Psa. 51:5. 

Various imperfections were stamped upon us before 
our birth. As the Scriptures say, "There is none righteous, 
no, not one"; "for all have sinned, and come short 
of the glory of God." (Rom. 3:10,23.) All come short 
of that standard which God would be pleased to recognize. 
But amongst mankind there are some who have not lost 
their reverence, whatever else they may have lost in the 
unbalance of mind resulting from the fall. Or perhaps 
they have the quality of conscientiousness or appreciation 
of justice well developed. These qualities draw or incline 
their possessors toward God; and they feel as if they cannot 
be happy without Him. This is the drawing influence. 

This drawing influence may be illustrated by the effect 
of a magnet. If a quantity of steel filings were scattered 
throughout a box of sawdust, and a magnet were 
held close to the surface, the steel filings would immediately 
respond to the attraction of the magnet. On the 
other hand, the sawdust would not be affected; nor would 
the steel filings respond to any other influence than that 
of a magnet, exercised either directly or indirectly. 

Man was created in the image of God. The fall has 
greatly marred that image, but no one is totally depraved. 
All have unbalanced brains, some in one direction, others 
in another. When the Truth comes in contact with those 
whose organs of veneration or conscientiousness are less 
impaired, they are drawn to investigate it, with the hope 
of being drawn close to God. Those whose organs of 



veneration and conscientiousness are more impaired, do 
not have this experience, and are not drawn unto God, if 
haply they may find Him. 

Those who are without this drawing influence are not 
to be blamed; for they were born under those unfavorable 
conditions. Those who are reverential are, however, 
favored in that whoever would come to God must exercise 
faith in Christ; for without this faith there can be no 
blessing. At first this blessing and privilege are not clearly 
discerned by the seeker after righteousness. He merely 
longs to know God, and as he seeks, he finds; and as 
he knocks, it is opened unto him.— Matt. 7:7,8. 

Any one, therefore, who seeks God will find Him; for 
the Scriptures promise, "Draw nigh to God, and He will 
draw nigh to you." (James 4:8.) Those who thus find 
the way to God have something for which to be thankful 
in the possession of the quality of mind which led them to 
appreciate God. Persons of a particular character will 
follow on in the way and will, if faithful, attain to the 
reward. Those who have it not will not be drawn of the 
Lord until they shall have been made over in the next Age. 
We are not, therefore, to suppose that everybody is being 
drawn during the present Age. 

After a person has been drawn, guided and instructed, 
then his will comes into action. It is for him to decide 
what course he will pursue. When he sees that no man 
comes to the Father except through Christ, and that the 
conditions are self-sacrifice, then he has the matter squarely 
before his mind. There are Scriptures which warn him 
that the path is difficult, but there are other Scriptures 
which tell him of the glory, honor and immortality at the 
end of the way. It is for the person to decide what he 
will do. But he does not come fully into the family of 
God until he has decided, and has taken the step of 
thorough consecration unto death; only then can he be begotten 
of the Holy Spirit and enter the School of Christ. 

PRAYER A PRIVILEGE OF THE HOUSEHOLD OF FAITH 

During the Jewish Dispensation, the Jews had the 
privilege of approaching God in prayer; but during the 
Gospel Age they have not had this privilege. As long as 
the Atonement Day sacrifices were offered annually, they 
had the privilege of prayer under the Law Covenant; but 
as soon as the typical sin-offerings ceased, all those privileges 
which that Covenant secured for them terminated; 
therefore the Jews have no access to God. They are still 
under the Law Covenant; but they have lost this special 
feature of it, because the typical priesthood ceased to be 
recognized as soon as the Antitypical Priest appeared. 

The Church of Christ alone, therefore, at this time has 
the special privilege of coming to God in prayer; for the 
great Antitypical High Priest has made a satisfactory Sin-Offering 
of Himself. Whosoever will, through faith in 
Him and under the covenant relationship of sacrifice, may 
draw near to God in prayer, nothing doubting. 



But while only the consecrated class, the under priesthood, 
the New Creation, are thus encouraged to approach 
the Throne of Grace with confidence and courage, very 
evidently all who in any proper sense belong to the "household 
of faith" may to some extent enjoy the privileges of 
prayer, the privileges of thanksgiving and intercession, and 
may rejoice in the peace of God, in a realization of the 
forgiveness of sins through faith in the Atonement. 

During the Millennial Age, every good trait which any 
one possesses will be an advantage to him, and every evil 
trait will be a disadvantage. But no advantage will be 
so great that it will enable any to rise without the aid of 
Messiah. The less degraded will not have so far to retrace 
their steps; but where much grace is needed, much 
will be supplied. The power of the great Mediator will 
be adapted to all conditions; for the Scriptures give us the 
assurance that Christ's Kingdom will be instituted for that 
very purpose. Since there is none righteous, no, not one, 
therefore all must have the great Messiah to assist them 
back into full harmony with God. 

PRAYER AN OPPORTUNITY AND A NECESSITY 

While prayer is a privilege and not a command, yet our 
condition makes it a necessity. Because of the fall of 
man from his original perfection, our flesh has imperfections, 
frailties; and yet we, as New Creatures, have responsibility 
for these weaknesses. The only way to discharge 
these responsibilities is to go to the Throne of 
Grace and there obtain help in time of need. Whoever, 
therefore, goes frequently to the Throne of Grace in 
prayer thus indicates that he recognizes the necessity of 
using the opportunity which God has provided in his interest 
and as his privilege. 

Prayer is necessary to the well-being of any one who 
would properly enjoy the blessings and privileges of his 
organism. We have the organ of veneration, which appeals 

R5201 : page 85 

to us for the worship of God. If we decline this 
worship, ignorantly or wilfully, our best interests could not 
be served. In this respect, the majority of the world are not 
serving their best interests; but the Christian is so doing. 

The person who does the proper amount of watching 
will have no difficulty in determining when he ought to 
pray. If he watches properly, he will continually see 
something about which to pray. If he foresees trouble 
and says, "Tomorrow morning I will pray about the matter," 
he is making a mistake. As soon as one has any 
thought or idea of a coming difficulty, he should make it 
the subject of prayer. "To him that knocketh, it shall be 
opened." Whoever seeks the Divine pleasing will find it. 

The Lord's people are to watch in every direction. 
Our time is consecrated to the Lord, and it is our duty to 
watch that we render it to Him. If we consecrate our 



time to Him, and then waste it in reading novels and other 
worldly literature or in playing games, we are not using 
our time properly, although these practices are not sinful. 
Likewise we are to watch our own temptations, and to seek 
to control self and to guard against our own weaknesses, 
as well as those of others. We are also to watch the 
Word of the Lord, that we may be thoroughly furnished 
unto every good word and work. 

Every trial, every temptation, is a special trial, a special 
temptation. No one knows whither the smallest temptation 
may lead. The Scriptures warn us to take heed; for 
what may seem a small matter may lead to something 
great. The fact that a thing may seem small does not 
imply that it may not be the most serious event of our 
whole life. 

Those who have more opportunities for service are less 
liable to be led into temptation than are those who have 
fewer. We are, therefore, to be "not slothful in business"; 
but "fervent in spirit, serving the Lord." (Rom. 12:11.) 
Watching against the world and its temptations, against 
our own flesh and its weaknesses, against the Adversary 

R5202 : page 85 

and his delusions— these duties will keep us busy enough. 

We are also to watch the signs of the times. In our 
Lord's day He reproved some because they knew not the 
time of their visitation. His words were, "Ye can discern 
the face of the sky and of the earth; but how is it that ye 
do not discern this time?" (Luke 12:56.) If we are too 
much engaged in work or in pleasure to have time to 
study, to watch properly, we find ourselves in difficulty. 

WATCHING UNTO PRAYER COMMENDED 

It is one thing to be tempted, and quite another thing to 
enter into temptation. Our Lord was "in all points 
tempted like as we are, yet without sin"— He did not in any 
manner give way to the Tempter. So it should be with us. 
We are to resist the Devil and to watch and pray that we 
yield not to temptation. If we are negligent, if we think, 
"Oh, a little indulgence this once will not hurt us!" we 
are in danger. The only safe position for us to take is 
to watch and pray continually, for if we should enter temptation 
we know not where the matter may end. As some 
one has aptly said, "We cannot prevent the birds from 
flying over our heads, but we can prevent their nesting in 
our hair." 

On the night in which our Lord was betrayed, St. Peter 
was amongst the most confident of the Apostles. He said 
to the Lord, "Though all men shall be offended because of 
Thee, yet will I never be offended." (Matt. 26:33.) He 
did not know how much weakness was in him; therefore, 
when the Lord was watching and praying that momentous 
night, St. Peter was one of the first to fall asleep ! Afterwards 
he was the very one to deny the Lord, and denied 



Him with cursing ! 

We recall our Lord's words to St. Peter, "Simon, 
Simon, behold, Satan hath desired to have you, that he may 
sift you as wheat: but I have prayed for thee, that thy 
faith fail not." (Luke 22:31,32.) St. Peter's very courage 
led him into a trap placed before him by the Adversary. 
This quality he showed when he went into the courtyard 
of the palace and mingled with those who were there. 
St. John, who accompanied him, was a relative of one of 
the priests; but St. Peter, who was recognized by his 
speech as a Galilean, was courageous enough to enter, even 
after having cut off the ear of one of the priest's servants. 
-John 18:15,16. 

Our Lord had foretold what would take place, saying, 
"I tell thee, Peter, the cock shall not crow this day, before 
that thou shalt thrice deny that thou knowest Me." 
(Luke 22:34.) After this had happened on the night of 
the trial, St. Peter remembered the words of Jesus, "and 
went out, and wept bitterly." (Luke 22:62.) Had he not 
done so, we know not what might have happened to him. 
The weeping showed that the denial was merely the result 
of weakness of the flesh. 

St. Peter could have taken a wrong attitude. He could 
have said, "I had a right to stand up for my own life, and 
not to be implicated in this matter." Thus he might have 
gotten into a wrong condition of heart; but his crushing 
out of this evil inclination toward self-preservation proved 
that in spite of his thrice repeated denial he was at heart 
loyal to his Master. So is it also with us; he who resists 
the smallest temptation thereby strengthens his character 
that he may be able to withstand the greater ones. 

A good story is told which illustrates the wisdom of not 
entering into temptation. A man who desired to hire a 
coachman had a number of applicants for the position. 
They were ushered into his office, and he asked them, 
"How near could you drive to the edge of a precipice without 
danger of accident?" One said he could drive within 
a foot without fear of falling over; another thought he 
could safely come within six inches of the edge; and so on. 
Finally, one man who had listened in silence to the others, 
said, "I do not know how near to the edge of the precipice 
I could safely drive; but I do know that I would keep as 
far away from it as I possibly could." This man was 
given the position. 

This is the principle upon which we should act. The 
one who keeps the farthest away from temptation is on the 
safe side. Those who feel too confident of their own 
strength and power and go too near the danger line are 
liable to slip over the edge. Let us ever pray that we may 
not enter into temptation; let us also watch that we may 
keep out of danger. 

PRAYING FOR TEMPORAL THINGS 

On His last evening with His Apostles, our Lord said 
to them, "Hitherto have ye asked nothing in My name; ask, 



and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full." (John 16:24.) 
Undoubtedly there is a special blessing to those 
who look for a fulfilment of His promise. Our Lord 
said, on one occasion, that the Heavenly Father is more 
willing to give the Holy Spirit to those who ask Him, than 
are earthly parents to give good gifts to their children. 
(Luke 11:13.) He did not mean that we must necessarily 
use the words, "Give us the Holy Spirit," or that we should 
pray for a Pentecostal blessing, as do some well-meaning 
friends; but that we should ask for the spirit of the Truth, 
of a sound mind, for the wisdom which comes from above. 

We are not wise enough to guide our matters aright. 
We are instructed, "If any of you lack wisdom, let him 
ask of God, who giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth 
not; and it shall be given him." (James 1:5.) This 

R5202 : page 86 

wisdom seems to be especially necessary to us as the servants 
of God, that the words of our mouths and the meditations 
of our hearts may be acceptable in the sight of 
the Lord.-Psa. 19:14. 

Our Lord instructed His disciples, "Take no thought, 
saying, What shall we eat? or, What shall we drink? or, 
Wherewithal shall we be clothed? (for after all these 
things do the Gentiles seek); for your Heavenly Father 
knoweth that ye have need of all these things." (Matt. 6:31,32.) 
His words seem to imply that we are to be different 
from the world. They would be ready to ask and 
pray for every imaginable blessing— different kinds of 
food, houses, money, and what not! They could not pray 
for spiritual things; for they have no appreciation of such 
gifts. Be not like them. 

Why, then, did our Lord in His prayer say, "Give us 
this day our daily bread"? This is a very different matter 
from specialization in prayer. The Lord has promised 
that, if we are faithful, our bread and water shall be sure. 
(Isa. 33:16.) We shall not be neglected. It is very 
proper that we acknowledge the Lord as the Giver of all 
good. According to His promise, we look to Him to give 
us food and raiment. Whatever we have, we acknowledge 
our dependence upon the Lord for what He provides for 
us; and we ask for nothing beyond what He does provide. 

The more we advance in spiritual development, the less 
we feel like dictating to the Lord and the greater confidence 
we have in His Wisdom and the more faith in His 
promises. The most that we should do is to make mention 
to Him of those promises for temporal provision and of 
our trust in them. Of one thing we may be sure— that the 
Lord, who has called us to be His followers, has us under 
His supervision, and will see to it that all things shall work 
together for our good. If he calls us to be members of the 
Body of Christ, neither lack of food nor anything else can 
hinder us from the full opportunity of making our calling 
and election sure. 

Those around whom the Angel of the Lord encampeth 



(Psa. 34:7), may be said to have a charmed life. The 

Lord is directing His Church. Therefore, think you that 

He will permit loss of life through accident or illness before 

we have had time to comply with the terms of His 

invitation? Surely not! Therefore, "Man shall not live 

by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of 

the mouth of God." (Matt. 4:4.) We are trusting in 

the promises of God. He will accomplish His Divine purpose 

in us, if we abide in Him and His Word abides in us, 

and if we are faithful in obedience. 

The Editor does not recall having from childhood asked 
the Lord for physical strength or health. He has known 
times when his physical strength was not great and when 
there were opportunities for service which seemed to require 
more strength than he had. Then he has taken 
pleasure in going before the Lord in prayer and saying 
that he was trusting that the necessary strength and all 
else which the Lord saw best to give him would be provided; 
but that if the Lord saw best that he should not be 
able to make a satisfactory presentation, he would still do 
his part and leave the rest with the Lord, knowing that 
whatever the Lord permitted would be the best experience 
for him. 

This course has always been sufficient. In forty years 
of active service, he has never missed a meeting because 
of lack of strength, although there have been times when 
his friends have said, "You cannot possibly speak tonight!" 
His reply invariably has been, "If the Lord gives me 
strength, I will go to the meeting place, and will trust Him 
for strength to speak." At one time he almost fainted on 
the platform; but grace sufficient has always been his portion. 
So long as he remains on this side of the veil, he 
intends to speak whenever he has an opportunity, unless 
he is unable to do so. He is sure that if the Lord gives 
him the opportunity to speak, He will also furnish the 
needed strength. 

PROPER SUBJECTS FOR PRAYER 

When we recall that St. James said of some of his day, 
"Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss" (James 4:3), 
we feel that we should be careful what we ask for. 
Our Lord instructed His Apostles that it is very important 
to abide in Him and to see that His words abide in us, if 
we would have our prayers answered. His words are, "If 
ye abide in Me and My words abide in you, ye shall ask 
what ye will, and it shall be done unto you." (John 15:7.) 
In other words, petitions according to the Lord's 

R5203 : page 86 

will shall be answered, but those contrary to His will shall 
remain unanswered. 

To ask selfishly for the things of the earth would not 
be true prayer. Many Christians have a mandatory way 
of telling the Lord what they would like to have Him do 



for them— that so many should be converted to Him at a 
meeting; that this meeting should be thus prospered; etc. 
Our prayers should be along higher lines than these. 
Temporalities should be presented in a casual way. We 
should have the desire to subsist in such a manner as would 
be pleasing to the Lord and should be thankful for whatever 
His providence may give us— whether much or little. 

It has been suggested that to pray for anything which 
God is willing to give is entirely proper. We may pray 
for the Holy Spirit, for more love, more gentleness, more 
patience, more wisdom from on High. We may pray that 
all these things will work together for our good; for He 
has promised that this shall be. We may pray for guidance 
from the Lord as may be best in His sight. But we 
may not tell Him what to do; for we have no means of 
knowing what is His will in matters in general. 

Our Lord did not pray in a mandatory fashion. With 
His petitions, He said, "Not My will, but Thine, be done" 
—I have no will of My own; for I have given up My will 
and I desire to have Thy will done. This is a prayer of 
full submission. It did not mean that our Lord did not 
pray in faith, nor that He would not get what He desired. 
It meant that He desired to learn the Father's will; and 
He learned that the Father willed that He should drink 
the cup of suffering to the very dregs. 

If we are submissive, our prayers will become more 
and more messages of thanksgiving. We shall increasingly 
desire to walk in the Master's footsteps. We shall 
desire that His will be done in us rather than anything 
that we could attempt to tell Him. Everything will be according 
to His Plan, which will come to pass, and which 
He will not alter for us nor for anyone else in the world. 
Those who have reached this development of Christian 
living will realize that it is not necessary to pray that God 
will save this or that one; for has He not promised to save 
all the people of the earth who will come to Him in His 
appointed way? 

Consider the case of Saul of Tarsus. He was seeking 
to do God's will, but was blinded. After God had opened 
his eyes to the real facts of the case, he went forward in 
the right way. He was a holiness man both before and 
after he received the Truth; but the enlightenment which 
he received taught him better how to do the will of God. 
If he had not been a chosen vessel of the Lord, he would 
have had no such experience, but rather he would have 
been treated as was Simon the Sorcerer. 

R5203 : page 87 

ANSWER TO PRAYER DELAYED FOR OUR GOOD 

Amongst some Christian people, agonizing in prayer, 
wrestling with God as Jacob wrestled with the angel, is 
very much encouraged. Frequently these people do so 
much praying that they do no studying, much to their disadvantage. 
The Scriptures instruct us to study to show 



ourselves approved unto God (2 Tim. 2:15), and not to 
seek to get something in a miraculous way, but rather in 
an intelligent manner. People who pray after this fashion 
are proceeding somewhat as did the prophets of Baal 
in the time of Elijah. Those men ran along the altar, 
cutting themselves with stones and crying to their god to 
consume the sacrifice.— I Kings 18:26-29. 

The Prophet Elijah, on the contrary, was very calm. 
He worshiped an intelligent God, who needed not to be 
shouted at to attract His attention. When the time came 
for Elijah to pray, he did so, using few words, but going 
straight to the point.— I Kings 18:36-38. 

There is a lesson for Christians in this narrative. 
Some who misunderstand the Divine Character and Plan 
in general, pray for the things which they should not, and 
neglect to ask for the right things. If we abide in the 
Lord and His words abide in us, we shall know what to ask 
for; and we shall be so careful about our asking that we 
shall not ask amiss. 

If one's prayers seem not to be answered, he should not 
become faint-hearted and cease to pray. Our Lord says 
that we should pray and not faint. (Luke 18:1-8.) Our 
Heavenly Father may will to bring us into such a condition 
of heart that we can appreciate His blessing. It may be 
God's will to delay the answer for our highest good. 

Thirty-nine hundred years ago, God promised Abraham 
that he should have the land of Canaan, and that in his 
Seed all the families of the earth should be blessed. That 
promise is not yet fulfilled. (Acts 7:5.) For more than 
eighteen hundred years the Church has prayed, "Thy Kingdom 
come! Thy will be done on earth, as it is in Heaven." 
The Lord has not answered the prayer yet; nevertheless 
we are to continue to pray and to wait patiently. We have 
faith that God will do as He has promised. "Wait ye upon 
Me, saith the Lord, until the Day that I rise up."— Zeph. 3:8. 

There is a great blessing in store for all those who delight 
their hearts in the way of the Lord. We are in line 
with His gracious promises. We are waiting and praying. 
By and by, the Lord says, He will avenge His own Elect 
—in the end of this Age. He will deliver them from all 
the opposition of the flesh and of the Adversary. He will 
set them on High and pour them out a blessing such as He 
has promised. Then the prayers will be answered. Meantime, 
the prayers continue to go up, earnestly, trustfully. 

There is a difference between "saying one's prayers" 
and praying. In prayer, we should have some definite request 
before our minds, in order that we may look intelligently 
for an answer. A brother, who was carefully 
scrutinizing his thoughts, words and doings, with a view to 
discovering what trait of character most needed upbuilding, 
concluded that he needed patience. Sometime after, 
he wrote, "I have been wondering what is the matter. I 
have been praying for more patience; but my trials are of 
such a character that my patience is actually growing less. 
But lately I begin to see that the Lord is answering my 
prayer for patience in this very way, and is permitting 



these trials for the very purpose of developing this trait of 
character in me." 

This experience is in line with the Apostle's injunction, 
"Take unto you the whole armor of God." (Eph. 6:13.) 
Whatever our prayer may be, we should watch to see in 
what manner the Lord is answering our petitions. This 
attitude on our part will demonstrate our faith, trust and 
loyalty. In turn our faith will be strengthened. Thus 
shall we be pleasing to the Lord because of our confidence 
in Him. He knows the way that we take better than do we 
ourselves. Then if something which we had not been anticipating 
should come into our lives, we should think, "Here 
is a lesson for us to learn— of patience, of obedience." 

It is the privilege of the Lord's people to ask, in order 
that they may have fulness of joy. We have this joy and 
the "peace of God, which passeth all understanding," and 
we rejoice greatly in hope of the glorious things which 
the Father has in store for us and which the Holy Spirit 
reveals through the Word. The joyful Christian is the 
thankful Christian. The thankful Christian is the one who 
is making the best use of his life. By reason of having exercised 
thankfulness of heart, he will be the better prepared 
for the Kingdom. Those less thankful may attain 
the Kingdom, for aught we know. But the thankless heart 
will not get the Kingdom. 

THE ATMOSPHERE OF PRAYER 

The text, "Pray without ceasing," would seem to be the 
equivalent of the statement, "Cease not to pray"— the petition 
continues, as if the person were in an expectant attitude. 
In one way or another that petition may be still 
awaiting an answer. This idea is carried out in a court 
of law. It is the custom to address the court, saying that 
the applicants pray for such and such release from such 
and such difficulty in certain cases. That request might 
be withdrawn, or it might be continued. So it is with the 
prayers which we make to the Heavenly Court. We have 
made our petition; and if it is worth asking for, it is worth 
waiting for. 

We should not be as the Gentiles, who thought that they 
would be heard for their much speaking. But we should 
seek first the Kingdom of God. Our prayers should be 
along that line. Whatever temporal experiences we would 
have the Heavenly Father might see to be helpful to us in 
the attainment of the Heavenly things of the Gospel. We 
should not cease our praying, although we are not bound 
by an iron law. God has not commanded us to pray, because 
that would be in the nature of a fixed rule, to disobey 
which would be sin. But we believe He will bless 
those who ask. The more we feel our need of things, the 
more we appreciate them when we get them. The Lord 
would have us appreciate these gifts by going frequently 
to request them; then, when they come to us, we are in a 
condition to receive and to make a better use of them. 

We have many reasons for giving thanks— the heart 



that gives thanks will find itself more and more in a 
thankful attitude. At first when we begin to give thanks, 
we do so for the more pleasant things; but as our experience 
increases, we find joy in the afflictions and the 
persecutions of life; for these experiences refine our 
hearts and make them more susceptible to the right as 
against the wrong— the Truth as against the error, the 
purity as against the impurity. 

Not only should we pray frequently and with regularity, 
but we should be always in the attitude of prayer. 
The children of God should be in that attitude of heart 
which looks to the Lord for Divine guidance in every 
perplexity and every experience. Just as the needle turns 
to the pole, so our hearts should turn to the Lord. If 
there is pain or trouble or difficulty in our pathway, we 
should look to Him. If there is privilege of serving the 
Lord, we should not think ourselves competent for the 

R5204 : page 88 

service without turning to the Lord for help. In other 
words, the Christian's prayer should ascend not only in the 
beginning of the day; the atmosphere of prayer should 
surround him continually. It should not be a mere sense 
of duty, but an appreciation of a great privilege. 

Those who appreciate the Lord at all could not afford 
to be without this privilege. Those who do appreciate this 
privilege rejoice to go to the Heavenly Father many times 
a day. Our advice to all who are seeking to walk the 
narrow way, would be that they forget not this privilege. 
But in their families or in their rooms with their roommate, 
the prayer should be in such a form as would be 
reasonable and proper, according to what would be their 
best judgment of pleasing the Lord— and not to be an intrusion 
in any sense. 

FAITH STRENGTHENED BY PRAYER 

As to just how the prayers of one may benefit another 
we may not know. We have not sufficient information to 
philosophize on it very deeply. We might surmise certain 
mental influences proceeding from one to another, 
just as we know electrical influences to proceed from one 
station to another thousands of miles away. The powers 
of the mind are something not comprehended. We can 
influence ourselves, and, to a certain extent, influence 
another. One mind can influence another without a word, 
by some telepathic power. As to why God permits this 
and gives blessings in answer to prayer we cannot say. 
We are left to philosophize, to speculate. 

If we are in the School of Christ, we are there to be 
taught, to learn certain lessons of life. One of the lessons 
is to have full, perfect faith in God— absolute trust. Such 
a trust is exercised by our prayers for ourselves as well 
as for others; and this trust is cultivated by our prayers. 
God is pleased to bless these prayers, and thus to cultivate 



and strengthen our faith. We cannot suppose that God 
would leave any important work undone if we failed to 
pray for it, or that the answer to our prayer would come 
as we look for it; but blessings may come from one 
channel or another. God is quite able to overrule any matter 
so that He can give blessings, either by our co-operation 
and prayers, or without our co-operation and prayers. 

We have reason to believe that when we pray for 
others our prayers avail. We have known instances 
where prayers have been answered very remarkably. 
The Lord's Word seems to inculcate this faith in us. 
God's people have been people of prayer, and are people 
of prayer. We cannot imagine how one could be a consistent 
follower of Christ without prayer. 

FOR WHOM MAY WE NOW PRAY? 

We understand that promiscuous praying for health 
during the Gospel Age would have been improper, and 
that only by means of the gift of healing were the early 
cures of the Age performed; that it ceased with the death 
of the Apostles after accomplishing its object; and that 
the proper prayers relating to sickness, on the part of 
the saints, would have been those offered for the forgiveness 
of sins— as a result of which healing followed. 
But we see, too, that as the Millennial Age is dawning— 
lapping upon the Gospel Age, which is closing— we should 
expect that healing and general restitution would begin 
to be manifested, much as we do see it. And this leads 
us to inquire, In the light of the foregoing examination 
of the Bible teachings, and in the light of our present 
location in the dawn of the Millennium, for whom may 
we now pray? 

We answer, the saints cannot properly pray for their 
own health now, any more than could their Master. They 
cannot properly ask the Restitution privileges which they 
have consecrated, nor can they ask that their sacrifices 
be nullified, by having all the cost of weariness, exhaustion, 
stripes or sickness miraculously removed. But when 
they realize their afflictions to be punishments for sins, 
they can still feel at liberty to confess their sins one to 
another, and to pray God for forgiveness. Thus they may 
as a result be healed. 

The saints who abide in Christ, and in whom His 
Word abides, may pray for others than themselves, especially 
in view of the fact that we are now in the 
beginning of the Times of Restitution; namely, in cases 
where they are sure their object is not self-exaltation; 
where their desires for the recovery of the sick are not 
selfish, and where they have reason to believe that the 
restored health would be consecrated to good works and 
the glory of God. 

In such cases we may upon request pray for the 
recovery of the afflicted or imbecile not of the consecrated 
Little Flock— the sacrificers, the Royal Priesthood. Yet 
even in such cases, though our faith must necessarily be 



strong, because confident of asking from right motives, 
and at a time when the Lord is pleased to grant a beginning 
of Restitution blessings, we should always say, as 
the Master did in His prayers— "Nevertheless, not My 
will, but Thine, be done."— Luke 22:42. 

However, it is not time yet to expect general healing 
and full Restitution work, as that evidently will not be 
due until the entire Priesthood shall have finished sacrificing 
and entered with their Head and Chief Priest, Jesus, 
into the glories and perfections of the Heavenly state, or 
condition, typified by the Most Holy. 

PRAYER FOR KINGS AND GOVERNMENTS 

In his Epistle to Timothy, St. Paul says, "I exhort, 
therefore, that first of all, supplications, prayers, intercessions, 
and giving of thanks, be made for all men; 
for kings and for all that are in authority; that we may 
lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty." 
(I Timothy 2: 1,2.) Other Scriptures tell us clearly 
that the kingdoms of this world are not the Kingdoms of 
our Lord. (Luke 19:11,12.) They inform us in an indirect 
way that the world would not appreciate the fact 
that the affairs of the present order of things are all 
under the supervision and care of Satan (Matthew 4:8,9; 
John 14:30); that the Lord will not set up His Kingdom 
of righteousness until His appointed time. When 
that time shall come, all kings and priests and people will 
serve and obey Him. (Daniel 7:27.) His reign will be 
the one that will be "the desire of all nations." 

But the Bible gives us to understand that, in the meantime, 
these present kingdoms are given the opportunity 
of seeing what they can do under these conditions. 
(Daniel 2:37-44.) When the typical kingdom of Israel 
was destroyed and the kingdom was given to Nebuchadnezzar, 
it was for the opportunity of seeing what his 
kingdom could do. It might be righteous or unrighteous. 

And so it has been from the kingdom of Nebuchadnezzar 
down. They are all Gentile kingdoms, and not 
representatives of God. All these various kingdoms are 
demonstrating various principles of government. Mankind 
under these kingdoms are learning lessons of experience 
which will be valuable to them in the future. 
Under these kingdoms we have seen man battling for 
rights. Sometimes they have been defeated, and sometimes 
they have been victorious— as the case may have 

R5204 : page 89 

been. In the various battlings we have seen righteousness 
and unrighteousness striving together; but with all, 
policy rules. 

Under all the kingdoms mankind has demonstrated 
that no government by imperfect man can rectify the 
difficulties which confront humanity. We cannot abolish 
sin and sorrow, crying and dying. Had only one king or 



one nation been permitted to experiment with the race, 
we would not have known whether or not other nations 
might not have been successful, had they had the opportunity. 
Each nation in turn seeks to be the universal 
power, and each claims to be the better government; as, 
for instance, the American Government wants to give 
better government to the Filipinos, and Great Britain 
wants to give better government to the people of South 
Africa. What do civilized nations and tongues do in less 
civilized lands? What can they do for the betterment of 
conditions? In all these countries, in all their endeavors, 
they show that selfishness dominates. 

POWER USED FOR SELFISH PURPOSES 

We see the fact demonstrated that if one nation had 
really the power to bless others, it would not bless them 
without taking advantage of them. Our civilized nations 
in heathen lands use their power in a selfish way, taking 
money away from their fellow-creatures. Instead of 
leading them to higher and better conditions, things have 
generally been conducted upon a commercial basis. And 
these very people who have more or less taken advantage 
of others in their extremity and need, and those people 
who have been taken advantage of by fear, will all no 
doubt learn some good lesson from these experiences. 

God is permitting the nations to learn these various 
lessons, before setting up His Kingdom in great power 
and glory. When His Kingdom shall be established, the 
contrast between its government and all these other 
governments will be so marked that all will have a great 
deal to learn. No doubt many who suffered from injustice 
will be all the better prepared to appreciate the better 
government when it shall come in. 

In the meantime, God's people who are being called 
out to be members in the Body of The Messiah are not told 
to say, "These kingdoms are not doing well and our 
Kingdom will show this." On the contrary, we should 
speak encouraging words: "Your nation is seeming to do 
about the best it knows how to do. As it gets more intelligent, 
it strives for a better government." 

SYMPATHY FOR THOSE IN AUTHORITY 

We who belong to the new Kingdom are as citizens 
in a foreign country. We see that we are more or less 
influenced by the condition of the things of this world. 
We have sympathy with mankind. We are glad that a 
New Dispensation is coming in. We see that these who 
are striving to make things better have a herculean task. 
If they were to give it up to us it would take all of our 
time; and under present evil conditions we could do no 
better than they are doing. We have great sympathy for 

R5205 : page 89 



kings and princes. They do well to accomplish so much, 
with sin in every direction. 

Our sympathy would lead us to consider them kindly 
in our minds. And we may pray for them such wisdom 
as God sees best. It would not do for us to request of 
God that one of them should be healed, if he were sick. 
If we had some means of helping, we should use that 
means; but as for the results, we should remember that 
these lie in the hands of God. We should help in any 
way we can. We are not to specify, but merely to pray 
God's blessings upon these kingdoms. 

We are interested in these kingdoms because we are 
interested in mankind in general. We wish to live a 
peaceful and godly life, that we may have that much more 
opportunity for reading and studying. (I Timothy 2:1,2.) 
We are glad if there is peace in the earth now; and 
we do not intend to quarrel. We intend to pray for these 
rulers; for we do not believe that they are at heart black 
or evil intentioned. Perhaps they are trying to do to the 
best of their knowledge what would be best for all. Most 
of the monarchs of Europe are not wishing to pull the 
people into war. 

PRESENT DAY BLESSINGS 

As to the people who are keeping such a wonderful 
government in our own land, we see how they are having 
persons to watch every building that is being erected; 
how they give special attention to the fire department and 
the water department that there may be a proper supply 
and purity of water; and how they care for the general 
health of the city, providing for quarantine, etc., etc. 
Those who have charge of the school systems for the 
education of the young, and of the hospital systems, are 
doing a great work! 

We should reflect that ours is a happy day in comparison 
with what it would be if we were living as people 
did in the time of the barbarians. When we see the wonderful 
things which are being done today— the great buildings, 
bridges and other wonderful improvements— we say, 
"What is man! Surely a wonderful piece of Divine 
mechanism! What things he can do even in his imperfect 
condition! And what will he not be able to accomplish 
when Messiah's Kingdom is here, which will put stripes 
on the disobedient, and utterly destroy those who will 
not come into harmony with its rule of righteousness!" 

We are glad that things are moving as well as they 
are. Instead of berating the people who are the leaders, 
we prefer to think that they are well intentioned people. 
We can well pray for such without any difficulty in mind. 
And we can feel glad and thank God that these people 
take care of us as well as they do. 

Our prayer to God for kings, etc., is that He will so 
overrule and direct among the nations as would be most 
in harmony with His wise plans, for the blessing and development 
of the Church now being selected. For though 



God has given over the world to the rule of the "Prince of 
this world" until the full end of the Gentile Times, yet God 
has not given unlimited power. The wrath of man shall 
not work ruin to the Plan of God; for He will cause the 
wrath of man to work to His praise, and all that will not 
so work He will restrain. (Psalm 76:10.) This is what 
the Apostle has in view: Pray God's guidance and direction 
over all the affairs of life and over rulers to the end that 
the piety, sobriety and growth of the Church may be 
conserved. 



FORMAL PRAYER 

"I often say my prayers; 

But do I always pray? 
And do the wishes of my heart 

Go with the words I say? 

I may as well kneel down 

And worship gods of stone, 
As offer to the living God 

A prayer of words alone; 

For words without the heart 

The Lord will never hear, 
Nor will He to those lips attend 

Whose prayers are not sincere. 



R5205 : page 90 

MAKING FRIENDS WITH MAMMON 

--APRIL 20. -GENESIS 33:1-15.- 

"Be ye kind one to another, tender-hearted, forgiving 
each other, even as God also in Christ forgave you."— 
Ephesians 4:32. (R.V.) 

THE GREAT TEACHER admonished His 

followers, "Make unto yourselves friends 

with the Mammon of unrighteousness." In 

other words, His followers were not to be 

selfish and grudging, or to be exactors of 

the last dollar or shilling. They were to be 

generous in their dealings, and thereby secure 

the friendship of those who otherwise 

might hate them. In other words, the followers 

of Jesus were to have Heavenly ambitions 

instead of earthly ones, and they were to be willing 

to allow others to have the best of the bargain in earthly 

matters, if thereby they could forward their spiritual interests. 

This is well exemplified in today's lesson. 

GIVING ALL FOR GOD'S FAVOR 



In a previous lesson we saw how Jacob willingly, gladly, 
gave up all of the earthly riches of Abraham and 
Isaac, and left all those in possession of Esau, claiming 
only that he should be the heir of the spiritual blessings— 
the great Promise made to Abraham, confirmed to Isaac 
and to Jacob himself. That Promise was not in respect 
to the present, but to the future; it was purely of faith. 
What cared Esau for a promise of the future? He desired 
what he got— the earthly inheritance. Nor do we find 
that after he got possession of the earthly inheritance, he 
ever gave a thought to the Covenant, which reads, "In thy 
Seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed." 

But all the while, that Covenant was the one thing before 
the mind of Jacob. He would not contend with Esau 
for the earthly blessing, although it was included in the 
purchase which he had made. He would give Esau all 
of the earthly blessing, if he might inherit this great blessing 
of the future. All of Jacob's course in life was governed 
by this great Promise. If the Seed of Blessing was 
to come through him, then he must have children; hence 
he married and reared a goodly family, regarding them all 
as identified with himself in the original Promise. His 
accumulation of wealth, flocks and herds, was along the 
same line— a desire to become great and influential, in 
line with that Promise. 

Under the Lord's guidance, he had left his Uncle 
Laban's house, with the flocks and herds and servants 
which he had gradually accumulated there. Under Divine 
direction he was going back to the land of his father. 
Although twenty years had passed since he left home, 
he felt a timidity respecting his brother Esau, and prayed 
to the Lord upon the subject, reminding Him of the 
Promise, in which he trusted. 

Then he sent word ahead to his brother that he was 
coming. Next he prepared a present— a gift of considerable 
value for those times— two hundred and twenty sheep, 
two hundred and twenty goats, sixty camels, fifty cattle, 
thirty asses, under the direction of servants. How large 
a proportion of his flocks and herds these were we know 
not, but they did represent long years of toil on Jacob's 
part. They were earthly things, however— things of the 
present time— and Jacob valued them as nothing in comparison 
to the great Promise which he possessed. He 
could give this goodly portion of earthly Mammon as a 
present to his brother Esau to purchase his favor, his 
good will. He was not under obligations to Esau; rather, 
Esau was indebted to him. 

Jacob, the younger by a few minutes, had purchased 
of his elder twin brother all of the first-born's portion, 
which included the major share of Isaac's worldly riches. 
Jacob had left all these in Esau's hands. The latter, naturally 
enough, might expect that Jacob was now coming 
to claim his riches— to take possession of the estate. 

Esau was ready to fight for it, of course. Even if 
Jacob had protested that he laid no claim to the estate, 



Esau would continually have judged him according to his 

own standards, and would have mistrusted that at an 

opportune time Jacob would make an attack. Thus a 

rivalry between the two families would have been established 

—a feud. Such a feud would have interfered with 

Jacob's hopes in connection with the Abrahamic Promise. 

He must be a co-worker with God in the matter of establishing 

his seed, or posterity, numerous and influential, 

and qualified in due time to bless all the families of earth. 

THE WISDOM OF JACOB'S COURSE 

Jacob not only offered the present to Esau, but insisted 
upon his accepting it. It would stand as a pledge 
of good faith between them. It would help to heal any 
old sores. Esau would be all the more willing to see the 
prosperity of his brother; for he realized that he had 
gotten the better of Jacob; first, by getting the patrimony, 
and secondly, by getting in addition so rich a present. 

R5206 : page 90 

Evidently Jacob's course was the wise one. He still 
had plenty, and God could give him as many more sheep, 
goats, cattle, camels and asses as He pleased. His chief 
concern would be the promotion of everything appertaining 
to that great Abrahamic Promise, in which he delighted, 
the fulfilment of which lay beyond the present life. 

THE LESSON OF GENEROSITY 

One lesson which we as Christians may draw from the 
course of experiences of Jacob is generosity toward the 
world— toward those who have no interest in the Heavenly 
Promise. We do not mean to institute a comparison 
between Jacob and ourselves, in the sense of holding him 
up as a pattern for Christian conduct. Quite to the contrary, 
we point out that while Jacob's faith was commendable 
and may be copied by us, his standing with God 
was very different from ours. While he was an heir of 
that Abrahamic Promise and the Christian Church are 
also heirs of it, our inheritances are different. 

We have already seen that the Abrahamic Promise is 
to have a double fulfilment. The earthly fulfilment is to 
come to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and all of the faithful; 
while the higher, the Heavenly fulfilment, is to come 
to Christ and His spirit-begotten followers— the true 
Christians of this Gospel Age. Only the spirit-begotten 
from Pentecost onward have enjoyed the blessed privileges 
of the School of Christ, or been able to develop the 
fruits and grace of the Holy Spirit. 

Nevertheless, the general principle holds good with the 
Spiritual Heirs as with the natural heirs of that Promise 
—that faith in the Promise makes secondary everything 
else in life, hence, as Jacob was willing to set aside 
all other ambitions, aims, hopes and loves, wishing merely 



to see the accomplishment of this Abrahamic Promise and 
to surrender earthly rights and privileges in its favor, so 
should we, the Spiritual Heirs— yea, more so. We have 
much advantage every way. We can understand the 
Promise better than could they. 

R5206 : page 91 

We see how God has already begun the preparation 
for the fulfilment of that Promise in the sending of His 
Son to redeem our race, and thus to make possible the 
blessing of all the families of the earth in due time. We 
see further that Jesus, having redeemed mankind, has 
been highly exalted, and now in power and great glory is 
merely waiting for the time to come when His Elect Spiritual 
Church will be completed. Then the Messianic 
Kingdom will be established; and then Abraham, Isaac, 
Jacob and all the faithful heirs of the earthly part of the 
inheritance will be awakened from the tomb, to enjoy 
their share in the grand work of world-blessing which 
God has promised. 

As Jacob forsook his father's house, leaving all with 
his brother without contention, trusting only to the 
Heavenly Promise, so must we Spiritual Israelites forsake 
all earthly hopes and aims for joint-heirship with 
Christ in the Heavenly Kingdom. As Jacob was glad to 
give goodly presents to his brother for the sake of peace 
and prosperity and to assist in carrying out God's arrangement 
under this Promise, so should we as Christians be 
willing to give to our partners in life, our neighbors and 
friends and brethren, the larger share of earth's good 
things, if thereby we may forward the interests of the 
Lord's cause in connection with the Abrahamic Promise, 
in which we trust. 

The world has the things of the present time. They 
are its prize. Mankind set their hearts upon these earthly 
things— they know nothing higher. We, on the contrary, 
appreciate the Heavenly things, esteeming, as the Apostle 
said, that all the things of earth are unworthy of comparison. 
We, like St. Paul, esteem the greatest things of 
an earthly kind but loss and dross that we may win Christ 
—that we may win a joint-heirship with Jesus in the great 
blessing of God by becoming members of the Spiritual 
Seed of Abraham, and participating in the glorious work 
of this Promise— the blessing of all the families of the 
earth.— Galatians 3:29. 

SET YOUR AFFECTIONS ABOVE 

God had certain lessons of faith and obedience for 
the Ancient Worthies to learn. And how well they 
learned these! How much faith we see manifested in 
Abraham's career, and Isaac's and Jacob's, and all along 
down the line amongst those enumerated by St. Paul in 
Hebrews 1 1 ! How their obedience proved their loyalty as 
well as their faith ! 



We are not surprised that those noble characters are 
to have a goodly place in the work of blessing mankind 
under Messiah's Kingdom. Their experiences in life 
were a schooling, and training and preparation for what 
lies before them during Messiah's Kingdom. If they were 
faithful to God and trusted Him in the dark, and loyally 
sacrificed earthly interests, doing His will, how sure we 
may be that they will be no less loyal, no less faithful, no 
less obedient, when as perfect human beings under the 
favorable conditions of Messiah's Kingdom they shall be 
entrusted with honorable service and power by the great 
Messiah! 

Who cannot see that if the Ancient Worthies of the 
House of Servants required testing as to obedience, faith, 
loyalty, much more the spirit-begotten members of the 
Christian Church require testing along these same lines! 
There are two reasons why our testing should be more 
thorough than theirs. (1) We are members of the House 
of Sons, while they were members only of the House of 
Servants. We have not only the spirit of begetting as 
Son of God, but additionally have much clearer light 
shining upon the Divine Revelation, making known to us 
God's will and showing us how His Plan is outworking. 
(2) Additionally, our testing is for a still higher position 
of glory and honor— "that we might become partakers 
of the Divine nature"; that we might be joint-heirs with 
Christ in His Kingdom on the Heavenly, or spiritual, 
plane, still more important than the earthly plane, which 
the Ancient Worthies will receive. As St. Peter says, 
"What manner of persons ought we to be"— we who have 
had such great favors and privileges and enlightenment! 

If then Abraham left his father's house— kindred— to 
be a stranger in a strange land in obedience to the Lord's 
leading, will the Lord expect less of faith and obedience 
in His spirit-begotten children of this Gospel Age? Surely 
not! If Jacob surrendered up all of his rights to his 
father's property, should not the spirit-begotten children 
of God be willing to do as much, or more? If Jacob was 
willing to give liberally of his earthly possessions to secure 
peace with those who owed him much, ought not we, who 
have received the Holy Spirit, be willing to give still more 
generously of this world's Mammon, or riches, to those 
who love the present world, in order to secure our liberties 
and privileges, which we prize especially as opportunities 
to make our calling and election sure to the 
Heavenly gifts and Heavenly calling in connection with 
the Divine Plan? 

FINALLY OUR GOLDEN TEXT 

Our Golden Text seems at first not very closely related 
to the lesson. Nevertheless there is a relationship. It is 
this: Whoever cultivates the spirit of generosity and 
benevolence toward others in the interest of the Lord's 
Cause will thereby be making character. Generosity in 
dealing with our enemies, with the world, will gradually 



make us more generous in all our dealings— in our homes, 
with our families, and especially in the Lord's family, to 
which our text refers. 

"Be ye kind one to another, tender-hearted, forgiving 
each other, even as God also in Christ forgave you." We 
are not to forget that the Church of this Gospel Age is 
represented as being in the School of Christ, to be taught 
and prepared for Divine service, glory, honor in association 
with the great Redeemer during His Messianic 
Reign. We are not to forget that the lessons of this 
School are the graces of the Holy Spirit, and to whatever 
extent we attain these graces, to that extent we shall be 
prepared for the place in the Kingdom to which God has 
called us. To whatever extent God's people neglect the 
cultivation of these fruits of the Spirit, in that same proportion 
they will be unfit to share in Messiah's Kingdom. 

Is not this the very essence of St. Peter's exhortation 
when he says, "Add to your faith, fortitude; to fortitude, 
knowledge; to knowledge, patience," etc. "If these things 
be in you in abounding measure, they shall make you to be 
neither barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of the 
Lord, and thus an entrance shall be ministered unto you 
abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and 
Savior Jesus Christ. But he that cannot see these things 
is blind and cannot see afar off," and looks merely at the 
things of this present life, and will be unprepared for the 
graduation examinations prior to the inauguration of the 
New Dispensation— now at hand. —2 Peter 1:5-11. 



R5206 : page 92 

THE DIFFERENT STEPS IN JUSTIFICATION 

EVEN BEFORE Christ came into the world, 

God had dealings to a certain extent with 

some of the human race. He dealt with 

Adam, telling him of the penalty for sin and 

promising that the Seed of the woman 

should some day bruise the serpent's head. 

He dealt also with Enoch, with Noah, with 

Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and others, centuries 

before Jesus was born. God did not, however, 

deal with these men in the particular 

and special sense in which He has dealt with the Gospel 

Church, who are privileged to be called "the sons of God." 

-John 1:12. 

The Scriptures state that Abraham believed God, and 
his faith was counted to him for righteousness. (Gen. 15:6.) 
God must have had some dealings with Abraham 

R5207 : page 92 

before he believed or there would have been nothing for 
Abraham to believe. Evidently God had had some communication 



with him before faith and trust could have 
brought him into even a tacitly justified condition. 

Abraham sought to be as nearly perfect in conduct 
as possible, and to do those things which are pleasing to 
God. After he had manifested his desire to be obedient, 
God said, If you will prove your faith by leaving your native 
land and risking the loss of your present earthly comforts 
and of the home of your childhood, I will make a 
Covenant with you. Abraham believed God. 

As soon as opportunity was afforded, Abraham left 
Chaldea and journeyed to Haran. Later, God made him 
certain promises on condition that he would go into the 
land of Canaan. After he had entered Canaan, God said, 
"All the land which thou canst see will I give unto thee 
and to thy seed after thee." (Gen. 13:15.) Abraham was 
called "The Friend of God." (James 2:23.) St. Paul 
tells us that God preached the Gospel unto Abraham, saying, 
"In thee shall all the families of the earth be blessed." 
— Galatians 3:8; Genesis 12:3. 

FAITH IN GOD THE ESSENCE OF RIGHTEOUSNESS 

So we see that there was a kind of dealing with the 
Ancient Worthies before Christ came— before there was 
any actual justification to life. None could be thus justified 
until a life had been given as a corresponding price 
for Adam's forfeited life. Hence the promise of God, so 
far as these were concerned, was only a hope. They 
understood that in some way He intended to do something 
for their relief, but did not know how God, who had once 
condemned them to death, could give them everlasting 
life. Nevertheless, they had faith in the promise, and this 
God counted for righteousness; for faith in God is the 
essence of all righteousness. By this faith they were 
justified to fellowship with God. 

When Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and all the Prophets manifested 
their faith toward God, they proved their heart-loyalty, 
so that long after their death He could say, "I am 
the God of Abraham, of Isaac and of Jacob." They believed 
that some day they would be raised from the dead. 
If there were no resurrection, God could not have spoken 
of them as He did; "For He is not a God of the dead, but 
of the living." (Luke 20:37,38.) This is the argument 
with which Jesus offset the teachings of the Sadducees 
that there will be no resurrection of the dead; but it was 
not given as a proof that the patriarchs were in heaven at 
the time, for Jesus distinctly tells us that at the time in 
which He was speaking no man had ever ascended into 
Heaven.— John 3:13. 

We see, then, that Abraham had a measure of relationship 
with God, but not until he had manifested his faith. 
God had dealt with him, however, before this manifestation 
of heart-loyalty, and that dealing consisted in giving 
him knowledge of how to become the Friend of God. 

In due time God will indicate to the members of the 
human family that He is willing to accept them on terms 



by which He will be their God and they shall be His people, 

but that they must prove their faith by walking before 

Him to the best of their ability. This is the most that God 

does for any one— simply to give him knowledge of the 

steps which he must take in order to have complete justification. 

He says, "My son, give Me thine heart." (Prov. 23:26.) 

On this principle God spoke to the Lord Jesus 

Christ and continues to speak to all who would come unto 

the Father by Him. 

TENTATIVE JUSTIFICATION NOT CONSECRATION 

Manifestly, things are somewhat different now from 
what they were in Abraham's time. Abraham did not become 
a son of God; for he lived before the opening up of 
the way to life, and that which God counted a justifying 
faith could not bring him redemption. Our Lord had not 
yet opened up that living way. Notwithstanding the fact 
that the redemption had not taken place, Abraham had 
God's promise that in due time he and his Seed should bless 
the world. 

The Message that now goes forth is that God is willing 
to receive again those who were once His sons, but who 
lost their sonship through the disobedience of Adam. 
Therefore, the very knowledge of God's Plan is an offer 
of salvation to whosoever may hear of that Plan. God 
says, in substance, If you wish to become My son, this is 
the way. "My son, give Me thine heart." After you 
have made a full consecration, I will reveal to you the 
deep things of My Word. 

We should make a clear distinction between what God 
has done and what He intends to do. God considered 
Abraham and all the faithful of past ages as the servant 
class. (Heb. 3:5.) But with the faithful of the Gospel 
Age it is different. St. John tells us that "To as many as 
received Him, to them gave He privilege to become the 
sons of God." (John 1:12.) Only since Pentecost has opportunity 
been given for any to become sons. Hence, before 
that time none could become "heirs of God, and joint-heirs 
with Christ"— heirs of the Abrahamic Promise. ~ 
Rom. 8:17. 

To those who have come into Christ since Pentecost 
the assurance is given that they shall be made joint-heirs 
with the Lord if they continue faithful to the end, that if 
they suffer with Him, they shall also be glorified together 
with Him. (Rom. 8:17.) The only ones who have full 
relationship with God are the consecrated, who have received 
the full life-justification possessed by none others 
in the world. 

Just as God dealt in the past with those who dealt with 
Him, and as He gave them encouragement and directed 
them by His Voice, so now He gives those who deal with 
Him particular information respecting His will through 
the Son and through faith in the blood of our Lord Jesus. 
Whoever thus starts out now is beginning to come into a 
justified condition; and every step of progress that he 



takes brings him nearer to consecration. 

FROM KNOWLEDGE TO TENTATIVE JUSTIFICATION 

The first step leading to justification is the gaining of 
a little knowledge; for no man can be justified in ignorance. 
This knowledge leads to a step of faith. With 
each advance in faith based upon that knowledge comes 
greater opportunity for increase of knowledge and faith. 
Thus we learn to walk by faith rather than by sight. 

All of these steps, however, lead up to a full and perfect 
justification. First we come to a faith in God, believing 

R5207 : page 93 

that there is a Great Creator, that we are His 

creatures, and that He has merciful intentions toward us. 

Then other steps lead us to see that God has made arrangements 

for receiving us back into fellowship with 

Himself through the Lord Jesus Christ and His work of 

grace. We see that "Christ died for our sins according 

to the Scriptures." (1 Cor. 15:3.) This is a step of 

greater knowledge and leads to another step of obedience. 

Thus we draw nearer to God. As St. James says, "Draw 

nigh to God and He will draw nigh to you." (James 4:8.) 

Each step enables us to see that we are getting 

nearer to the blessing. 

After seeing that the Lord Jesus has prepared the way 
for the forgiveness of sin, we learn that there are certain 
terms upon which our sins will be forgiven. This is another 
step of knowledge. Then we are brought to the point 
where the Lord tells us by His own Word and the words 
of the Apostles that this forgiveness is based upon faith 
in Him and full acceptance of His finished work, that the 
only way by which we may become sharers in that work 
is by the consecration of ourselves and all that we have 
to the Father, and that we take up our cross and follow 
Jesus. We also learn that unless we take this step we 
cannot reach full justification. 

TENTATIVE JUSTIFICATION DEFINED 

When one has been drawn to the Father through His 
Word and His providences, and has accepted the blood of 
Jesus Christ as his only means of salvation, he comes to 
the place where he must decide whether he will present 
himself to God or whether he will wait for the Millennial 
blessings of Restitution. What he will do is uncertain. 
He is tentatively (that is temporarily) justified for a 
purpose— that of considering which step he will take. He 
is still on the human plane— a natural man. 

Tentative justification, then, is for the purpose of giving 
a standing with God, from which a believer in our 
Lord's Ransom-sacrifice as his only hope of salvation may 
ascertain whether he has that spirit of sacrifice which 
will lead him to full consecration. The believer is at liberty 



to choose which course he will take. He may offer 
himself in consecration or he may decide not to do so. 
But should he decide to wait for Restitution, he thereby 
proves that he has not appreciated God's offer. 

The object in preaching the Gospel during this Gospel 
Age— or at all— is to give an opportunity to whosoever 
will hear to attain to the privilege of spirit nature. Whoever 
hears the call and neglects to take advantage of it has 
evidently received the grace of God in vain. He suffers 
the loss of whatever he might have profited by accepting 
the offer. If for the doing of a certain piece of work a 
reward is promised, the one who fails to perform the 
work loses the reward, the honor, the money, or whatever 
was promised for doing the work. 

God does not intend to inflict punishment on those who 
decide not to make the sacrifice of their humanity. But 
this class cannot gain the prize offered to those who do so. 
Only those who use their opportunity to be dead with 
Christ shall live with Him— become participators in the 
glorious things that are His. Those who take this step 
constitute the Church at the present time. 

For the others, however, we trust that they will have 
opportunities in the future, in the Millennial Age. Under 
the favorable conditions of that time we hope that they 
will do better than they have done in this Age. Yet our 

R5208 : page 93 

thought is that the person who has come to a knowledge 
of God's grace and has had a measure of light respecting 
it, but has rejected it, will be in a worse position than 
those who have never heard of it. 

Nevertheless, we do not wish to discourage any one 
who experiences faith in Restitution, in a future life, in 
good works. We would not discourage any one who hopes 
for earthly life, Restitution blessings. We believe that 
there are a great many people who are living noble lives, 
but who have neither faith nor light regarding the high 
calling. They are not on that account to suffer forever, 
except in the sense that they will have lost the opportunity 
of attaining the Kingdom blessing. 

VITALIZED JUSTIFICATION 

The Lord says that one should take the step of consecration 
only after counting the cost. (Luke 14:27-33.) 
After one has decided to take this step, he presents himself 
to the Lord. If his consecration is accepted, the Lord 
imputes enough of His merit to make the sacrifice perfect; 
for nothing imperfect can be presented to Jehovah. At 
the very moment of his acceptance as perfect through the 
imputed merit of Christ, he is reckoned alive in the full 
sense of the word; he has received actual justification in 
a legal sense. His justification is said to be vitalized. In 
other words, as soon as our Lord Jesus becomes his Advocate, 
God is reconciled to that sinner and treats him as 



one actually perfect. Full justification means full making 
right in the sight of Jehovah. 

Let us be sure that we clearly understand this important 
point. Justification is said to be vitalized when, by 
the imputation of the merit of Christ, one who has made a 
full consecration receives by faith his share of the redemptive 
work of Christ. Those who have received 
vitalized justification can have no part in Restitution. 
Since that which is vitalized is made alive, justification 
that is vitalized is said to be unto life, for one's future 
existence depends upon his retaining that justification 
after our Lord's merit has been imputed. Abraham's justification, 
on the contrary, was not unto life, but only to 
fellowship with God. Christ had not died in Abraham's 
day and, therefore, merit could not have been imputed to 
any one. 

By means of the various steps by which God has led 
us to Himself we reach the fulness and completeness of 
justification. That justification is vitalized by Jesus, who 
imputes to us a sufficiency of His merit to cover our deficiency. 
At the same moment God accepts that sacrifice 
which has already been offered to Him through the Advocate. 
This acceptance is indicated by the begetting of the 
Holy Spirit. 

The one thus covered with the imputed merit of Christ 
and begotten of the Holy Spirit is thenceforth a New 
Creature. (2 Cor. 5:17.) If he continues faithful to his 
consecration vow, he will ultimately be presented to the 
Father as a member of the Bride class. Those who fail 
to keep their vow will be put through severe trials, great 
tribulation, which will eventually prepare them for a 
lesser place than they would have had if they had kept 
their robes unspotted. 

During this Gospel Age only those who have presented 
their bodies as living sacrifices are given the Holy Spirit. 
This power operates in their lives for their development 
as New Creatures, to bring them into harmony with God 
and to prepare them for membership in the Body of Christ. 

SANCTIFICATION A GRADUAL PROCESS 

In the early stages of the Church there were "gifts of 
the Spirit," necessary to the inauguration of the Church. 
These gifts of the Spirit ceased, however, as soon as the 
Church had been established and the New Testament had 
been completed. We no longer have the gift of healing, 
of speaking with tongues, etc., but we have something 
more valuable than are gifts. These were for the infantile 

R5208 : page 94 

condition of the Church. Instead, we have today the 
fruits of the Holy Spirit, which are developed and matured 
gradually as the result of labor. 

In some characters the period of maturing fruit of 
good size and flavor is longer than in others. Nevertheless, 



as surely as we receive the Holy Spirit into good and 
honest hearts and are submissive to the prunings of the 
Great Husbandman, so surely shall we bear large, luscious 
fruit in due time. The fruits of the Spirit, the Apostle 
says, are manifest; that is, they can be seen in our lives. 
They are meekness, self-control, faith, goodness, gentleness, 
long-suffering, brotherly-kindness and love. 

At the beginning of our existence as New Creatures 
the fruits of the Holy Spirit germinate within us, but these 
must grow to maturity. We must bear fruit. The Lord 
says, "Every branch in Me that beareth not fruit He 
taketh away"— cuts it off— "and every branch that beareth 
fruit, He pruneth it, that it may bring forth more fruit." 
(John 15:2.) There is more or less pain in the prunings 
and testings of loyalty and obedience, but every manifestation 
of obedience helps to prepare us for membership 
in the Bride Class. 

The work of actual justification and of actual sanctification 
and growth in grace is gradual. Completeness will 
be attained only in the First Resurrection, for "flesh and 
blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God." (I Cor. 15:50.) 
Those who will constitute the First Resurrection 
are the blessed ones— the holy ones, who have cultivated 
the fruits and graces of the Spirit. As St. Peter tells us, 
"Add to your faith virtue; and to virtue knowledge; and 
to knowledge temperance; and to temperance patience; 
and to patience godliness; and to godliness brotherly-kindness; 
and to brotherly-kindness love. For if these 
things be in you and abound, they make you that ye shall 
neither be barren [idle] nor unfruitful in the knowledge 
of our Lord Jesus Christ."— 2 Peter 1:5-8. 



GETHSEMANE! 

Gethsemane! The Garden's lonely shade the world's 
Redeemer sought that night. He went alone to pray 
For grace and strength to drink the last drop in His Cup. 
Great souls crave solitude in sorrow's hour! Not e'en 
His well-beloved three might share the sacredness 
Of that deep woe,— He bade them tarry, while He went 
A little farther on, and fell upon His face. 



Gethsemane! A solitary place, apart, 

No mortal feet may press in sympathy that dark, 

Encrimsoned earth. No human hand the fevered brow 

May cool, no other heart can share its agony, 

No voice but God's may break the solemn silence there,- 

A place where every soul must drink alone the Cup 

The Father's hand hath poured, and given to His child. 

Gethsemane! A desert place, alone, apart? 

Ah, no! The anguished heart doth never cry in vain 



To Him who marks the smallest sparrow when it falls, 
For He shall send His Angel with the message, "Fear 
Thou not, for I am with thee! I will ne'er forsake, 
Nor let thee fail! My right hand shall uphold, My love, 
My power shall keep thee, even to the bitter end!" 
GERTRUDE W. SEIBERT. 



R5208 : page 94 

SOUTHERN CONVENTION TOUR 

AT THE SUGGESTION of the Newspaper 
Syndicate which handles our weekly discourses 
through about 1,500 newspapers, we 
made a visit to Colon, Panama and Havana, 
in order that the discourses might 
come from those points bearing a measure 
of local color. Incidentally, we arranged for 
other meetings, as follows: 
Jacksonville, Fla., Feb. 16th and 17th.— 

A convention of Bible Students gathered 
here on the 15th, to the number of about 200. They reported 
having had a splendid season of spiritual refreshment 
prior to our arrival, and that our coming in no wise 
diminished their joy and zeal. 

We gave one public discourse at the Duval Theater. 
We had excellent attention. Crowds were turned away, 
unable to gain admittance. We hope that some good was 
accomplished— that some of the Lord's people were refreshed 
and strengthened in spirit; and that others, not 
consecrated, were enabled to see a light attractive to their 
hearts, which may bless them in after-days, leading them 
to righteousness and the Golden Rule, if not to the grand 
climax of full consecration to the Lord. 

At Colon and Panama we gave public addresses, on 
Feb. 22d and 23d. In both instances the theaters were 
packed in a way not permitted in the United States. At 
Colon it was estimated that about 600 stood during the 
service, while many hundreds were turned away. At 
Panama we gave additionally an address to the Bible Students, 
numbering about 100. They came from different 
parts of the Canal Zone. Nine-tenths of the attendance of 
the interested in those parts are colored, very few being 
white. 

Kingston, Jamaica, we reached Feb. 25th. We found 
a large convention already in session, crowding Collegiate 
Hall— about 600— nearly all colored. These gathered from 
various parts of the island, and represented one-half of 
the interested there. Some of these dear friends spent 
nearly all that they possessed to come to the convention. 

R5209 : page 94 

We found them a very interesting company, very earnest 



for the Lord and for the Truth. Their singing was 
excellent. 

On the next day we had two meetings in the theater. 
The one in the afternoon was attended by convention 
friends and about as many more of the public, invited 
by special cards. These friends assembled in the evening 
at Collegiate Hall, so as to give the full benefit of the theater 
to the public. And the public came in crowds. The 
theater seats about 1,100. Besides these, approximately 
700 were jammed into all the aisles and corridors and windows, 
and probably 2,000 were turned away. These were 
nearly all colored, not more than ten per cent, whites. 

The friends had arranged to reserve certain seats for 
the whites, desiring especially that they should have an 
opportunity to hear; but the crowd, while orderly, insisted 
on taking possession of these. A number of ministers 
were present. They all remarked the eagerness of the 
people to hear, and seemed surprised that anything religious 
should have such a drawing influence. The Episcopal 
minister thoughtfully and wisely observed that the 
secret of the interest lay in the fact that our Message was 
a "Gospel of Hope." 

The newspapers, commenting on the people comprising 
the convention, commented upon their cleanliness, order, 
etc.; and the fact that they used neither tobacco nor 
liquors, and needed no attention from the police. In substance, 
they said, "This speaks well for the work of Pastor 
Russell and his associates. We hope that they may accomplish 
still more of their commendable work in Jamaica." 

R5209 : page 95 

They also referred to the fact that money 

and collections were not mentioned in connection with 

this convention. 

On the 27th we gave an address on the Oneness of the 
Body of Christ, through Baptism of the one Spirit; and 
later we had a consecration service for children. The 
convention closed with a Love Feast, in which four 
brethren especially representing the Society in Jamaica, 
stood with us in line and shook hands with the company 
as they filed past, meantime singing some of our beautiful 
hymns of praise and thanks to the Giver of every good 
and perfect gift. 

In the evening our boat departed for Santiago, Cuba. 
About 150 were on the pier, singing and waving us goodbye. 
Their order, cleanliness and earnestness were afterwards 
commented on by passengers on our boat. We 
were complimented on having such friends and adherents. 

Santiago was the scene of the principal battle in the 
war which brought Cuban freedom from the yoke of 
Spain. We had the opportunity of visiting the battlefield 
—San Juan Hill, where the principal part of the battle 
was fought, and Kettle Hill, celebrated as the point 
where Colonel Roosevelt and his corps were engaged and 
suffered severe losses. 



A journey of about 500 miles brought us to Havana, 
in time for a publicly announced meeting, with just 
one hour to spare. English is comparatively little used in 
Havana, and our congregation was small— about 200. 
However, even in this small number we had the satisfaction 
of knowing that some received a blessing, of 
which we trust to hear further on. 

Monday, March 3, was spent in crossing from Havana 
to Key West. We arrived at Key West just in time for an 
advertised meeting in its largest auditorium. We had a 
splendid hearing on the topic, "Beyond the Grave." Our 
boat for Tampa permitting, we announced a meeting for 
the following night at the same place. The second subject 
was "Where Are the Dead?" The attention was excellent. 
Approximately, from five to six hundred of Key West's 
most intelligent and thoughtful people thus heard the 
Truth discussed for altogether four hours. We have hope 
that some of the hearers had eyes and ears of understanding, 
that some of them are of the consecrated class, and 
that the number of Bible Students there will be considerably 
increased. 

Tampa was our next stop. Our steamer arrived in 
good time for the appointed meeting on Wednesday, 
March 5th. The Casino was crowded with a very intelligent 
audience of citizens, Bible Students and tourists. 
About three hundred were turned away. Our topic was, 
"Beyond the Grave." After the meeting many stopped to 
greet us. Altogether, we had a very enjoyable time. 

The friends had made arrangements for a little convention 
of Bible Students, following the public address. 
We arranged our time of departure so as to permit the 
service of blessing the children, and a discourse for an 
hour on "The Three Bodies of Christ"— the Church in 
her three aspects portrayed in the Word of God. We trust 
that the brethren were encouraged, and that the fruitage 
of our visit may appear in the Kingdom, if not sooner. 

Pensacola, Fla., was our next stop. There we had from 
noon until 10:10 p.m., March 7th. The Bible Students here 
also had arranged for a little convention, and visitors 
from nearby towns were in attendance. The programme 
was the same as at Tampa— a semi-public meeting for the 
Bible Students, and another meeting for the general 
public, with the same topics as at Tampa. As usual, we 
had a crowded house and closest attention. 

Leaving at 10:00 p. m., Friday night, we reached Washington 
on Sunday morning, in time for a morning meeting 
with the class of Bible Students, and the usual Sunday 
afternoon meeting at Washington Temple. Leaving the 
capital, we reached Baltimore in time for the appointed 
meeting in the Academy of Music. The public discourse 
at Washington and Baltimore was the same— "The 
Grandest Inauguration." All interested, we presume, already 
have had reports of that discourse, as it appeared in 
the newspapers regularly publishing the sermons. 

Incidentally, we remark that a fund has been provided, 
so that any of the Lord's people who cannot afford to take 



a paper publishing the sermons weekly may be supplied 
free. The dear friends who have arranged this matter 
voluntarily are not only willing to pay for the papers, but 
very much pleased indeed to do so. We are again living 
in the time when the poor have the Gospel preached to 
them. Be sure to avail yourselves of this, another Divinely 
arranged matter. 

Address all requests for sermon papers to THE WATCH 
TOWER office. But will each ask for himself and not for 
another? It is the intention not to send papers to any 
who do not express a personal desire to have them. Send 
in your name thus for a free subscription. You need not 
be in fear of ever being asked to pay for the paper. Any 
such request would be a mistake, and should be promptly 
reported to THE WATCH TOWER office. 



page 95 

INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEARLY BELOVED PASTOR: 

Greetings in our dear Lord's name! 

There is in my mind a blessing for which I have become 
filled with the desire to convey to you my appreciation and 
gratitude. I refer to your suggestion, regarding the words, 
"What shall I render unto the Lord for all His benefits toward 
me." That these be our first waking thoughts. 

What a holy joy and assistance has resulted in my case! 
The moment I open my eyes in the morning I repeat it, and 
as you say, it is a glorious beginning of the day. To me 
it seems one positive evidence that a heart is really the dear 
Lord's when we desire from the earliest moment of the day 
forward to its end, to earnestly prove our love and loyalty 
to Him. One very sweet thought in connection with this 
is that it seems a tightening of heart-bonds, to know that 
at about the same hour every morning our prayer ascends 
with that of our faithful Pastor, whom many of us, by the 
dear Lord's grace, have come to love with an unspeakable 
tenderness. 

Yes, dear Brother, I agree with you that the present finds 
us having a very good time, with the peace of God in our 
hearts and all the joy of the Holy Spirit. As we pray for 
you, we desire your prayers— dear Brother Erb and I. With 
fervent Christian love, Your Sister in Him, 

MRS. JONATHAN R. ERB. 



MY DEARLY BELOVED PASTOR AND BROTHER: 

Greetings in the Lord! I wish to briefly express my growing 
appreciation of the Berean Questions on the Scripture 
Studies. Have been using them in connection with my daily 
reading in the second, third and fourth volumes. I tried not 
using them for about five days, thinking that I hardly needed 
them for volume four, but since I have taken them up again, 



I appreciate them more than ever. They help to emphasize 
important points which I otherwise might loose. How thankful 
I am for this further help which seems to me is also 
"meat in due season." 

The TOWERS are so helpful and encouraging. May you be 
even more richly blessed in your work and labor of love is 
my prayer. 

Please accept my hearty thanks for the helpful colporteur 
letter and the beautiful little pin. Sister Anna also wishes me 
to express her thanks for the HEAVENLY MANNA she received. 

My mother and sisters join in extending to you very much 
Christian love. In His Dear Name, L. GILLESPIE. 



page 97 

VOL. XXXIV APRIL 1 No. 
A. D. 1913-A. M. 6041 



CONTENTS 

"Shall a Nation be Born at Once?" 99 

Two Classes Born in Zion 99 

Rejoice With Jerusalem 100 

Qualities and Attributes of Jehovah 101 

The Omnipotence of Jehovah 101 

"God is Love" 102 

The Permission of Evil 102 

The Conflict Between Flesh and Spirit 103 

The Conflict Ends with Death 104 

Discerning the Will of God 104 

The Oneness of the Body of Christ 105 

The Gospel of Hope 106 

"The Whole Creation Groaneth" 106 

Gethsemane (Poem) 107 

Hated Without a Cause 107 

"If We Suffer With Him" 108 

Afflicted, Yet a Comforter 109 

The Value of Adversity 110 

An Interesting Letter Ill 

Berean Questions in Scripture Studies Ill 

page 98 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



ON MEMORIAL SUNDAY 

On April 20th, at 10 a. m., at Brooklyn Tabernacle, an 
opportunity will be given for symbolic baptism. 



1913-GENERAL CONVENTIONS- 1913 

We are giving timely notice of this year's Conventions to 
permit the friends to arrange their affairs accordingly, and to 
decide which they may prefer to attend. Places and dates 
as follows: 

Pertle Springs, Mo. (near Warrensburg) June 1-8 

Hot Springs, Ark June 1-8 

Madison, Wis June 29-July 6 

Springfield, Mass July 13-20 

Toronto, Canada July 20-27 

Asheville, N. C July 20-27 

Mountain Lake Park, Md July 20-27 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR MAY 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. 
At the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns 
for May follow: (1) 165; (2) 1; (3) 160; (4) 176; (5) 191; 
(6) 327; (7) 12; (8) 130; (9) 260; (10) 324; (11) 195; (12) 
145; (13) 90; (14) 312; (15) 315; (16) 108; (17) 299; (18) 314; 
(19) 301; (20) 72; (21) 201; (22) 107; (23) 109; (24) 87; 
(25) 16; (26) 257; (27) 5; (28) 29; (29) 135; (30) 151; (31) 93. 



R5211 : page 99 

"SHALL A NATION BE BORN AT ONCE?" 

"Before she travailed, she brought forth; before her pain 
came, she was delivered of a Man child. Who hath heard 
such a thing? Who hath seen such things? Shall 
the earth be made to bring forth in one day? or shall 
a nation be born at once? For as soon as Zion travailed, 
she brought forth her children."— Isa. 66:7,8. 

THE name "Zion" was anciently applied to a 
prominent hill of Jerusalem, generally regarded 
as the southwestern and highest of 
those on which the city was built. It included 



the most ancient part of the city, 

with the citadel; and having been first occupied 

by a palace, it was called "the city of 

David." (2 Chron. 5:2.) It was also called 

the "holy hill," or "hill of the sanctuary" 

(Psa. 2:6), being the original site of the 

tabernacle pitched by David for the reception of the ark. 

By the Prophets the name "Zion" was often put for 
Jerusalem itself, and also for its inhabitants, who were 
sometimes called sons and daughters of Zion. The word 
was often used in a wider sense, as was Jerusalem also, 
to signify the entire nation of Israel. And since fleshly 
Israel was typical of Spiritual Israel, the name "Zion" applies 
with still deeper significance to the Gospel Church, a 
term which throughout the Gospel Age included the entire 
body of professed Christians, of whom all the truly 
consecrated are on probation for full membership in the 
Church triumphant— the true Church, the Zion of the 
future and the true Zion of the present Age, the Elect 
Little Flock, to whom it is the Father's good pleasure to 
give the Kingdom. (Luke 12:32.) In the symbolic application 
of the term we must, therefore, judge from the 
character of the prophecy whether the reference is to the 
fleshly or to the Spiritual House of Israel, or to both; and, 
if to the latter, whether it applies in its broadest sense to 
the nominal Gospel Church, or to the Elect Little Flock, 
the only true Church in God's estimation. 

The symbolic travail in the above prophecy is a reference 
to the great time of trouble— the travail that is to 
come upon the nominal Gospel Church, great "Babylon," 
from which some are to be accounted worthy to escape. 
(Luke 21:36.) This is indicated by the preceding verses, 
which locate the time of this prophecy as synchronous 
with that wherein is heard "a voice of noise [confusion] 
from the city" [Babylon], and "a voice [of truth and 
warning] from the Temple" [the Elect Little Flock of 
consecrated and faithful ones], and "a voice of Jehovah, 
that rendereth recompense to His enemies"— in the great 
time of trouble.— Isa. 66:6. 

The travail that is coming upon nominal Zion— "Christendom," 
"Babylon"— will be a great and sore affliction, 
"a time of trouble such as was not since there was a 
nation." (Dan. 12:1.) But the marvelous thing the 
Prophet here has to record is that a Man child is to be 
born out of Zion before this travail comes. This is a 
striking reference to the fact, elsewhere clearly taught, 
that the ripe wheat of the Gospel Church are to be separated 
from the tares, that they are to be gathered into 
the barn condition of safety before the burning, the consuming 
trouble, shall come upon the latter. (Matt. 13:30.) 
This Man child, therefore, is the Little Flock— the true 
Zion in God's estimation, the Body of Christ; as it is 
written, "There shall come out of Zion [the nominal Gospel 
Church] the Deliverer [The Christ, Head and Body], 
and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob [fleshly 
Israel, or Zion]."— Rom. 11:26. 



TWO CLASSES BORN IN ZION 

This is the Man child that is to bless all the families of 
the earth. (Gen. 28:14; Gal. 3:16,29.) The birth of the 
Man child is the First Resurrection. Blessed and holy 
are all they that have part in the First Resurrection. (Rev. 20:6.) 
Such are now begotten of God by the Word of 
Truth, and quickened by the Holy Spirit (James 1:18; 
Eph. 2:1; Rom. 8:11), and in due time— before the travail 
—they will be born in the glorious likeness of Christ. 

The birth of the Man child began over eighteen hundred 
years ago with the resurrection of Christ Jesus. 
There the Head of this Body of Christ came forth; and 
as surely as the Head has been born, so surely shall the 
Body come forth. "Shall I bring to the birth, and not 
cause to bring forth? saith the Lord: shall I cause to 
bring forth and shut the womb? saith thy God." (Isa. 66:9.) 
Ah, no: "the Man child," The Christ complete, the 
Great Deliverer, shall come forth! 

Yet "who hath heard such a thing? who hath seen 
such things?" for not only shall the Body of Christ, the 
true overcoming Zion, the "holy nation, the peculiar people," 
be delivered out of nominal Zion before the travail; 
but when she travails, a Great Company of other children 
will be born. This is the Great Company described in the 
Apocalypse as coming up out of the great tribulation, having 
washed their robes and made them white in the blood 
of the Lamb. (Rev. 7:14.) The Body of Christ, the Man 
child, born before the travail, will be composed of those 
who heard and obeyed the call, "Come out of her, My 
people," etc. (Rev. 18:4), and who were counted worthy 
to have a part in the First Resurrection. 

The many children born through the great tribulation 

R5211 :page 100 

will be those believers in nominal Zion, Babylon, who have 
allowed themselves to become measurably intoxicated by 
the spirit of Babylon, the spirit of the world, and who, 
therefore, are not quick to discern and prompt to obey the 
voice of the Lord in this harvest time. They fail to see 
that it is harvest time, and consequently fail to understand 
the separating work which the sickle of Present Truth is 
accomplishing. They regard those servants of God who 
wield the sickle as enemies, who oppose them and the 
Lord, whom they serve. 

The great tribulation, or travail, that is coming upon 
nominal Zion is the only thing that can convince such as 
these. This class includes a large number of believing 
children of God, whose manner of life is righteous and 
generally circumspect, but who are nevertheless worldly-minded, 
and who are not rendering themselves a living 
sacrifice to God, following the Lord through evil and 
through good report, and meekly bearing the reproach of 
Christ. They have respect to men's opinions, traditions 



and plans, and fail to submit themselves fully to the will 
and plan of the Lord. And only when they behold the 
wreck of nominal Zion— Christendom, Babylon— will they 
realize its gross errors and be delivered from them and it. 

CHRIST A STUMBLING-STONE TO SPIRITUAL ISRAEL 

"Behold," says the Prophet, "I lay in Zion a stumbling-stone 
and rock of offense; and whosoever believeth on 
Him shall not be ashamed." (Rom. 9:33; Isa. 8:14,15; 
28:16.) That stumbling-stone is redemption through the 
precious blood of Christ. At that stone the fleshly Zion 
stumbled, and so now the nominal spiritual Israel is 
stumbling at the same stone; for it was to be "a stone of 
stumbling and a rock of offense to both the houses of 
Israel" (Isa. 8:14)— the fleshly and the spiritual. 

The Elect Little Flock of overcomers do not so stumble, 
but recognize this as the chief corner-stone of the true 
Zion, remembering the words of the Prophet, "Behold I 
lay in Zion a chief corner-stone, elect, precious; and he 
that believeth on Him shall not be confounded. Unto 
you, therefore, which believe [in Christ as your Redeemer 
who bought you with His precious blood] He is precious; 
but unto them which be disobedient,. ..the 
same is made. ..a stone of stumbling and a rock 
of offense, even to them which stumble at the Word, being 
disobedient; whereunto also they were appointed." 
(I Peter 2:6-8.) God does not purpose to deliver His 
Kingdom unto any of the disobedient. They need the 
fiery trial of the coming tribulation to bring them into a 
proper attitude before God; and hence they must come up 
through the great tribulation. 

While those who are truly begotten of God, who have 
been quickened by His Spirit to the new spiritual life, and 
who are faithful in fulfilling their covenant of entire 
consecration as living sacrifices unto God, may well rejoice 
in hope of the First Resurrection, and of being born 
before the travail upon nominal Zion, it is also a cause of 
rejoicing that many of the weaker children of God, now 
stumbling with nominal Zion, will, nevertheless, by and by 
be recovered and saved so as by fire [born] through the 
great tribulation [travail], in which nominal Zion shall 
expire, but from which they shall come forth. 

REJOICE WITH JERUSALEM 

"Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad with her, all 
ye that love her: rejoice for joy with her, all ye that 
mourn for her." "Behold, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing 
and her people a joy. And I will rejoice in Jerusalem and 
joy in My people, and the voice of weeping shall no more 
be heard in her, nor the voice of crying."— Isa. 66:10; 
65:18,19. 

This call to rejoice with Jerusalem immediately follows 
the prophetic announcement of the birth of Zion, 
the terms Zion and Jerusalem being here used interchangeably. 



The birth of Zion, the exaltation of the Body of 
Christ to Kingdom power and glory, will indeed be a cause 
for rejoicing on the part of all people. It is for this exaltation 
and manifestation of the sons of God that the whole 
creation waits, groaning and travailing.— Rom. 8:19-23. 

When the true Zion is thus exalted, then will follow 
the great work of the Kingdom. The travail upon nominal 
Zion immediately succeeding will quickly liberate the 
true children of God still in her, and they shall come forth 
to larger views and higher principles, and to develop into 
nobler characters. The rule of the iron rod will quickly 
subdue all things, completely breaking up the whole present 
social fabric and accomplishing the leveling process 
which will make ready for the reign of righteousness. 

Then the great Millennial reign of righteousness will 
begin, when every man will have a full, fair opportunity 
to gain everlasting life by faith and obedience to the New 
Covenant. And no man's opportunity will be less than a 
hundred years; though if he wastes all of that time without 
taking any steps toward reformation, he will be considered 
unworthy of life and will be cut off in the Second 
Death. (Isa. 65:20.) But the obedient shall eat the good 
of the land. (Isa. 1:19.) "They shall build houses and inhabit 
them [there will not be so many houses to let in 
those days probably, but improved and cultivated homesteads, 
in which the owners shall take pleasure and comfort]; 
and they shall plant vineyards and eat the fruit of 
them. They shall not build and another inhabit; they 
shall not plant and another eat; for as the days of a tree 
are the days of My people ["They shall renew their 
strength"— Isa. 40:31]; and Mine Elect [all the faithful and 
obedient then] shall long enjoy the work of their hands. 
They shall not labor in vain, nor bring forth for trouble; 
for they are the seed [the children] of the blessed of the 
Lord [the Church], and their offspring with them."— 
Isa. 65:21-23. 

"And it shall come to pass that before they call I will 
answer, and while they are yet speaking I will hear"— so 
near will the Lord be, so mindful of all their interests. 
"The wolf and the lamb shall feed together [The reference 
here may be to men formerly of wolf-like or lamb-like 
character, or to animals, or to both— the expression 
signifying in any case a reign of peace]; and the lion shall 
eat straw like the bullock, and dust shall be the serpent's 
meat [—another expression similar to, 'His enemies shall 
lick the dust,' signifying the destruction of the serpent, 
or rather of Satan, whom the serpent symbolizes]. They 
shall not hurt nor destroy in all My holy mountain [Kingdom], 
saith the Lord."-Isa. 65:24,25. 

Thus the birth of the true Zion will be a cause for rejoicing 
among all who truly love righteousness: for 
though it will first dash in pieces all their long cherished 
hopes, it is the dawn of real hope for all the world. It 
will humble all their pride, despoil them of all their cherished 
possessions and what they have come to esteem 
their rights, break down all their boasted institutions, civil, 



social and religious, and completely wreck all order and 
all hope, until they begin to see hope in the new order of 
things inaugurated by the Kingdom of God. 

Yes, rejoice with Jerusalem, Zion, and be glad with 
her, all ye that love her, as well as all ye that mourn for 
her now and try to dissuade her from her course, not seeing 
the prize at the end of her life of faithful self-sacrifice; 
for soon her glory will appear, not only to her own 
exceeding joy, but also to the joy and blessing of "all the 
families of the earth." 



R5209 :page 101 

QUALITIES AND ATTRIBUTES OF JEHOVAH 

THE SCRIPTURES declare a "beginning of 

the creation of God." His qualities and attributes 

were the same then that they are 

now; for the Scriptures also declare His 

unchangeableness— "the same yesterday, today 

and forever."— Hebrews 13:8; 

Psalm 90:1,2. 

The completeness of the Divine perfection 
is such that companionship is not necessary 
to the happiness of Jehovah. The 

One who "inhabiteth eternity" is self-centered. The creation 
of angels and of man was indeed His pleasure, because, 
benevolently, He desires to do good, to give capacity 
for pleasure and to afford it opportunity for gratification. 
Furthermore, the highest good of His creatures calls for 
an exhibition to the full of all the elements of Divine 
character— Divine Justice, Love, Power and Wisdom. 

BELIEF IN SATAN LOGICAL 

The declaration of the Bible respecting the Father's 
Power is that "the eyes of the Lord [the intelligence of 
Jehovah] are in every place, beholding the evil and the 
good." (Proverbs 15:3.) This statement implies that 
there are things evil as well as good; things which God 
approves and things which He disapproves. This citation 
comes the nearest to a suggestion of God's omnipresence 
contained in the Scriptures. 

The fact that the Lord has knowledge of all conditions 
of things is not out of harmony with the other fact that 
He permits conditions which He disapproves, and which 
He declares that He will ultimately destroy. "All the 
wicked will He destroy."— Psalm 145:20. 

If we accept the great Divine premise that the Bible 
is the Word of God, then we are bound to accept the 
declaration that there is a being called Satan, that he is 
the "god of this world" (2 Corinthians 4:4), and that he 
now works in the "hearts of the children of disobedience." 
(Ephesians 2:2.) These words imply not only that there 



are evil principles at work in this world, but that behind 
them there are evil spirit beings, of whom Satan is the 
inspirer and through whom he is working. 

Certain statements are made respecting Satan which 
could not properly be applied to a principle of evil, or to a 
working of error; as, for instance, Jesus declared that 
Satan was a "murderer" from the beginning— and a 
"liar." (John 8:44.) Errors and principles are not murderers 
and liars. It would be a misuse of language to 
make such application. Only an intelligent being can be 
a murderer or a liar. Hence the whole tenor of the Scriptures 

R5210 :page 101 

upholds the assertion that there is such a being as 
Satan and that he is in opposition to God. 

If we were to suppose the everlasting continuance of 
Satan as a being, as an adversary of God, the matter 
would seem strange to us, because irreconcilable with our 
conception of Divine Power. We have the statement of 
the Scriptures respecting his reign and ultimate destruction. 
(Hebrews 2:14.) With this information we have a 
reasonable, logical thought on the subject. When we consider 
the Scriptural presentation further, that originally 
Satan was not an evil being, but that he made himself 
evil by the exercise of personal liberty and became the 
enemy of God, the subject seems to be clear and reasonable. 
In fact, this is the only rational solution to the problem 
of his existence. 

To suppose that there is no Satan is to suppose that 
God has permitted His Word to deceive mankind in this 
respect, or that the Devil is a manifestation of God Himself 
—a position which is unthinkable. Nor is it logical to 
say that there is a Devil, an opponent of God, and at the 
same time to maintain that God is all in all, and omnipresent 
—everywhere present. But we do not find this latter 
statement to be Biblical. The Scriptural proposition is 
that at the close of the Millennial Age, when Christ shall 
have conquered sin and Satan, when Satan shall have 
been destroyed, and when the Kingdom of the Universe 
shall be in absolute harmony, then God will be all in all. 
(I Corinthians 15:28.) To all eternity there will be no 
opposition to His will. There is opposition now, however, 
in many places and at many times. But ultimately, 
God will have full control. 

THE OMNIPOTENCE OF JEHOVAH 

To say that God is all Power is sophistry of language 
which often misleads the one questioning as well as the 
one attempting to answer him. The statement is not 
correct. If God is all Power, then He is not Love or 
Justice or Wisdom. He would thus be limited to the one 
great attribute of Power, or force. Such cannot be the 
thought entertained by any logical mind. It is, nevertheless, 
a form of statement that is often used, perhaps unintentionally, 



but very injuriously to the reasoning 
faculties. 

The Bible nowhere says God is all Power. There is a 
marked difference between being power and exercising 
power. God is all-powerful. He has the ability to exercise 
power in any direction to the extent that He wills. 
If He had chosen, He could have so created Satan that 
he could not think or do other than in harmony with the 
Divine will; or He could have exercised His power to 
crush the Adversary and thus have destroyed him long 
ago. But He has permitted Satan to exist for six thousand 
years, in the sense that He does not restrain the 
Devil from doing evil. The Scriptures, however, tell us 
that God will eventually destroy him. 

The scope of the exercise of Divine Power is the Universe, 
but it is difficult for our finite minds to comprehend 
the meaning of this word— Universe. Astronomers tell 
us that by the aid of photo-astronomy they can see nearly 
125,000,000 suns— the centers of solar systems like our 
own, with supposedly more than a billion of planets more 
or less like our earth. These, we may assume, are in 
process of development, are in preparation for inhabitants, 
whom the great Creator will in due time provide. From 
the Scriptural standpoint, however, the great work of 
human creation began with our earth. What a boundless 
thought we have in the mere suggestion that the billion 
worlds are to be peopled, and that the lessons of righteousness 
and sin, of life and death eternal, now being taught 
to humanity, will never need to be repeated! 

We stand appalled at the immensity of space and at 
the law and order which everywhere reign! We heartily 
assent to the words of the Prophet David, "Day unto 
day uttereth speech, and night unto night showeth knowledge. 
There is no speech nor language where their voice 
is not heard." (Psalm 19:2,3.) The person who can 
look upon this wonderful display of superhuman power 
and believe that these worlds created themselves, shows to 
the majority of us that, if he has brains, they are sadly 
disordered, unbalanced. Whoever, after mature thought, 
concludes that there is no God, that everything came to 
be what it is by chance or by the operation of some blind 
force— that person is described in the Scriptures in the 
following words, "The fool hath said in his heart, There 
is no God."— Psalm 14:1. 

As scientific instruments demonstrate to us the immensity 
of the Universe, we perceive that the Prophet used 
very moderate language indeed in his description of the 
majestic power and greatness of the Creator, when he 
represents Jehovah as weighing the mountains in His 
balance and holding the seas in the hollow of His Hand. 

R5210 : page 102 

(Isaiah 40:12.) From His standpoint, a thousand years 

are but as a watch in the night. (Psalm 90:4.) How insignificantly 

small we all feel in the presence of our God! 



No wonder some great men are inclined to say that humanity 
is too insignificant from the Divine standpoint to 
be worthy of the least consideration— much less to be 
objects of Divine care and providence! 

THE OMNISCIENCE OF JEHOVAH 

To say that God is all Knowledge is also an inaccurate 
statement. If God were all Knowledge, how could He 
be all Power? God has all Knowledge, possesses all 
Knowledge. But this is a different matter. If we say, 
"The boy has a hoop," we do not mean that he is a hoop. 
To be a hoop and to have a hoop are not the same. God 
is omniscient; that is, He knows all things. This very fact 
proves that He is a personal God. There can be no 
knowledge without personality. Knowledge implies cognizance 
of external things. Amongst the things outside 
the Divine Person are things both good and evil. 

When we read that God created man in His own image 
and likeness (Genesis 1:26,27), we may know that 
man is not God. He was merely made in the image of 
God. Because God is perfect, therefore the human being 
made in His image would be satisfactory to God. That 
human being had knowledge. But he neglected the Word 
of God, and thus he learned something by his neglect. 
What he learned is mentioned in the Scriptures. "He is 
become as one of Us [the Elohim], to know good and 
evil." (Genesis 3:22.) This statement proves that God 
knows good and evil. 

If God did not know evil from good, then He could not 
be our Instructor. By His laws, His principles, God sets 
before our minds that which is right and that which is 
wrong. Adam knew how to discriminate between right 
and wrong, but his disobedience increased his knowledge 
of both good and evil. In his fallen condition man cannot 
always determine between them. Therefore God gave 
Israel a Law, and man's knowledge of that Law assists 
him to discriminate between good and evil. 

One of old time said, "Thou art a God which hidest 
Thyself." (Isaiah 45:15.) How true! As a result the 
world by wisdom knows not God. He is near in His 
Wisdom and Love, yet He can be seen only by those 
whose eyes of understanding have been opened. But we 
are glad that the time is coming when all the blind eyes 
shall see clearly. "As truly as I live," says Jehovah, "all 
the earth shall be filled with the glory of the Lord." "The 
earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the 
Lord, as the waters cover the sea." (Num. 14:21; Hab. 2:14.) 
Then all shall see what God hath wrought, and 
our temporary blindness will but accentuate the glorious 
brightness of His Wisdom, Justice, Love and Power. 

"GOD IS LOVE" 

God is Love in the sense that the term Love represents 
the central principle of the Divine character. There is 



nothing contrary to love in God. The Scriptures do not 
teach that there is nothing except love anywhere— that 
God is everywhere and love is everywhere. But they 
teach that God is a loving character. This does not militate 
against the other statements that God is just, wise and 
powerful. But this quality of Love best of all represents 
the Divine Being. All of His Justice is in harmony with 
His Love. There is no exercise of Justice or Power in an 
evil sense, for all His attributes work together for good to 
all His creatures. 

The Scriptures encourage us to reason from the known 
to the unknown. They tell us that although God is so 
great, so wise, so powerful, He is also just and loving. 
And the more we consider the matter, the more reasonable 
the Bible description of the Almighty appears. His 
Power we see demonstrated. The Wisdom of One so 
great cannot be doubted. When we come to consider, 
Could One so wise and so powerful be unjust or ungenerous? 
Our hearts answer, No ! No one is really great 
who is devoid of justice and love. So surely as our God 
is Jehovah, He must possess these qualities. 

When we came in contact with the Bible, and particularly 
after we learned something of its teachings and got 
rid of the misrepresentations which gathered about it 
during the Dark Ages— then we began to recognize it as 
the Message of Jehovah to His creatures. It informs us 
that the great Creator of the Universe is not only Almighty 
and All-wise, but loving and kind, with Justice 
as the foundation of His Empire. (Psalm 89:13,14.) 
From the Bible we learn, too, that our Creator has been 
pleased to make us in His own image, in His own moral 
likeness, to the intent that we may enjoy Him and the 
fruits of His righteousness to all eternity. 

All the Power, all the Justice, all the Wisdom, of God 
must be used in accordance with His own character, which 
is Love. It will therefore be loving Wisdom, loving Justice, 
which He will use toward all creation in the exercise 
of His loving Power for their good. He created man. 
He permitted Adam to disobey His Law, telling us that 

R5211 :page 102 

He knew in advance what man would do and that He 
permitted man to do wrong.— Isaiah 46:9,10. 

In permitting sin to enter the world, God had two ends 
in view. He purposed to give an illustration to the angels 
respecting the results of obedience and of disobedience. 
He also intended that the human family should gain a lesson 
from this experience. Thus we know that God's arrangement 
from the beginning has been for a resurrection 
of the dead. "As all in Adam die, even so shall all in 
Christ be made alive."— I Corinthians 15:21,22. 

If we were to take any fragment of Scripture as a 
basis for a system of doctrine, we would find ourselves 
either teaching universalism on the one hand, or claiming 
that God has no Wisdom, or that He purposed the evil, or 



what not. We would get into all sorts of confusion. But 
when we see the perfect adjustment of God's Justice, Wisdom, 
Love and Power, and realize that He has good purposes 
respecting the evil, that He has fully marked out 
what it shall do and what it shall not do, either in its 
present influence, or in its ultimate influence, this gives us 
confidence in the character of God. 

THE PERMISSION OF EVIL 

From only one standpoint can Divine Wisdom and 
Love be discerned in connection with the history of mankind. 
It must include the Age about to be ushered in— 
the period of Messiah's reign of righteousness. This will 
be the time when every member of Adam's race, sharing 
the penalty of sin and death because inheriting his weaknesses, 
will be set free from these; the time when the 
full knowledge of the glory of God shall be granted to 
every human being, and when a full opportunity will 
come to each, by obedience, to gain life everlasting. 

The lesson thus far taught is the goodness and the 
severity of God— His goodness in bringing us into being, 
and His severity in the punishment of Father Adam's 
wilful transgression; also to both men and angels, Justice, 
unswerving Justice. The next lesson to be taught to 
God's intelligent creatures is that God is Love. The 
foundation for these lessons is already laid in the Ransom-sacrifice 
of Jesus, through and on account of which 
He becomes the world's Redeemer and Restorer. A few 

R5211 :page 103 

can believe this Message by faith; but not many have the 
ear of faith or the eye of faith. Only the saints are 
able to appreciate this great fact at the present time. 

That which is now secret and understood only by the 
few is shortly to be made manifest to every creature in 
heaven and in earth. All will then see and be able to 
appreciate the great fact that the redemption accomplished 
by the sacrifice of Jesus is world-wide and means a full 
deliverance from the sin-and-death condemnation which 
passed upon Adam and all of his race, to all who will accept 
the same as a gift from God. The remainder will 
be destroyed in the Second Death. 

THE SECOND DEATH THE ESSENCE OF WISDOM 

As for the Second Death, we easily see that if God 
created man in His own image, man must of necessity be 
a free moral agent; otherwise he would not be in 
God's image. If he was created a free moral agent, he 
must have the power or privilege to will wrong as well as 
right. If he exercise his power in the direction of evil, 
God has the power to destroy him. On the other hand, if 
he live in harmony with righteousness God has the power 
to grant him life to all eternity. 



The destruction of the wicked in the Second Death 
is the essence of Wisdom. As to the declaration that God 
is too pure to behold evil (Habakkuk 1:13), the thought 
of the original seems to be that God's character is so pure 
and so righteous that He will not continue to behold evil. 
He will not permit evil to exist to all eternity, for this 
condition would not be pleasing to Him. 

This very thought implies that there is evil to behold. 
If not so, how could He behold it? But this is all consistent 
with the Divine Plan. Ultimately all evil shall be 
destroyed. Ultimately all creatures which are "in heaven 
and on earth and such as are in the sea" shall be heard 
saying, "Blessing and honor and glory and power, be unto 
Him that sitteth upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb forever 
and ever."— Revelation 5:13. 



R5211 :page 103 

THE CONFLICT BETWEEN FLESH AND SPIRIT 

"The flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against 
the flesh; and these are contrary the one to the other; so 
that ye cannot do the things that ye would."— Galatians 5:17. 

THE APOSTLE is addressing these words to 

Christians, who have become New Creatures 

in Christ, to whom old things have passed 

away, and all things have become new. 

These are said to be begotten of the Holy 

Spirit and therefore to be, in reality, spirit 

beings, who will be changed in the Resurrection, 

"in a moment, in the twinkling of 

an eye"— spirit beings who have not yet 

been completed. But the New Creature 

has only the flesh in which to operate at the present time. 

God expects that the New Creature will manifest his 
loyalty, and demonstrate worthiness of perfection of the 
spirit in the First Resurrection. The Apostle says that 
such must expect to find a conflict going on— the Spirit 
lusting against the flesh and the flesh against the Spirit. 
The word lust here used is a good Anglo-Saxon word 
meaning desire. The New Creature strongly desires to be 
loyal to God and to do His will. The flesh strongly desires 
against all this. 

These two spirits are in opposition. The two are in 
antagonism. The flesh desires to serve itself. It has 
earthly desires, earthly objects, earthly aims. The New 
Creature desires to set its affections on the Heavenly 
things and to sacrifice the earthly interests and aims and 
prospects, to live as a spirit being tabernacling in the 
flesh— to live no longer as a human being with earthly 
interests. Whatever serves the one interest is in conflict 
with the other interest. 



NEW CREATURES HAMPERED BY THE FLESH 

The words of our text are not addressed to the world, 
but to the Church. The Church has been begotten of the 
Holy Spirit— a New Creation. If these live after the 
flesh, if they renounce their covenant of sacrifice, they 
will die. But if they mortify, or kill, the deeds of the 
flesh and abandon this wholly for the Spirit, they shall 
live— have everlasting life. We all see that in our Lord 
Jesus, holy, harmless, undefiled, there was such a contrast; 
the earthly interests drawing one way, and the Heavenly 
interests another. These were all pure and perfect desires; 
nevertheless, as the New Creature, begotten of the 
Holy Spirit, He was obliged to overcome them. 

We recall our Lord's words very near the conclusion 
of His ministry: "I have a baptism to be baptized with; 
and how am I straitened till it be accomplished!" (Luke 12:50.) 
The conflict was going on; but the Lord's spirit 
was firm, and He was obedient to the terms of His sacrifice. 
Being perfect, however, He could do those things 
that He would. He did them, and won the great victory. 

In our case the matter is different. We are by nature 
fallen. Our earthly appetites and tastes are depraved. 
All are more or less selfish; some more depraved than 
are others. 

Our flesh is depraved; we cannot do the things that we 
would. Hence we need the merit of Christ to assist us; 
hence the Apostle tells us that every time we as New 
Creatures have done wrong, we should acknowledge the 
error and go to the Throne of Heavenly Grace to obtain 
mercy and find help for future needs. Thus we show to 
God the loyalty of our hearts. All those having Christ's 
mind and disposition are hampered merely by the weaknesses 
of the flesh, the fallen flesh; but they have an Advocate, 
to whom they may go and have these weaknesses 
of the fallen flesh compensated for. 

The question may arise, Why should there be any 
conflict between the flesh and the spirit in our case? and 
how do we overcome these weaknesses sufficiently to 
desire to become joint-sacrificers with Christ, before we 
are begotten of the Spirit at all? The answer is that 
while the whole race is fallen, many of the fallen ones 
realize the shame of their condition and long to do 
righteously, but are unable to do so. They find themselves 
to be slaves of sin. They are weak; they are so 
bound that they cannot do the things that they would. 
Many of the Jews were in this condition. They were 
desirous to do God's will, but were unable to do so. The 
desire was there, the will was there. But because of 
man's fallen condition there were other qualities of their 
mind in opposition. 

The human mind is made up of various qualities. 
When sin came in, the lower and baser of these qualities 
of the original man gained the ascendancy, and the nobler 
of these qualities gradually became effaced, until the original 
likeness of God was measurably gone from humanity. 



But in some of the sons and daughters of Adam there is 
sufficient of the original God-likeness to oppose sin and to 
seek to have reformation of life. Such good influences 
are manifest even amongst the heathen. 
During the Jewish Age, some amongst the Jews were 

R5212:page 104 

seeking to live in harmony with God. Others were following 

the course of Belial, and serving Satan and giving 

themselves up to selfishness. And so it is today. The 

Jews could not keep their Law, and unless they could 

keep the Law perfectly, they would fail of getting everlasting 

life, just the same as those who had never been 

under the Law. Since Pentecost there has been a different 

arrangement. God has provided a Savior, whose 

death is efficacious for the sins of the world. 

THE CONFLICT ENDS WITH DEATH 

Why, then, has this death not yet been effective for 
the world? God is wishing to find a class willing to lay 
down life itself in God's service. Some of these fallen 
children of Adam, noting the call of God's Word— to 
become footstep-followers of Jesus— have enough strength 
of character to follow in Christ's footsteps. They manifest 
their determination by consecrating their lives to His 
service. Such a consecration means that the higher 
qualities of the mind have united, and have gotten control, 
of the lower qualities of the mind, putting them under 
constraint. 

Under the inspiring influence of God's promises and 
the Message of the Gospel, they are through the great 
Advocate received as members of His Body— as New 
Creatures in Christ, begotten of the Holy Spirit. Thenceforth 
they have a relationship with God. They are expected 
then to go forward from step to step, continually 
fighting against the snares of Satan. This is the Christian's 
life— the battle mentioned in our text. The two influences 
—the flesh and the Spirit— are contrary; hence 
the conflict. 

There is no need to go outside and battle with others. 
There is plenty to do within. Happy are those who, by 
their endeavors, show their loyalty to God! In due time, 
by the power of the First Resurrection, they will lose the 
old body altogether and will be clothed upon with immortality. 
If we are "faithful unto death," we shall be 
like Him, our Lord and Head, see Him as He is, and 
share His glory. 

There is, however, a great and continuous battle; for 
although the new will asserts itself, puts the body under 
and compels its subjection to the new mind, nevertheless, 
the mortal body, not being actually dead, is continually 
coming in contact with the world and the Adversary, and 
is continually being stimulated by these and by earthly 
cares, ambitions, methods, strivings, conflicts, to insubordination 



to our new will. 

No saint is without experience of this kind— fightings 
without and within. It must be a fight to the finish, or 
the great prize for which we fight will not be gained. For 
although the New Creature, by the Lord's grace and 
strength, repeatedly masters the mortal body, nevertheless, 
until death there can be no cessation of the conflict. 

"How goes the fight with thee? 

The life-long battle 'gainst all evil things? 
Thine no low strife, and thine no selfish aim; 

It is the war of giants and of kings! 



"Say not the fight is long; 

'Tis but one battle and the fight is o'er; 
No second warfare mars thy victory, 

And the one triumph is for evermore!" 



R5212 : page 104 

DISCERNING THE WILL OF GOD 

"Teach me Thy way, O Lord."— Psalm 27:11. 

THE LORD does not wish us to walk by sight, 

and thus to have no difficulty in discerning 

His will. Therefore He puts matters in 

such a way that both our obedience and our 

perseverance are tested; for we are to walk 

by faith and not by sight. In order to do 

this, we should daily take everything to 

the Lord in prayer. We should not undertake 

anything without seeking to know 

the will of the Lord respecting the matter. 

Since, however, we have no miraculous insight 
through which we may know what is the will of God in 
all the details of every-day life, we are not always able to 
discern that will. When the matter is one about which the 
Scriptures give instructions, then the way is clear; for 
the only course which the child of God desires to follow 
is that of obedience. But when the matter is such as depends 
upon one's own judgment, then the way is not so 
clear. Realizing that our judgment is not sufficient, we 
should not tax our minds with what we know is beyond our 
power to decide, but should leave the matter to the Lord. 

We know that the Lord can direct our course in whatever 
way He chooses, if we put ourselves under His care. 
So at the beginning of the day we can say, "Lord, here 
am I; I thank Thee for the privilege of another day, 
which I hope will be full of opportunities for serving the 
Truth and the brethren. I ask Thee to direct my thoughts, 
words and conduct, that I may serve Thee acceptably." 



Then we may go forth and use our best judgment. 

If the Lord wants to lead us in one direction or another, 
that is His part, not ours. We have solicited His 
guidance; and our eyes are alert to know and to do His 
will at any cost. In this attitude we may rest easy, 
knowing that God is able and willing to overrule all 
things for His glory and our profit. 

As a child, the Editor noticed that some people had a 
certain way of going to the Lord with all of their affairs. 
They would open their Bibles at random; and whatever 
verse their thumb or finger happened to touch they would 
consider to be the Lord's message to them; and they 
would follow its suggestion carefully. Sometimes the 
text to which they opened seemed to be a remarkable answer 
to their prayer. 

This method is not one with which the Editor desires 
to find fault. But since it did not appeal to his judgment, 
he took the matter to the Lord in prayer and said, "Father, 
I am really afraid to adopt this plan. So if it please Thee, 
I would rather be directed by my judgment than by this 
method; for my mind does not seem capable of accepting 
it." The Lord seems to have taken him at his word. 

There is surely a reason why right is right in every 
matter; and we should desire to know it. We should desire 
to know why God wishes a matter this way rather 
than that way; not that we doubt His wisdom, but that 
we may enter into the spirit of the Divine regulations. 
The Editor's method of seeking Divine guidance is to 
study the Scriptures, taking all of the verses bearing upon 
the subject under consideration, and trying to find the 
underlying principle of God's dealings and teachings. 

By this method he has much more happiness than he 
otherwise could have. By following the other method he 
could not know whether God or the Devil or chance 
would open the Bible for him. He much prefers to follow 
what he believes to be the teaching of the Word of 
God; that is, to commit all to the Father in prayer, asking 
Him to guide both reason and judgment, and then go out 

R5212 : page 105 

and use that judgment and reason to the best of his ability. 
Even if God should permit him to use his judgment 
in a way that afterward appeared not to have been the 
best, nevertheless the Father may use it to bring some 
great blessing or profitable lesson. By judgment, of 
course, he means his understanding of the Father's Word 
and of His providential leadings. Thus doing, he knows 
that all things shall work together for good.— Rom. 8:28. 



R5212 : page 105 

THE ONENESS OF THE BODY OF CHRIST 



"For as the body is one, and hath many members, and all 
the members of that one body, being many, are one body; so 
also is Christ. For by one Spirit are we all baptized 
into one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether 
we be bond or free; and have all been made to 
drink into one Spirit."— I Corinthians 12:12,13. 

WE ARE all baptized by one Spirit into one 

Body. The figure of a human body of 

many members, operating together for the 

general good and for the accomplishment 

of one general purpose, one work, is a mental 

picture that is very generally made use 

of by the whole world. It is not confined 

to the Church. In our own country we 

speak of the President, our Chief Executive, 

as the Head of the Government. We speak 

of the Congressional Body and the Senatorial Body, and 

of the co-operation of the various members of these bodies 

in a work for the general good. 

The specially called out of God's people during this 
Gospel Age, whether they be called out from amongst the 
Jews or from amongst the Gentiles, are of one Body, because 
the Body is one, and not a divided Body. In this 
respect, the Body of Christ is different from the political 
bodies of today. In the United States, for instance, 
there are the Republican party and the Democratic party. 

R5213 : page 105 

They are not united in the most desirable sense. But the 
Lord says, through the Apostle, that the Church is one 
Body of Christ, that many members compose this one 
Body, and that all the members are related to each other. 

The members of the Body of Christ all have one work, 
one purpose, or object, in view, and one method by which 
to attain that purpose. They are called to a special service 
—that they may show forth the praises of God. The 
world is seeking to show forth the praises of king or 
queen or sect or what not. But this class have but one 
aim and object in life— to serve God. They are His representatives 
in the world. 

God is the real Emperor, or Ruler, of the Universe. 
But His subjects in this part of His Dominion are under a 
curse of death. He does not intend to leave them in this 
condition. He intends to roll away this curse eventually 
and to bring them a blessing. 

Many who in the past heard of this purpose did not 
understand; and many who understood found their hopes 
grow faint, as the time was long. The Scriptures say 
that God's plans will not fail; that His present Plan is the 
election, or selection, of the Church, and that the purpose 
of the election of the Church is for the blessing of the 
non-elect. God had this purpose in mind from before the 
foundation of the world, and He will carry it out. The 
Church is being chosen that they may be associated with 



the Son of God, the Logos, the Mediator, in His Kingdom. 
THE ONENESS OF THE BODY ILLUSTRATED 

Those who are now called out all receive a begetting 
of the Holy Spirit. They are all baptized by the one 
Spirit into the one Body. His members are fellow-sharers 
in the suffering of this present time. They are to 
be fellow-sharers in the glories that are to follow. So 
the Apostle is here dilating on this particular phase of the 
subject. One member cannot say to another, "You are not 
needed"; for God hath set the members every one of 
them in the Body as has pleased Him. And the Body 
would not be complete without every one of them, unless 
one should fail to make his calling and election sure. 

With this view of matters, we should be very sympathetic 
with each other. There is no division in the human 
body. Yet one hand is separate from the other hand; 
there is a separation between the hand and the foot. But 
there is a work for every part of the body to do. The 
hand and the foot are connected through the head. The 
brain is in touch with all parts of the body through the 
nerves. Nourishment passes from the central stations to 
the various parts of the body. So it is in the spiritual 
Body. We are not all doing the same thing. God has 
a variety of things to be done. He gives one a work to 
do in this department, He gives another work to do in 
another department. 

The Apostle proceeds to say that if one member suffer, 
all the other members come to its relief. If one member 
of the Body of Christ suffer, all the other members 
suffer with it. And no member can be in ill condition 
without the knowledge and sympathy of the Head Member, 
Christ. Our Lord said to Saul of Tarsus, "I am Jesus, 
whom thou persecutest." When Saul was persecuting 
some of the members of the Church, he was persecuting 
Jesus. Whether it is a member living back in Jesus' day 
or one living today, it is the one Body. There is one 
God and Father of all, one Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 
and one Holy Spirit by which all are to be controlled and 
guided. 

It is blessed to mark this oneness between Christ 
Jesus and the members of His Body. Our Lord does not 
selfishly grasp all the glory and seek to retain it for Himself. 
On the contrary, with loving solicitude He marks 
the progress of His Body-members as they develop in 
character-likeness to Himself, and says, "They are Mine; 
and I am glorified in them" (John 17:10); and He would 
have them all bound up together with Himself in the 
Father's Love. He would also have them with Himself, 
beholding and sharing the glory which the Father has 
conferred upon Him as a reward for His loyalty and 
obedience throughout all the crucial testings which came 
upon Him. 

All the Divine family are bound together in one bond 
of love and fellowship and confidence and sympathy and 



harmony and common interest; and the honor and glory 

of one are the honor and glory of all. The Lord's prayer 

abounds with petitions for this oneness. Mark the expression 

—"That they all may be one; as Thou, Father, 

are in Me and I in Thee" [Thy Spirit, or disposition, and 

purposes and aim being common to us all]. (John 17:21.) 

Hence He would have us adopt the same Father's Spirit, 

aim and purpose, and devote all our powers with zeal 

and faithfulness to the accomplishment of the Father's will. 



Be not men's servant: think what costly price 

Was paid that thou might'st His own bondsman be, 
Whose service perfect freedom is. Let this 

Hold fast thy heart. His claim is great to thee. 
All His are thine to serve: Christ's brethren here 

Are needing aid, in them thou servest Him. 
The least of all is still His member dear, 

The weakest cost His life-blood to redeem. 



R5213 : page 106 

THE GOSPEL OF HOPE 

FOLLOWING our public address at Havana, a 

lady of some prominence came forward and 

expressed herself as greatly pleased with 

what she had heard. She said she appreciated 

the hopeful outlook which we had 

held before the audience respecting God's 

Love and care, and the comforts of the 

Truth in the present life, and the hopes respecting 

the future life. 

"But," said this lady, "I wish, Pastor 
Russell, that you could inoculate THE WATCH TOWER 
readers with this same spirit of hope breathed in your discourses. 
I am well acquainted with some who are deeply 
interested in your presentations of the Bible teachings, 
but who seem to lose sight of the hope and the good 
things, being chiefly impressed with matters that are very 
doleful and discouraging. They seem to dwell upon a 
coming time of trouble to such an extent as to make both 
themselves and others about them sad. I believe that if 
they could be inoculated with more of the spirit of hope 
in respect to the future, they could be much happier themselves 
and make others about them much happier. I believe 
that they would really make much more progress in 
the propagation of the Truth, if indeed your presentations 
are the Truth, as they seem to be." We promised to lay 
the matter before THE WATCH TOWER readers, and are 
now doing so. 

YE HAVE NEED OF HOPE 



The Apostle wrote, "Ye have need of patience." We 
are not contradicting his statement when we add that 
also, "Ye have need of hope." Without hope, patience 
would soon fritter away; and no length or breadth or 
depth of character could be expected. The very word 
Gospel is full of hope; for it means Good Tidings. Whoever, 
therefore, would preach the Gospel should be sure 
that his message is one of Good Tidings, one of Hope. 
True, it may be necessary and appropriate at times to 
say something respecting the time of trouble that we see 
near. Yet even that subject is to be approached from 
the standpoint of Good Tidings. To tell about the time 
of trouble merely to alarm people, would not be to use 
it as a part of the Good Tidings. If necessary to refer 
to the time of trouble, we should mention it merely as 
that dark cloud which for a little season will obscure the 
dawn of the rapidly oncoming Day of Christ— the Day 
of blessing and joy— the world's jubilee— the time of rolling 
away the curse and substituting God's blessing. 

"THE WHOLE CREATION GROANETH" 

The majority of the world and also of the Lord's consecrated 
people have plenty of trouble in the present time 
without being terrorized needlessly in respect to the great 
day of trouble. Let us remember that, additionally, the 
world has a latent fear respecting the future. They have 
been told by distinguished religious teachers and by musty 
creeds that nearly everybody was damned in advance to 
spend an eternity of torture. And although this is no 
longer outwardly preached to intelligent people, and no 
longer would be believed, nevertheless insinuations are 
often thrown out; and a secret fear lurks in the mind 
lest there should really be something terrible awaiting the 
masses after death— a Catholic Purgatory of awful severity, 
if not the endless torture of Protestantism. Much of 
the present day tendency toward intoxication with pleasures 
and travels, as well as with alcoholic intoxicants, is 
the result of an attempt to get away from fearful forebodings 
—to substitute more pleasant and happifying 
thoughts. 

What the world specially needs is what the Bible alone 
can give. Bible Students alone are qualified to introduce 
others to this comfort of the Scriptures. More and more, 
therefore, it should be our aim to bind up the broken-hearted 
and to say to the weary and heavy-laden, "Come 
to Christ, and find relief and rest. Come now, and see 
who is the great Burden-bearer for all who become His 
followers. Then look beyond the present and see how, 
in harmony with the Father's gracious arrangement, He 
will eventually scatter the blessings of Restitution far 
and wide. Behold the Love of God, which constraineth 
us! Cast away your fear of Him! Draw nigh unto Him 
through Christ, and He will draw nigh unto you." 

As there may be proper times for telling something 



about the time of trouble coming, which will inaugurate 
Messiah's glorious reign, so there may be proper times 

R5214 : page 106 

for telling the wayward that those who sin shall suffer; 
that walking in the ways of sin they are walking away 
from God; that the end of that way is death— the Second 
Death; and that "whatsoever a man soweth, that shall 
he also reap." But these features of the Divine Word 
are not so necessary to be repeated every day; for mankind 
instinctively know that sin leads to suffering of 
some kind, and that righteousness sooner or later brings 
its reward. 

What the world needs most is encouragement to turn 
away from sin, to realize the sympathy of God for the 
rebellious family of Adam, and to know of the arrangement 
which God has made whereby He will have mercy 
upon all, through Christ. We need to follow the Master's 
course when He declared, "Blessed are your eyes, for 
they see; and your ears, for they hear." We need to tell 
those who see and hear what a blessing they enjoy. 

It is necessary at times to point to the narrow way 
of self-sacrifice, self-denial, suffering, which the followers 
of Jesus must take if they would share with Him in 
His Kingdom glories, honors and immortality. But they 
will find the narrowness of the way, even if we should not 
tell them. No one can walk in the narrow way, no one 
can follow Jesus, without knowing the truth of the statement, 
"Through much tribulation shall ye enter the Kingdom 
of Heaven." 

What then shall we tell the people? Oh, give them 
also the Message of hope, the Message of joy, the Message 
of peace! Let us draw the attention of the 
brethren to the blessed privileges that are ours, rather 
than frequently to point them to the trials and hardships 
of the way. But what are the privileges of the Christian, 
if through great tribulation he must enter the Kingdom? 
They are, oh, so grand! It is his to know the joy of sins 
forgiven; and many need to have this told them over 
and over again, that they may fully appreciate it. It is 
his to know of the Heavenly Father's Love and care- 
matters so easily forgotten in the stress of life. These 
assurances of the Word need to be repeated over and 
over: "The Father Himself loveth you." "God is for us." 
"All things shall work together for good to them that 
love God." 

As these promises of God's Word abound in our hearts, 
they promote the fruits of the Holy Spirit; joy and peace 
come in, such as the world can neither give nor take 
away. The peace of God, which passeth all human understanding 
thus gradually comes more and more to dwell in 
our hearts; and so thankfulness results. Thankfulness in 
turn leads to more joy and praise, and to more sympathy 
for our fellows— for our families and for the world. Thus 
the Christian finds himself growing in grace, knowledge 



and love. 

"THINK ON THESE THINGS" 

All this is in full accord with St. Paul's advice: 
"Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, 

R5214 : page 107 

whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are 
pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are 
of good report; if there be any virtue, and if there be 
any praise, think on these things." (Philippians 4:8.) 
Following this course then— of preaching the Gospel of 
Hope— we are following the Master and the Apostles. 
They had so much of this spirit of hope, trust, confidence, 
love, joy and peace, that they could rejoice in tribulation; 
and they did so. The Apostles even sang praise to God 
that they were accounted worthy to share in the sufferings 
of Christ, that they might also share in His coming 
glories. 

Let us then, dear brethren, realize that the world has 
tears and sorrows enough, and fears aplenty. Let us 
more and more use our time, strength, talents, joys, etc., 
in relieving the poor world of its mental distress. 
Hearken to the words of Jesus, "God shall wipe all tears 
from all eyes." "Be ye perfect, even as your Father 
which is in Heaven is perfect." As it will be God's great 
work in the future, through Christ and the Church, to 
wipe away earth's tears, let us chase away some of those 
fears at the present time. Thus we shall help to prepare 
the way for the world to come back into fellowship with 
God by and by, for the faithful of the present time to 
walk more carefully in the footsteps of Jesus and to encourage 
one another in the good way. 



GETHSEMANE 

I journeyed through the twilight 

Where all was dark and drear, 
And wondered why my Savior 

Did not seem always near. 
As steeper grew the pathway 

And full of thorns the road, 
I stumbled, deaf and blinded, 

Beneath my heavy load. 

The tears of my own grieving 
Had filled mine eyes with mist, 

And thro' the vapory veiling 
The face of Christ I missed. 

At last I fixed my vision 

On Heavenly Heights of Love, 

Whose tips were ever glowing 



In sunlight from above. 

And wandering thus, up-gazing, 

I earnestly pressed on, 
Unheeding thorns and thistles 

By which my feet were torn. 
At last, worn out and weary, 

I fell upon the ground. 
Where, worn by time and tempest, 

A granite cross I found. 

I leaned my head upon it, 

My all on it I laid; 
Together with my sorrows, 

My joys I also gave. 
Then suddenly a rustling 

Of pinions filled the air, 
And lo! beside me kneeling 

I saw an Angel there. 
And midnight in the Garden 

Was bright as day to me, 
For Christ stood 'mid the shadows 

Of my Gethsemane! 

BIRLA I. MORRIS. 



R5214 : page 107 

HATED WITHOUT A CAUSE 

--APRIL 27.-GENESIS 37.- 

"Love Envieth Not."— 1 Corinthians 13:4. 

THE STORY of Joseph and his brethren, beautiful 
in its simplicity as a narrative, is deeply 
interesting and instructive, from various 
viewpoints. One lesson would be the unwisdom 
of a parent in showing too great a 
preference for one child above another, and 
thus cultivating amongst the children a 
spirit of envy. Another lesson would be 
along the line of the unwisdom of telling 
even our dreams to unsympathetic ears: as 
when Joseph told his dreams to his brethren. In the one 
dream, he saw eleven shocks of wheat bow down to one 
shock, which was his. In the other dream, he saw the sun, 
the moon and the eleven stars all doing homage to him. 
Joseph was not to be blamed for having these dreams. 
Unlike the majority of dreams, they apparently came not 
from indigestion, but were from the Lord. Joseph was 
not even to blame for artlessly telling the dream to his 
brethren; and evidently this was the very thing which the 
Lord intended should be done. The Lord foreknew the 
jealousy of Joseph's brethren, and how envy would be cultivated 



in their minds; and He gave the opportunity for it; 

for He had already mapped out Joseph's subsequent experiences, 

which the envy of his brethren merely helped 

to accomplish. 

We may, however, learn the lesson that in general it is 
the part of wisdom to keep to one's self truths not necessary 
for another to know which might merely arouse opposition. 
Jesus encouraged this very thought, saying, 
"Cast not your pearls before swine, lest they turn again 
and injure you." Very deep truths connected with the 
Divine Plan and with Christian hopes had better not be 
told to others than those for whom they are intended by 
the Lord— namely, the meek. 

JOSEPH A TYPE OF MESSIAH 

The most important feature of today's Bible Study is 
that which in addition to all that we have suggested, 
recognizes Joseph as a type, or prophetic picture of Christ, 
the Messiah. Joseph was kind to his brethren and was 
on an errand of mercy to them when their envy plotted 
his death, and later on sold him into slavery in Egypt. 
His brethren hated him without a cause— merely because 
he was good, because his father loved him, and because 
God in the dreams foreshadowed his coming exaltation. 

Joseph's brethren should have said, "Let us rejoice that 
we have so noble a brother. Let us rejoice if it be God's 
will that he should be very highly exalted. God's Promise 
made to our grandfathers, Abraham and Isaac, and to our 
father Jacob, may thus be reaching a fulfilment. Let 
God's blessings come in whatever way He sees best. We 
will rejoice with our brother, as we see that he is pleasing 
to God and to our father Jacob. We will seek more and 
more to copy his character." But they were envious to 
the point of cruelty, first resolving to murder him, and 
later, merely as an alternative, to sell him as a slave. 

"THEY HATED HIM WITHOUT A CAUSE" 

But God's providence continued with Joseph and 
blessed him as a slave, and through much tribulation 
finally brought him to the throne of Egypt— next in influence 
and power to Pharaoh himself. Then it was that 
the famine of the land drove Joseph's brethren to Egypt 
to buy wheat. Thus was fulfilled his dream— that his 

R5215 :page 108 

brethren bow down, as illustrated in the eleven sheaves 
which bowed down before his. 

Later on when his father and the entire family came 
into Egypt to live in Goshen, they all did obeisance to 
Joseph, as the representative of the Egyptian Government, 
thus fulfilling the second dream. But all of these experiences 
were at the time dark. They all looked as though 
the Lord had less love for Joseph than for any others of 



his family, until the time came for his exaltation to the 
throne. Then everything changed. 

"WHICH THINGS ARE AN ALLEGORY" 

The allegorical meaning of all this, as applied to 
Joseph, is that he was also hated without a cause. We 
read in Psalm 69:4, "They that hate me without a cause 
are more than the hairs of mine head." Jesus quoted this 
statement and applied it to Himself, saying, "They hated 
Me without a cause." (John 15:25.) The brethren of 
Jesus were the Jews, who crucified Him. But there was 
no cause of death found in Him. 

We perceive that it was for envy that they delivered 
Him up and called for His crucifixion, because His works 
were good and theirs were evil; because he taught the 
way of the Lord more perfectly than they; because He 
declared to them that the time would come when they and 
all others would recognize Him as the Messiah— coming 
in the clouds of Heaven with power and great glory— and 
would bow the knee to Him. 

As with Joseph, disaster, treachery and shame prepared 
the way for glory and honor on the throne of 
Egypt, so with Jesus. His trying experiences proved Him 
loyal to God and led onward to His exaltation to the right 
hand of Divine Majesty. St. Paul refers to this, saying 
of Jesus, "Who for the joy that was set before Him endured 
the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at 
the right hand of the Throne of God." (Hebrews 12:2.) 
Again he says, "Though He was rich, for your sakes He 
became poor, that ye through His poverty might become 
rich" (2 Corinthians 8:9), even as the experiences of 
Joseph— all of his humiliation— prepared the way for him 
to be succored and honored by Pharaoh. Again we read 
of Jesus, that "He learned obedience by the things which 
He suffered; and being made perfect [through suffering], 
He became the Author of eternal salvation to all 
those that obey Him."— Hebrews 5:9. 

"IF WE SUFFER WITH HIM" 

The Scriptures assure us that in God's great Plan, not 
only Jesus is to be exalted to the Throne as the world's 
Messiah, but with Him is to be a company of brethren, 
sharers of the same glory, honor and immortality. And 
these brethren, in God's great Purpose, are required to 
pass through similar experiences to those of their Elder 
Brother Jesus. Their experiences, therefore, are illustrated 
also in Joseph's experiences. They are not on an 
equality with their Elder Brother. He is designated their 
Head, their Chief, the Captain of their salvation. So we 
read again, that God, "in bringing many sons to glory, 
made the Captain of their salvation perfect through sufferings. 
-Hebrews 2:10. 

And all of the company of sons received under this 
great Captain must similarly be perfected through 



sufferings. 

Does not this account for the trying experiences of the 
Church during the past nineteen centuries? The Apostle 
John declares, "As He was, so are we, in this world"; and 
again, "The world knoweth us not, because it knew Him 
not." As Joseph's brethren were blind to the fact that 
their brother would be their savior from famine, as well 
as the savior of the Egyptians, so the world fails to realize 
that only through The Messiah will any have eternal life. 

In the very same connection in which Jesus mentions 
that He was hated without a cause, He plainly forewarns 
all of His elect followers that they must similarly expect 
to be hated unjustly. We read, "If the world hate you, ye 
know that it hated Me before it hated you. If ye were of 
the world, the world would love its own; but because ye 
are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the 
world, therefore the world hateth you. Remember the 
word that I said unto you, The servant is not greater than 
his lord. If they have persecuted Me, they will also persecute 
you; if they have kept My saying, they will keep 
yours also. But all these things will they do unto you for 
My name's sake, because they know not Him that sent Me. 
...But this cometh to pass that the word might be 
fulfilled that is written in their Law, They hated Me without 
a cause."— John 15:18-25. 

We give in full the same text from which our Lord 
quoted, "They that hate Me without a cause are more 
than the hairs of Mine head. ..Let not them that 
wait on Thee, O Lord God of hosts, be ashamed for My 
sake; let not those that seek Thee be confounded for My 
sake, O God of Israel. Because for Thy sake I have borne 
reproach: shame hath covered My face. I am become a 
stranger unto My brethren, and an alien unto My mother's 
children. For the zeal of Thine house hath eaten Me up; 
and the reproaches of them that reproached Thee are 
fallen upon Me. Reproach hath broken My heart; and 
I am full of heaviness; and I looked for some to take pity, 
but there was none; and for comforters, but I found none. 
They gave Me also gall for My meat; and in My thirst 
they gave Me vinegar to drink."— Psalm 69:4-9,20,21. 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE FACTS 

We have considered the facts— that Jesus and all of 
His followers, according to Divine intention, have suffered 
shame and contempt. We perceive that, in the case of 
Jesus and of the early Church, the persecution came from 
their brethren according to the flesh— from the Jews. And 
since then, all the way down the Gospel Age, the persecutions 
of the Church, the brethren of Jesus, the Household 
of Faith, have come from their brethren, too. These 
brethren are not Jews, but Christians. As the Jewish religionists 
in Jesus' day persecuted their more righteous 
brethren, so since then nominal Christians have been the 
chief persecutors of the Lord's faithful followers. 

This persecution has come upon faithful souls of 



nearly every denomination. And, sad to say, this persecution 
has come from unfaithful souls of nearly every 
denomination. Presbyterians, Covenanters, Episcopalians, 
Roman Catholics, Methodists and Baptists have all 
endured persecutions from blinded brethren; and blinded 
ones amongst themselves have also shared in the 
persecuting work. In nearly every case the profession has 
been made that the persecuting was done for the glory of 
God. Thus the Lord through the Prophet expresses the 
matter, saying, "Your brethren that hated you, that cast 
you out for My name's sake, said, Let the Lord be glorified! 
But He shall appear to your joy, and they shall be 
ashamed."— Isaiah 66:5. 

Already the world in general, including the Jews, realize 
that a great mistake was made in persecuting Jesus 
unto death. Already to some extent similar transgressions 
against the faithful followers of Jesus have been 
recognized. And yet the same blindness, from the same 
envious disposition, leads on to persecution even in our day. 

The majority admit that they do not know very distinctly 
much about God or much about the Bible. They 

R5215 : page 109 

pray for light, and sing, "Lead, kindly Light, amid the encircling 
gloom." And yet, if any light appear, if any 
voice of love or tenderness be heard, directing toward the 
dawning of the New Day, and pointing out with clearness 
the riches of God's grace and the lengths and breadths of 
His mercy, immediately their songs for light cease, and 
their stones of ridicule and slander are hurled. And why? 
Lest peradventure there should be any change; lest any 
one should get further light; lest the Divine promise should 
be fulfilled, and a new Dawn should be ushered in. 

But what is the philosophy of these facts of history? 
Why has God permitted, yea, ordained that Christ should 
suffer, and that all who would walk in His steps must share 
in His experiences of ignominy and shame and reproach 
—suffering with Him? In Jesus' case, the Father used the 
trying experiences to test the love and loyalty of His Son, 
and to demonstrate His obedience to angels and to men. 
Intending to confer upon Him very great glory and honor, 
the Father would have all to see, as He saw it, the 
worthiness of the Logos, subsequently Jesus. 

In a symbolical picture the Heavenly hosts are represented 
as acknowledging the propriety of the high exaltation 
of Jesus, because of His faithfulness unto death, saying, 
"Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power, 
and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and 
glory, and blessing." And if such a demonstration of the 
worthiness of Jesus, the Logos, was necessary or proper, 
much more necessary would it seem that an elect Church, 
being gathered from amongst a fallen race, should be 
proven loyal to God to the very last— even unto death. 
There is a difference, however. 



R5216 : page 109 

In the case of the Master, it was a demonstration that 
He was perfect before He left the Heavenly glory, and 
perfect also when He became the Man Christ Jesus— "holy, 
harmless, undefiled and separate from sinners." "In Him 
was no sin." In the case of His followers, the imperfection 
of the flesh still remains; but they are judged, not 
according to the weaknesses of their flesh— of heredity— 
but according to the love and zeal of their hearts. And 
this loving zeal is witnessed to by their endeavor to walk 
faithfully in the footsteps of their Leader and Savior, 
overcoming to the best of their ability the weaknesses 
of their flesh, and "showing forth the praises of Him 
who called them out of darkness into His marvelous light." 



R5216 : page 109 

AFFLICTED, YET A COMFORTER 

-MAY 4.-GENESIS 40 AND 41.- 

"God giveth grace to the humble."— 1 Peter 5:5. 

JOSEPH may well be designated the model 

young man of Old Testament times. In 

some respects, he would be a model for any 

time. There is a distinction to be made, 

however. Joseph lived before the time of 

spirit-begetting, and hence was merely a 

natural man, not a Christian. He lived before 

the time of Bibles, before the time of 

preaching and Sunday Schools. He merely 

inherited from his father a strong faith in 

the God of Abraham, who had promised that, ultimately, 

a blessing should come to all people through Jacob's posterity. 

Joseph, who was one of that family, reverenced 

God and sought to live humbly, nobly. His faithfulness 

to God and his trust in God's Promise served as a rudder 

to guide and direct all the affairs of his life. Whatsoever 

he did was with a view to pleasing God and winning His 

approval. 

Such faithfulness was probably rare at that time, as it 
is today, and the reward came in Joseph's advancement 
to the highest station in the house of his master— that of 
steward. His conscientiousness led him to be careful, 
economical and wise; and his master could and did entrust 
everything to his care. Young men of Joseph's type are 
very much valued everywhere today— yea, they have been 
valued in every period of the world's history— trustworthy 
men, faithful men, economical men, wise men; and all 
these qualities go with godliness— with faith in God, and 
a realization of responsibility to Him. 

But just in the height of Joseph's prosperity, calamity 



came. His steadfastness to principle angered his mistress. 
She falsely accused him; and he was cast into prison and 
made to appear guilty of a heinous crime, disloyal to his 
master and benefactor. Yet all the while he was innocent; 
but only God and himself knew of that innocence. The 
Adversary had made circumstantial evidence to appear so 
strong that Joseph's guilt was not questioned. The poet 
Shakespeare noted this trait of human weakness in these 
words: "Hell hath no fury like a woman scorned." 

How strange it seems that God would allow so terrible 
a blight to fall upon the life of one who was seeking to 
walk in the ways of righteousness! We can imagine 
Joseph's querying why this evil had befallen him, and saying 
with the Prophet, "They that work wickedness are set 
up; yea, they that tempt God are even delivered; while 
those who seek to live righteously suffer persecution." 

But evidently Joseph did not permit himself to question 
the Wisdom of Divine Providence which took him to 
prison in Egypt any more than he allowed himself to question 
the Wisdom of the same Providence in permitting him 
to be sold a slave into Egypt. His faith in God endured 
the test. He became stronger as he found himself shut 
away from all earthly hopes and ambitions— dead to the 
world. The more did he cultivate faith in the Almighty; 
the more did he determine that at any cost he would live 
righteously, soberly, reverentially. Even in prison, his 
faithfulness, intelligence and general goodness were recognized. 
He became the prison keeper's trusty man and 
assistant. Such a character, no matter how much traduced, 
misrepresented and slandered, eventually will commend 
itself to those with whom it has close contact. And 
the principle holds good today, as then. 

DREAMS OF BUTLER AND BAKER 

The prison regulations of old were less methodical 
than at present. Joseph had been in prison for years, had 
probably been forgotten, and might have continued there 
indefinitely, had not something occurred to bring his case 
to official notice. When he was twenty-eight years old, 
two high officials were thrust into prison because Pharaoh 
had taken some offence at their conduct. One of these 
was the king's secretary and butler, or cup-bearer. The 
other was head of his culinary department. 

Joseph, as the general overseer of the prison, came in 
contact with these men, noted their sadness of face and 
tendered sympathy. What a noble example! Instead of 
moping about, bemoaning his lot, Joseph was cheerful, 
trusting in God and waiting for some circumstance by 
which God would eventually open up the way before him. 
Such a noble character can always find time to speak a 
word of consolation to those in trouble! What an example 
to worldly men of today! What an example to Christian 

R5216 :page 110 



men of today, who have much advantage over him in 
so many ways. 

There are some who tell us that our race is rising so 
rapidly from brute nature by evolutionary processes, that 
impliedly Joseph, living nearly four thousand years ago— 
two thousand years after Adam's creation— would be 
almost a brute, only a few removes from the monkey. 
But how different a view is given of him by this little 
narrative, which makes no attempt to pointing a moral 
with his experiences, but merely records them as matters 
of fact! 

When Joseph learned that the two official prisoners 
were troubled because of impressive dreams, he volunteered 
interpretations. The one was encouraging, and the 
other discouraging. He told the butler that within three 
days he would be back again in favor with the king, but 
informed the baker that within three days he would be 
executed. Then Joseph, mindful of the fact that he had 
a duty to perform in respect to attaining his own liberty, 
urged upon the butler— the one he had so encouraged and 
befriended— that when at liberty he would remember his 
comforter and do something to bring Joseph's case before 
proper authorities, that he might be heard and, if possible, 
be released. 

But alas, for the hardness of heart so prevalent! The 
butler forgot all about Joseph, his prisoner friend, for two 
years! Then the matter was brought to his attention by 
Pharaoh's dream; for none of the wise men of Egypt were 
able to interpret it. With apologies for his neglect, the 
butler told the king of the dream experiences of the baker 
and himself in prison and of the wonderful young man 
Joseph, who by some god-given power had interpreted 
their dreams, just as these turned out. 

During those two years, Joseph doubtless hoped much 
and waited longingly for some adjustment of his case. We 
doubt not that, instead of growing faint in respect to his 
faith in God, he all the more earnestly laid hold upon 
the Lord, and realized that his experiences must be for 
good. And so they were; for it was when Joseph was just 
thirty years of age— when he had just reached manhood 
under the old-time law— that Pharaoh sent for him to interpret 
his dreams, and rewarded him very highly. 

PHARAOH'S DREAMS INTERPRETED 

Pharaoh related his two dreams. In the first he saw 
seven fine, strong cattle, and a little later the same number 
of very poor, lean cattle— the worst he had ever seen. In 
the dream, the lean cattle ate up the fat ones, and looked 
none the better. In the second dream, the king saw a fine 
stalk of corn grow up out of the earth, bearing seven full, 
healthy ears of corn; and then he saw another stalk with 
seven withered ears, good for nothing. The latter swallowed 
up the former, and looked none the better. 

Young Joseph quickly gave the explanation of the 
dreams; but before doing so, he very distinctly told the 



king that the interpretation came not from himself, but 
from God. Thus he exemplified the Scriptural teaching, 
"In all thy ways acknowledge Him," and "He shall give 
thee the desires of thine heart."— Prov. 3:6; Psalm 37:4. 

Joseph explained that the two dreams referred to the 
same matter— that unitedly they taught that there would 
be seven years of great plenty in the land of Egypt; and 
that these would be followed by seven years of famine, 
which would fully consume all the surplus of the plentiful 
years. Proceeding, Joseph offered the suggestion that 
God evidently meant this information to be used by Pharaoh, 
and recommended that, forthwith, a special agent of 
the king should be appointed to buy up all the surplus 
grain in the seven years of plenty and to store it for use 
during the seven years of famine. 

Pharaoh very wisely acceded, and with manifestation 
of great breadth of mind and desire to serve the interests 
of his people, promptly appointed Joseph himself to 
be the purchaser of the surplus corn of the years of plenty, 
to have full charge of the matter and to attend to its disbursement 
in the following years of famine. 

Thus Joseph stepped out of prison into a fourteen 
years' contract. From suffering because of slander he 
suddenly stepped into a place of highest authority, next to 
Pharaoh, in the greatest empire of those days. Can we 
doubt that God's hand was in the matter of Joseph's success 
and exaltation? Surely not! Nor should we infer 
any lack of Divine favor in Joseph's experiences of adversity. 

R5217 :page 110 

On the contrary, we may feel sure that the lessons 
of his adversity were merely preparations for his 
subsequent experiences as Pharaoh's logos, or mouthpiece, 
throughout the kingdom. 

We are reminded again of the lesson of a week ago— 
that Joseph's experiences were typical of those of Jesus 
and the Church, His followers. The Bible assures us that 
the graces of humility and patience are both closely related 
to love and loyalty. St. Paul reminds us of this when he 
declares, "If ye be without chastisement,... then are 
ye. ..not sons. For what son is he whom the father 
chasteneth not?" He reminds us that "Whom the Lord 
loveth He chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom He 
receiveth."— Hebrews 12:6-8. 

It was so with Jesus, and with all the faithful Apostles, 
and has been so with all the followers of Jesus during 
this Gospel Age. It will undoubtedly continue to be true 
in the case of all the consecrated Church. It is because 
the Lord Jesus loves these noble characters that He counts 
them worthy of trials and testings, disciplines, etc. These 
are necessary to qualify them for the positions of honor, 
glory, immortality and great responsibility, to which the 
Father has called Jesus and His brethren, the Church. 

THE VALUE OF ADVERSITY 



Jacob's special love for his son Joseph manifested itself 
in favoritism— the princely coat, or robe, etc. Quite possibly 
he would have spoiled his son, had not Divine Providence 
interfered and taken him entirely out of this father's 
control. Many fathers, especially the rich, have made 
similar mistakes. Hence the sons of the rich are not 
always a credit to their fathers. 

The great Heavenly Father, however, makes no such 
mistakes. His people are assured that trials and difficulties 
are marks rather of their relationship to God and of 
His loving care over them. True, this providential care 
is restricted: "The Lord knoweth them that are His." 
His special dealings are with His consecrated people— 
those who have entered into a covenant with Him, who 
have become His servants and His children. To these 
alone belongs the promise that "all things shall work together 
for good to them that love God, to those who are 
the called according to His purpose."— Romans 8:28. 

While this special call applies peculiarly to the Church 
of this Gospel Age, there is a sense in which it was applicable 
to the Hebrews, since the time of Abraham. 
Joseph belonged to this line which was in covenant relationship 
with God. This accounts for God's dealing with 
him rather than with young men of other families than 
Abraham's. Incidentally, it is worthy of notice that the 
Israelites passed through many trying experiences because 
of being God's people. Many of those experiences they 
might have escaped, had they not come into covenant 
relationship with God. But had they escaped the trials 

R5217 :page 111 

and difficulties, they would have escaped certain privileges 
and blessings also. And the blessings which God gives 
always outweigh the adversities which prepare for them. 

JEWISH AND CHRISTIAN ELECTIONS 

This reminds us that the Bible declares that the Jewish 
people, and subsequently the Christians, are God's Elect- 
God's Chosen People— the Seed of Abraham, natural and 
Spiritual. Both have offers of God's blessings not accorded 
to other peoples; and in both cases the trying experiences 
are to fit the elect ones for the future glories to 
which they have been invited. 

Nevertheless, God has also a great blessing in store 
for the non-elect. During the thousand years of Messiah's 
reign, the elect Church, the saintly only, will be Messiah's 
joint-heirs in the great Kingdom of God, which will then 
take control of the earth. Then also the Elect from the 
Hebrews will be used, in another part of the work, in conjunction 
with the Christian Church, the one on the 
Heavenly plane, the other on the earthly. Through these 
two Israels, God's blessings are to be poured out on all 
nations, kindreds, peoples and tongues. 



Although God has not specially supervised the affairs 
of any except these two elect classes, nevertheless we see 
that He has permitted, in a general way, great lessons of 
adversity to come to the whole human family. As the 
special trials and difficulties of the elect classes are intended 
to work for them special blessing and qualifications 
for their work as God's agencies, so the general tribulations 
of the world will give general lessons that will be 
helpful to all people by giving all experiences with sin and 
death— by teaching all thus the exceeding sinfulness of sin. 

By and by, when Messiah's Kingdom shall be established, 
when Satan shall be bound, when the reign of 
righteousness shall begin, when the curse shall be lifted, 
when the blessing shall flow instead— then the lessons of 
sorrow and tears and crying and dying will all prove valuable. 
Humanity will appreciate the great blessings of God 
in the future very largely by contrast with the evils and 
sorrows of the present time. When, by and by, they shall 
learn fully and conclusively that all these sorrows and 
tears are the results of violation of God's laws and disregard 
of His injunctions, the lesson undoubtedly will be one 
that will never be forgotten. 

Wherever the plowshare of trouble has gone, it has 
served to break up the fallow ground and to make ready 
for the seed of Divine Truth and grace. The next Age, 
under Messiah's beneficent rule, will be the time of sowing 
the seeds of knowledge of God and appreciation of His 
glorious character and Plan. The results will undoubtedly 
be glorious, as the Scriptures declare. Eventually all will 
participate in these blessings everlastingly, except such as 
intelligently refuse them, choosing sin rather than righteousness, 
in that Day when the knowledge of the Truth will 
be given to all and when assistance to righteousness will 
be apparent. 



R5217 :page 111 

AN INTERESTING LETTER 
THE SECRETARY, THE I.B.S.A., 

DEAR SIR: 

Can you let me have a copy of "The Divine Plan of the 
Ages." Helping Hand series? I saw a copy in a cell of the 
Kandy Gaol today. The prisoner said it had been a great 
help and blessing to him. He had spent a fortnight of great 
darkness and doubt, but this book had cheered him up. Yours 
sincerely, (Signed) ROBERT A. CLARKE, 

Captain Salvation Army, Kandy, Ceylon. 

The above is the result of a book placed in a prison library in India. 



page 111 



BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 

Series VI., Study XIV. --Sundry Earthly 
Obligations of the New Creation. 

MAY 4 

Read p. 568, par. 2, to p. 571, par. 1. 

(13) What is the Scriptural injunction with respect to 
indorsing notes for others? P. 568, par. 2. 

(14) How should the New Creation regulate their household 
affairs with respect to petty borrowing and lending, as 
between neighbors? P. 569, par. 1, 2. 

(15) How should the borrowing of time by others be 
regarded by the New Creation? P. 570, par. 1. 

(16) What beautiful example did our Lord set us with 
respect to waiting for a positive invitation and assurance of 
welcome before accepting hospitalities? P. 570, par. 2. 

(17) To what extent should New Creatures permit themselves 
to be imposed upon by uninvited guests, whether 
"brethren" or relatives according to the flesh? P. 571, par. 1. 

MAY 11 

Read p. 572, par. 1, to p. 574, par. 3. 

"TAKE NO THOUGHT FOR THE MORROW." 

(18) Does Matthew 6:34,19,20, teach us to make no provision 
for the future? What example has the Heavenly 

Father set us in this respect? P. 572, par. 1. 

(19) What is the proper interpretation of Matt. 6:34? 
P. 572, par. 2. 

(20) What is the difference between carefulness and 
anxious care respecting the morrow, and how is this illustrated 
in Scripture? P. 573, par. 1. 

(21) Does Matt. 6:19,20, imply carelessness in respect to 
the daily interests of the present life? P. 573, par. 2. 

(22) How should all who have "chosen Christ" as their 
Master regard their earthly possessions? P. 573, par. 3; 
P. 574, par. 1. 

(23) How should money be regarded by the New Creation? 
P. 574, par. 2, 3. 

MAY 18 



Read p. 575, par. 1, to p. 578, par. 1. 



(24) What does full consecration to the Lord require of 
the poor as well as the rich? P. 575, par. 1. 

(25) Suggest what further explanation our Lord might 
have given "the rich young man," had he possessed the proper 
heart-condition. P. 576, par. 1, 2. 

(26) Does consecration of our all to the Lord imply that 



all our means must be used exclusively in religious work? 
P. 576, par. 3; P. 577, par. 1. 

(27) What instructions do the Scriptures give with respect 
to making future provision for our families? P. 577, par. 2. 

(28) What is the duty of every parent with respect to 
reasonable provision for his children's present and future 
interests and necessities? P. 578, par. 1. 

MAY 25 

Read p. 578, par. 2, to p. 582, par. 2. 

ORGANIZATIONS FOR MUTUAL BENEFIT. 

(29) Is the question of Insurance a religious or a purely 
business proposition? P. 578, par. 2. 

(30) In a case where the wife is not in sympathy with 
Present Truth, what course would be advisable on the part 
of the husband? P. 579, par. 1. 

(31) In view of the great Time of Trouble, what may 

be expected of Insurance Companies, especially those of a 
fraternal character? P. 579, par. 2; P. 580, par. 1. 

(32) Should the New Creation become members of 
Masonic or other secret societies? P. 580, par. 2; P. 581, par. 1. 

(33) What liberty of choice may the New Creation exercise 
in the matter of joining other mutual-benefit associations, 
not of a religious nature? P. 581, par. 2. 

(34) What advice is suggested regarding membership in 
labor organizations? P. 582, par. 1, 2. 



page 113 

VOL. XXXIV APRIL 15 No. 8 
A. D. 1913-A. M. 6041 



CONTENTS 

God's Sympathy for His People 115 

The Lord's Method of Deliverance 115 

The Time, My Soul, Is Short (Poem) 116 

Privileges of the Sons of God 117 

The Divine Object in Answering Prayer 117 

Training for Membership in the Kingdom 118 

Lessons in Every Experience of Life 118 

The New Creature's Struggle for Existence 119 

Death of the Flesh Essential 119 

Cross-Bearing a Privilege 120 

Cross-Bearing the Way of Growth 121 

"What Shall I Render Unto the Lord?" 

(Poem) 121 

Re Christ's Resurrection 122 

The Gifts of Whitsuntide 123 



"Ye Are All One Body" 124 

The Sowing and the Reaping 125 

Many Stripes and Few Stripes 125 

The Abrahamic and the New Covenant 127 

An Interesting Question 127 

page 114 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



PLEASE REMEMBER THESE THINGS 

Give your full address at the top of each letter you write, 
and please print it if you cannot write plainly. Please address 
your communications to the WATCH TOWER SOCIETY, whether 
in Brooklyn or London or Melbourne. Only very personal 
matters should be addressed to the Editor— Pastor C. T. 
RUSSELL. Our work here is different in the various departments; 
for instance, the Pilgrim Department, the Colporteur 
Department, the Volunteer Department, the Convention Committee, 
etc. In case the subject matter of your letter makes 
it specially appropriate to one or another of those Departments, 
please add the same to the address, but always make 
the main address the WATCH TOWER SOCIETY. 

The general Convention season is approaching, and we desire 
to know about how many to expect at each of the different 
gatherings. We have purposely scattered them this year, so 
that no one of them may be too large or unwieldy. Experience 
shows that better spiritual results are obtained when the 



crowd is not too large. We prefer Conventions ranging from 
a thousand to two thousand, rather than either larger or 
smaller ones. We have taken your interest into consideration 
in the arrangements, and hope that all may be pleased, and 
still more than usually profited. Scattering of the Conventions 
permits the attendance of some who could not so well 
be present at a greater distance from their homes, which 
would involve greater expense for travel. 

We note again, as formerly, that no one should endeavor to 
attend a Convention expecting the cost to come under $1.35 
per day. We can procure rooms at fifty cents, or room and 
board for one dollar, in nearly every case, per day; but in 
some cases the board would not include luncheon. Of course, 
street car fare would be extra, and little incidentals should 
not be forgotten. 

We are mentioning the lowest rate with more than one 
person in a room. A separate room will generally cost $1.50 
with board, and from that up to $5.00 or more per day. We 
are solicitous for those who wish to economize. Others can 
always find accommodations. We would like to hear as quickly 
as possible from all the friends who anticipate attending 
Conventions this year. We want to know just how many to 
expect at the different places, and how many to attempt to 
provide for. Write, please, as soon as you conveniently can. 



BROTHER RUSSELL'S LARGE MAIL 

I wish to express my appreciation to the dear friends of 
THE WATCH TOWER list for their thousands of kind letters- 
some of them individual and some of them from Classes. 
These letters tell me of your love and that you are praying for 
me, and that you have absolute confidence in my integrity. It 
would afford me great pleasure to answer these kind communications, 
and to tell you all of my love for you. I reflect, 
however, that such personal answers would accomplish no 
real good, and that you all hear from me regularly twice a 
month through THE WATCH TOWER. I console myself with 
the thought that you will know that my time is being otherwise 
engaged in the Master's service, and that you will be 
fully content with the expression of your love, etc., without 
hearing from me in return— except in such cases as really require 
answers. 

Very truly your brother and servant in the Lord, 
C. T. RUSSELL. 



STORM AND FLOOD SUFFERERS 

Our Society's funds are strictly limited for spiritual services 
—providing spiritual food and the robe of Christ's 
righteousness. 

However, some thoughtful brethren have provided a 
"Comfort Fund" under the care of Brother Russell. So far 
as it goes it is available for the temporal needs of any 



WATCH TOWER readers who have suffered in recent storms. 
We will be glad to hear from such, either directly or through 
the I.B.S.A. class secretary. 

THE WATCH TOWER SOCIETY will be glad to assist by 
making good losses of its publications. Advise at once. 



1913-NEW VOLUNTEER MATTER-- 19 13 

All orders received will soon be filled. We are hoping for 
good results this year. Classes that have not sent in requests 
for Volunteer matter, please take notice. 



R5217 :page 115 

GOD'S SYMPATHY FOR HIS PEOPLE 

"Thus saith the High and Lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, 
whose Name is Holy; I dwell in the high and holy place, with 
him that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive 
the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the 
contrite ones."— Isaiah 57:15. 

JEHOVAH is the High and Lofty One who 

inhabits eternity. Before the mountains 

were brought forth, or the hills, before the 

First-born was created, He is God. To 

Moses at the burning bush, He said, "I AM 

THAT I AM." (Exodus 3:14.) Our God 

is very great, very wise, very high. Nevertheless, 

the Scriptures show us that He is 

also very sympathetic. He is a God of 

Mercy and of Love. 

The passage from which our text is taken informs us 
that if God were to contend with humanity, the end of 
the strife would be that mankind would be blotted out of 
existence. But He remembers that we are dust, and has 
compassion upon us. In this respect He is different from 
the gods of the heathen, who are domineering, apparently 
bent on wreaking vengeance upon those in their power. 

Besides being very great and lofty, our God is particularly 
sympathetic towards those who are of a broken 
and contrite heart, whose spirit is humble, who realize 
that they are imperfect, who desire to be in accord with 
Him, and to dwell in holiness. To such He is ever near— 
to revive the spirit of the humble, to give them strength. 
He will not trample them into the dust, as many an earthly 
potentate has done to his subjects, but will assist them in 
the right way, and revive the heart of the contrite. These 
are to know that our God is a God of sympathy, compassion 
and love, who takes pleasure in reviving their hearts 
and in bringing them back into harmony with Him, if they 
are willing to be led. 



DISCOURAGEMENT WITH SELF A FAVORABLE CONDITION 

There is a difference between a broken and a contrite 
heart. A heart is broken when it is bowed down with 
grief and sorrow; a heart is contrite when it has a quiet, 
deep, continual sorrow for acts not in harmony with 
righteousness. A broken will is not necessarily the same; 
for there are those whose wills are broken, but who are 

R5218 :page 115 

not submissive to the Divine will. 

To be repentant is to be thoroughly submissive to the 
Divine will, and implies a change of mental attitude toward 
sin. This humble, discouraged condition becomes 
a very favorable one if the person will seek Divine assistance, 
if he will become submissive to the Lord and ready 
to do the Divine will. Such will surely receive the blessing 
of God; for the Lord is very nigh to every one who is 
broken-hearted. The way to full consecration would be 
very short to him. 

If such as be of contrite heart will be submissive to the 
Lord, He will save them from their difficulties and bring 
them into a large place, as the Prophet David states. 
(Psalm 18:19.) This does not necessarily mean that He 
will deliver them from financial troubles, but that He will 
give them peace and rest, which are better than money. 
If they have family troubles, they will find in Him a superior 
Friend, who is able and willing to administer 
superior consolation and refreshment. 

Come, ye disconsolate! where'er ye languish, 

Come to the mercy-seat, fervently kneel; 
Here bring your wounded hearts; here tell your anguish; 

Earth hath no sorrow that heaven cannot heal. 

Joy of the desolate, light of the straying, 

Hope of the penitent, fadeless and pure! 
Here speaks the Comforter, tenderly saying, 

Earth hath no sorrow that heaven cannot cure. 

THE LORD'S METHOD OF DELIVERANCE 

The Scriptures assure us that, "There is none righteous, 
no, not one." There is relative righteousness, however, 
which God can approve. Those who are seeking to be 
in harmony with Him to the best of their ability, who are 
walking in the ways of righteousness, and at the same 
time are trusting in the precious blood of our Redeemer- 
such are spoken of as righteous. Of these it is said, 
"Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness; 
for they shall be filled."— Matthew 5:6. 

This class, however, shall have afflictions. The Scriptures 
tell us that all who will live godly lives shall suffer. 
(Acts 14:22; 2 Timothy 3:12; Romans 5:3-5.) The reason 



why this is true is that the world is traveling in the 
opposite direction to righteousness— in the way of selfishness 
and gratification of the flesh. We read, "If any man 
love the world, the love of the Father is not in him." 
(I John 2:15.) This is especially true of this Gospel 
Age, when some are following in the footsteps of the 
Master. It was also true of the Jewish Age, when some 
were seeking to walk in the way of righteousness. The 
Lord delivered them out of their afflictions, not in the 
sense of shielding them from trials, but in that of not 
permitting them to be overcome by their difficulties. 
The Ancient Worthies fully appreciated the Divine 
favor exercised in their behalf, and took joyfully the 
spoiling of their goods, in order that they might have 
the continuance of that favor and larger blessings by and 

R5218 :page 116 

by. God delivered them out of their trials and difficulties 
by not permitting these to overcome them. This was 
also true of our Lord, and is true of the Church as well. 
The Lord delivers us out of our trials and difficulties, so 
that mentally we are not oppressed by them in the same 
way as are others. He will sustain and support us in our 
experiences and will eventually deliver us by giving us a 
share in the First Resurrection. 

The sons of God by adoption are, during this Gospel 
Age, especially beset by trials and difficulties. If they 
should fall, however, the fact that they have stumbled 
will not make them feel like going back into sin, if their 
hearts are of the right stamp. On the contrary, they will 
feel like St. Peter, who, when others were stumbling, said, 
"Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou hast the words of 
eternal life." (John 6:68.) The true people of God have 
no desire to go to any one but Him. If they stumble, they 
recover themselves, avail themselves of His arrangements 
for forgiveness and press on. By these stumblings they 
learn of their own weaknesses, and then fortify themselves 
so that they may be strong in the Lord, and in the 
power of His might.— Ephesians 6:10. 

A just man will not fall into sin. The very most 
that could happen to him would be to stumble. There are 
various causes for stumbling. But if the heart is right, 
the man will rise again; for the Lord will show him that 
he has made a mistake and will point out the way to him 
by which he may recover himself. If he is a lover of 
righteousness, he will desire to press on toward that 
which is right, just, approved of the Lord, even if he 
should stumble many times.— Psalm 37:23,24; Prov. 24:16. 

THE EVIDENCE OF FAVOR WITH GOD 

So far as our humanity is concerned, we are undone 
by reason of the fall. It behooves us, then, to be very 
humble, to feel our own littleness, our own fallen condition. 
It becomes us to be very contrite, very much in 



opposition to sin, to feel that sin is the great blight upon 
the whole race, and that God will not be in harmony with 
anything except that which is righteous and holy. 

All, therefore, who would be in harmony with God 
must be repentant in respect to their own shortcomings 
and must be appreciative of His lofty standards— His holy 
standards. He, in turn, informs these that they have His 
sympathy, and that they shall have His succor. He appreciates 
the attitude of mind in which they are; and 
therefore, as our text tells us, He is ready to revive the 
spirit of the humble and contrite ones. To such He will 
show His salvation; to others He will not. 

Only the humble-minded can really appreciate their 
own condition. God not only will revive their spirit, but 
is willing to lift them up and to make them again sons 
of God, with all that this implies of blessing. He has this 
attitude toward the humble and contrite in the present 
time, and He has always had this spirit toward the humble 
and contrite ones. Throughout Christ's reign this humble 
class will have His favor and blessing. Only the humble 
and contrite ones have the opportunity of becoming joint-heirs 
with our Lord. 

God resists the proud. To the humble He gives grace, 
and opens the eyes of their understanding. They become 
His children because they are in the attitude to receive 
His blessings and to be guided by His instruction. The 
text applies not only in the present time, but will have 
an application in the next Age. "Go through, go through 
the gates; prepare ye the way of the people; cast up, cast 
up the highway; gather out the stones; lift up a standard 
for the people." (Isaiah 62:10.) These words are all 
intended to indicate the preparations for the incoming 
Age. There is no provision for the proud, none for the 
haughty, none for the self-conscious— but all for the 
humble-minded. 

If God has these blessings in store for the humble 
only, and if the humble are few in number at the present 
time, what of the others of humanity? God is allowing 
now a humiliating influence to work with people, which 
should teach them humility and lead them to be contrite 
of heart. But much more will this be the case in the next 
Age. "When Thy judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants 
of the world will learn righteousness." (Isaiah 26:9.) 
All the blessings will be upon the contrite and 
humble. And this will be so markedly before the attention 
of the people that all will know a change has taken place. 

Now the humble and contrite are trodden down in the 
street. Now the proud are happy. "Now we call the 
proud happy; yea, they that work wickedness are set up; 
yea, even they that tempt God are delivered." (Malachi 3:15.) 
But in the new Kingdom every one that exalteth 
himself shall be abased, and the humble shall be exalted. 
(Luke 14:1 1.) God has provided a thousand years for the 
education of all. A thousand years may seem a short 
period for this work when we know that for six thousand 
years things have been going wrong. But we must recollect 



that during the six thousand years, many of the people 
have lived but a short time— many dying in infancy. 

In the new order of things this will be changed, and 
each will live longer. "There shall be no more thence an 
infant of days, nor an old man that hath not filled his 
days; for the child shall die an hundred years old; but the 
sinner being an hundred years old shall be accursed." 
(Isaiah 65:20.) "Judgment [justice] also will I lay to the 
line, and righteousness to the plummet: and the hail shall 
sweep away the refuge of lies, and the waters shall overflow 
the hiding-place."— Isaiah 28:17. 

And then it will not be necessary for one to say to 
another, "Know the Lord; for they shall all know Me, 
from the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith 
the Lord." (Jeremiah 31:34.) The high standard that God 
has for His people will be recognized. Then all who have 
humility and the right condition of heart will come into 
harmony with God. All who refuse to come into harmony 
with God will get the wages of sin— the Second Death. 



R5227 :page 116 

THE TIME, MY SOUL, IS SHORT! 

No time to linger by the way, 
No time for ease, no time for play; 
No time for earthly loves or joys, 
No time for worldly cares or toys— 
The time, my soul, is short! 

No time to murmur or complain, 
No time to heed the heart's dull pain; 
No time for tears or mournful song, 
No time to ask, How far? How long?— 
The time, my soul, is short! 

Ah, yes! 'tis short— yet time enough 
To run thy course, so steep and rough; 
Just time to reap "the fields," so white, 
Before the coming of "the night"— 
Just time, my soul, just time! 

Just time to make thy heart more pure, 
Just time to make thy "calling sure," 
Just time to enter through "the door," 
To reign with Christ for evermore- 
Just time, my soul, just time! 

GERTRUDE W. SEIBERT. 



R5219 :page 117 

PRIVILEGES OF THE SONS OF GOD 



"Your Father knoweth what things 
ye have need of."— Matthew 6:8. 

THESE words were not addressed to the world 

in general; for the whole world is lying in 

sin, altogether out of relationship with God. 

These words were not addressed even to the 

ordinary Jew; for the Jews are also members 

of the Adamic race, which is out of 

harmony with God, and their Covenant was 

not one of sonship, but of servants. Moses 

was faithful as a servant over all his house. 

(Hebrews 3:5.) We never find Israelites 

referred to as sons of God. In the prophecies there are 

references made as to what God would do for them in the 

future. But there is no direct statement that He was 

their Father, or that they were His children. 

We all see that this was so. It would have been improper 
that this should be otherwise, for the Sin-Atonement 
has not yet been made for the world. Neither a Jew 
nor one of the world today has a right to call God his 
Father, nor to think of Him as his Father. The only ones 
who have a right to call God "our Father," are those who 
have come into covenant relationship with Him through 
Christ. Through this relationship, the Apostle John says, 
"Now are we the sons of God." 

We are not yet in the Kingdom, to be sons of God 
without imperfection; but in the future, in the moment 
of our "change," we shall be "sons of God without rebuke," 
and be like our Master and share His glory. But in the 
present time we are sons of God, and have this blessed 
privilege, this honor, of calling God our Father, because 
we have received His Holy Spirit. We have this treasure 
of the Holy Spirit in earthen vessels, and walk by faith, 
not by sight. All those who have come into the Body of 
Christ by full consecration are sons of God by faith, and 
are permitted to call themselves such, to realize Him as 
their Father, and to think of the testimony of the Scriptures 
as fully and completely referring to themselves. 

SONS OF GOD BY FAITH 

But the question is, Why did the Lord use these 
words to the early disciples before He appeared in the 
presence of God on their behalf and made an imputation 
of His merit for them? Were they not really under the 
Law Covenant still? We answer, Yes. They were still 
under the Law Covenant. Only by faith were they permitted 
to call God their Father. They had accepted 
Christ as the Way, the Truth and the Life, had accepted 
Jesus as the Sent of God, the One who would ultimately 
accomplish all that He had come to do. They were to 
manifest their faith by calling God their Father, calling 
themselves the sons of God— although we find that they 
did not really speak of themselves as the sons of God. 



It was some time after our Lord's death that their 
faith began to grasp this privilege. The Jews would have 
been afraid to call themselves sons of God, or to call Him 
their Father. If they had spoken of themselves as sons 
of God, they would have thought that they were doing 
something reprehensible. When Jesus spoke of Himself 
as the Son of God, they said that He was a blasphemer.— 
John 5:18; Luke 22:70,71. 

We find from the context that the Lord is advising us 
that we should not think of our petitions to the Heavenly 
Father as being for His information. Our Lord said, 
practically, "You have not an ignorant Father. The 
heathen go through great supplications, as though their 
God was asleep, or indifferent, when they petition him. 
But you, as My disciples, know of God as your Heavenly 
Father; and as a good earthly father loves his child and 
makes provision for it, so your Heavenly Father knoweth 
the things you have need of before you ask Him. It is 
not necessary for you to give Him advice; for He knows 
your needs better than you do, and is aware that some 
of the things for which you ask would be injurious." 

THE DIVINE OBJECT IN ANSWERING PRAYER 

Why then do we ask at all, since He is our Father, 
and, as a loving Father, makes all the provisions necessary 
and needful? We answer that our instruction to pray is 
intended to awake a further realization of the fact that 
all of our blessings come from the Heavenly Father; 
otherwise we should fail to get a great spiritual blessing 
from contemplating His love and care. He would not 
have us get the blessing in the same way that trees take 
in moisture. He would have us to be intelligent, to consider 
that He is our Father. He knows our needs and 
has made provision for them. He wishes us to exercise 
faith in respect to His care and to all the things promised. 

The Divine object, then, in answering prayer is that 
we may have a stimulation of faith in connection with 
our receiving daily blessings— both temporal and spiritual. 
The Lord knows the things that the world has need of, 
and He is making a general provision for the world. He 
has already arranged a way by which the world ultimately 
will return as sons on the human plane, and He is making 
all things to work together for good to them in a general 
and broad way. God has a great Plan of redemption 
through Jesus, and a great Plan of exalting the Church 
to be with her Lord in the Heavenly Kingdom. Then 
that Kingdom shall pour blessings upon the earth for the 
rolling away of the curse, and for the Restitution of 
mankind to the original perfection of Adam in Eden. 

To whatever extent any one has an ear to hear, it is 
proper to tell him about these good things. But only 
those who have the ear to hear are to be specially instructed 
at this present time. The knowledge of God's 
grace at this time has been especially for the called-out 
ones. The remainder of mankind has been allowed to 



remain in ignorance. It is quite proper that, as they begin 
to be awakened, they should hear a little and understand 
a little; but we are certain that the world cannot see the 
deep things of God. As the Apostle tells us, "The natural 
man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God; for 
they are foolishness to him; neither can he know them, 
because they are spiritually discerned." Again he tells 
us that "The Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep 
things of God."— I Corinthians 2:14,10. 

WHO MAY PRAY 

The Lord is not dealing with the world; for they are 
not in covenant relationship with Him and, therefore, 
they cannot please Him now. His last dealing with the 
world was when they were condemned in Adam. They 
had no right to life. They were sinners and must die. 
He has not yet completed the arrangement for the healing 
of the breach. He has been getting ready for that New 
Covenant arrangement for the restoration of the world. 

The only ones who are now in relationship with Him 
are the members of the Body of Christ. "If ye abide 
in Me and My words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye 
will, and it shall be done unto you." If we go out of 
relationship to Christ, then we have no right to pray. 
But if we maintain this relationship, if His Word abides 
in us, if we are conforming our lives to His will, and 
if we are in harmony with His will and the Spirit of His 
Word, we may ask what we will, and it shall be done. 

Those who are abiding fully in Christ would not want 
anything except God's will to be done. And if they have 

R5219 :page 118 

His Word abiding in them richly, they will know what 
things they may properly ask for. But if they are ignorant 
of God's will in the matter, then they would surely say, 
"Not my will, but Thine be done!" So whatever would 
be the petition, they would get it, because they desire 
God's will to be done. 



R5219 :page 118 

TRAINING FOR MEMBERSHIP IN THE KINGDOM 

"Consider the lilies of the field, 
how they grow."— Matthew 6:28. 

IN THE Sermon on the Mount, the Master is 

teaching His disciples certain important lessons. 

He is not teaching the world, but 

those who had come to Him, especially desiring 

to be taught, desiring to be His disciples. 

He points out to them that if they would be 



His disciples, thenceforth their main object 

in life would be to seek to become members 

of the Kingdom of God. He Himself is to 

be the great King; and an elect, choice number 

from the world are to be associated with Him in that 

Kingdom. When this election is completed, that Kingdom 

will be established. Then the blessing of all the world 

will follow under that Kingdom, in harmony with the 

promise made to Abraham, "In thee and in thy Seed shall 

all the families of the earth be blessed." 

These, then, who aspire to be members of the Kingdom 
class should make this the chief aim and object of life: 
"Seek first the Kingdom of God and His righteousness"; 
that is to say, the righteousness necessary to attain a place 
in that Kingdom. And all things necessary are promised 
to be supplied to such aspirants and seekers. Our Lord 
did not promise rich clothing, fine houses, ease or luxury; 
nor could we suppose that these would be specially helpful. 

Certain training is necessary for membership in the 
Kingdom. God, the great Husbandman in one picture, 
the great Overseer in another, would supervise the affairs 
of each member; and all things would be made to work 
together for their good. If they needed experience in 
trials, difficulties and privations, He would see to it that 
they got those experiences. If they were proud, they 
would get experiences that would humble them. If they 

R5220 :page 118 

were rude, they would have experiences that would make 
them polite. It is necessary for them to have these experiences; 
for if they did not learn at all, they would 
never get the inheritance to which they have become heirs. 

LESSONS IN EVERY EXPERIENCE OF LIFE 

The Master took note of the fact that the majority of 
people are full of the cares of this present life— what 
they shall eat, what they shall drink, and wherewithal 
they shall be clothed. He saw that many of the poor 
were distressed, not knowing, perhaps, whence the next 
meal would come. If such were the Lord's people, they 
should exercise faith. If the Father permitted His children 
to be in these difficulties, He saw that there was 
some good lesson for them to learn. They were to seek 
to learn that lesson, and not to fret about their condition. 

This did not mean that His followers were to be negligent, 
to care nothing about their appearance or about what 
they should eat. This is not the way to do; but while 
appreciating the beauties of nature, of dress, etc., they 
were to have faith in their Heavenly Father and to realize 
that the luxuries of life might not be the best for them. 
But they were to be content— knowing that all things 
would work out good to those who were rightly exercised. 

This matter of taking anxious thought for food and 
clothing is not confined to the poor. Some of the middle 



class, as they rise to wealth, find themselves engrossed with 
the cares of this life, eating, drinking and dressing— saying 
to themselves, What shall I wear this time, or that 
time, etc.? Eating and drinking and dressing seem to 
be the engrossing thoughts of both rich and poor. 

The Lord's people are to be content with such things 
as they have. They are to seek to provide things honest 
and decent. But honest and decent things are not extravagant 
things. The Lord's people are not to be inclined 
to use money in self-gratification. As they look 
about and see others of the Lord's children, they see that 
they must not take too many of these blessings for themselves, 
but that they should use their money with economy. 
They should use their money as a part of their stewardship, 
and know that they are to give an account of it. 

We are to seek first of all the interests of the Kingdom. 
If the interests of the Kingdom need money, we would 
feel guilty if we should use the Lord's consecrated money 
in self-gratification. Presumably this is the reason that 
the Lord has left the interests of the Kingdom in a condition 
of semi-poverty— in order that His people may forward 
the interests of that Kingdom. Our God is very rich. 
All the gold and silver are His, and the cattle on a thousand 
hills; and if it was for the interests of the Kingdom 
class, He would forward them money in abundance. 
Things are left as they are, then, that we may practise 
economy, may have an opportunity of denying ourselves 
present blessings for the interests of the Kingdom. 

LESSONS LEARNED FROM THE LILIES 

In this connection, our text comes in, illustrating the 
thought by the lily of the field. Indigenous to the soil, it 
has those things provided which are necessary for its 
development. The Lord did not choose a hot-house plant, 
dependent upon the horticulturist, but He chose a flower 
from the field. That flower grows under those conditions 
because the great Protector has arranged for its interest. 

This does not mean for the plant to be idle; for if it 
were idle, it would die. The bulb is continually sending 
up nourishment to its stalks. It is not idle by any means. 
But does the plant do this by worrying? No. It merely 
uses the opportunities that come to it. It merely exercises 
its functions by the laws of its nature. 

God makes provision for the lily in its native soil; 
and as it grows in its beauty, "even Solomon in all his 
glory was not arrayed like one of these." So is it to 
be with God's children. When the Father begets us as 
His children and we are placed under present conditions, 
we may be sure that He who so placed us made the necessary 
arrangements for us; that He is not unwise; that 
He has not put us in conditions that are unfavorable for 
us. They are all of Divine arrangement. 

If we move ourselves out of these conditions, we may 
be responsible in some degree, but as long as we exercise 
no will of our own to take ourselves out of His providential 



care, we may be sure that all things will be overruled 
to work for good to us. If we then seek to adorn 
ourselves with all the graces of the Holy Spirit, and if 
we use the opportunities that are in our immediate grasp, 
we shall be using the means for our own development. 
The lily has a right to use everything within its power 
for its own nourishment. So it is our right and our duty 
to use the means within our power for beautifying our 
characters and for our spiritual nourishment, knowing 

R5220 :page 119 

that He who began the good work in us is able to complete 
it unto the Day of Jesus Christ. 

DEVOUT CONTEMPLATION OF THE DIVINE CHARACTER 
HELPFUL 

Our Lord calls attention to how such simple things 
in nature should be studied, be considered. The lessons 
to be learned in connection with all the affairs of life 
will be helpful to such as approach the study from the 
right standpoint of faith in the Creator, and a realization 
that He is necessarily the embodiment and representative 
of the very highest and very noblest qualities of which 
the human mind could conceive— perfect in Justice, perfect 
in Wisdom, perfect in Power, perfect in Love. 

The heart that thus considers, makes progress, grows 
in grace, in knowledge, in love. The heart that fails to 
consider the little things, is hindered from a proper consideration 
of God and from a proper appreciation of His 
Plan, and thus from a proper appreciation of His 
Character. 



R5220 :page 119 

THE NEW CREATURE'S STRUGGLE FOR EXISTENCE 

"I keep my body under and bring it into subjection,... 
lest I myself should be a castaway."— 1 Corinthians 9:27. 

THERE is a duality in Christians that is not to 

be recognized in others. The natural man 

has no distinct entity aside from his body. 

The New Creature is recognized as having 

a life and entity distinct from the body; and 

this New Creature is temporarily being developed 

and nourished in the old body. The 

old body has its will, its desires. The New 

Creature has its interests, its desires. Consequently 

there is a conflict between them. 

In the first part of the text— "I keep my body under"— 
we may see the thought of mastery. The New Creature 
should say, "I am the master— I will not allow my body 



to master me," as though there were fear lest the old 
creature should get the New Creature down and strangle 
it. It is a battle to determine which will win, which will 
live and not be destroyed. 

The first thing, then, is for the New Creature to get 
the body under, and thus have the mastery. The New 
Creature having gained the mastery should, as a secondary 
step, bring the old nature into subjection and not 
do its bidding. The old creature is continually trying to 
assert itself. Very frequently it argues as to how it should 
be treated and how it should not be treated. Sometimes 
through false sympathy it might be treated too well. 

We must remember that the life of the old creature 
means the death of the New Creature. We must vanquish 
the flesh; and we shall not be the victor until the flesh is 
entirely destroyed. Our victories as New Creatures will 
not be gained until we as old creatures die. So the battle 
is unto the death, and there should be no particular sympathy 
between the two natures. 

That which would enliven, encourage, the flesh in any 
way is a foe, and must be banished from our hearts. This 
might lead in some cases to extremes of conduct, and we 
might be judged as extremists by the world. But the 
world is not our judge. The world has no "exceeding 
great and precious promises" before them. They are a 
different class from us altogether. We are not to take 
our instructions from them, nor to allow them to shape 
our view of the matter, but we are to use the spirit of a 
sound mind in all things. 

DEATH OF THE FLESH ESSENTIAL 

The Apostle says that we are to be dead with Christ, 
to suffer with Him. The Master invites us to take up our 
cross and follow Him. This means the complete subjection 
of the flesh— the death of the flesh. If we fail to gain 
the victory over the flesh, we shall fail to gain the great 
prize. The ones who are to gain the prize of the High 
Calling are those who will crucify the flesh, who will put 
it to death. We are to be "more than conquerors." 

This is what the Apostle means: But I keep my body 
under and bring it into subjection; lest that by any means, 
when I have preached to others, I myself should be a 
castaway. All the preaching to others will not get me into 
the Kingdom. I must keep my body under and bring it 
into subjection, using all diligence. Whatever I would 
get out of it, my pampering it in any way would be to my 

R5221 :page 119 

disadvantage. I am to be on the lookout to accomplish 
the victory, lest I should be a castaway. 

KNOWLEDGE OF THE NEW WILL CONDITIONAL 

Elsewhere the Apostle has told us that the Church is 



a New Creation of God; and that to those begotten again 
of the Holy Spirit old things pass away and all things 
become new. (2 Corinthians 5:17.) Addressing the same 
class, he says, "Ye have put off the old man with his 
deeds." We have put off the old man, the natural, fallen 
man, with his privileges as the successor of Adam, in the 
same sense that we put off the old will and have received a 
new mind, in Christ. Instead, therefore, of belonging to 
the human family, we have stepped into membership in the 
Body of Christ— out of the old into the new. 

The Body of Christ is not human, but spiritual. We 
have made this transfer from one family, with its hopes 
and interests, into the other. The old man is in a fallen 
and dilapidated condition in every way; and we realize 
that its deeds were far from satisfactory to ourselves, and 
especially unsatisfactory in God's sight. We, therefore, 
by our wills, stepped out of this condition, under guidance 
from on High. We have made a full consecration of all 
the old rights and interests, which we had in the old 
nature, in order that we may be in the New Man, Christ. 

As we have come into membership in the New Man, 
Christ, of which Jesus is the Head, we have under this 
Head an increase of knowledge. "We are renewed in 
knowledge after the image of Him that created us." The 
New Creature comes to a more and more clear knowledge 
of the new will in proportion as he seeks to put down the 
human will and to be directed by the Holy Spirit. 

It would seem, therefore, that we put off the old man, 
Adam, and the human nature in general, in order that we 
may put on Christ and be found in Him, as members of 
His Body, and may receive with Him a share in the 
exceeding glory, and ultimately be accounted worthy of 
a place in the Kingdom of God. In proportion as we grow 
in grace, in knowledge, our appreciation of the Heavenly 
things increases. Thus our renewing progresses. 

The new will recognized by God in the begetting of 
the Holy Spirit is the New Creature which thus puts off 
the old and puts on the new. Its existence depends on 
this transformation. Failure means Second Death. 
Barely to overcome would mean a lower place on the 
spirit plane— in the "Great Company." Only the "more 
than conquerors" will get joint-heirship with their Lord— 
with exceeding glory and the divine nature. 



R5221 :page 120 

CROSS-BEARING A PRIVILEGE 

"And as they led Him away, they laid hold upon one Simon, 
...and on him they laid the cross, that he might bear it 
after Jesus."— Luke 23:26. 

THIS TEXT brings before our minds the whole 
scene of our Master's shame, ignominy— His 



condemnation by the Roman Governor at the 

solicitation of the chief priests and scribes 

and Pharisees— men of His own nation. 

Those who led Him away were the centurion 

and soldiers appointed by Pilate— not willingly, 

but by reason of the stress laid on him 

by the Jewish nation. The chief priests had 

threatened to report him as unfaithful to 

the interests of the Roman Empire, if he did not condemn 

Jesus. And then how would the Emperor treat him who 

allowed this humble Nazarene to make the claim of being 

king in territory under Roman jurisdiction? 

We remember that the Jewish Sanhedrin tried the Lord 
under a different charge altogether. Their charge against 
Him was blasphemy, the penalty of which, under the Law, 
would have been stoning to death. Possibly they were 
not allowed to do stoning at that time; or possibly they 
feared the people. 

It was not Divinely intended that our Lord should be 
stoned, but that He should be treated as a cursed one- 
hanged upon a tree. (Deuteronomy 21:22,23.) "As 
Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must 
the Son of Man be lifted up." (John 3:14,15.) So 
through fear of the multitude or from lack of authority 
from the Roman Governor, the Jews failed to stone Jesus. 

Since they could not bring the charge of blasphemy 
before a Roman Court, they were obliged to bring a 
different charge— that, while they were loyal to the Roman 
Emperor, Jesus was disloyal to the Roman interests. Pilate 
washed his hands of the affair. He wished to be free 
from any guilt. But under stress of the Jews, and willing to 
keep peace, he caused the charge to be made that our Lord 
was crucified because of claiming to be King of the Jews. 

The narrative seems to imply that Jesus bore His own 
cross on the way to Calvary, and that He fell beneath 
its weight. There might have been various reasons for 
this. He was weak from undergoing very rigorous 
physical and mental strain. He had suffered from the 
bloody sweat in the Garden of Gethsemane, and had endured 
different trials— before the Sanhedrin, before Pilate, 
and before Herod. After this He was flogged! We can 
imagine that a person who had undergone so much would 
be scarcely able to walk, let alone carry a burden. 

THE PROBABLE WEIGHT OF THE CROSS 

When we think of our Lord as a perfect man, we 
would not think of Him as being the strongest of men. 
The imperfections of our race have manifested themselves 
in various ways. We have no reason to suppose that the 
first specimen of our race, Adam, was of surpassing 
strength, which might denote coarseness. We see this 
principle illustrated in fruits and vegetables. When we 
find an overgrown apple, we learn that it is not so tender 
as one of average size. So with a man of great physical 
stature— a giant. He might be coarse. We are to think of 



our Lord, not as extremely rugged, nor as weak, but as 
of great delicacy, and of reasonable strength and fiber. 

When we think of the cross, too, we believe that it was 
of no light weight. We know of no light woods in the 
vicinity of Jerusalem. The most common tree there is 
the olive, which is an extremely heavy wood and of remarkable 
density. If we should suppose the cross to have 
been three feet in the ground and of reasonable height, 
it must have been at least twelve to fourteen feet long, 
and the cross-beam must have been at least five feet. 
Allowing a reasonable thickness for strength and for 
keeping it from bending under its load, we would think 
that the cross must have weighed from one hundred and 
fifty to two hundred pounds. This gives us the thought 
that it was no light weight. 

R5222 : page 120 

LESSONS FROM THE INCIDENT 

We have every reason to sympathize greatly with the 
tradition that the Lord fell under the weight of the cross. 
It was at this juncture that Simon, evidently a strong 
and rugged countryman who was passing by, was stopped 
by the centurion and his band, and compelled to assist 
Jesus in carrying the cross. Apparently, even then, its 
weight was on Jesus. 

There are lessons for us in this incident. One is that 
the disciples of Jesus, the faithful eleven, missed an opportunity 
of cross-bearing. At first we might be inclined 
to censure them severely. We must reflect, however, that 
they feared for their lives. We may sympathize with 
them, and at the same time learn a lesson of greater 
courage in everything connected with the Master. 

It is true that the multitude might have been as anxious 
to cry for the death of the disciples as for the Lord's. 
But one of them had said that he was ready to die for 
the Lord, and so said they all. How strange that in the 
moment of testing they did not display the courage! It 
is much easier to attest great loyalty, great faithfulness, 
than it is to manifest these traits when the test comes. 
With the opportune moment, come the difficulties, and the 
fearful sights and sounds, carrying terror with them. 

We, of course, have no opportunity of doing anything 
of this kind for the Master Himself. But we realize that 
He is still with us in the brethren. What a precious 
privilege this affords us of still helping to bear the Master's 
cross! How advantageous to know that He still 
recognizes that whatsoever is done unto the least of these 
His brethren is done unto Him! 

CROSS-BEARING PRECEDES CROWNING 

Another thought that we have in this connection is 
that Simon, under the necessity of cross-bearing, would 
receive the burden either willingly or unwillingly. We 



have no record of what his experiences were. There is a 
tradition which declares that he afterwards became one 
of the Master's disciples. So in the Lord's providence, 
sometimes there is responsibility laid upon us. And if the 
Lord lays a cross upon us, will it be borne with gladness 
or with murmuring? If the former, we shall have a 
blessing, even though we had not sought the cross, even 
if it had been forced upon us. 

When trials and difficulties come, and crosses are 
forced upon us, happy are we if we appreciate the opportunity 
of cross-bearing, recognizing that this is closely 
connected with the crowning. Simon represented in this 
case all of the Lord's faithful ones who help to bear the 
cross, following His example, walking in His steps. The 
cross will not be too heavy for us. The Lord will bear the 
heavy end of it; and our experiences will be only such 
as will be for our good and will work out for our blessing. 



R5218 : page 120 

"I know not the way that's before me, 

The joys or the griefs it may bring; 
What clouds are o'erhanging the future, 

What flowers by the wayside may spring. 
But there's One who will journey beside me, 

Nor in weal nor in woe will forsake; 
And this is my solace and comfort, 

'He knoweth the way that I take.'" 



R5223 : page 121 

CROSS-BEARING THE WAY OF GROWTH 

"Whosoever doth not bear his cross, and come 
after Me, cannot be My disciple."— Luke 14:27. 

A DISCIPLE is a pupil, one who follows a 
teacher or leader. The Lord has promised 
His disciples certain great blessings. If 
they are obedient, they shall be greatly 
blessed with everlasting life, shall sit with 
Him in His Throne, and be with Him 
where He is. 

It becomes, therefore, an important question 
as to what is involved in discipleship. 
Is it an easy or a difficult matter? How 
can we enter the School of Christ? The Lord here and 
elsewhere tells us the terms. In another text He says, 
"If any man will come after Me, let him deny himself, 
take up his cross, and follow Me." "Whosoever doth not 
bear his cross, and come after Me, cannot be My disciple." 
-Matthew 16:24; Luke 14:27. 



There is, therefore, evidently a process in the matter. 
First of all, one must see what discipleship is and what 
the cross is. Some may perceive more or less distinctly 
than others. To some it might be a very severe ordeal 
to take up the cross. Some people judge the weight of a 
thing through perception; others through experience. 

Our Lord said that it would be better not to take up 
the cross unless we have the determination to go on unto 
the end. He illustrates this in saying, "No man, having put 
his hand to the plow, and looking back, is fit for the 
Kingdom of God."— Luke 9:62. 

The Lord very distinctly told what the cross would 
imply to those who become His disciples. He said that 
whosoever would be His disciple would suffer persecution. 
He warned us that carrying the cross would be a serious 
matter. If, therefore, you determine that you would like 
to be His disciple, sit down and count the cost. If you 
take up the cross, it is to be not merely lifted, but carried 
faithfully unto death. 

WHAT CONSTITUTES CROSS-BEARING? 

The taking up of the cross, then, is done after we 
come to a knowledge of the Truth. The world are not 
bearing the cross at all; neither are those who are having 
their own wills crossed continually. Many a man will 
say, "Since I married, I have my cross with my wife"; 
and many a wife will say that she has her cross with her 
husband. But neither of these is the cross of Christ— 
the difficulty is that there was misjudgment in the marriage. 
The couples are mismated. 

Nevertheless such a thing might become cross-bearing. 
If, for instance, the opposition of husband or wife were 
engendered by faithfulness to the Lord, the bearing of this 
would be cross-bearing, because of being endured for 
Christ's sake, for the Truth's sake. Endurance of opposition 
by business competitors because of our faithfulness 
to Christ would be part of the cross-bearing. Probably 
it is good for us that we do not see all the time what 
the cross means. 

"We know not what awaits us, 
God kindly veils our eyes, 
And o'er each step of our onward way 
He makes new scenes to rise." 

We cannot take up the cross until we have seen what 
the cross is, and have engaged to take up that cross and 
become Christ's disciple. After we have taken up that 
cross, it has to be borne, our Lord tells us. Bearing it 
does not mean our running away from it, or getting 
alarmed at it. Bearing the cross means enduring it. We 
are to follow our instructions along this line. 

Our Lord says, "When they persecute you in one city, 
flee to another." Whosoever is faithful will suffer persecution. 
Therefore, to be without opposition is proof, 
not that we are being favored of God, but that He is not 
dealing with us as sons. Only those whom He deals with 



as sons will become of the Royal Priesthood and participate 
in His glorious Kingdom. Whoever thinks to run 
away from the difficulties that come, makes a mistake. 

THE PURPOSE ACCOMPLISHED BY TRIALS 

What, then, would be the basis on which we could 
relieve ourselves from trials? We should not seek to 
release ourselves unless we realize that by endurance we 
are accomplishing no service for the Truth. Then we 
might seek to see whether the Lord would open some 
other door. If, for instance, one finds himself where he 
is simply suffering and doing no good, let him look about 
and ask the Lord in prayer to show him what to do. 
Perhaps the Lord may open a way of escape. We shall 
not get rid of our trials and imperfections, however, until 
we get rid of the mortal flesh; for the course of the world 
is out of line with righteousness. The whole world is out 
of the way through ignorance, superstition, blindness; and 
amidst them we are to strive to show forth the praises 
of Him who called us from darkness into marvelous light. 

So, then, the following after the Lord is apparently 
the thing that is especially emphasized in our text. The 
bearing of the cross is the way of growth in character 
for the consecrated child of God. If no trials or difficulties 
come to us, if our appetites or desires are never 
interfered with in our service to the Lord and the Truth, 
we may be sure that we are making some mistake. We 
have not become His disciples. 

But if we should have these trials, the Apostle says 
that we are to consider them only as light afflictions and 
but for a moment; and that these are working out "for 
us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory." 
We are looking at the present time, not for the things that 
are seen— the earthly applause and glory— but for the 
Heavenly Glory— for the things that the Lord has promised 
to those that love Him.— 2 Corinthians 4:17,18. 



R5221 :page 121 

"WHAT SHALL I RENDER UNTO THE LORD?" 

(Psalm 116:12-14) 

What shall I render, Lord, to Thee 
For all Thy benefits toward me? 
For life and every earthly good, 
For raiment, shelter, daily food; 
For light and Truth, for peace and love, 
For heavenly wisdom from above?— 
How great Thy bounties unto me! 
What have I that is not from Thee? 

For all these benefits toward me, 



What shall I render, Lord, to Thee? 
The Cup Thy hand of Love hath poured, 
I'll humbly take, most gracious Lord, 
And call upon Thy holy name 
To help me Thy great Plan proclaim; 
I'll spend my days in ceaseless praise, 
And tell abroad Thy wondrous ways! 

"Salvation's Cup"— of suffering, too— 
Of suffering with God's chosen few, 
Dear Lord, I'll drink of this, Thy Cup, 
And smiling through my tears, look up— 
A mingled Cup of grief and joy, 
Of blessedness without alloy, 
Of Love and fellowship Divine, 
A foretaste of the Kingdom-wine! 

That all, dear Lord, may know and see 

Thy countless benefits toward me, 

Before Thy congregation, now, 

I'll pay my consecration Vow; 

And in Thy strength, supplied each day, 

I'll strive to walk the narrow way 

That leads to rest and God and Thee, 

And blissful immortality! GERTRUDE W. SEIBERT. 



R5222 : page 122 

RE CHRIST'S RESURRECTION 

"Christ... being put to death indeed in flesh, 

but made alive in spirit."— 1 Peter 3:18. Rotherham. 

For forty days after His resurrection our Lord was 
with His disciples before His ascension. Yet He revealed 
Himself to them, according to the Records, not more 
than eleven times in all— and some of these instances are 
probably duplications. His interviews with the disciples 
lasted only a few minutes each, except on the walk to 
Emmaus. These manifestations were attended by circumstances 
and conditions which spoke in thunder tones 
of a great change which had occurred to Him. Evidently 
He was no longer the same being, although He had the 
same loving interest in them as before. He was still 
their Lord and Master, the same Jesus, though no longer 
Jesus in the flesh. He was now "the Lord, that Spirit," 
"a quickening Spirit." 

There is no Scriptural statement to the effect that 
Jesus arose in the flesh. We have noted the Scriptures 
very carefully, and find none of them to say that Jesus 
arose in the flesh. On the contrary, we find, as the 
Apostle declares, "Now the Lord is that Spirit." (2 Corinthians 3:17.) 
St. Paul in telling us how he saw 
the Lord Jesus, says that he saw the Lord, not in the flesh, 



but shining "above the brightness of the sun" "at noonday." 
-Acts 26:13-15. 

The Apostle tells us that the Church is to be a spirit 
body: "It is sown in corruption; it is raised in incorruption: 
it is sown in dishonor; it is raised in glory: it is sown 
in weakness; it is raised in power: it is sown a natural 
body; it is raised a spiritual body." (I Corinthians 15:42-44.) 
He tells us that our experiences in the resurrection 
must be similar to those of our Lord. In our 
Lord's case there was a sowing in dishonor and raising in 
glory; a sowing an animal body and a raising a spirit 
body. St. Peter calls attention to this fact when he says, 
"Christ... being put to death indeed in flesh, but made 
alive in spirit."— I Peter 3:18. Rotherham. 

The question, then, arises, How could the Lord be 
raised a spirit body? We can merely give you the Word 
of the Lord for it. He was raised so. The new nature 
began when our Lord was begotten of the Holy Spirit at 
the time of His baptism, and was completed when he was 
perfected as a spirit being at His Resurrection. 

The various Scriptures which are cited about Jesus' appearance 
in bodies of flesh do not prove that Jesus had a 
body of flesh; for angels have appeared among mankind 
in fleshly bodies. And when Jesus rose from the dead, 
He appeared, or materialized, in the same way that He had 
appeared to Abraham in olden times. (Genesis 18:1,2; 15:4,5.) 
One of His manifestations after His resurrection 
was when He took a walk with two of His disciples to 
Emmaus and sat down with them to supper. When He 
broke bread, He became known to them and vanished out 
of their sight! -Luke 24:30,31. 

A MATERIALIZED BODY 

In the case when He appeared to His disciples, it is 
stated that He came into the room where they were, 
"when the doors were shut where the disciples were assembled 
for fear of the Jews." We read further along, 
that eight days later He again appeared in the same room, 
in the same manner, "the doors being shut." (John 20:19,26.) 
These things were evidently to show the 
disciples that He was no longer a flesh being, but a spirit 
being. During the forty days after His resurrection He 
appeared, probably, not more than three hours in all. He 
remained with them to establish their faith, so that they 
might be able to receive the Holy Spirit at the proper time. 

In answer to a question about Philip's vanishing from 
the sight of the eunuch, and being found at Azotus, we 
reply that God was able to take him away. But there 
was nothing said about his being made a spirit being. 
Philip will, no doubt, in due time share with the Lord the 
change of nature in the First Resurrection— "in a moment, 
in the twinkling of an eye"; for "Flesh and blood cannot 
inherit the Kingdom of God."— I Corinthians 15:52,50. 

When Jesus appeared in Jerusalem in the midst of His 
disciples and they were affrighted, He said, "Behold My 



hands and My feet, that it is I Myself: handle Me and 
see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see Me 
have." (Luke 24:39.) He was there impressing upon 
them that they were not SEEING a spirit being, a spirit 
body. They saw a materialized body. The Lord was a 
Spirit all the time, however, and the flesh and bones were 
merely agents of appearance. So our Lord appeared in 
flesh and bones, and He also appeared in clothing. 

BODY AND CLOTHING CREATED FOR THE OCCASION 

Where did the flesh and bones come from? The same 
place that the clothing came from. The human body of 
flesh and bones, etc., and its clothing, which appeared suddenly 
while the doors were shut, did not go out of the door, 
but simply disappeared, or dissolved, into the same elements 
from which He had created them a few moments 
before. "He vanished [Greek, ginomai aphantos, became 
non-manifest, i.e., invisible. Strong's Exhaustive Concordance.] 
out of their sight" (Luke 24:3 1), and was no 
longer seen of them when the flesh and bones and clothing 
in which He had manifested Himself were dissolved, 
though doubtless He was still with them— invisibly 
present; so also much of the time during those forty days. 

The power manifested by our Lord, to create and dissolve 
the clothing in which He appeared, was just as 
superhuman as the creating and dissolving of His assumed 
human body; and the body was no more His glorious 
spirit body than were the clothes He wore. It will be 
remembered that the seamless robe and other clothing 
which our Redeemer wore before His crucifixion had 
been divided among the Roman soldiers, and that the 
grave clothes were left folded away in the sepulcher (John 19:23,24,40; 
20:5-7), so that the clothing in which He 
appeared on the different occasions mentioned must have 
been specially created. 

Our thought is that our Lord was perfect in the flesh 
when He was a man, and that He gave Himself an Offering, 
as a Ransom-price for Adam. "We see Jesus, who 
was made a little lower than the angels for the suffering 
of death, crowned with glory and honor." "A body hast 
Thou prepared Me." (Hebrews 2:9; 10:5.) That earthly, 
human body of flesh suffered death; and God would not 

R5223 : page 122 

again make Him flesh, but He raised our Lord from the 
dead a New Creature of the Divine nature. After His 
resurrection our Lord said to His Apostles, "All power is 
given unto Me in Heaven and in earth."— Matthew 28:18. 

All this indicates to us the great change that came to 
our Lord at the time of His resurrection. If He is now 
merely a man, He is still "lower than the angels." And 
to think of our Lord as a man and lower than the angels 
is contrary to the Lord's Word that He is exalted far above 
angels to the Divine nature. "And being found in fashion 



as a man, He humbled Himself, and became obedient unto 
death, even the death of the cross. Wherefore God also 
hath highly exalted Him, and given Him a name which is 
above every name; that at the name of Jesus every knee 
should bow, of things in Heaven, and things in earth, and 
things under the earth; and that every tongue should confess 
that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the 
Father."— Philippians 2:8-11. 



R5223 : page 123 

THE GIFTS OF WHITSUNTIDE 

-MAY 11. -I CORINTHIANS 12:1-11.- 

"There are diversities of gifts, 
but the same Spirit."— Verse 4. 

WHITSUNTIDE, or Pentecost, marks a very 
special period in God's great Program respecting 
mankind. It stands next in importance 
to the great events connected with our 
Lord Jesus; viz., His baptism at Jordan and 
the anointing of the Holy Spirit there, His 
finishing of His vow of consecration at Calvary, 
His resurrection from the dead on the 
third day— His glorious spirit-birth, as partaker 
of the Divine nature. 

All that Jesus did necessarily preceded the acceptance 
of any members of the human family to joint-heirship 
with Him, or to any recognition of God as His children. 
God acknowledged Adam as His son on the human plane, 
"a little lower than the angels," so long as he remained 
obedient and loyal; but when he disobeyed and came under 
the Divine sentence of death, he broke the covenant between 
God and himself. (Hosea 6:7, margin.) From 
that time onward, God had no sons amongst men until 
Jesus' time, because all were imperfect, sharing in Father 
Adam's imperfection by laws of heredity. 

Then God sent forth His Son, born of a woman, with 
a life uncontaminated, a life that was not derived from 
Father Adam and was therefore not involved in his sentence. 
This One, "holy, harmless, undefiled and separate 
from sinners," God recognized as His Son. When He 
made consecration of His life at Jordan and symbolized 
it in His water baptism, God accepted the sacrifice and 
bestowed upon Him the Holy Spirit in begetting power. 

Thenceforth He was the Son of God in two senses- 
first, according to the flesh; and second, according to the 
Spirit. But in God's order the spirit-begotten One was 
to triumph by fully offering up the fleshly one. This work 
of Jesus was accomplished at Calvary, where He laid down 
His life on behalf of the sins of the whole world. 



R5224 : page 123 

But still God could not recognize the world. They 
were all sinners, and continued so to be until Jesus 
ascended on High, appeared in the Father's presence, 
and made satisfaction for sins. Be it noted, however, that 
He did not make satisfaction for all sins then, but merely 
for the sins of the Church— for the sins of those who 
would be called of the Father, and who would accept the 
call and walk in the footsteps of Jesus. As for the world, 
their sins are still on them. 

The only way to obtain forgiveness of sins during this 
Age, therefore, is to become a disciple of Jesus. Thus, as 
the Apostle says, we, Jesus' followers, have escaped the 
condemnation that is still on the world. The Scriptures 
show us that God has a different way of dealing with the 
world, and a different time. He will deal with the world 
through Christ's Millennial Kingdom, for a thousand 
years, to scatter their darkness, to forgive their sins and 
lift them up to human perfection. Meantime, God deals 
with the Church only; and it is the Church class that the 
Apostle discusses in today's lesson. 

This Church class began its existence at Pentecost- 
Whitsuntide. Hence, we say that this marks a most important 
era in the affairs of the Church. It is true that 
Jesus called His disciples and told them various things 
during His ministry; but when He left them, He instructed 
them to tarry and not to begin their work at all until they 
should be duly authorized by the Father, duly anointed 
with the Holy Spirit. This anointing which they would 
receive would be their authority, and would give them the 
necessary qualification to be the mouthpieces and ambassadors 
of the Father and of the Son. 

The Father could not recognize them sooner than 
Pentecost; for until Christ's presentation of His merit on 
their behalf, they were like the remainder of the world- 
still sinners, still condemned. When the Pentecostal blessing 
came, it manifested the fact that Jesus had ascended 
to the Father's presence; and that the Father had graciously 
received Him, had appreciated His great work of 
sacrifice, and had accepted it as satisfactory for the sins of 
the Church— the Household of Faith. It was on the basis 
of this forgiveness of sins, as well as on the basis of the 
consecration of the disciples to God and His service, that 
the spirit-begetting of Pentecost came upon them. 

THE GIFTS OF THE SPIRIT 

We are to distinguish between the gifts of the Spirit 
and the fruits of the Spirit. The fruits of the Holy Spirit 
are developments of the heart and character, which come 
more or less slowly, according to the personality and the 
environment of each of the spirit-begotten ones. These 
fruits of the Spirit, the Apostle tells us, can be seen; they 
are manifest— "Meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering, 
brotherly-kindness, love." 



These fruits must be developed in our hearts; and this 
will mean more or less of a manifestation of them in our 
words and deeds, as well as in our thoughts. The riper 
the Christian, the riper these fruits; and if no fruits, then 
no Christian; for as the Apostle says, "If any man have 
not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of His." But this 
Spirit of Christ, these fruits of the Spirit, may be more 
or less overshadowed by weaknesses of the flesh; and all 
may not be able to see to what extent the brother who is 
weak in the flesh is really fighting a good fight against the 
spirit of the world, the spirit of the Adversary, and the 
mind of his own flesh. 

God alone knoweth the heart; therefore, we are to 
judge nothing as respects the degree of faithfulness. We 
may, however, and should judge as to whether or not we 
see good fruits or bad fruits in ourselves, or in others who 
profess to be followers of Jesus. The Master said, "By 
their fruits ye shall know them. Do men gather grapes 
of thorns, or figs of thistles?" Surely not! The thorns 
and the thistles are bad fruits, belonging to the evil nature, 
and not fruits of the Spirit, of the Lord, appertaining to 
the New Creature. 

But when Pentecost came, those disciples who had 
already accepted Jesus were not prepared to manifest immediately 
rich, ripe fruitage of the Holy Spirit. It requires 
days, weeks, months, years, for such development. 
Up to this time they were natural men. Only a few days 
before Jesus had said to them, "Except ye become as little 
children, ye shall in no wise enter into the Kingdom." He 
perceived that there was strife amongst themselves as to 
which should be greatest; and that this was entirely contrary 
to the proper spirit which they must have if they 
would finally be accounted worthy of participation in His 
Kingdom. We see then why the brethren waiting at 
Pentecost in the upper room could not have a manifestation 
of the fruits of the Spirit at that time. But it was 
very necessary to them and to us that they should have 
some manifestation of God's favor; that there should be 
some way in which God would show that Jesus had accomplished 
the Father's work, and that His sacrifice had been 
acceptable to the Father on our behalf. God manifested 
this acceptance by the bestowment of certain gifts, which 
were not fruits of the Spirit, in any sense of the word. 

R5224 : page 124 

Those gifts were widely distributed in the early 
Church, and were miraculous. Some who had received the 
gift of the Spirit spoke one language and some another, 
of which they had previously no knowledge; some had the 
gift of interpreting the foreign languages which the others 
spoke; some received the gift of healing; and some had 
power to work other miracles. 

These gifts served a three-fold purpose: (1) They 
proved God's favor, and that it had come through Christ, 
and therefore proved that He had ascended, and that His 



entire work of redemption had been satisfactory to the 
Father. (2) They were proofs to the public that God 
was with these people. This would lead lovers of God to 
investigate the Message they bore. (3) They were an 
assurance to the disciples themselves that they were following 
in the right way, and that God was blessing them 
and leading them. 

All these experiences, indispensable for the establishment 
of the early Church, came at a time when such manifestation 
was most necessary. The early Church could not 
walk by faith as we do. They needed the assistance of 
sight, to the extent that was there granted; for they had 
no Bibles. They had no instruction from God except such 
as came through these channels. 

St. Paul explains the matter in today's lesson. When 
they came together, one would speak in an unknown 
tongue. Another would arise in another part of the audience, 
and with a power not his own give an interpretation 
of the foreign language used by the speaker with 
"tongues." This drew the brethren together every day, 
especially on the first day of the week. They wanted to 
have fellowship and instruction; and in this way they obtained 
it, God guiding in respect to the messages delivered 
in unknown tongues and to the interpretations. 

Thus God taught them in almost the only way they 
could have received instruction at that time, but very differently 
from the way in which He now instructs His people, 
or has ever instructed them since the Apostles' day. 
Such instruction is no longer necessary, and is therefore 
no longer given. Instead, we have something much better. 
We have the Gospels, recording our Lord's words, parables, 
dark sayings, etc.; we have the Epistles of the New 
Testament, comments of the inspired Apostles on the Old 
Testament writings; and we have the prophecies of the 
Old Testament, to which St. Peter declares, "We do well 
to take heed, as unto a light which shineth in a dark place, 
until the Day dawn."— 2 Peter 1:19. 

OURS A BETTER EXPERIENCE 

With these Divinely provided helps, the man of God, 
as St. Paul declares, "may be thoroughly furnished unto 
every good work." Through these channels the Holy 
Spirit is instructing the Church. But the gifts of the 
Spirit were necessary at Pentecost. Instead of those 
gifts, we now have the fruits of the Spirit, as testifying 
God's favor, and our own progress in the good way. With 
our further enlightenment the Lord requires of us more 
than was required of the early Church— that we walk by 
faith and not by sight. 

St. Paul points out that all these variations in the manifestations 
of the Spirit meant, not different spirits, but 
the one Spirit, working in the entire Church, with the one 
purpose of building them all up as various members in the 
one Body of Christ. He says, "There are diversities of 
operations, but it is the same God that worketh all in all. 



To one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom; to another, 
the word of knowledge; to another, faith; to another, 
gifts of healing; to another, miracles; to another, 
prophecy; to another, discerning of spirits; to another, 
diversity of tongues and interpretations." 

"YE ARE ALL ONE BODY" 

The oneness of the Church with each other and with 
their Lord, the Head, St. Paul repeatedly sets forth, and 
particularly in today's lesson. He shows that the different 
gifts enabled the different members of the Body to co-operate 
for their mutual welfare, edification and upbuilding, 
in preparation for the glories of service in the coming 
Kingdom. He says that as the human body is one, 
but has many members, all under the control of the head, 
so also is the Body of Christ. The Church is one Body, 
but composed of many members, all under the control of 
the Head, Jesus, operating through the Spirit of Truth, 
by the Word of Truth and by Divine providences. 

The object of the organization of the Church is not 
the conversion of the world, but it is the upbuilding of 
herself and preparation for a future service. That future 
service is to be the blessing of the world. But before that 
service for the world can be properly begun, the Church 
herself must be developed, proven, approved of God, and 

R5225 : page 124 

glorified by a share in the First Resurrection. 

A MORE EXCELLENT WAY 

St. Paul, further on in the chapter, tells how the various 
members of the Body should co-operate with each 
other, offsetting each other's imperfections, compensating 
for each other's shortcomings and weaknesses, and seeking 
only the welfare of the Body as a whole. There 
should be no schisms, no division, no sectarianism in the 
Body of Christ, the Church, and all the members should 
have the same love one for another. Sectarian love and 
sectarian pride should be unknown. Likewise, if any of the 
members suffer, all should feel a sympathy. He points out 
that God set the different members in this Body: first, the 
Apostles; and secondarily, prophets, or orators; and 
thirdly, teachers; after that, miracles, gifts, helps, diversities 
of tongues. All have not the same office given them 
of the Lord, but each should seek faithfully to use the 
talents which he possesses; and while using these gifts they 
should seek the best they are capable of exercising. 

Then the Apostle adds, "Yet shew I unto you a more 
excellent way," still better than any of these gifts. Following 
along (chapter 13), he declares that one might 
have these gifts, and yet make shipwreck entirely; and 
that it was necessary, even with the gifts, to cultivate the 
fruits of the Spirit. For though we should have the gift 



of prophecy, understanding all mysteries and knowledge, 
and have all faith, but have not love— the great fruit of 
the Spirit— we would be nothing. Moreover, he declares 
that the gifts would vanish away, but that the fruits would 
last eternally. 

It is important, then, in our consideration of Whitsuntide 
blessings, that we remember that without the fruits 
of the Spirit we would be nothing, and would have no 
share in the glorious Messianic Kingdom, for which we 
are waiting and praying, "Thy Kingdom come; Thy will 
be done on earth as in Heaven." 



R5225 : page 125 

THE SOWING AND THE REAPING 

-MAY 18.-GENESIS 42.- 

"Whatsoever a man soweth, that 
shall he also reap."— Galatians 6:7. 

THE STORY of Joseph and his brethren continues. 

Today's lesson illustrates how the 

remembrance of their cruelty toward their 

brother Joseph, inspired by envy, continued 

to harass the evil-doers many long years 

after. Our Golden Text seems to lay down 

a general principle, applicable not only to 

the consecrated people of God, but to mankind 

in general. Whatsoever anybody sows 

wilfully, intelligently, will bring a harvest, a reaping, of 

similarly good or evil kind. 

The famine was general throughout that region of the 
world. It included Palestine as well as Egypt. The word 
spread that there was no lack of food in Egypt, that there 
was corn there, sold at moderate prices, and that it belonged 
to the old stock. Jacob directed his sons, who 
were men of families themselves, to go down to Egypt 
and make purchases of wheat. 

As strangers, they were directed to Joseph, who doubtless 
was on the lookout for them. He spoke to them 
through an interpreter, asking if they were not spies, coming 
to see how much wheat was in Egypt, that they might 
bring an army to steal it. They explained their situation 
truthfully. Joseph then inquired about his father and his 
younger brother Benjamin. Finally he put one of them 
into prison, and sent all the others home with corn, with 
the understanding that they would need more corn and 
might have plenty of it, as long as the famine lasted, provided 
that they should prove that they were not spies by 
bringing their youngest brother along with them. Meantime, 
Simeon would be held as hostage. 

The guilty consciences of the brethren began to connect 
up these various experiences with their own wrong 



course in the past. They said one to another, "We are 
verily guilty concerning our brother, when we saw the 
anguish of his soul, when he besought us and we would 
not hear: therefore is this distress come upon us." They 
knew not that Joseph understood them, but he withdrew 
and wept. His heart was not hard. He was merely giving 
them a lesson that would be profitable for them in 
coming years. 

The Scriptures represent that when the Messianic 
Kingdom will begin to shed its blessings abroad, the antitypical 
Joseph, Messiah, will likewise speak roughly to 
the people in a time of trouble, and cause them great 
vexation and worry as to what the outcome will be. But 
all the while the Lord's heart will be full of love and 
sympathy for the poor groaning creation, for whom 
He already has died, and in whose interest His Kingdom 
will be established. The time of trouble upon the world 
in the beginning of Messiah's reign will evidently be for 
the very purpose of preparing the hearts of mankind for 
the blessings which the Lord is so willing to bestow. 

MANY STRIPES AND FEW STRIPES 

When Jacob's ten sons arrived with their wheat, they 
told the whole story of their experience to their father. 
They explained why Simeon was not with them— that he 
was kept as a hostage. Moreover, they were perplexed 
to find that no money had been charged them for the 
wheat. The money they had paid for it was returned in 
each sack. Everything seemed strange to them, and the 
minds of the brethren continually adverted to the crime 
of years ago, in connection with their brother Joseph. 
Many times during those intervening years they had 
reaped crops of sorrow and fearful surmisings respecting 
what the providence of a just God might ultimately exact 
from them in the nature of trouble, similar to that which 
they had brought upon their brother. 

How advantageous it would be to the whole world if 
this principle were generally recognized— if all realized the 
truthfulness of God's Word that every trespass must receive 
a just recompense of reward! We have lost such 
an appreciation of justice, and such a looking for a 
righteous retribution, in the fog of a very false doctrine, 
which has become prevalent. That false doctrine ascribes 
only the one punishment for every sin, and that an unthinkable 
one; viz., everlasting torture. In the first place, 
how few there are that really believe that doctrine or are 
really influenced by it! Its monstrosity makes it unbelievable, 
and turns the mind away from the proper view 
of the real punishments which God has foretold. 

Added to this first inconsistency and its evil effect, we 
mention another, which associates itself thus: Our Catholic 
friends claim that by membership in the church they will 
escape eternal torment and get some lesser torment. And 
that theory seems so much more logical than the Protestant 
one that many accept it as the lesser evil of the two. 



Then comes our Protestant theory that a man or a woman, 

the moment before death, may say, "God forgive me!" 

and immediately pass into Paradise, and escape all punishment 

for sins. These theories, we claim, are all injurious, 

as well as inconsistent. The Scriptural theory, we are 

sure, would be found the more effective, if it were 

preached, if it were believed. 

That Scriptural theory is expressed in our Golden 
Text: "Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap." 
If he sows a desire for cruelty, words of deceit, injustice, 
selfishness, evil speaking, slander, he will surely have a 
reaping time, and will gather rewards in harmony with 
his desire. 

It is impossible for humanity to improve upon the 
Divine arrangement. Hence all Christian people should 
begin afresh to tell the world both of the Justice and the 
Love of God— that God's just penalty against sin is death, 
but that He has made provision through Christ for a release 
from that penalty, during Christ's Messianic reign of 
a thousand years. Then every member of Adam's race 
will be granted a full opportunity of reconciliation with 
God and of restoration to the image and likeness of God, 
lost for all by Father Adam's sin. 

But meantime, each individual has a responsibility in 
respect to his every word and act and thought. To whatever 
extent he sins against light, knowledge and the 
Golden Rule, to the same extent he degrades his character, 
and thus makes his opportunity for return to the image 
and likeness of God the more difficult. He whose conscience 
becomes the most degraded will find the way for 
retracing his course the most difficult and steep. 

According to this Divine rule, the Millennium may 
find heathen people more ready to go up on the Highway 
of Holiness than people of so-called Christian lands. The 
latter, having had more light, more privilege, more opportunity 
and sinning against greater knowledge, have 
seared their consciences more deeply. Of some such Jesus 
exclaimed, "How can ye escape the condemnation of 
Gehenna!"— the Second Death. 

JACOB'S GRAY HAIRS FOR SHEOL 

When poor old Jacob heard that Benjamin would be 
required to go on the next expedition for wheat, he demurred 
and declared that it must never be. Joseph was 

R5226 : page 126 

gone, and if now he should lose his youngest son, Benjamin, 
the grief would bring down his gray hairs quickly 
to Sheol— the tomb— the state of death. 

In our common version English Bible this word Sheol 
is repeatedly translated Hell, Pit, and Grave. In olden 
times, these three English words were synonymous in 
meaning. As for instance, a man, speaking of burying 
so many bushels of potatoes in a pit, would call it helling 



the potatoes. And when this term was used in respect to 
humanity, sometimes the word grave was used. Altogether, 
the word Sheol occurs sixty-six times, and more than 
one-half of these times it is translated pit and grave. 

When the Revised Version was in preparation, the 
learned men charged with that work refused any longer 
to translate the word Sheol by the word Hell, because in 
the intervening centuries that word had gradually lost its 
original meaning and had come to have the significance 
of a place of fire and of torture. Since no such meaning 
attaches to the word Sheol in the Hebrew, these scholars 
refused to so translate it into English. To these facts 
they all agreed, but then came a dispute as to how it 
should be translated. Some would not agree to translate 
Sheol uniformly by the English word grave, or tomb, 
fearing that this would appear very radical to some Christian 
people. 

Finally, as a compromise to settle the question, it was 
concluded that in all places where Sheol and the corresponding 
Greek word Hades had been translated Hell in 
our Common Version, the Hebrew word Sheol or the 
Greek word Hades should be substituted, and left without 
translation. If any of the people found out their meaning, 
it would be all right. If they did not find out, they might 
remain in ignorance, and still think of Hades and Sheol as 
signifying a place of torture. Our Baptist friends have 
recently met with a similar difficulty and have given the 
translation of Sheol and Hades as "the Underworld." Of 
course the grave, the tomb, the state of death, may be 
thus indicated, and no one can find fault. 

It is needless to say that when Jacob spoke of his gray 
hairs as going down to Sheol, he did not mean his sons to 
understand that he expected to go to eternal torment. 
What he did mean is evident. He meant, "My sons, I 
am now old and gray-headed, and to lose this youngest 
son would hasten my death"— "bring down my gray hairs 
to Sheol, to the tomb." No one need question where 
Jacob's gray hairs would go. They did go to Sheol 
eventually, but not because of grief. Jacob's old age was 
made very happy by the fellowship of his sons, and by 
the realization that God had highly exalted Joseph to the 
rulership of Egypt. 

OUR GOLDEN TEXT LESSON 

Although St. Paul, as we have seen, made a general 
observation to the effect that whatsoever any man sows, 
that shall he also reap, nevertheless, he evidently used 
these words with particular reference to the experiences 
of the Church. The context makes such an application. 
The context applies these words directly to the consecrated 
people of God, assuring them that a consecration 
to be dead with Christ is not sufficient. On the contrary, 
God cannot be mocked, cannot be deceived, cannot be 
trifled with. If God has entered into a covenant with us, 
nothing else than our agreement will stand. 



Then the Apostle recites the agreement which Christians 
covenant with the Lord. They covenant to sacrifice 
all earthly interests, aims, hopes, that thereby they may 
be pleasing and acceptable to God, and become heirs with 
Jesus of the incorruptible things to be attained on the 
other side the veil, as spirit beings, as New Creatures in 
Christ. He says, "He that soweth to the flesh, shall of 
the flesh reap corruption." By this he means that if any 
Christian who has entered into this covenant with God 
to become dead to the will of the flesh and alive to the will 
of God, shall live after the flesh— according to its desires, 
its promptings, its leadings, its appetites— the end of that 
man's way will be death— the Second Death, symbolized 
by the Gehenna fire, which destroyed the offal outside the 
City of Jerusalem. 

On the other hand, if any man sow to the spirit, if he 
live according to the New Creature, by living in harmony 
with his covenant of consecration— not merely making a 
start in the right direction— this would decide the matter 
in his favor. Some of the best people who have ever 
lived have made more or less serious blunders, under the 
temptations of the flesh. But stumbling into sin would 
not be living after the flesh— it would merely be a start 
to so live. The soul, rightly exercised by his sin, by the 
weakness, may recover itself, and come back to the Throne 
of Heavenly Grace, and in the name of Jesus obtain 
mercy and find grace to help for further time of need. 
But if these opportunities and privileges were not used, 
and if the course of living after the flesh were pursued, 
the result would be death. 

So, on the other hand, to make a start to live a 
righteous, self-sacrificing life would not be sufficient; and 
to return to a righteous course, after having been overtaken 
in a fault and shedding some tears of penitence, 
would not be sufficient to recover him. But if we live 
after the Spirit, if we through the Spirit do mortify the 
deeds of the body, then we shall gain the eternal life on 
the spirit plane which God has promised to all the faithful. 
But this matter of living after the Spirit is a great contract, 
and one that needs continual watchfulness and 
prayer, lest we be overtaken in a fault— lest we let these 
precious things of God's promise slip from us— lest we 
become overcharged with the cares of this life and the 
deceitfulness of riches— lest our faith become weak and 
we faint by the way. 

We need to have this thought definitely before our 
minds: While each act and word and thought has its 
bearing upon the ultimate results in every Christian's life, 
nevertheless no one thought, no one word, and no one 
deed carries the deciding weight, either for good or for 
evil. The more loyal we are, the more faithful we are, 
the fewer slips we shall make, the more like our Redeemer 
we shall be, and the brighter will be our reward, for as 
the Apostle declares, "As star differeth from star in glory, 
so also is The Resurrection of the Dead." 

Those, then, who are of the world may know that 



every good and every evil act of theirs will have a weight 
and influence in respect to their trial for life or death 
under the Messianic Kingdom arrangements. And every 
Christian who has entered into a covenant to become dead 
with Christ that he may also live with Him, to suffer with 
Christ that he may also reign with Him— all such should 
know that every word, every thought, every act, has a 
bearing upon the great results. Hence, as the Apostle 
says, all such should walk through life circumspectly, 
wisely, seeking to know and to do the things pleasing to 
God, and to attain the highest reward. 



R5226 : page 127 

THE ABRAHAMIC COVENANT AND THE NEW COVENANT 

THE ABRAHAMIC COVENANT is not the 
New Covenant, even as it is not the Law 
Covenant. The New Covenant is the name 
of that arrangement which God will make 
with Israel and all mankind who, during 
the period of Messiah's reign, desire to become 
"Israelites indeed." That New Covenant 
will be inaugurated as a measure for 
carrying out the blessings purposed in the 
Abrahamic Covenant. 

The Abrahamic Covenant relates especially to the Seed 
of Abraham, which is to be made glorious and powerful, 
with a view to the blessing of the world. The New Covenant 
relates to the arrangement by which the antitypical 
Seed of Abraham, when glorified, will accomplish the 
honorable work assigned to it in the Abrahamic Covenant. 

The fulfilment of the Abrahamic Covenant began in 
the person of our Lord Jesus, not when He left the 
Heavenly glory, nor when He was born a babe at Bethlehem, 
but when God accepted His consecration and begat 
Him to a new nature at the time of His baptism, perfecting 
Him in the new nature at His resurrection. The 
Man Jesus, before being begotten of the Holy Spirit, was 
not the Seed of Abraham according to promise, capable 
of blessing mankind; for so long as Jesus was in the 
flesh, even though perfect, the blessing of the world 
through Him was impossible. The world lay under a 
death sentence and could not be blessed until provision 
should be made for the lifting of that death sentence. 

The provision of the Ransom, therefore, was necessary 
for the world. Jesus in the flesh, in providing the 
Ransom-price, would have had no life for Himself that 
He might become the King of Glory and Priest after the 
order of Melchizedek (Psa. 110:4; Heb. 5:10) unless 
God had begotten and quickened and raised Him to the 
higher, spirit nature. Hence, although Jesus, through 
His mother, was of the seed of Abraham according to the 
flesh, He did not inherit this Abrahamic Covenant according 



to the flesh, but as the New Creature. 

In order, therefore, to attain this higher nature, in 
order to be the Spiritual Seed of Abraham and bless all 
the families of the earth, it was necessary for Jesus to 
enter into a special covenant of sacrifice. The Church, 
members of His Body, must share all His experiences and 
lay down the earthly life also; for whether Jews or 
Gentiles it would still be true that flesh and blood cannot 
inherit the Kingdom. Hence the privilege of the Church 
is to enter into the covenant of sacrifice with Jesus. Thus 
we read, "Gather My saints together unto Me; those that 
have made a covenant with Me by sacrifice."— Psa. 50:5. 

It has required the entire Gospel Age for the gathering 
of these saints and the making of their sacrifices. 
Those sacrifices must be accomplished before they can 
attain to the Heavenly nature— before they can be members 
of the Spiritual Seed of Abraham and heirs according 
to the promise. Thus the Apostle declares, "Israel hath 

R5227 : page 127 

not obtained that which he seeketh for [to be the Spiritual 
Seed of Abraham]; but the Election hath obtained it, 
and the rest were blinded."— Rom. 11:7. 

The Election obtained this blessed state through the 
covenant of sacrifice, in which Jesus acted as their Advocate. 
The first members were accepted at Pentecost. 
The last members, we trust, will soon finish their course 
with joy. Then the Spiritual Seed of Abraham will be 
complete and ready to serve the world as the great antitypical 
Mediator— of the New Covenant. 

The Abrahamic Covenant was God's own Covenant, 
or promise. Because it was unconditional, it has no mediator 
(Gal. 3:19,20), neither did it need to be sealed with 
blood. Rather, we might say that God sealed it with 
His oath. (Heb. 6:16-18.) The Law Covenant needed 
the blood of bulls and goats as an offset to the sins of 
the people, who were to be blessed typically. The New 
Covenant needs the blood of better sacrifices as satisfaction 
for the sins of the people, who are to be blessed 
actually. These two Covenants could not go into effect 
without the shedding of blood and the remission of 
sins.-Heb. 9:18-22. 

But the Abrahamic Covenant centers itself in the 
New Creatures. From the first, God meant primarily the 
Spiritual Seed of Abraham, the New Creation, which has 
never known sin. Jesus Himself was holy, harmless, undefiled 
and separate from sinners, and needed not any 
atonement for sin in order to enter into that Covenant 
relationship and become Abraham's Spiritual Seed and 
Heir. Those accepted as His members would have 
had no such standing or worthiness except as He adopted 
them as His members, imputed His own merit to them 
and offered them sacrificially as His own flesh. 

Hence, strictly speaking, we cannot say that the Abrahamic 
Covenant has ever been sealed with blood, or 



that it will ever be so sealed. This does not alter the 
fact, however, that not without blood (death) could Jesus 
have become the great antitypical Prophet, Priest and 
King; and not without blood (death) could we, His members, 
be accepted through Him. Only in this indirect way 
can it be said that the Abrahamic Covenant is sealed with 
blood. St. Paul intimates that it was sealed by the oath 
of Jehovah.-Heb. 6:13-18. 



R5227 : page 127 

AN INTERESTING QUESTION 

Question.— Is there any way of determining our standing 
before God? 

Answer.— The Apostle John says that "If our hearts 
condemn us not, then we have confidence toward God." 
(I John 3:21.) In order that we may begin to measure 
ourselves and our progress, to know whether or not we 
are pleasing God in the affairs of life, we must know first 
of all whether we have taken steps to come into His 
family. Have we made a full consecration of ourselves 
to do the Divine will? If we know that we have made a 
full consecration of ourselves, the next question should 
be, To what extent do I know God's will, and to what extent 
am I seeking to do it? Do I use my time, strength, 
influence and all that I have, sacrificially, to the best of 
my ability, not counting my life dear unto myself? If 
we find that in a general way this is the course we are 
following, then there is every reason for us to have great 
satisfaction. 

Then we find that the thing to be expected is that all 
those who will "live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer 
persecution." (2 Tim. 3:12.) If we find that we have not 
this witness of the Spirit, if we have no persecution, 
then we have not been letting our light shine out. This 
should not lead us into anything foolish, but we should examine 
ourselves to see whether we are laying down our 
lives in His service. If we find no suffering in the present 
time, it should be a cause of perplexity to us. 

If we find persecutions, then we should make sure that 
our persecutions are not from any wrong which we have 
done ourselves, nor from busybodying in other men's 
matters, but that we are suffering for the Truth's sake, 
for the brethren's sake. If we have these evidences that 
we have come into God's family, if we are studying to 
know and to do His will, if we are having trials and difficulties 
in the pathway and are being rightly exercised 
thereby, we may count ourselves as His faithful people. 



page 129 

VOL. XXXIV MAY 1 No. 9 
A. D. 1913-A. M. 6041 



CONTENTS 

Evidences of the Anointing of the Holy 
Spirit 131 

Distinction Between Anointing and 
Begetting 131 

The Anointing Not the Mind of Christ 132 

Dwelling Together in Unity 133 

Friction the Result of Selfishness 133 

"No Schism in the Body" 134 

Anointing the "Feet" of Christ 134 

Antitypical Perfume on Antitypical Feet 135 

A Disciple's Prayer (Poem) 135 

Benjamin's Portion Five-Fold 136 

Two Tribulation Classes 137 

Lessons Learned by Joseph's Brethren 138 

When Will Men Profit? 139 

Mercy Is Better Than Sacrifice 140 

"Fall Not Out By The Way" 141 

Some Interesting Letters 142 

Requests for Pilgrim Visits 143 

Berean Questions in Scripture Studies 143 

page 130 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



A WORD TO CONVENTIONERS 

You will assist us, and therefore advantage all concerned 
by advising us in advance where you intend going; and for 
what days; and how many are to constitute your party; and 
color and sex. Address at each Convention city, three weeks 
in advance, Laymen's Home Missionary Movement. 

It will further advantage all if we have the engagement of 
all rooms. Then you will not be going in at the eleventh 
hour and taking, at higher prices, rooms we had already 
secured for others, and causing trouble when you wish to bless. 

RE HOT SPRINGS, ARK. 

Hot Springs is in the mountains of Arkansas and therefore 
will not be so hot as its name might imply. The surroundings 
are beautiful and attractive. It is under U.S. Government 
control, and sanitary to the highest degree. It has few sick 
visitors in summer. We are expecting that the attendance 
there from Texas and the South will be considerable. 

OMISSION AND ADDITIONS 

Cross off the list Mt. Lake Park, Md. 

The International Bible Students Association Classes 
of Los Angeles and San Francisco are arranging for Conventions 
to be held in connection with Brother Russell's 
visits to their Cities. Los Angeles proposes five days of 
Bible study, June 11 to 15; San Francisco proposes three 
days, June 14, 15, 16. Such of our readers as desire to 
attend those Conventions are requested to write for particulars 
—railway excursion rates, etc. State what railway 
routing you prefer, going and returning. Address Laymen's 
Home Missionary Movement, Box 325, San Francisco, Cal., 
or 405 So. Hill St., Room 316, Los Angeles, Cal. The Brethren 
will arrange for special parties and for entertainment, etc. 
Our readers on the Pacific Coast proposing to attend the later 
Conventions in the East may also receive helpful information 
respecting routes, rates, etc. Surely avail yourselves of these 
Christian hospitalities. 

Dr. L. W. Jones, of 3003 Walnut Street, Chicago, 111., 
learning of Brother Russell's arrangements for the Convention 
Tour to the Pacific, has made up a Convention 
Party to accompany him, or rather asked him if they 
may have the pleasure of his company on their special 
train. He has very thankfully accepted the kind hospitalities. 
Parties wishing to join the Excursion Train enroute 
can address the Doctor direct, or, if they prefer, communicate 
through the Laymen's Home Missionary Movement 
of the Pacific Coast at addresses above. 



SUBSCRIPTIONS FOR SERMON NEWSPAPERS 

We are glad to know that our readers subscribe for the 
journals which publish Brother Russell's sermons weekly. We 
are specially glad when they encourage and support the paper 
published nearest to their post-office. We are still more pleased 
when these subscriptions pass through our hands. This may 
be done by those who make up clubs— everyway. 

Our readers must not think that newspapers which send 
them letters requesting them to act as agents are prompted 
by us. Whatever we have to say to you on the subject of 
subscription will be said either through the WATCH TOWER 
columns or through the Pilgrims, or directly by letter. 

Letters coming to you through newspapers are merely 
circulars and need no reply. 



Whenever and wherever our readers see in newspapers 
anything from the pen of Brother Russell, there and then 
they should recognize an Editor to be encouraged and a 
paper to be assisted. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR JUNE 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. 
At the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns 
for June follow: (1)305; (2) 1; (3) 105; (4) 114; (5) 43; (6) 
145; (7) 230; (8) 7; (9) Vow; (10) 321; (11) 293; (12) 95; 
(13) 238; (14) 50; (15) 320; (16) 325; (17) 145; (18) 27; (19) 
15; (20) 259; (21) 198; (22) 222; (23) 226; (24) 333; (25) 4; 
(26) 246; (27) 313; (28) 165; (29) 160; (30) 130. 



R5227 :page 131 

EVIDENCES OF THE ANOINTING OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 

"Christ in you, the hope 
of glory."— Colossians 1:27. 

THE SCRIPTURES frequently speak of the 

Church as being "in Christ," giving the 

thought of membership in His Body. 

(Romans 12:4,5; I Corinthians 12:12-27; 

2 Corinthians 5:17.) Our Lord Himself 

used the figure of a vine and its branches to 

convey the same thought. He spoke of 

Himself as the Vine, and of the Church 

as the branches in the Vine, partaking of 

nourishment therefrom. (John 15:1,2.) 

It is not this thought, however, that is expressed by the 



Apostle's words, "Christ in you, the hope of glory." 

The word Christ signifies anointed. All who will be 
members of the Royal Priesthood will be anointed— not 
separately, but collectively. This was pictured during the 
Jewish Age by the installation into office of both the 
kings and the high priests of Israel. According to the 
Law, every king and every high priest must be anointed, 
else he could not serve. The oil which was used in this 
ceremony was of a peculiar kind, which might not be used 
for any other purpose.— Exodus 30:22,23. 

The anointing which our Lord and the members of 
His mystical Body have received is different from anything 
else in the whole world. It is the anointing of the 
Holy Spirit, which is variously spoken of as the spirit of 
holiness, the spirit of a sound mind, the spirit of the 
Truth, and the Spirit of God. It is not the Truth, but the 
spirit of the Truth, it is not the Word of God, although 
it is in harmony with the Word; it is not holiness, yet it 
is in full accord with holiness. It is the spirit, the disposition, 
which is associated with a sound mind, with 
holiness, with Truth and with the Word of God. 

As the anointing of kings and priests in Israel was the 
Divine evidence that they were accepted to office, so was 
it with our Lord Jesus. St. Peter tells us that "God 
anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Spirit and with 
power." (Acts 10:38.) Our Lord was set apart for a 
very high office. In harmony with the Divine arrangement, 
He is to be the great antitypical King and Priest— 
"after the order of Melchizedek." 

During the Gospel Age, God has been setting apart 
those who are to be members of the Body of Christ. These 
are invited to be kings and priests unto our God— a Royal 
Priesthood. Consequently, when one is received into this 
Body, under the Headship of Christ, he comes under the 
anointing of the Holy Spirit. This unction is from the 

R5228 :page 131 

Father in that He alone can give the recognition. It is 
from the Son in that we can come to the Father only 
through Him. 

This is well illustrated by the consecration of the Jewish 
high priest. The holy oil was poured upon Aaron's head, 
typifying the anointing of our Lord at the time of His 
consecration. The oil then ran down to the very skirts 
of Aaron's garments, thus typifying the anointing of the 
Body of Christ, which is the Church. This descent of the 
Holy Spirit upon the Church was manifested at Pentecost. 

DISTINCTION BETWEEN ANOINTING AND BEGETTING 

The anointing of the Holy Spirit is slightly different 
from the begetting of the Holy Spirit. The Holy Spirit 
which came upon Jesus at Jordan was both the begetting 
and the anointing power of God. Our Lord was The 
Anointed from the moment at which He was begotten. 



So with the Church at Pentecost. They were waiting 
for acceptance of God. Our Lord had appeared in the 
presence of God as their Advocate, in order that their 
sacrifices might be acceptable. When the Father recognized 
their acceptance by shedding forth the Holy Spirit 
—when there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as 
of fire, and "sat upon each one of them" (Acts 2:3, R.V.) 
—that recognition was both their begetting and their 
anointing. The former— the begetting— represents the 
matter from the individual standpoint, and the latter— 
the anointing— from the collective. We are begotten individually, 
but we were anointed collectively. 

If we should consider the anointing and the begetting 
as two different steps of progress, we should be obliged 
to say that the begetting takes place first, and that the 
begotten one is anointed, or recognized as an heir of 
God. But this giving the one a priority over the other is 
not necessary to the thought. These seem to be two pictures, 
which represent the matter from two different 
standpoints. We are not individually anointed, nor are we 
collectively begotten. 

This Spirit which we receive from God abides in us. 
Whoever loses the Spirit loses the light, and passes into 
the death condition. So the Apostle urges, "Grieve not 
the Spirit." If we cease to be in the Body of Christ, we 
cease to be anointed. If we lose the spirit of our begetting, 
we shall die. The begetting represents the beginning 
of our experience, and the resurrection the completion. 
Each is individually begotten and born of the 
Spirit. 

In the picture of anointing the whole Body is 
anointed. There will be no need for a repetition of the 

R5228 : page 132 

ceremony. At the beginning of the Gospel Age, the one 
Body was anointed, and all who will be members of that 
Body come under that one anointing, and all these will 
share in His resurrection— the First Resurrection— the 
Chief Resurrection. 

THE ANOINTING NOT THE MIND OF CHRIST 

Not only was our Lord begotten to the new nature, 
anointed of the Holy Spirit, but each member of the Body 
must be similarly begotten, for "flesh and blood cannot 
inherit the Kingdom of God." If we have received this 
anointing, we are eligible to all that God has promised to 
The Christ— primarily to the Head, and also to the members 
of His Body. As God foreknew the great Shepherd 
of the sheep, the Redeemer, He also foreknew this class. 

Long before our Lord came into the world, the 
Father had planned that there should be an Anointed 
Company, the Head of which should be our Lord, and the 
Body of which should be the Church. (Ephesians 1:3,4,22,23.) 
Jesus was to have the first place in the Christ 



Company, and associated with Him would be those who 
would have His Spirit, His will, who had made a full consecration 
of their lives to do God's will faithfully, even 
unto death. 

For those who have this spirit of consecration, and 
have presented themselves in sacrifice, our Lord stands 
as the Advocate before the Father, to make good for 
them, to cover their blemishes and imperfections. Our 
Lord's work is not that of anointing, but of making it 
possible for us to be received by the Father. The anointing 
is of the Father, but by the Son. St. Peter says that 
Jesus, having received the Spirit of the Father, shed it 
forth. -Acts 2:33. 

As long as we have this Spirit of God, it is an evidence 
to us that we are children of God. So long as we possess 
it, we maintain this relationship of sons. (Romans 8:9,14.) 
Then the consequent thought is that if we are children 
of God we are "heirs of God and joint-heirs with Jesus 
Christ," "to an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled and 
that fadeth not away, reserved in Heaven for you, who 
are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, 
ready to be revealed in the last time."— Romans 8:17; 
I Peter 1:5. 

The words of our text suggest the thought that whoever 
has the Spirit of God has the evidence that he is an 
heir of glory and will receive the reward, if found faithful. 
On one occasion the Apostle John said, "But the 
anointing which ye have received of Him abideth in you, 
and ye need not that any man teach you." (I John 2:27.) 
Those who have this anointing have no need that any one 
teach them that fact, for they have the evidence of it, the 
proof of it in their own hearts and experiences. These 
evidences are more apparent to themselves than to any 
one else. 

The evidences that one has been anointed may not be 
understood except as we have the instructions of the 
Word of God. The Scriptures give us an outline of the 
witness to the possession of the Holy Spirit, so as to 
leave no room for doubt. They tell us that the Holy 
Spirit, the begetting power in us, leads us more and more 
to have the mind of Christ. We were not anointed with 
the mind of Christ, but with the Holy Spirit, and whoever 
has the Holy Spirit will find that he will develop the 
mind of Christ. 

CHARACTERISTICS OF THE MIND OF CHRIST 

The mind of Christ is the will to do the Father's will. 
Our Lord, when a child, said on one occasion to His 
mother, "How is it that ye sought Me? wist ye not 
that I must be about My Father's business?" (Luke 2:49.) 
We recognize that we have a Heavenly Father, 
whose service is the highest possible service. Those who 
are His must have this spirit. The work of the New 
Creature must be the Heavenly work, otherwise he will 
have no proof that he has passed from the condemnation 



upon the human race and become a New Creature. 

If we have the spirit of loyalty to God, to the Truth 
and to the brethren, we have the mind, the disposition of 
Christ. We also have indeed the weaknesses of the flesh, 
but it is our privilege to fight against these and to become 
more and more transformed in the spirit of our minds, to 
have our minds more centered in the Truth and in the 
service of the brethren. 

If there is a decrease of zeal in this direction, then 
we may know that there is danger of going backward 
instead of forward. We hear of instances where the 
Lord's people have lost their first love and have become 
more or less cold. From our standpoint we may know 
when any have lost their first love. It is when they have 
allowed their minds to be led away to earthly things- 
love of family, of home, of worldly possessions, etc., all 
of which war against the Heavenly things. We should 
seek our pleasures, not from earthly sources, but from 
the Heavenly source. Very frequently we find Christians 
who tell us that they had a blessed experience when first 
they knew the Lord, but that they do not now feel as near 
to Him as formerly. If we probe the matter, we nearly 
always find that they went into business, or married, or 
did something which has warred against the Holy Spirit. 
We are not speaking against those things, but "If ye know 
these things, happy are ye if ye do them"— the things 
that make for our peace. 

OTHER EVIDENCES OF THE ANOINTING 

In addition to having the mind of Christ, we have 
other evidences that we have been anointed. We find 
ourselves needing the spiritual food, and to satisfy our 
hunger, our Heavenly Father has provided us the knowledge 
of the Divine Plan, the knowledge of our Lord. 
Each new view gives us fresh inspiration. Then if we 
find some of the brethren spiritually hungry, how can we 
withhold from giving them the spiritual refreshment 
which we have? If one has earthly mercies and dispenses 
them, God may give him the privilege of opening blind 
eyes. If it is a blessing to open physically blinded eyes, 
how much greater a blessing is it to open the spiritually 
blinded eyes! We have the blessed privilege of helping 
some to get their eyes open to see spiritual things, and 
also of helping others who already see to understand 
more clearly. 

If we love the Truth, we will serve the Truth. This 
service is sure to bring upon us the disapproval of the 
world, it will not bring us an earthly passport. The world 
will say that we are doing it for money or some selfish 
object, for they are sure to err, sure to fail to see the 
real purpose of the truly consecrated people of God. If 
we endure these things, we thereby prove ourselves to be 
good soldiers of Jesus Christ. 

If devotion to the will of the Father brought upon 
our Lord shame, ignominy, we must not wonder that we 



are treated likewise. If the world called the Master of 
the House of Sons Beelzebub, they will assuredly call 
His followers some evil name. The willingness to receive 
all this as a part of our reasonable service is a 
further evidence that we have been anointed. 

Probably the Lord's people find that they can very 
easily love some of the brethren, but that there are some 
others whom it is not so easy to love, for they do not 

R5229 : page 133 

seem to be lovable. However, we should reflect that if 
the Lord can receive and love these brethren, we should 
do the same, and that our love should help them out of 
their naturally mean traits of disposition. Thus we shall 
develop love for all of the brethren— the rich and the 
poor, the educated and the uneducated— and desire to 
render them assistance as opportunity may offer. 

The evidences that one has been anointed with the 
Holy Spirit are, increasing desire for spiritual things, 
desire to assist others to see and to grow in knowledge 
and Heavenly grace, persecution from the worldly-minded, 
and the development of the mind of Christ— the disposition 
which is loving, generous, forgiving toward others 
and which is reverential toward God and obedient to His 
will. Whoever finds, on self-examination, that he has 
these evidences in his own heart has the witness of the 
Spirit that he is a child of God. 

THE HOPE OF GLORY 

The word "glory" carries with it the thought of honor 
and dignity— sometimes also that of brightness, shining. 
The Scriptures speak of the Heavenly Father as having 
the excellent glory, that glory unto which none others 
can approach. Our Lord Jesus is said to have been received 
up into glory— honor and distinction. Of Adam 
it is said that he was "crowned with glory and honor," 
was put over the beasts of the field, the fowl of the air 
and the fish of the sea. (Psalm 8:5-8; Genesis 1:28.) 
In this connection the word "glory" seems to indicate that 
Adam was made in the image of his Creator. 

Applying these same thoughts to ourselves, we find 
that as yet we have no glory. What blessing we have 
received is the possession of the Holy Spirit, the evidence 
of our adoption into the family of God. This, however, 
is merely the beginning of the glory which God has 
promised to those who are faithful— merely the earnest. 
To have the Holy Spirit in us is to have the anointing in 
us. If we allow the Holy Spirit to operate in us, and 
ourselves faithfully co-operate therewith, the end will be 
glorious. 

Thus the anointing which we have received— the Spirit 
of Christ in us— is the hope or basis of the glory which 
we are expecting— a glory which is to be like that of our 
Redeemer— a glory which is above that of angels, principalities 



and powers— a glory which is next to that of 

the Lord. This anointing, this Spirit of Christ within us, 

is the earnest, or hope, or basis, of all that is coming. 

Hence we should heed the admonition of the Apostle that 

we quench not the anointing, this Holy Spirit of Christ. 

On the contrary, we are to cultivate it, develop it, give 

attention to it. If we should allow it to die, because of 

neglect of the help which God has supplied, if we should 

quench it by indulgence in sin, we should thereby demonstrate 

that we are unworthy of the blessing and fit only 

for the Second Death. 



R5229 : page 133 

DWELLING TOGETHER IN UNITY 

"Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for 
brethren to dwell together in unity!"— Psalm 133:1. 

IN SOME earthly families there is a considerable 

degree of unity. Of such we 

sometimes say, "This family all seem to pull 

together." In other families there seems 

to be a pulling apart. When we see husband 

and wife, brothers and sisters, seeking 

to help one another, we say, "There is a 

great deal of love in that family." By this 

we mean an earthly love— a certain amount 

of animal love. This disposition is a right 

one. The Bible seems to imply that there is an obligation, 

a special duty, to those who are near to us. The Scriptures 

say that a man should not neglect his own household. 

He that careth not for his own is worse than an unbeliever. 

-I Timothy 5:8. 

Man was originally created in the image of God, and 
had love Divine as the inspiring influence in his life. 
This love has been largely effaced by selfishness, which is 
the representative of sin. In proportion as people are 
fallen, to that extent they are selfish. Some are kind and 
generous to the members of their own family, and seek to 
co-operate in helping one another. We cannot say that 
this is not a right principle, if, in seeking to do for its 
own, it does not injure others. Brothers and sisters 
should sympathize with one another, and have a spirit of 
helpfulness one toward another. Wherever we see this 
spirit in a family we say, "That is a delightful family." 

There are other families where there seems to be a 
personal selfishness, and no brotherly sympathy at all. In 
such families there is a desire to do more for an outsider 
than for one of their own. The members see more blemishes 
in their own than in others. In such cases, justice 
is lacking. Whenever the principle of justice is overridden, 
a spirit of antagonism is engendered instead of love, 
and under such conditions there is no unity possible. 



FRICTION THE RESULT OF SELFISHNESS 

Let us apply this rule to the Lord's family— the 
Church. God has organized a new family in the world— 
not according to any earthly ties, but according to the 
Spirit of God. This family consists of those who have 
been begotten of the one Spirit of the Father. What a 
beautiful family it is! We see a type of this family in 
the days of Gideon. All the sons of Joash, Gideon's 
father, were different from the others of Israel in their 
general appearance. It is written that they resembled the 
children of kings. (Judges 8:18.) So should it be with 
us. As we have the Spirit of the Lord, we should shine 
out in our words and deeds, and in every way should 
"show forth the praises of Him who has called us out of 
darkness into His marvelous light."— I Peter 2:9. 

Evidently the principle of selfishness is the root from 
which all disagreements emanate. Surely there is nothing 
of selfishness in the Lord's Spirit. Whence then is this 
spirit of strife and discord which sometimes manifests 
itself among the Lord's people? One sets himself up and 
seeks to take away the rights and liberties of others. 
Others, having a similar spirit, may desire to be clannish. 
One says, "I am of Paul"; another, "I am of Apollos," a 
third, "I am of Christ." This spirit is wrong. St. Paul 
points out that there is none other than Christ to whom 
we should be united. 

The most favorable condition for unity is that all seek 
to have the Lord's will done in their mortal bodies. The 
only difficulty that could then arise would result from 
ignorance or from weakness of the flesh that had not been 
overcome or that could not be overcome. The other members 
of the congregation, having the Spirit of the Master, 
would assume that the erring brother was merely ignorant, 
and not wilfully in opposition. Therefore in all kindness 
and gentleness they would seek to point out the will of 
the Father as expressed in Christ. The younger brother 
would be glad to have this done, because he would have 
the Spirit of Christ. 

If the difficulty were one of the flesh, the brethren 

R5229 : page 134 

should recognize that it was merely a weakness of the 
flesh, and sympathetically they should point out to the 
brother wherein he had come short. In turn, he should 
make apology for his mistake. Then he should be freely 
forgiven. So he would learn and would come into proper 
unity with the other brethren. Thus we are all, at the 
present time, to have the Spirit of the Master, and so far 
as possible to live together in unity. 

"NO SCHISM IN THE BODY" 

It is, however, not possible always to "dwell together 



in unity" with everybody. It would be impossible for 
God and Satan thus to dwell. There are some people who 
have the spirit of Satan. We could have no unity with 
such a one. There would be polishing from coming in 
contact with such, but there could be no unity; for what 
fellowship could light have with darkness? On one 
occasion St. Paul wrote to the Corinthian Church, "I 
hear that there are divisions among you." Then he proceeded 
to say that it must be so, in order that whatever 
was wrong might come to the surface, that the inharmony 
of the situation might be realized, and that the one in 
the wrong might be led to go out, because he was an 
intruder. (I Corinthians 11:18,19.) Recognizing his 
position, such a one would go out, saying by his action, 
"I am not a member of the Body of Christ; these are the 
Lord's people." Or, failing to go out, he should be 
advised to do so. 

Those who are not brethren, who are not children of 
light, but children of darkness, associating with the 
brethren, must be dealt with along the lines of the Divine 
direction laid down in Matthew 18:15-17. We may not take 
any measures not Scriptural. This is the only method. 

We have seen great machines running with great 
precision and very little commotion. The parts are 
dwelling together in unity; all are working in perfect 
order, because they are well put together. They could 
not fall together, or there would be merely a rattling. 
The family of God are like a great machine. The setting 
of the members in the Body is under the supervision of 
the great Engineer, who brings them into the spirit of 
harmony, through the impartation of His own Spirit. 

The working of a new engine or other machine is very 
slow at first, because there is a certain amount of friction 
engendered when the parts begin to move. So when the 
engineer finds that there is friction in any of the parts, 
he puts on a little lubricating oil, and thus prevents injury. 
When the parts are worn smooth, there is little danger of 
friction. So with the members of the Body of Christ. 
When they are new in the Body we must expect some 
friction, and then we should exercise more of the Spirit 
of the Lord. And we should be very sure of our own 
spirit, of our own intention. 

Even if the one causing friction should not be of the 
Body, even if he were a stranger— no part of the machine 

R5230 : page 134 

to which he is attaching himself— there would be all the 

more need of oil. We should, therefore, remember that 

no matter how well developed each member may be, he 

will need the Holy Spirit. If we find any member unendurable, 

we should go to the Lord in prayer and ask for 

more of His Spirit, that we may exercise more patience 

and more brotherly-kindness in dealing with that one. So 

shall we be pleasing to the Lord, and helpful in building 

one another up and in doing good unto all men, especially 



to the Household of Faith. 



R5230 : page 134 

ANOINTING "THE FEET" OF CHRIST 

"She hath done what she could."— Mark 14:8. 

WE CAN scarcely think of a higher encomium 

that could have come from the Master's 

lips to any of His followers. This expression 

of Jesus, then, should be of special 

comfort, particularly so to the sisters in the 

Church. They have not all the opportunities 

that the brethren have of service in the 

Truth. There are certain limitations of the 

sex, and these, of course, were upon Mary. 

She did not have the privilege of going 

about with Jesus to hear all of His teachings, and of co-operating 

with Him in that way, nor of being one of the 

seventy sent out to do mighty works, to proclaim the 

Kingdom. 

But not discouraged by these limitations, Mary was 
very much on the alert to improve all the opportunities 
that she had. She and her family had been special friends 
of Jesus— for how long a time we do not know. But 
we know that He frequently went to their home; and the 
Scriptures testify that "Jesus loved Martha, and her sister, 
and Lazarus."— John 11:5. 

When Lazarus fell sick, the sisters sent Him word, 
"He whom Thou lovest is sick." They manifested their 
faith and submission also as to what answer would come 
—as to whether He would simply send word, or bless a 
handkerchief, or what not. They felt that He would 
care for them— being a special friend of the family. 

It must have been a great trial of their faith when 
our Lord remained away, when Lazarus died, when the 
funeral took place. On the fourth day after, Jesus came 
to Bethany— too late to do any good! We remember that 
then Mary, who had sat at Jesus' feet to be taught of 
Him, was so overcome because He had not sent some help 
in her brother's case, that she did not feel that she even 
wished to see the Lord. She did not feel like honoring 
Him. So when she heard that He had come, she sat still 
in the house, and did not go to greet Him. Of course, 
after Jesus had called forth Lazarus from the tomb, her 
faith and love and zeal were revived and intensified. Her 
faith had been sorely tried and tested, and had finally 
triumphed. 

On this occasion, when Jesus came up to Jerusalem, 
prior to the crucifixion, He came to their home as usual. 
Then Lazarus and Martha and Mary made quite a feast, 
at which there were present some of the Pharisees from 
the city of Jerusalem. After this feast, Jesus rode upon 



the ass into Jerusalem, and was proclaimed King by a 
multitude of disciples. It looked as if things were getting 
very favorable, and as if very soon the people would 
receive Him as King.— Luke 19:37-40. 

Some had previously wondered and some had persisted 
in faith. These thought that now was the moment 
of Jesus' glorification, and this, they felt sure, meant also 
their own glorification. When He came into Jerusalem, 
He drove out the money-changers from the Temple, and 
all things seemed auspicious. Later on, some of the scribes 
and Pharisees tried to show up the fallacy of His teachings, 
and they were all put to flight, so that they were 
afraid to ask him questions, because it did more harm 
than good.-Luke 20:40. 

FAULT-FINDING ANTAGONISTIC TO LOVE 

The common people were in favor of Jesus, but the 
leaders were much discontented. They said, "The Romans 
will treat us badly and not give us any liberty, if we allow 

R5230 : page 135 

this thing to go on. It will bring us all into disgrace." 
So the high priest said, "It is expedient for us that one 
man should die for the people, and that the whole nation 
perish not." (John 11:50.) But this determination was 
to be kept quiet. The chief priest and rulers, therefore, 
worked secretly. 

Just before the day of the crucifixion, Jesus was 
again in the home of Lazarus and Martha and Mary. It 
was on this occasion that Mary took the opportunity of 
breaking a box of ointment and pouring it over the head 
of Jesus. This ointment was not oil— such ointment as 
we use today— but very expensive perfume. The alabaster 
package in which this was put up was apparently a 
small vase. 

Mary broke the vase— probably uncorked it— that she 
might pour out the ointment. In this way she manifested 
her high appreciation of His being a Guest at their home. 
To Mary our Lord was not simply a great man. To her 
He was more, He was the Messiah. So far as she understood, 
she adored Him, reverenced Him as her Lord; and 
she took this opportunity for showing her devotion by 
pouring upon Him the precious perfume. 

One of the disciples, Judas, rebuked the woman, saying, 
"This is a shameful waste of money, this ointment 
was valuable." Such ointments were much more expensive 
at that time than now. By the synthetic process we 
can now manufacture almost any odor without using even 
one flower. But the process used in olden times made it 
much more costly. 

As Judas was upbraiding Mary, Jesus stopped him, 
saying, "Let her alone; why trouble ye her? She hath 
wrought a good work on Me.... She hath done what 
she could." She has manifested her love, her devotion. 



She has not followed Me as you disciples have done. She 
had the restrictions of her sex upon her. But this is one 
thing that she could do, and one thing that she did. I 
appreciate what she has done. She has anointed Me for 
My burial-Mark 14:6,8. 

THE MASTER'S TRIBUTE OF APPROVAL 

We may suppose that these would seem very strange 
words for the Master to use— "She hath anointed My 
body aforehand for the burying." The disciples thought 
He would not die. But Jesus was so in the habit of saying 
peculiar things that if they stopped to quarrel over 
them, they would have been led away from Him. On 
one occasion He had said, "Except ye eat the flesh of the 
Son of Man, and drink His blood, ye have no life in 
you." (John 6:53.) This saying had perplexed them 
greatly. When He said He was about to be crucified, 
they thought, How can He use language which is so untruthful? 
And when St. Peter said, "Be it far from 
Thee, Lord! This shall not be unto Thee!" Jesus upbraided 
him. -Matthew 16:22,23. 

These words, these things, came to their remembrance 
in future days; and thus their faith and hope and trust 
were much intensified and were made more precious. 
Thus also our faith has been strengthened. 

Applying to ourselves Jesus' words to Mary, we can 
see that no one could have a higher tribute from the 
Master's lips than the approval given to Mary's act. 
Apparently it meant: She cannot do more— she has done 
all she could. There is encouragement in these words for 
all of us. However brethren may criticize us, if we are 

R5231 :page 135 

sure that our hearts have been loyal to the Lord, we may 
be sure that He will say of us sympathetically, "It is not 
any great thing that they can do, but they are doing what 
they can." As the Heavenly Father looks down upon us, 
He must see that we are doing very little. It is comforting, 
however, for us to know that the Heavenly Father 
is pleased to look down upon us, and that He sees that we 
are trying to do what we can. 

This text should be of special encouragement to the 
sisters. They have special opportunities, in a more private 
manner, of ministering to the Body of Christ. Of course 
it does not mean that the brethren are not to minister 
to the Body of Christ— to wash one another's feet, etc.— 
but it points specially to the privilege of the sisters— the 
anointing of the Head and the feet. 

ANTITYPICAL PERFUME ON ANTITYPICAL FEET 

We of today are in a very special sense the feet members. 
This expression is specially applicable to those who 
are living now— the last members of the Body of Christ, 



the Church. The expression, "anointing the feet," seems 
to call attention to the fact that any service done to any 
member of the Body of Christ will be esteemed a service 
to Him. He will say of all who thus serve Him that they 
have done what they could. 

Mary's conduct in this case, and her deep humility, 
are in strange contrast with that of the Apostles on the 
next day. When they had assembled for the Passover 
Supper, they felt their own importance so much that they 
were not willing to be servants to each other. They were 
going to be kings on the Throne. Therefore they were 
not going to wash each other's feet; and not only so, but 
they were not going to wash the Master's feet. Then the 
Master washed their feet, and set them an example. 

This is a special time for seeking to honor one another, 
to serve one another and to strengthen each other's 
hearts. The perfume itself is a beautiful picture of love 
and devotion, and illustrates the manner in which we 
can pour perfume on each other by speaking graciously to 
each other, and by seeking to see the best that there is 
in one another. "Be ye therefore followers of God, as 
dear children; and walk in love, as Christ also hath loved 
us, and hath given himself for us an offering and a sacrifice 
to God for a sweet-smelling savor."— Ephesians 5:1,2. 



A DISCIPLE'S PRAYER 

Loving Master, I am thine; 

Joined with Thee I may resign 

All I have that is of earth, 

Yet I know it has no worth, 

But in it I think and live, 

And I have naught else to give. 

Even this Thou didst give me 

As a test that Thou mightst see 

Whether I love these things more, 

Counting up my little store 

As of wealth that can compare 

With the crown that I may wear 

If I gladly give it all, 

Letting my ambitions fall, 

Toppling as the flames arise 

Through my willing sacrifice. 

Honored am I thus to be 

Called to heirship, Lord, with Thee, 

And my seeming pause was due 

To the overwhelming view 

Of Thy dazzling purity, 

And my own depravity, 

In contrasting the exchange 

Of human life for spirit gains; 

Holiness to replace sin, 

Peace and joy where grief has been, 

And if faithful in the strife 



The reward, Immortal Life! 
Trusting, humbly do I pray: 
Keep me faithful day by day! 

--MARY CHRISTIANCY. 



R5231 :page 136 

BENJAMIN'S PORTION FIVE-FOLD 

-MAY 25.-GENESIS 43.- 

"He that loveth his brother abideth 
in the light."— I John 2: 10. 

WHEN the wheat supply procured from Egypt 

began to run low, Jacob urged his sons to 

go again for more. But they positively refused 

to do so unless their younger brother, 

Benjamin, should go along. Then one of 

the brethren— Judah— became surety for 

Benjamin. Jacob finally consented, sending 

with them a present of honey, spices, etc., 

and double money, and Benjamin, saying, 

"And God Almighty give you mercy before 

the man [Joseph], that he may send away your other 

brother, Simeon, and Benjamin. If I be bereaved of my 

children, I am bereaved." 

Again they were expected by Joseph, who this time 
gave instructions that a dinner should be served for them 
in his presence. They were in fear, however, especially 
because the money had been put into the mouths of their 
sacks at their former visit. They communed with Joseph's 
steward at the door of the house and got his answer— so 
different from what they would probably get today in 
Egypt, or anywhere else. He said, "Peace be to you, 
fear not: your God, and the God of your father, hath 
given you treasure in your sacks; I had your money. 
And he brought Simeon out unto them." Then he gave 
them water, wherewith to wash and refresh themselves, 
and provender for their asses, and made ready for the 
noon repast. 

Then Joseph came in, robed as an Egyptian prince. 
They bowed themselves to the earth, and tendered him 
the present. Tenderly he inquired for their father, 
and then in respect to Benjamin, their younger brother. 
So deep was his emotion that he was obliged to retire 
for a time to shed tears of joy. Restraining himself, he 
returned, and the meal proceeded. From his own private 
table he caused portions to be sent to his eleven brethren, 
having already directed that they should be seated according 
to their age and birthright. This also astonished the 
brethren, and much more were they astonished when they 
perceived that the helping given to the youngest brother 
was five portions instead of one— a mark of special favor. 



The story is very simple, very touching, very beautiful, 
both for children and for those of mature mind. The 
setting is so natural as to carry with it the conviction of 
truth, so guileless as to be fully in harmony with what 
might be expected in the Book of God. 

THE SPIRITUAL LESSON TAUGHT 

Bible Students, realizing that Joseph was a type of 
The Messiah, are of the opinion that Benjamin, Joseph's 
younger brother by the same mother, was also a type. As 
Abraham's wives were typical of different covenants, so 
Bible Students seem to see that Rachel, the mother of 
Joseph and Benjamin, typified a special covenant— the 
Covenant of Sacrifice, which has operated during this 
Gospel Age, and which brings forth two distinctly separate 
classes of saints. These two classes of saints seem to 
be typified by Joseph and Benjamin. 

The highest class is represented in Joseph— The Messiah 
—the class that includes the specially faithful of God's 
people during this Gospel Age— Jesus and all of His footstep 
followers. This class, eventually, as typified by 
Joseph, will reach the Throne of empire, becoming the 
King or Ruler of the universe, next to the Almighty 
Creator, typified by Pharaoh, who took Joseph out of the 
prison-house of death and highly exalted him to be next to 
himself in power and great glory. 

It has evidently escaped the attention of many Bible 
Students, until recently, that two classes of saintly Christians 
are being developed during this Gospel Age— a superior 
class, represented by Joseph, and an inferior class, 
represented by Benjamin. The word Benjamin signifies 
"son of my right hand." The name Benoni— "son of my 
pain"— was given to him by his mother, who died in 
giving him birth. 

The antitypical lesson here would be that this special 
Covenant, typified by Rachel, gives birth to the elect 
Church, The Messiah, of which Jesus is the Head, and 
will also give birth to another class, and then cease- 
expire— giving birth to no more. The secondary class 
are Scripturally designated as tribulation saints, the declaration 
being made that they shall "come up out of 
great tribulation" to the blessing which they will inherit. 
Moreover, this class is represented as being much more 
numerous than the still more honored class, typified by 
Joseph. 

"LITTLE FLOCK"-"GREAT COMPANY" 

In order to present this view clearly, we must refer 
to Revelation, 7th chapter. There we are given the picture 
of 144,000, sealed in their foreheads. These are the same 
that are elsewhere represented as standing with the Lamb 
on Mount Zion, and singing the song which none but themselves 
could learn to sing. (Revelation 14:1-3.) Again, 
these are represented as being with the Lamb, standing 



upon the sea of glass. (Revelation 15:2,3.) Thus in 
various ways this group seems to represent the Very Elect, 
the saintly few, the Little Flock, to whom it will be the 
Father's good pleasure to give the Millennial Kingdom, as 
joint-heirs with their Lord and Redeemer. 

In Revelation 7:4, we read that these are from the 
twelve tribes of Israel— 12,000 from each tribe. This is 
understood by Bible Students to signify that God originally 
arranged for the full number of the Elect to be taken 
from Natural Israel, as though He did not know that 
Natural Israel would reject the Lord and crucify Him. 
The Plan was laid out on the Israelitish basis, even though 
God knew in advance that Israel would not obtain that 
which he sought (the chief blessing), but that the Election 
would obtain it, and the remainder of that nation 
would be temporarily blinded, until the completion of the 
gathering of the Elect.— Romans 11:7,25-33. 

Although many of the Israelites were dispersed 
amongst the surrounding nations, it is evident from the 
Scriptural records that the entire nation— every tribe- 
was represented in Palestine after the return from Babylonian 
captivity. Thus, Jesus referred to His work as 
being for the twelve tribes of Israel, and the Apostles did 
also. As a matter of fact, the saintly ones of the Jews 
who heard the call, and who responded, and who were 
begotten of the Holy Spirit, and who thus became Spiritual 
Israelites and sons of God— were from all the various 
tribes, of some more and of some less. These constituted 
so many of the foreordained 144,000. 

But there were not enough of the saintly ones to complete 
the Election. Hence by Divine favor the Message 
was carried to the Gentiles, Cornelius being the first Gentile 
convert. During the intervening centuries, the 
Gentiles who have responded to God's call have been accepted 
and begotten of the Holy Spirit, have been reckoned 
in as Israelites indeed, as spiritual members of the Seed 
of Abraham, as heirs, together with the elect Jews, to the 
First Resurrection, according to God's Promise made to 

R5232 : page 137 

Abraham— Natural Israel being still heir to God's 
secondary promises. 

Thus the sealing of the Elect has been in progress for 
nearly nineteen centuries. Altogether, gathered from 
Jews and Gentiles, there will be 144,000 kings and priests 
unto God, followers of the Lamb, and His joint-heirs in 
the Kingdom. The filling up of these assignments of 
12,000 each to the twelve tribes we may understand to be 
accomplished in the same way that British regiments of 
soldiers in India are recruited. The enlistments are made 
all over Great Britain, but the enlisted man— no matter 
from what city or country he be— may be assigned to 
membership in whatever regiment is deficient in numbers. 

"AFTER THESE THINGS I BEHELD" 



After the account of the sealing of the 144,000 of the 
Very Elect, in the same chapter we have an account of the 
Great Company. We read, "I beheld, and lo, a great 
company, whose number no man knoweth [unlike the 
Little Flock, these were not predestinated, or foreordained, 
as to number], of all nations, kindreds, peoples and 
tongues, stood before the Throne and before the Lamb, 
clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands; and 
cried with a loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God who 
sitteth upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb." 

It should be noticed that the promise to the elect kings 
and priests is that their blessing will be not before the 
Throne, but in the Throne. Moreover, their victory will 
not be shown by palm branches, but by crowns of glory. 
All these circumstances attest that this Great Company 
before the Throne and with palm branches are a wholly 
different company from the Elect, the Bride, who will 
share Messiah's Throne and glory. This Great Company 
is elsewhere referred to symbolically as the "virgins," the 
Bride's companions, who will follow her. They will enter 
into the palace with her, into the presence of the great 
King, but they will not be the Bride.— Psalm 45:14,15. 

This Great Company was explained to the Revelator, 
and the explanation is for us. We read, "These are they 
which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their 
robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. 
Therefore are they before the Throne of God, and serve 
Him day and night in His Temple; and He that sitteth 
on the Throne shall dwell among them." 

Bible Students notice that the Little Flock class are 
styled "the Temple of God," "living stones," whereas this 
Great Company will serve God in that Temple— in and 
through the Church. They also notice that this class who 
will wash their robes and make them white in the blood 
of the Lamb during a great time of trouble, must of 
necessity be a different class from the Bride, who are 
described as watching and keeping their garments unspotted 
from the world— that they may be without spot 
and without wrinkle in the presence of the King. 

TWO TRIBULATION CLASSES 

The Little Flock, the Royal Priesthood, the Elect 
Church, of which Christ is the Head, will indeed pass 
through tribulations. So it is written, "Through much 
tribulation shall ye enter the Kingdom." Indeed we know 
that the Lord Himself passed through great tribulation, 
shame, suffering and death. We know the same also of 
His footstep followers, the Apostles and others. 

Nevertheless, these are not described in the Bible as 
the Tribulation Class, because, by virtue of their greater 
faith, these are able to rejoice in their tribulations and to 
count them all joy, knowing that these are working out 
for them a far more exceeding and eternal weight of 
glory. These pass through the tribulations joyfully, because 



they consider the things that are seen as temporal. 
They look with the eye of faith to the things not seen, to 
the things eternal, which God hath in reservation for them 
that love Him. 

The Tribulation Saints are variously pictured in the 
Scriptures as those who lack in the amount of their 
zeal, but who do not lack in their loyalty. The Tribulation 
Saints fail to go on and fulfil their vows of sacrifice, and 
to be heroes in the fight against the world, the flesh and 
the Adversary. As the Scriptures say, "Through fear of 
death they are all their lifetime subject to bondage"— 
bondage to the flesh, bondage to the customs of society 
—fearful of the sacrificing experiences which they covenanted 
should be theirs.— Hebrews 2:15. 

For this reason, they cannot be accepted of the Lord 
as copies of His dear Son, and as worthy of sharing in His 
glory, honor and immortality. Nevertheless, the Lord is 
very compassionate, and tests them as to their loyalty to 
Him. As many as ultimately prove faithful, loyal, He 
proposes shall be granted everlasting life, even though 
they fail of joint-heirship in the Kingdom, the very thing 
to which they were invited. As it is written, "Ye are all 
called in the one hope of your calling."— Ephesians 4:4. 

Undoubtedly, there have been some of this class developed 
all the way down through the Gospel Age, but 
the Scriptures picture this class especially in connection 
with the tribulation coming on the world in the close of 
this Age. Take for instance, the statement that they 
should come up out of great tribulation, also St. Paul's 
statement that "that Day shall try every man's work of 
what sort it is." They that builded with gold, silver and 
precious stones, he declares will stand the test. The fire 
of that Day will not cause them tribulation— will not 
destroy their faith structure. Then he describes the Great 
Company class, saying that others have built improperly 
with wood, hay and stubble, and that the fire of that Day 
shall completely destroy all such improper structures. He 
declares, nevertheless, that if they builded, even improperly 
upon the true Foundation, they shall be saved, so 
as by fire— saved in the time of trouble, coming up to 
God's favor through great tribulation, and sharers in a 
goodly resurrection, although not participants in the First 
Resurrection. For of it we read, "Blessed and holy are 
all those who have part in the First [chief] Resurrection; 
on such the Second Death hath no power; but they shall 
be priests of God and of Christ and shall reign with Him 
a thousand years."— Revelation 20:6. 

BENJAMIN'S FIVE PORTIONS 

In dispensing his bounties, Joseph gave abundantly to 
all of his brethren. But to Benjamin, his full brother, 
of the same mother, he gave five portions. To Bible 
Students it appears that, since Joseph clearly typifies The 
Messiah and His kingly power and glory, the blessings 
distributed to his brethren represent favors that Messiah 



will bestow upon Natural Israel, His brethren according 
to the flesh, in addition to the general blessing which His 
Messianic reign will give to the whole world, represented 
in the Egyptians. 

According to this picture Benjamin, the son of pain, 
would represent the Great Company class of the Lord's 
people, who will come up out of great tribulation to a 
higher plane, to a higher condition, to a higher blessing, 
than the remainder of the world. They, begotten of the 
Holy Spirit like the Church, will also be spirit beings, if 
found worthy of life. And their brethren, who sold the 
antitypical Joseph, will nevertheless be greatly blessed by 
Him. 



R5232 : page 138 

LESSONS LEARNED BY JOSEPH'S BRETHREN 

--JUNE 1. -GENESIS 44.- 

"Confess therefore your sins one to another, and pray one 
for another, that ye may be healed."— James 5: 16. (R.V.) 

TODAY'S lesson shows us that Joseph's 

brethren were not nearly so hard-hearted as 

at first they appeared to be— when they 

purposed to kill him, and subsequently left 

him in the pit to die, and still later sold him 

into slavery. The doctrine of total depravity, 

which so many of us were taught in our 

youth, is again and again disproved, not only 

in our own characters, but in our experiences 

with others. He who considers everybody 

totally depraved approaches his fellows from the wrong 

standpoint. Looking for depravity, on which he has 

theorized, he finds it, and not looking for anything good, 

he misses what good there is. 

The Scriptural proposition is the correct one; viz., 
that all men are depraved, that none is perfect, no, not 
one; that all have sinned; all have shared in the results 
of original sin; and all consequently come short of the 
glory of God, which was exemplified in the perfection of 
Father Adam. The Scriptural thought is that God can 
accept to fellowship with Himself only that which is perfect. 
He can give His favor and eternal life only to 
those fully in accord with His own perfection. Hence, all 
men being sinners through the fall, all need a redemption; 
all need a reconciliation. 

The opportunity for such a reconciliation comes during 
this Gospel Age to a comparatively few, and to these 
it is under restriction. They must be perfect in heart, 
in will, in intention, and by faith must accept of Christ's 
merit as covering all their blemishes. From this standpoint 
God accepts them as New Creatures, ignoring the 



unintentional weaknesses of their flesh. Thus, through 
Christ, the true Church of consecrated believers alone 
are reckoned and dealt with as sons of God, have the 
privileges of sons of God and of fellowship with the Father 
in prayer, and have the Divine supervision of their interests, 
which guarantees that all things shall work together 

R5233 : page 138 

for their highest welfare. But even these will need to 
be perfected by the power of the First Resurrection before 
they shall see God, and be fully ushered into all the 
glorious things that He has in reservation for them. 

The world's justification is arranged for along totally 
different lines. The time for it, according to the Scriptures, 
will be the coming Age, when Messiah's Kingdom 
shall bind Satan's influence, roll away the curse, and 
bring instead blessings to the entire race. God will not 
deal with the willing and obedient then as He deals with 
His faithful now. Instead, they will be left under the 
care of the great Mediator, and be justified, or made 
actually right, during those thousand years. The willing 
and obedient, brought back to the original perfection of 
Adam, and fully instructed by the great Teacher, will be 
ready, at the close of the Millennium, to be presented to 
the Father, and to be accepted by Him as sons. But, 
meantime, all not willing and anxious for reconciliation 
will perish by the way, in the Second Death. 

The point we would here emphasize is that God nowhere 
declares that man is totally depraved, but He does 
declare that the slightest degree of imperfection cannot 
be tolerated by Him. Hence the Divine arrangement, 
through Jesus, the Redeemer and Restorer, is that all of 
our lacks, all of our shortcomings, few or many, much or 
little, will be made up for each of us by the great Redeemer, 
without whose sacrifice and aid recovery to 
perfection and acceptableness with the Father will be 
impossible. 

JOSEPH'S BRETHREN TENDER-HEARTED 

Our lesson shows that Joseph's experiences, mixed with 
faith by him, worked out in him a grand character, full 
of sympathy and wholly obedient to God. But by a different 
process, Joseph's ten brethren were exercised by remorse, 
and became more sympathetic, more brotherly-kind, 
more loyal to their father Jacob. Rewards of all 
life's experiences— the bitter and the sweet, our right doings 
and our wrong doings— are intended, under the 
Divine supervision, to be corrective and helpful to us. 
Confidence in God, however, is necessary as a basis for 
any such blessing. We have seen Joseph's confidence, 
and today's lesson shows us that his brethren, although of 
a different character, still recognized the Almighty, had a 
reverence for Him, and realized that He might be expected 
to give just recompense for every evil deed. 



Our lesson tells us that after the feast which Joseph 
made and in which Benjamin got five portions, the eleven 
brethren departed for home, well pleased with their experiences 
and the favor of the Egyptian ruler. Before 
their departure, Joseph, desiring to test his brethren as 
to their sympathy for their father and for their loving 
interest in their youngest brother, had caused his own 
silver cup to be placed in the mouth of Benjamin's sack 
of wheat. After they had gotten fairly started upon their 
journey homeward to Canaan, Joseph sent after them 
servants from his house to say, "Why have you been 
so ungracious to your benefactor? Why have you taken 
his silver cup? What treacherous men you are!" They 
protested innocence, and declared that if the cup were 
found in their possession, they would all willingly become 
slaves. The search for the cup, according to Joseph's 
direction, began with the eldest brother and ended with 
Benjamin's sack. There it was found. In great distress 
the entire company wended its way back to the palace. 

Again Joseph was austere and reproved them, that he 
might give them the opportunity to show their selfishness 
and to abandon Benjamin. Again protesting their innocence, 
they nevertheless declared themselves willing to 
become Joseph's slaves. But he answered, "God forbid! 
Only the one who has been guilty— Benjamin— shall be my 
slave. Return to your families and to your father with 
food, and continue to enjoy the favors of Egypt." 

This proposition he knew would test them. Would 
they be glad to escape personal servitude, and get back 
to their own families and leave Benjamin a slave? Had 
they the same cold heartlessness that they had exhibited 
in his own case, when they sold him into slavery? Would 
they similarly disregard their poor old father's interests 
and happiness? 

Then it was that Judah, who had pledged himself to 
his father that Benjamin should return in safety, made 
an appeal to Joseph. He narrated the circumstances connected 
with Benjamin's coming— how the poor old father 
set his heart upon Benjamin, and how he had pledged 
himself for the lad's return. He wound up an eloquent 
plea with the entreaty that he might be retained as the 
bondman, and that his brother Benjamin might be permitted 
to go free: "Now, therefore, I pray thee, let thy 
servant abide instead of the lad, a bondman to my lord; 
and let the lad go up with his brethren. For how shall 
I go up to my father, and the lad be not with me? lest 
peradventure I see the evil that shall come on my father." 

The evidence of a change of heart was satisfactory to 
Joseph, and is to us all. All who love righteousness 
rejoice in righteousness, as those who love sin rejoice 

R5233 : page 139 

in it. When we perceive so marked a change in those 
men, we rejoice not only for their sakes, but also for 
the general lesson which their experiences furnish. The 



conviction is borne in upon us that much of the sin, much 
of the meanness, much of the cruelty of the present time, 
may be attributed to inherited weaknesses and immature 
experience. We say to ourselves, "How great a change 
probably would be effected by a larger, broader, deeper 
knowledge of ourselves and of each other!" 

And do not the daily experiences of life tend to give 
us the broadening of sympathies and thus character-development? 
We believe that this is true. Doubtless 
there are exceptions to every rule, but it is our conviction 
that there is a sufficiency of the likeness of God remaining 
in every member of our race to permit him at times to 
appreciate the good, the true, the noble, the pure. It is 
because he is surrounded by sin and selfishness that these 
Godlike sentiments are so rarely appealed to, or brought 
into exercise. 

It seems reasonable to suppose that if every human 
being were to have one hundred years of experience under 
present conditions, and then to be given a fresh start, 
nearly all of them would profit greatly by the experiences, 
and live more sane and reasonable lives. Nearly all of 
them would be more generous, as well as more just. We 
admit that there are exceptions. We are free to confess 
that the Divine arrangement which limits human life under 
present conditions is a very wise one. 

Some members of the human family appear to cultivate 
merely the selfish propensities, and rarely to exercise 
beneficent sentiments. For such persons to live more 
than a century would mean to give them that mush more 
opportunity selfishly to enslave their fellow creatures. 
God, however, has both the Wisdom and the Power to 
eventually bring home to each member of our race valuable 
lessons along the lines laid down by the wise man, 
"Righteousness exalteth a nation; but sin is a reproach to 
any people."— Proverbs 14:34. 

WHEN WILL MEN PROFIT? 

But some one will say, Admitting the premise that 
life's trials and scourgings— providential stripes— teach 
men the sinfulness of sin and the wisdom of righteousness, 
admitting that in time all of our race might learn something 
along the lines of this great lesson, even as did 
Joseph's brethren, where would be the profit of such instruction, 
if only the saintly, who walk in the footsteps of 
Jesus under a covenant of self-sacrifice, are to share in 
the glorious reward, the Kingdom? How will the remainder 
of the race profit by their experiences, if death 
ends all hope? Of what avail can the lessons of life be 
to those who fail to complete those lessons before they die, 
or who fail to become saints— fail to become fit for the 
Kingdom of God? 

The answer is that we all have made a mistake in 
respect to the teachings of the Bible. The Bible nowhere 
says that all hope of salvation ends when we fall asleep 
in death. So far as the Church class is concerned, it is 



true that death will end their period of probation. But it 
is not true in respect to the world. The Apostle shows 
that the Church is a special class, called out from the 
world and given a trial for life everlasting or death everlasting 
in advance of humanity in general. These, if 
faithful, will not only gain everlasting life, but have it 
upon a higher than human plane. As spirit beings, they 
will attain to that perfection in the Resurrection. 

It is to the Church class that the Apostle indicates 
that, if they commit wilful sin, death will end all, saying, 
"If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die; but if ye through 
the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live." 
The ye in both cases refers to the Church, not to the world. 
—Romans 8:13. 

Again, the Apostle declares, "If we sin wilfully after 
that we have received a knowledge of the Truth, there 
remaineth no more sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful 
looking for of judgment and fiery indignation," which 
would destroy us as adversaries of God. "For it is impossible 
for those who... were made partakers of the 
Holy Spirit, and have tasted the good Word of God, and 
the powers of the world to come, if they shall fall away, 
to renew them again unto repentance."— Hebrews 6:4-6. 

Both of these Scriptures, however, apply exclusively 
to the Church, because the Church alone is on trial at the 
present time. The world's time for trial, or testing, will 
be in the next Age. The thousand years of Christ's reign 
will be the great thousand-year Judgment Day of the 
world. In it will be determined the worthiness or unworthiness 
for everlasting life of all humanity. All found 
worthy will eventually be perfected and granted the Divine 

R5234 : page 139 

blessing of everlasting life. All found unworthy in that 
world's trial Day will be condemned as unworthy of life, 
sentenced to the Second Death. 

The experiences of the present life, good and bad, will 
have their bearing upon the world's future trial, but will 
not decide the case for any one. Because of misuse of 
present opportunities and knowledge, some will enter upon 
the future life and its judgment disadvantaged proportionately. 
Those disadvantages will be their stripes, their 
whippings, their chastisement, for present failures. 
Others, rightly exercised by the trials and difficulties of 
life, will be made more gentle, more sympathetic, more 
just, more loving, by them, as were Joseph's brethren. 
Thus they will be the better prepared for a goodly entrance 
upon the testings of the great Judgment Day of the 
Messianic Kingdom. 

And as Joseph, whom they sold into Egyptian slavery, 
was the judge of his brethren, so The Christ, Jesus and 
the Church, will be the Judges of the world. As the 
Apostle says, "Know ye not that the saints shall judge 
the world?"— I Corinthians 6:2. 

As Joseph judged not his brethren according to what 



they had done to him in the past, but according to their 
attitude of heart at the time, so the future judgment of 
the world will take note of the condition of men's hearts 
at the time, rather than take note of their wrong conditions 
of the previous time. Nevertheless, the principle 
of justice continually operates: he who sins shall suffer. 
Joseph's brethren suffered for the wrong doing toward 
him, and they identified their various tribulations with 
that great sin of years gone by. So it will be with 
humanity in general. Every sin, every transgression, will 
receive a just recompense of reward, not an unjust one— 
not eternal torment. 

The good deeds and the evil deeds of mankind each 
have an influence upon their mentality and character, and 
that mentality and character are not lost in the sleep of 
death. There is to be a resurrection of all that are in 
their graves. All shall hear the voice of the Son of Man 
and come forth, each in his own order. The saintly ones 
shall come forth to the perfection of life at the beginning 
of the Age, that they may be the judges of the world. The 
unsaintly ones shall come forth also, that they may be 
brought to a knowledge of the Truth. All shall have 
the opportunity of profiting by their works in the past, by 
the lessons learned, and by the glorious light of Messiah's 
Kingdom, which then will be everywhere, and which will 
scatter all ignorance, superstition and darkness, and light 

R5234 : page 140 

the way of return to fellowship with God and everlasting 
life. 

Our Golden Text is supposed by some to have reference 
to physical healing. But by others these words are 
understood especially to apply to spiritual healing, by far 
the more important. Of these spiritual healings the 
Psalmist speaks, saying, "Who forgiveth all thine iniquities; 
who healeth all thy diseases; who redeemeth thy 
life from destruction; who crowneth thee with loving 
kindness and tender mercies." (Psalms 103:3,4.) They 
who hide their sins from themselves and who think to hide 
them from the Lord greatly err, and will make no progress. 



R5234 : page 140 

MERCY IS BETTER THAN SACRIFICE 

-JUNE 8.-GENESIS 45:1-46:7.- 

"Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for 
brethren to dwell together in unity!"— Psalm 133:1. 

WHEN Joseph beheld how changed were his 
brethren, he sympathized with them. When 
he saw that their hearts went back to their 



wrong course in his own case, and that they 

realized the Divine disapproval and were 

sorry, he pitied them. When he saw their 

interest in his aged father and their unwillingness 

to hasten his death by an unkind 

act or word he was full of pity. He wished, 

however, that the disclosure of his identity 

should not be witnessed by the Egyptians. Realizing that 

his emotions were getting the better of him, he hastily 

cried out, ordering all the Egyptians to leave the room. 

Then he made himself known, saying, "I am Joseph your 

brother, whom ye sold into Egypt." 

We can well imagine the consternation of the brethren. 
It had appeared to them that their trials and difficulties 
were multiplied, and that somehow or other Joseph had 
been identified with all their troubles. Now, to be in his 
presence, to hear him speak to them, no longer through 
an interpreter, but directly in their own language, telling 
them that he was Joseph, we can imagine how they felt- 
stunned. 

But Joseph, full of true sympathy and pity, hastened to 
set them at their ease. He did not cruelly threaten them, 
nor cause them to suffer punishment for their wrong-doing. 
He did not even chide them for the wrong. Instead, 
realizing that sin had already brought them a punishment, 
Joseph consoled them, saying, "Be not grieved, nor angry 
with yourselves that ye sold me hither; for God did send 
me before you, to preserve life. ..to preserve you 
a posterity in the earth, and to save your lives by a great 
deliverance. So now it was not you that sent me hither, 
but God." 

How beautiful the revenge! Joseph heaped upon his 
brethren unasked forgiveness and expressions of sympathy. 
Alas, how few Christians under similar circumstances 
would have been so noble! And yet Christians 
have much advantage every way over Joseph, in that they 
have been begotten of the Holy Spirit and have the instructions 
of the Scriptures. How beautifully Joseph 
represented in type Christ and His Spirit. How evidently 
our creeds of the Dark Ages misled us when they taught 
us to believe that all the Jews, the brethren of Christ, 
were to be eternally tormented because they had crucified 
Jesus instead of accepting Him and becoming His 
disciples! 

Now in the better light shining from one page to another 
of the Bible, God's people are seeing that instead of 
Messiah's purposing the eternal torture of the Jews, He 
purposes the contrary— that they shall obtain Divine 
mercy and forgiveness. This mercy will be extended to 
them very shortly, after Messiah's Kingdom shall have 
been established, as St. Paul points out in Romans 11:25-33: 
"They shall obtain mercy through your mercy." 
The same thought is expressed by the Prophet, saying of 
Israel, "They shall look upon Him whom they pierced, 
and shall mourn for Him." (Zechariah 12:10.) Theirs 
will be a mourning of true sorrow, as they shall realize 



the grievous wrong committed more than eighteen centuries 

ago. But instead of their being punished with an 

eternity of torture, the Lord will be gracious to them, as 

He declares, "And I will pour upon them the spirit of 

grace and of supplication." How beautiful, and how much 

in harmony with our typical lesson of today! Joseph's 

ten brethren apparently typified Israel, as the Egyptians 

typified the Gentiles, as Benjamin typified the Great Company, 

and as Joseph himself typified the Messianic class, 

the Elect, of whom Jesus is the Head, and the overcoming 

Church, the members of His Body. 

"SPEAK COMFORTABLY TO JERUSALEM" 

All along, the Bible record has been consistent with 
itself and with the Divine character. Our trouble has 
arisen from giving heed to the creeds of the Dark Ages. 
The Bible indeed does tell that no one can become a member 
of Spiritual Israel except by believing in Jesus as the 
Son of God, and becoming associated with Him in the 
self-denials and sufferings of this present time, that they 
may have joint-heirship in the coming Kingdom. Our 
mistake was in adding to that simple Message, and telling 
the world, the Jews included, that the fate of all others 
is eternal torment. 

Quite to the contrary, now we see that what Spiritual 
Israel gains is the Kingdom, and that Natural Israel and 
the world lose, in the sense of failing to attain that highest 
glory and blessing. But we see also that God's object in 
arranging for such a Kingdom is that it may bestow the 
needed blessings upon Natural Israel and through them 
ultimately upon all people. 

This is the general lesson taught by the full forgiveness 
of Joseph's brethren. The assurance given them 
that they merely carried out the Divine Program corresponds 
well with the message that shall ultimately come 
to the Jews; viz., that their crucifixion of Messiah was 
merely a carrying out of the Divine Purpose, through 
which the blessing of God is made available to all the 
families of the earth. To this agree the words of St. 
Peter at Pentecost. Addressing some of the repentant 
Jews he explained this matter fully, saying, "I wot that 
through ignorance ye did it, as did also your rulers." 
(Acts 3:17.) St. Paul says, "For if they had known they 
would not have crucified the Lord of glory."— I Cor. 2:8. 

God's attitude toward the Jews, Joseph's brethren in 
antitype, is clearly presented in the prophecy of Isaiah. (40:1,2.) 
That prophecy is especially located at the end 
of this Gospel Age. We believe that it is the message due 
to the Jews at the present time. It says not one word 
about their eternal torture, but on the contrary, it is in 
full agreement with St. Paul's statement that with the 
end of this Age God's favor will return to the Jews, and 
they shall obtain mercy through Spiritual Israel— the 
Messianic Body, of which Jesus is the Head. We read, 
"Comfort ye, comfort ye My people, saith your God. 



R5235 : page 141 

Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that 
her warfare is accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned: 
for she hath received of the Lord's hand double 
[the second portion] for all her sins." 

Israel has indeed been obliged to drink the cup of 
ignominy and shame and sorrow, during the nearly nineteen 
centuries since she sold her Redeemer to the Romans, 
to be put to death. Sorry we are that so much of this 
affliction has come to her at the hands of those who mistakenly 
have professed to be the followers of Jesus! Sorry 
we are that the Jews have thus had so much reason for 
failing to understand the Spirit of Christ! They can 
understand this only by remembering that as there are 
true Jews and false Jews, so likewise there are true Christians 
and false Christians. "If any man have not the 
Spirit of Christ, he is none of His." 

JOSEPH WAS LONG MISUNDERSTOOD 

Joseph's brethren failed to understand him— so great 
was the difference between their characters and his. Even 
after they had become more sympathetic and tenderhearted, 
they had still a sufficiency of bitterness of spirit 
and of animosity that, if they had been in Joseph's place, 
they would have seen to it that somehow or other future 
punishments would have been meted out. They were, 
therefore, surprised by Joseph's words of brotherly kindness 
and sympathy, and unable to believe that he meant 
it all. They concluded that he was dealing graciously 
with them for his father Jacob's sake. 

So we find that years afterwards, when Jacob died, 
these ten brethren were in great trepidation lest Joseph 
should then wreak his vengeance upon them. They went to 
him again, asking for a continuance of his forgiveness. But 
Joseph said unto them, "Fear not: for am I in the place 
of God? But as for you, ye thought evil against me; but 
God meant it unto good, to bring to pass, as it is this 
day, to save much people alive. Now therefore fear ye 
not: I will nourish you, and your little ones. And he 
comforted them, and spake kindly unto them."— 
Genesis 50:19-21. 

JOSEPH WAS TAUGHT OF GOD 

However he learned the lesson, it is most manifest that 
Joseph was taught of God. Vengeance against his brethren 
he had none. Whatever punishment would come to 
them for their sin would be not his to inflict, but God's. 
And that punishment they evidently did receive in the 
mental torture, fears and forebodings of many years. Joseph 
had nothing to do with regulating the Divine arrangements 
whereby Justice always metes out punishment 
for every wrong. It was his to be generous, loving, kind, 



an exemplification of the great Redeemer and His Messianic 
Kingdom. 

It was the same in respect to his own experiences. 
We note with astonishment that a man with so few opportunities 
had such a comprehensive grasp of the Spirit of 
Truth, the Spirit of Christ. We who have been begotten 
of the Holy Spirit, and who have the example of the 
words of Jesus and the Apostles and the history of all 
past ages, may still sit at Joseph's feet, and be amazed to 
perceive how thoroughly he learned of God, and may 
apply similar lessons to ourselves. Never a murmur, 
never a word of repining, against the bitter lot that had 
been his! In every word, in everything, he testifies to 
God's Goodness, Wisdom, Love and Power. He realized 
that to have made a single change or alteration in the 
experiences that had come to him would have been to do 
injury to the Plan as a whole, and he would have failed 
to learn some of the lessons of life which he needed. 

Oh, how much all the followers of Jesus need to look 
unto the Lord in respect to all their trying experiences ! 
How much we all need to have and to exercise faith in 
God— that he knows, He sees and He is able and willing 
to make all things work together for good to us, because 
we love Him, because we have been called according to 
His Purpose, because we are seeking to make that calling 
and that election sure by the development of a character 
which will make us "meet for the inheritance of the 
saints in light," and for join t-heirship with our Redeemer! 

JACOB IN EGYPT 

Joseph planned that for the five remaining years of 
the famine, at least, his father Jacob and indeed the entire 
family should come into Egypt. He thought of the district 
styled Goshen as very suitable for their purposes, 
being a cattle-grazing locality. Pharaoh, heartily in accord 
with Joseph, his prime minister, and pleased with 
the prosperity of affairs under his management, gave full 
consent, and suggested that Egyptian wagons be sent to 
fetch the old man Jacob and the women and children, not 
so able to ride upon the asses, camels, etc. Joseph prepared 
delicacies for the journey and little presents, indicative 
of his love. He sent a special message to his 
father, "Tell my father of my glory in Egypt, and of all 
that ye have seen; and ye shall haste to bring down my 
father hither." Then he kissed them all goodby, saying: 

"FALL NOT OUT BY THE WAY" 

Evidently Joseph was a keen observer of human 
nature. Many would have thought it unnecessary to 
caution the brethren against disputes under all the circumstances. 
Many would have said, "They will be so 
overjoyed with the blessings of God in the outcome of 
their experiences that love will prevail amongst them, and 
no disputes." The contrary, however, is often true. 



When prosperity comes, there are opportunities to quarrel 
over the spoils, to feel more or less of envy and 
selfishness. 

Under former conditions, the brethren would have 
felt jealous of Benjamin, because of the greater attention 
which he received from Joseph and because of the present 
of three hundred pieces of silver given to him. They 
might have queried as to how much liberty they would 
have in the land of Goshen. The suggestion might have 
come to some that they would then be under the thumb 
of Joseph, and that he would favor Benjamin, etc. Evidently 
Joseph's warning, "Fall not out by the way," was 
timely. 

We have known matters to go similarly with the 
Lord's brethren. When in tribulation, their hearts were 
crying to the Lord, but in prosperity they were disposed 
to grudge one against another, and to be envious and 
jealous of each other's opportunities, blessings and privileges. 
What a great mistake! Each should remember 
that the Master's eye is noting his progress in Christlikeness. 
Each should remember that brotherly love is one 
of the tests of character. 

It is all the more true because sometimes brethren in 
Christ can make more trouble for us than any others. 
The very closeness of our relationship, the very knowledge 
of each other, give to each of us opportunities for 
criticism and evil surmisings that might not arise as respects 
others. Well it is that all of God's people should 
accept Joseph's words, "See that ye fall not out one with 
another by the way." It is the way planned for us by the 
Lord. It is a narrow and difficult way, full of adversities 
to the flesh, and trials and tests to the spirit. Proportionately, 
there should be love and sympathy, co-operation 
and helpfulness. The words of the Psalmist used 
as our Golden Text in this lesson, were evidently prophetically 
written as respects the Church, the Lord's brethren: 

R5235 : page 142 

"Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for brethren 
to dwell together in unity." 

The Psalmist proceeds to compare this unity of the 
brethren, the Church, with the precious ointment poured 
upon the head of the king and of the high priest on their 
induction into office. The significance of the illustration 
evidently is that the anointing oil typified the Holy Spirit, 
and that as it ran down the high priest's beard, and even 
to the skirts of his garment, it anointed the entire body 
of the priest. That priest typifies Melchizedek, the Royal 
Priest— Jesus the Head, and the Church His Body. 
Throughout this Gospel Age the anointing of the Holy 
Spirit, which came to the Church, the Body of Christ, 
at Pentecost, has continued, and gives an unction, or 
anointing, to all of His true members. And by this 
anointing these members may be recognized as one with 
Christ, "For by one Spirit ye were all anointed into one 



Body."— I Corinthians 12:13. 



R5235 : page 142 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
WHAT A CHORD IT STRUCK! 

DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST: 

I was glad to receive your letter today, and what a chord 
it struck! What meaning such words as "First-borns" and 
"Little Flock" have now! I was glad to hear about Sister 
Adams. I have been learning much since I saw her, and you 
may tell her that I find this Truth more wonderful every 
day. Kindly convey to her Christian greetings from Sister 
Farrer and myself. I am sure the whole class would join. 

Yes, Brother, I have been a Presbyterian minister, graduated 
from Knox College, Toronto, in 1898. I was at the Assembly 
Meeting held in Hamilton in 1899. I was commissioner from 
Regina Presbytery. I never dreamed of this Truth at that 
time. Truth is stranger than fiction. From the first day I 
started for Presbytery and college, I knew something was 
out of gear; what it was I could not tell. I was loyal to the 
Presbyterian Church. Many of the people I loved dearly: 
such men as Drs. Grant and Gray of Orillia, Dr. McLeod of 
Barrie and Dr. Caven of Knox College. I thought a great 
deal, but Brother, there are some big bits to swallow, and 
I am afraid if the truth was told, many things were swallowed 
and never digested, and this is true in all denominations, and 

R5236 : page 142 

I find the Presbyterians just as worthy as any. I have been 
careful in my thoughts, yet held my mind open to conviction. 
Years of knocking about on the mission field from nearly 
one end of Canada to the other, has had its effect. When I 
became fully acquainted with the workings behind the scenes, 
I was astounded. I have felt so many times that our people were 
not treated fairly, and certainly many of our poor missionaries 
were shamefully used, and could not defend themselves. 
I have certainly wondered where the hearts of the older and 

more prosperous ministers were. The city of is the 

limit! One city minister told me a few days ago that the 
church, i.e., the Presbyterian Church here, had all gone to 
the Devil. Those were his words. Another minister, a 
Presbyterian, too, was up to our class on Wednesday last, and 
is reading the first volume; he knows something is wrong, 
and what he sees is not Christianity. Is it not strange that 
so many of our ministers are down on the Truth people! It 
must be because we hold to the Bible. 
Say, Brother, take a look behind the scenes and see every 

big city minister in lay hold of Evolution and 

deny the Ransom of Jesus Christ! This year I became heartsick 
and resolved to remain at home, attend no church, and 



try to study and love the Bible, as it was the only thing I had 
worth while. I have not been preaching for awhile on account 
of poor health, but have been looking on. I knew we 
should assemble, but where I could not say. It was not at 
former places. Strange, I had never heard of Bible Students 
or read Pastor Russell's books. A friend of mine invited me 
to a meeting one evening, and I went. On returning home 
I told Mrs. Farrer that I had heard more Scripture than I 
had studied and heard all the while I had been at the coast, 
all packed into one talk. It was certainly a wonderful talk. 
It shook me up; I never heard the like, and I told my wife 
that that man had the best of the argument by a mile. 

During the following week I got hungry for more, but did 
not know where to go or what literature to get. However, 
I knew about the meeting the next Sunday, so I went to 
see if I could get anything to read. I did and hurried home 
to see what I had. I was not anxious to be seen around the 
place. I tell you, Brother. I soon found out what a prize I had 
in that first volume. We had absolutely nothing to compare 
with the first, fifth and sixth volumes, in college. I have 
wondered why we did not have them as text books. It was 
only after I got started in the Truth that I knew that Pastor 
C. T. Russell was the author of the books. I tell you, Brother 
Adams, I rejoice to be called a fool for Jesus' sake. 

I attended Mr. Wilson's church while down in the city. 
Poor Wilson, I knew him before I went to college, but he 
is at sea, in the same boat as we were all in. The fact is 
we learned nothing much of the Bible at college. I am sending 
a letter of withdrawal to the Presbytery and will mail you 
a copy later on. 

With much Christian love, I am your brother in Christ, 
W. H. FARRER. 



THE PEOPLE FREE? NOT SO THE MINISTERS 
Something Interesting from an Inquiring Friend. 
I wrote the following to a Presbyterian minister: 

DEAR SIR:— Do you subscribe to the following statement, 
taken from the Confession of Faith?— "The Bodies of men 
after death return to dust, and see corruption, but their souls 
(which neither die nor sleep), having an immortal subsistence, 
immediately return to God who gave them. The souls of the 
righteous, being then made perfect in holiness, are received 
into the highest Heavens, where they behold the face of God 
in light and glory, waiting for the full redemption of their 
bodies; and the souls of the wicked are cast into hell, where 
they remain in torments and utter darkness, reserved to the 
Judgment of the great Day. Besides these two places for 
souls separated from their bodies, the Scripture acknowledgeth 
none. 

"At the last Day, such as are found alive shall not die, but 
be changed; and all the dead shall be raised up with the self-same 



bodies, and none other, although with different qualities, 
which shall be united again to their souls forever."— Confession 
of Faith, Chapter XXXII, 1, 2. 

The following is the answer from said minister: 

DEAR MR. :— Perhaps next week I may be able to 

call and see you, but as we have special meetings this week, 
I could not do so before. 

I take it for granted that your inquiry relates to your real 
relationship to God and is not simply a matter of speculation. 
For I have no time nor inclination to engage in simple discussion 
and argument. Life is too short for that. 

Nor do I care to defend the teachings of theology, which 
are quite different things from religion, for nobody is asked 
to accept Presbyterian Theology— or even read it— except 
Ministers, Elders and Deacons; you doubtless are aware of 
that. The first and only thing we require of private members 
of the church is to accept Jesus Christ, God incarnate, as 
Savior and Lord. Sincerely yours, 

What would be an appropriate answer on my part? 

THE EDITOR'S REPLY 

I would not attempt to discuss the matter further with 
the gentleman, but would merely thank him for his kind letter, 
and say that, as I was neither a minister nor an Elder of the 
Presbyterian Church, my conscience would go free; but that 
I had a sympathy for elders and ministers. I would proceed 
to say that, having found something satisfactory on the subject 
of "The State of Men after Death, and of the Resurrection 
of the Dead" (heading of chapter in the "Confession," from 
which the extract is copied), I ventured to recommend to him 
STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES by Pastor Russell, the books 
which God blessed to my heart and head enlightenment, 
hoping they might prove a blessing to him also. 



DEAR BRETHREN: 

Re the Dayton Flood: The newspaper reports of the number 
of dead have been much exaggerated. It is indeed sad, 
and many thrilling experiences and miraculous rescues have 
been reported. 

As far as we can learn up to this writing, none of the 
Dayton Ecclesia were drowned, although a number of us have 
had thrilling experiences and narrow escapes. The shrieks 
and wails of the panic-stricken people, mingled with the moans 
of drowning horses, etc., was terrible to hear. It turned our 
minds to Daniel's description of the great time of trouble. 

Sister Pottle and Sister H. F. Rieck were confined to an 
attic with the writer for about thirty hours before the sisters 
were rescued by boats. Here the value of the Truth was 

R5236 : page 143 



manifested. God's promised Grace to help in time of need 
was surely manifest, as the sisters were calm and composed. 
In the most perilous moments, one of the sisters calmly said, 
"Well, perhaps the time has come." 

Our experience has been a valuable one. After forty-eight 
hours of confinement, the writer waded through about four 
feet of water for four squares, where the troops helped him 
into a boat and then to the landing. Brother Driscoll, also, 
will have some thrilling experiences to relate to you. 

We still have many, many blessings to count. One of the 
greatest is the knowledge of the Truth, and the love of the 
brethren. This experience will draw us closer together, as 
we have learned of the dear brethren's anxiety and efforts for 
our rescue. 

Beloved, remember us kindly at the Throne of Grace, that 
we may be meek, humble and serviceable. 
Your Brother by Participation, 

P. D. POTTLE.-Dayton, Ohio. 



page 143 

REQUESTS FOR PILGRIM VISITS 

Please bear in mind that with this issue of the TOWER all 
requests for Pilgrim visits now on file expire. All who are 
desirous of securing the visits by the traveling brethren during 
the ensuing year— May, 1913, to May, 1914— should 
promptly notify us. No charge is made for this service, the 
expense being borne by contributions to the Tract Fund. 
The friends at each place provide proper places for the 
meetings, and are pleased to entertain the Lord's servants. 

We request that postcards be used in making applications 
for these visits, and specially desire replies to all of the following 
questions. The questions need not be repeated, but 
merely indicated thus: (a), (b), etc. 

(a) How many Bible Students in your vicinity use the 
STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES? 

(b) Are weekly meetings held? 

(c) How many are usually in attendance? 

(d) Where do you now meet on Sundays? (Give full street 
addresses and name of auditorium.) 

(e) At what hours are the Sunday meetings held? 

(f) Was a vote taken on the Pilgrim invitation? 

(g) How many voted for the invitation to be sent? 

(h) Do you desire Sunday appointments for Special Public 

Lectures? 

(i) How frequently do you desire such Special appointments? 

(j) What is the seating capacity of Auditorium you could 

secure? 

(k) What attendance do you think could be secured for 

well-advertised public sessions in good Auditorium? 

(1) Would a suitable place be found for meetings not specially 

advertised? 

(m) Have the members of your class chosen leaders in 



accordance with suggestions of SCRIPTURE STUDIES, 

Volume VI., chapters 5 and 6? 

If so, give name and full address of each. 

(n) Give full names and full addresses of the two (2) to 

whom notices of Pilgrim visits should be sent. (Please 

notify the Pilgrim Department as to any change or 

removal.) 

(o) If your town is not on a railroad give the name of 

proper railroad station at which to stop. 

(p) How many miles from station is meeting place, and 

which direction from station? 

(q) Would Pilgrim be met at station? 

(r) If not, how should Pilgrim get from said station? 

(s) Give writer's full name and address. 

(t) Any additional remarks. 



page 143 

BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
Series VI., Study XIV. 
SUNDRY EARTHLY OBLIGATIONS OF THE NEW CREATION 

JUNE 1 
Read p. 583, par. 1, to p. 585, par. 1. 

CONSCIENTIOUS MEDDLING 

(35) What is a "busybody," and what is the Scriptural 
reproof of such? P. 583, par. 1. 

(36) How should the Golden Rule be applied in such 
cases? P. 583, par. 2. 

(37) What is the peculiar form in which this natural 
tendency to meddle in the affairs of others sometimes 
attacks the New Creature? P. 583, par. 3. 

(38) When tempted to interfere with the affairs of others, 
what questions should we ask ourselves? P. 584, par. 1, first part. 

(39) Would it be "busybodying" on the part of a parent 

to look into the affairs of the family under his care? P. 585, top. 

(40) Where is the admonition against "busybodying" to be 
especially remembered and heeded? P. 585, par. 1. 

JUNE 8 

Read p. 586, par. 1, to p. 589, par. 2. 

"BLESSING GOD AND CURSING MEN" 

(41) How great is the influence of the tongue among the 
members of the natural body? P. 586, par. 1. 

(42) What is the only proper and successful method of 
restraining the tongue? P. 587, par. 1, 2. 



SOCIAL OBLIGATIONS 

(43) What are the cravings of the new mind for fellowship 
with kindred minds? P. 588, par. 1. 

(44) What are the admonitions of the Word against associating 
with evil-doers? P. 588, par. 2. 

(45) What should be our sentiments toward and association 
with those related to us by ties of blood? P. 589, par. 1. 

(46) What was evidently the intention of the Lord with 
respect to the forming of a new family— the "household of 
faith?" P. 589, par. 2. 

JUNE 15 

Read p. 590, par. 1, to p. 594, par. 1. 

(47) Does this new relationship imply the ignoring of sex 
proprieties, or that the unbelieving husband or wife should be 
neglected? P. 590, par. 1. 

"HONOR ALL MEN" 

(48) What should be the attitude of the New Creation 
toward the powers that be? What are the Scriptural admonitions 
along this line? P. 590, par. 2, 3. 

(49) What advantage has the New Creature from his 
viewpoint of present conditions in the world? P. 591, par. 1, 2. 

(50) Is it wise or necessary for the New Creation to 

alarm the world in respect to the Time of Trouble? P. 592, par. 1. 

(5 1) What position should the New Creation take in the 
matter of voting? P. 593, par. 1 to 5. 

(52) Should we use carnal weapons and fight for our 
native country and its rulers? P. 594, par. 1. 

JUNE 22 

Read p. 594, par. 2, to p. 598, par. 1. 

(53) In the event of our being required to do military 

service, what would be the proper course to pursue? P. 594, par. 2. 

THE NEW CREATION AND MORAL REFORMS 

(54) Explain how our consecration vow should touch and 
purify every act of our lives. P. 595. 

WEARING OF COSTLY APPAREL 

(55) Give three good reasons why the New Creation should 
not wear extravagant and conspicuous apparel. P. 596, par. 1 
to 4. 

(56) Would the investing of money in stocks, bonds, etc., 
be any more in harmony with our consecration vow than if 

spent upon extravagant dress and luxurious homes? P. 597, par. 1. 

(57) Is there any connection between our stewardship 



and the fact that the Lord has left His cause in need of 
financial support? P. 597, par. 2. 

(58) Briefly, what would be considered the proper course 
for the New Creation with respect to dress and money matters? 
P. 598, par. 1. 

Series VI., Study XV. 

THE FOES AND BESETMENTS OF THE NEW CREATION 

JUNE 29 

Read p. 599, to p. 602, par. 2. 

(1) What is the chief enemy of the New Creation? Is 

the New Creature double-minded, or is he controlled by two 
wills? P. 599. 

(2) Are the death of the flesh and its will, and the subsequent 
resurrection of the flesh actual or reckoned matters? 

And how must these "dead" and "alive" conditions be maintained 
by the New Creature? P. 600, par. 1. 

(3) What is the declaration of the Scriptures respecting 
the natural heart? And how is the heart of the New Creature 
different? P. 600, par. 2. 

(4) How does the old heart, the selfish disposition, constantly 
assail the new heart and practise deceptions upon it? 

P. 601, par. 1. 

(5) What is one of the favorite and deceptive arguments 
of this old heart? P. 601, par. 2. 

(6) How must the new heart meet these attacks? P. 602, 
par. 1, 2. 



page 145 

VOL. XXXIV MAY 15 No. 10 
A. D. 1913-A. M. 6041 



CONTENTS 

A Convincing Proof of the Resurrection 147 

Our Lord's Change of Nature 148 

Resurrection Much Misunderstood 148 

The Manner of Mother Eve's Temptation 149 

Deception Through Mental Suggestion 149 

Degradation of the Serpent Not an 
Injustice 150 

Storms on the Sea of Life 150 

Legal and Actual Cancellation of Sin 151 

Responsibility According to Ability 152 

All Things Work for Good to Them 152 

Spiritual Israel's Experiences 153 

Joys of the Life to Come 154 



Reports of Memorial Celebrations 154 

Woes Ancient and Modern 155 

The Victories of Faith 156 

Faith Is Not Credulity 156 

The Faith Before and Since Christ Came 157 

The Mystery-Christ in You 158 

Interesting Questions 158 

page 146 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



RE DEFECTIVE BOOKS 

Colporteurs and others who may receive books from us 
that are seriously defective will confer a favor by reporting 
the fact at once. Give particulars re time received. We want 
all our books to be right. 

LARGE MOTTOES FOR MOUNTING 

We have secured some new large mottoes, size 15 x 20 
inches. They are of four designs of beautiful flowers, and 
still greater variety of texts. We have put these up in tubes 
for safety— four for $ 1 ; postage prepaid. 

RECEIPTS FOR WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTIONS 

Regular subscribers for THE WATCH TOWER receive a receipt 



on the wrapper— showing how far their subscription is 

paid. Thus, if you had been paid up to January, 1913, and 

sent in a dollar, renewing until January, 1914, we would 

merely add the figure 4. Such a figure 4, under such circumstances, 

would stand for the year 1914. 

THINGS YOU OUGHT TO KNOW 

Our new edition of DAILY HEAVENLY MANNA in purple 
cloth has gilt edges. The price remains the same, 35c. postpaid. 
Every reader of THE WATCH TOWER should have a 
copy of the Manna and should use it daily, for his spiritual 
nourishment. 

The same in De Luxe, purple leather binding, gold edges, 
$1.10 postpaid. 



R5236 : page 147 

A CONVINCING PROOF OF THE RESURRECTION 

"Be not faithless, but believing."— John 20:27. 

PREVIOUS to the occasion of the words of 

our text, St. Thomas, the Apostle, had not 

been present at any of the manifestations 

of Jesus after His resurrection. He seems 

to have been of a rather skeptical turn of 

mind. He heard the other Apostles telling 

about what they had seen, about the manifestations 

that had taken place, and he felt 

that on such evidence he could not believe 

in the resurrection of Jesus. He thought 

that his brethren had been too easily deceived. 

St. Thomas did not accredit his fellow disciples with 
an attempt at deceiving him; but as he declared, he would 
not believe on any such testimony as he had received. 
He said, "Unless I see the spear mark, unless I shall see 
in His hands the print of the nails, and put my finger into 
the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into His side, I 
will not believe." You cannot convince me that He is 
not dead. You cannot convince me that a person put to 
death after that manner is again alive. I cannot say 
where the deception came from, but you brethren are too 
easily deceived. 

A week later, Jesus appeared in the "upper room" a 
second time. After saluting the company, He said to St. 

R5237 : page 147 

Thomas, "Reach hither thy finger and behold My hands; 
and reach hither thy hand and thrust it into My side; and 
be not faithless, but believing." Again, He said, "A 
spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see Me have." The 
disciples did not see, evidently, the spirit being. They saw 



merely a materialization— actual flesh and bones. St. 
Thomas did as the Lord had requested. Then he said, 
"My Lord and my God!" He acknowledged that Jesus 
was the Lord. It was not an apparition. The brethren 
had not been deceived. He was the one who had come 
very near being deceived by his own lack of faith. 

We cannot doubt that in this incident the Lord has 
given to all of His followers a very helpful lesson. Had 
none of the Apostles even seemed to doubt the Lord's 
resurrection, they might have failed to bring out convincing 
proof of the fact. They might afterward have 
thought to themselves, "Why did we not make further 
investigation?" But here we have evidence of the 
investigation. 

There are some people who are naturally very cautious. 
St. Thomas seems to have been one of these. We cannot 
think that the Lord is displeased with such characters. 
From our standpoint, indeed, the person who is inclined 
to be somewhat critical is rather to be approved. We 
would naturally incline to disapprove those who are too 
easily credulous, too easily persuaded. We are even to 
think highly of those who are of the mental attitude of 
St. Thomas. We are glad that there was one such hard 
thinker as this Apostle. 

The Lord said in this connection, "Because thou hast 
seen, thou hast believed. Blessed are those who have not 
seen, and yet have believed." There might be a question 
as to what the Lord meant by these words. He may have 
meant, Do not congratulate yourself that you were not 
easy to convince; or He may have meant, There is a 
special blessing for those who have faith— who believe 
without seeing. 

There were above five hundred brethren amongst the 
disciples at the time of our Lord's crucifixion. The 
Apostle says that He was seen of these at one time. 
(I Corinthians 15:6.) But afterwards the brethren were 
obliged to believe without seeing, merely on the testimony 
of others. We are in this category ourselves. All the 
Christian Church throughout the Gospel Age have believed 
without seeing the outward demonstration. Whether on 
this account the Lord would be specially pleased with us, 
we know not. But we think not. Whether we believe on 
slight evidence or on greater evidence is dependent upon 
the structure of the brain. God seems to have made provision 
that all those called of Him may have a sufficiency 
of evidence. And He gives us the additional evidence 
from the days of the Apostles to help to sustain our faith. 
We have the benefit of the doubts of St. Thomas and of 
our Lord's demonstration of His change of nature. 

FAITH THE CENTER OF CHRISTIAN PROGRESS 

The question might be asked, Why did Jesus lay stress 
upon the importance of faith? Why did He imply that 
St. Thomas could not be His disciple at all without believing? 
There are many who tell us that they cannot 



see that faith has any province, that they see no reason 
why God should bless faith, that in their opinion God 
should reward us for the doing. They say, "We are 
doing all the good works that we can." The Bible always 
sustains the thought that any one who does not do to the 
best of his ability shall receive stripes. But the Bible also 
holds out the other thought— that God purposes to reward 
His people according to their faith; that whoever cannot 
exercise perfect faith cannot be His disciple; that if one 
has not faith, it is impossible for him to get into the 
Kingdom. 

In God's arrangement, faith has been made the very 
center of Christian progress— faith in the things He has 
done, faith in the things He has promised to do. Faith is 
the thing which, by God's grace, enables us to avail ourselves 

R5237 : page 148 

of the wonderful opportunities of this present time. 
"Without faith it is impossible to please God." But this 
does not mean that conditions will always be as now, or 
that God will forever reject those who, on account of 
their mental make-up, cannot now exercise faith, but it 
means that at the present time He will save no others 
than the faithful. 

The Scriptures very clearly indicate, however, that 
after the selection of the Church, and the reward of their 
faith, the Lord will then deal with the world through the 
class which exercise faith now— through Christ and the 
Church— for the blessing of all mankind. In the next 
Age less faith will be required than now. Messiah's 
Kingdom established, will be openly manifested. Then 
mankind will not be obliged to walk by faith. They will 
walk by sight, whereas now we must walk by faith and 
not by sight. 

From the natural standpoint it looks as though God 
were not ruling the world at all, but that the world were 
being ruled by chance or by Satan himself— so different 
are conditions from what we would expect if God were 
recognized as the great King. Consequently we must 
exercise faith, if we are to receive the blessing at this 
time. By and by, during the Messianic rule, when everything 
contrary to righteousness will be punished, and 
everything in harmony with righteousness will be rewarded, 
then all opposers of righteousness will be cast 
down, and all lovers of righteousness will be prosperous. 
That will be the time of walking by sight. 

In the present time we must walk by faith because ours 
is a special salvation. The "high calling" is a peculiar 
privilege, for a special class. In the next Age, however, 
mankind's unbalance of mind through the fall will be 
compensated for. Those who need much demonstration 
will have much; those who need less will have less. The 
matter will be made so clear that there will be no excuse 
for any one not to attain to full obedience of works, and 
these works will gradually lead them up to full human 



perfection. God has made nothing unreasonable in His 
laws and requirements, His every demand is reasonable 
and essential. 

OUR LORD'S CHANGE OF NATURE 

Putting ourselves into the position of the disciples 
during the forty days after Jesus had arisen from the 
dead, we can readily imagine that they were considerably 
confused. One and another of them had been witnesses 
of strange things— they could not explain what, but they 
had seen what purported to be Jesus— on one occasion the 
appearance was as the gardener, on another occasion as 
a stranger, etc. They saw no mark of identity, and did 
not really know whether they had seen Him at all. On 
another occasion, looking very much like His former self, 
He appeared in their midst, the doors being shut. They 
could not imagine how a human being could have come in 
while the doors were shut. Therefore there was considerable 
perplexity. 

The Scriptures give us to understand that the reason 
why our Lord thus manifested Himself in various forms 
was that God raised Jesus from the dead to a different 
plane of existence— as a spirit being. The Scriptures 
declare, "Now the Lord is that Spirit." (2 Corinthians 3:17.) 
The Second Adam is the Heavenly Lord. He is 
not the earthly man Jesus. This explanation we can appreciate 
because we are living since Pentecost. We can 
see and understand that Jesus had become a spirit being, 
and that like the angels he could, where it was necessary, 
appear like a human being. We would not question at all 
that if Jesus had any reason for showing the identical 
body that had been crucified He could have appeared in 
it, could have opened the door and the Apostles could 
have been blinded, so that they could not see the door 
opening and shutting, as He entered. But the account 
contradicts such supposition and is very explicit in the 
statement that "the doors were shut," not that the Apostles 
did not see them open, but that they did not open at all. 
In the second statement— when St. Thomas was present— 
our Lord appeared in the same manner, "The doors being 
shut."-John 20:19,26. 

While Jesus could have brought the body, and could 
have maintained Himself inside of it as a spirit being, He 
did not do so. If He had done this they would have been 
deceived, supposing that He had arisen in His body of 
flesh in which He had been crucified. Therefore He 
appeared in different bodies of flesh, but under conditions 
that left no doubt as to His identity. He knew that after 
the disciples had received the Holy Spirit all would be 
plain to them. So He made no attempt to explain to them 
at that time, but merely kept them in touch with Himself 
until after the Pentecostal blessings had come, when they 
were able to understand from the true viewpoint. 

Our thought, therefore, would be that the body in 
which our Lord appeared was materialized. This was not 



a deception. It was intended, on the contrary, to keep the 
disciples from being deceived. Being natural men, they 
could not appreciate a change from human nature to spirit 
nature. Therefore this appearance was to help them over 
a difficulty— to keep them from saying "He is not risen." 

RESURRECTION MUCH MISUNDERSTOOD 

The disciples could see that our Lord had a different 
power altogether from what He had before He died. 
Thus He appeared time and again during the forty days 
—a few minutes at a time. This very evidently was to 
accomplish the purpose of demonstrating to them that He 
was a spirit being, that He had power to come and go 
like the wind, that He could appear in the flesh when 
necessary, and then vanish at will, and that He could 
come in one form and another form. This was the great 
lesson by which He purposed to keep them from being 
in any way deceived. 

We cannot imagine how Jesus could have substantiated 
His resurrection and confirmed the faith of His disciples 
in any better way. If He had remained with them as a 
man, they would have felt bound to believe that the same 

R5238 : page 148 

personality, the same flesh, was His still, and they would 
have been unable to understand His words, "Lo, I am with 
you alway, even unto the end of the Age." But now 
they could understand that as He had appeared and 
vanished from sight, although really present with them 
throughout the forty days, He could also in a different 
sense, be with them all through the Gospel Age, and return 
in person when necessary, in the end of the Age. 

We see no deception in this, but an avoidance of 
deception. We are to remember that it took several of 
these manifestations to attest the fact that He was a 
changed being. If the disciples had thought of Him as 
a Man in Heaven, it would have led them into serious 
difficulty, just as we see is now the case with our friends 
in the nominal Churches, who think Jesus arose in the 
same flesh, and that He retains that flesh in Heaven. As 
the hymn says, 

"Five bleeding wounds He bears, 

Received on Calvary; 
They pour effectual prayers, 
They strongly plead for me." 

Our friends believe this. We ask them if they think 
that as Jesus bears the marks, the scars, of His wounded 
flesh, that all of His followers will likewise bear theirs. 

R5238 : page 149 

They answer, Yes. Then we remind them that some of 
them were most horribly maltreated, often mutilated, before 
they died. Think of those who were beheaded; and 



those who met with accidents and wounds! If they are 
to bear those marks and bruises in Heaven, or be headless, 
they will be a disfigured set. 

We show them that those who hold this view do not 
believe at all in the Redemption— the Redemption of which 
the Bible treats. We quote to our friends, "He poured 
out His soul unto death;" He made "His soul an offering 
for sin." Yes, they answer, we believe that His fleshly 
body was sacrificed. We reply, His fleshly body will only 
redeem the fleshly body of Adam. But Adam had more 
than the fleshly body. It was the soul of Adam that sinned 
—and Jesus must have given a soul in order to redeem 
Adam. -Isaiah 53:10,12. 

If the body never was a part of Jesus, then it was not 
Jesus that died, but His body; it was not He that was 
humiliated, but His body; it was not He who left His 
glory that was sacrificed, but His body. Now, if the body 
never was Jesus, then He deceived mankind into thinking 
that He was a man; and He deceived the Apostle into 
saying that "He who was rich, for our sakes became 
poor." (2 Corinthians 8:9.) Then to speak of His being 
tempted, as the Apostle Paul spoke of Him, was wrong, 
for He could not be tempted like us, if He were altogether 
of a different nature. So we see that the Truth, as the 
Bible teaches it, is harmonious. 

THE RESURRECTION OF THE WORLD 

The First Resurrection, Christ's Resurrection, began 
with the glorious change of our Lord, more than eighteen 
centuries ago, and as His Resurrection, it will be completed 
when the last member of His Body shall have experienced 
the change from earthly to Heavenly, Divine 
nature. The world's resurrection cannot take place before 
that of the Church, but must follow it. The Ancient 
Worthies will be the first of the earthly class to be resurrected 
to human nature. But their resurrection will not 
be at the same time as that of the Church, but later— as 
the Apostle says, "They, without us, shall not be made 
perfect."— Hebrews 11:39,40. 

The awakening of the world will probably not begin 
for fifty or a hundred years after the Kingdom has been 
established. During that time, however, the resurrection 
process— the raising up gradually— will be in operation 
amongst the nations then living. As gradually nations, 
peoples, kindreds and tongues are awakened, they must 
be brought to a knowledge of the Truth, and must give 
the assent of their wills, before any resurrection processes 
begin to operate in them. This work will continue all 
down through the thousand years of Messiah's Reign. 

The world's resurrection will not be fully completed 
until the end of the thousand years, while the Church's 
resurrection will be completed at the beginning of the 
thousand years. For this reason it would be improper to 
say that the resurrections of the just and of the unjust 
take place at the same time. Indeed, the world will not 



be raised up fully until, at the close of the thousand years, 
they shall be turned over to God, even the Father; for one 
result of the fall was the loss of the Heavenly Father's 
favor and fellowship. Mankind will not be delivered out 
of that feature of the fall until the Mediator shall have 
accomplished His work in them. 



R5238 : page 149 

THE MANNER OF MOTHER EVE'S TEMPTATION 

"Now the serpent was more subtle than any beast of the field 
which the Lord God had made. And he said unto the woman, 
Yea, hath God said, Ye shall not eat of 
every tree in the garden?"— Genesis 3:1. 

THE SCRIPTURAL teaching that God knows 
no sin, signifies that He practises no sin. 
He commits no sin, connives at no sin. He 
is not an assistant to sin. He cannot look 
upon sin with any degree of allowance. He 
shows no favor, no light of His countenance, 
no light of His eye, on anything that is sinful. 
On the contrary, He would turn His 
back upon these things. He would not have 
the slightest sympathy with anything sinful. 

If, therefore, man were sinful in the largest possible 
degree, God would have no sympathy with him. The 
Scriptures present the thought that man is not thus sinful 
in the highest degree, but that he is sinful on account of 
weaknesses; that these weaknesses had their start, or 
beginning, away back in the disobedience of Father Adam; 
and that Father Adam's death penalty came upon him as 
the result of his disobedience, as recorded in Genesis. Because 
man is thus a sinner by nature rather than by will, 
therefore God has purposed to redeem him from the curse 
and to give him full reconciliation with Himself by the 
Restitution to be accomplished by our Lord Jesus under 
the Messianic Kingdom. 

Such as will not conform to the laws and regulations 
of that Kingdom will be accounted as wilful sinners. God 
will not look upon them with any degree of allowance. 
He will take from them every right and privilege. They 
will be destroyed. As it is written, "All the wicked will 
He [God] destroy," in the Second Death.— Psalms 145:20. 

DECEPTION THROUGH MENTAL SUGGESTION 

There is intelligent sin. Those who know right and do 
wrong are wilful sinners. The great wilful sinner, according 
to the Scriptures, is Satan. He was a murderer 
from the beginning, we read, and abode not in the Truth. 
(John 8:44.) He murdered our race by his deception. He 
did not tell the truth, but he misrepresented it. He told 



Mother Eve that she would not die, if she ate of the forbidden 
fruit; and that she would have wisdom and knowledge 
such as she craved. We are not to understand that 
Satan did this in a direct way, but through the serpent. 

According to the Scriptures, the serpent at that time 
did not creep, but was next in intelligence to our first 
parents. Satan used this serpent to counsel Eve to disobey 
the Creator. Eve should have said, "Who is this 
that teaches me to disobey the Great Creator who made 
man?" The temptation came, however, in a very deceptive 
manner. The serpent spake not by words, but, apparently, 
by actions. It went continually to the tree of whose fruit 
Adam and Eve were forbidden to eat, and ate of the fruit. 

Mother Eve saw that the serpent ate of the fruit and 
that it was the wisest of all cattle. Then the thought occurred 
to her that the reason why the serpent was the 
wisest of all cattle was because it ate of the tree, the 
forbidden fruit. Next the thought came that the reason 
why they were not to eat of the fruit of the tree was 
that they might be kept from being as intelligent as they 
might otherwise be. Lastly, the thought was suggested, 
If you eat of the fruit of that tree, the influence of that 
fruit upon you will make you as God Himself. You will 
know everything. So it was this indirect teaching under 
the obsession of the serpent by Satan that constituted the 
serious deception which came to Eve. 

R5238 : page 150 

DEGRADATION OF THE SERPENT NOT AN INJUSTICE 

It might be argued that Mother Eve did not sin. She 
did sin. She knew that she had no right to violate the 
command which she had received. Every one who does 
wrong knowingly commits sin. We might just as well 
excuse the man who steals a thousand dollars. He knows 
at the time that he is stealing a thousand dollars. Whether 
he is ever caught or not, the wrong has been committed. 

In other words, the wrong starts with the heart, with 
a willingness or intention to do wrong. Such a one is a 
sinner— a transgressor of the Law. So Mother Eve was 
a transgressor of the Law, and in that sense she was 
amenable to the penalty. The serpent was not, however, 
a moral being, that he should receive a special punishment 
as a criminal. The criminal was Satan, who will one day 
be destroyed, as will also all those who have his spirit, 
his disposition. 

There was a certain penalty, however, meted out upon 
the serpent— not for its punishment, for it had done nothing 
contrary to its nature, but to make the serpent a 
synonym of Sin, because it was the tool of Sin. The 
serpent became the symbol of Satan and of Sin. When 

R5239 : page 150 

the children of Israel were disobedient in the wilderness, 



God permitted them to be bitten by fiery serpents. He 
instructed Moses to raise up a brazen serpent upon a pole, 
that whoever looked upon it might live. (Numbers 21:6-9.) 
Our Lord said that "As Moses lifted up the 
serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of Man 
be lifted up: that whosoever believeth in Him should not 
perish, but have everlasting life." (John 3:14,15.) Even 
as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness for the 
healing of the people, so all may be healed by looking to 
our Lord for the help necessary. 

There was no injustice done to the serpent, when God 
said, "On thy belly shalt thou go." God has made no 
covenant with any one except His intelligent creatures. 
So if an ox were degraded to the condition of a bullfrog, 
there would be no violation of justice. The serpent and 
other beasts have life as an unmerited favor from the 
great Creator. No creature would have the least right 
to question whatever privileges or blessings would come 
to him. To simply degrade the beast from one form of 
life to another form of life was no injustice. It is, however, 
a lesson in humility, which has been profitable, more 
or less, all through the six thousand years of man's history, 
and will be profitable all through Messiah's coming 
glorious reign of righteousness. 



R5239 : page 150 

STORMS ON THE SEA OF LIFE 

"He maketh the storm a calm."— Psalm 107:29. 

IF THERE is anything in the world which 

causes a man to feel his own littleness it is 

a storm at sea. The voyagers realize that 

no human arm could calm that storm. The 

text, then, refers to the Almighty One, our 

Heavenly Father. Our Heavenly Father, 

however, always uses instrumentalities. The 

Scriptures tell us that after He had created 

one great being, He rested. This One was 

the Logos, the Only Begotten of the Father, 

the First-born of all creation. (Colossians 1:15; Revelation 3:14.) 

All the power the Father has since exercised 

has been through the Lord Jesus. 

The passage of Scripture used as our text may not 
have been understood fully and completely by the Psalmist, 
the one who uttered this prophecy. Like many other 
Scriptures it has a special application to the Church of 
Christ. The Apostle Paul tells us that these things were 
written beforehand for our admonition, instruction. (I Corinthians 10:11.) 
We believe that nearly all the 

prophecies recognize the Lord and His Body first. There 
have been many storms permitted by the Lord to come 
upon the little company of His followers. Sometimes the 



whole journey of life has been a stormy one. We sometimes 
sing, "When the storms of life are raging." In his 
Epistles, the Apostle intimates that those who do not have 
storms, trials and difficulties lack proof that they are 
God's children; for God would not be dealing with such 
as His children.— Hebrews 12:7,8. 

If we are children of God, we need to have trials and 
testings, that these may make us meet for the inheritance 
of the saints in light. (Colossians 1:12.) In all these 
experiences, the tendency of the trial is to drive us nearer 
to the Lord, to make us feel that we need the Divine 
shelter and care. And so a blessing comes out of these 
storms. We are not to think of God as making these 
storms, either literal or figurative. Satan is the great 
Enemy. While literal storms come about by natural laws, 
apparently, yet there may be a power exercised by spirit 
beings to produce them. During our Lord's ministry a 
storm of this kind was raised on the Sea of Galilee. The 
storm was so sudden and so great that, although the lake 
is not very large, the boat seemed in danger of going 
down, and the disciples, although experienced fishermen, 
were in terror. Jesus was asleep in the end of the boat. 
They came to Him and said, "Master! carest Thou not 
that we perish?" 

STORMS A TEST OF FAITH 

Satan knew that Jesus and the disciples were in the 
boat on the sea. Perhaps he thought that by causing this 
storm he could destroy Jesus and thwart the Father's 
Plan. Jesus rebuked the storm. This He would not have 
done, we suppose, if it had been caused by the Father. 
Then He applied the lesson to the disciples, saying, "O ye 
of little faith, why did ye doubt?" 

The Lord's evident intention in letting the storm go 
as far as it did was to test the faith of the disciples, and 
to give a lesson such as this text is giving us now. It 
would cause them to remember in future years, in all 
their difficulties, whether from their own imperfections, or 
the imperfections of others, or as the result of the work 
of fallen angels, that all things were under Divine oversight. 
This also we should remember: We have the assurance 
that all these things will work for good to us, and 
that He will with the temptation provide also a way of 
escape, that we may be able to bear it. — I Cor. 10:13. 

This was illustrated in the storm on the sea, and the 
Lord's act in rebuking the storm. So if we have trials 
and difficulties, we should cry unto the Lord— we should 
exercise faith enough to cry unto Him. It should not be 
that blind faith which would say, "Whatever the fates 
have ordained, that is my portion; and there is no escape." 
This latter is the condition of the heathen, but is not the 
case with us. The Lord allows the storms to press us 
more and more so that we will cry unto Him. Then He 
will hear us and give us the necessary deliverance. He 
may not always make it a very speedy deliverance, but 



He will make a way for us to escape. We must remember 
also that it is the New Creature with which He is dealing. 
These storms may be right inside, in our own person— 

R5239 :page 151 

storms of passion, of anger, of resentment. These we are 
not to allow to go on; but we are to cry for the Lord's 
help, that we may be overcomers of these storms— trials. 

GREAT STORM OF WRATH COMING 

This incident of the Sea of Galilee pictures what the 
Lord is doing for the Church now, and what He will do in 
the future for the world. He intends to deliver the whole 
world from sin and death, which have had a long reign 
of six thousand years. This period has been one continuous 
storm, with occasional brief lulls. Meantime the 
world is receiving certain great lessons as to the desirability 
of harmony with God. By and by they will come to 
understand, and will then greatly appreciate the importance 
of being fully in accord with God and very 
obedient to the Divine direction. Thus a foundation stone 
is being laid in their education for the next Age. 

Finally, this storm on Galilee seems to picture very 
graphically the great time of trouble with which this Age 
will end. Then the reign of Satan will cease, and the 
reign of Messiah will begin. We are not to think of 
Jesus' Kingdom as bringing about the great time of 
trouble. The Scriptural thought seems rather to be that 
Christ's work in the present time is with the Church, and 
that with the completion of the Church, with the glorification 
of the Church, Christ's Kingdom will be set up. This 
Day of Trouble will be more particularly the Day of 
Jehovah. In this, Divine Justice will have a hand. 

We do not mean, however, to exclude the Lord Jesus, 
for He is the chief factor in all that God does. But when 
the Kingdom of Messiah comes, it will exercise a restraining 
power— will bring down the lofty, will turn the 
wrath of man so as to cause it to praise God. This wrath 
of man will bring "a time of trouble such as never was 
since there was a nation." In some of the Scriptural 
pictures it is represented as a whirlwind, and in others it 
is represented as a great tidal wave— the sea and the 
waves will roar. Then in the midst of a great storm, 
which will be sufficient to wreck the whole human fabric, 
Messiah's Kingdom will be set up. It will cause wars to 
cease. Satan will be bound. The light of the knowledge 
of the glory of God will fill the whole earth. "The desire 
of all nations shall come," and will be recognized in the 
making of the storm a calm, by this Kingdom of Messiah. 



R5239 :page 151 



LEGAL AND ACTUAL CANCELLATION OF SIN 

BECAUSE the entire race of Adam was in him 

when he was sentenced, it was condemned 

with him; and during the six thousand years 

since, it has been unable, on account of 

weakness, frailty, sin, to extricate itself 

from this Divine condemnation. God has 

provided the Redeemer for the very purpose 

of lifting the death-penalty upon mankind 

because of the disobedience of Adam, in 

order that as condemnation has passed 

upon all because of the disobedience of one, so justification 

to life, through the obedience of one, might pass 

upon all.— Romans 5:18,19. 

More than eighteen hundred years ago our Lord laid 
down the Ransom-price for man's life. During the interim, 
the Church has been called from amongst mankind 
and permitted to become sharers with Him in His sacrificial 
death, that they might afterwards share in His glory. 
When the last member shall have passed beyond the veil, 
and the great High Priest shall have been completed— 
Jesus the Head and the Church His Body— then Christ 
will present His merit for the sins of the whole world. 
Divine Justice will accept this merit. With this acceptance, 
the sins of the whole world will be canceled in 

R5240 :page 151 

a legal sense, just as those of the Church are now. When 
we come into the Divinely appointed relationship with the 
Lord, there is no condemnation to us who are thus in 
Christ Jesus.— Romans 8:1. 

At the end of the Gospel Age, when the Ransom-price 
shall have been applied for the world, and shall have 
been accepted by the Father, the whole world will be 
placed in the hands of Jesus Christ. Then, through The 
Christ as the Mediator, the New Covenant will go into 
operation, the terms and conditions of which will be open 
to all mankind— for it will contain blessings for all. 

Nevertheless, there will be something for men to do 
in order to avail themselves of the blessings of this 
Covenant. As it is God's part to make such a Covenant, 
so during the thousand years of Christ's reign it will be 
the part of humanity to accept the terms and come into 
harmony with God through its requirements. Gradually 
mankind will come up, all who will, to the standard of 
everlasting life, but those who refuse to respond will die 
the Second Death. 

From this point of view, we see that it will require 
the entire thousand years of Christ's reign to accomplish 
fully the work of the antitypical Atonement Day— making 
all mankind at-one with God. The work of At-one-ment 
includes the satisfaction of Justice, not only at the beginning 
of the Millennial Age, but throughout the Millennium. 
This is shown in the type of the inauguration of the Law 



Covenant. Moses sprinkled the blood first upon the tables 
of the Law, and then upon all the people. As the work of 
sprinkling the people was a task that undoubtedly took a 
long time to accomplish, so the antitypical sprinkling of 
mankind will require many years. 

A COMING SETTLEMENT FOR SIN 

The answer to the question, Will mankind come forth 
from the tomb free from condemnation? depends largely 
upon the point of view. They will come forth free from 
Divine condemnation, for all of the condemnation which 
came upon them through heredity will have been satisfied 
by the Ransom-price paid by Christ for Adam and all of 
his race. And for other sins than those of heredity there 
will have been a settlement— at the end of the Gospel 
Age. The Scriptures indicate that of this present generation 
God will require all the righteous blood shed from 
the time of Abel down to the present. Hence for wilful 
sin there will be satisfaction rendered through a great 
time of trouble, such as never was since there was a 
nation, even to that time.— Daniel 12:1; Matthew 24:21. 

A type of this trouble is seen in that which came upon 
the Jewish nation at the end of the Jewish Age. 
(Matthew 23:34-36.) In the Revelation, we find an illustration 
of this coming satisfaction, for injustice perpetrated. 
We read, "How long, O Lord, holy and true, 
dost Thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that 
dwell on the earth? And white robes were given unto 
every one of them; and it was said unto them that they 
should rest yet for a little season, until their fellow-servants 
also and their brethren, that should be killed as 
they were, should be fulfilled." (Revelation 6:10,11.) 
That Day of Vengeance is about at the door of 
Christendom. 

From all this it is evident that Divine Justice does not 
intend to terminate fully the adjustment of accounts until 
there is a full ledger of Justice, so to speak. From that 

R5240 : page 152 

time forward, each one will be responsible for the weaknesses 
and blemishes of his own conduct.— Jer. 31:29,30. 

RESPONSIBILITY ACCORDING TO ABILITY 

Mankind will not be accountable for the violation of 
a perfect standard, but each will be held responsible in 
proportion to his own knowledge and ability. During the 
Millennium, the rule will be such as would now be considered 
just in a well regulated family. The stronger 
child is given the heavier burden to carry. So it will be 
during the coming Age. Each one will be accountable for 
what he can bear. He will not be held responsible for 
perfection and condemned for inability to reach it, but 
will be judged according to his ability. 



During the thousand years, each individual will make 
progress to the extent that he shall endeavor to comply 
with the regulations of the Kingdom. But before he can 
do this, he must enter into the New Covenant and 
formally purpose to be one who will come into line with 
the requirements of the great King and His Assistants. 
If he fails to do this, he will be considered an outlaw, 
and at a hundred years old he will be destroyed as a 
sinner. (Isaiah 65:20.) The weaknesses upon him will 
not be regarded as sin, except as all imperfection is sin. 
But no one will be held responsible for more than he is 
able to do, nor will he be condemned for what he is not 
able to perform. 

Under the Millennial Kingdom, mankind will be dealt 
with, not individually, as with the Church of this Age, but 
collectively, as with the Jewish nation. Individual relationship 
with the Father will not be possible until the end 
of the thousand years— until Messiah shall have put down 
all imperfection and shall have lifted mankind up out of 
sin and death conditions into perfection as human beings. 
Then He will deliver the Kingdom over to the Father, and 
will no longer stand between humanity and Divine Justice. 
-I Corinthians 15:24. 

The Scriptures show, however, that before the 
Heavenly Father will receive the restored race of mankind, 
He will give them a very crucial test by permitting 
some wonderfully deceiving influence to go abroad in the 
world. This influence proceeds from "the dragon, that 
old serpent, which is called the Devil and Satan." By 
that time every one will know right from wrong. The 
test, therefore, will be to determine whether those who 
know right will practise wrong. Consequently the Lord 
will prove them, as He did Father Adam and Mother 
Eve, to demonstrate whether they are as loyal to Him as 
they should be.— Revelation 20:7-10. 

Those who fail in any of the tests of obedience will 
be judged unworthy of everlasting life, and will be 
destroyed. Those who prove themselves worthy of everlasting 
life will receive it. Of that time the Apostle Paul 
says, "The creature itself also shall be delivered from 
the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the 
children of God." (Romans 8:21.) All the members of 
the groaning race of mankind, who will be obedient, will 
be delivered from sin and death conditions into the full 
liberty of the sons of God— such as Adam enjoyed before 
his fall. They will have the knowledge which he lacked, 
and will pass the test which he failed to pass. 



R5240 : page 152 

ALL THINGS WORK FOR GOOD TO THEM 
-JUNE 15. -GENESIS 46:28-34; 47:12,28-31.- 



"To them that love God all things 
work together for good."— Romans 8:28. 

SO JACOB and all his family left the land of 

Canaan, the Land of Promise, Palestine; 

and, at the invitation of Pharaoh through 

Joseph, they located in the land of Goshen, 

suitable to their business which was that of 

herdsmen and shepherds. Joseph went in 

his chariot to Goshen, and there met his 

father Jacob, whom he had not seen for 

many years. After the custom of oriental 

countries, they kissed each other, and Joseph 

wept. Then came the official presentation of Jacob and 

his family to Pharaoh. Joseph was careful that they 

should make no mistake. He therefore let the king clearly 

know that their occupation was that of shepherds and 

herdsmen; for the Egyptians despised that business, and 

hence would keep themselves separate from the Hebrews. 

Thus the land of Goshen became almost like a separate 

country from Egypt. 

Jacob at this time was one hundred thirty years old, 
and quite feeble. Brought into the presence of Pharaoh, 
Jacob blessed him— in the sense of asking the Divine 
blessing upon him, we may assume. Thus the family 
of Jacob, now called by their new name, Israel, became 
firmly established in the land of Egypt. Jacob lived 
seventeen years thereafter, during which Joseph and his 
people, the Israelites, were in favor with Pharaoh and 
the Egyptians. 

Our lesson relates especially to God's willingness and 
ability to make all the experiences of His people to work 
out for their good. This naturally suggests that we inquire 
in what way Jacob's life experiences were to his 
welfare. The Scriptures declare, "Jacob have I loved; 
Esau have I hated [loved less]." God's Love should be 
distinctly seen manifested in some way in making matters 
work for good to Jacob and his family. The question 
is, How? Can we see the lines along which Divine favor 
operated for the welfare of Jacob and his family? 

Only with the eye of faith, guided by the words of 
Jesus, His Apostles and the Prophets, can we see how 
God's blessing was with Israel and gave them blessings 
more than others. Many have not this eye of faith. 
Hence only the few can see, appreciate, understand, this 
matter. The majority both of professing Christians and 
of Jews fail to see what blessing came to Israel. Proportionately 
such are weak in faith, and quite ready to be 
turned aside by Higher Critics and Evolutionists into 
total unbelief in the Bible and the Divine Plan of the 
Ages which it sets forth. 

Jacob, having become the heir of the great Promise 
made to Abraham (in thy Seed shall all the families of 
the earth be blessed), straightway seems to have gotten 
into trouble. He fled from home, leaving everything to 
his brother. He served his uncle Laban for seven years, 



that he might have Rachel for his wife, but Divine Providence 
permitted him to be cheated, and he was obliged to 
serve seven years more for her. Time and again his 
uncle Laban changed his wages in an endeavor to get 
the best of him. Thus Jacob was thrown into competition 
with his uncle in the endeavor to protect his own interests. 

Finally, with the fruit of many years' toil, he returned 
to Canaan, fearful, however, of his brother Esau, whom 
he placated with a rich present. Later, he lost his wife 
and was bereft of Joseph, his beloved son. Then came 
the famine, the recovery of Joseph and the incidents of 
our recent lesson. Later on, that very move into Egypt 
appeared to have been a disastrous one, for the Egyptians 

R5241 :page 153 

enslaved the Israelites. Finally, they were delivered, only 
to have trying experiences in the wilderness of Paran for 
forty years, before entering Canaan proper. 

HOW DID GOD BLESS ISRAEL? 

Then it was a gradual matter to get possession of the 
land. They had various trials and difficulties, captivities 
to the Philistines, the Syrians, etc. Later on, they had 
kings, and then a rebellion, or division of the Kingdom, 
followed by more wars, famines, pestilences, until they 
were all carried captive into Babylon. They went away 
numerous, they returned a comparatively small company. 
Then they had more trials, wars, etc. 

By and by, Jesus came, and was repudiated by all 
except the few. Then the nation was repudiated by God. 
"Your house is left unto you desolate." Gradually trouble 
and anarchy came upon them, until as a nation they went 
to Hades— nationally they fell asleep. They have been 
asleep for more than eighteen centuries, while personally 
they have endured persecutions in many nations. 

What we want to see is how God's blessing was 
identified with all those experiences of Israel. We want 
to know in what way God overruled for their good and 
blessing more than in the affairs of other nations. To 
understand this, we must take a glance at other nations 
and peoples and their experiences and then must look 
also into the future. 

Where is Egypt— where is the government of the 
Pharaohs today? Where is Assyria— where are their 
peoples today? Where are the Philistines? Where are 
any and all of the nations who flourished in the days of 
Israel? The answer is that they are no more. They 
have merged with other peoples or have been blotted out 
by natural processes. They could not be restored today, 
because none of those peoples remain anywhere. We 
are not discussing the numerous tribes of India, nor the 
consolidated bands of China and Japan, nor the barbarous 
tribes of Africa. These all have been outside the line of 
our history, because not closely identified with the nation 



of Israel, Natural or Spiritual. 

But Israel exists today, even though the nation is 
asleep in Hades, Sheol, waiting for a national awakening 
and resurrection. That awakening is already arousing 
"dry bones" from despair, and pointing forward to a future 
day of blessing and prosperity. One result of God's providential 
care over Israel has been that as a people they 
have been maintained in existence. It is this hope of 
future blessings, based upon God's promise to Abraham, 
which continues to vitalize that people. It is this hope 
which by and by, according to prophecy, will re-vitalize 
Israel, and again bring her forward and identify her with 
the great Messianic Kingdom, which will bless the world. 

But some one may say, Tell us not about national 
blessings, for we shall have to think of the whole world 
from the standpoint of one human brotherhood. If Israel 
has been blessed of God, there should be some personal 
blessing manifest and not merely a national prolongation 
of grace, in their life as a people. 

Very true, we answer. There are both personal and 
national blessings of the past and for the future. God's 
dealings with Israel in the past did not indeed prove all 
of that nation to be holy, saintly, and worthy of the 
highest honor and stations in the Divine Program. But 
those providences served to select in that nation a peculiar 
people, of similar characteristics to those possessed by 
Abraham; viz., faith and obedience. Following Abraham 
came Isaac; following Isaac came Jacob; and following 
Jacob came the nation of Israel amongst whom there 
were a few, from time to time, worthy of being ranked 
with their fathers Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. 

The trying experiences of centuries of national life 
tended to develop noble characters, strong in faith and 
loyal to the core. St. Paul enumerates some of these 
besides Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and the Prophets. He 
includes with them all those "Israelites indeed" who were 
loyal to God to the extent of suffering persecutions for 
righteousness' sake and for the sake of the hopes which 
they received through that Abrahamic Promise. Some of 
these, he says, were "stoned to death, some were sawn 
asunder. ...of whom the world was not worthy." 

This selecting process continued down to the time 
of Jesus, and found a glorious company, even if it were 
not a numerous one. God was seeking such people, and 
He found the ones whom He sought. True, they have not 
yet received their reward. True, their reward is not be 
a Heavenly one, but an earthly one as was promised them. 
"All the land that thou seest will I give to thee, and to 
thy seed after thee." 

These faithful ones of Israel are the ones for whom 
all things have been working together favorably— because 
they loved God, because they were responsive to the 
righteousness which He set before them and to the great 
Promise which He gave them. The time is near at hand, 
we believe, when these will constitute Messiah's earthly 
representatives in the ruling and blessing of the world 



of mankind. 

What was prophesied of them before will be fulfilled. 
Instead of being the fathers, they will be Messiah's children, 
receiving everlasting life from Him as a Father. 
He will make them princes in all the earth, in subordinate 
co-operation with His Heavenly Empire. (Psalm 45:16.) 
Thus we see that all the trials and difficulties of Israel 
were, under Divine Providence, working together for 
good to that special class, "Israelites indeed, in whom was 
no guile," and who loved God supremely. And their 
reward is nigh at hand. Through them, the blessing will 
extend to every nation of earth. 

SPIRITUAL ISRAEL'S EXPERIENCES 

When God's time came, at the First Advent, to call 
out from the world a special class of Spiritual Israelites, 
He gave the first opportunity to the children of Jacob. 
As many of them at that time as were "Israelites indeed, 
in whom was no guile," were privileged to have special 
opportunities and instructions from Jesus. All of that 
true, loyal class were enabled by special providential guidance 
and instruction, to recognize Him as the Messiah, 
while all others were blinded by prejudice, superstition 
and obscure statements. 

This was another advantage that came to the natural 
seed of Abraham— that they should have the first opportunity 
of becoming members of Spiritual Israel, of which 
they had previously had no information whatever. Nor 
have they yet learned that The Messiah for whom they 
were waiting is to be a Spiritual Messiah, instead of a 
fleshly one, and that He is to be a composite Messiah, 
instead of a single person— that He is to be composed 
of many members. 

Thus the natural children of Abraham had "much 
advantage every way, chiefly because to them were committed 
the oracles of God," and because having those 
oracles, those prophecies, they had the best opportunity 
of all people of knowing respecting Messiah and of coming 
into harmony with Him, becoming His disciples. 

But as was said of Natural Israel, so with still greater 
emphasis it might be said of Spiritual Israel, that their 
privileges brought to them special sufferings and persecutions. 
Jesus was buffeted, all manner of evil was said 
against Him falsely, and He was finally crucified as a 
criminal, because He averred that He was the Son of 

R5241 : page 154 

God, and did not deny that He was the One who ultimately 
would be the King of Glory. 

Then for centuries the faithful followers of Jesus had 
bitter experiences. Sometimes they were literally tortured, 
literally persecuted, literally flayed alive. At other 
times they suffered symbolical persecution, symbolical flaying 
alive, and had all manner of evil spoken against them 



falsely for Christ's sake. Deceptions, false doctrines, and 
antitypical carrying into symbolical Babylon— all these 
have been experiences of the people of God. Nor does 
this close the list; for St. Paul declared, "Whosoever will 
live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution." So 
whoever today belongs to the Lord has the assurance that 
if he is faithful to his Master, he will have the opposition 
of Satan, of the world and of his own flesh. 

The questions arise, How are these things working 
better for us than for the world? Do not Christians die 
the same as unbelievers, the same as Jews, the same as Mohammedans, 
the same as the heathen? Do they not have 
their share of sickness, sorrow, and pain in connection 
with their dying experiences? Surely none can dispute 
the truthfulness of this suggestion! Wherein then, shall 
we say, is there an advantage in being a Spiritual 
Israelite? If all the world is redeemed by the precious 
blood of Christ, if all the world is to have a blessing 
under Messiah's glorious reign of a thousand years, and 
if the Ancient Worthies are to have the first place in the 
Kingdom that will then be established under the whole 
heavens, what will be the advantage, if any, to those who 
have been faithful and loyal Spiritual Israelites— to those 
who have endured hardness as good soldiers and have 
sought to lay down their lives in the Master's service, 
in the service of the brethren, in the service of the Truth, 
in the service of God? 

R5242 : page 154 

MUCH ADVANTAGE EVERY WAY IS OURS 

The advantages of this class are numerous, and lay 
hold upon the present life, as well as that which is to 
come. In the present time, it is the privilege of these 
to enjoy the peace of God, which passeth all human understanding. 
It is their privilege to know by faith that all 
things are working together for good to them because 
they love God. It is their privilege to realize that whatever 
may happen to others in the world, nothing can 
happen, so far as they are concerned. Their affairs and 
interests are all subject to a Divine supervision. No 
wonder they can have peace in every storm! No wonder 
they are able to rejoice even in tribulation! 

Theirs is a joy of spirit, of which no earthly experience 
can rob them, and their joys increase daily, yearly, 
as they ripen in Christian experience, and as they grow 
in knowledge and in grace. Theirs is a privilege of access 
to the Throne of Heavenly Grace, and a privilege of 
communion with the Heavenly Father and with their 
Lord Jesus Christ. They may count themselves, as St. 
Peter declares, members of the Royal Priesthood, the Holy 
Nation of Israel, the Peculiar People of God. They may 
rejoice in the privilege of being God's ambassadors, and 
of telling the Good Tidings to others, thus to "show forth 
the praises of Him who called them out of darkness into 



His marvelous light." Oh, great are the privileges and 
mercies and blessing of these Spiritual Israelites, far 
more than compensating for their disciplines, tribulations 
and oppositions! 

JOYS OF THE LIFE TO COME 

But beyond all these experiences of the present life lie 
the riches of God's grace for the future, which these 
possess and hold with the power of faith. As St. Paul 
declares, they have the "promise of the life which now is 
and also of that which is to come." And that life to 
come is such a wonderful life that the study of it is an 
endless matter. Every step of obedience brings them 
rights and privileges with God, brings them a step forward 
also in knowledge of Himself and of His glorious 
Plan. Thus the more saintly and self-sacrificing the character, 
the deeper may be his knowledge, the richer his 
experiences, the more precious his hopes and anticipations. 

Are we asked, What are the anticipations of this 
class? The answer is, They anticipate the things which 
God has promised; they anticipate that as they are now 
children of God, so their promised resurrection from the 
dead to full spiritual perfection will make them sons of 
God on the highest plane. And if children, then they will 
be "heirs, heirs of God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, 
their Lord." Besides, these Spiritual Israelites are heirs 
of a Spiritual Canaan, a Spiritual Kingdom. To enter 
upon their Kingdom they must needs experience the 
powers of a better resurrection than others. And this will 
mean, the Apostle assures us, that they will "be changed 
in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye," for "flesh and 
blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God." Is it not true 
then, in the fullest and most absolute sense, that all things 
are working together for good to those who love God, 
to the called ones according to His purpose, not only to 
those who were called during the Jewish Age, but also to 
those who have been called and who have accepted the 
call during this Gospel Age! 



R5242 : page 154 

REPORTS OF MEMORIAL CELEBRATIONS 

The annual reports of the numbers participating in the 
Memorial Supper constitute one of our best means of knowing 
approximately the number of fully consecrated Christians 
interested in what is styled Present Truth. For this reason 
we have specially requested that reports be sent to us as 
promptly as possible after the celebration each year. For some 
reason we are continually disappointed. Evidently many of 
the Classes do not elect scribes or secretaries, or else those 
elected are not suitable persons or slack in the Lord's business. 
We have waited the press in order to print a satisfactory report. 



Ten days have passed since the Memorial, and only a 

small fraction of the Classes have reported. For instance, 

there are over eleven hundred Classes in the U.S. and Canada, 

but we have heard from only two hundred and sixty-five of 

them, representing 7,944 commemorators. The following statement 

shows only those cities reporting fifty or more participants. 

The Brooklyn report for this year is smaller than a 

year ago, not because of less interest, but because some of the 

outside Classes have grown to an extent that justifies holding 

separate Memorials more convenient for some of the more 

feeble members. The same applies to Pittsburgh, Pa. 

Brooklyn, N.Y 815 Allentown, Pa 73 

Boston, Mass 360 Binghamton, Pa 72 

Pittsburgh, Pa 350 Toledo, 71 

Los Angeles, Cal 310 Worcester, Mass 71 

Cleveland, 189 Spokane, Wash 70 

Seattle, Wash 164 Cincinnati, 70 

Washington, D.C 160 Jacksonville, Fla 58 

Minneapolis and St. Paul. 160 Newark, N.J 57 

Detroit, Mich 149 San Francisco, Cal 56 

Indianapolis, Ind 129 Springfield, Mass 55 

St. Louis, Mo 124 Pasadena, Cal 50 

San Antonio, Texas 119 Altoona, Pa 50 

Portland, Ore 112 London, Eng., Tabernacle.. 525 

Columbus, 98 " " Forest Gate.. 313 

Buffalo, N.Y 97 Bristol, Eng 95 

Lancaster, Pa 87 Oldham, Eng 87 

Denver, Colo 85 Sheffield, Eng 73 

Houston, Texas 80 Birmingham, Eng 56 

Richmond, Va 79 Glasgow, Scotland 428 

Lynn, Mass 78 Eleven Classes S. India... 455 



R5242 : page 155 

WOES ANCIENT AND MODERN 

--JUNE 22.-AMOS 6:1-8.- 

"Seek good, and not evil, that 
ye may live."— Amos 5:14. 

FT IS safe to say that everybody is seeking 

good, and not evil. Everybody is seeking 

pleasure, and not misery— happiness, and 

not woe. The difficulty is that all of our 

judgments are more or less perverted. Some 

have greater wisdom than others; but there 

is none perfect, "none righteous, no, not 

one." All come short of the glorious standard 

which God has set. The difficulty is 

that we have all been born in sin and are 

all misshapen. Not only our bodies are imperfect, but 

likewise our brains are unbalanced— some one way, and 



some another. Consequently young men and maidens, 
looking forth from childhood and youth upon the problems 
of life, have various conceptions of happiness, 
pleasure, joy, and make various resolutions and endeavors 
respecting the filling of their cup with blessings— long 
life, riches, ease, honor, etc. 

The teachers of our public schools and colleges have 
a most wonderful opportunity for influencing the course 
of humanity. We rejoice in the thought that the teachers 
of the world in general are striving nobly for the fulfilment 
of gracious, benevolent ideals, and they are using 
their opportunities for the blessing and uplift of their 
pupils. And yet evidently many of them have but a slight 
appreciation of their great privileges. And some, of 
course, like the remainder of the world, are selfish, and 
think of their work from the standpoint of business— so 
much effort, so much pay. 

Fain would we encourage the teachers of the world to 
look not entirely to the reward of the present, but especially 
to the still more important reward of the future. 
It is growingly the view of Bible students that our every 
act and word, yea, and our very thoughts, our motives, 
have to do not only with our present experiences, but also 
with our future life— secured for all through the redemption 
Sacrifice at Calvary. 

Of course, the first and chief responsibility for children 
rests upon their parents. And no doubt the majority 
of parents, to some extent, realize their responsibility in 
God's sight and man's, for the children they bring into 
the world. But they labor under the difficulties of their 
own ignorance. They knew not the proper course to 
take in life themselves. Their lives have been a succession 
of blunders— some more, some less, serious. They 
presume that their children must blunder similarly, and 
that success will be largely a matter of luck. Not seeing 
the principles underlying life's experiences, they are unable 
to guide their children intelligently. Here teachers, 
moralists, religionists and humanitarians, find their opportunity. 
But how little anyone seems able to accomplish 
along any line! And how discouraged the philanthropic 
become! 

On the whole, however, a broad view, contrasting the 
present time with fifty years ago, shows that progress is 
being made in many directions. Our cities are cleaner— 
both physically and morally— so far, at least, as outward 
appearance and standards are concerned. However 
shocked and shamed we may be at occasional disclosures 
of corruption and vice, those whose memories go back 
half a century can tell that no longer do we have the vile 
"doggeries" of old, with poor sots sitting, lying, in various 
degrees of intoxication inside and outside the premise. 

R5243 : page 155 

No longer does vice flaunt itself in the face of society. 
The battle against intoxication and the social evil is making 



progress in that, at least, it has made former conditions 
impossible. 

In some States the progress has been more than in 
others. The "doggeries" have been transferred into 
gilded palaces. The sot is disdained, even by the man 
who contributes to his fall by tempting his appetite beyond 
the power of his will. 

NEW ISSUES NOW--NEW TEMPTATIONS 

Our lesson tells of a time in the history of Israel when 
the prosperous class had become wealthy— when many of 
the nation's wisest and most brilliant people had settled 
down to ease and luxury— to self-gratification. They 
considered that they had won in the battle of life, and 
would now take their ease and enjoy the fruits of their 
strife and diligence. They would let the other fellow 
do the worrying for awhile, and they would live on Easy 
Street. 

The Lord through the Prophet upbraided them, assuring 
them that He was not pleased with such a course. 
He tells them that woes are to be expected as a result. 
It was made the mission of Amos to call attention to the 
fact that aggressive selfishness had accumulated great 
riches, that the wealthy were living in great luxury, and 
that these conditions fostered pride and moral laxity 
amongst the wealthy; while the poor were being filled 
with avarice, losing respect for God and religion, for 
truth and mercy, and the desire for further knowledge 
of God. Society was on the edge of a great volcano, and 
God declared that an eruption was near at hand. Amos 
was His mouthpiece. Today's lesson is a part of the 
Message he delivered. 

PRESENT DAY CONDITIONS CORRESPOND 

Our lesson is not inappropriate to our times. Notwithstanding 
the progress that has been made in many 
good lines, and notwithstanding the philanthropic sentiments 
of many, inside and outside the Christian denominations, 
nevertheless there is danger. First of all, let 
us consider the danger of the rich. The wealth of our 
day to a certain extent reaches to the very humblest and 
scatters blessings to all. 

But the bulk of the world's wealth is in the hands of 
the few. The inordinately rich are in great danger of 
injuring themselves. Some of these cannot devise ways 
and means by which to consume even their incomes. 
Luxuries of every kind are tasted in the hope of finding 
rest, happiness, joy, peace. Not finding these, mankind 
still pursue them, seeking new avenues to happiness. 
Wealth brings increased opportunity for sin in its various 
forms, including debauchery. 

The influence upon the poor is notable. The latter, 
seeking pleasure, imagine erroneously that the rich and 
indolent are finding it, while they themselves are seeking 



in vain. Thus the poorer, surrounded by the wonderful 
blessings of our day, are often miserable, because their 
minds are discontented. They want happiness, joy, 
pleasure, and believe they can obtain these only through 
wealth. The result is that their hearts are filling with 
anger and malice, and jealousy of the rich. The way is 
thus paved for most evil and atrocious conditions, and 
many are fully persuaded that our present favorable social 
conditions are maintained only through police and military 
power, backed by all the assistance of modern times 
—the telegraph, telephones, etc. 

"WARN THEM THAT ARE RICH" 

These words of the Apostle never were more in season 
than now. Those trusting in the uncertainty of riches 
need to arouse themselves. They need to learn the lesson 

R5243 : page 156 

that the pleasure they seek lies not in the direction of 
their indulgence of self, but rather in self-sacrifice— in 
the service of others. Indeed this is the great lesson for 
all to learn— both rich and poor. While millions are seeking 
for joy, pleasure, only a remarkably few have found 
them. Those few are God's saintly people— whether 
Catholics or Protestants. 

The secret of their success in finding what others are 
still seeking for lies in the fact that they have been 
Heaven-directed, and that they have followed the guidance 
of God's Word. And the more fully they have 
heeded His instructions, the greater has been their blessing. 
God's Message to all is, Seek first God's righteousness, 
God's will, the Divine Rule or Kingdom. Father 
Adam rebelled against the Divine will, and by breaking 
his covenant precipitated upon himself an avalanche of 
imperfection and death, which has since remained on the 
world— the reign of sin and death. 

God's Word reveals that in due time He will roll away 
the curse, and bring blessings and opportunities to every 
member of our race. But meantime He would gather out 
a special class for a special purpose— the Church of the 
First-borns, whose names are written in Heaven. (Heb. 12:23.) 
These are to be highly exalted and to be used 
of the Almighty with the Savior Jesus in the great work 
of blessing the whole world. These are the Seed of 
Abraham, the Body of The Messiah, of which Jesus is the 
Head.— Galatians 3:16-29. 

The greatest privilege of the present time is to get 
into this elect company of God's saints. In order to enter 
this company, faith and obedience are necessary requisites. 
That faith must recognize Jesus as the Lamb of 
God, the Sin-bearer. It must recognize Him also as the 
Pattern and Exemplar. The reward will be to those who 
have His spirit, His disposition, and who will walk 
through the present life in His footsteps. Such will 



eventually gain with Him glory, honor, immortality— the 
Kingdom. 

In the present time, they will to the world seem to 
have the unfavorable side, a battle against the world, the 
flesh and the Adversary. The world cannot understand 
what pleasure and blessing these really enjoy because of 
the surrender of their wills to God's will, and because of 
the Spirit of the Lord, which they consequently receive. 
But these alone have the peace and joy and blessing which 
the world can neither give nor take away. What other 
men are seeking and failing to find, God's saints enjoy. 

"Peace is theirs which knows no measure, 
Joys which through all time abide." 



R5243 : page 156 

THE VICTORIES OF FAITH 

-JUNE 29.-ACTS 7:9-16; HEB. 11:20-22.- 

"This is the victory that overcometh 
the world, even our faith."— 1 John 5:4. 

WE ARE living in a day when faith is greatly 

discounted— in a day when people seem disposed 

to say, "I care not what a man believes, 

if only his life be honorable." And 

by this generally is meant that faith is of 

no consequence. Those who so hold usually 

put honor of men as the highest goal. Their 

sentiments, translated into plain English, 

would be, "With all your getting, get money 

and prosperity; for without these, no matter 

what you believe, or whom you worship, you will never 

prosper in the present life, success in which is the only 

goal now recognized by an increasing number." 

The Bible standpoint, however, is the very reverse of 
this. God's Word puts faith first, and builds character 
upon that faith. God declares that no human being can 
do perfect works. Hence He has not made works the 
standard. Faith is God's standard, and He assures us that 
whoever has the proper faith must of necessity have works 
which will correspond to his faith. In line with this 
principle, we note that God's favorites of the Bible have 
all been men of faith. Their faith did not make them 
perfect, nor were their works always acceptable in God's 
sight, but He punished them for evil works and rewarded 
them for their great faith. 

Thus we find in the Bible record that some of God's 
favorites committed grievous sins and made serious mistakes, 
and still, for all that, maintained themselves in 
God's favor, by reason of their faith. 



GOD LOVES NOT THE WICKED 

Of all religious books ever written or ever read, the 
Bible is perhaps the most candid. It tells of the mistakes 
and the sins of the very characters which it holds up as 
models and examples of men after God's own heart. Yet 
the Bible leaves no room for any one to assume that God 
loves wickedness, or that the friends of God are the depraved 
of mankind. Quite to the contrary, the highest 
possible standards of righteousness, in word, in deed and 
in thought, are inculcated, and we are distinctly told that 
full acceptance with God can be only along the lines of 
truth and righteousness. 

God tells us that we and all mankind are by nature 
sinners. He tells us that we could do nothing to clear 
away our own guilt and the sentence that stands against 
us as members of the fallen race. But He also tells us 
that He purposes to adjust that matter for us satisfactorily; 
and hence that our responsibility is not for what 
we cannot avoid, but for what we can avoid— not for what 
we cannot do, but for what we can do. He tells us that 
the foundation of all our noblest endeavors will lie along 
the lines of confidence in Him. This confidence He calls 
faith. He assures us that without faith it is impossible 
to please Him, and He has shown us this in all the 
lessons of the Bible. 

FAITH IS NOT CREDULITY 

Many make the mistake of supposing that faith is 
credulity. Under this delusion they are ready to swallow 
any and everything of a religious kind, if they are told 

R5244 : page 156 

that God says so. But this is not the faith which the 
Bible encourages. On the contrary, the Bible would have 
us know definitely the things that God has promised, and 
exercise a definite faith in those things and give no heed 
whatever to the seductive vagaries of Satan, of our fellow 
men, or of our own imagination. 

It is not for us to quarrel with those who take a 
different view of matters and who in the name of faith 
bind their followers with ignorance and superstition, and 
seek to prevent them from using their reasoning faculties. 
It is for us to address those who are feeling after God 
if haply they might find Him— those who are not content 
with superstitions, but whose hearts and minds cry out 
after the living God and His definite Word, His solemn 
statement of His will respecting us, and of His Plan, and 
of the part which we may have therein. So Jesus and the 
Apostles attempted not to teach everybody, but merely 
those who hungered and thirsted after righteousness. In 
the language of Jesus, "He that hath an ear to hear, 
let him hear." 



R5244 : page 157 

THE FAITH BEFORE CHRIST CAME 

Let us look into the past, and note the method by which 
God has all along sought His peculiar people. The first 
proclamation of God's purposes respecting our race was 
made to Abraham. God spake to Abraham, saying, "Walk 
as in My presence, and be thou perfect"— i. e., Do your 
best to be perfect. After Abraham had manifested some 
faith, God gave him further tests. When in obedience to 
those tests Abraham left his native land to live in Canaan, 
he manifested so great a faith that God called him His 
friend, and made to him the very first revelation of the 
Divine purposes in respect to humanity. 

Abraham knew that there was a curse upon the race, 
under which the whole creation was groaning, going down 
to the tomb, and God's declaration to him was that the 
time would come when, instead of the curse, He would 
send a blessing. This meant to Abraham that, instead 
men becoming more imperfect and wasting away in 
death, a change would come, by which they would be 
rescued from the dying condition, and resurrected from 
the power of the tomb. 

This was a wonderful proposition, even for God to 
make; yet Abraham, with childlike faith, believed the 
Message. God declared to him that, because of his own 
faith, He would greatly bless him and his posterity, so 
that through him as a father eventually would come 
children who would accomplish the great work of blessing 
mankind, and would rescue all from the power of sin, 
Satan and death. The briefly epitomized statement of 
all this was in the words, "In thee and in thy Seed shall 
all the families of the earth be blessed."— Genesis 28:14. 

What was it to have faith in that Promise? What 
did it mean to Abraham? Assuredly it meant that thenceforth 
Abraham's mind would take in a larger horizon— 
the world of humanity, instead of merely his own immediate 
family and flocks and herds, and his nearest 
neighbors. It meant that if God would so honor his 
posterity, Abraham would seek in everything to co-operate 
with God and that great Promise. 

For years God tested Abraham's faith. Yet he still 
believed. "His faith staggered not." After Isaac had 
been born and as yet had no child, God directed that 
this son of promise, the one in whom the whole Promise 
centered, should be sacrificed. What a test of faith! 
What a grand development of faith Abraham had acquired 
when he was ready to obey the Voice Divine, 
accounting that God was able to raise Isaac up again 
from the dead! Oh, for such a trust in God! Oh, for 
such a faith! Oh, for such an appreciation of Divine 
Power! What could not be accomplished in the world 
through the Divine Message if such faith prevailed 
amongst God's children! What would God not do for 
children who would trust Him thus! 



It was the same with Isaac and with Jacob. They 
trusted that same Promise. It influenced the whole course 
of their lives. It made them more like God. It shaped 
every interest of life. Although they understood practically 
nothing of how God would accomplish so great 
a blessing, their faith laid hold upon the fact. From 
their posterity God would raise up a holy people to be 
His agency, His channel, for instructing the world, ruling 
the world, uplifting the world, resurrecting the dead, 
bringing mankind back to all that was lost through 
Adam's disobedience. 

Their faith might have had plenty of opportunities 
for stumbling, if it had been weaker. If they had been 
more worldly-wise, they might have said, How can God 
do this thing and yet be just? Having once pronounced 
a sentence, how can He clear the guilty? But their faith 
wavered not. In their hearts they said, "God has promised; 
and what God has promised, He will do, and He will 
have His own way of accomplishing it." 

By and by, the nation of Israel as a whole was called 
the people of God. The nation as a whole entered into 
a Covenant with God, and He with them, through Moses, 
the mediator of the Law Covenant. Israel was impulsed 
by faith— faith in the Promise made to Abraham that God 
would use his posterity and through it bless all people, all 
of Adam's race— the living and the dead. 

The Covenant of Sinai pledged the people of Israel 
that they would be a holy nation, that they would keep 
God's Law blamelessly. God covenanted that in that 
event He would fulfil in them the Promise made to 
Abraham. God knew that imperfect human beings could 
not keep His perfect Law. But He would let them try; 
He would let them learn the lesson; He would through 
that lesson give instruction to the angels respecting His 
own righteousness. He would also through it give instruction 
to Spiritual Israel, whom later He would develop 
and through whom the blessings actually would come. 
This St. Paul explains, saying, "The Law Covenant was 
added because of transgressions, until the promised Seed 
should come."— Galatians 3:19. 

In other words, God started this work with Israel, in 
a typical manner, long centuries before the real Spiritual 
Israel would be developed. But He did not thereby do 
injury to the people who had covenanted to keep the 
Law, but who were unable to do so. On the contrary, 
they as a people were blessed by their endeavors to keep 
that Law, and blessed also by the chastisements which 
came upon them because of their failures and lack of faith. 

But God especially blessed all of that people who 
shared Abraham's faith, so that the Apostle Paul could 
enumerate, in addition to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, a 
considerable number who pleased God because of their 
faith, long centuries before Christ, the Spiritual Seed of 
Abraham came. Those Ancient Worthies, although they 
will not be the Seed of Abraham in the highest sense, on 
the spirit plane, will be the seed of blessing on the earthly 



plane— the channel through which the heavenly blessings 
will ultimately be extended to all nations. 

What was it that impulsed the Jewish people during 
all those centuries past? Was it not faith in God— faith 
that He would fulfil the Promise made to Abraham? It 
surely was! And it is that Promise that still actuates 
such of the Jews as have not lost their faith— such of 
them as are still Jews. Those who have lost the faith 
of Abraham are no longer in any sense of the word related 
to the Promise; for the Promise was according to faith. 

St. Paul speaks sympathetically of the Jewish nation, 
in respect to that original Promise which God made to 
them, saying: "Unto which Promise our twelve tribes, 
instantly serving God day and night, hope to come." 
(Acts 26:7.) And all the Jews, in proportion as they 
still maintain that hope, may still expect to come to a 
realization of all and more than they ever dreamed of. 

FAITH SINCE CHRIST CAME 

The coming of Christ did not change the Divine Purpose, 
and therefore did not change the faith of God's 
people. Jesus and the Apostles believed and taught the 
very Gospel which, St. Paul says, God preached in the 
beginning to Abraham. (Galations 3:8.) The Apostolic 
Message also was that all the families of the earth were 
to be blessed through the Seed of Abraham. But there 
was an additional feature then to be proclaimed and to 
be believed; viz., that God had begun the work of providing 
this Seed of Abraham, The Messiah— that God 
had sent the Logos, His Son, into the world, that He 

R5244 : page 158 

might become the Seed of Abraham on the spirit plane, 
and eventually fulfil every feature of the original Promise. 

All the Jews were in expectation of the Messiah, 
but they were not all Israelites indeed; they did not all 
have the proper faith. God preferred, therefore, to allow 
some of them to remain in a measure of blindness on 
the subject, while others were granted a special anointing 
of the eyes of their understanding, their eyes of faith. 
To this class Jesus said, "To you it is given to know the 
mysteries of the Kingdom of God"— the Messianic Kingdom, 
through which the Seed of Abraham is to bless all 
the families of the earth. 

Then came another step of faith. The early disciples 
said: We desire to believe that Jesus, the Son of God, 
is the foretold Seed of Abraham, but we do not see Him 
doing the work of blessing the world. Instead of reigning 
in triumph to dispense to the world the blessings secured 
by His sacrifice, He has gone to Heaven. How shall 
we understand this? 

THE MYSTERY-CHRIST IN YOU 



The answer of God through the Apostles was that 
"the faith once delivered to the saints" was still the same, 
but that now, under the guidance of the Holy Spirit, they 
were to understand that The Messiah would not be one 
person, but many persons— not Jesus alone would be the 
Seed of Abraham, but Jesus as the Head and the Church 

R5245 : page 158 

as His members, or Body, would be that Seed. St. Paul 
says, "Ye, brethren, as Isaac was, are the children of 
Promise." Jesus was represented by the head of Isaac, 
the Church was represented by the body of Isaac, in that 
figure. It has taken the entire Gospel Age to develop 
the Body of Christ, the Church. 

Under another figure, Jesus was represented in Isaac, 
and the Church was represented in Rebecca, his bride. 
According to this figure, the antitypical Isaac has entered 
into glory, but waits for the development of the antitypical 
Rebecca. At the appointed and appropriate time 
He will come, the Seed of Abraham, and receive His 
Bride to Himself, and they twain will be one. And 
through the One, through the Kingdom of Glory, will 
come to all the families of the earth the blessing promised 
nearly four thousand years ago to Abraham. 

This is "the faith once delivered to the saints," the 
hope set before us in the Gospel— the faith that God will 
use the Seed of Abraham to bless all humanity, and the 
hope that we by faithful perseverance and trust may 
become joint-heirs with Jesus, the Redeemer, in all that 
glorious inheritance of the Messianic Kingdom. 

Let us not doubt the Wisdom of God in the arrangement 
which He has made, and which He has caused to 
be set forth in the Scriptures; viz., that this faith, based 
upon the Abrahamic Promise, is the Power of God by 
which it is His will that all His people shall be sanctified- 
separated so far as possible from the world and from 
sin; sanctified to Himself in Christ Jesus, their Lord. 
This is "the faith once delivered to the saints." This is 
the faith which enables us to gain the victory over the 
spirit of the world, and to be separate, sanctified to God, 
for service here and hereafter. 



R5245 : page 158 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS 
MORE ABOUT HIGHWAY OF HOLINESS 

Question.— Will any one be forced, or compelled, to 
walk up the Highway of Holiness? 

Answer.— At present there is no Highway of Holiness; 
consequently no one is walking on it during the 
Gospel Age. There will be no such Highway until the 



Great King takes control of affairs, overthrows the present 
order of things and sets up the Kingdom of Heaven. 
Then a Highway of Holiness will be prepared, upon which 
the righteous can walk. During the Gospel Age there 
are but two ways— the Narrow Way and the Broad Way. 
(Matt. 7:13,14.) The former is for those who desire to 
walk in the footsteps of Jesus, and is a steep, rugged path. 
The latter is the road that leads to destruction and is a broad 
way on which the human race are hurrying to the tomb. 

Those who walk acceptably in the footsteps of the 
Master must do so willingly. Theirs must be a voluntary 
devotion. To be forced is not at all the thought. The 
Little Flock will thus run the Narrow Way; but the Great 
Company will have experiences which will force them, 
not to take one special way, but to decide for themselves, 
what course they will pursue. There is a difference between 
forcing a man to go aboard a vessel, and bringing 
certain influences to bear which will cause him to desire 
to do so. 

In the next Age, when the world's Highway of Holiness 
shall have been opened up (Isa. 35:8), force will be 
used to bring all mankind to a knowledge of the Truth 
respecting God's provision for them. Wrong doing will 
then be punished with corrective stripes. But it would be 
far from right to suppose that mankind will be driven or 
forced along the Highway of Holiness. All who go up 
thereon must exert themselves; for it will be an upward 
way. Our Savior stated the Father's sentiment respecting 
all to whom He will ever grant everlasting life. His 
words were, "But the hour cometh, and now is, when the 
true worshipers shall worship the Father in spirit and 
in truth; for the Father seeketh such to worship Him." 



"PERFECT LOVE CASTETH OUT FEAR" 

Question.— What kind of fear is referred to in the 
text, "There is no fear in love, but perfect love casteth 
out fear."— I John 4:18. 

Answer.— Fear is a mental condition which is begotten 
of uncertainty. There are some things which we ought to 
fear, and some which we need not fear. The Adversary 
seems to take advantage of the fallen condition of the 
race, and to cause them to fear God; for it is natural to 
avoid whomsoever we fear. Mankind realize instinctively 
that they are sinners by nature and that there is a penalty 
for sin. Taking advantage of this fear of the consequences 
of sin, the Adversary tries to instill in them a dread of 
God. He pictures before their imperfect minds a God 
who is unjust, over-severe in His dealings with sin and 
the sinner, for whom He has prepared a place of everlasting 
torture. 

As we gradually come to a clear knowledge of God 
and of the principles by which He regulates the universe, 
we lose this improper fear; and in its stead comes a love 



for God and a realization that He has love for us. Our 
love for Him grows in proportion as we perceive that He 
loves mankind, and has made provision for them whereby 
they may have an opportunity for everlasting life. After 
we have come to love Him perfectly, all fear in the sense 
of dread is cast out. 

Our knowledge and love should not, however, cast out 
the fear of displeasing God; for proper fear (reverence) 
must never be cast out. The more we have of reverential 
love, the more of the proper fear we shall have. Who 
would not fear to offend a brother or a neighbor whom he 
loved and appreciated? Much more should we dread 
offending our just, wise, loving God. 

R5245 : page 159 

The principle that "perfect love casteth out fear" 
should operate between husband and wife, between parents 
and children. The wife who fears her husband cannot 
be as happy as she would be if there were perfect love; 
and so also children who are in dread of either, or both, 
of their parents cannot love them with true filial affection. 
Each should fear to wound or offend the other, and should 
strive to have that perfect love which God is pleased to 
have all of His intelligent creatures exercise. 



RIGHTEOUS JUDGMENT AND CRITICISM 

Question.— How may we distinguish between "righteous 
judgment" and criticism? 

Answer.— The Lord says, "Judge not according to the 
appearance, but judge righteous judgment." (John 7:24.) 
St. Paul says, "Therefore judge nothing before the time, 
until the Lord come." (I Cor. 4:5.) The question then 
arises, What is "righteous judgment"? A righteous judgment 
is a right decision. But since we cannot read the 
heart, how can we render a right decision? The Scriptures 
answer that we cannot read one another's hearts 
and therefore should not attempt to judge them. 

If, then, we cannot judge each other's hearts, motives 
or intentions, what can we judge? The answer of Scripture 
is that we may judge each other's conduct. If we 
see one of the Lord's people doing something improper, 
we might say, "Dear Brother (or Sister), your conduct 
would seem to be contrary to the Word of God, and to be 
bringing forth bad fruitage." If that person should reply, 
"It does not seem to me that I am doing wrong," we must 
not judge or condemn that one's heart. But we should judge 
between good and evil conduct, and at the proper time and 
place call attention to the matter and leave it there. 

There is a difference between judging the heart, which 
we have no right to do, and judging the conduct, which 
is right to do. But it does not always follow that our 
judgment of another's conduct must always be right. We 



are all prone to make mistakes. 

If we should come to a brother and say, "Dear 
Brother, your conduct seems to be wrong, but I am sure 
that you want to do right. Will you explain?" He may 
be able to show us that the fruitage was good when we 
thought it bad. We may have misunderstood the matter. 
We are not to condemn our brother, but to go directly to 
him and get his view. Then if we cannot agree, we should 
tell him how it seems to us, and ask him to judge his own 
heart. We can do no more. 



SETTING MEMBERS IN THE BODY 

Question.— What is signified by God's "setting the 
members every one of them in the Body, as it hath pleased 
Him "?-I Corinthians 12:18. 

Answer.— In the present time there is a Church of 
Christ on probation. We sometimes say that we are members 
of the Church Militant; but to be a member of the 
Church Militant will not prove that we shall be in the 
Church Triumphant. Only those who are "faithful unto 
death" will be in the Church Triumphant. St. Paul, 
whom God had set in a very high position in the Church 
feared lest he might become a castaway. He said, "I keep 
under my body, and bring it into subjection; lest that by 
any means, when I have preached to others, I myself 
should be a castaway." (I Cor. 9:27.) Various privileges 
and opportunities are granted to us while in the flesh, 
and our acceptance in the end and our participation in the 
glory beyond will depend upon our faithfulness here. 

The Apostle says that the various members, "fitly 
framed together, grow into an holy Temple in the Lord." 
(Eph. 2:21.) We may not use this figure too literally or 
we may get into confusion. The stones in the Temple differ 
to some extent one from the other. In what is called 
"random range work" building there are places for little 
stones and places for larger stones. This might, in some 

R5246 : page 159 

respects, represent our being a larger or a smaller stone in 
the Temple— representing the privileges or honor which 
we may have beyond the veil. 

St. Paul also says that he was trying to do much more, 
that he was trying to have a larger share in the trials 
and self-denials, in order that he might have a larger 
share in the work beyond. This did not mean that he 
desired self-aggrandizement, or that he was either proud 
or self-seeking. And we shall not be so if we would attain 
that to which God would have us attain— the glorious 
character-likeness of our Master. 



"JERUSALEM... MOTHER OF US ALL" 

Question.— In the text, "Jerusalem which is above is 
free, which is the mother of us all" (Galations 4:26), who 
are meant by "us," and how is the spiritual Jerusalem the 
"mother of us all"? 

Answer.— The Apostle here uses a figure of speech 
which is common in the Scriptures, and in which a city is 
referred to as the mother of its inhabitants; for instance, 
"daughters of Jerusalem," "daughters of Zion," "Sodom 
and her daughters," etc. The "us" class mean the saints 
of God. The citizenship of the saints is in Heaven— in 
the Heavenly Jerusalem, which will not be built until the 
First Resurrection. By faith we look forward and speak 
of that promised condition and of our citizenship therein. 

The Church is developed under the same Covenant-Mother 
as was Christ; for we are His members. His was 
a covenant of sacrifice. "Gather My saints together 
unto Me; those that have made a covenant with Me by 
sacrifice." (Psa. 50:5.) The Man Christ Jesus entered 
into a covenant with the Father, which meant the sacrifice 
of His flesh, His earthly nature. As a reward for this 
sacrifice, the Father made Him a New Creature of the 
Divine nature— "far above angels," constituting Him the 
Great Messiah who shall bless the world. 

Carrying out the Father's Plan, our Lord imputes His 
merit to such as now follow His example, and walk in His 
footsteps, performing the same covenant of sacrifice. If 
these are faithful, they will share in the great work of 
Messiah in blessing the world, and will constitute the New 
Jerusalem, the Millennial Kingdom. By faith we are its 
children. Even now, our citizenship is in Heaven. 



BROAD UNSECTARIAN QUESTIONS 

The following are the questions usually put by Brother 
Russell when receiving candidates for Water Immersion. 
It will be noticed that they are on broad lines— questions 
which any Christian, whatever his confession, should be 
able to answer in the affirmative without hesitation if he 
is suitable to be acknowledged as a member of the Church 
of Christ: 

(1) Have you repented of sin with such restitution 
as you are able, and are you trusting in the merit of 
Christ's sacrifice for the forgiveness of your sins and the 
basis of your justification? 

(2) Have you made a full consecration of yourself 
with all the powers that you possess— talent, money, time, 
influence— all to the Lord, to be used faithfully in His 
service, even unto death? 

(3) On the basis of these confessions, we acknowledge 
you as a member of the Household of Faith, and give to 
you as such the right hand of fellowship, not in the name 
of any sect or party or creed, but in the name of the 



Redeemer, our glorified Lord, and His faithful followers. 



page 161 

VOL. XXXIV JUNE 1 No. 1 1 
A. D. 1913-A. M. 6041 



CONTENTS 

The Transforming Influence of Thought 163 

Importance of Right Thinking 163 

The Church On Trial for Life 164 

The Influence of Thought Upon Health 165 

Earthly Loves vs. Heavenly Love 165 

"Keep Thy Heart With All Diligence" 166 

"Let Your Moderation Be Known" 167 

"Meditate On These Things" 167 

Service of the Brethren a Proper Zeal 168 

The Preparation for the Divine Nature 168 

Moses, the Goodly Child 169 

Co-operating With God's Providence 169 

Aided and Protected 170 

God's Instrument In Preparation 170 

Moses, Jethro's Shepherd 171 

1913— General Conventions 162, 172 

Interesting Items and Letters 172 

Report of the Glasgow Class I.B.S.A 173 

Berean Lessons and Testimony Meetings 175 

Berean Questions in Scripture Studies 175 

page 162 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



EXCURSIONS TO PERTLE SPRINGS 

Friends desiring to go to Pertle Springs via St. Louis or 
by Special Train from Kansas City should address Laymens 
Home Missionary Movement of either city. 

EXCURSIONS-TEXAS TO HOT SPRINGS 

We are advised that the I.& G.N.R.R. will furnish 
tourist sleepers to Hot Springs from San Antonio, May 31, 
train 4, 2 P.M.; also from Galveston 2:40 P.M., same date, 
at special rates. Those desiring accommodations may address 
Laymens Home Missionary Movement, Wallis, Texas. 

EXCURSIONS TO LOS ANGELES AND SAN FRANCISCO 

A special party will leave San Francisco for Los Angeles 
Convention on the Southern Pacific, Valley Line, 
train No. 50, June 10th, at 4:40 P.M., arriving at Los 
Angeles 8:15 next morning. 

A special party will leave Los Angeles for San Francisco 
Convention on the Southern Pacific, Valley Line, 
June 15th, at 7:15 P.M., arriving at San Francisco next 
morning at 9 A.M. 

All friends attending these Conventions or the One 
Day Conventions following them, at Portland, Tacoma, 
Seattle, Victoria, Vancouver, Calgary, Edmonton and 
Regina, should obtain from the Ticket Agent a Certificate-Receipt 
showing that they paid full fare going to Convention 
of the Laymens Home Missionary Movement. This 
Certificate-Receipt, signed by Convention Secretary, will 
entitle the owner to a return ticket at one-third (1/3) 
fare, over same railroad. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR JULY 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. 
At the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns 
for July follow: (1) 165; (2) 267; (3) 130; (4) 58; (5) 95; 
(6) 82; (7) 101; (8) 299; (9) 4; (10) 326; (11) 145; (12) 293; 
(13) Vow; (14) 246; (15) 7; (16) 313; (17) 168; (18) 149; 
(19) 259; (20) 15; (21) 208; (22) 222; (23) 320; (24) 260; (25) 
267; (26) 43; (27) 155; (28) 166; (29) 305; (30) 120; (31) 209. 



R5246 : page 163 



THE TRANSFORMING INFLUENCE OF THOUGHT 

"As he thinketh in his heart, so is he." (Proverbs 23:7.) 

"Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out of it are the issues of 

life."— Proverbs 4:23. 

THE HEART is one of the most important organs 
of our body. If it ceases to work, death 
is sure to follow. The blood that flows 
through the heart constitutes the life, the 
energy of the body. If the blood current is 
interrupted for a little while, a clot is 
formed. This is so much of a preparation 
for death. There must be a continual stream 
of blood circulating through our bodies to 
keep life there. 

In view of this important function of our natural 
hearts, the Bible very properly uses the heart, the center 
of life, as a symbol of the center of our affections, including 
the will. Our will has to do with everything we do. 
Whoever of the Lord's people wills to seek more and more 
to purify himself becomes more and more alive. If we are 
pure in heart, we resolve to live righteously and soberly in 
the present life. Whoever appreciates the principle that 
right is right, and wrong is wrong will desire to live right 
—whether Jew or Gentile or the Church of God. 

The Church, having accepted God's terms, have made a 
consecration of their lives to Him. They have engaged to 
fight a good fight against the world, the flesh and the 
Devil. They are under special obligations as New Creatures. 
Their hopes and ambitions are separate from those 
of the world. They are therefore doubly responsible in 
respect to their hearts, which represent their inmost 
sentiments. 

According to a man's innermost sentiment, so is he. 
As a man thinketh in his heart, so is his real character. 
What is your real will? What are your real sentiments? 
Not, What words do you use? not, What are your actions? 
but, What is the motive underlying all these? 

The New Creature is to be God-like, spiritual, eventually 
of the spirit nature in glory— perfect. But before it attains 
that perfection, the heart of the New Creature is required 
to prove its loyalty. Some will be overcomes in 
a higher sense than others, but none will be overcomers 
except those who are true, loyal, pure. If, therefore, we 
have made a consecration to God, it would be our endeavor 
that our hearts, our desires, our motives be perfect. 
The only proper attitude is to confess our imperfections, 
if we are wrong. God expects us to be loyal of heart. 
And that loyalty of heart should reach out and control the 
whole life. 

If our thoughts are not according to our ideals, we 
should endeavor to make them so. We should put away 
anger, malice, hatred, strife, and all such works of the 
flesh and the Devil. With some people, in some conditions, 
these thoughts go very deep. It is not the transitory 



thoughts of the mind— the passing thoughts— that are 
meant in our text. Even people of very bad character may 
at times have deep emotions. The eyes of some persons 
will be suffused with tears over some trivial matter. This 
makes them appear to be very tender-hearted, and yet 
their lives may show that they would as easily be moved to 
some vicious deed as to sympathy. 

We see this fact illustrated in the conduct of mobs. 
The people who hailed Jesus as King were five days later 
crying, "Crucify Him!" Those who shortly before had 
seemed to be so appreciative of Him appeared to lose that 
appreciation. 

IMPORTANCE OF RIGHT THINKING 

In reality a man is not always what on the surface he 
seems to be. His real character is deep down below— the 
purpose of his life. These are not the mere transitory 
thoughts, but the deep fissures of thought, if we may so 
designate those which involve the whole life. The Scriptures 
bring to our attention the fact that we are to be 
transformed by the renewing of our minds— by having 
them made over.— Rom. 12:2. 

The Apostle, speaking of some very vicious traits of 
character, says, "And such were some of you, but ye are 
washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, in the 
name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God." 
(1 Cor. 6:11.) This cleansing, this sanctifying, comes not 
merely through the reading of the Truth, or the mental 
application of the Truth, but through the heart— thinking 
on the Truth. This heart- thinking, these deep resolutions, 
are ours as Christians, and are to be guided by certain 
principles. These have to do with the real man 
whom God is considering— not the old creature, more or 
less blemished, according to the degree of depravity. God 
looks at the New Creature. 

These deep heart convictions and purposes constitute 
a transformation of character. This is the man's real 
condition, and so is he. If he have some transitory emotion 
of anger or of malice, it would not be his real thought, 
his real intention. Therefore it would not be he, but his 
old nature, temporarily asserting itself. As a New Creature, 
he is to watch his words, his thoughts, his actions. 
If a transitory, wrong thought should pass through his 
mind, it would not be the thought of his heart. And he 
as a New Creature, should stop it, put it away, so that it 

R5247 : page 164 

may not take root in his heart, and choke out better 
sentiments. 

This right thinking of the heart has very much to do 
with the whole life. The Apostle says that we are transformed 
by the renewing of our minds, to know what is the 
perfect will of God. This is the Christian's standpoint. 
How glad we are that our Heavenly Father is judging us 



from this standpoint! How glad we are that He is able 
to read the heart, that He knows our hearts, that He 
knows our inmost thoughts! 

At one time we might have thought that we were doing 
God service when we were not. We show our loyalty to 
God by giving attention to His Word, that we may know 
what is His will. The more we study God's Word, the 
more we receive the spirit of the Truth, and the more we 
appreciate it. And in proportion as we understand God's 
regulations and desire to be guided by them, our hearts 
will become purified. Then the more care shall we take of 
our hands, what they shall do; and of our tongues, what 
they shall say. Thus we shall keep our hearts— submit 
our wills to the will of God. 

The will is a part of our heart, just as the rudder is a 
part of the ship. The new will is the rudder to steer us 
this way or that way. The more we understand the 
Word of the Lord, the better we understand how to guide 
our lives. Therefore we are to keep our hearts and purify 
them by the knowledge of God's Truth, the study of God's 
Truth. To do this, the will must ever be on the alert, 
watching with prayer and thanksgiving. 

THE CHURCH ON TRIAL FOR LIFE 

Some one may ask, why should we do all this? In a 
general way we might answer, that we may do right— 
because right is right. But that reason is not sufficient 
for us. While all appreciate the superiority of right over 
wrong, yet in our fallen condition we need to have some 
inducements to action. So the Lord puts certain inducements 
before us. He says, "If your heart is right, I desire 
to give you everlasting life. If your heart is wrong, 
then you will not be of the kind to whom I will grant 
this boon. You will die the Second Death." 

Six thousand years ago there was a trial. Our first 
father, Adam, was tried, and failed. Consequently we 
have no right to life. But God has arranged through our 
Lord Jesus that every member of Adam's race may have 
another trial. The Father is willing to give life everlasting 
to all who love righteousness. 

So we thankfully accept this provision, and say, 
"Heavenly Father, wilt Thou indeed give us another opportunity 
for gaining everlasting life? We would love to 
have that life! We are very thankful for the opportunity! 
We love righteousness! If we are loyal to the principles of 
righteousness, shall we get everlasting life? It is our desire 
that Thy will be done in us— even that we love 
righteousness and hate iniquity." "Very well, then," the 
Heavenly Father says, "I will put you into the School of 
Christ, where you will learn righteousness." 

Day by day we are learning in the School of Christ. 
Our different experiences are a part of the general instructions 
for those who love righteousness and who desire 
to be taught of the Lord. The issue of our trial will 
be life or death. The world is not now on trial. There 



is no possibility for the world to gain life as yet. During 
this Gospel Age the Church are the only ones who 
are under this Covenant of Sacrifice— who are on trial, 
therefore, for everlasting life or everlasting death. In 
the next Age, the world will have their opportunity for 
learning obedience. Then the issue for them will be life 
or death. 

God says, "I have set before you life and death, blessing 
or cursing." There is a curse for every one who loves 
unrighteousness; there is a blessing for every one who 
loves righteousness. So during the thousand years of 
Christ's Reign the world will be on trial for everlasting 
life or everlasting death. All who are obedient will get 
everlasting life. But all who have the spirit of Satan will 
be destroyed in the Second Death. 

Only those who are more than mere overcomers will 
be of the Royal Priesthood. There is no excuse for our getting 
into the Great Company. Let us keep our hearts with 
all diligence. Let us watch our hearts. If they are in full 
harmony with God's will, we shall have little trouble with 
our tongues. "Out of the abundance of the heart the 
mouth speaketh."-Math. 12:34. 

Our heart is the most wonderful organ of our body. 
The tongue is the most subtle of all our members. The 
Lord takes our words as an index of our heart condition. 
But since we are imperfect, it is not possible for us to be 
faultless in word and deed. Yet we are diligently and 
faithfully to seek to attain the perfect mastery of our 
words. We should be especially on guard in respect to 
evil speaking. Every tendency toward slander is to be 
checked. Whoever of us is reviled is not to revile again. 
These tendencies belong to the old nature. To be pleasing 
to the Master, we are to keep our hearts free from every 
form of evil. If this be done, the heart is rightly instructed 
of the Lord. Then we will know that we must 
make good whatever is wrong. We are bound, thoroughly 
bound, to make it good to the best of our ability. Our 
heart must keep itself right. 

DEFICIENCY IN MODERN EDUCATION 

This same principle is applicable to the whole world, 
though not on a scale so far reaching. Mankind are influenced 
by thought, by experience. So vicious children 
may be trained up under favorable environments to become 
useful citizens. We have seen where, even with 
people of the world, good resolutions to live honestly, 
justly, soberly, have had a blessed influence on the life, 
making noble men and women, although these may not be 
Christians. 

We have also seen the reverse of this— those who were 
criminals, but not so of necessity. Some of them were 
born under good conditions; but have read bad books and 
meditated upon sinful things. Thus the thoughts of their 
hearts have been evil instead of good. Thus they have become 
inclined toward evil. As they allow their minds to 



ran in a certain direction, and allow these thoughts to become 
deeply rooted in their hearts, some of them become 
very vicious. 

We were deeply impressed with this fact in noticing 
the photographs of the four gunmen recently convicted of 
murder in New York. Had we seen their pictures before 
knowing who they were, we should have said, "Those are 
strong characters." Their hearts had gone wrong, doubtless 
because of wrong education and a failure to appreciate 
the principles of righteousness. This seems to be 
largely the case at the present time. Very few see the 
principles of righteousness at all. The majority are 
swayed by superstition, by fear and by hopes which are 
more or less ephemeral, more or less deceptive. 

So we see that the general education of our day is 
lacking in a very important respect. Although the schools 
have taken away to some extent the veil of ignorance and 
superstition, yet they are not giving instead the full, 
proper view of righteousness. This is because in a general 
way the Divine character and the Divine laws are 
being ignored. There is an attempt to teach mortality entirely 

R5247 : page 165 

aside from the Divine Law. But this course seems 
to be undermining faith— separating the pupils from faith 
in a Supreme Creator. Thus we see that while the world 
is making wonderful progress in education, yet it is not 
reaching its own ideals. The human mind in its fallen and 
perverted condition, is unable to see the subject of morality 
from a standpoint which educators would put before it. 

The human mind needs the influence of its higher organs 
to assist the lower organs. Hence, although these 
educational influences are beneficial in many respects, yet 
they are very injurious in others. They do not inculcate 
veneration for God and for the Divine will. Therefore 
people are unable to grasp the best principles. The only 
persons who are in the right attitude are those who are 
seeking to have new thoughts, to have thoughts conformed 
to the Divine arrangement, taking the mind of Christ instead 
of their own imaginations and judgment, and thus 
growing up into Him in all things. This is our happy 
position. 

INFLUENCE OF THOUGHT UPON HEALTH 

There is another view of the text— "As a man thinketh 
in his heart, so is he"— given by Christian Scientist; 
namely, that according to our minds, so be it unto us. 
They get some good out of this view. They say that if 
one thinks about kind, noble things, he will be influenced 
thus. We think our Christian Scientist friends are partly 
right and partly wrong. They hold that if one thinks 
himself to be well, he will be well; that if one thinks 
himself to be sick, he will be sick. There is a measure 
of truth in this view. 



One-half the people in the world are sick because they 
think they are so. If they thought, not about their aches 
and pains, but about more helpful things, they would no 
doubt be better and stronger in every way. The mind has 
something to do with our condition. Whoever mopes about 
a headache will undoubtedly make it worse. Whoever 
tries to put the thought of his condition away and to give 
attention to other things will undoubtedly help himself. 

The less we think about our aches and pains the better 
for us. If we talk about them we aggravate them. It is 
also bad to exercise too much sympathy with each other. 
Of course, there are times when it would be cruel not to 
show sympathy. But it is not wise to encourage those 
who are weak to complain about their condition. We become 
stronger in proportion as we try to avoid thinking of 
our ailments. 

The mistake made by our Christian Scientist friends is 
that they carry this principle too far. Thinking ourselves 
sound will not make us so. And it would not be right to 
lie about the matter, and to say that we have no aches and 
pains when we have them. The middle line is the one 
which the Bible encourages— not to say that we have 
neither aches nor pains, not to say that death is "mortal 
error," and that there is no death. But we can help the 

R5248 : page 165 

dying process along, or we can seek to cultivate the more 
helpful thoughts, and thus exercise a helpful influence 
upon ourselves and others. 

One notices this principle in action in a sick room. 
Some people will go into the sick room, express a great 
deal of sympathy, and leave the sick person under the 
impression that he is in a much worse condition than he 
really is; whereas they should have helped the person by 
encouraging remarks. It is not necessary to say to the 
sick, "You are looking extremely bad!" But we might 
say, "Are you feeling better this morning? Have you 
had a good rest?" Many people do not know how much 
they do rest, and do not feel thankful enough. So we 
might suggest, "I hope you are feeling thankful to the 
Lord, and that you are glad because of this beautiful day. 
See how the sun shines into your room! Hear the birds 
sing!" The condition of some people when they are sick 
is that of "groanings which cannot be uttered." Sick people 
need some one to bring sunshine into the room. 

So, then, dear friends, let us resolve that since we have 
covenanted with the Lord to become dead to the old life, 
to the old ambitions, to the things of the past, these are to 
be all given over. We will wish to think as the Lord 
would have us think, to view all the affairs of life as 
He would have us view them, and to be influenced by the 
ambitions which He sets before us in His Word. Thus 
doing, we shall as New Creatures grow into the character-likeness 
of the Lord. 



R5248 : page 165 

EARTHLY LOVES VS. HEAVENLY LOVE 

JOURNALISTS realize that for some years 

past the civilized world has entered upon an 

epoch of passion, lust and crime. Editors, 

especially of the better journals, realizing 

that the publication of details tends to stir 

up anger and lustful passions, are unitedly 

suppressing these. Their wisdom is to be 

commended, especially in view of the fact 

that their business managers, knowing the 

depraved taste of the people, realize that 

the more nauseating the details, the greater the interest 

of the public in general, and the greater their appreciation 

of the journal which panders to their taste. 

There are different ways of accounting for this wave 
of passion and crime. Our enemies would doubtless charge 
that our teachings, favoring the idea that the Bible Hell is 
not a place of eternal torment, but the tomb, are setting at 
liberty human passion by taking off the brake of fear. 
Our reply is that the vicious do not receive our message. 
As the Scriptures declare, "None of the wicked shall understand, 
but the wise [in wisdom from on High] shall 
understand." The viciously wicked are not sufficiently interested 
to find out what we believe or teach. Their beliefs 
are not built upon the Word of God, but upon the 
general weight of denominational prestige. 

On the contrary, our charge is that the general unbelief 
in God and in the Bible— unbelief in any kind of Hell 
or Heaven— more likely has to do with this wave of crime. 
For the past thirty years our great colleges have been turning 
out agnostics by the thousands. Nearly every graduate 
is an agnostic. The influence of their unbelief in the 
Bible pervades every stratum of society, because of their 
influence in the higher walks of life— in the pulpit, in social 
circles, etc. And be it noted that the crimes of our 
day are frequently committed by college-bred men and 
women, and by others who, under their influence, discredit 
the Bible as the Word of God. 

But we believe that there is something peculiar to our 
time, in addition to the foregoing. Ours is a day of great 
mental activity in every direction— a day of push, of feverish 
excitement, along all lines. Highly seasoned foods and 
drinks whet the physical appetite, and lead on to spicy 
desires in every direction. The strain is too great for our 
race, considering its weakness, its degeneration attained 
during the past six thousand years. But whatever is the 
philosophy, the fact remains that the world is in a very 
feverish condition, in a condition of intense excitement, 
easily aroused to expression along every line— anger, 
malice, hatred, strife, envy, pride. 



God's consecrated people, although not of the world, 

R5248 : page 166 

are in the world. Although they are New Creatures, with 

new wills, "sanctified in Christ Jesus," nevertheless they 

"have this treasure in earthen vessels." Their earthen vessels 

are subject to like passions and storms to those which 

assail the world in general. If we are right in supposing 

that the Adversary himself and the fallen angels have 

much to do with the excitement of passions in wrong directions, 

then we may feel sure also that these spirit adversaries 

would be especially on the alert to entrap and 

ensnare the consecrated followers of the Lord. As St. 

Paul expresses it, "We are not ignorant of his devices" 

(2 Cor. 2:1 1), and we realize that flesh and blood is not 

competent for a struggle against the "wicked spirits in influential 

positions." (Eph. 6:12.) The Lord's people, 

therefore, need to be on the alert more than do others, 

even though all need to be specially alert now to withstand 

the evil tendencies of our day, which all admit, 

however they may explain them. 

"KEEP THY HEART WITH ALL DILIGENCE" 

The secret of the Christian's strength consists in his 
having given up his own will— the will of his own flesh— 
and having taken instead of it the will of Christ. His 
danger consists of the endeavor of his flesh to override the 
decision of his new will. The flesh covertly insists that 
this and that and the other things are not wrong, because 
they are natural. It insists that its rights should be conserved; 
it even sometimes insists that the New Creature 
would commit a crime in mortifying the flesh, with its 
affections and desires.— Col. 3:5; Gal. 5:24. 

The New Creature cannot rely upon the suggestions 
of the flesh in every matter. Experience teaches it that 
it would be deceived and ensnared if it gave heed to the 
counsels of the flesh. Hence the New Creature must rely 
wholly upon the Lord and His counsel— the Word of 
God. The New Creature's reasoning upon any subject 
must be along the lines of Divine instruction. He dare 
not trust his own judgment, the judgment of his own flesh 
in the matter; neither dare he trust the judgment of fellowmen, 
who might be more or less influenced by their 
fleshly minds, however conscientious, and however proper 
they might intend their advice to be. The New Creature 
must hear from the Word of God the outline of his proper 
course, and must follow. He dare not deviate from it, 
not knowing what dire results might follow. 

As the Christian advances in spiritual development, in 
control of the flesh, in the appreciation of the mind of 
Christ, he certainly does, in one sense of the word, become 
"strong in the Lord and in the power of His might" 
—the power of the Holy Spirit. He becomes more gentle, 
more meek, more patient, more brotherly-kind, more 



loving. He is thus developing the fruits and growing in 
the graces of the Holy Spirit and in character-likeness to 
the Master and Pattern. But his dangers are not over; 
for he finds the Adversary and the flesh ready to attack 
him along new lines— totally different from those of the 
attacks when he first gave his heart to the Lord. 

These later attacks are along the lines of love— the very 
climax of spiritual attainment. As a New Creature, he 
desires that his love shall be pure, holy, spiritual. He desires 
that his love for the brethren shall be along the same 
lines as is his love for the Father and for the Son and for 
the holy angels. But as he attempts to adjust this love 
to present conditions, his holy and pure intentions and 
ambitions and desires are assailed by the flesh. 

Not merely do the brethren and sisters, like himself, 
appreciate spiritual things, purity, truth, etc., but their 
development in the fruits of the Spirit tend to make them 
more attractive in the flesh, as well as more attractive in 
mind and disposition. As the spiritual love and confidence 
and fellowship increase, there is a new danger through the 
weaknesses of the flesh. Hence there is necessity for every 
child of God to be constantly on the alert— watching unto 
prayer against any and every intrusion of the fleshly mind, 
its appetites and desires. It must be mortified, crucified, 
killed, whatever the cost, in order that the New Creature 
may survive. The life of the one means the death of 
the other. The sooner we comprehend this great truth, 
the better for us. 

"SET YOUR AFFECTIONS ON THINGS ABOVE" 

These earthly loves do not always tend toward sensuality, 
but they do always tend in another direction from 
the interests of the New Creature. We have known instances 
in which very strong attachments grew up between 
brethren, and similarly between sisters, to their spiritual 
injury. The injury consists in a satisfaction of the longings 
of their souls in an earthly companionship, however 
pure. It is not the Lord's intention that His people should 
have heart-satisfaction in anybody, on the earthly plane. 
It is His intention that thorough loyalty to Him and to 
His Word will make us realize our individual responsibility 
to Him, and draw us individually close to Him, that in 
Him we may each find the companionship, joy, and peace 
which all true hearts crave. 

Any satisfaction, therefore, in the fellowship of the 
old creature, however pure-intentioned, is to the discredit 
of the New Creature and his spiritual fellowship with the 
Lord. The fact that we would be fully satisfied in any 
one on the earthly plane should be an evidence to us that 
we have not attained that lofty sentiment and aspiration 
which the Lord designs for us and which He alone can 
satisfy. 

R5249 : page 166 



The admission into our lives of a close, absorbing fellowship 
in the flesh, however pure the intention, would be 
a disadvantage to the New Creature in another way. Not 
only would it imply his failure to rightly appreciate the 
Lord and fellowship with Him, but it would imply a failure 
to rightly appreciate the fellowship of the entire Body of 
Christ, which is the Church. 

The Spirit of Christ is too broad to permit the centering 
of our sympathy and interest upon one individual, except 
that individual be the Lord Himself. As for others— the 
Body of Christ, the Church— our interest should be in all of 
them, not merely in the rich, but in the poor; not merely 
in the wise and noble, but in the less wise and ignoble; not 
merely in the educated, but also in the ignorant and stupid. 
Our interest must not be in the flesh, but in them as New 
Creatures in Christ. And those who have the greatest 
handicap as respects earthly teaching and weaknesses of 
the flesh are the ones deserving of our earthly sympathies 
and affections, as they strive to fight the good fight and 
overcome their blemishes. 

We exhort, therefore, that we as the Lord's people set 
our affections more and more upon the things above, and 
not on the things of the earth, that we may be transformed, 
that we may thus prove what is the good and acceptable 
will of God— that His will may be done in us 
perfectly. His will is not unreasonable. He remembers 
our frame— that it is but dust. He desires our will to be 
that our consecration shall be to Him, that it shall not be 
along lines of the flesh, but of the spirit, and not merely 
toward one individual, or little clique of the Church, but 
toward all who have named the name of Christ and who 
have set their faces Heavenward as soldiers of the cross 
marching toward the antitypical Mount Zion and the general 
Assembly of the Church of the First-born.— Psalm 103:14; 
Romans 8:4; Hebrews 12:23. 



R5249 : page 167 

"LET YOUR MODERATION BE KNOWN" 

ST. PAUL urged, "Let your moderation be 

known unto all men. The Lord is at hand." 

(Phil. 4:5.) The latter clause of this exhortation 

implies that it belongs specially to 

the closing of this Gospel Age— to the opening 

of the New Dispensation. Surely we 

find his words applicable to ourselves— yea, 

to all mankind! 

Surely there never was a time when this 
counsel of moderation was so much needed 
as now! The very air seems charged with some exciting, 
nervous force. Good people, wise people, thoughtful people, 
seem easily excited and liable to lose their balance at 
the very suggestion of ridiculous and foolish things. If 



any of us find such to be our condition, prayer should be 
made for that Wisdom which cometh from Above, to 
strengthen, establish and settle our hearts and lives in the 
will of God. 

Excitement over some vagary of interpretation of 
God's Word may be injurious to ourselves, injurious to 
those with whom we may have any influence, and injuriously 
encouraging to the one who propounds the foolish 
interpretation, whether such interpretation relates to 
this journal, to its Editor, to the general interests of the 
Harvest work, or to other matters and persons. 

It is unavoidable that politicians, socialists, anarchists 
and others, attempting to forecast the future respecting 
themselves and the world, should be carried away with 
their own ideas, and lose their bearings and talk irrationally. 
God's people, on the contrary, are to be most moderate 
in all things. First, they are to recognize their own 
littleness and inability, and God's greatness and sufficiency. 
Secondly, they are to remember that God is ordering all 
the affairs and interests of His Church and also those of 
the world; and that all things are working together for 
good to those who love Him and who are called according 
to His purpose— to be members of His elect Church, the 
Bride of Christ. -Rom. 8:28-30. 

Such consciousness of personal littleness and of Divine 
greatness should keep us very humble and restrain us 
from all boastfulness and headiness and "know-it-all-ness." 
We should be very thankful and very appreciative of what 
God has made known to us of His gracious purposes, but 
should strictly avoid every attempt to run before the Lord 
and to try to rudely break into any feature of His Plan 
which He has not yet unlocked. We should remember that 
any knowledge we might gain in advance of God's due 
time would be injurious to us. As, for instance, Mother 
Eve, already possessed of knowledge of good, by disobedience 
broke into and gained a knowledge of evil, in 
advance of the Divine regulation. The knowledge thus 
gained was expensive. 

AVOID WHATEVER ENGENDERS STRIFE 

We urge THE WATCH TOWER readers to exercise moderation 
in respect to their faith and conduct in all matters 
—including their chronological forecasts of the future. 
In our judgment, it is very unwise to spend valuable time 
and energy in guessing what will take place this year, 
next year, etc. On the contrary, we should be using the 
knowledge we possess— doing with our might what our 
hands find to do. The Adversary undoubtedly would like 
to attract us away from the things that we already know, 
and from our privileges of service, into speculation respecting 
those matters of which we have no knowledge. 
We urge that the Lord's people stifle curiosity, and desist 
from prying into things not clearly set forth in God's 
Word, as being injurious to them, hurtful to the Cause 
we are all desirous of serving, and tending to hinder the 



work of grace in our own hearts and in the hearts of those 
to whom we are the Lord's ambassadors and mouthpieces. 

We take this occasion to remind our readers afresh 
that nowhere in our writings have they found anything 
positively stated respecting the closing years of this Age, 
except that we understand that the Gentile Times will 
close in October 1914, and that consequently we expect, 
speedily following that date, the transfer of the rulership 
of earth to the great King of Glory, in a "time of trouble 
such as never was since there was a nation." We have 
pointed out that prior to that date a testing work will be 
in progress in the Church— a time in which the question 
will be, not so much, who will fall? as, who shall be able 
to stand in this evil day?— Eph. 6:11. 

We did in discussing the Great Pyramid— STUDIES IN 
THE SCRIPTURES Series— suggest that possibly a certain 
measurement of the step at the upper end of the Grand 
Gallery might signify something important by the end of 
1910. But we hope that we made it clear that we built 
nothing on that suggestion— that it was merely a suggestion, 
a guess only, but a pointer that the year 1911 might 
be looked to with interest. We may say, however, that 
every year now is bound to be full of interest and activity 
of thought, both to our readers and the entire civilized 
world. Surely, 

"We are living, we are dwelling, 

In a grand and awful time; 
In an Age on ages telling, 

To be living is sublime!" 

Indeed, as respects the date 1914, which we have emphasized, 
and respecting which we have repeatedly expressed 
our faith, our conviction— even respecting this 
date we have never knowingly spoken in infallible terms. 
We have always admitted that it is a matter of faith and 
conviction, rather than of absolute knowledge. We invite 
a careful re-examination of the chapter on chronology, as 
such a reading will prove helpful, sobering. Therein we 
point out that if our knowledge were wholly based upon 
chronology we would be far from certain of the date- 
that our faith in it is based largely upon the corroboration, 
interlacing and intermeshing of various prophecies which 
seem to prove the reliability of the Bible chronology and 
of our use of it in connection with this date. 

"MEDITATE ON THESE THINGS" 

We see no reason for disparaging the date and convictions 
associated with it. Although only one and a half 
years remain for the accomplishment of great things in 
the work, we should not forget that in our wonderful day 
as much can be accomplished in one year as previously 
would have been accomplished in five years. We urge, 
moreover, that a knowledge of the times and seasons connected 
with the Divine Plan of the Ages is helpful, encouraging 



and inspiring. Nevertheless, such knowledge 

is not of itself the Gospel. If every date of the chronology 

and every prophecy were blotted out, we should still 

be joyful in the Lord, and should still rejoice in His glorious 

Gospel, of which Jesus and His great Sacrifice constitutes 

the center, and our promised participation with 

Him as His members in the blessing of all the families of 

the earth constitutes the circumference. 

This is the Good Tidings of God's grace in Christ— 
whether the completion of the Church shall be accomplished 
before 1914 or not. Let us preach the Message of 
God's grace, and let our hearts be stimulated with God's 
Message through the Prophets, to the effect that the blessing 
is nigh at hand. Let our moderation be manifest to all, 
and let the fact that we know only in part and understand 
only in part help to keep us humble and moderate in word 
and deed and thought. Thus we shall best serve the interests 

R5250 : page 168 

of our Master and His Cause, and be most in harmony 
with the teachings of His Word. 

It is our conviction that the great time of trouble will 
come upon the world through the great Adversary, Satan, 
and his fallen host. It will not surprise us to find evidences 
accumulating that the work of breaking down the 
human will through hypnotism, etc., is all a part of the 
great scheme by which shortly, gradually, increasingly, 
power will be exercised upon the minds of mankind— to 
excite them to unwisdom and to passion. Such of God's 
children as shall have learned the lessons of His Word 
along the lines of moderation of thought, rest of heart in 
the Lord, patient waiting for His time and way, and assisted 
by the Vow to careful self inspection and government 
daily, will be greatly blessed and by this means 
kept from the snare of the Adversary— the hour of 
temptation is coming upon all that dwell upon the face of 
the whole earth.— Rev. 3:10. 



R5250 : page 168 

SERVICE OF THE BRETHREN A PROPER ZEAL 

"The zeal of Thine House hath consumed Me."— Psa. 69:9. 

THESE WORDS must have seemed extremely 
poetical, hyperbolic, to those of David's time. 
David indeed had a zeal for the House of 
God— for the Tabernacle first, and subsequently 
for the Temple, which he desired to 
build, but which the Lord would not permit 
him to build. David had a real zeal for 
that House. 
We get the key to this prophecy from its 



application in the New Testament to our 

Lord. When Jesus had made a scourge of small cords, 

He drove the money-changers out of the Temple. Then 

His disciples remembered and probably quoted the passage: 

"The zeal of Thine House hath eaten Me up." (John 2:17.) 

The Lord's House in that case was the Temple; 

and our Lord's zeal in cleansing the Temple of all merchandise 

would be considered by some as very appropriate, 

and by others as very extreme. 

But the still deeper meaning is indicated by the declaration 
that the Church is His House— the House of God. 
The Apostles, speaking of the Church, say that we are the 
Temple of the Holy Spirit. (I Cor. 6:19.) Again, it is 
said that we are builded together as living stones. (I Pet. 2:4,5.) 
So we see that the real House of God for which 
Jesus had zeal was the House of Sons. The Jews had been 
a House of Servants under Moses; but Christ was a Son 
over His own House— the House of Sons— "whose House 
are we, if we hold fast the confidence and the rejoicing of 
the hope firm unto the end;" for "Faithful is He that 
calleth you."-Heb. 3:5,6; I Thess. 5:24. 

THE SPIRIT OF CHRIST THE SPIRIT OF SERVICE 

Having this view of the House before our minds, we 
can see in what way Jesus' zeal for the House of God 
consumed Him— burned Him up. We use the word burn, 
consume, in the same way that we use the word rust, in the 
case of iron. And so zeal is that which is warm, aglow, 
hot. With this view of the Master and His House before 
our minds— the House that He was interested in— we 
perceive that His zeal, His energy for them, prompted 
Him, led Him, to lay down His life— for as many as 
would become God's House, God's sons, God's people. 
This zeal for the Lord's House, for the Lord's people, consumed 
His time and strength in helping them. 

During this Gospel Age the Lord invites the Church to 
be similarly consumed with Him. But the only ones 
who are yet members of the House of God, or sons of 
God, are those who are begotten of the Holy Spirit, as the 
Apostle distinctly tells us. If we then have this Spirit of 
Christ, it will be the spirit of service. It will be a zeal, a 
warmth, an energy, prompting us to serve in the Church. 
It will mean that we will be consumed as the Master was 
consumed— in the service of His Church, which is His 
Body.-Matthew 20:28; I John 3:16. 

THE PREPARATION FOR THE DIVINE NATURE 

There are sons of God on the Heavenly plane who were 
never given an opportunity to manifest such a zeal as this. 
There was no offer made to them to be associated in the 
reclamation of mankind. This privilege was given to the 
Logos, the Only Begotten. To Him was given the opportunity 
to lay down His life— "Who made Himself of no 
reputation, and took upon Him the form of a servant, and 



was made in the likeness of men; and being found in 
fashion as a man, He humbled Himself, and became obedient 
unto death, even the death of the cross. Therefore, 
God also hath highly exalted Him, and given Him a 
name which is above every name."— Phil. 2:7-9. 

Our Lord's zeal has not cost Him His Heavenly home, 
His Heavenly estate; but, on the contrary, God has highly 
exalted Him— to a higher position. The statement that He 
was consumed refers to His earthly life, which He laid 
down for the world. The Father has given Him a still 
higher nature than He had before— the Divine nature. 
And this zeal in being consumed prepared Him for the 
high reward of the Divine nature. 

St. Peter says that the Lord hath "given unto us exceeding 
great and precious promises, that by these [working 
in us] we might become partakers of the Divine nature." 
(2 Pet. 1:4.) The Apostle Paul says that if we suffer with 
Christ, we shall reign with Him; if we be dead with 
Him, we shall live with Him. (2 Tim. 2:11,12.) If we 
have our earthly natures consumed, then we shall get the 
Divine nature. "We shall be changed, in a moment, in 
the twinkling of an eye."— 1 Cor. 15:51,52. 

This opportunity, then, of manifesting a fulness of zeal 
for the service of God, was granted, not to Adam, or to 
any of the human family, until this Gospel Age. This opportunity 
will not come to the sons of God in the next Age. 
The sacrificing then will be at an end; and there will be 
no more sin, sorrow, pain, sighing, crying or dying!— 
Isaiah 35:10; 51:11; Revelation 21:4. 



"One more day's work for Jesus, 

One less of life for me! 

But Heaven is nearer, and Christ is dearer, 

Than yesterday to me; 

His love and light fill all my soul tonight! 

"One more day's work for Jesus! 

How glorious is my King! 

'Tis joy, not duty, to show His beauty; 

My soul mounts on the wing, 

At the mere thought how Christ my life has bought! 

"One more day's work for Jesus! 

How sweet the work has been, 

To tell the story, to show the glory, 

Where Christ's flock enter in! 

How it did shine in this poor heart of mine! 

"O blessed work for Jesus! 

O rest at Jesus' feet! 

There toil seems pleasure, my wants are treasure, 

And pain for Him is sweet. 

Lord, if I may, I'll serve another day!" 



R5250 : page 169 

MOSES, THE GOODLY CHILD 

--JULY 6.--EXODUS 1:22-2:10.- 

"Whoso receiveth one such little child in 
My name, receiveth Me."— Matthew 18:5. 

JOSEPH was the Grand Vizier of Egypt for 
eighty years— dying at the age of one hundred 
and ten years. Surely his brethren, 
the Israelites, suffered no oppression during 
that time. Shortly thereafter, however, another 
Pharaoh came into power, who "knew 
not Joseph"— who ignored his services to 
Egypt and the tentative covenant with the 
Israelites. This Pharaoh is supposed to 
have been Rameses II, a hard-hearted, 
selfish despot. 

This Pharaoh perceived that the Israelites were multiplying 
much more rapidly than were the Egyptians. 
Therefore he considered them a menace. At first they 
had been viewed as a protection to Egypt, because the 
land of Goshen lay to the eastward, and an enemy advancing 
against Egypt would encounter the Israelites first. 
Egypt's only antagonist in those days was Assyria. When 
the Israelites became more numerous than the Egyptians, 
a new danger threatened; for an invading army might 
bribe them, and thus the rule of the Pharaohs be 
overthrown. 

To meet this contingency, various expedients were 
tried. First, an edict compelled the Israelites to perform 
arduous labors, which it was hoped would undermine their 
strength— weaken them. On the contrary, however, they 
seemed to flourish increasingly with every added burden. 
The next repressive measure was the edict to the Hebrew 
midwives— that every male child of the Israelites should 
be strangled at birth. But this command was disregarded, 
the midwives claiming that they arrived too late. The 
final resort was the royal edict that the Israelites must 
drown every new-born male infant. Failure to do this 
was made a punishable crime. 

R5251 :page 169 

It was under these conditions that Moses was born. 
The account indicates that both his parents were pious, 
and hence we are not surprised at the statement that he 
as a babe "was a goodly child"— fair, beautiful. Comparatively 
few parents seem to realize that where children 
are otherwise than "goodly"— graceful in feature and 
character— a responsibility for the defects rests upon 
them. We do not mean by this that it would be possible 



that any human pair could bring forth absolutely perfect 
children. "Who can bring a clean thing out of an 
unclean?"-Job 14:4. 

What we do mean is that as careful breeding affects 
the features, form and character of the lower animals, 
and improves both fruits and flowers, so also it is potent 
in respect to humanity. Yea, much more so; for while 
neither the parent nor the state may ignore the choice of 
comrades in human marriage, nevertheless the married 
have in their own control the most wonderful power 
known in the world whereby to influence the character 
and form of their children before birth, and not to be 
ignored after their birth— the power of the mind. 

Were this law of nature clearly recognized by intelligent, 
conscientious people, what a change would speedily 
be effected! We are assuming that such parents would 
not only desire to bring into the world children beautiful 
in form, in feature and character, but that they would 
feel it a crime not to do their very best in these respects. 

If every mother realized that during the period of 
gestation her mental moods were either blessing or cursing 
her offspring, how persistent she would be in resisting 
evil moods and tantrums! How carefully she would 
guard her reading, her companionship, her mental reflections! 
How faithfully she would put into execution the 
suggestions of the Apostle respecting whatsoever things 
are pure, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things 
are true, whatsoever things are noble, whatsoever things 
are honorable and beautiful— to think on these things, and 
thus to birth-mark her child after the highest, noblest 
conceptions of which she might be capable! 

And if the father realized his responsibility, how careful 
he would be to do his full duty! not merely as a 
father and life-giver, but as a protector and guardian of 
the mother, assisting her in the most important function 
of human life and in the time of her greatest need of 
assistance, according to his ability. The mother, during 
gestation particularly, would be surrounded by things suggestive 
of the good, the great, the noble, the pure, the 
intellectual, the cultured. He would be especially sympathetic, 
and would endeavor to keep the mother's mind at 
ease. Even if too poor to provide luxuries— pictures, art, 
etc.— he could measurably fill the place by conversing with 
the mother on noble and ennobling themes, or he could 
read to her. Ah, when civilized peoples shall finally learn 
that the same care which they exercise in respect to the 
breeding of their fast horses, fancy dogs, pigeons and 
swine can be applied still more successfully in their own 
families, who will doubt the wonderful results? 

Josephus, the Jewish historian, says that those who 
met the infant Moses as he was carried along the stream 
forgot their business, and stood still to gaze at him. The 
time is nearing when human perfection of features, form 
and character will be considered the grandest thing in the 
whole world. Then the names of the parents of such will 
be honored on the pages of fame still more than those 



honored with first prizes for flowers, fruits and dumb 
animals. It is quite to the point that the parents of Moses 
are well spoken of in the Old Testament; while in the 
New Testament we are distinctly told that they were people 
of faith, and counted in the noble list of Ancient 
Worthies, who are to share in the "better resurrection" 
on account of faith.— Hebrews 1 1:23. 

CO-OPERATING WITH GOD'S PROVIDENCE 

It is entirely probable that the parents of Moses 
thought how to advance the plan which proved so successful 
for the saving of his life. They knew of the 
custom of the Egyptian Princess to resort to a certain 
secluded spot on the Nile for her bath, which is presumed 
to have been part of a religious custom. They surmised 
that so beautiful a baby boy would have a special attraction 
for her. They may even, as tradition claims, have 
been guided by a dream to take the course they did. But 
however we shall account for the matter, we perceive 
that it was co-operation between the parents and Divine 
providence which brought the results. 

A little basket was woven of bulrushes, which grow 
abundantly along the banks of the Nile. On the outside 
it was made water-tight with pitch. The babe was placed 
therein, and at a proper time was left near the spot visited 
by the princess. Then conveniently near stood Moses' 
sister, Miriam, about eight years old, ready to suggest the 
bringing of a nurse. It is even quite probable that the 
princess herself perceived the ruse and merely co-operated, 
believing that the little one might as well have as its caretaker 
its own mother, and that she might be its patron 
and benefactress. 

Thus in God's providence, notwithstanding the opposition 
of the king, the wonderful Moses was reared in the 
royal palace, and in Egypt's schools became "learned in 
all the wisdom of the Egyptians." Thus God's providence 

R5251 :page 170 

prepared the suitable person for his great work as the 
leader of Israel— and more, as the prototype of Messiah 
who in God's due time will be the Deliverer of all 
humanity desirous of becoming God's people and willing 
to be led by Him into the antitypical Land of Promise. 

AIDED AND PROTECTED 

How much there is of simple, yet wonderful romance 
in this narrative! Think of the leadings of Divine providence 
in this case! One day the child Moses was a danger 
and a menace in the home of his parents. At any moment 
his presence might be discovered and made known to an 
Egyptian officer. Then he would be killed, and the home 
broken up, and possibly the lives of his parents lost for 
venturing to disobey the royal edict. The next day, 



through Divine providence, the child is back in the same 
home, and its own mother is paid by the Egyptian princess 
for caring for it, and is every way fully protected by 
royal favor. 

We know not at what age the child was considered 
weaned, but it is assumed to have been when he was four 
years old. This interesting child at this interesting age 
was then claimed by the princess as her own son. He 
was given the name Moses, of which Professor Sayce 
says: "The Greek form of the Hebrew Mosheh— Moyses— 
is derived by Josephus from the Coptic (ancient Egyptian) 
Mo (water), and uses (saved out of it). In other 
words, the princess made a pun of the name, as though she 
had said: This is my son, because I brought him forth— 
out of the water.'" Truly, we never know when Divine 
Wisdom is working in human woof into the Divine web 
or plan. God's people are ever to remember that in all 
their undertakings He is "working all things according to 
the counsel of His own will." While using human instrumentalities, 
God nevertheless respects the human will 
and merely co-operates with it. And whoever most 
zealously co-operates with God receives proportionately 
the larger share of the Divine blessing. 

We are not to understand that God's providences use 
only His saintly people and their families, nor even that He 
uses only those who are at least nominally His. In the 
present lesson we see how God made even the wrath of 
man praise Him and accomplish some of His purposes for 
the furtherance of His great Plan of the Ages amongst 
those wholly ignorant of Him— "aliens and strangers from 
the commonwealth of Israel." The entire household of 
Pharaoh, as well as the princess, were used of the Lord 
in respect to the preservation of Moses and his education 
and preparation for his great work. Surely this simple 
lesson, received into good and honest hearts, gives us 
greater faith in God and greater reliance upon His Wisdom 
and Power to fulfil all the gracious promises which 
He has made to the Church, to Israel and to the world. 



R5251 :page 170 

GOD'S INSTRUMENT IN PREPARATION 

-JULY 13. -EXODUS 2:11-25.- 

"Blessed are the meek: for they shall 
inherit the earth."— Matthew 5:5. 

THE deliberateness of Divine providence often 
astounds us. Our lives are so brief, our 
limitations so many, that any plans we may 
have must be pushed to completion as rapidly 
as we are able. But not so with the Almighty, 
who is "from everlasting to everlasting 



God." He has unlimited time at His 

disposal, and accordingly is working out His 

sovereign will with great deliberation. It 

is a comfort to His people to be assured that 

He knew the end from the beginning, and is working all 

things according to the counsel of His own will. Bible 

Students are being blessed in proportion as they are learning 

that the Divine will is always a good will— just, wise 

and loving. 

The education of Moses is briefly summed up in the 
Scriptures in the statement that "he was learned in all 
the wisdom of the Egyptians." Legend tells us something 
of his schooling in the philosophies of that time, and 
declares that he was a successful Egyptian general; but 
it is for us to follow the Bible account. The time was 
nearing when God intended to bring the Israelites out of 
Egypt into the land which He had promised Abraham 
should be theirs— a pictorial illustration of the still more 

R5252 : page 170 

wonderful deliverance by the greater than Moses, which 
is now nearing. 

God's providences may be noted in respect to the experiences 
of Moses, who is credited by the Lord with 
having been "the meekest man in all the earth." God 
wanted a meek man for the important position which He 
intended Moses to fill. And the lessons and experiences 
given to Moses helped to make him meek. Who cannot 
see that, if he had been proud and arrogant, he would 
have been unfit for the duties and responsibilities which 
devolved upon him as the leader of his people out of 
Egypt to the borders of Canaan? Perhaps no man in 
the world had a more difficult task than that represented 
in those forty years of Moses' experience. We may be 
sure that he was prepared for the ordeal only by the 
experiences of the eighty years of his life which preceded 
the Exodus. 

The adopted son of the princess of Egypt, Moses must 
have been a court favorite, and in danger of cultivating 
pride and arrogance. As an offset to this, he had continually 
before him the fact that his features were Jewish, 
and that thus every one had knowledge of his identity 
with the despised and oppressed people. The tendency 
of this would naturally be toward one of two courses: 
Either he would seek to ignore the Hebrews and to become 
more and more identified with the Egyptians, or he 
would exercise faith in the special promises of which his 
people were heirs as children of Abraham, Isaac and 
Jacob. 

This was perhaps his first test. Would he prove loyal 
to God and to those Divine promises relating to the 
future? Would his faith be equal to the task of casting 
in his lot with the enslaved and oppressed people, and 
thus losing caste with Pharaoh, his family and all the 
Egyptians of influence? St. Paul notes that Moses was 



a victor in respect to these matters. He chose rather to 
suffer affliction with the people of God than to enjoy the 
riches and honors which might have been his as an 
adopted member of the royal family. (Hebrews 1 1:24-26.) 
We may well surmise that if he had taken 
side with the Egyptians, he might even have become the 
reigning Pharaoh. 

To Moses the Promise which God made to Abraham, 
and repeated to Isaac and to Jacob, and which still waits 
its fulfilment, was more to be desired than all the riches 
and honors of earth. Moses stood well this test in respect 
to his faith and loyalty. He would be on God's side at 
any cost! Similarly, there have always been tests, both 
to the Natural Israelites and to the Spiritual Israelites, 
and these tests are still applied in our day. The world 

R5252:page 171 

holds out inducements to the Jew to abandon his covenant 
relationship with God, as it also holds out inducements 
to the Spiritual Israelite to abandon his spiritual relationship 
with God. 

It is still true that the friendship of the world means 
enmity with God, and the friendship with God means the 
enmity of the world, so widely different and opposed is 
the Kingdom of Darkness to the Kingdom of Light and 
everything related thereto. It is still as true today as in 
Moses' time that "Whosoever will live godly [in this 
present time] shall suffer persecution." But it shall not 
always be so. A great change is impending. Those who 
love righteousness will be exalted, blessed, while those 
who love sin will be restrained and punished. 

MOSES DISCOURAGED, HEARTBROKEN 

Trusting in the Lord's Promise, Moses believed that 
the time had come for the deliverance of the Israelites 
from their bondage. He knew well of his miraculous 
preservation, and had the assurance of God's Promise that 
this signified that God had a special work for him to do. 
He was ready and anxious to begin that work. He knew 
not of his own unreadiness. Nothing was further from 
his thought than that he would require forty years more 
of special schooling. Supposing that the time had come 
to strike for liberty, he was on the alert. He would 
inspire his people with confidence in him. They should 
know that although he was educated in the court of 
Pharaoh, his sympathies were with them, and that he 
could be relied upon as their leader. 

An occasion to show his zeal for his brethren came 
when he saw an Egyptian abusing one of them unjustly. 
He threw himself into the conflict. The Egyptian was 
killed in the scuffle. The Israelite was delivered. Moses 
perceived that none of the Egyptians knew of the matter, 
so he buried the victim in the sand. He doubted not that 
his brethren would quietly pass the word along that he 



was their friend and defender, and that thus they would 
look to him with confidence as their leader, when God's 
providence would open the door for them to leave Egypt. 
But all these dreams faded when, on the following day, 
he perceived that there was no such loyalty among his 
brethren as he had expected, and that instead of being 
his followers they were ready to deliver him to the 
Egyptian authorities for having rendered assistance to 
one of their race. 

Thoroughly discouraged and fearing for his life, 
Moses fled to the wilderness of Midian. It looked as 
though all of his loyalty and all of his forty years of 
education and development had gone to waste. He had 
supposed that he was being prepared to be the captain of 
the Lord's host and to lead it forth. In one hour all of 
his hopes were dashed and he was a fugitive, fearing to 
show his face in the palace amongst the Egyptians or 
amongst those of his own race. "A wasted life," was 
undoubtedly his comment— forty years spent in cherishing 
hopes and ambitions never to be realized. 

MOSES, JETHRO'S SHEPHERD 

As the fugitive sat upon the casing of a well, shepherds 
brought their flocks to it for water. Amongst the 
sheep-tenders were Jethro's daughters, and opposing them 
some ungallant shepherds, who not only did not help, but 
hindered them. Moses, full of the instinct of justice, not 
only took their part, but helped by drawing water for 
their flocks, and incidentally walked with them toward 
their home. Jethro was appreciative of the stranger, who 
did not at the time disclose his identity. He who was 
learned in all the learning of the Egyptians, and who had 
been one of the generals of Egypt, was now thoroughly 
crestfallen, meek, tractable, teachable. 

Moses married one of Jethro's daughters, and continued 
to be a humble shepherd for forty years. He did 
not at the time understand the Lord's providence in his 
affairs, but he was all those years learning a most important 
lesson of meekness, of full submission to the 
Divine will. When the lesson had been learned, God's 
time had come to put His thus doubly educated servant 
into a most important place, for which he would have 
never been qualified without just such experiences. 

God's dealings with Moses illustrate the general principles 
of His dealing with all those of whom He would 
make special servants prepared for special services. Our 
Lord Jesus in the Heavenly courts testified His loyalty 
and fidelity to the Almighty. As a means toward his 
further exaltation the opportunity was given Him of becoming 
the Savior of mankind, and thus of carrying out 
the Divine Program. He gladly responded. "Although 
He was a Son, yet learned He obedience by the things 
which He suffered." (Hebrews 5:8.) And the Apostle 
declares that because of this demonstration of His full 
submission to the Father's will "unto death, even the death 



of the cross," therefore God highly exalted Him in His 

resurrection, not only as high as He was before, but 

higher— "far above angels, principalities and powers, and 

every name that is named."— Philippians 2:9-1 1; Ephesians 1:20-23; 

1 Peter 3:22. 

Similarly, God during this Gospel Age is calling out 
of the world a saintly company, a Little Flock, to be associated 
with Jesus in His great work of the future, the 
blessing of all the families of the earth, as promised by 
God to Abraham, saying, "In thy Seed shall all the families 
of the earth be blessed." Those responsive to this 
special invitation are required to demonstrate their loyalty 
to God, "through evil report and through good report- 
as deceivers and yet true." At times these saintly ones 
have even been branded, as was St. Paul, "the filth of the 
world and the offscouring of all things."— I Corinthians 4:13; 

2 Corinthians 6:8. 

These insults came frequently from poor, blinded 
slaves of sin, and at other times, the Bible says, from those 
who are "willingly ignorant." But, nevertheless, all these 
sons of God whom He is now receiving as members of 
the Royal Priesthood to be members of the Bride class, 
must be tested in respect to their humility— their submissiveness 
to the Divine will. Only those who learn this 
lesson and become copies of God's dear Son (Romans 8:29), 
will be "meet for the inheritance of the saints in 
light"— prepared for the glory, honor, immortality, and 
the Divine nature which God has promised to His faithful, 
elect Church. 



R5255 :page 171 

"In pastures green? Not always; sometimes He 
Who knoweth best in kindness leadeth me 
In weary ways, where heavy shadows be. 
Out of the sunshine, warm and soft and bright, 
Out of the sunshine into darkest night; 
I oft would faint with terror and with fright, 
Only for this— I know He holds my hand; 
So, whether in the green or desert land, 
I trust, although I may not understand. 

"And by still waters? No, not always so; 
Ofttimes the heavy tempests round me blow, 
And o'er my soul the waves and billows go. 
But when the storm beats loudest, and I cry 
Aloud for help, the Master standeth by, 
And whispers to my soul, 'Lo, it is I!' 
Above the tempest wild I hear Him say, 
'Beyond this darkness lies the perfect day; 
In every path of thine I lead the way.'" 



page 172 

1913-GENERAL CONVENTIONS-- 19 13 

LAST year, difficulty was experienced because 

our Convention gathering at Washington 

was too large and unwieldy. This year we 

are seeking to avoid such an experience by 

increasing the number of Conventions and 

scattering them. Not only are moderate-sized 

Conventions found more enjoyable 

and more edifying, but additionally they are 

much less expensive and permit, therefore, 

a larger attendance— many finding it possible 

to go a short distance who cannot well afford the time 

and expense of a long journey. It is quite proper that 

these matters should be taken into consideration by you 

in making your arrangements for Convention privileges 

and blessings, and also by the Society in making the arrangements 

for such Conventions. This is but exercising 

the spirit of a sound mind. 

In all of the Conventions, practically the same average 
of daily expense will be incurred; namely, from $1.25 a 
day and upward. The $1.25 rate will secure reasonable, 
comfortable entertainment, but, of course, not a separate 
room, and only plain, wholesome food. If in some instances 
it should be possible to do better than this, be 
assured that we will give you all the advantage possible. 
The Society merely acts for you in making the arrangements. 
And it is much better that we make the arrangements 
and assignments in advance. 

When a big crowd begins to arrive, it is quite a 
temptation to human nature to raise the price. It is all 
right for those who expect to pay $2.50 to $5.00 per day 
at a hotel to come without any previous arrangement, if 
they choose; but it makes trouble for everybody if those 
who want cheap accommodations come to the Convention 
place without any arrangements, and begin to bid for 
places we have already secured and have assigned to 
others. None of the Lord's children willingly do this, 
and yet it is done nearly every year. We ask all to help 
us this year by co-operating with the Society and not 
taking up, at a higher price, lodgings, etc., which we have 
already secured to others. With this fair notice, any 
who do this this year will be asked to vacate. 

HOW TO SECURE ACCOMMODATIONS 

In due time a representative of the Society will be 
sent to each Convention point to arrange for all the available 
and desirable quarters, and to make the assignments 
according to your requests and to send you a memorandum 
of the locality assigned to you, so that you may 
arrive, knowing just where you are going, and so that 
the entertainer will know just who is coming. Be assured 
that the representative will follow your instructions 



as far as possible, and with care. 

These representatives will be addressed "Laymens 
Home Missionary Movement," and addresses will be 
given in these columns (page 2) in due time— two to 
three weeks in advance of each Convention. 

RAILWAY RATES, NAMES OF SPEAKERS, ETC. 

We are getting out programs giving the names of 
speakers, and the railway rates in connection with each 
Convention. When you decide which Convention you 
will attend, please write for the program, which will be 
sent free. 

Below find a complete list of the Conventions. 
Brother Russell hopes to attend them all, but he will 
probably be unable to give more than two days at each. 

CONVENTION DATES 

Pertle Springs (Warrensburg), Mo June 1- 8. 

Hot Springs, Ark " 1- 8. 

Los Angeles, Cal " 11-15. 

San Francisco, Cal " 14-16. 

Madison, Wis " 29-July 6. 

Springfield, Mass July 13-20. 

Asheville, N. C " 20-27. 

Toronto, Can " 20-27. 

London, England Aug. 1- 4. 

Glasgow, Scotland " 23-24. 

We have arranged to have about fifteen public speakers 
of ability at each of these Conventions. Besides 
these, there will be a goodly number of considerable 
ability to assist in symposiums. 

For the most part, we are leaving the evenings without 
special appointments on the program. This will give 
a better opportunity for rest and meditation on the things 
heard in the earlier part of the day, and for fellowship 
together in spiritual things. Chart Talks, etc., will be 
given by some public speakers at homes where the friends 
are being entertained, if there be special requests 
therefor. 

Come praying that you may obtain a blessing and also 
that your attendance may prove profitable, helpful, to 
others. All who so come, we feel sure will be blessed. 
Those whose circumstances or conditions will not permit 
their attendance may surely join with us in spirit, remembering 
us in prayer, and they will be remembered in 
the prayers of the Conventioners; for the family of God 
is one in hope, interest and aims. 

We urge none to attend the Conventions. If, in the 
providence of God, your affairs are not favorable, remember 
that He is able to overrule in this and in all 
things for your good. The lesson of submission learned 
in staying at home may be just as important a one for 
you as any blessing which you could secure by attending. 



Nevertheless, all who love the Lord, who are trusting in 
the precious blood of Jesus and who have made a full 
consecration of their lives in the Divine service will be 
cordially welcome. 



R5252 : page 172 

INTERESTING ITEMS AND LETTERS 
J. PIERPONT MORGAN'S WILL 

No doubt many, as well as the Editor, were surprised to 
read the opening paragraph of Mr. Morgan's will, as reported 
in the public press, as follows: 

"I commit my soul into the hands of my Savior, in full 
confidence that, having redeemed it and washed it in His 
most precious blood. He will present it faultless before the 
Throne of my Heavenly Father, and I entreat my children 
to maintain and defend at all hazards and at any cost of 
personal sacrifice, the blessed doctrine of the complete atonement 
for sin through the blood of Jesus Christ, once offered 
and through that alone." 

Many know of a prominent part taken by this gentlemen 
in the affairs of the Episcopal Church. The newspapers also 
informed the world of the fact that Mr. Morgan more or 
less recognized the Pope. Many were inclined to think of 
his church membership and church attendance as merely 
formalism— " Churchianity . " 

Now it appears that, regardless of whether or not Mr. 
Morgan was a fully consecrated saint of God, he at least 
trusted in the Savior. Moreover, the faith professed in the 
above quotation from his will intimates a much clearer appreciation 
of the Atonement Work of Christ than the majority 
of ministers of various denominations would be ready 
to acknowledge. 

Evidently Mr. Morgan was not a Higher Critic, nor in 
sympathy with them; for Higher Critics cannot and do not 
receive the Bible teaching respecting the value of the death 
of Christ as the Atonement Price for the sins of mankind. 

Evidently, also, Mr. Morgan was not a believer in the 
doctrine of Evolution; for that doctrine holds that instead 
of having original sin, which needs to be canceled before the 

R5253 : page 173 

sinner can have fellowship with God, the contrary is true. 
Evolutionists hold that man started as second cousin to the 
monkey, too unintelligent to be guilty of any transgression, 
and that as a race man has been progressing upward, upward, 
and needs only to be let alone in order to fully evolute 
into a god— that is to say, the generations of evoluted men 
millions of years in the future will be gods. But respecting 
man present and past, Evolution makes no claim, seeing only 
a destructive process in operation, and trusting that it is 



working out the preservation and development of the best 
of the species. 

The great financier's will, viewed from this standpoint, 
is meaningful. It implies that, notwithstanding vast financial 
enterprises and the social round of which he was more or 
less the center, he, nevertheless, caught the thought that he 
was a sinner; that he needed a Savior; that Jesus was that 
Savior sent of God; and that through His blood, His death, 
and through it alone, can come remission of sins and deliverance 
from the penalty of sin— corruption, death— by a 
resurrection. 



GOD'S ESTIMATION DIFFERENT FROM THE WORLD'S 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I request your opinion upon the correctness of a thought 
expressed in a friendly publication in the following language: 

"When the holy Jesus died, it was as a victim of Sin, which, 
for the moment, seemed to have the victory. Indeed, He could 
not have died, had sin not been imputed to Him; for all the 
promises of health, prosperity and life which were by the Law 
were His. The Law said, 'The man which doeth these things 
shall live by them.' (Rom. 10:5.) Thus came a necessity for 
our Lord to be accounted a sinner, in order that He might die 
for the people. For this reason we do not see that it is 
possible for the members of the Church to die unless, like 
Him, they are accounted sinners." 

I am well aware that the Lord Jesus would not have died 
(the publication says, "could not have died") if there had 
been no sin to be atoned for. But if our Lord died as above 
suggested, it seems to me that His death must have been a 
penal death and not a sacrificial one. Could He die both a 
penal and a sacrificial death? It seems not so to me. If the 
Lord Jesus died a penal death, it would appear to me that 
He could have no life-rights left to His credit to bestow upon 
either the Church or the world.... 

I anxiously await your reply, for if the foregoing expression 
is correct I have seriously misunderstood both the Scriptures 
and the Dawns. 

Your loving brother in our dear Redeemer, 
W. W. M.-Va. 



THE EDITOR'S REPLY 

DEAR BROTHER M :-- 

I am glad to note your careful discrimination in your 
Scripture studies. This is one lesson that all the dear friends 
in the Truth need to learn— not to accept implicitly everything 
that they read, nor everything that even a regular Pilgrim may 
express. The same principle, of course, holds true with respect 
to our own presentations, oral and printed. All that 
we receive as spiritual food should be thoroughly masticated 



before assimilation. We have great confidence in all of the 

dear brethren engaged in the Pilgrim service; otherwise they 

would not thus represent the Society. However, we must 

not be held responsible for their every expression. We believe 

them to be thoroughly well-intentioned, but perfection 

will be reached only beyond the veil. We come now to your 

question. 

We cannot quite endorse the phraseology of the statement 
which you quote. All of the Church die as the victims of 
sin in the sense that Sin and Death are personified in the 
Scriptures. Sin has actuated all those who oppose the Truth 
and persecute the Lord and His consecrated footstep 
followers. 

But we cannot agree to the thought that our Lord's death 
was a penal one. One Scripture might be considered as supporting 
this thought, namely, the words, "He hath made Him 
to be sin for us, who knew no sin." (2 Cor. 5:21.) But this 
Scripture we understand to signify that our Lord who knew 
no sin, was made a Sin-Offering on our behalf. We remember 
also the Scripture which declares that "As Moses lifted 
up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of 
Man be lifted up." (John 3:14.) The serpent, indeed, is the 
symbol for Sin. But we can think of only one way that our 
Lord was viewed as a serpent— in the sense that He underwent 
all the experiences which a sinner could have been required 
to undergo. Thus He suffered as a sinner and for 
the sinner the same penalty that might be required of any 
sinner. But while He was a malefactor, a sinner, etc., in 
the eyes of men, He was the reverse of all this in the eyes of 
His true followers and in the Father's sight. 

What Jesus did He plainly stated— He laid down, or surrendered, 
His life, because thus He could best serve the 
Father's purposes. He did not give away His life. Nor did 
He die under condemnation as a sinner. He did not forfeit 
His life. Nor did the Jews or Roman soldiers take His life 
away from Him contrary to His permission. He laid it down 
of Himself. Had He died a sinner in God's sight, with sin 
imputed to Him by the Father, He would have had nothing to 
give for the redemption of Adam and his race— He would 
have been unable to become their Regenerator in the Times of 
Restitution. 

We submit that the only proper view of the Lord's death 
is that it was a manifestation of His absolute obedience to 
the Father's will. That extreme of obedience was rewarded 
with the Divine nature and glorious exaltation in His resurrection. 
The risen, glorious Redeemer made no satisfaction 
of Justice and paid nothing over on behalf of anybody until 
after He ascended up on High. Then He appropriated of 
His merit to all who, during this Age, would accept the 
Father's call and drawing to become members of Christ's 
Body. To each of these He has imputed enough of His own 
merit to make good the deficiencies of their flesh, in order 
that they, like Himself, might present to God sacrifices holy 
and acceptable, and thereupon be begotten to the spirit nature. 

Later on, our Lord's human life, unforfeited and not yet 
given away, will be given away on behalf of Israel and the 



world, canceling "the sins of all the people" and securing for 
Himself the Mediatorial Throne of the Millennial Age, for 
the blessing of Israel, through its Mediator, and all the 
families of the earth through Israel, and under Israel's New 
Law Covenant... 

I note your second question, relative to our statement in 
THE WATCH TOWER of March 1, 1910, page 88, second column 
—where we set forth that Satan's "little season" will be after 
Messiah shall have delivered up the Kingdom to the Father. 
It is true that some years ago we were not so clear on this 
point as now— less positive. The great Mediator will indeed 
"destroy from amongst the people" all who will not obey 
Him, throughout the Millennial Age; so that at the transfer 
of His Kingdom and the vacating of His Mediatorship, the 
world of mankind will be perfect. The Mediator will step 
from between God and man, and Divine tests will be applied, 
to prove, to demonstrate, the heart-faithful. The sentence 
upon the disloyal is: "There will come fire from God out of 
Heaven and destroy them." This indicates a testing and 
punishing by Divine Justice. This would not be possible so 
long as the Mediatorial Kingdom held sway. However, we 
understand that our Lord will be the Father's Representative 
in connection with that exhibition of Divine Justice which will 
follow His Mediatorship, just as He was the Father's Representative 
and Agent before He came into the world to be our 
Redeemer. 

The trial will follow the thousand years of Christ's reign, 
at the conclusion of which He will deliver up the Kingdom 
to God, even the Father. Hence the loosing of Satan and the 
testing of the perfected race will be the result of their being 
turned over into the hands of absolute Justice, and in contradistinction 
to their having been in the hands of Mercy through 
the Mediator for a thousand years. That judgment, or test, 
therefore, will be of the Father, of Justice— a similar test to 
that which originally came upon Father Adam. 

However, it is written that all things are of the Father 

R5254 : page 173 

and by the Son. We are to understand that the glorious Son 
of God will be the Father's active Agent in respect to that 
Judgment, as well as in all other matters. But it will be the 
Father's Judgment, or the judgment of Justice, for the Son's 
Mediatorial Kingdom will have ended. 



REPORT OF THE GLASGOW CLASS I.B.S.A. 

DEARLY BELOVED PASTOR:- 

We have just held our annual business meeting, and we 
know you will unite with us in praising God for all His 
lovingkindness and tender mercies throughout 1912 in permitting 
us to have the privilege of serving in the Harvest 
Work. The following are a few of the items reported on: 

There are now more Departments, and more workers in 



these Departments, than ever before; and what is more encouraging 
there is more activity and energy displayed than 
at any previous time. Doubtless all taking part are realizing 
the shortness of the time and are doing with their might 
what their hands find to do. 
There are now nine Elders and twenty-three Deacons. 

R5254 : page 174 

the work being divided into nineteen Departments. A 
schedule of these divisions and appointments has been printed 
this session and a copy is enclosed herewith. 

We have thirty regular Church meetings each week, besides 
a number of occasional meetings from time to time, 
including a monthly Question Meeting, Quarterly Harvest 
Work Meeting, meetings to report progress, and extra meetings 
when Pilgrims visit us. The Elders hold a monthly 
business meeting, and all the elected brethren meet every 
Saturday to consider and advise on any matter coming 
forward. 

The printed syllabus enclosed includes all the regular 
Church meetings. These syllabuses are not only distributed 
among the brethren, but are also given to any interested who 
ask for them. 

Our meetings are as follows: 

(1) Seven Sunday morning meetings in different districts; 
aggregate attendance about 253. Two Sunday morning meetings 
outside boundaries, for which chairmen are provided 

from Glasgow; attendance about 40. 

(2) A united meeting on Sunday evenings, well advertised, 
for the Church and all interested; attendance varying from 
400 to 700. 

(3) Eleven Wednesday evening meetings in homes of the 
brethren; aggregate attendance, 146. 

(4) Eight Berean Studies on Fridays, and one on Sunday 
afternoon; total number of students, about 180. 

(5) One week-night united Church meeting on Monday 
evenings, for the study of "Tabernacle Shadows"; average 
attendance, about 90. 

Monthly Question Meetings are held about the last Saturday 
of the month, and questions are answered by the Elder 
brethren (who take the meeting in turn), or by a Pilgrim, 
when the Question Meeting fits in with his visit. 

A "Harvest Work Meeting" is held quarterly, on a Sunday 
afternoon, to hear and give experiences, and also to exhort 
one another, in the different branches of the work; average 
attendance, about 150. 

Visitation.— There are now 50 visitors (9 brothers and 
41 sisters) engaged in this work. It is intended that the 
visits should be monthly, and in case of sickness or distress 
oftener. 

The Volunteer Work is now divided into two sections; 
viz., extended Glasgow (being designated, "The Inner 
Circle"), and the 30 miles radius around Glasgow (being 
called "The Outer Circle"). The number of Peoples Pulpits 
distributed from January 1 to December 31, 1912, is 510,230 



for regular volunteer work, including special distribution in 
July; and the number of Everybodys Paper, for Class Extension 
work, is 291,600, making a total of 801,830. About 
200 Volunteers take part in this work. 

Occasional Colporteuring.— Thirty-six brethren are taking 
part in this branch, compared with twenty last year— an increase 
of sixteen. The number of books sold is close to 1,000. 

Besides these thirty-six, there are sixteen sisters and one 
brother from the Glasgow Church giving all their time to 
this work, and several other brethren, who are in readiness 
for another branch of the work, are devoting a good deal of 
time to colporteuring at present. 

Book-loaning.— Thirty-one brethren are taking part in 
this Department. At present there are 225 books in the work. 
Each one has 6 books, but some wish 12. This work seems 
to be opening up and we anticipate more will be done in this 
way. 

Local Pilgrim Service.— Twelve Churches are served, 
monthly visits being paid on request. 

Class Extension.— This work has increased rapidly during 
the past year. There have been 17 series held, which comprises 
15 series of 6 meetings, one of 3 meetings, one of 2 
meetings; and there have also been three single meetings; 
total number of meetings 98. Tracts distributed, 291,600; 
attendance averaging one person per 100 tracts distributed. 
The attention at all the meetings has been most marked. 

New classes have been formed in four places and existing 
classes strengthened in three places. 

The total expenditure has been approximately L190 ($950), 
averaging barely L2 ($10) per single meeting. 

Convention.— The outstanding feature of the past year 
was the General Scotch Convention, held July 25-28, and the 
presence of you, our dear Pastor, with us for three whole 
days. The number attending the Convention ranged from 
500 to 800. 

We appreciated very much, and benefited greatly by, your 
presence with us at that time. The Convention finished with 
a Love Feast in the Convention Hall, and a large public meeting 
in St. Andrews' Grand Hall, filled to overflowing, the 
attendance being about 5,000 and many being turned away. 

Baptisms at Glasgow, during 1912, numbered 81, and the 
number at the Memorial Supper in March was 363. 

At the close of the Business Meeting it was unanimously 
decided to send you a message of love, with the following 
texts: 

"The Lord bless thee and keep thee; the Lord make His 
face shine upon thee and be gracious unto thee; the Lord 
lift up His countenance upon thee and give thee peace."— 
Num. 6:24-26. 

"Wherefore, also, we pray always for you, that our God 
would count you worthy of this calling and fulfil all the good 
pleasure of His goodness and the work of faith with power; 
that the name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in 
you, and you in Him, according to the grace of our God and 
the Lord Jesus Christ."— 2 Thess. 1:11,12. 

And we wish to say how much we appreciate your loving 



interest in us, and all the help we receive from you through 
THE WATCH TOWER and through the many visits from Pilgrim 
brethren who come to us from time to time. We thank you 
and our Heavenly Father for all these blessings, and we would 
just like to say how much we are longing to see your face 
and to hear your voice again. Come soon! 
With much Christian love, 

GILBERT MACKENZIE, Secretary. 



"IT SATISFIES MY LONGINGS" 

DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

I came to the Lord in 1886, and had been a worker in the 
vineyard for over sixteen years, but on account of the inconsistency 
of Christian teachings, I, ten years ago, went out to 
seek the Truth somewhere else, having lost faith in Christianity. 
For ten long, weary years I roamed through the 
world. Theosophy, the Vedas, the Ancient Mysteries, Agnosticism, 
and all else have been the food of my soul. Finally, 
last Easter morning, I decided that Christianity, with all its 
faults and shortcomings, held out more hope for the weary 
than all the above mentioned husks together. True, I found 
some truths in all, but nothing, nothing to be compared with 
the Truth that is accessible even to the weakest Christian. 
Well, I found my way back— the old, old story of the prodigal's 
return— an Easter morning in my soul. 

Since then one of your tracts came into my hands, and I 
joyfully accepted the truths I found. I am now studying the 
SCRIPTURE STUDIES; I love them. 

I never thought that I would ever be able to believe in the 
miracles recorded in the Bible. But I do now. I now look on 
the laws of nature merely as the habits of God, and as I would 
set aside a habit whenever I thought expedient for a certain 
purpose, He would set a settled habit aside for the time 
being. 

As I said above, I am studying the SCRIPTURE STUDIES. I 
would also be pleased to subscribe to the WATCH TOWER, if 
your will be good enough to enter my name as a subscriber. 

Thanking you again for your kindness, I am 
Yours in Christ, 

ALEX. P. RIEDEL.-N.Y. 



THE LIGHT IN INDIA 

MY DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

I want to thank you for sample copy of THE WATCH 
TOWER, and also for Report on Foreign Mission Work, received 
a few months ago, and very much appreciated. 

I would like to have THE WATCH TOWER sent regularly, 
beginning with January 1913, to above address. I will send 
subscription price in due course. 

I am much interested in prophetic Bible Studies, and am 



looking for the Lord's speedy return. I have been working as 

R5255 : page 174 

a missionary in China for many years, and am now on furlough, 
most of which will be spent in Travancore, India. May 
I ask an interest in your prayers for future guidance? 
With thanks in anticipation, believe me to remain, 

Yours very sincerely. .—Travancore, India. 



REJOICING IN TRIBULATION 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Greeting in His name! Your good and encouraging letter 
of 17th inst. received and very much appreciated. 

While we suffered much loss of goods, we did, and still 
do, and intend always to cling closely to Rom. 8:28. Yes, we 
were in perfect peace. The flood of water did not reach our 
second floor by 18 inches; and though our neighbors left their 
homes and went to the hills, we stayed where we were (upstairs) 
seven days and eight nights, having plenty to eat and 

R5255 : page 175 

drink (thanks to your advice as to food for time of trouble). 
We went to bed every night and slept soundly. 

While some of those of the world noted and commented 
on our peace, others said it was wicked to take things so 
calmly and serenely while they (the world) were so worried 
and so many were losing their goods. 

Your brother and sister by His grace, 

MR. AND MRS. J. L. DILLI.-Ohio. 



R5255 : page 175 

BEREAN LESSONS AND TESTIMONY MEETINGS 

WE HAVE REQUESTED the traveling Pilgrims 
to do what they can to assist the different 
Classes with whom they meet to a proper appreciation 
of the great value of Berean Study 
Classes and Testimony Meetings. While we 
have advised these and described their successful 
operation and method in SCRIPTURE 
STUDIES, Vol. VI., some of the dear friends 
seem not to fully appreciate them. We believe 
this is because they have never seen 
them in proper operation. With good Berean Study 
Classes and Testimony Meetings rightly conducted, the 
I.B.S.A. Classes will surely be prosperous in spiritual 
things— whether they have any preaching or not. 
The Pilgrim Brethren are selected with care, and with 



the thought that they are well rounded out in Christian 
experience and along the lines of the Berean Studies and 
in leading Testimony Meetings. It is our thought, therefore, 
that if a Pilgrim visits a place where such meetings 
are not held, he cannot do the friends a better service than 
to give them a sample of how such meetings should be 
conducted to be interesting and profitable— along the lines 
indicated in Vol. VI. 

In places where such meetings are already in vogue, 
and are successful and well attended by the interested, 
sample meetings by the Pilgrims would not be so necessary. 
Nevertheless, we have suggested to them that where 
they serve a class more than one evening, and one of those 
is the regular Testimony Meeting evening, it will be well 
for them to conduct the Testimony Meeting along the lines 
of Vol. VI., closing in an hour, and then taking an extra 
half-hour for a heart-to-heart talk along the lines which 
the time, place and circumstances may suggest to them as 
most helpful to the Class. We have urged all the dear 
Brethren who do public speaking to confine their discourse 
to sixty minutes— and surely not to exceed seventy minutes 
—and that if for any reason they speak longer than 
this, they will kindly explain to us the particular reasons 
therefor. 

This is not done to hamper the brethren, but because 
uniformly long discourses are too strenuous for the public, 
and therefore apt to hinder the Cause we all wish to serve. 
Exceptions to this are made in the case of the two or 
three brethren who are generally used to open a series of 
meetings; for a special endeavor is then made to bring out 
an audience and a little extra time may be necessary, and 
in the case of especially interesting speakers, a long discourse 
may be wise. The average speaker, however, can 
accomplish more good in an hour than in two hours. 

In these and in all suggestions and regulations, dear 
friends, be assured that our aim, object, motive, is the 
Lord's glory and the blessing of His people. 



page 175 

BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
Series VI., Study XV. 
THE FOES AND BESETMENTS OF THE NEW CREATION 
JULY 6 
Read p. 603, par. 1, to p. 605, par. 2. 

(7) What is "fanaticism," and how should it be avoided? 
and what is absolutely essential in order to properly apply the 
principles of righteousness to our daily lives? P. 603, par. 1. 

(8) What thought should constantly be kept in mind by 



the New Creature? And what is the only restriction we 
should recognize along this line? P. 603, par. 2. 

THE WORLD AS AN ENEMY OF THE NEW CREATION 

(9) Why is the spirit of the world in general opposed to 
the standard of the New Creation? P. 604, par. 1, 2. 

(10) Why is the world one of the chief enemies of the 

New Creation, and why is a collision unavoidable? P. 604, par. 3. 

(11) Explain why even the noblest aims and objects of 
the world in general are contrary to the standards of the 
New Creation. P. 605, par. 1. 

(12) With what spirit should we meet the hatred and 
opposition of the world? P. 605, par. 2. 

JULY 13 

Read p. 606, par. 1, 2, to p. 611, par. 1. 

(13) Explain the Scriptural injunction, "Love not the 
world," etc. (1 John 2:15.) P. 606, par. 1, 2. 

(14) Has the Lord set for us the herculean task of reforming 
the world? and would it be proper for us to make 

a business of denouncing the present order of things? P. 
607, par. 1,2. 

(15) What Scriptural examples in this respect may we 
well follow? P. 607, par. 3. 

(16) What is the special work for the "Royal Priesthood" 
at the present time? P. 608, par. 1, 2. 

THE GREAT ADVERSARY, SATAN 

(17) Quote Scriptural proofs of the personality of Satan. 
Pp. 609 to 611. 

(18) What Scriptural evidence that Satan is not only the 
enemy of the Church but also of all mankind? P. 611, par. 1. 

JULY 20 

Read p. 611, par. 2, to p. 614, par. 1. 

(19) Explain how Satan's opposition to the New Creature 
differs from that of the world and of our own flesh. 

P. 611, par. 2. 

HE WAS A LIAR AND A MURDERER FROM THE BEGINNING 

(20) What Scripture declares that Satan began the rebellion 
against God, and led our first parents into sin and death? 

P. 612, par. 1, first fourteen lines. 

(21) Give Scriptural proof that Satan was created perfect 
and upright. P. 612, par. 1, last part. 

(22) How has God created all His intelligent creatures 
so that being perfect does not insure remaining perfect? 
P. 612, par. 2. 

(23) Are there different orders and positions among the 



angelic ranks? And how did the angels probably regard the 
creation of man? P. 613, par. 1. 

(24) What was the probable reasoning of Satan with respect 
to our first parents? P. 613, par. 2; P. 614, par. 1. 

JULY 27 



Read p. 614, par. 2, to p. 619, par. 1. 



(25) How may Satan have suggested to Eve's mind the 
thought of injustice on Jehovah's part? P. 614, par. 2; P. 615, 
par. 1. 

(26) What was possibly Satan's disappointment over the 
result of his deception? And why was Adam's responsibility 
greater than Eve's? P. 615, par. 2. 

(27) Did the results of Satan's first lie tend toward his 
reformation? P. 616, par. 1. 

(28) What is the supreme object of all Satan's efforts? 
P. 616, par. 2. 

(29) Since the Truth is much more reasonable than Error, 
why has it not prevailed, and what religious system has been 
Satan's masterpiece and worthy representative? P. 617, par. 1. 

(30) Show how Isaiah 14:12-17 applies to Satan and his 
chief representative system. P. 618, par. 1, 2. 

(3 1) What is the similarity between literal and symbolic 
Babylon? And what will be their doom, as well as that of 
Satan? P. 619, par. 1. 



page 177 

VOL. XXXIV JUNE 15 No. 12 
A. D. 1913-A. M. 6041 



CONTENTS 

"Your Redemption Draweth Nigh" 179 

The "Secret Place" of His Saints 179 

Retribution for Wilful Sin 180 

A Word to the Watchers 181 

Evidences of the New Day 181 

Watchmen for A Purpose 182 

The Messengers of God in "The Last Days" 182 

Christ's Presence A Stumbling-Stone 183 

Hope (Poem) 183 

Spiritual Vision Proportionate to Heart 
Purity 184 

Individual Claims for Retribution 185 

General and Special Rights Under Law 185 

Our Share In the Cup of Suffering 186 

Making the Wilderness Bloom 186 

"With What Judgment Ye Judge" 187 

Moses Called to Service 188 



The Refiner's Fire (Poem) 189 

Men of Destiny 190 

Some Interesting Questions 191 

page 178 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



R5264 : page 178 

VOLUNTEER EXTENSION WORK 

The Volunteers this year are doing nobly and we have 
splendid ammunition. No doubt the results will be great. 
However, we must not hope to know the details until we reach 
the Kingdom. Meantime it is ours to do faithfully what our 
hands find to do— what our Lord privileges us to do. We are 
His ambassadors, His witnesses. 

We suggest that Class Extension work find parallel in 
Volunteer Extension work. After you have served your place 
of residence, seek the Lord's blessing in an endeavor to extend 
the distribution of free literature to other towns and cities 
within a reasonable radius. The Society is pleased to 
supply the ammunition free of all charges. It merely wishes, 
with the order, the names of the places to be served and the 
assurance that the work undertaken will (D.V.) be promptly 
done— that the literature will not be permitted to lie by unused. 
Remember that census population includes infants and that a 
proper estimate of one paper to the family would be one to 



five of the population. That is to say, a town of 5,000 would 
require 1,000 copies of the Volunteer matter. In cases where 
the population is found to be foreign, remember we have free 
literature in nearly all languages. 

"He that reapeth receiveth wages and gathereth fruit unto 
eternal life," is the message of our Master to us, one and all. 



R5255 : page 179 

"YOUR REDEMPTION DRAWETH NIGH" 

Come, My people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy 
doors about thee; hide thyself as it were for a little moment, 
until the indignation be overpast. For, behold, the Lord 
cometh out of His place to punish the inhabitants of the 
earth for their iniquity; the earth also shall disclose her 
blood, and shall no more cover her slain."— Isaiah 26:20,21. 

THERE is an affectionate tenderness about 

these words of our Heavenly Father which 

helps us to realize His great love for His 

people, and His special care over them. 

But while appreciating very gratefully this 

special love and care in the comfort, encouragement 

and protection afforded us by 

our Heavenly Father in the world's great 

tribulation, we would come far short of having 

His Spirit if we should regard the matter 

with self-complacency, forgetful of His great love for 

the world also. This love, veiled behind the clouds of 

His righteous indignation against their sins, in wisdom 

strikes the heavenly blow which will shatter all their idols 

and humble their pride in the dust, that so the sore 

wounds of His wrath may prepare them for their everlasting 

healing. 

If God so loved the world as to give His Only Begotten 
Son, "that whosoever believeth in Him should not perish 
[eternally], but have everlasting life," He loves them 
still, and it is His love that wields the rod for their correction. 
He also would have His people so regard His 
judgments, and while they rejoice in the sunshine of His 
favor, because by faith they have come into an attitude 
which can receive it, He would have them share His spirit 
toward the world; and while the blows of His righteous 
indignation fall heavily upon the world, He would have 
us point them to the cause of their calamities and to the 
only remedy— "In returning [to God] and rest [in Him 
alone] shall ye be saved; in quietness and in confidence 
shall be your strength." "Be still," saith the Lord, "and 
know that I am God; I will be exalted among the nations, 
I will be exalted in the earth."— Isa. 30:15; 
Psa. 46:10. 

But who are those whom the Lord is pleased to designate 
by the endearing name, "My people"? Does this 



class include every one upon whom His name is named? 
No; for that would include a great number of false professors. 
As the Psalmist expresses it, it includes all those 
who have made a covenant with God by sacrifice (Psa. 50:5.) 
—all the consecrated and faithful children of God, 
however young or weak they may be, whose hearts are 
fixed firmly and resolutely to be truly loyal and obedient 
children by His assisting grace. 

To be numbered among the children of God is a great 
privilege; but it means much more than many seem to 
understand— much more both on their part and on God's 
part. On their part, it signifies, not merely a name to 
live in some great organization which bears the Christian 
name, but that they have become sons and heirs of God 
through Christ; that they have fully consecrated themselves 
to God to follow in the footsteps of His dear Son; 
that they have renounced the vain pomp and glory of the 
world and have solemnly covenanted to live apart from 
its spirit, ambitions, hopes and aims; and not only so, but 
that in pursuance of that covenant, they are striving daily 
to be faithful, and meekly to take up their cross and follow 
their Leader and Head, Christ Jesus. 

On God's part it signifies the fulfilment of all His 
gracious promises to such through Christ, both for the 
life that now is, and for that which is to come. It signifies 
that in the present life we have His Fatherly Love, 
care, discipline, counsel, teaching, protection and encouragement, 
to the end; and that afterwards we shall be 
received into His glorious presence, and into everlasting 
rest, joy and peace. Oh, how blessed to be the people of 
God! even in the present life the reward of His favor is 
beyond computation. 

THE "SECRET PLACE" OF HIS SAINTS 

The place of hiding is "the secret place of the Most 
High," "under the shadow of the Almighty." (Psa. 91:1-9.) 
This secret place of the Most High, Beloved, is 
the place of intimate communion and fellowship with God, 
through the blessed privilege of prayer and through faith 
in His precious Word and His promised providential care. 

"When all around our souls gives way, 
He then is all our hope and stay." 

Oh, how precious is this hiding place! What rest and 
refreshment we find in the midst of the commotion that is 
even now bestirring the whole world, but especially the 
nations of Christendom— rest from the pride and folly 
of men in their abortive efforts to readjust the present 
unsatisfactory social order; and rest from the strife of 
tongues in their equally vain attempt to evolve the clear 
principles of truth and righteousness from the present 
confusion of human traditions. (Psa. 31:20.) Here we 
find rest, peace, light and joy, which the world can neither 
give nor take away. 



Few indeed are those who can understand our motives 
in thus withdrawing from the world and from the various 

R5255 : page 180 

organizations of the nominal Christian Church, to walk 

alone with God; and many are the reproaches which such 

must endure for His name's sake. But fear not; "shut 

thy doors [of faith] about thee," and heed not the reproaches; 

turn a deaf ear to them, and "Sanctify the Lord 

of Hosts Himself, and let Him be your fear, and let Him 

be your dread," (Isa. 8:13.); and, "Above all, take [for 

the conflict before you] the shield of faith, wherewith ye 

shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked." 

(Eph. 6: 16.) "And this is the victory that overcometh the 

world, even our faith."— I Jno. 5:4. 

It is to inspire such a faith as this that the Lord has 
offered us, in addition to all His precious promises, so 
many encouragements to simple, childlike trust in Him, 
and that He has bidden us to turn a deaf ear to the reproaches 
of man, saying, "Hearken unto Me, ye that know 
righteousness, the people in whose heart is My Law; fear 
ye not the reproach of men, neither be afraid of their 
revilings....I, even I, am He that comforteth 
you; who art thou, that thou shouldest be afraid of a man 
that shall die, and of the son of a man that shall be made 
as grass; and forgettest the Lord thy Maker, that has 
stretched forth the Heavens, and laid the foundations of 
the earth; and hast feared continually every day because 
of the fury of the oppressor, as if he were ready to destroy? 
...I have put My Words in thy mouth, and 
I have covered thee in the shadow of Mine hand, that I 
may plant the Heavens [establish the new Heavens], and 
lay the foundations of the earth [the new earth], and 
say unto Zion [the people tried and proved by these afflictions 
to be the worthy heirs of the new Kingdom— the 
new Heavens and earth], Thou art MY PEOPLE."— 
Isa. 51:7,12,13,16. 

While the storm of trouble which is to engulf the 
whole world will affect all men, both individually and collectively, 
the Lord's people, who seek only to draw yet 
closer to Him, entering more fully into the secret place 
of communion and fellowship and rest in Him, and shutting 
the doors of faith about them, will there be safely 
hidden from the alarm and fear and trembling that will 
take hold upon all other classes. And while they patiently 
endure its effects upon their temporal interests, they will 
rejoice not only in the knowledge of God's overruling 
Providence, in the whirlwind and in the storm as well as 
in the calms of life, but also in His blessed assurance that 
His wrath will be thus revealed only "for a little moment," 
and then will His righteous Kingdom be manifested 
in power and great glory, and they "shall shine 
forth as the sun. "-Matt. 13:43. 

Speaking of the trouble at the end of the Gospel Age, 
our Lord said, "Watch ye, therefore, and pray always, 



that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these things 
that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of 
Man." (Luke 21:36.) Again (vs. 28) He said, "When 
these things begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift 
up your heads; for your redemption draweth nigh." "My 
people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy doors." 

How much trouble there will be in our passing into the 
secret "chambers," in passing unto the Lord, we do not 
know. Yet when this trouble comes, there will be such a 
blessing from the Lord that those who go through it will 
be able to rejoice in tribulation. Whatever their experiences 
will be, these will be joyful in that they will have 
the thought of being forever with the Lord. We can rejoice 
even as did St. Stephen. 

RETRIBUTION FOR WILFUL SIN 

Verse 21 seems to refer to the operation of the principle 
of justice in God's judgments upon the world. The 
Heavenly Father stands for Justice, and He has appointed 
that all of His Mercy shall be exercised through the Lord 
Jesus Christ. Our Lord will be specially identified with 
the trouble upon the nations, but it will not be so much 
His work as the Father's. The Day of Trouble is called 
the Day of Jehovah. We read that "In that Day His feet 
shall stand upon the Mount of Olives," and that there 
shall be a great earthquake.— Zech. 14:4. 

While God has done nothing for mankind during the 
past six thousand years, but has rested so far as any work 
of Restitution is concerned, yet in some instances He 
has interfered to prevent the spread of evil, as in the 
case of the Amalekites and of the Sodomites. The Scriptures 
seem to indicate that in the end of this Age He will 
intervene in the affairs of mankind, and execute justice in 
the time of trouble. 

In the Scriptures, Justice is represented as calling for 
retribution. The blood of the murderers' victims is said 
to cry for vengeance. Whether the sin has been literal 
murder, or has been some injustice which has led to 
crime or suicide, Justice will require of humanity this 
much of retribution on this score. Justice demands that 
the children of Adam shall suffer. The Church of Christ 
is a separate class, taken out from the world and having 
their sins forgiven. They are upholders of Truth and 
righteousness. 

But this time of trouble coming upon the world will be 
the time when Justice will get its dues, so to speak. Justice 
will take its "pound of flesh." It will require for the 
more or less wilful sins of humanity. The class that has 

R5256 : page 180 

reaped the benefit of the spoliation of the poor in the past, 
will have to pay some of the toll to Justice in squaring the 
accounts. The Apostle James says, "Go to now, ye rich 
men, weep and howl for the miseries that shall come 



upon you." We are not to think, however, that in this 
present time God is dealing with the rich. None are on 
trial now except the Church of Christ. The others are 
merely the world of mankind, one part of which God 
will permit to wreak a measure of vengeance on the other 
part. But man's extremity will be God's opportunity. 
His appointed time for the establishment of His Kingdom 
will have come, and He will cause this wrath of man to 
work out good for humanity. 

Those who are causing this trouble to come on are not 
aware of what they are doing. But when satisfaction 
shall have been made to Justice, Messiah's Kingdom will 
interpose. We read that "except those days should be 
shortened, there should no flesh be saved." This exacting 
of a penalty for such sins as we have enumerated is not 
at all in conflict with the Bible teaching that Christ died 
for sin. Jesus pays the sin-debt of the world. 

The sin-debt of the world was a death penalty. Unless 
the Lord Jesus had met that penalty, the world would 
never be released. That death penalty would have remained 
upon the world, without any injustice in any way. 
The selfishness which has led to murder is, however, 
much more than the meeting of Adam's sin penalty by 
our Lord. Whoever has, through injustice, been responsible 
for murderous conditions is held responsible for 
those conditions. 

We read that in the end of the Jewish Age our Lord 
said that God would require from that generation a reckoning 
for all the righteous blood shed from the time of 
Abel down. (Matt. 23:35.) And the trouble which came 
upon the Jewish nation in the end of their Age fully 
settled that account. They had light and knowledge, and 
thus were held responsible. They were obliged to suffer 
because of the injuries that were not only perpetrated 
by some, but endorsed or winked at by others. 

R5256 :page 181 

LIGHT AND RESPONSIBILITY 

In the close of this Age, it would seem, the judgment 
of the Lord will be upon Christendom, which has had 
much light, although at times only a refracted light. But 
a measure of responsibility has come with it, and apparently 
the Lord's edict is that they shall not escape the 
penalty. From this generation He will require all the 
righteous blood shed during this Age, upon it, even as He 
did from the Jews in the end of their Age. This will 
cause the great time of trouble here, as it did there. So 
far as the world is concerned, they might not perceive the 
relationship between this time and the past. We know 
only from the Scriptures. God gives us this understanding, 
that we may have the greater poise and comfort of 
mind. 

In thinking of the nature of the tribulation at the end 
of this Age, we are first of all to remember that it is a 



tribulation coming upon the world and the hypocrites. 
The Lord tells us that if we are faithful, we shall not 
come into the condemnation coming upon the world. The 
intimation is that those who are not faithful enough to 
get into the Little Flock will come into this condemnation 
with the world. So the Lord tells us of some who 
will get their portion with the hypocrites.— Matt. 24:51. 

Only the wheat class constitute the Church of Christ. 
Only they will be gathered into the barn. (Matt. 13:30.) 
The tare class will undergo this time of trouble 
coming upon the world. The hypocrite class will include 
the rich of this world. These are addressed by St. James, 5:1-6. 
In these verses, the Apostle is turning aside from 
his line of thought. Then he addresses the Church again. 
The trouble will be especially hard on the rich, who are 
represented as weeping and howling for misery. 

The Great Company class is typically represented by 
the scapegoat of Israel's Atonement Day ceremonies. 
The bullock typifies our Lord Jesus, and the Lord's goat 
His faithful followers. (Heb. 13:11-13.) After the 
faithful ones have finished their course, then something 
will be done with the scapegoat— the Great Company. 
The account in Leviticus is very specific that the high 
priest will then lay upon the head of the scapegoat all 
the iniquities of all Israel. (Lev. 16:21.) All the sins 
of all the people were laid upon the head of the scapegoat, 
that it might bear them away— make full satisfaction. 
As has been suggested, God has made provision for 
the cancellation of original sin through Christ, and has 
made arrangements for the satisfaction of Justice, so far 
as all the other sins of the world are concerned, through 
the Great Company class. 

There is a correspondency between the end of the 
Jewish Age and the end of this Gospel Age in this way: 
As expiation for the taking of the life of Jesus was required 
of the Jewish nation, so at the end of the Gospel 
Age, the sacrificed life of the Church will in a measure 
be required of nominal Spiritual Israel. 

The Lord seems to give this suggestion, when He 
says that "the blood of all the prophets, which was shed 
from the foundation of the world, may be required of 
this generation; from the blood of Abel unto the blood 
of Zacharias, which perished between the altar and the 
temple: verily I say unto you, it shall be required of this 
generation." (Luke 11:50,51.) And St. Paul writes 
that all things written in the prophecies shall be fulfilled. 
So in the end of this Age there are certain things charged 
up against Christendom for their evil deeds. This will 
include all the persecutions of this Gospel Age, including 
also, presumably, all the persecutions against the Jews. 
Therefore the Scriptures indicate that a great time of 
trouble similar to that which came upon the Jewish nation 
will now come upon all Christendom. The experiences 
of Israel in the year 70 will be paralleled in the 
experiences of the year 1915. 



R5256 :page 181 

A WORD TO THE WATCHERS 

"Let us watch and be sober."— 1 Thess. 5:6. 

THE APOSTLE PAUL is addressing the 
Church, himself included, when he says, "Let 
us watch and be sober." He indicates in the 
context that we are to watch for the Day, 
for Messiah's Kingdom, which will produce 
that Day. We know to expect the rising of 
the Sun of Righteousness. The Church is to 
be delivered from sin and death early in the 
morning of that wonderful Day. Their part 
is to be in the First Resurrection, to glory, 
honor and immortality with their Lord. 

St. Paul tells us that God has so arranged His Program 
that the Day will come as a thief in the night— 
stealthily: and that those who are asleep will not be aware 
that the Day has come, and might therefore not be expected 
to be in a waiting attitude. Our Master's words 
are, "Take heed to yourselves, lest... that Day 
come upon you unawares. ...Watch ye therefore." 
(Luke 21:34,36.) We believe that He leaves the matter 
in obscurity, because it will be better for us as a 
whole not to know the exact time. For instance, in the 
long period of the Dark Ages it was better that Christians 
did not know just when the time of Christ's return would 
come. There were wonderful events transpiring in their 
day, and have been, in fact, in every day, but so much the 
more, we read, as the Day approaches. 

While the Adversary is ever active in his efforts to do 
harm to the Lord's cause, he will be still more seductive in 
his evil influences during the last days. We must therefore, 
as the Day draws near, be more and more alert in 
guarding every point of attack. The Lord allows us to do 
this watching, and He will reward the faithful ones, for 
He takes pleasure in the watchers. These will not be careless. 
Any who are careless will not be of the Kingdom 
class, for they are not of the kind that He wishes to 
glorify. 

God wishes those who are awake to be learning more 
and more of His Plan. These will grow in grace and in 
knowledge as they watch. They will not be like the world. 
The world will be in a stupor— they will be unworthy of 
the Day. Darkness covers the whole earth at the present 
time. But God's people are granted a special light. They 
love the light. "Thy Word is a lamp unto my feet, and a 
light unto my path." (Psa. 119:105.) It is not a light like 
that of the moon, which reaches far out, but merely a little 
light at the feet of those who are watching for it. 
Those who are going to sleep will find their light going 
out. 



EVIDENCES OF THE NEW DAY 

The way that the Lord has been marking out for His 
people all down through the Age has been a narrow way— 
a very narrow way. His light is given only to those who 
are seeking— those who are waiting— those who are watching. 
These will discern the dawning of the morning. 

Others will not see. They have not watched to catch 
the foregleams of the New Day. While things transpire 
that are evidences of the New Day, they are quite unconscious. 
For instance, the wonderful blessings of our 

R5257 :page 182 

day are manifestations of the New Dispensation. The 
dawn is here. We are astonished that the people do not 
see. But they attribute these wonderful things to different 
causes. They think that these are merely the results of 
man's taking another step forward in progress from the 
monkey-stage. He has become more intelligent, goes to 
concerts, churches, etc. He is getting farther away from 
the monkey! The power to use steam and electricity 
proves to these that we are entering the Brain Age! They 
forget that the few are talented inventors, etc. 

We can see that all these great blessings belong to the 
New Dispensation. God is bringing it about. We can see 
that it is not the educated people, but those less educated, 
who have discovered the wonderful inventions most useful 
to man. The inventions which have proved the greatest 
blessings the world has ever known have been discovered 
by unlearned men. These things are not due to 
the "brain age," as they tell us. Perhaps none of the 
present generation will compare with Shakespeare; perhaps 
none will compare with St. Paul; none perhaps will 
compare with Solomon, or David, or Moses. 

WATCHMEN FOR A PURPOSE 

The Apostle says, "Let us watch and be sober." We 
cannot say that he here refers to abstinence from the use 
of liquors, tobacco and other things which have a stupefying 
effect on the nerves. The thought is that we should 
be watchful and sober in mind. We find a great many 
people who are excitable— carried about by every wind of 
doctrine. They cannot give the reason for what they accept. 
They do not know that the Truth is intended for 
only the one class of people— for those who are watching. 

How carefully we should watch all the increasing signs 
of the New Day! But the watchman who stands at the 
post of duty, and sees things going on, but keeps his 
mouth shut, is of no use at all. We want a watchman for 
a purpose! Those who are on the alert should call the 
attention of others to these wonderful things. They 
should seek to arouse the Household of Faith. 

There are people who are as fully consecrated as ourselves, 



perhaps, only they are not awake. We should 

give them a kindly shake to arouse them to see the wonderful 

things. And since we are to be called away soon 

to the marriage, we are to remember that a part of our 

watching should be to keep our garments white. We are 

to watch to some purpose. If we realized how near the 

Bridegroom is, how careful we would be of our robes! 

Others do not know, but the Bride-elect knows how near 

the Bridegroom is. She will watch and be sober. 

In one sense of the word, there might be many things 
to lead to excitability. We might merely jump up and 
down as we see the wonderful things, and clap our hands, 
etc. But not so! We are to be sober. Yet we are not to 
be stupid— stolid. We should remember that the Lord is 
giving us this knowledge to be used, and we should use 
it more and more. As we more clearly see our imperfections, 
we should watch and be sober, and we shall accordingly 
be circumspect, we shall be helpful to others, 
and will put on more and more the fruits and graces of 
the Holy Spirit— patience, meekness, gentleness, brotherly-kindness, 
love. And as we watch, we shall be putting 
off anger, malice, hatred, envy, strife. Thus we shall be 
pleasing and acceptable to the Bridegroom, and we shall 
thus be making ourselves ready to enter in with Him into 
the joys and blessings that are now so near— at the door. 



R5257 : page 182 

THE MESSENGERS OF GOD IN "THE LAST DAYS" 

"He shall give His angels [messengers] a charge concerning 
thee, to guard thee in all thy ways."— Psalm 91:11. 

IN THE MIDST of the "perilous times" of this 
"evil day," and of the warning voices of the 
Holy Prophets and Apostles pointing out 
snares and pestilences and subtle dangers on 
every hand— and in the midst, too, of a realizing 
sense of the actual existence of such 
evil besetments and perils— how precious to 
the saints are the assurances of Divine protection 
and care and personal love! 

Evidently the person referred to in our 
text as giving a charge, or message, is Jehovah, the 
Heavenly Father. The Prophet David is prophesying in 
respect to some person, then future. That person was 
primarily, we believe, the Lord Jesus Christ; and secondarily, 
all those whom He has accepted as members of His 
Body throughout this Gospel Age— the Messiah class, 
Head and members. The words imply a special care of 
God over this class. All through the Scriptures they are referred 
to as those whom God specially loves and specially 
cares for. Our Lord Jesus is the Only Begotten, the Well-beloved 
Son, and all those who are His members are peculiarly 



loved. Jesus said to some of His faithful disciples, 
"The Father Himself loveth you." 

The charge given to the angels we would understand 
to have a very broad application. The Apostle Paul assures 
us that the angels of God are ministering spirits sent 
forth to minister unto and to serve those who shall be heirs 
of salvation, the saved ones of this Gospel Age. Yes, all 
of these, because believers in Christ, because at heart faithful, 
because fully consecrated to the Lord and begotten of 
His Spirit, are the special and happy objects of His grace, 
ministered to and served by the invisible messengers. Our 
Lord Jesus sets forth practically the same thought in His 
declaration, "Their angels do always behold [have access 
to] the face of My Father." The Master's words seem to 
imply that one or more of these angels have charge over 
the consecrated ones, the Very Elect. 

Our Lord uses a different figure of speech from that of 
the Apostle, as though He would assure us that these 
messengers would not be delayed in caring for our interests. 
They would not be hindered by more important 
Heavenly business, but would at once have direct access 
to the Divine presence and attention, so that our interests 
would have all needed consideration. Our Lord would 
have us realize that we are of the House of Sons, under 
Himself the chief Son, hence no time is lost in bringing 
our interests to the Father. Our interests have first 
place, our angels have always access to the Father. Before 
we speak, He knows our minds. Before we realize 
our own necessities, He has made provision for them. A 
wonderful watch-care has been arranged. It is hard for 
us to understand how the Almighty God can give such 
particular care and attention to our needs. Instead of being 
puffed up that God has manifested such loving consideration 
towards us, it should make us feel how little we are, 
how unworthy of such blessings. 

Although the Father makes such use of Heavenly 
messengers, this by no means invalidates the thought that 
the Lord's earthly children are frequently used of Him 
as ministers, servants, the one of another. Indeed, we 
may be assured that the invisible messengers are required 
generally to act through human instrumentalities. Of 
this we have illustrations in the Harvest work, supervised 
by our present Lord and His Heavenly hosts, yet in the 
main carried on by members of His Body in the flesh. 

The Apostle Paul has stated that the Lord makes His 

R5257 : page 183 

ministers, or servants, a flaming fire, and intimates to us 
that any and every agency and power that Divine providence 
uses is a part of that care over His people. (Heb. 1:7.) 
In other words, every agency used of God— whether 
it be fire or electricity or man, or whatever— would be a 
messenger of God. And whatever would not be to His 
praise and work out what He chooses, He is able to restrain 
—as He tells us.— Psalm 76:10. 



OVERCOMERS DEVELOPED BY TRIAL 

These angels are to "keep thee in all thy ways"— not 
only in all the affairs of the Church, both individually and 
collectively, but also in all times; it was kept during the 
Dark Ages as well as at other times. But this care will 
not keep us from temptation. None can be of this elect 
Church unless they have trials. In order to have the 
overcoming qualities of heart they must have the tests. 
But the Lord's promised grace is to be with them for their 
assistance— not to overcome for them, but to sustain them. 
His grace is sufficient for us. He does not make up for a 
poor will; but He does make up for imperfect bodies. If 
the will is poor, He does not want such in His elect 
Church. He wants His people to be strong in will- 
nothing doubting— overcomers. 

The next verse of the Psalm from which our text is 
taken proceeds to say that these messengers which have a 
charge over the affairs of the Church, Head and Body, 
will keep the feet from stumbling. In a general way we 
might apply the term feet to some members of the Body 
all down, in all times of the Age; as we might say, for 
instance, one member is a hand, and one a foot, etc. The 
Church, resting on those feet members all the way down, 
throughout the Gospel Age, will be guided aright; they 
will not be allowed to stumble; for, "Thy Word is a lamp 
unto my feet and a light unto my pathway." Thus they 
would be enabled to surmount the difficulties in their path. 

So all down through the Gospel Age the messengers of 
the Lord have helped His people over all of their trials. 
But this reference to the feet seems especially applicable 
to the last members of the Body of Christ. "How beautiful 
upon the mountains are the feet of him that bringeth 
good tidings, that publisheth peace. ..that saith 
unto Zion, Thy God reigneth!" (Isa. 52:7.) This would 
seem to apply to the last members of the Church. This 
could not have been said all the way down the Age. It is 
only for us who are living at the present time to say. 

These various manifestations of progress that we see, 
are just beginning. The new regime is only opening. 

R5258 :page 183 

After our Lord shall have delivered and glorified the 
Church, then He will begin the work with the world. 
None had the right to say, "Thy God reigneth," in the 
past; but since 1878, we are making this proclamation. 

CHRIST'S PRESENCE A STUMBLING-STONE 

The text seems to imply that the feet members at this 
time would be in a position of special trial, and be as a 
stumbling-stone. And this calls to our remembrance that 
the Lord foretold this, saying, "He shall be. ..for 
a stone of stumbling and for a rock of offense to both the 



houses of Israel." (Isa. 8:14.) This stone was stumbled 
over in the end of the Jewish Age. (I Peter 2:8.) The 
Scriptures set forth that Jesus is the Way. The Lord 
is a Stumbling-Stone in the pathway of many. These 
passages do not refer to the world. It was not the Gentile 
nations that stumbled over Jesus at His First Advent, 
but it was some of the true Israelites who were there 
stumbled. And the text implies the stumbling of some 
true Spiritual Israelites because of the coming of the 
Lord in a way totally different from what they had 
imagined. So we believe that there are very many good 
Christian people today who are stumbling over Christ's 
Presence. They thought so and so; they imagined so and 
so. And all is so different from what they had imagined 
and expected that it is just as it was in the end of the 
Jewish Age, when the rabbis stumbled. 

The question is, why should not the angels have charge 
over all good people, so that they would not stumble? Is 
not this the promise? We answer that the promise is made 
to all who are of the elect class. But in order to remain 
members of this Body, they must all stand the trial. It 
will be a test. Are they willing to have the assistance of 
the angels— messengers? Are they willing to surmount 
these difficulties and to remain in the way? 

One class will be in a condition to receive the trials in 
the proper manner; another class will be so self-confident, 
so overcharged with the cares of this life, and so lacking 
in spiritual development, that they will not be ready to 
avail themselves of the services of the angels. This is 
because God uses as His messengers some whom the world 
will not be ready to receive. 

PARALLELISM BETWEEN JEWISH AND GOSPEL AGES 

In the Jewish Age the Lord used some whom the 
scribes, the doctors of the Law and the chief priests could 
not accept at all. If He wanted to use agents, or channels, 
or messengers, to teach the people, why did He not 
choose the learned scribes or the pompous Pharisees of 
that day? Why did the Lord use as His messengers men 
who had been fishermen, tax-gatherers— persons whom 
the learned would think entirely unfit as instructors, or 
teachers? We recall that in the end of the Jewish Age 
it was written of two of them (and perhaps of them all) 
that the people perceived that they were unlearned and 
ignorant men. (Acts 4:13.) How could it be that God 
would pass by some of the most learned of that day? 
"Thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, 
and hast revealed them unto babes. Even so, Father: for 
so it seemed good in Thy sight."— Matt. 1 1:25,26. 

So today the Lord is using channels, agencies, messengers, 
that are not acceptable to many whom they approach. 
And while these are making up their minds to believe, 
slow in this because overcharged with the cares of this 
life, the elect company will be made up. Then the others 
will say, "Lord, Lord, open unto us." But the Lord will 



declare that He cannot recognize them as members of His 
Body, the Elect. They will not have shown the spirit of 
meekness, gentleness, patience, love, necessary to give 
them a place in this Body. So it will be only the Body 
members who will be lifted up by the messengers and carried 
safely through the trials and difficulties which will be 
permitted to test the love, loyalty and obedience to the will 
of God, of all who have made with Him a Covenant of 
Sacrifice— even unto death. 



HOPE 



"O Father, just to see Thee face to face, 

E'er endless death 
Should claim me for its own- 
To hear Thy voice, behold Thy Throne! 

And for one moment 
Hear Thee call me Thine, and Thine alone! 

Ah ! that were worth 
Long years of suffering and pain. 

"But what, O God, must be the joy of this— 

To see Thy face, 
To feel Thy touch, and folded to Thy breast 
To hear Thee say, "We ne'er shall part!" 

Break not, O heart! 
Though thou hast naught of worth, 

Be this thy plea 
God's own Almighty love, and Christ's sufficiency. 
—A Friend. 



R5258 : page 184 

SPIRITUAL VISION PROPORTIONATE TO HEART PURITY 

"Be ye clean, that bear the 
vessels of the Lord."— Isa. 52:11. 

THE VESSELS of the Lord in the Tabernacle, 
and also in the Temple, were those vessels 
which were connected with the holy services 
—in the Court, in the Holy and the Most 
Holy. They consisted of hooks, censer, pans 
snuffers, cups, bowls— a variety of precious 
vessels. Those used in the Holy and the 
Most Holy were of gold, and those used in 
the Court were of copper. 

The only ones who were allowed to handle 
these vessels at all were the consecrated class. The 
priests handled these in the Holy and the Most Holy in 
certain parts of the service, and in less important services 
they were covered up and borne in the hands of the 



Levites. So the vessels were handled only by the priests 
and the Levites. They required a cleansing before being 
used, and so were washed. Every bearer of these was required 
to be cleansed, typically washed free from sin. 

In the antitype, our Lord is the great High Priest. 
The most faithful of His followers are those who are 
counted as the Priesthood in God's sight, on trial now to 
see whether they will constitute the Priests in glory. But 
all who have made consecration have the Robe of Christ's 
Righteousness. Whoever is not thus clothed upon by the 
righteousness of Christ, whoever is not thus justified in 
God's sight, can have neither part nor lot in handling the 
holy things— the precious truths. 

The antitypical significance of the Prophet's exhortation 
in our text is that as in the type God required that 
everything should be clean, so we must be clean, pure 
of heart. "Blessed are the pure in heart." We have not 
perfection of flesh at the present time. When we have 
come into Christ, this imperfection of the flesh is said to 
be covered by a clean, white robe, representing the righteousness, 
the merit, of Christ. We must abide in Him. 
So long as we are in the flesh, we must have the Robe of 
Christ's Righteousness, in order to be clean. 

Moreover, as it was required of the priests that they 
keep their robes clean, so we are exhorted to put away 
all filthiness of the flesh and to keep our robes clean. We 
are told that the Church will be without spot, and clean. 
(Eph. 5:26,27.) And if we marvel how this could be, the 
Scriptures show us how it is. We were cleansed from 
sins of the past when the robe was given us, and this 
means also a provision on God's part for the continued 
cleansing of all the sins that are ours through weakness, 
through temptation, through unavoidable failures. But 
nothing in this provision indicates a cleansing from wilful 
sin. 

PURITY OF HEART ESSENTIAL 

We as New Creatures could not have wilful sin and 
still remain New Creatures; for the New Creature represents 
the mind of Christ, which is holy. Whatever weaknesses 
and imperfections there may be are attached to the 
flesh; and all these are covered by the Robe of Christ's 
Righteousness. We approach the Throne of Heavenly 
Grace and find grace to help in every time of need. 

The context seems to make the text applicable in the 
present time. It was applicable in our Lord's day. He 
was holy, harmless, undefiled. It was applicable in the 
Apostles' day. All these must be clean. One, who was 
unclean, Judas, went to his own destruction. We believe 
that he went into the Second Death because he failed to 
use the opportunities that had been given to him. 

As it was possible for Judas to fail, it is also possible 
for us to fail— to a greater or a less extent. As he was 
put out of the Divine service because of impurity of 
heart, love of money, etc., so we may be sure that all not 



pure in heart will be put out of this service. Just as none 
would be placed in this service if not pure in heart, so if 
any become impure they will be put out of it. 

This is illustrated by the case of Ananias and Sapphira, 
who were put out of their affiliation with the Priesthood 
because of their love of money and their attempt to deceive. 

R5259 :page 184 

We remember this also in the case of Simon 
Magus and others mentioned in the New Testament. 
There might be some defiled of heart and other people 
not know of it. As the Scriptures intimate, there might 
be some highly esteemed among men, and not highly 
esteemed in God's sight. And there might be some not 
much esteemed among men, but highly esteemed of God. 
"The world knoweth us not, even as it knew Him not."— 
I John 3:1. 

PRESENT-DAY OPPONENTS OF RIGHTEOUSNESS 

No doubt there are those occupying pulpits who may 
esteem themselves as really the ministers of God, and be 
thus esteemed of others, who do not honor His Word. 
We are told that some of the ministers of Satan are 
thought to be ministers of God. (2 Cor. 11:13-15; Rev. 2:2; 
3:9.) Some of them confess that they have no faith, 
no God at all. Some of them say that God is simply the 
god of nature. And others, again, say that they believe 
in God, but do not believe in the Scriptures. 

We cannot suppose that these are bearing the vessels 
of the Lord's House in any sense of the word. Probably 
they never did bear these vessels. Or possibly they might 
have done so, and then gone into error, gone out of the 
Court condition altogether, become enemies of the cross of 
Christ. (Philippians 3:18.) The Apostle speaks of some 
such who hold down (Greek katecho) the Truth in unrighteousness. 
In this text the word hold is used, not in 
the sense of retaining the Truth, but of oppressing it.— 
Romans 1:18. 

In another Epistle the Apostle speaks of some who 
preach Christ with contention (Phil. 1:15,16.); but he is 
not in any way here referring to those bearing the vessels 
of the Lord's House. He seems to refer to those 
who have not known Christ, but who nevertheless were 
drawing attention to the fact that there is a Christ; that 
they had heard that there was such a claim put forth— that 
there is a Christ— just as there are some today who are 
more or less calling attention to certain features of the 
Truth. We would not think that these in any sense of the 
word are bearing the vessels of the Lord's House, but 
rather that they are opponents. 

The passage from which our text is taken seems to indicate 
that those who bear the vessels of the Lord's 
House would have a special force and influence at the 
present time. This is shown in the statement, "How beautiful 



upon the mountains are the feet of Him who bringeth 
good tidings, that publisheth peace; that bringeth good 
tidings of good, that publisheth salvation; that saith unto 
Zion, Thy God reigneth!" (Isaiah 52:7.) This seems to 
be applicable now in a sense that it never was previously; 
for the time for the Kingdom reign is practically here, the 
time for this Message of God is at hand. We believe 
that the Kingdom of God is in process of erection, and 
the gathering of the saints now in process of completion. 
With the completion of this class will come the inauguration 
of the Kingdom. 

The context also shows that the time is near when the 
Message shall be preached to every creature. We believe 
that this is even now being fulfilled. Many are seeing the 
Restitution of all things and the glorious outcome of the 
Divine Plan. All who would be thus engaged in proclaiming 
the Message are exhorted to be clean. 

R5259 : page 185 

THE PURE IN HEART THE TARGET OF THE ENEMY 

The intimation of the Scriptures everywhere is that 
there are adverse influences at work in the world, tending 
to defile the people of God. They all have, of course, 
through the weaknesses of their own flesh, a sufficiency of 
temptation, we might say, to overcome. But the Scriptures 
say that this is not all they have to contend against. 
There are fallen angels that operate through occult influences 
and that are intent upon defiling especially the 
saintly class. But they are intent upon defiling all. 

The purer the person, the more surely will he be the 
target. You notice that the speckled birds are more a 
mark for the huntsman than are the others. Thus all 
who are bearing the vessels of the Lord's House are special 
targets for the fiery darts of the Wicked One. So we 
must contend against the world, the flesh and the Adversary. 
Those who are in the right condition of heart, the 
pure in heart, earnest as the Lord's children, watch to keep 
their garments clean. Unless they watch, they will surely 
get their garments defiled. Satan is specially endeavoring 
to touch them; and we know that wherever he would touch 
there is defilement. Whoever the Wicked One touches 
receives a measure of injury. And there is a measure of 
culpability in the individual before he is touched. 

The suggestion is that to whatever extent one becomes 
defiled, unclean, in that proportion he would not be fit to 
be entrusted with the vessels of the Lord's House. Perhaps 
all of God's people can say from experience that they 
know something of what this means. Doubtless it is the 
experience of all of the Lord's children that in proportion 
as their hearts are clean their spiritual vision is clear. 
And in proportion as they depart from this purity, in that 
proportion they would have less and less opportunity for 
service— for bearing the vessels of the Truth. 



R5259 : page 185 

INDIVIDUAL CLAIMS FOR RETRIBUTION 

"Lay not this sin to their charge."— Acts 7:60. 

THE words of St. Stephen on the occasion of 
his martyrdom, "Lord, lay not this sin to 
their charge," must not be understood to 
mean that he was in any way dictating to 
the Almighty how to deal with those who 
were taking his life. Nor are we to think 
that he was praying for the forgiveness of 
all the sins of these people. We are to narrow 
the matter down to the words used— 
"Lay not this sin to their charge." 

So far as St. Stephen was concerned, he had no special 
claim to make upon Justice for retribution. The question 
then arises, has any one such a claim? The answer is 
that it would seem that any one who suffers injustice has 
a claim for retribution. In our common courts, there are 
some crimes and acts of injustice which are taken up for 
consideration, though there are others which would never 
be touched, unless the individual concerned took up a 
charge. 

In St. Stephen's case, we understand that the wrongs 
done him are charged up against the wrong-doers. They 
were already tainted with original sin, as members of the 
human family; they were already under condemnation to 
death. The Lord Jesus had already begun the work of 
making satisfaction for their sins and for the sins of the 
whole world. In His own time and way, God will judge 
these sinners. Hence they shall have a just recompense, 
in proportion as they were guilty of wrong-doing. 

Jesus intimates that crimes against any of the members 
of His Body will have to be expiated. The doing of injury 
to one of the Lord's people is especially evil in God's 
sight, and especially punishable; for these are in special 
covenant relationship with Him, while the world is outside 
of this protection of Divine Justice, except in a general 
way. 

The words attributed to our Lord, "Father, forgive 
them, for they know not what they do," given in our 
Common Version Bible, are not found in the oldest Greek 
MSS. It would be rather more difficult for Jesus to offer 
such a prayer than for us to do so; for the Scriptures declare 
that He knew what was in man. We do not know. 
Any prayer that we might offer respecting man would be 
very different from what Jesus would offer. Therefore, 
we must leave these words out of consideration when 
thinking of St. Stephen's words. 

GENERAL AND SPECIAL RIGHTS UNDER THE LAW 



We ask ourselves, to what extent was St. Stephen right 
and within his privileges in offering such a prayer? If 
he were one of the Apostles, we should be bound not to 
make inquiry, but to suppose that he was right. The 
fact that the words are recorded in Scripture does not 
prove anything more than if they were from one of us. 

In our Common Law, there seems to be this principle- 
each individual seems to have certain rights in addition 
to the general rights under the Law. These special rights 
he may or may not press, if occasion should arise. In St. 
Stephen's case, we understand that he had a right to waive 
the claims of Justice, and did so. It is as though he had 
said, "I put in no protest, and ask for no vengeance on my 
account." 

The question then arises, did he have a right to wish 
for vengeance on them? We think not. Our Lord's instructions 
are, "Be ye therefore merciful, as your Father 
also is merciful." (Luke 6:36.) But so far as the general 
principles of righteousness are concerned, we must not 
interfere. St. Stephen very properly limits his prayer in 
this sense, as if he were saying (paraphrasing), "Heavenly 
Father, I am not asking for vengeance on them, but that 
they may not be held especially responsible for this sin 
against me." 

DEFENSE OF THE INTERESTS OF THE TRUTH A DUTY 

We are admonished by our Lord to love our enemies, 
and to do good to them who hate us, and to pray for them 
who despitefully use us and persecute us. The question 
then comes in, Would it ever be right for us to appeal to 
Justice? Should we always say, "Father, forgive them; I 
forgive them"? Should we wish that the courts should do 

R5260 : page 185 

nothing against them? No! Where the interests of the 
Lord's Cause are involved, it is our duty to say something 
in defense of the Truth; but not in a personal matter. 

Of course, the world will not understand our motive, 
for the world does not act except for personal reasons. 
Consequently, they would suppose that we acted for our 
own sakes. But we have given up all our earthly rights, 
in consecration; that is, we covenanted to give up every 
claim to our just rights in the world. This is the substance 
of our consecration. 

Where the interests of the Lord's Cause are involved, 
however, it is our duty to act for the good of the Truth, 
for the reason that certain impressions inimical to the 
Truth may be stopped. We see illustrations of this principle 
in the case of the Apostle Paul at court; also when he 
said to Elymas the sorcerer, "O thou child of the Devil, 
...wilt thou not cease to pervert the right ways of 
the Lord?. ..thou shalt be blind, not seeing the sun 
for a season." (Acts 13:10,11.) In these cases, and also 



R5260 : page 186 

in that of Alexander the coppersmith, we may be sure that 
the Apostle was not seeking personal revenge. 

This attitude should also be ours in all the affairs of 
life. If anything is done in opposition to those who oppose 
themselves, it should be done in the same spirit that 
the Apostle showed in the course which he took. We all 
find that as we grow in grace and in knowledge we develop 
a spirit of charity— forgiveness. This is as it should 
be. Greater knowledge of God, greater development in 
character-likeness of Christ, should make us the more 
generous, forgiving. 

IGNORANCE THE REAL CAUSE OF MUCH INJUSTICE 

The Lord blesses us in giving us a clearer knowledge 
of the Truth. When we come to the knowledge of the 
Truth, it gives us a sympathetic feeling for the world. 
We are all fallen. But the Apostle says, "Ye are washed, 
ye are sanctified, ye are justified in the name of the Lord 
Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God." (I Cor. 6:11.) 
Others, who are not cleansed, not sanctified, not justified, 
are in the gall of bitterness, so to speak. 

When we consider all the evil deeds done in the world, 
and when we look back through the pages of history, we 
can see that the majority of those who perpetrated evil 
did so because they did not appreciate the principles involved 
in the matter. St. Peter, speaking by inspiration, 
says that in ignorance Israel killed the Prince of Life. 
(Acts 3:15,17.) St. Paul, who gave the authority of the 
Sanhedrin for the stoning of St. Stephen, tells us that he 
did these things in ignorance, in blindness; and that he 
verily thought that he was doing God service. 

If this was true of all these cases in the past, may we 
not think that quite certainly the same principle is operating 
now— individually, personally? The Lord is able to 
stop these things, and will do so in due time. He will lift 
the veil and let the light shine out in due time. But it is 
not the due time as yet. The Church has not yet completed 
the sufferings of Christ. 

OUR SHARE OF THE CUP OF SUFFERING 

We should rejoice in having a share in the sufferings 
of Christ, and should receive our share in meekness and 
uncomplaining obedience, realizing that the Father hath 
poured the cup which we are to drink. If we love our 
enemies and do not wish to do them harm, but on the 
contrary wish to open the eyes of their understanding and 
to do them good, then we have the right spirit. Any desire 
to do them injury would prove that we are lacking in the 
Lord's Spirit. Whoever finds that he has a spirit of 
viciousness will find that he has much to learn. But whoever 
finds in himself evidence of the Spirit of the Lord in 
this matter, may rejoice. 



By and by, these very ones who are persecuting, slandering, 
doing evil towards us, will see clearly, and they will 
be ashamed. As the Scriptures say, "Your brethren that 
hated you and cast you out for My Name's sake, said, Let 
the Lord be glorified; but He shall appear to your joy, and 
they shall be ashamed." (Isa. 66:5.) The time when 
they shall be ashamed is the time when Christ shall appear 
and they shall see. "And when He shall appear, we shall 
be like Him." So, then, our opportunity for revenge will 
be future, and our revenge will be to do our enemies good. 
We will do them so much good that they will be thoroughly 
ashamed of what they are now doing against us. 



R5262 : page 186 

MAKING THE WILDERNESS BLOOM 

BIBLE STUDENTS are more and more having 

proofs set before them of the fulfilment of 

the Scriptures. The promise has stood in 

the Bible for centuries, that God would ultimately 

turn away the curse from the earth 

and that, instead of thorns and thistles, it 

would yield blessings to mankind. This 

great change was to come at the close of the 

six great Days of a thousand years each— 

the period of the reign of sin and death. 

The great Seventh Day, the Day of Christ— a thousand 

years— is to witness a wonderful transformation from 

darkness to light, from evil to good, from the curse to the 

blessing. 

That thousand years of blessing is in the Bible styled 
"The Times [or years] of Restitution of all things which 
God hath spoken by the mouth of all the Holy Prophets 
since the world began." (Acts 3:19-21.) Bible Students 
are calling the attention of each other and of the world to 
the fact that the six thousand years of the reign of sin 
and death are past, and that we are living in the dawn of 
Messiah's Day— the Millennium. 

Blessings are coming to mankind from every quarter. 
But they are not coming as miraculously as many had expected. 
God's blessing is coming through human enlightenment. 
He is lifting the veil, and men of ordinary capacity 
are seeing things which their equally bright forefathers 
never dreamed of. Artesian wells are serving to irrigate 
certain sections and to make them very fruitful. The diverting 
of streams for irrigation purposes is rapidly making 
arid lands blossom as the rose. 

Advancement along the lines of horticulture is improving 
our plants and flowers greatly. It is difficult to 
imagine how more beautiful bloom could ever have 
been seen in Eden of old, or how anything more nearly 
perfect and beautiful could ever be hoped for in the 
Paradise which by and by will be world-wide. Horticulture 



is receiving enlightenment and blessing from 

Heaven. Ideal apples, pears, plums, grapes, etc., are coming 

to us in the place of the poor stunted fruits of the 

past. We may well wonder how there could be much further 

improvement made in some directions. Yet the matter 

of improvement is about in its infancy. 

We quote below an interesting item respecting a valuable 
work now being conducted by Mr. Burbank, of California, 
a man who has already given us some new varieties 
of fruit and done much to educate the world along horticultural 
lines. We quote: 

"While the recognition of the value of Burbank's work 
by the Carnegie Institution and the appropriation of funds 
was helpful at a time most needed, it is not as important 
from a utilitarian standpoint as was the bill passed by 
Congress last August giving Mr. Burbank grants of lands 
for conducting his experiments regarding the spineless 
cacti. The bill provides for the placing of twelve sections 
of desert land at his disposal in locations to be selected by 
him in California, Nevada, Arizona and New Mexico, each 
section containing 640 acres of land. 

"While the stories of the spineless cactus and its possibilities 
as an addition to the food and industrial resources 
of the country were ridiculed at the beginning, the 
demonstrations already given by Mr. Burbank are convincing 
proof of its practicability. About ten years ago he began 
to study the cactus with a view of making it useful 
to the human race, instead of the enemy it always has been 
regarded. He recognized its good qualities, namely, that 
it was hardy and would grow where nothing else would, in 
the blistering heat of the desert, and that it had much 
nutrition stored in its thick leaves and golden or crimson 
fruit. 

R5262 : page 187 

"His first two objects were the removal of the sharp 
thorns covering the branches, leaves and fruit, and the 
removal of the woody, fibrous skeleton of the leaves, 
which made them indigestible. The cactus selected by 
Burbank for his experiments was the Opuntia species, 
native to Mexico and South America. Hundreds of thousands 
of seeds were planted and extensive crossings were 
made between the pollens of the flowers. In making the 
thornless cactus, Mr. Burbank recognized the fact that it 
took much of the vital force of the cacti to develop the 
powerful thorns and supply the leaves with fibers. In 
breeding these away he gave nature a chance to devote her 
energy to improving the fruit. He has accomplished this 
in a manner that seems absolutely marvelous. 

"The fruit of the cactus is like a fat cucumber in appearance, 
slightly flattened at the ends. It is delicious for 
jelly and jams, and one variety has a pineapple flavor. 
The juice has been found invaluable for mixing paint, and 

R5263 : page 187 



the coloring of the red fruit is permanent and of great 
brilliance. Cactus fruit already is on sale in the Western 
States, and a large commercial company has been formed 
in California for its exploitation. 

"At present Mr. Burbank is devoting his time chiefly 
to the selection of the sites of his experiment fields in the 
desert lands supplied him by the Government. If, as is 
generally believed, his claims can be demonstrated upon 
this large scale, he will add many millions of dollars to 
the resources of the world. There are billions of acres of 
desert ground in different parts of the world, and if these 
are all made productive, the benefit to all is apparent. 

"It is claimed that an acre of cactus plants will produce 
200 tons of food value. A corn production of a ton and 
a half is considered good, and a five-ton yield of alfalfa is 
exceptional. The leaves of the cactus may be used as 
forage as acceptably as alfalfa. If the produce is utilized 
for the manufacture of wood alcohol, the yield is estimated 
as amounting to $1,200 value per acre as against $35 for 
Indian corn. It must be considered that this cactus is to 
be produced entirely upon desert lands, which never before 
have been productive of anything of commercial value." 



R5260 : page 187 

"WITH WHAT JUDGMENT YE JUDGE" 

RECENTLY we received a copy of a letter sent 

to Rev. Moorehead. We have not learned 

if it received a reply. The spirit of the letter 

is kind and moderate, hence we publish it. 

It is in marked contrast with the various 

slanderous attacks made upon the Editor of 

THE WATCH TOWER. A number of religious 

papers of various denominations attack 

Brother Russell with slander and abuse, 

and such a manifestation of alarm and 

viciousness as to suggest that they are terrified and fearful 

that all their honor of men and titles and scholarship 

and musty creeds will be scattered as the chaff of the 

summer's threshing floor. 

We trust that Brother Russell's friends, as well as his 
enemies, recognize how different is his attitude. He does 
indeed attack false doctrines unsparingly, but he never, in 
his sermons or any of his writings, descends to personalities. 
It is because the clashing creeds cannot be sustained 
by their devotees that the latter manifest their displeasure 
by attacking Pastor Russell. 

The letter follows: 

REV. WILLIAM G. MOOREHEAD, D.D. 
DEAR DR. MOOREHEAD: 

I read some time ago your article in the seventh volume 



of Fundamentals on "MILLENNIAL DAWN," the teaching of Mr. 
C. T. Russell. I felt like writing you at that time but did not. 
Recently I read the summary of your article in one of my 
religious papers and have had an increasing impression to 
write you. I hesitate to do so because of the high regard 
I have always had for you as one of my teachers of twenty 
years ago, and also because of the high esteem in which you 
are held in the company of Biblical expositors and Christian 
workers in general. Yet I feel also that in the interest of 
truth and fairness your article should have some attention. 

I feel that this article from your pen is unworthy of a 
man like you. I cannot understand why such a careful student 
as yourself should make statements such as you make in this 
article, when they are so manifestly and greatly in error. 

In addition to reading five of the six volumes of "MILLENNIAL 
DAWN" carefully, and the sixth volume in part, I have also 
read many other pamphlets, magazine articles and sermons 
of Pastor Russell's, and also every criticism I have found 
or heard of in opposition to his teachings. I was one of 
his critics for about fifteen years, and I based my criticisms 
upon reading about half of one chapter of one of his books. 
A few years ago it occurred to me that I might not understand 
his full thought, so I took time to inform myself on 
the subject I had been criticising, and when I obtained more 
information I became an admirer of his work, though I do 
not agree with him in all his conclusions. I have reached 
the conclusion concerning the authors of the criticisms that 
I have read, that they do not know any more about Pastor 
Russell's teachings than I did in the days when I was so 
liberal with my condemnation. They all remind me of the 
testimony of the two witnesses who offered testimony before 
the Jewish council when Jesus was on trial. They said, 
"We heard him say: 'I will destroy this temple that is made 
with hands, and within three days I will build another made 
without hands.'" Now Jesus had said something like that— 
though essentially different. These critics seem to have read 
Pastor Russell's works with the same methods and motives 
that Thomas Paine, Robert Ingersoll and others of their class 
read the Scriptures and criticized them. This seems very 
unfortunate since it has been done by men who have been 
eminent for Christian character and leaders of Christian 
thought. 

Coming now to your article: I cannot take up all the mistakes 
you have made in this, but will confine myself to those 
lying on the surface. In the opening sentence you assure us 
that in the MILLENNIAL DAWN series there are "six rather 
bulky volumes, comprising in all some two thousand pages." 
On page 123, you speak of "a careful reading of these 
volumes," so we conclude that you have read them all carefully. 
(This is what you should have done before putting 
yourself on record in criticism of them.) I note that in your 
references to and quotations from these books you confine 
yourself to the first three volumes, and chiefly to the first 
two. I note also that you quote a single sentence, or part 
of a paragraph, giving only a partial presentation of the 
author's thought, and then proceed to criticize it. This is a 



most unfair method. It reminds me of an article I read a 
few years ago in which the writer was opposing the doctrine 
of the total depravity of man, and as a proof text he quoted 
John 9:3, "Neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents," 
and said that Jesus here taught that here were at least three 
persons who had never sinned. Your method with Pastor 
Russell is identical. 

Under the heading, "Ninth Error," in your article, you say: 
"One of these, the ninth error, essential and fundamental in 
Christianity, is the person and work of the Holy Spirit. There 
is a strange and ominous silence regarding this most important 

R5261 :page 187 

subject very apparent in the writings of Pastor Russell. 
A careful reading of those volumes, comprising more 
than one thousand pages, has discovered but one solitary 
reference to the Spirit; it is a casual mention of the Spirit 
in connection with the Day of Pentecost. The statement is 
simply made as a historic fact, or rather as an event which 
marks a stage in the development of the Christian Church. 
Not one word of teaching has the writer found in MILLENNIAL 
DAWN as to the distinct personality of the Spirit, or as to 
His supreme agency in the salvation of sinners." 

Now I must say frankly, though courteously, that I cannot 
understand how, or why, a man with your record for 
accuracy could be so careless or dishonest as to make such 
a statement. In your opening statement you say, "There are 
six volumes of two thousand pages;" and here you say that 
you have given these volumes a careful reading, and count 
but ONE thousand pages, and then you make a bold and 
erroneous statement— that the author ignores the Holy Spirit. 

R5261 :page 188 

A judge would not think of rendering a verdict with only 
half the evidence in, but you speak boldly in condemnation 
of Pastor Russell when you are only half way through his 
books. Now, if you have gotten these volumes a "careful 
reading," I do not see how you missed in the fifth volume, 
pages 163 to 300, where the author gives ONE HUNDRED AND 
THIRTY-SEVEN PAGES to a full presentation of the person and 
work of the Holy Spirit, in connection with the redemption of 
the race of man. How can you explain this? 

It is true that Pastor Russell may teach some things concerning 
the Holy Spirit that you will not agree with, but he 
does not ignore the Spirit, as you say he does. It is evident 
that in making this criticism you were very careless, to say 
the least, and this should make those who are seeking the 
Truth very cautious about accepting your statements without 
full verification. 

Another mistake which lies on the surface in your article 
is found on page 125, where in reference to Pastor Russell's 
lecture on the subject of "To Hell and Back Again," you say: 
"Crowds have listened with no little satisfaction to his assertions 
that there is no hell, no eternal punishment, no hopelessness 



after death." Now I have not heard Pastor Russell speak 
at any time, nor have I read this particular lecture, but if 
he in this lecture teaches that there is no hell, and no punishment 
for the finally impenitent, then he in this lecture flatly 
contradicts what is very clear in all his writings. I have never 
read an expositor who speaks with more clearness and earnestness 
of the eternal punishment to be meted out to the finally 
impenitent. It is true that he does not believe in a literal 
lake of fire of burning brimstone, and that men are eternally 
tortured in this, but in this he is not out of harmony with 
thousands of other good, orthodox teachers. 

I hope you will not think me impertinent if I, as one of 
your former students, ask you a question here, as we used to 
have the privilege of doing in the class-room. In this article 
of yours, in Fundamentals, on page 126, you say: "We read 
in Revelation 19:20; 20:10, that after a thousand years in the 
lake of fire the Beast and the False Prophet are still there 
undestroyed." Now, I have looked up the several translations 
that I have in my library and I do not find that word "undestroyed" 
in any of them. In what translation will I find it, 
and what is the authority for putting it into that passage? I 
am a seeker after the full Truth, and if that has any authority 
for being in that passage I would like to know it, for it is 
important. 

Now, in closing, I want to say that you need have no concern 
about one of your pupils following Pastor Russell. I 
have his books in my library and consult them freely, as I 
do every other good expositor I can find, and afford to buy. 
I have gotten beyond the early stage of the disciples who 
wanted to forbid some to teach or cast out devils because 
they "follow not US." I have gotten unlimited aid from you, 
and also from Pastor Russell. I do not feel like saying with 
you that he is "being used of the evil one to subvert the truth 
of God." My church officials still regard me as sufficiently 
orthodox that they can go to sleep and allow me to continue 
preaching to the congregation. 

With kindest regards for you and highest appreciation of 
the help I have received from you, I am 

Yours in His service, T. S. THOMPSON.--N. Dak. 



R5261 :page 188 

MOSES CALLED TO SERVICE 

--JULY 20.-EXODUS 3:1-14.- 

"Blessed are the pure in heart: for 
they shall see God."— Matthew 5:8. 

MOSES was forty years old when he fled from 
Pharaoh, discouraged. He was eighty years 
old when God called him to be the leader of 
Israel. The first forty years of his life were 
an ordinary schooling, the last forty a 



special schooling in meekness. He was now 

ready for service at exactly the time when 

God wished to use him. So thoroughly discouraged 

had he become that he who was 

ready to lead the hosts of Israel without a 

special Divine commission and authorization was now so 

distrustful of himself that even when called of the Lord 

he apologized, pleading his unfitness, etc. He did not 

realize that he had only then become fit. 

So it is with some of God's children today. They 
little realize the importance of the lesson of meekness- 
submission— teachableness. He who learns this lesson is 
getting the most important preparation for Divine service. 
"The Lord resisteth the proud, but showeth grace to the 
humble"— the meek, the teachable, the submissive. The 
Apostle, on the strength of this principle, urges the 
Church, saying, "Humble yourselves, therefore, under the 
mighty hand of God"— submit yourselves to whatever 
God's providence shall bring to you in life's experiences 
—"that He may exalt you in due time"— after He shall 
have made you ready for the exaltation and for the service 
He wishes you to perform.— I Peter 5:6. 

Moses was tending Jethro's flocks, and perhaps considering 
how wise it was that forty years before he had 
been unsuccessful in arousing his brethren to flee out of 
Egypt. He could see now, in the light of maturer years, 
what a herculean task he would have had as their leader. 
He could see with maturer years the dangers and the 
difficulties of the wilderness journey. He could better 
understand the difficulties that would have attended his 
people in attempting to take possession of the land of 
Canaan— how they would have been resisted by the inhabitants 
of the land, more experienced than they in 
warfare, etc. Quite possibly he philosophized upon the 
folly of human ambitions, and concluded that the people 
unready to be delivered had been as wise or wiser than 
himself in remaining rather in bondage. 

THE BURNING BUSH CONSUMED NOT 

Thus meditating, while his flocks pastured on the 
mountainside, Moses caught sight of something most unusual. 
A bush was afire, yet it was not consumed. The 
longer he gazed, the more curious he became, until he resolved 
to investigate. He approached the bush. From 
it came a voice, declaring the phenomenon to be a manifestation 
of God's presence and power. Moses obeyed 
the command that he should take off his sandals, because 
it was holy ground, by reason of the presence of the Angel 
of the Lord. Moses covered his face in reverence, while 
he hearkened to the Divine message. 

God's message portrayed to Moses' mind the foundation 
for his hopes and those of the Israelites. The statement, 
"I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac and 
the God of Jacob," brought to this instructed man of God 
a clear understanding of what was signified by this experience. 



By it God reminded him of the special Covenant 
which He had made with Abraham, and had renewed with 
Isaac, and confirmed to Jacob for an everlasting covenant. 
Thus Moses was assured that God had not forgotten the 
good things which He had promised. Thus his faith and 
hope must have been re-established. He learned that 
God's time had come for the deliverance of the Israelites 
and for their attaining the Land of Promise— Canaan, the 
land flowing with milk and honey— i.e., very rich, very 
productive. 

If during those forty years, and perhaps before, Moses 
had time and again wondered whether God really cared 
for the Israelites and why He permitted them to be oppressed 
by the Egyptians, he now had God's own assurance 
that He did know it and that He did care, with the 
intimation that for some good reason He had all these 
years waited, and had withheld help which He at any time 
had been able to give, and that He had a purpose in so 

R5262 : page 189 

withholding. The Lord's explanation of the matter closed 
with an invitation to Moses to now be His servant, and 
messenger and mouthpiece to Pharaoh, calling upon him 
to liberate the captive Israelites. 

"CERTAINLY I WILL BE WITH THEE" 

Then Moses, who forty years before was full of confidence 
and courage, and ready to lead the Israelites, but 
who now was lacking in self-confidence, replied to the 
Lord: "Who am I, that I should go unto Pharaoh, and 
that I should bring forth the children of Israel out of 
Egypt?" This meant, Lord, surely you know that I am 
a failure; with all the educational advantages that I had, 
I am fit for nothing better than to be a sheep-tender; Lord, 
surely there must be some one much more competent than 
I for the leadership of Israel, else I fear that my people 
will never get out of Egypt. 

God's reply was: "Surely I will be with thee." I shall 
not expect you to do this of yourself. I realize that it 
is a great task, a mighty work, but "I will be with thee." 
By way of making the matter forceful, the Lord declared 
not only that Moses should lead forth the people, but that 
they should come to that very mountain, "the mount of 
God"— and worship Him there. 

Moses, remembering his previous failure, was cautious. 
He inquired what response he should make to the 
Israelites if he should tell them that God sent him this 
time and they should inquire, Who? Which God? What 
is His name? The Divine answer was that God's name 
is, "I AM THAT I AM "-the self-existing One. But 
Moses had become so distrustful of himself that he still 
could not think of undertaking this great work. He urged 
that the Egyptians would not let the people go. He felt 
more and more convinced that their intention was to keep 



the Israelites as their slaves. Another objection was that 
the Israelites themselves would not believe that God had 
really appeared to Moses. 

Answering these objections, the Lord gave Moses certain 
signs, convincing him that he was talking to the 
Omnipotent One, and assured him that these same signs 
would be convincing to the Israelites and the Egyptians. 

SLOW OF SPEECH AND INCOMPETENT 

So meek was Moses that although he fully believed the 
Lord and trusted His power, he could not realize that even 
with Divine help he would be successful. It must be God's 
thought that some one else would be found for so important 
a work. Moses declared, "I am not eloquent, but am 
slow of speech and of a slow tongue." Moreover, he was 
inexperienced as a servant or prophet of the Lord. Surely 
it must be that the Lord was merely trying him to see 
whether he would be rash enough to undertake such a 
matter, but really intending to use some one else. But 
no! The Lord's answer was, "I will be with thy mouth 
and teach thee what thou shalt say."— Exod. 4:10,12. 

So today the Lord's true people of the Gospel Age 
are all spirit-begotten, and are all thereby authorized and 
qualified to be ambassadors for God, to speak the Truth 
in love, in the name of God, and as servants of the Lord 
Jesus Christ. But to some of us at times it seems impossible 
to realize how great the honor God has conferred 
upon us in inviting us to be His agents and mouthpieces 
in speaking His Message to the world or to the brethren 
in the Church. And then when convinced that the Lord 
will be with us, some are in danger of being too rash and 
wilful in connection with the matter. While such need 
no encouragement, doubtless those who, like Moses, need 
to be encouraged, are in less danger of being injured by 
the great honor that attaches to the service of God in any 
capacity. 

To the humble ones now, as to Moses of old, God 
declares: "I will be with thee; I will be with thy mouth 
and teach thee what thou shalt say." As one lesson is to 
have no confidence in ourselves or in our own judgment 
or strength, another important lesson is that we should 
have every confidence, absolute confidence, in God. Not 
until this lesson is learned will any be really fit to be 
God's mouthpieces. In the case of Moses, humility, lack 
of self-confidence, meekness, had become so pronounced 
in him during his forty years of training along that line 
that he prayed the Lord that, even if he should be used, 
some one else might be the spokesman. God heard his 
request and granted that he should have his brother Aaron 
for a companion and mouthpiece, when he would go before 
Pharaoh to make demands in the name of the Lord. 

Nevertheless, Aaron was not the one competent for 
the great work. He did not have the same schooling that 
Moses enjoyed. Therefore God appointed that Moses 
should be as a god, or ruler, to his brother Aaron and 



that the latter should be as his servant, or mouthpiece, 
speaking only as authorized by the meek and lowly Moses 
in whom, because of his meekness, God was reposing the 
responsibility. 

Everything in the Scriptures points us to the fact that 
humility is a quality most essential to all of the Lord's 
people who would be used of the Lord in any important 
or special work for Him. If the followers of the Lord 
could continually keep this in memory, and would persistently 
shape their course accordingly, how much they 
would be used, we may be sure. Any service for the Lord 
is an honor; but the more we are permitted to serve, the 
more will be our blessing in the present life and the 
greater also will be our reward in the life to come. Let 
us, therefore, as the Apostle says, humble ourselves under 
God's mighty hand, that He may exalt us in due time. 



R5264 : page 189 

THE REFINER'S FIRE 

He sat by a fire of seven-fold heat 

As He watched the precious ore, 
And closer He bent with a searching gaze, 

As He heated it more and more. 

He knew He had ore that could stand the test, 

And He wanted the finest gold, 
To mould as a crown for the King to wear, 

Set with gems of a price untold. 

So He laid our gold on the burning fire, 

Tho' we fain would have said Him, "Nay"; 

And He watched the dross that we had not seen 
As it melted and passed away. 

And the gold grew brighter, and yet more bright, 
But our eyes were so dim with tears, 

We saw but the fire— not the Master's hand— 
And questioned with anxious fears. 

Yet our gold shone out with a richer glow 

As it mirrored a Form above, 
That bent o'er the fire, unseen by us, 

With a look of ineffable love. 

Can we think that it pleases His loving heart 

To cause us a moment's pain? 
Ah, no! but He saw thro' the present cross 

The bliss of eternal gain. 

So He waited there with a watchful eye, 

With a love that is strong and sure, 
And His gold did not suffer a whit more heat 



Than was needed to make it pure! —Unknown. 



R5263 : page 190 

MEN OF DESTINY 

-JULY 27.-EXODUS 5:1-14.- 

"Blessed are they that mourn: for they 
shall be comforted."— Matthew 5:4. 

NAPOLEON was styled a man of destiny, and 

surely many things connected with his experiences 

look as though the Lord's providence 

had something to do with him. This 

does not signify that he was a servant of 

God— far from it! But it does signify that 

Divine Wisdom has at all times been able to 

overrule the wrath of man to serve Him, 

and the remainder to restrain, thus to cause 

all things to work out the Divine purpose. 

Just what were the Divine purposes in Napoleon's day 

was far from clear, to even the saints of God then living. 

Indeed, we may say that that purpose is only partially 

understood by the Lord's people yet, although Bible 

Students can see with the eye of faith many ways in which 

the campaigns of Napoleon worked changes which undoubtedly 

have had much to do with the world's progress 

during the past century. To the ear of faith God declares, 

All my purposes shall be accomplished. "The word that 

is gone forth out of My mouth shall not return unto Me 

void; it shall accomplish that which I please, saith the 

Lord." -Isaiah 55:11. 

The Pharaoh who reigned in Egypt at the time that 
God delivered the Israelites was also a man of destiny. 
We may be even more sure of this than in respect to 
Napoleon, because we have Divine assurance of the fact. 
"And in very deed for this cause have I raised thee up, 
for to show in thee My power; and that My name may be 
declared throughout all the earth." (Exodus 9:16.) "St. 
Paul declared that God hardened this Pharaoh's heart that 
he should not let the people of Israel go free. He quotes 
the Divine Word: "For the Scripture saith unto Pharaoh, 
Even for this same purpose have I raised thee up, that 
I might show My power in thee, and that My name might 
be declared throughout all the earth."— Romans 9:17. 

But God's people very seriously misunderstood the 
purport of these words when in the past they interpreted 
them to mean that God had created Pharaoh a wicked, hard-hearted 
man, and that subsequently, He still further hardened 
his heart. Not so ! The Scriptures declare that all 
God's work is perfect. He never made an imperfect man. 
Adam was created in His Maker's likeness, His moral 
image. It is sin that has wrought the havoc, that has 



made man selfish and hard-hearted. 

VIEWING THE OTHER SIDE 

This degeneracy has been passed down from parent to 
child along the lines of heredity, so that Pharaoh was by 
nature what his forefathers had made him, plus the action 
of his own volition. St. James declares, "God tempteth 
no man." (James 1:13.) There is nothing surer than 
that God has never directly used His mighty power to 
harden the heart of any human being. On the contrary, 
the Lord's providences, blessings, instructions and mercies 
are all intended to soften the heart, to take away its 
stoniness. 

Bible Students now realize that the Apostle meant to 
tell us that from amongst the princes of Egypt God 
raised up to the throne of that kingdom a stubborn ruler, 
upon whose heart the mercies of God, in lifting one 
plague after another, would have only a hardening effect. 
And God raised this prince to the throne, so as to teach 
a great lesson respecting Divine tenderness, gentleness 
and forgiveness, and to illustrate the principle that God's 
greatest blessing to mankind— a free will— may be perverted 
by Satan to work his greatest injury. 

Not all men of destiny are in opposition to God, however. 
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, David, Solomon 
and the Prophets, as well as Jesus and His Apostles and 
all His followers, are men of destiny— foreknown, "called 
of God." With these men of destiny the Lord equally 
operates, and similarly. Upon these His mercies, tenderness 
and gracious promises have a softening effect, making 
them tender-hearted, forgiving, loving, more and more 
tending toward the development of the graces of the Holy 
Spirit— "meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering, 
brotherly-kindness, love." 

The destiny of these men is only partly worked out in 
the present life. They are permitted to pay a goodly 
price for the maintenance of their fellowship with God 
and inheritance of His promises. This costs them the 
friendship of the world, and oftentimes the loss of things 
highly esteemed amongst men, but it brings them the 
"Peace of God which passeth all understanding." And 
this peace and joy and comfort amidst tribulation are 
merely the foretaste of the riches of Divine grace which 
God has in reservation for these— in Messiah's Kingdom. 

Such of these saints as lived before the Redeemer 
offered His sacrifice for sins are to have a better resurrection 
to earthly nature than the remainder of mankind 
will have, and to be "princes in all the earth" as the 
human representatives of the Messianic Kingdom for a 
thousand years. The men of destiny, from the time of the 
First Advent of our Lord down, are to have a still higher 
reward— a change of nature. The Captain of their Salvation, 
the Redeemer, has already reached His destiny of 
high exaltation, "far above angels, principalities and 
powers"— "at the right hand of God."— Philippians 2:9; 



Ephesians 1:20,21. 

The loyal band following in His footsteps in the Narrow 
Way, seeking, according to the Divine promise, glory, 
honor, immortality and join t-heirship in Messiah's Kingdom, 
are also men of destiny. But their destiny has not 
yet been attained. It is for them to wait until the full 
number of the elect Church shall have been called, chosen 
and proved faithful. Then their destiny will be reached 
by the glorious change of the First Resurrection; for 
"flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God." 
By their change they will be perfected in the Divine 
nature like their Master. (2 Peter 1:4.) O glorious 
destiny! United, or married, to their Lord on the 
Heavenly plane, they will be His joint-heirs, a Royal 
Priesthood, to reign with Him a thousand years for the 
very purpose of blessing the world of mankind, for whose 
recovery Christ died.— Revelation 20:6. 

Eventually, the destinies of those faithful before the 
Cross and those faithful since the Cross will be united 
in the Kingdom, as St. Paul declares. The Ancient 
Worthies, although proved, cannot be made perfect until 
the Church, of still higher destiny, shall have reached her 
glory. -Hebrews 11:38-40. 

"I KNOW NOT THE LORD" 

In due course Moses, accompanied by Aaron, who 
acted as his mouthpiece, presented himself before Pharaoh 
and delivered the Divine message respecting the liberation 
of the Israelites. He was met with derision, Pharaoh declaring, 
"I know not Jehovah, neither will I let Israel go." 
For a time it seemed as though the whole work would be 
a failure. It was a time of testing to the faith of not only 
Moses and Aaron, but all the Israelites. Pharaoh with 
great hardness of heart sent forth the edict that the tasks 
of the Israelites should be increased. The Israelites were 
doing forced labor, making bricks for public buildings. 

R5263 :page 191 

Apparently the bricks were made of unburned clay, and 
straw was provided for use as a binder. By the new 
rule, the Israelites must produce the same number of 
bricks per day, but must additionally scour the fields and 
hedges to gather some kind of stubble that would serve 
them as binders. Thus their tasks were practically 
doubled; and if not performed, they were beaten. Can 
we wonder that the Israelites of less faith murmured 
against Moses and Aaron and blamed them with the increase 
of their tasks ! Nevertheless, by these very bitter 
experiences the people were all the more prepared to welcome 
the liberty subsequently offered them in God's 
providence. 

And is this not true in respect to some of our spiritual 
liberties also? To some extent, at first, our efforts to 
please and obey God bring greater trials of the flesh, 



greater oppositions from the Adversary. The Lord would 
strengthen our faith, and cause us to appreciate the 
privilege of being set free from the power of sin and 

R5264:page 191 

death, and of being inducted into His family. 

Confirmations of this very account of the tribulations 
of the Israelites were discovered by the French savant, 
M. E. Naville, in 1884. He found the city of Pithom, 
which the Israelites built. (Exodus 1:11.) In the British 
Museum in London and also in the Metropolitan 
Museum, New York, there are on exhibition some of these 
very bricks. In size they are about four inches to eight 
inches square and about two inches thick— unbaked, but 
very hard. Another traveler, describing the walls of 
Pithom, says: "The lower courses of these walls, and for 
some distance up, are made of well-made bricks, with 
chopped straw in them; but, higher up, the courses of 
brick are not so good. The straw is long and scanty, and 
the last courses have no straw at all, but have sedges, 
rushes, and water plants, which had been mingled with 
the mud in their making." 

PREPARATIONS FOR CANAAN 

The statement of Exodus 1: 14 is generally understood 
to imply that the Israelites were compelled to learn all 
the trades and occupations of their masters. They had 
been from Abraham's time a pastoral people, and by this 
very operation they were forced, as it were, into an industrial 
school in the foremost civilization of that day. 
It was a severe training, but a very useful one and undoubtedly 
a grand preparation for the necessities that lay 
before them. Shall we say that all this was of chance? 
Shall we not rather say that the Lord in His providence 
was dealing with them— humbling them, as well as qualifying 
them for the larger opportunities He intended to 
present? 

Whoever can discern the Lord's leadings in connection 
with typical Israel of old should be fully prepared to note 
and appreciate Divine providences in his own case as a 
Spiritual Israelite. Nevertheless, few lessons are harder 
to learn than this one— that God supervises the affairs of 
all who are truly His. Nevertheless, it is well to remember 
that only those who have entered into covenant relationship 
with God, and who are maintaining that relationship, 
can apply to themselves the comforting words of St. 
Paul, "We know that all things work together for good to 
them that love God, to them who are the called according 
to His purpose."— Romans 8:28. Our present experiences 
of disappointment, trials, vexations, oppositions, etc., are 
designed to work in us the peaceable fruits of righteousness, 
and to thus "work out for us a far more exceeding 
and eternal weight of glory." 



R5264:page 191 

SOME INTERESTING QUESTIONS 
ADAMIC OR SACRIFICIAL DEATH? 

Question.— Suppose that one of God's consecrated 
saints should die by some convulsion of nature— flood, 
fire, etc.— would such a death be sacrificial, or would it be 
Adamic? 

Answer.— A consecrated child of God could not die 
the Adamic death. His death would either be the sacrificial 
death or the Second Death. If when he died he 
were a consecrated child of God, his death would be merely 
a completion of the consecration which he had previously 
made. Our lives are made holy and acceptable by 
the great High Priest, in whatever form death may come. 
But if in the meantime this consecrated child of God 
should turn away from Him, then it would be the Second 
Death. If he sin wilfully, deliberately, he commits the 
"sin unto death."— I John 5:16. 



OUR LORD'S BAPTISM 

Question.— Was our Lord baptized in water before He 
was baptized of the Holy Spirit? 

Answer.— The Scriptural account of our Lord's baptism 
at Jordan seems to imply that God made the manifestation 
of the descent of the Holy Spirit on Jesus after His 
baptism in water. He was baptized into death before He 
went into the water, in the sense that He had given up 
His own will; in the sense that the Apostle quotes from 
the Old Testament— "Lo, I come: in the volume of the 
Book it is written of Me; I delight to do Thy will, O My 
God." (Psa. 40:7,8; Heb. 10:7.) Our Lord came to do 
everything written in the Book concerning Him. 

Our Lord was already dead to His own will; otherwise 
He could not have gone to John at Jordan. But God's 
manifestation of His acceptance of Jesus' sacrifice of 
Himself, apparently waited until after Jesus had performed 
the symbol. So we read that after He had come 
up out of the water, the Holy Spirit descended like a dove. 
God gave that outward sign, not for all, but for John, who 
"saw and bare record," as the Scriptures declare.— 
John 1:32-34. 



CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT 

Question.— How near to the character-likeness of our 
Lord Jesus Christ must one attain on this side the veil in 



order to have good hope of being one of the Elect on the 
other side of the veil? 

Answer.— Jehovah God will not accept anything that is 
imperfect. Even our human nature presented to Him sacrificially 
by the High Priest needed first to be covered by 
the merit of the Priest Himself and to be thus perfected 
before being Divinely accepted. In thinking of ourselves, 
however, we are to remember that we have the New 
Creature in an earthen vessel. It is the New Creature 
that must have the likeness of Christ. 

In the flesh we are beset by the world, the flesh and the 
Devil. All these things conspire to hinder the New Creature 
from working perfectly in the old body. The will 
must be nothing less than perfect. As Jesus said, "Blessed 
are the pure in heart." (Matt. 5:8.) Purity of heart must 
be absolute. 

The pure of heart are those whose intentions are pure, 
whose motives are pure, who desire the best— long for 
the best. These may have strong consolation, may have 
full confidence toward God respecting the glorious things 
He has promised; for they could do no more than the 
best they are able to do in the mortal body— and thus show 
their devotion. 



page 193 

VOL. XXXIV JULY 1 No. 13 
A. D. 1913-A. M. 6041 



CONTENTS 

The Greatest Thing in the Universe— Part 1 195 

Purpose Served by the Gifts 195 

Love— Varying in Kind 196 

Evil Surmising Not Of Love 197 

Our Proper Attitude Toward Enemies 198 

"These Things Were Types" 198 

The "Vow" Represented in the Tassels 199 

"He Cometh With Clouds" 200 

Living After The Flesh 201 

Means of Spiritual Growth 201 

Causes of Failure 202 

Pertle Springs and Hot Springs 202 

Fighting Against God 203 

Slavery's Cost to Egyptians 203 

Waters Turned Into Blood 204 

Israel Spared, Or Passed Over 205 

The Passover's Real Meaning 205 

First-Borns Blood-Protected 206 

An Interesting Letter 206 

Berean Questions in Scripture Studies 207 

page 194 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



R5273 : page 194 

RESISTING THE EVIL ONE 

The great Adversary seems to be especially active now. About one-fourth 
of all the preachers in many cities have pledged themselves to 
an opposition to the Gospel Message which we are sending forth. Unable 
to do this logically and Biblically, they grasp at opportunities to 
slander and falsify. They are co-operating with the Brooklyn Eagle and 
scattering a slanderous copy of the same which seriously perverts and 
misrepresents the Truth. These are being sold and sometimes given 
away free for the purpose of arousing prejudice. 

A recent number of the BIBLE STUDENTS MONTHLY has been especially 
prepared as a brief answer and offset to these attacks being made 
by those whom Satan has deluded into His service. 

We are prepared to supply free in any quantity a sufficient number 
of these little papers to serve any city or town which has been served 
by the Eagle. We invite the assistance and co-operation in this service 
of all who love the Lord and the Truth. Orders may be sent in at once. 
But we advise against the using of this special issue in other places 
where the ministers have not entered into such a combine and are not 
thus actively serving the Adversary. It is, and should always be, the 
policy of God's people, so far as possible, to live peaceably. We do 
not wish to make an attack upon anybody, but merely to repel attacks 
and to set the people free for their benefit. 



R5268 : page 194 

A CURE FOR SURFACE CANCER 

Cancer troubles are becoming more numerous. We know of no 
remedy for internal cancers except surgery. Even then a cure is 
doubtful. We have recently learned of a very effective and simple 
remedy for cancers which show themselves on the surface of the body. 
We are informed that a physician, after testing this remedy, paid $1,000 
for the information, and that he has established a Cancer Hospital 
which is doing good work. The recipe has come to us free and we are 
willing to communicate the formula, but to those only who are troubled 
with surface cancers and who will write to us directly, stating particulars. 
No fee will be charged, but in order to protect the sufferers, 
we require a promise that they will not sell the formula to others, nor 
receive pay for the use of it, nor communicate the formula to anybody. 
Any one known to be a sufferer can be informed of the terms on which 
the prescription is obtainable through us. 



1913-GENERAL CONVENTIONS-1913 



MADISON, WISCONSIN, JUNE 29--JULY 6 

The third General Convention of the year will be very favorably 
located for the friends in the Central, Western and Northwestern States. 
All sessions will be held in the large convention auditorium at the 
Monona Park Grounds. This park is beautifully located on the outskirts 
of the city, and is reached by the electric street car lines of Madison 
which run within five blocks of the Auditorium. The grounds and 
auditorium being on the lake front, some may find it more convenient 
to take the boats which run between Madison and the Assembly Grounds. 
The street carfare is 5c, and the boats have met this rate and will 
charge the same— 5c. in each direction during the time of our convention. 

There are no lodging accommodations at the grounds, hence all the 
friends will be located at most convenient places in the city of Madison. 
Such accommodations will, if desired, include breakfast and an evening 
dinner. Luncheon will be provided at the convention grounds for 10c. 
and 15c, as there will not be much opportunity for returning to the 
city between morning and afternoon sessions. 

Railway rates: As a low rate of 2c per mile is always available in 
this section, no further special reduction has been made for this convention. 
However, all expecting to attend should immediately inquire 
of their local ticket agent. From many points low summer tourist rate 
tickets are on sale to Madison. From the extreme West summer tourist 
rates to Chicago permitting stop-over at Madison may be found cheaper. 
In some instances, a party rate for ten or more on one ticket traveling 
together may be better. If ticket agent cannot inform you, request him 
to telegraph his General Passenger Agent for lowest round trip rate. 

Accommodations: Address your request for accommodations (stating 
what days you expect to be at the convention, how many are to constitute 
your party, and color and sex) to Laymens Home Missionary Movement, 
Madison, Wis. 



SPRINGFIELD, MASSACHUSETTS, JULY 13-20 

This convention will be held in one of the most magnificent, large 
auditoriums in the world. It is located in the center of the beautiful 



AT THIS POINT THERE IS A PHOTO OF- 
SPRINGFIELD'S NEW CONVENTION AUDITORIUM 

city of Springfield, but is a cool, large, spacious building promising to 
be a most comfortable place for this mid-summer General Convention. 

(Continued on page 207.) 

page 207 

Railway rates: The New England Passenger Association have granted 
a special rate of fare and three-fifths for the round trip on the Certificate 
Plan. All attending from New England points should, when purchasing 
tickets, mention that they are going to the International Bible 



Students Association Convention, and when purchasing full fare one way 
ticket, be sure to secure a Certificate-Receipt. This Certificate-Receipt, 
signed by Convention Secretary, at Springfield, will entitle the owner 
to purchase a return ticket at three-fifths (3/5) fare. However, inquire 
of your local ticket agent at once, as there may be other special excursion 
rates, or a lower rate might be secured by a party of ten or 
more traveling together on one ticket. We understand a special train 
for Bible Students has already been arranged for from Boston, with a 
special low rate. From all other points in the United States, summer 
tourist rates to Springfield, Mass., or to Boston, Mass., will probably 
be found very reasonable. 

Accommodations: Our representatives will secure best possible accommodations 
at moderate rates as previously mentioned. So that all 
may be comfortably located, however, it will be necessary, if you expect 
to attend, to immediately advise how many will constitute your party, 
stating color and sex and what days each will expect to attend. Address 
all requests and information to Laymens Home Missionary Movement, 
Springfield, Mass. 



ASHEVILLE, NORTH CAROLINA, JULY 20-27 

This General Convention will be most favorably located for the 
friends over the entire South, as well as many from the Middle and 
Western States and elsewhere. Being located in the mountains at a 
high altitude (2,250 ft.) the temperature is quite moderate. The Convention 
Auditorium, we are informed, is quite a large and comfortable 
one. 

Railway rates: The Southeastern Passenger Association have granted 
very favorable rates from all points in the Southeast, and we advise 
the friends everywhere, who expect to attend this convention, to get 
particulars from their local ticket agent, asking for special rate to the 
International Bible Students Association Convention, at Asheville, N.C. 
Special summer tourist rate tickets are also on sale to Asheville. 

Accommodations: If you expect to attend this convention, advise 
us promptly for what days, how many are to constitute your party, and 
color and sex. Address all requests and information to Laymens Home 
Missionary Movement, Asheville, North Carolina. 



TORONTO, ONTARIO, JULY 20-27 

For the Canadian friends this General Convention will be most 
favorably located, although no doubt there will also be a goodly number 
in attendance from the United States. 

All sessions are to be held in the Horticultural Hall at the Canadian 
National Exhibition Park, West Toronto. The Park is easily accessible 
by Grand Trunk Railway and by King Street and other trolley car lines. 

Railway rates: Railways have made the same concessions as last 
year. There are always special rates to Niagara Falls, which is about 
two hours' sail by steamer to Toronto at a moderate price. If no rate 
as low as l-l/2c. per mile each way is available, purchase a one-way 
ticket to Toronto, and have your agent fill out a Certificate-Receipt and 
bring it with you. This will entitle you to a return ticket for 25c. 



This Certificate-Receipt, signed by Convention Secretary, will entitle 
the owner to a return ticket at 25c. to many Canadian points, and to 
American points in the Eastern States at three-fifths (3/5) the regular 
rate for return passage. Be sure to secure a Certificate-Receipt, account 
I.B.S.A. Convention, when purchasing one-way railroad tickets 
through to Toronto. There may be other cheaper excursion rates for 
the round trip to Niagara Falls or to Toronto. Ask your local ticket 
agent at least a week in advance. 

Accommodations: If you expect to attend this convention, advise 
us promptly for what days, how many are to constitute your party, and 
color and sex. Address all requests and information to Laymens Home 
Missionary Movement, Toronto, Ont. 



R5265 : page 195 

THE GREATEST THING IN THE UNIVERSE 

PART I. 

"Covet earnestly the best gifts: and yet I show 
unto you a more excellent way."— 1 Cor. 12:31. 

THE Apostle James has declared that every 
good and every perfect gift cometh down 
from the Father of lights, with whom is no 
variableness or shadow of turning. Hence 
every gift from God would be a blessing. 
Even those upon whom God will execute 
the sentence of the Second Death may be 
said to receive something that is not really 
an injury to their best interests. 

In thinking over these different gifts of 
God, the Apostle Paul enumerates some of those that were 
given to the Church in the beginning of this Gospel Age. 
We read in the Psalms: "Thou hast received gifts for 
men; yea, for the rebellious also, that the Lord God might 
dwell amongst them." (Psalm 68:18.) Some of those 
gifts were given to the men who became followers of the 
Lord Jesus. After Jesus had ascended, all His followers 
were to particularly wait until He would send them, from 
the Father, the power and blessing of the Holy Spirit, 
which was to come to each sincere believer, and which 
was to be accompanied by gifts— by some outward gift 
and manifestation, useful and to be used. 

In our context the Apostle enumerates some of these 
gifts— apostles, prophets, evangelists, teachers, pastors; 
others received gifts of tongues, healings, power to perform 
miracles, power to cast out Satan, power to interpret 
tongues, power to discern spirits. Some received one of 
these and some another; some received several. St. Paul 
had various gifts, and declared that he spoke more tongues 
than they all. (I Cor. 14: 18.) It would appear that the 
early Church thought very highly of the gift of tongues. 
They became very anxious to have God give them this 



particular gift. 

But the Apostle tells them that God had still more 
valuable blessings than this of speaking with tongues, 
which they so earnestly desired. They were to distinguish 
between the different gifts, and they were to desire, were 
to prefer, the best— to exercise discrimination of mind as 
to which would be the best gift. He declares that he would 
rather speak five words in a known tongue than to speak 
ten thousand in an unknown tongue, and not be able to 
interpret. He told them that they should pray for interpretation 
—that they should not only desire to speak in 
unknown tongues, but also desire to give the interpretation, 
or the proper meaning in order to be understood. 
In his letter to the Church at Corinth, chapters 12 and 14, 
he expressed the thought that these different tongues and 
gifts were all intended to minister to the Church for their 
benefit as a whole. 

PURPOSE SERVED BY THE GIFTS 

The gift of tongues was given at that time to supply 
their lack otherwise. The early Church had no Bible. 
Being put out of the synagogues, they had no access to 
the Old Testament, and the New Testament was not yet 
written. Therefore God's people without these gifts 
would have had very little to help them— to teach them. 
None were qualified to teach the brethren. Only the 
power of God could give them this ability to teach. Therefore 
the Apostle Paul urged them not to forsake the 
assembling of themselves together. As they saw the great 
Day of Christ drawing on, they should have great desire 
to come together and to discuss these things of God's Plan. 

And when they were assembled, it was of great advantage 
to them that some one should rise to speak. And 
they might desire, or pray, as the case might be, that God 
would send them some interpretation. In this way the 
Church was drawn together and held together. They did 
not know what Message would come in this way from the 
Lord. 

We are not to suppose that God would thus give any 
very deep doctrinal matters. But it does appear that in 
this way He gave His people some milk of the Word, until 
the New Testament should be arranged— written and 
collected in an available form. The Apostle Paul led off 
with these gifts to the Church. The gifts of tongues, 
nevertheless, were surpassed by higher gifts, some higher 
arrangements for them. St. Paul would rather that they 
should be orators, public speakers, or have an interpretation 
of an unknown tongue. This would mean more of 
personal contact with the Lord. Therefore they should 
desire such a gift in preference to one of less importance. 

Then the Apostle proceeds: "Yet show I unto you a 
more excellent way!" something still better than those 
special gifts which he had been discussing— better than 
speaking with tongues, better than working miracles, 
better than interpreting. He goes on to show that these 



things would pass away, and be no longer necessary to the 
Church, but he was going to tell them of things that would 
never pass away. Therefore they should discern and seek 
especially the best gift. They should not only discriminate 
amongst these gifts and choose the best, but they 
should be looking beyond these to a developed condition of 
heart which would be specially pleasing to the Lord, and 

R5265 : page 196 

would bring them into closer relationship with Him. 

He proceeds to explain that this is Love. They might 
have the gift of prophesying, of working miracles, of 
healing the sick, of speaking with tongues, of interpretation, 
and yet come short of ever attaining the highest blessing 
of the Lord, unless they should incorporate into their 
lives this better thing— LOVE. No matter how well able 
they might be to speak with tongues or to interpret or to 
work miracles, etc., this Love was a far more important 
thing for them to have. Then he enumerates the various 
qualities of Love— meekness, patience, brotherly kindness, 
etc. The sum of them all is Love. It is love for the brethren, 
love for friends, love for neighbors, love for our 
enemies, which would do them good, and not at all wish to 
see them suffer injury. This, then, is the more excellent 
thing. 

Though the elements of Love are developed qualities 
and may, therefore, properly be called fruits, they may be 
called gifts also. From the apple-tree we get gifts of 
apples; from the peach-tree we get gifts of peaches; from 
the pear-tree, gifts of pears, etc. Since we have to do 
with the development of these qualities of the Spirit, they 
are styled fruits of the Spirit. And they are far more 
excellent and far more to be desired than the merely mechanical 
gifts, which at the first came to all of God's 
people, because of their special need, but many of which 
passed away shortly after the Apostles died. 

LOVE-VARYING IN KIND 

The question naturally and properly arises, What is 
Love? The Bible answers, "God is Love." As it is impossible 
to fully describe God in all His greatness, so it 
seems impossible to fully describe all that would be 
comprehended in the word Love. Love is the most 
powerful thing in the world; therefore Love most nearly 
represents God, because He is the Supreme, Almighty 
One. We might say that God is not this, not that, not the 
other. And so with Love— we might describe it by saying 
what it is not. Nothing can be right that is out of harmony 
with Love, as nothing can be right that is out of 
harmony with God. The Apostle says, in describing 
Love, that it does not think evil, does not vaunt itself, has 
not the disposition to be puffed up, is not easily provoked, 
does not take pleasure in iniquity, etc. 

We may, of course, remember that our word love is 



made to cover a variety of sentiments; for instance, the 
love of a hen for her chickens, her care over them; the 
love of a father and mother for their children, and their 
care over them. Love, then, includes this interest in all 
that are under one's care. God has this quality of sympathy 
which leads Him to look out for the whole universe 
—all sentient creatures, all that have life. He is bound 
by Love to look out for all these. 

In human love— natural love— we find sympathy a very 
strong quality. Then we have a higher than mere sympathetic 
love— we have esteem, appreciation of some admirable 
quality. We say that we love certain traits in the 
character of some one. Again we have something more 
than mere sympathy and esteem; we have affectionate 
love. That is a very real and deep interest in every affair 
of the one we love— a deep, sympathetic love which would 
stop at nothing— even though it is an earthly love. The 
only thing that could be superior to it would be our love 
for the Almighty, which should dominate us as superior 
to this affectionate love. 

Later comes in the spiritual love for the Lord's people 
which seeks to avoid all fleshly preferences, seeking 
merely to live as a New Creature, and to look after the 
welfare of the New Creature. Thus doing, we become 
closely united to the things of God and to all who are 
associated with us in the work of this Gospel Age. This is 
the highest type of love on any plane of being— this into 
which we have entered. God is Love. The more we 
grow up into this proper, spiritual Love, the more we are 
growing up into the character-likeness of our Father, of 
which we read, "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your 
Father which is in heaven is perfect."— Matt. 5:48. 

This love does not stop with those who are appreciative 
of it, but also goes out to those who are unappreciative, 
knowing that something is hindering them from 
attaching any value to such love. Love, then, is so much 
of God's likeness, the thing to be most appreciated, the 
thing without which all else in life is useless. To be 
devoid of love is to be devoid of God-likeness. And so 
the Apostle goes on to enumerate the characteristics of 
this love— meekness, gentleness, long-suffering, brotherly 

R5266 : page 196 

kindness, godliness [God-likeness]— Love. All of these 
are merely parts or streams of Love flowing from the 
inexhaustible Fountain. These characteristics all proceed 
from Love, and are strong in proportion as our love is 
strong. 

JUSTICE THE BASIS OF LOVE 

Next we inquire as to the way in which Love fulfils 
the Divine Law. Divine Law is not necessary as respects 
restraint from good deeds. There is no need of a law to 
say, "You shall not do too much for your brother, or give 



him too much money." No law is necessary along these 
lines. But Divine Law steps in and says, "You shall not 
come short of a certain standard." So the Law calls 
merely for justice. 

The Apostle Paul points out that since the Law calls 
for justice, we shall not murder our neighbor either by our 
act or by our tongue. We must be perfectly just in everything 
pertaining to our neighbor. Every thought of our 
mind must be just, absolutely just. This is the standard 
of the Divine Law. We are violators of the Law if we 
give less than justice to anybody. Therefore the Law 
as set forth to the Jews, told them what they should not 
do. "Thou shalt not bear false witness." "Thou shalt 
not steal," etc.— telling them merely the things that they 
should not do. Whoever loves his brother would not wish 
to steal from him either his property or his good name. 
Hence love fulfils everything that the Law could demand. 

Love has no limit in its capacity; as, for instance, 
God's sympathetic love was exercised toward mankind 
after He had pronounced the sentence of death. That 
death sentence must stand, yet 
"Twas Love contrived the way 

To save rebellious man; 
And all the steps that Love display, 
Which drew the wondrous plan." 

Love has done this by providing for the satisfying of 
the Law in respect to Adam, so that Adam can be freed 
from the Law sentence. Justice could not lay this obligation 
upon the Logos; therefore God could not command. 
The only thing He could do was to set before Jesus 
certain incentives. God set before Him the joy of being 
the savior of men, and the additional joy of high exaltation 
in God's Love and favor and to the glorious Kingdom 
privileges. So Love might use various inducements. 

Love with us must also be just. We can never take 
what belongs to one and give it to another. The sympathy 
may be there, but Love cannot act in violation of 
Justice. Hence the advantage that Christians have who 
are students of God's Word. The Bible gives us the true 
conception of what justice is. It gives us the balance of 
a sound mind. The Heavenly Father has sympathy and 
love, but He exercises these qualities according to the 

R5266 : page 197 

principles of justice. We are not limited to justice. It 
was not our law that condemned our brother, but God's 
Law of Justice. So we are at liberty to exercise our love 
beyond mere justice. 

Jesus gave the example of one who owed his master a 
large sum of money; and when he could not pay, his 
master forgave him. Then this man went out to one who 
owed him a few pence, and, because he could not pay the 
debt at once, began to inflict punishment. We ourselves 
cannot render perfect justice, and we cannot rightfully 
require it of others. God, who is perfect and just, has a 



right to demand justice. 

EVIL SURMISING NOT OF LOVE 

Love, as we have seen, is that great and grand quality 
which more fully than any other quality represents our 
Heavenly Father. Love includes a great many things— 
not merely generosity and affection. It seems to include 
every good quality— things that can be appreciated outside 
of justice. 

The Apostle's statement, "Love thinketh no evil," is not 
to be understood to signify that Love is blind to evil, or 
that those who have the spirit of love are blind to evil. On 
the contrary, Love is wounded every day by contact with 
evil influences, and Love cannot help knowing that it is an 
evil thing that is doing the wounding. Love is not, therefore, 
to be blind, and say that there is no evil thing— no 
such thing as sin, selfishness and meanness; all these 
various things exist. Love is in contention with all these 
unlovely things. 

Love thinketh that there is evil, and our quotation 
from the Apostle does not contradict this. The imperfection 
in the translation may perhaps be charged with the 
apparent difficulty. "Love does not surmise evil," would 
seem to be the proper thought. What is it to surmise 
evil? We answer that we have various means for arriving 
at conclusions. We see some things. We gain knowledge 
in various ways, direct or indirect. And for Love 
to have knowledge of evil is not wrong. But to surmise 
evil— to imagine evil when we do not have the knowledge 
—is wrong. Love does not surmise evil. 

If we saw some one do an evil deed or knew in some way 
that the evil deed were committed, and it came under our 
jurisdiction, Love would not hinder us from punishing the 
guilty person. Suppose the matter is mere hearsay and 
the report not well founded; then Love would be prompt 
to say, "I do not know that this is so. I will need to have 
proof." Love would wish to think well of every circumstance, 
every condition. If we saw that murder was committed, 
we would not be justified in surmising who did it. 
We might think who were the most probable ones, in 
order to make an investigation. We would think of the 
persons who had less love, but we should not hastily decide 
who is the murderer, simply because he or she has an unsavory 
character, an unloving character. We are to give 
him the full benefit of the doubt. We are to make 
investigation. 

It would seem that some of the most serious wrongs 
have been committed by surmising evil. Evil has been 
surmised against people without a shadow of proof. It is 
not for us to say that any are totally depraved. Very few 
are totally depraved. But whoever surmises evil, even a 
little, shows that he is lacking in the quality of Love. 
Whoever surmises evil much shows that he has a very 
small degree of Love. Evil surmising makes countless 
thousands mourn. Surmising evil of others has caused 



more suffering in the world than all the battles that were 
ever fought! 

The Lord's people are being taught of God, and hence 
are learning more and more to control their thoughts and 
words and acts. Our thoughts are to be kind! Our 
thoughts are to be generous! Our thoughts are to be just! 
We are not to allow an evil suspicion to lodge in our minds 
against anybody. The common law of man decides that 
no judgment shall be passed against any one until the 
thing be proven against him. Those who have done the 
most evil and caused the most difficulty are those who 
have surmised evil against others. But it is better if we 
learn this as a precept from the Lord's Word, and happy 
are we if we see the degrading power of evil-speaking and 
evil-thinking and entirely refrain therefrom. 

"LOVE YOUR ENEMIES" 

The basis of this instruction— that we love our enemies 
—is evidently that our characters may be developed. Retaliation 
is a natural element of the mind, and particularly 
of the fallen mind— the fleshly mind. The more selfish 
we are, the more inclined we are to render evil for evil, 
slander for slander, blow for blow. 

Our Lord taught the very reverse spirit. We are to 
love even our enemies, doing them good in return for 
their hatred, and ever sympathizing with their condition 
and desiring blessings upon them from the Lord, while 
they are feeling the very opposite toward us, as indicated 
by the persecutions they practise upon us. The Lord says 
that we are to do this in order that we may be the children 
of our Father who is in Heaven. We have been begotten 
of the Holy Spirit, and by practising along these lines we 
become more and more like Him in character. 

Possibly at the beginning of our experience we may 
not see why we should do this. We must practise along 
this line in order that we may develop His character. 
Some one might ask, Will not God punish His enemies? 
Yes! "All the wicked will God destroy." Does not God 
punish those who sin? Yes, all who sin will suffer. Then 
why should not we practise along this same line? Because 
we are not yet qualified to do so. In time, we shall be 
judges of mankind, but we shall not be prepared for this 
until we have first learned the lesson of love. We would 
be too severe, and would not be inclined to do them all 
the good that God would have us do them. 

Does God require us to love where He does not love? 
Oh, no! "God so loved the world"— when they were yet 
sinners! Has God then not a love for mankind? Yes, 
He has a certain love for all mankind. He will see that 
every righteous act will have a just recompense of reward. 
And He will make reasonable allowance for all with 
whom He deals. He has a broad, sympathetic love, and 
wishes to make allowance for these in the way which He 
sees to be best for them. 

When we practise this love to our enemies, we are 



developing a side of our character which is much unbalanced. 
If we get this side balanced, the other side will 
become balanced also. Naturally we wish to see that 
everything wrong is punished, and everything right rewarded. 
In other words, justice stands nearer to us in 
our imperfect condition than does love. Therefore, in 
order to be used of God we must cultivate this quality of 
love. We see why God is sympathetic with mankind. To 
all the wicked He is a consuming fire; that is to say, He is 
so opposed to everything that is impure that it will be 
destroyed, sooner or later. 

It is because the Lord sees in our human family, the 
human race, certain elements of Godlikeness that He is 
dealing with them at all, we may be sure. If from God's 
standpoint He had seen that men were only evil, continually 
evil, we may feel sure that He would not have made 
any arrangement for Restitution in the next Age. It is 

R5267 : page 198 

because God sees that some of the human family would 
rather be right than wrong that He is going to all this 
trouble of redemption, taking all this time, etc., to give 
these everlasting life. In the meantime He is granting 
the experiences of the present, which will be helpful to 
them through all eternity. 

OUR PROPER ATTITUDE TOWARD ENEMIES 

We do not suppose that God has a love for Satan, although 
at first He did have a love for him. But since 
Satan is now of an evil, vicious character, it would be 
wrong for God to love him, and it would be wrong for us 
to love him. Even the worldly condition we must not 
love. We cannot serve God and Mammon. We cannot 
love God and Mammon, because they are opposite. But 
as regards Satan, it is not our part to slander him, nor to 
express vituperative sentiments toward him. He is God's 
enemy. And God is able to attend to that case much 
better than we. So we are not to judge Satan nor to 
revile him. We read that even Michael would not bring 
a railing accusation against him, but said, "The Lord rebuke 
thee."— Jude 9. 

We are to do all the good we can, and be as helpful as 
possible. We are not competent to judge, to decree. It 
is therefore our duty to be fully submissive, and in due 
time the Lord will manifest the principles of righteousness, 
as in contrast with the principles of error. He will 
render His just verdict in due time, through His appointed 
Channel. 

In respect to those who ignorantly seem to be adversaries 
of the Church at the present time, we are to have 
a sympathetic love— not the love of a brother. God refuses 
to accept any of these as His children; He merely exercises 
toward them sympathetic love. He does not wish to 
do them any harm. Rather He is preparing to assist 



them. By and by He will provide for them everything 
that will be helpful in bringing them out of their sinful 
condition. We would rather assume that all of the human 
family are what they are because of the fall and not because 
of wilful love of sin. To take any other viewpoint 
would be judging, and we are not authorized to be judges 
now. 

Taking this viewpoint, we recognize that some of our 
race fell more in one direction, and some more in other 
directions, and that "all have sinned and come short of the 
glory of God"— the glorious standard which God has set. 
We ourselves need Divine sympathy, and we ought to be 
glad to render sympathy to others. 
(To be concluded in our next issue.) 



R5267 : page 198 

"THESE THINGS WERE TYPES" 

"Now these things were our examples [Greek tupos— types], 
to the intent that we should not lust after evil things, as they 
[typical Israel] also lusted. ...Now all these things 
happened unto them for ensamples [Greek tupos— types]: 
and they are written for our admonition upon whom 
the ends of the world are come. Wherefore let him that 
thinketh he standeth take heed 
lest he fall. "-1 Corinthians 10:6-12. 

ST. PAUL'S WORDS have great weight with 
every reader of this journal. The above 
text, even in our Common Version, is very 
strong, very forceful, but its force is multiplied 
when we notice that in the Greek the 
word type is used; for a type is a very 
exact pattern of the antitype, which is on a 
larger scale. 

The force of the statement is further 
intensified when we notice that the Ends, 
or Harvests, of the Ages are referred to. The Apostle 
lived in the Harvest of the Jewish Age; and we believe 
that we are living in its antitype, the Harvest of this 
Gospel Age. More than this, in the Greek the Apostle's 
words imply a special pressure, or testing, connected with 
these Harvests— just such pressure and testing as we 
know were upon the Jewish nation in St. Paul's day, and 
just such pressure and testing as are upon Christendom 
in this our day— the Harvest, or End, of this Gospel Age. 

Literally, St. Paul said, "They are written for our 
admonition upon whom the Ends of the Ages press 
down." Elsewhere the same Apostle urges respecting this 
same time, that God's people should have on "the whole 
armor of God" in this "evil day," that they may be able 
to stand. (Eph. 6:13.) Here he suggests that in this 
Harvest time some of us may feel too self-confident, and 



hence not sufficiently watchful, careful. He urges, "Let 
him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall." The 
wherefore of verse 12 connects this danger of falling 
with those stumblings and fallings of Israel which, the 
Apostle tells us, are "our types." 

SUGGESTIONS OF ANOTHER 

A dear brother in the Truth writes us at considerable 
length concerning the five different experiences referred 
to by the Apostle as "our types." Studying these with 
apparent great care, the brother thinks that he sees double 
fulfilments of these types during this Harvest time. He 
notes the invasion of Darwinism among God's people, 
as corresponding to the invasion of the quails among the 
Israelites lusting after flesh as against the manna. The 
teachings of Evolution ignore the Bible statement of 
man's fall, of the redeeming work of Jesus, and of the 
ultimate blessing of the world through His Kingdom, 
and give the people in their stead worldly doctrines for 
religious food; especially the view that man has evolved 
from the brute by natural inherent forces. This temptation 
upon Christendom has led to great deflections, and 
through it many have lost their spiritual hopes, if not 
their spiritual lives. 

The second temptation, pictured by the worshiping 
of the golden calf, the brother understands to be the worship 
of self and the works of self, especially evidencing 
itself in the Higher Criticism movement, wherein religious 
leaders, seemingly in self-love, set forth to the 
people the product of their intellects as objects of worship, 
instead of holding Jehovah, who is set forth in the 
Scripture Plan as Perfect in Wisdom, Justice, Love and 
Power, as the One to be worshiped. The worship of 
money, also, he thinks is incidental to the decline of the 
worship of the true God. This temptation also has resulted 
in much spiritual harm and death. 

The third temptation he also interprets symbolically, 
understanding it to mean improper combinations as between 
things spiritual and things temporal, and between 
things true and things false, as represented in the tendency 
to mix religion and pleasure and money-getting, and 
also the disposition to combine various religions with 
politics. This also, he suggests, has caused considerable 
destruction of spirituality in Christendom. 

The fourth test, styled by the Apostle as "tempting 
Christ," was a rebellion against Moses, who typified 
Christ. The people desired to take a short-cut through 
the land of Edom, thus to enter the Promised Land, 
whereas Moses directed their course by a more circuitous 
journey through the wilderness. Our brother sees in this 

R5267 : page 199 

a type of how in our day there has arisen in all the 
nominal churches an opposition to the narrow way of 



self-sacrifice— the wilderness journey toward the Canaan 
of Rest— a desire to make a short-cut, taking in the pleasures 
of this present life and the fellowship of the world. 
This temptation is represented by the official removal 
of restrictions upon Christian conduct, by which it has 
become popular for Christians to become theatre-goers, 
novel readers, game players, society people, and social 
and political reformers, supposedly the highest type of 
Christian workers. 

There is a murmuring against the "narrow way" of 
discipleship— a murmuring against the voice of the Lord 
through the Scriptures and against all those who walk in 
that wilderness way, in the footsteps of Jesus, and who 
teach others so to do. The fiery serpents have bitten 
many of these murmurers. Many are sick because of 
these bites, and only a recognition of the efficacy of the 
Redeemer's blood can save them unto everlasting life. 
Thank God, for many of them there will be a further opportunity 
for looking to Jesus than has been afforded 
in the present life! 

The fulfilment of the fifth of these types of the trials 
and testings of this Harvest period our brother believes 
to be just upon us, and will be by far the most severe 
test, and will mean the spiritual death of large numbers. 
He is inclined to connect its fulfilment with THE WATCH 
TOWER publications and the wide murmurings against 
them— as mouthpieces of God. 

In all of these "our types," the brother thinks he finds 
not only nominal Christendom involved, but also in a 
special sense those of God's people who see and appreciate 
the time in which we are living as the Harvest time, 
and who are enjoying the "meat in due season" now provided 
for the Household of Faith. It is unnecessary for 
us to elaborate the brother's application of the first four 
of these temptations, tests, as they have had fulfilment in 
connection with the Harvest work and THE WATCH 
TOWER publications. We will, therefore, be content to 

R5268 : page 199 

elaborate a little his view of the fifth of these trials belonging 
to this Harvest time, and written for our admonition, 
as "our types." 

THE "VOW" REPRESENTED IN THE TASSELS 

In Numbers 16, we have in great detail the fifth of 
"these things written for our admonition," as "our types." 
Our brother urges that the account really begins with the 
last four verses of Numbers 15. There the Lord directed 
Moses, saying, "Speak unto the children of Israel, and 
bid them that they make them fringes in the borders of 
their garments, throughout their generations, and that 
they put upon the fringe of the borders a ribband of blue. 
And it shall be unto you for a fringe, that ye may look 
upon it, and remember all the commandments of the Lord, 



and do them; and that ye seek not after your own heart, 
and your own eyes, after which ye use to go a whoring; 
that ye may remember and do all My commandments, and 
be holy unto your God."— Numbers 15:38-40. 

The brother points out that the word here rendered 
fringe is in the Hebrew tsitsith, and signifies a tassel. 
The Jews still follow this command. Next to their skin 
they wear a holy cloth a few inches long, over their 
chests and backs, with a hole in the center for the head, 
much resembling a garment worn by the priests. Upon 
the corners of the holy cloth they fasten tassels tied with 
blue ribbon. The symbolism is "Holiness to the Lord." 

Interpreting this, the brother suggests that it was a 
new commandment or counsel given by Moses as the 
Lord's mouthpiece, and that it was this that led to the 
rebellion of Korah, Dathan, Abiram and On, with two 
hundred and fifty of the principal men of Israel. Ostensibly 
their rebellion was not against God, but against 
Moses; but really it was against God, because Moses 
merely acted as His mouthpiece. 

Applying these things, the brother suggests that the 
"Vow unto the Lord" suggested in the columns of THE 
WATCH TOWER as an aid to greater holiness and as an 
assistance in remembering the Lord's commandments, 
was presented to the Lord's people in 1908. True, the 
Vow was not presented as a command from God, but 
merely as a suggestion of something which would help 
the Spiritual Israelites in their endeavor to grow in grace 
and knowledge and love, in holiness and in sympathetic 
fellowship with each other, remembering each other and 
all the interests of the Work daily at the Throne of 
Heavenly Grace. This suggestion of something for their 
spiritual advantage and for their protection in this "evil 
day," when it is a question of "who shall be able to 
stand," was expected to bring a hearty response from all 
who are "Israelites indeed." 

After Moses had given the instructions from the Lord 
respecting the fringes, etc., to the surprise of many, there 
followed immediately an uprising amongst the Levites— 
amongst the consecrated— under the leadership of Korah. 
The uproar was seemingly on the question of holiness. 
"Two hundred and fifty of the princes of the assembly, 
famous in the congregation, men of renown,... 
gathered themselves together against Moses and against 
Aaron, and said unto them, Ye take too much upon you, 
seeing all the congregation are holy, every one of them, 
and the Lord is among them; wherefore then lift ye up 
yourselves above the congregation of the Lord?"— 
Num. 16:2,3. 

The suggested application of this type is that as "our 
type" the "fringe" tied with a blue ribbon (Num. 15:38) 
represents the Vow, we looking upon it as a means of 
grace, as an assistance toward the remembering of all the 
commandments of the Lord to do them, and that "Ye 
speak not after your own heart and your own minds." 
The Vow is a suggestion that we remember God's commandments 



and speak not after our own heart of the 

flesh, nor after our own wisdom, but that we remember 

and do all of God's will and requirements and glorify 

our God. The rising of Korah, Dathan, Abiram and On, 

with the two hundred and fifty of the principal men of 

the congregation, represented in type the opposition engendered 

against the Lord's Harvest work, now being 

carried on through this journal and the Watch Tower 

Society, and which took for its text, in opposition to the 

Vow suggested, "Ye take too much upon you, seeing all 

the congregation are holy, every one of them." Wherefore 

then lift ye up so high a standard of the Lord? 

Why lift up so high a standard of righteous endeavor of 

thought and word and deed? 

MOSES EXPOSTULATED IN VAIN 

How Moses entreated and expostulated, and how he 
was reviled, is described in Numbers 16:4-35, also the 
final result— that Korah, Dathan, Abiram and their families 
were swallowed up by the opening of the earth, and 
the band of two hundred and fifty were destroyed by fire. 
This is interpreted to signify that those rebellious ones 
who posed as being so holy were disapproved of the Lord, 
and in some manner, in the antitype, will lose their spiritual 
life— possibly by being swallowed up, or consumed, 
by worldliness, business, etc. Our interpreter suggests 
that this taking of censers and offering of incense by 
these men, pictures the bringing forth of many tracts and 

R5268 : page 200 

pamphlets as offerings of incense to God by those who 
oppose us. 

Aaron stood in the midst of the offerers with his censer 
and incense, and his offering alone was accepted. The 
brother also calls our attention to the sequel of the matter, 
which he believes may yet in some degree be future. 

The children of Israel, instead of recognizing the 
Justice of the Lord in dealing with those who were rebellious 
against His Divine arrangements, condemned 
Moses and Aaron for the death of Korah, Dathan and 
Abiram and the two hundred and fifty transgressors, ignoring 
the Lord's relationship to the matter entirely, 
(verse 41.) A host of them gathered against Moses and 
Aaron, and murmured, saying, "Ye have killed the people 
of the Lord!" The result was that the Lord's anger was 
aroused against the murmurers. A plague broke out 
amongst them, so that fourteen thousand seven hundred 
perished as a result. And the remainder were spared 
because of the haste of Aaron in running into the midst 
of the afflicted people with the holy and acceptable incense. 
The brother suggests that this was next to the 
most destructive plague of the five, and that this is the 
portion which the Apostle specially emphasized when 
saying, "These things were our types." "Neither murmur 



ye, as some of them also murmured, and were destroyed 
of the destroyer." 

LESSONS WE MAY SAFELY LEARN 

Without fully endorsing every item of the foregoing, 
we must say that some features of these, "our types," fit 
reasonably well to the interpretations suggested. However, 
entirely aside from these types, entirely aside from 
this or any other interpretation of them, we know that 
we are living in the "hour of temptation" (Rev. 3:10), in 
the "evil day," in which this Age will be merged into 
the New Dispensation. We surely know that "Judgment 
begins with the House of God." We surely know that 
it is to extend eventually to all Christendom. If the 
Judgment, or trial, or fiery testing, of the world, will 
mean to them "a time of trouble such as never was since 
there was a nation," it will surely mean a time of fiery 
trial to the Household of Faith, with whom it begins. 
The question is, "Who shall be able to stand?" The answer 
is, the holy— the sanctified in Christ Jesus. 

The spirit of rebellion against all laws, rules, regulations, 
human and Divine, seems to be in the very air we 
breathe. It is a time therefore for the child of God to 
be seeking peace and pursuing it increasingly, as far as 
possible with all, acting as peacemakers and not as strife 
breeders. It is a time when many seem prompted to 
offer incense which the Lord has not commissioned them 
to offer. The spirit of ambition, rivalry and desire to be 
greatest amongst the Lord's people is one of the most 
dangerous foes of the Church, not only to those over 
whom they rule, but also to those who will be the rulers 
and teachers. The lesson to every one of us is, "Humble 
yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that 
He may exalt you in due time." 

Another lesson is that loyalty to God means that we 
shall remember that He has undertaken the supervision 
of His Church's affairs, and that He is competent for all 
that He has undertaken. Consequently, the loyal and 
obedient must be careful how they undertake to be or to 
do, to make or to break, anything connected with the 
work of the Lord. They are more and more to expect 
and look for Divine leadings in all of their affairs, and 
equally in the affairs of the Church of Christ. 



R5269 : page 200 

"HE COMETH WITH CLOUDS" 

"Behold, He cometh with clouds; and every eye shall see Him, 
and they also which pierced Him; and all kindreds of the 
earth shall wail because of Him."— Revelation 1:7. 

THIS Scripture is generally quoted as a proof 



that our Lord Jesus at His Second Coming 
will be visible to the whole human family; 
that they will all have great mourning when 
they see Him; that it will be a sad day for 
them— especially for the Jews. Our thought 
respecting the passage, in the light of other 
Scriptures, is different from this. In the 
first place, the Lord Himself said, "Yet a 
little while, and the world seeth Me no 
more, but ye shall see Me." Only the Lord's faithful 
followers were to see Him. The Apostle Paul explains 
that Jesus' followers will see Him because they are to be 
changed in the First Resurrection, "in a moment, in the 
twinkling of an eye." The Scriptures clearly indicate 
that our Lord's present condition is the Heavenly, the 
spirit condition, not only as high a condition as before He 
came into the world, but still higher. 

The Lord prayed to the Father that He would glorify 
Him with the glory that He had with Him before He 
came into the world— "before the world was." The 
Father assured Him that He had glorified Him and would 
glorify Him again. (John 17:5; 12:28. Vatican MS.) 
The Scriptures also assure us that our Lord in His 
glorified condition is far above angels, principalities and 
powers. (Philippians 2:9,10.) When He was a man, he 
was "a little lower than the angels." (Heb. 2:6-9.) The 
Scriptures declare that the Lord is now the express image 
of the Father's person (Heb. 1:3), and also declare of 
Him, "Whom no man hath seen nor can see." 

Another Scripture tells us that the coming of Christ 
will be for the blessing of the world. The very object 
of His coming will be for the lifting up of the poor and 
fallen race. St. Peter tells us that there will be "times 
of refreshing," "Times of Restitution of all things, which 
God hath spoken by the mouth of ALL His Holy Prophets 
since the world began."— Acts 3:19-21. 

How shall we harmonize this last statement with that 
of our text, which says that He shall come with 
clouds; that every eye shall see Him; and that all mankind 
"shall wail because of Him"? The answer is that 
in harmony with other Scriptures the coming with clouds 
would signify the coming in a period of trouble— the 
word "clouds" being used to signify trouble— in the dark 
Day. He is coming in clouds, in that the time in which 
He will first manifest Himself to the world will be a 
very dark Day to the world— "a time of trouble such as 
never was since there was a nation," and, we are told, 
never shall be again. (Matt. 24:21.) That will be a 
dark, cloudy Day. 

In that Day, ultimately all eyes shall be opened; and 
all mankind shall see Him with the eyes of their understanding 
—see Him in the sense that we see Him now, 
and have knowledge of Him and of the Father. A blind 
man sees in the same sense. He says, "I see now"— 
meaning that he sees with his intellectual sight. It is far 
better to see with the intellect than with the natural sight. 



Darkness now covers the earth. "The god of this 
world hath blinded the minds of all those who believe 
not." (2 Corinthians 4:4.) There are a great many 

R5269 : page 201 

blinded minds at the present time. They do not know the 

object of Christ's coming. They do not have the Scriptural 

teaching as to why He comes. But their blinded 

eyes shall be opened. Every human being shall come to 

an understanding of the fact that the Lord's Kingdom 

is for the blessing of "all the families of the earth" according 

to God's Promise made to Abraham and all the 

Prophets after his day. 

The Jews will come to recognize Him. The Apostle 
Paul says, "Blindness in part is happened to Israel, until 
the fulness of the Gentiles be come in. And so all Israel 
shall be saved" (Romans 11:25,26) from their blindness, 
from their ignorance, from their misunderstanding at 
His presentation of Himself at His First Advent. Another 
Scripture says that when they see Him, recognize 
the "sign of the Son of Man in the heavens, then shall 
all the tribes of the earth mourn, and they shall see the 
Son of Man coming in the clouds of heaven with power 
and great glory." (Matthew 24:30.) The Prophet says 
that those that "pierced Him" shall mourn for Him as 
a man mourns for his only son. (Zechariah 12:10.) 
Thus they will appreciate Christ, and their eyes will be 
the first eyes that will be opened. But at that same time, 
when their eyes begin to see out of obscurity, there will 
not be anything that they can see with the natural sight. 

There is first of all to be a parousia, or presence, of 
Christ, which will be known only to His Church, His 
Bride class. The culmination of His work in the parousia 
will be the gathering of the Church to Himself in the 
First Resurrection. The Scriptures go on to say that 
He shall be revealed in flaming fire, taking vengeance. 

The "clouds of heaven" well represent the confusion 
in general. The world for a time will be in ignorance of 
His presence. But gradually they will come to know 
that they are in the time of trouble, the Day of wrath, 
in which this Age is to close. Then they will mourn. 
The whole world will be in mourning. If the world has 
mourned in the past, much more shall we expect it to do 
so when the trouble will be general. In the midst of that 
trouble, they will gradually learn of the grace of God. 
Human selfishness, they will find, has been so overruled 
as to lead up to the glorious Kingdom of Messiah, through 
which are to come all the blessings which God has 
promised. 



R5269 : page 201 

LIVING AFTER THE FLESH 



"For if ye live after the flesh, 
ye shall die."— Romans 8:13. 

THESE words, addressed by the Apostle to the 

consecrated Christians living at Rome, are 

equally applicable to Christian people living 

all down through this Age. The terms all 

during the Gospel Dispensation are the 

same. They have not changed, and will not 

change. The call is to become soldiers of 

the Lord Jesus Christ, under the banner of 

the cross, and to have the trials and the 

difficulties in the present life and the reward 

that will follow. The agreement of our consecration is 

that we will make a full surrender of ourselves as human 

beings, that we will give up our earthly rights and 

privileges, as we have control of these. It includes still 

more than this. It includes the giving up of our hopes 

as members of the world of mankind. 

God's provision for the world is that they shall be 
recovered from sin, and brought back to the full human 
perfection lost by Adam's disobedience. We who accept 
the offer of this Gospel Dispensation surrender all those 
Restitution privileges which Jesus' death would have given 
us. We surrender these for the hope which the Church 
is granted, not the hope of human perfection, but the 
hope of being accounted worthy to attain, with the Master, 
to glory, honor and immortality— the Divine nature. 

These are merely hopes, merely prospects. We do 
not see the glorious things themselves. We merely have 
the Lord's Word respecting them. We give up the earthly 
hope for the Heavenly hope. These begotten of the Holy 
Spirit are called New Creatures. And these New Creatures 
are to live, not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. 
That is to say, they are not to obey the dictates of the 
flesh, but those of the Holy Spirit of God. 

MEANS OF SPIRITUAL GROWTH 

This Holy Spirit that they are to obey they receive 
in several ways. Primarily, they receive it in begetting, 
and it is an influence directly from God. This spiritual 
creature, thus begun, is to grow in grace, knowledge and 
love— to grow up into Christ and into full development in 
the Body of Christ. And this New Creature is to feed on 
the Word of God. It is not only to use the Word of 
God, but also to go to the Father in prayer and note His 
providences. It may even learn some things by its failures 
and by the disciplines incidental to those failures. 

These New Creatures are thus to demonstrate their 
loyalty of heart, their confidence in God, in all these 
matters. And if they do this to the end of the journey, 
eventually they will reign in the glorious Kingdom of 
Messiah. And those who will receive the reward of joint-heirship 
with the Lord, will be those who have proven 



their loyalty even unto death. 

The great Captain of our Salvation was the first One 
who was given this opportunity. He was found faithful. 
He laid down His life in obedience to the Father's will. 
His experiences were the cup which the Father poured 
for Him. At all times the language of his inmost being 
was, "I delight to do Thy will, O Lord! Thy Law is 
written in My heart." This is the course that must be 
followed by all who would reach the same goal as Christ, 
and be a joint-heir with Him in His Kingdom. 

A joint-heir is a co-inheritor, one who shares an inheritance 
with another. The Father purposed from the 
very beginning that He would have, not only the Head- 
Christ— but also the Church, His Body. "He who foreknew 
Jesus foreknew us also by Jesus." The Apostle 
says that, in bringing many sons to glory, it behooved God 

R5270 : page 201 

to make the Captain of our Salvation perfect through 
sufferings— through the things that He suffered. And 
those sons who would be associated with Him in that 
glorious Kingdom must suffer also in the things through 
which they pass.— Heb. 2:10; 2 Tim. 2:11,12. 

Amongst the trials and difficulties through which the 
followers of our Lord must pass, are the besetments of 
Sin and Satan, the allurements of the world, and the 
weaknesses of the human nature. Some of these the 
Master underwent— but He was holy, harmless, undefiled 
and separate from sinners. We are not able to overcome 
completely, and so we have the imputation of the 
merit of Christ to cover our unintentional blemishes. 
Jesus had no such allowance made for Him. We who 
are imperfect and blemished have this arrangement made 
for us in order that we may have an opportunity of 
reaching this goal. Every imperfection that we have is 

R5270 : page 202 

covered by the merit of Christ. Thus we are well started 
on this race-course. 

We are not only to resist sin, but we are to lay down 
our rights. We are to count the spoiling of our goods all 
joy, knowing that our trials, rightly received, are working 
out for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight 
of glory. If any would be intimidated by the loss of 
name or fame or what-not, he would not be of the right 
spirit, and would not be classed as an overcomer. 

TWO CLASSES OF THE UNFAITHFUL 

We have been describing the faithful ones— those who 
walk in the Redeemer's footsteps to the end. But there 
are two other classes. The one class returns to sin again 
—as St. Peter says, "like a sow to her wallowing in the 
mire." (2 Peter 2:22.) Such have no provision made 



for them. They have gone clear back on their Covenant, 
and the Apostle points out that there is nothing left for 
these but "the blackness of darkness." 

Then there is another class, who would not think of 
going back to live in this manner, like the hog, to wallow 
in sin. But they are held back by the fear of death, and 
are all their lifetime subject to bondage. (Hebrews 2:15.) 
They fear that sacrificial death. They will not exercise 
sufficient faith and courage. They will not be of the 
favored class, because they have not a sufficiency of the 
Master's character. And yet they are not bad. They 
have a loyalty of heart. If this were not so, they would 
go back to the wallowing in the mire, like the other class 
described. 

The Lord sees that these love Him, and that under 
favorable conditions they would be very glad to live for 
Him. But they are living in an adverse time. And the 
Lord in great compassion does not suffer them to lose 
all, but provides for them a way of escape. So He 
allows trials to come upon them— it is God's providence 
that does this. As the Apostle says, He delivers such 
unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the 
spirit may be saved in the Day of the Lord Jesus. If 
such profit by their experiences, they might get into the 
Great Company class and be of the spiritual nature. But 
they will not be counted worthy to be sharers in the 
highest blessing, the Divine nature. 

A place in either of these two classes is not, as a rule, 
reached instantly. Any one begotten of the Holy Spirit 
at one moment could not the next moment die the Second 
Death. There is too much of a difference between spirit-begetting 
and the condition of wilful sin for us to imagine 
that they could follow closely the one upon the other. 
They are opposites. It would be impossible to pass from 
the one condition to the other instantly. So this class 
prospers for a time, but as the trials, difficulties and 
persecutions incident to the Christian life come in they 
gradually fall away. 

CAUSES OF FAILURE 

In these classes there is a failure to live up to the 
standard. In both cases there is a tendency to take a 
medium course— neither to live close to the Lord and His 
requirements nor to drift away from Him. As the 
Apostle says, if we continue to live after the flesh, if we 
take that course of life which would be pleasing to our 
old natures, we may know that it is the broad road that 
leads to destruction. And so if we live after the flesh 
and continue so to live, the end will be death. 

We learn from the Scriptures that the Lord would 
not allow any who really love Him, who are loyal of 
heart and have merely made a misstep, to go into the 
Second Death. The Apostle John says, "If any man [in 
Christ] sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus 
Christ the Righteous." (I John 2:1.) Let him come to 



the Throne of Grace, that he may obtain mercy and help 
in time of need. But any misstep would have a tendency 
to lead us farther and farther away from the goal. We 
are always to press on. The death of those who live 
after the flesh will be the Second Death; for these New 
Creatures have already passed from the first death. The 
Apostle says that we have passed from death unto life. 

We, this class referred to in the text, have received 
our share of the Sacrifice of Christ, and having received 
our portion there would be nothing more left for us, if 
we should lose it. And if any of these misuse their share, 
any death that they die would be the Second Death. 
There is but one death to the New Creature; for it can 
never be redeemed. Every provision is made for helping 
it, but no provision if it takes the position of a wilful 
sinner. 

The Apostle says, "I beseech you, brethren, that ye 
present your bodies a living sacrifice." And this is what 
the faithful are doing— laying down their lives. And 
this is the condition on which they will obtain the great 
reward of the Divine nature! 



R5270 : page 202 

PERTLE SPRINGS AND HOT SPRINGS 

OUR Western Convention Tour may properly 

be termed a series of Conventions, of from 

one day to eight days' duration each. First 

came one day at Kalamazoo, Mich.; then 

one day at Toledo, O.; then one day at Jackson, 

Mich.; then one day at Kansas City, 

Mo. At all of these cities interesting public 

meetings were held, averaging about 

1,200; besides smaller meetings for the 

interested. 

Next came Pertle Springs, Mo.— an eight days' Convention. 
It had an attendance of about 500, with occasionally 
800, when swelled by the public. All seemed to 
enjoy this quiet resting place, away from distractions of 
every kind. The program showed fourteen Pilgrims. Besides 
these, others of ability were tried out on symposiums. 
Fifty-four were immersed— 25 brethren and 29 
sisters. The Editor's stay was for only two days. He 
hastened onward. 

Oklahoma City was our next stop. Two meetings 
were with the interested, including about 100 from nearby 
places. Seventeen were baptized. A public meeting was 
attended by fully 3,000. A deep interest was manifested 
and we trust some were drawn nearer to the Lord as 
the eyes of their understanding opened more widely to 
the beauties of God's Word. 

Little Rock, Ark., had a One-Day Convention with 
about 200 friends in attendance. The public meeting was 



rated at 700. The public is surely awakening to a realization 
that the lack of church attendance is to be attributed 
to a lack of faith; and the lack of faith to be attributed 
to a lack of knowledge of the Bible's real teachings. 

Hot Springs, Ark.— Our eight days' Convention here 
was none too cool at midday, but the friends had a most 
enjoyable time. It was a splendid Convention in every 
good sense. The friends in attendance represented 
thirty -two States, to the estimated number of 1,000— 
though we doubt if there were so many except at the public 
meetings, when the attendance ran up to the auditorium's 
capacity. Total number immersed forty-one— 23 
sisters and 18 brothers. 

Amongst the items of interest here were three resolutions 

R5270 : page 203 

of the I.B.S.A., declaring:— 

(1) That it is the sense of the Convention that the 
time has come for the learned to inform the less learned 
that the Bible words Sheol, Hades, Tartarus and Gehenna 
do not refer to places or conditions of fiery tortures, but 
that the first two signify the tomb; 

(2) That the Earth was already created when the 
narrative of Genesis begins: "And the Earth was, without 
form and void"; that the seven Epoch-Days of Genesis 
should be made known to the public, that the true harmony 
between the Bible and Science may be realized. 

(3) It was unanimously resolved that the time has 
come for the use of moving pictures in teaching Bible 
truths. It was brought out by the discussion that the 
Lord sanctioned this in His use of parables and in the 
symbols of Revelation, which are word pictures. It was 
conceded that so important an avenue for reaching the 
heads and hearts of mankind should not be neglected. 

The Editor later explained that he had been at work 
upon this very plan for three years and now had almost 
ready hundreds of beautiful pictures, which will undoubtedly 
attract great crowds and herald the Gospel, and help 
the public back to faith in God, and in the Bible as the 
Word, or Revelation of God. 

Later, when endorsing the Convention's resolutions, 
the Association's President declared that he would advocate 
the use of "The Temple," West Sixty-third Street, 
near Broadway, New York City, as the permanent home 
for the Gospel in pictures— "The Photo-Drama of Creation." 
He believed that its use on seven days of the 

R5271 : page 203 

week, and three times daily, would prove a wonderful 
work of grace to many— much more so than to use it 
merely one day of the week for preaching. 

This led to an explanation of what "The Temple" is. 
Almost providentially a property worth nearly half a million 
dollars had come under the Association's control for 



Gospel work. True, the property is mortgaged for nearly 
its worth; but no matter: the low interest will be a very 
moderate rental. Besides, while The Temple will be the 
home of "The Photo-Drama of Creation," the Exhibition 
will have numerous duplications, for the preaching of the 
Gospel far and near. 

At Hot Springs, Brother Russell joined the Excursion 
Train. It consisted of nine cars, and in them about 200 
Truth friends, desirous of accompanying their Pastor on 
the trans-continental tour. 

The Convention was royally welcomed by the Business 
Men's League of Hot Springs, and urged to "Come 
again." Their letter of invitation addressed to the I.B.S.A. 
Secretary follows: 

DEAR SIR: 

The Business Men's League of Hot Springs, Arkansas, 
herewith tender the International Bible Students Association, 
a hearty and cordial invitation to hold their next convention 
in Hot Springs. 

In extending this invitation, we wish to assure you of our 
appreciation of the honor and pleasure you have conferred 
upon us by favoring us with your presence during the past 
week. 

Hot Springs is to be congratulated upon having had your 
celebrated leader, Pastor Russell, in our midst, and you may 
rest assured that, should you decide to accept this invitation, 
nothing will be left undone to make your next visit one of 
the most pleasurable and memorable ones in the history of 
your organization. 

Trusting you will favor us with an acceptance, we are, 
Yours very truly, 

HAMP WILLIAMS, President. 
GEORGE R. BELDING, Secretary. 



R5271 : page 203 

FIGHTING AGAINST GOD 

-AUGUST 3. -PSALM 105:23-36; EXODUS 7:11.- 

"Whosoever shall exalt himself shall be humbled: whosoever 
shall humble himself shall be exalted. "-Matthew 23:12. R.V. 

THE practice of injustice injures both parties 
—the afflicter as seriously as the afflicted. If 
this principle were generally recognized, 
fewer would attempt to practise injustice- 
inequity— iniquity. The Bible especially disclaims 
against all forms of iniquity and upholds 
justice, which is but another name for 
righteousness. All sins are great and grievous 
in proportion as they are injustices affecting 
the rights of others. No lesson 



seems so difficult for people in general to learn as the 
lesson of justice, which the Master briefly comprehended 
in His Golden Rule, "Do unto others as ye would that they 
should do unto you." 

There is no individual who does not need to guard 
himself along this line. With the coming of the opportunity 
to take advantage of another comes the test. It has 
a thousand forms, but is always the same— injustice. It 
may be practised by employer against employee, by parent 
against child, by husband against wife, by neighbor 
against friend; or reversely. In every case, however, we 
may be sure that the one who practises the injustice will 
suffer as severely in the end as the one against whom it 
is practised. This principle finds a forceful illustration in 
today's Study. 

SLAVERY'S COST TO THE EGYPTIANS 

On various pretexts the Egyptians justified their treatment 
of the Hebrews. They were becoming numerically 
strong, and might aid the enemies of Egypt in case of an 
invasion. Therefore the Egyptians wished to hinder the 
increase of that people. Unsuccessful in this they enslaved 
the Hebrews. The slavery proved so satisfactory 
and profitable to the Egyptians that they afterwards 
thought that they could not get along without the slaves. 
Hence, at the time of this Study, the Egyptians were 
ready to hold their slaves at almost any cost. 

Injustice— inequity— iniquity— got such a hold upon 
the Egyptians that the plagues necessary for the deliverance 
of the Hebrews were doubtless a full compensation 
of justice upon them, equivalent to the injustices 
which they had practised. Truthful is the proverb which 
says, "He who sins shall suffer"— a just recompense, 
somehow, sometime. 

The Egyptian plagues were miraculous from one viewpoint; 
not so from another. We are apt to style everything 
beyond our own experiences as miraculous, and 
everything within our range of experiences as natural. 
Thus Telephony and Wireless Telegraphy would rank as 
miraculous, did we not have ability to reproduce them, 
and to know how the results are secured. Similarly, the 
perfect flowers of our day, as contrasted with the inferior 
ones of fifty years ago, would be miraculous to us without 
the knowledge of how the improvements have been 
produced. 

On the other hand, from God's standpoint nothing is 
miraculous, since everything is accomplished in harmony 
with Wisdom and Power Divine. As we become familiar 
with the laws of nature and discern how the Almighty 
has accomplished certain things which we in the past 

R5271 : page 204 

called miraculous, it should not lessen our respect for the 
wonder itself, nor for the One who produced it. 



Applying this principle to today's Study, we find that 
the various plagues upon the Egyptians can be accounted 
for with more or less of reasonableness, but the people 
of God should all the more reverence Him who exercised 
that power. It is supposed that the ten plagues upon 
the Egyptians covered a period of ten months. Evidently 
they were part of a contest between the gods of the 
Egyptians and Jehovah, the God of the Hebrews. 

The Pharaohs claimed to be the representatives of 
the sun god, while their slave people, the Hebrews, worshiped 
the great unseen, unmanifested Jehovah. Thus, 
when Moses by Divine direction appeared before Pharaoh, 
he told him that the God of the Hebrews sent him word 
that the Israelites were to go out of Egypt to worship 
Him. Derisively Pharaoh inquired, "Who is this God of 
the Hebrews?" The intimation is that he did not recognize 
Him. He considered the sun god of the Egyptians 
the powerful one. 

Moses was instructed to give certain signs by which 
his authority as God's representative would be recognized. 
One of these was to cast his staff upon the ground, and 
it would turn into a serpent. It was a notable sign, but 
Pharaoh called in his magicians, and they performed a 
similar feat, or appeared to do so. Some have surmised 
that they performed a trick said to be common in India 
—hypnotizing a serpent and making it rigid in catalepsy, 
so it would appear like a staff. Then, released from the 
hypnosis, it would manifest itself as a serpent. We are 
not sure, however, that the magicians did not do more 
than this, for the other duplications of the work of Moses 
through Aaron cannot be accounted for on the basis of 
deception. 

What power did they use? We reply that according 
to the Scriptures there are but two sources of occult 
power— Divine and satanic. Unquestionably God has for 
centuries permitted Satan and the fallen angels, called 
demons, to exercise great power. In no other way can 
the psychic phenomena of India and, more recently, in 
Europe and America, be accounted for. And in thus saying, 
we are not charging that the spirit mediums are 
knowingly the servants of the evil spirits who personate 
the dead. Rather, we are excusing them as thoroughly 
deceived— blind leaders of the blind— who more and more 
are bringing the world under the power of these evil 
spirits, and rapidly increasing the numbers of the insane, 
who already number one out of every hundred adults. 

WATERS TURNED INTO BLOOD 

It is supposed that the plagues began in June and 
ended the following March. The first one, the turning of 
the waters into blood, was almost as miraculous as the 
turning of the water into wine by our Lord at Cana. 
Some think that they find the explanation of the miracle. 
We have no reason to doubt that some day we shall fully 
know how God exercised His power in performing this 



wonder, and also how the Lord Jesus operated chemically 
on the water to change it into wine. Undoubtedly the 
process is a simple one, if we only know how it was done. 
All the grape juice was originally water, and passed 
through chemical changes in the vine. More and more 
our chemists are learning of the secrets of nature, 
and the flavors of fruits are now produced by what is 
termed the synthetic process. Some are hoping to produce 
milk by this process very soon— the full equivalent of 
cows' milk— directly from the grass. 

Travelers tell us that in the early spring, before the 
freshets, they have seen the water of the Nile as red as 
blood. This color is produced by some micro-organisms 
in the water. If this were the method God used for 
turning the waters of Egypt into blood, or to look like 
blood, Pharaoh had probably heard of such changes before, 
and the miracle would consist chiefly in the ability 
of Moses and Aaron to effect the change suddenly— at 

R5272 : page 204 

their command— and in turn to abate it. The effect was 
sufficiently disastrous, for the fish of the river were killed, 
and the people could not drink the water. Still Pharaoh 
and his court held on to the injustice, and refused to let 
the Hebrews go. 

The second declaration of the authority of Jehovah 
in commanding the release of the Israelites was backed 
by the threat that a plague of frogs would come. And 
they did come. Everywhere the land was alive with frogs 
and toads— in the streets, in the fields, in the houses, in 
the bedrooms and the beds, in the troughs mixed with 
their food— frogs everywhere. Frogs in vast numbers 
are said to come to Egypt at times, but apparently never 
in so great numbers as on this occasion. It was a notable 
matter. Still Pharaoh, when there was respite, was unconvinced 
that he was fighting against Jehovah; and still 
he held on to the injustice of slavery. Pharaoh's magicians 
in some way were able to duplicate the first two 
plagues, but they merely added to the difficulty. They 
were unable to take away the frogs. Pharaoh was obliged 
to appeal to Moses, saying, "Entreat the Lord, that He 
may take away the frogs." 

The third plague was of lice. Dr. Merrins says: "The 
word lice probably means 'dust ticks,' so common in 
Egypt. This little creature fastens itself on to the victims, 
sucks the blood, and in a few hours distends from the size 
of a grain of sand to that of a pea. At certain seasons, 
it is as if the very dust of the land were turned into lice. 
The decaying heaps of frogs would inevitably be the 
breeding place of innumerable insects." He quotes Sir 
Samuel Baker as saying, "I have frequently seen dry 
desert places so infested with ticks that the ground was 
perfectly alive with these vermin, which are the greatest 
enemy of man and beast." The miracle in this case would 
consist in the producing of these ticks in unusual numbers 



and unusual places— not merely in the desert wilds, 
but throughout Egypt. 

It is well worthy of note that these first three plagues 
were shared by the Israelites as well as by the Egyptians, 
but in the succeeding plagues, as Moses pointed out in 
advance, the Israelites were spared. The Land of Goshen 
was protected. 

The plague of flies apparently, as the Psalmist says in 
this Study, was of various kinds— gnats, mosquitoes, house 
flies and cattle flies. The poor Egyptians were in torment 
—suffering a just retribution in offset to their own injustice, 
while the Israelites were preserved in this plague. 
Pharaoh relented and declared, "I will let the Israelites 
go, but not far away." But when God's mercy took away 
the plague, he hardened his heart again. He doubted, 
after all, whether their experiences had been any special 
chastisement from the Lord, and refused to let them go. 

THE CATTLE PLAGUE 

The cattle plague came next. It was a very grievous 
murrain (from the Latin, morior, to die), a disease much 
resembling the Russian Epizootic, which a few years ago 
spread sickness and death among the cattle of the world. 
The Israelites were cattle raisers and shepherds, yet this 
murrain was kept from them in the Land of Goshen, thus 
proving God's care, "that thou mayest know that there 
is none like Me in all the earth." The monetary loss by 

R5272 : page 205 

the murrain must have been very great. Then came the 
plague of ulcers and sores. Imagine the nation, from the 
king to his humblest servant, afflicted with distressing 
carbuncles! 

The seventh plague was a cyclone, hail and flaming 
fire. "He gave them hail for rain, and flaming fire in 
their land." This was a fearful storm, "thunder and hail 
and fire ran along upon the ground" or rained down unto 
the earth. (R.V.) "Hail, and fire mingled with the hail, 
very grievous." Their crops were destroyed, and their 
property injured. 

The eighth plague was one of swarms of locusts, and 
probably resembled the plague of grasshoppers which some 
years ago created such havoc in Kansas and Nebraska. 
Immense swarms of locusts have at other times come upon 
Egypt from Nubia. They covered the ground for miles, 
and sometimes to a depth of fifteen inches. Harmless of 
themselves, they are an enemy that cannot be disposed of. 
They are apt to eat everything that is green, before they 
fly away. In the midst of this calamity, Pharaoh confessed 
his sin and asked forgiveness. Yet, when the danger 
was passed, he again hardened his heart to resist the 
Lord's way, the way of righteousness. The success of 
injustice and the hope of future profit therefrom led him 
to brave what he now recognized to be the Power of the 



Almighty. 

The ninth plague was one of darkness over all the land. 
It probably resembled the London fogs, in which it is impossible 
to see, and in which lights are of little avail, and 
which brings business to a general standstill. This darkness 
may have been produced by dust in the air, as some 
believe, or in a thousand other ways that the Almighty 
might choose. Yet the Land of Goshen where the 
Israelites dwelt was exempt— another proof to Pharaoh 
that he was dealing with the God of Israel. 

Deeply impressed, Pharaoh yielded a little more than 
before, and offered to let the people go with their children, 
providing they left their flocks and herds in Egypt. When 
this proposal was refused, he commanded Moses to leave 
his presence and to see him no more upon penalty of death. 
To this threat came the calm reply of Moses: "Thou hast 
well spoken: I will see thy face no more." The next 
plague, as Moses knew, would be the final one, to which 
the hard heart of Pharaoh would succumb. 



R5272 : page 205 

ISRAEL SPARED, OR PASSED OVER 

-AUGUST 10.-EXODUS 12:21-31.- 

"The Son of Man came not to be ministered unto, but to 

minister, and to give His life a Ransom for many."— Matthew 20:28. 

CHRISTIAN people speak of the Jewish Passover 

as an institution, as a relic of the past, 

in which they have no special interest. This 

is because the meaning of the Passover is not 

generally grasped. Really the Christian is 

more deeply interested in the Passover than 

is the Jew. But there is one sense in which 

the entire world is interested in it, as we 

shall see in today's Study. 

The tenth plague, sent upon the Egyptians 
as a chastisement for their persistent injustice toward the 
Hebrews, was the death of their first-borns. In every 
home of Egypt there was death, and that of the flower 
of their families, the first-born— son or daughter. The 
terror of such a night can better be imagined than 
expressed. 

Death is always represented in the Scriptures as being 
the enemy of man— the penalty of sin. The death sentence 
came upon our first parents because of sin; and through 
them by the laws of heredity it has passed to all their children 
—the human family. We are all dying; and the Bible 
tells that the only hope of a recovery from death lies in the 
fact that God wills it, and that He has made preparation 
for the satisfaction of His Justice through the death of 
Jesus, "the Just for the unjust." It tells also that the great 



remedy for both sin and death is to be applied to mankind 
shortly. During Messiah's Reign, the death sentence shall 
be abolished, the curse shall be removed, there shall be 
no more sighing, crying or dying. 

On the contrary, the rolling away of the curse, death, 
will mean the bringing in of the blessing of life through 
the glorified Redeemer. Then He will become the Life-giver 
to all of those who, when fully enlightened, will accept 
the Divine favor at His hands. The resurrection 
process will begin for the full recovery of all the willing 
and obedient of humanity to the glorious perfection of 
Father Adam and to the privilege of life everlasting. 

What God brought upon the Egyptians in that night 
was, therefore, merely the same penalty that has been 
against all mankind for six thousand years. The penalty 
was not so much in the death as in the suddenness of it. 
The first-borns, retiring in good health, were corpses before 
morning, the death sentence coming upon them more 
suddenly than it otherwise would have done. They fell 
asleep. 

This plague did not touch the homes of the Israelites. 
Their first-borns were passed over, spared, protected, by 
the Almighty; hence the name Passover. By Divine command 
the Israelites made the anniversary of this event 
historical. Every Israelite shows his faith in God and his 
confidence in this record of the Divine deliverance of his 
forefathers, when he celebrates the Passover— or else he 
commits a fraud; for it has no other significance. 

THE PASSOVER'S REAL MEANING 

The experiences of Israel in being passed over were 
allegorical. As a type, they represented the experiences 
of God's Elect— Spiritual Israel. And be it noticed that 
Spiritual Israel is a company of saintly people of God, 
gathered from all nations and all denominations— Jews, 
Romans, French, British— "every nation, kindred, people 
and tongue." The chief members of Spiritual Israel came 
from Natural Israel, but no nation can lay exclusive 
claims. It is an elect class, chosen not along national lines, 
nor any preferential lines except those of character. 

R5273 : page 205 

This company of Spiritual Israelites was represented in 
the first-borns of Israel, the fleshly Israel who were passed 
over in that night. The next morning, all the hosts of 
Israel went forth under the leadership of the first-borns, 
who subsequently were represented in the priestly tribe, 
typifying the Royal Priesthood, whose Royal High Priest 
is the glorified Messiah. Soon He and His "Church of the 
First-borns" (Hebrews 12:23), glorified by participation in 
His resurrection, the First, or Chief Resurrection, will be 
installed in the glory and power of the Messianic Kingdom, 
for the blessing of all desirous of coming back into 
harmony with God. 



In the past, Bible students have been slow in understanding 
God's Word. Gradually, in the light of present 
privileges, they are coming to appreciate the fact that it 
presents lengths and breadths, heights and depths of 

R5273 : page 206 

Divine Love, Wisdom and Power, such as they never 
dreamed of before. Now they are seeing that when the 
Lord speaks of the Church of the First-borns, He implies 
that He intends to have other sons, and that these are 
merely the first. Just as the first-borns of Israel, passed 
over, were not the only ones saved from Egyptian bondage, 
so the Church of the First-borns will not be the only ones 
saved from the bondage of sin and death, symbolized by 
that Egyptian bondage. On the contrary, the preserving 
of the First-borns implies the deliverance of the remainder. 

The expressions night and morning have a significance 
in the antitype also. The Bible represents that the six 
thousand years in which Sin and Death have held sway 
and enslaved many who desired to be right with God are a 
night time. During this night God's people have been more 
and more oppressed by Satan and his servants, typified by 
Pharaoh and the Egyptians. It has been a long night of 
six thousand years, respecting which the Prophet declares, 
"Weeping may endure for a night, but joy cometh in the 
morning."— Psalm 30:5. 

The morning referred to will be the dawning of the 
great antitypical Sabbath, the Seventh Thousand- Year 
Day. Then Messiah and His Church of the First-born, 
passed over from death to life by Divine Power, will be 
installed in Kingdom glory, and the great work of blessing 
all those who desire to come into harmony with God will 
begin. 

That New Dispensation will be so different from the 
present one that it is figuratively called Day in contrast 
with the darkness of the present time, represented as night. 
In that Day of Messiah's Kingdom, He will be the great 
King— the Prince of Light. Then the Prince of Darkness 
will be bound. During that glorious Epoch of a thousand 
years, the hosts of mankind who desire to come into harmony 
with God will all become Israelites, and gradually 
be led by the antitypical Moses to the perfection of Paradise 
restored. Only the unwilling and the disobedient will 
fail to attain the full recovery of all that was lost by Adam 
in the disobedience in Eden, and redeemed by Jesus' death 
at Calvary. 

"ISRAEL MY FIRST-BORN" 

Since any blessing, any deliverance from the power of 
Sin and Death, was of God's grace, and not an obligation 
of Justice, He had a perfect right to determine long in 
advance that the blessings He intended to send should 
reach mankind through Abraham's Seed, or children. This 
He plainly declared, but in an indirect way. Unnoticed 



by the Jews, the Lord indicated that Abraham would have 
two different seeds, the one a Heavenly, the other an 
earthly. Thus He said: "Thy seed shall be (1) as the 
stars of heaven, and (2) as the sand of the seashore." 

God did not explain this to Abraham, but now we see 
the meaning of this feature of the Promise. The stars 
represent the Heavenly Seed of Abraham— Messiah and 
His Church, symbolically called His Bride. The sand of 
the seashore— multitudinous— represents the vast multitude 
who ultimately will be saved from sin and death and recovered 
to Divine favor and everlasting life, in the Messianic 
Kingdom of the Spiritual Seed, the "Church of the 
First-borns." Nor did God forget or turn aside from His 
favor to the natural seed of Abraham in the selection of 
the Spiritual Seed, for to them came the first privilege, or 
opportunity, and from them were gathered the first members 
of this Spiritual Israel— the Spiritual Seed of Abraham. 
Of them St. Paul says: "If ye be Christ's, then are 
ye Abraham's Seed, and heirs according to the Promise"— 
the Promise made to Abraham that in this, his Spiritual 
Seed, all mankind would receive the Divine blessing— the 
rolling away of the curse of sin and death.— Galatians 3:29; 
Revelation 21:4,5; 22:3. 

Moreover, the Scriptures indicate that after the Spiritual 
Israel will have been completed by the change from 
earthly nature to Heavenly nature, God's blessings will 
begin to come once more to the natural seed of Abraham. 
Thus God's providences were to the Jew first in respect to 
the spiritual privileges, and will be to the Jew first as respects 
the earthly privileges— Restitution to human perfection. 
-Romans 11:25-33; Acts 3:19-21. 

FIRST-BORNS BLOOD -PROTECTED 

Let us not fail to note that the Divine favor toward 
the first-born of Israel was not without blood. Indeed, as 
St. Paul points out, the whole lesson of the Old Testament 
Scriptures is that "Without the shedding of blood there 
can be no remission of sins." By Divine command, the 
Israelites indicated their faith in the Lord by taking a lamb 
of the first year without spot, killing it and sprinkling the 
blood upon the door posts and lintels of their houses and 
eating the flesh within. 

As the Passover was typical, so also were the lamb and 
the sprinkled blood. The lamb represented Jesus, the Lamb 
of God— spotless, pure, holy, harmless, undefiled. His 
death was not for His own sins, but for the sins of humanity. 
It is equally important to notice that Christ died not 
merely for the Church, but, as the Scriptures declare, for 
the sins of the whole world. The Church constituted only 
a small portion of the world; namely, the First-born portion. 
As St. James declares (1:18), we are a kind of first-fruits 
unto God of His creatures. The Church is passed 
over in the night, especially saved in advance of others; 
but none are spared except through the merit of the 
Blood. That the Blood covers more than the First-borns 



is shown by the fact that in the type it was sprinkled not 
merely upon the first-borns, but upon the house, as indicating 
the Household of Faith. 



R5273 : page 206 

AN INTERESTING LETTER 
GLAD FOR THE LIGHT -BRINGER 

DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL: 

I was very grateful to you for your kindness in answering 
my letter in reference to the gift of the Holy Spirit. I reread 
the pages you referred to in the "ATONEMENT BETWEEN GOD 
AND MAN," and that, coupled with the misunderstanding of 
the Scriptures by the teachers in the so-called Pentecostal 
Movement, finally convinced me that their leading could not 
be of God. 

I was introduced to them last spring by a very earnest 
Christian, and three weeks after, I received what they term 
the baptism of the Holy Spirit. So you know without my 
going into details the conflict I have been through, and the 
difficulty to become convinced it was not of God, and the 
great fear that came over me, that if I denounced it I should 
commit the unforgivable sin. 

I feel deeply grateful to my dear Heavenly Father that He 
has lead you to consecrate your time and ability to His service 
in so diligently searching and successfully finding a clearer 
interpretation of the Scriptures than has been given for so 
many centuries, and letting the light revealed to you shine 
forth so brightly to others. It has saved me from groping on 
in the terrible spiritual darkness that is now entrapping so 
many earnest Christians. 

May you, like Brother Paul, fight the good fight to the end. 
Persecution, both secular and religious, will follow, as it did 
in the time of our Lord and the Apostles, the latter being 
bitter, even unto the taking of their lives. With best wishes, 
dear Brother Russell, and the prayer that you may be richly 
blessed in the Harvest work of gathering in the "wheat," I 
remain, Yours by His grace, 

(Mrs.) MARTHA PUTLAND.-Eng. 



page 207 

BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
Series VI., Study XV. 
THE FOES AND BESETMENTS OF THE NEW CREATION 
AUGUST 3 



Read p. 619, par. 2, to p. 624, par. 2. 

SATAN'S ASSOCIATES IN EVIL-LEGIONS OF DEMONS 

(32) Did Satan have any angelic associates in the beginning 
of his rebellion? If not, how and when did he receive 
adherents from the ranks of the holy angels? P. 619, par. 2. 

(33) How have these fallen angels co-operated with Satan 
in deceiving and degrading mankind? P. 620, par. 1. 

(34) What does the statement that "man is a free moral 
agent" imply? And why is it possible for demons to absolutely 
control human beings as mediums? P. 620, par. 2. 

(35) What are the general methods and object of these 
fallen angels? Mention eight erroneous teachings which they 
have successfully promulgated among mankind. P. 621, par. 1 
to P. 623, par. 2. 

(36) Since Spiritism has been unsuccessful in deceiving 

the majority of Christians, what two other more subtle delusions 
has Satan recently introduced to capture these? 
P. 623, par. 3; P. 624, par. 1. 

(37) Why has Satan recently turned his attention to healing 
the sick? And what does this signify? P. 624, par. 2. 

AUGUST 10 

Read p. 624, par. 3, to p. 629, par. 2. 

(38) What has been the degrading effect of these works 
of the Devil upon the heathen? P. 624, par. 3. 

(39) What were the experiences of the Lord and the 
Apostles with these fallen angels? P. 625, par. 1, 2. 

"WE WRESTLE NOT [MERELY] WITH FLESH AND BLOOD" 

(40) Realizing then the great and demoralizing influence 
of these evil spirits upon mankind, why does God permit 
them to exercise their evil powers? And what three grand 
lessons, in consequence, will the world have learned at the 
end of the Millennial Age? Pp. 626, 627. 

THE MINISTRY OF EVIL 

(41) In the meantime, what have been the beneficial results 
of the permission of evil? P. 627, par. 1; 628, par. 1. 

(42) Amongst men, who are the greatest opponents of 
God and the Atonement, as viewed from the popular and the 
Divine standpoints, respectively? P. 629, par. 1. 

(43) What is our hope for some of the most violent, but 
ignorant opposers of the Truth? And what more serious 
position is occupied by the intelligent opponents of Present 
Truth, and what should be our attitude toward such? 

P. 629, par. 2. 

AUGUST 17 



Read p. 630, par. 1, to p. 633, par. 3. 



BESETMENTS OF THE ADVERSARY 

(44) Whose experiences with the Adversary illustrate all 
the temptations to which the Body of Christ is subjected? 
P. 630, par. 1. 

(45) What is one of the besetments of the Adversary 
which especially appeals to the flesh and its old mind? 
P. 630, par. 2; P. 631, par. 1. 

(46) What is the truth concerning the relation between the 
best interests of the New Creation and their physical condition? 
P. 631, par. 2. 

(47) Why is it essential that the New Creation should 
"walk by faith, and not by sight"? P. 631, par. 3. 

(48) Is it possible for us to take the infirmities of others, 
as did our Lord? And was Christ's vitality expended on 
behalf of His Church? P. 632, par. 1, 2. 

(49) What is the nature and cost of the "afflictions of 
Christ," which are endured by His Body Members? P. 633, 
par. 1, 2. 

(50) How may we distinguish between suffering for 
righteousness' sake and suffering for indiscretion or wrong 
doing? P. 633, par. 3. 

AUGUST 24 

Read p. 634, par. 1, to p. 638, par. 1. 

(5 1) If bodily ailments result from other than selfish or 
sinful causes, how should they be received and endured by 
the New Creature? P. 634, par. 1. 

(52) How should the New Creation regard their mortal 
bodies, and what liberty have they with respect to using 
legitimate remedies for the relief or cure of disease? P. 634, 
par. 2; P. 635, par. 1. 

(53) In considering our Lord's miracles, should we take 
the healed ones or the Healer as our pattern? P. 636, par. 1. 

(54) Would it have been right for our Lord to use His 
spiritual powers for His temporal needs? And must not the 
Church follow in His steps in this respect? P. 636, par. 2; 
P. 637, par. 1. 

"THE PRAYER OF FAITH SHALL SAVE THE SICK" 

(55) What Scriptures are chiefly relied upon by faith-healers? 
And how are these mis-applied? P. 637, par. 2; 

P. 638, par. 1. 

AUGUST 3 1 
Read p. 638, par. 1, to p. 641, par. 1. 
IF SATAN CAST OUT SATAN, HIS KINGDOM WANES 

(56) To what power did the Pharisees attribute our Lord's 
miracles, and what was His reply to them? P. 638, par. 1. 



(57) What was the chief object of miracles in the beginning 
of this Age, and why should we look with suspicion 

upon so-called miracles in the end of the Age? P. 638, par. 3; 
P. 639, par. 1. 

(58) What is the sure test of all these delusions? 
P. 639, par. 2. 

(59) If those who blaspheme the name of God perform 
wonderful works of healing, should we suppose the Lord is 
now endorsing their false teachings? P. 640, par. 1. 

(60) Suppose others who cure diseases are zealous in missionary 
work, should that change our opinion of the movement 

as a whole? P. 640, par. 2. 

(61) What are the evidences that Satan has about 
reached his extremity? P. 641, par. 1. 



page 209 

VOL. XXXIV JULY 15 No. 14 
A. D. 1913-A. M. 6041 



CONTENTS 

Evil-Doers and Busybodies 211 

Ensnared by the Adversary 211 

Busybodying an Evidence of Pride 212 

The Greatest Thing in the Universe— Part II 212 

The Basis of God's Love 213 

The Manifestation of God's Love 213 

How to Keep Ourselves in God's Love 214 

What Constitutes God's Love 214 

Watch and Pray! (Poem) 215 

Crossing the Red Sea 216 

Necessity of the Miracles 216 

The Angel of the Lord 216 

The Manna From Heaven 217 

Bitter Waters, then an Oasis 217 

The Bread from Heaven 218 

Convention-Train Report 218 

Words of Caution 220 

Some Interesting Letters 221 

Sister Seibert to Her Friends 221 

Luxurious Travel and Sacrifice 222 

page 210 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 



Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



1913-GENERAL CONVENTIONS-1913 

For information concerning the remaining conventions we 
refer our readers to second page of last issue of THE WATCH 
TOWER, July 1st issue, merely here mentioning places and 
dates, as follows: 

Springfield, Mass July 13-20 

Asheville, N.C July 20-27 

Toronto, Canada July 20-27 



POST-CARDS 

We carry in stock an excellent assortment of Scripture 
post-cards of our own selection, both Birthday and for general 
use. The price for all of these cards has been reduced to 
15c. per dozen, in any quantities. 



BEREAN QUESTION BOOKLETS 

We remind our readers that Question Booklets are in 
stock for Volumes I., II., III., IV. and V. of STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES, and also for TABERNACLE SHADOWS. Price 5c. 
each— 50c. per dozen, postpaid, brings them within the reach 
of all. Order freely according to your needs. 

Many of the Classes find these questions very helpful. The 
difficulty with many Classes in the past has been that not 
every one has the teaching ability to draw the information 
of the lessons from the Class. 

Excellent as public preaching is we believe that the Lord's 
people learn more in Berean Classes than by listening to any 



sermon. Thought is stimulated, quickened. 



R5274: page 211 

EVIL-DOERS AND BUSYBODIES 

"But let none of you suffer as. ..an evil-doer, or 

as a busybody in other men's matters."— 1 Peter 4:15. 

ASSUREDLY none of the Lord's people could 
willingly be evil-doers. He who would wilfully 
do evil would not have the Lord's 
Spirit, but that of the Adversary. Such 
being the case, the worst that could be said 
against any of the truly consecrated surely 
would be that he had been overtaken in a 
fault, or that he had some weakness of the 
flesh, or that by the snare of the Adversary 
he had been led into doing something which 
his heart disapproved. But evil deeds, even though unintentional, 
are to be guarded against carefully. "Let none 
of you suffer as an evil-doer"— not one— at any time- 
under any circumstances. 

But now we come to the second part of the Apostle's 
warning— busybodying. The saints seem as liable as 
others to become busybodies and to suffer for so doing. 
We have sometimes thought that the Lord's consecrated 
people are more inclined to be busybodies than are others. 
They have higher standards than others. Their love of 
righteousness is greater than before, and their hatred of 
iniquity is greater. There is continually a temptation, 
therefore, not to be content with minding one's own business, 
but to advise and to seek to regulate everybody and 
everything. 

Of course there is a duty devolving upon every parent 
to inquire more or less into the affairs of his children, or 
of those in any manner under his direct care, for whom 
he is responsible. But even in this he should seek to 
recognize individual rights and privacies, and not allow 
his sense of duty and responsibility to impel him to probe 
into every little matter. A certain reasonable amount 
of responsibility should be thrown upon children, and they 
should have a general idea of what is expected of them. 
They should be required to measure up to that standard, 
unless something positively indicates to the contrary. The 
spirit of busybodying is condemned by the Apostle, and 
all of God's people should be on guard against it. 

Our experience is that busybodying is a fruitful source 
of difficulty in the Church— in all the ecclesias. A clear 
knowledge of Present Truth seems rather to increase this 
difficulty. As in families a wrong feeling often obtains, 
which impels each member to want to know all about the 
affairs of every other member, so in the Church there is 
also a tendency to meddle, to inquire about, to interfere 



in the matters of others— to busybody. In some cases 
there seems to be a disposition to try to hunt up everything 
connected with each other, and to sit in judgment upon 
each other. 

The difficulty is a lack of love. "Love worketh no ill 
to his neighbor." It rejoices not to find flaws; it seeks 
not for them. It surmises no evil— rather it surmises 
good. Let each of the Lord's people judge himself in this 
matter and see to what extent he has been a busybody in 
the affairs of others. Let each decide in his own case 
that the fault, in proportion as he has it, is a lack of the 
spirit of love, and let each in that proportion go to the 
Lord prayerfully, earnestly seeking to be built up in the 
quality of love. 

Well do we know that he who loves not a brother 
whom he has seen has no assurance that he really loves 
God whom he has not seen. We may safely conclude that 
there is some of the gall of bitterness in the heart, if we 
take pleasure in seeking flaws in the flesh of the members 
of the Body of Christ. Their flesh, justified by the Redeemer 
and consecrated, becomes His flesh. Whoever, 
therefore, is a faultfinder and busybody in the affairs of 
the brethren is doing this against the flesh of Jesus. "I 
am Jesus whom thou persecutest."— Acts 9:5; 22:8. 

ENSNARED BY THE ADVERSARY 

Our confidence in the brethren is such that we cannot 
believe that any of them would willingly and intentionally, 
or of preference, take the loveless course of injury. Our 
thought is that the Adversary is on the alert to ensnare 
God's people and to develop in them the spirit of busybodying 
and lovelessness, under the guise of duty, love of 
righteousness, justice, etc. They overlook the fact that 
God neither authorized us to judge one another, nor to 
exact justice from each other. He neither authorized His 
people to chastise each other, nor to punish each other 
in any manner. He has never authorized His people to 
become inquisitors, investigators, busybodies. 

On the contrary, He has told us to "judge nothing 
before the time," and that He will attend to this matter. 
Is it not written, "The Lord will judge His people"? Are 
we afraid that He is incompetent? Shall we attempt to 
be wiser than He? Shall we take into our own hands 
matters which He said that we should leave in His hands? 
If we do so, we shall be sure to get ourselves into difficulty, 
and perhaps get others into difficulty as well. 

Whoever busybodies will suffer. It may be that the 
victim also will suffer and that many will be defiled, but 
we may be sure that the busybodies themselves will not 
escape. The punishment of the busybody in part no doubt 

R5274: page 212 

will be the rupture of his own relationship with God— the 
loss of his own peace and joy and fellowship with the 



Holy Spirit. This will be his reward for busybodying. 

If a brother and a sister in the Church seem to have 
difficulty, mind your own business, and allow them to settle 
the matter between themselves. If they are related as 
parents and children, let them adjust the matter by themselves, 
and learn whatever lessons the Lord as their Judge 
and Teacher will give them. If they are husband and wife, 
the matter is the same. Let them alone. Do not busybody. 
Even if one of them should come to you and ask 
advice, be slow to give it— decline to hear the case— follow 
the Lord's counsel. Advise the one who complains 
that the Lord has given instructions, and that it is not 
your province to interfere— that Matthew 18:15-17 directs 
the course to be pursued. 

See that you have nothing to do with such a case 
unless it come to you directly in line with this arrangement 
which the Lord has provided. Otherwise you are 
busybodying and will make trouble for yourselves and for 
others. If called into the family mix-up, rather regret 
the necessity than be eager to nose into their affairs. Advise 
them first, in the best way you know how, to adjust 
matters between themselves, reminding them of the words 
of Jesus, "That which God hath joined together let no 
man put asunder," and then see that you do nothing to 
put them asunder or to help to complete the separation of 
spirit which already has started. 

Remember that as the Lord's representative you have 
no authority whatever to be in the least a disturber, but 
are commissioned only to be a peacemaker. When you 
are called in, in such a case, try to be just, fair, reasonable, 
in full accord with the Golden Rule in every word that 
you shall utter. Those who may hope to be entrusted with 
the judgment of the world in the future (I Corinthians 6:2) 
must qualify now by a development of a high sense 
of mercy and love, as well as of justice. 

BUSYBODYING AN EVIDENCE OF PRIDE 

But, says one, is it not a part of our duty to help 
keep the Church pure? And in order to do so, should we 
not be on the alert? If, therefore, we see a husband and 
a wife, or a brother and a sister, or parents and children 
out of accord, are we not in duty bound to pry into their 
affairs, in order to see if we cannot set them straight? 

That is exactly the busybody's spirit. We are mentioning 
it because a great many of the Lord's dear people 
who mean the very best do not know what busybodying 
is while they are doing it. Mind your own affairs! If 
you get too busy watching others, the Adversary will take 
advantage of you. So long as the outward conduct of any 
brother or sister is reasonable and fair, Justice and Love 
both say that you should not meddle with them, in the 
sense of trying to mind their business. Content yourself 
with setting them a good example of meekness, faith, 
patience, brotherly-kindness, love. Then if they ever 
need advice, they may voluntarily come to you. And then 



will be your time to show your moderation and to give 

them advice as an oracle of God, in harmony with Matthew 18:15-17 

—and nothing more. 

But, says another, does not St. Paul criticize the 
Church at Corinth because they had in their midst one 
who had grievously sinned? And did he not upbraid the 
Church for their failure to judge and rid themselves of 
such a person? Quite true. But that was a case of open, 
wilful, acknowledged sin, disgraceful to the individual and 
to all with whom he associated. And so it should be 

R5275 : page 212 

today. If any one lives in open sin, and acknowledges it, 
and boasts of it, the case should be promptly taken note 
of by the Church along the lines of Matthew 18:15-18. If 
the erring one still continues in a wrong attitude, in open 
sin, the final step should be his complete separation from 
the Church. Until he has made a complete reform, he 
should be thoroughly disowned by the Church. 

Surely such cases are rare among the Lord's people, 
and equally rare should be the procedure which the 
Apostle suggests for such a case. The Apostle is not 
suggesting inquisition into the past lives of all those who 
constitute the Church of Christ. On the contrary, in one 
of his Epistles he intimates that he knew full well that 
many who were of the Church had at one time been quite 
disreputable characters. He says, "And such were some 
of you; but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye 
are justified, in the name of our Lord Jesus, and by the 
Spirit of our God. " —I Corinthians 6:11. 

It is a wholly mistaken idea that any of us is commissioned 
to set everybody else right. It betokens a great 
deal of pride to have such an impression. If some brother 
and sister do not harmonize very well, let them alone. If 
they think it best not to be very intimate, let them alone. 
If they are married, and believe it to be to their best 
interests to live separate, let them alone— mind your own 
business. If there is some secret fault, let them alone. 
"God will judge His people." You have no business to 
meddle with it, unless He gives you some further commission 
than we find in the Scriptures. 



R5275 : page 212 

THE GREATEST THING IN THE UNIVERSE 

PART II-PHILOSOPHY OF THE ATTITUDE OF SYMPATHY 

BE ye kind one to another, tender-hearted, forgiving 
one another, even as God for Christ's 
sake hath forgiven you." "For if ye do not 
forgive those who trespass against you, 
neither will your Father in Heaven forgive 



you." This means that if we would insist 

upon having from others abject acknowledgement 

of everything that is wrong, and 

if we carry this matter of judgment to an 

extreme, it would indicate that our own 

hearts are in a wrong condition. And then the best thing 

that could be done for us by the Lord would be to give us 

some of our own medicine. By this He would be teaching 

us a corrective lesson, that thus we might become sympathetic 

toward others. 

This matter, then, of forgiveness and sympathy toward 
the world, is one that God inculcates or enjoins upon 
His children after they come into His family. And this 
is in order to give us education. "For what son is he 
whom the father correcteth not?" "For if we be without 
chastisement,. ..then are. ..we not sons." These 
lessons are intensified to us as we grow in grace and in 
knowledge.— Hebrews 12:7,8. 

As our knowledge increases, we see how all fell 
through one man's disobedience. And this gives us a 
basis for sympathy. And our sympathy increases as we 
become more mature children of God. God desires this, 
that by the time we are ready to graduate, we will be very 
helpful. This should become the pleasure of our hearts— 
to be sympathetic with our enemies, no matter how they 
treat us. We know that they are doing these things 
because of the Adversary's influence over them. And we 

R5275 : page 213 

should desire to bless them and to do them all the good 

we can. The fact that they have done evil to us should 

not alter our attitude toward them— to do good unto all 

men as we have opportunity, praying for those who despitefully 

use us and persecute us. 

The thought would not be that we should especially 
devote our prayers to our enemies and persecutors, but 
rather that we should pray for them instead of against 
them. Some who are immature in spiritual things might 
think, "I will pray to God to punish them." But Jesus 
says we are not to do that. "Pray for your enemies." 
What shall we ask for them? He does not tell us this. 
The best thing we could ask for them would be that we 
might be used, or useful, if possible, in breaking this 
superstition upon them, that the eyes of their understanding 
might be opened. That is the very best thing we 
could ask for them. We may pray for them along that 
line, and God will bless us. And if it is possible for us to 
be helpful to them, God will show us how to do it. 

JUSTICE FIRST, LOVE FOLLOWED 

God is very great. We are very small. It is a 
wonderful thing to be informed that God loves us! The 
heathen religions seem to recognize nothing of this kind. 
The thought that pervades their votaries is that their gods 



need to be placated, or they will do them injury. And as 
for a God of love— that is a thought peculiar to the teachings 
of the Bible, and this feature of His character is not 
clearly exhibited in the Old Testament Scriptures— in His 
dealings with the Israelites. God manifested most plainly 
His Justice, and allowed the penalty to come upon the 
sinner. We are sure that He loves the angels. But man 
God placed under a ban and sentence. And year by year 
and century by century that sentence was executed. 

Then the proposition was made by the Lord that 
Israel might come back into His favor, if they would keep 
the Law; and it again looked favorable for them. But 
Israel failed. When man became degraded, sick, dying, 
humanity lost their beauty in God's sight. Man lost the 
gem— like qualities that made him pleasing to God. "We 
have all sinned and come short of the glory of God." 

We come down to the New Testament times, and find 
a new thing brought in— a double testimony— that God 
loved the whole world, even while they were sinners, and 
also the testimony that He loves the Church. "God so 
loved the world that He gave His Only Begotten Son, that 
whosoever believeth in Him should not perish, but have 
everlasting life." The penalty upon mankind was to 
perish, as being unfit to live and enjoy God's blessing. 
God had a sympathetic love for all His creatures who 
were under such condemnation. How was this love 
shown? We make inquiries and find out that the first 
manifestation of His Love was that He gave His Son to 
die for the world. Here He was merely beginning to 
show us how great He is and how great is His Love. 

THE BASIS OF GOD'S LOVE 

The Scriptures assure us that the great difficulty with 
mankind is that they are weak, fallen, ignorant, under 
bonds of superstition and misled by the Adversary. It is 
because God saw that the hearts of humanity are not 
really in that deplorable condition intentionally or deliberately 
that He has provided the way of escape. If we 
were wilfully, intentionally wicked, then the Lord would 
have no sympathy for us at all. When God looks at us as 
a race, He perceives that only very few have any knowledge 
of Him and of His character of Justice, Wisdom, 
Mercy and Love, and of the principles of His Government. 
And so God said, I will see what can be done with these 
creatures; I will make a Plan by which every one of 
them may be recovered through the gift of My beloved 
Son, the Logos. They shall be lifted up out of sin and 
degradation, and it will be the only lesson of the exceeding 
wickedness of sin that they will need throughout eternity. 
I will make the provision broad enough to include Adam 
and all his race. 

THE MANIFESTATION OF GOD'S LOVE 

The first feature of this Plan began to be manifested 



when our Lord Jesus came into the world. So the 
Scriptures say that Christ "brought life and immortality 
to light through the Gospel." What good tidings did He 
bring? Blessings for all of humanity who would seek 
Him in honesty and earnestness of heart! He brought 
the good tidings that all who would manifest their love 
for Him should have eternal life; and that a special class, 
who would manifest special love for the Lord, might become 
heirs of God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ His 
Son. "So great salvation began to be spoken by our 
Lord."-2 Tim. 1:10; Heb. 2:3. 

Not all can hear this Message, because some are so 
stupid through the blinding of the Adversary that they 
cannot believe it. To such it is not good tidings at all, 
but foolishness. Such have no ears to hear, the Bible 
says. Others can hear a little, and say that there is one 
chance in a million of escaping eternal torment. Others 
have their eyes and ears more widely open, and these are 
able to hear something, to appreciate something more 
than the majority. The Apostle tells us that "the god of 
this world hath blinded the minds of them that believe 
not."~2 Cor. 4:4. 

Looking back to the days of Jesus we find that, when 
He preached, many of the people delighted to hear His 
words. They said, "Never man spake like this man." 
He told the people that God loved them. And the people 
said, The Scribes and Pharisees will not have anything 
to do with us; but this man loves us and tells us that God 
loves us, that God does not despise even us poor miserable 
sinners! Oh, "never man spake like this man"! 

But their minds not being free, they were not able to 
appreciate all that He said. They thought that this Message 
which He brought them might be fabrication, and 
they dared not believe it. They asked, Have any of the 
Scribes and Pharisees believed and become Jesus' disciples? 
And when they learned that not many of them 
had, they said: Perhaps we are incompetent to judge; 

R5276 : page 213 

these are our leaders, we must follow them. 

But there were some who were able to take in the 
matter more fully. And to these Jesus said, "Blessed are 
your eyes, for they see; and your ears, for they hear." 
Then to these who could see and hear Jesus gave certain 
special lessons applicable to them— and not only to them, 
but to a certain like company, or class, all the way down 
through the Age. He told them that because they manifested 
a responsiveness of heart they were pleasing to 
Him. He told them that in proportion as they would 
make progress in imitating Him, in that same proportion 
they would come into fellowship with the Father and become 
participants in His Love. 

And when some took this step of consecration, Jesus 
told them, "The Father Himself loveth you"— He loves 
you because you have taken a stand for righteousness; 



because when you saw these principles of righteousness 
you were willing to do in accordance therewith. And the 
Father loves you because you are seeking to walk in the 
narrow way— the way which is difficult. The other way 
is a broad way, leading now to death and destruction. 
But this narrow way that I am pointing out to you, My 

R5276 : page 214 

dear disciples, is the way to life. It will cost you a great 
deal to be My disciples. But the Father will love you, 
and I will love you, and We will manifest Ourselves to 
you. And although you will have trials and difficulties 
you will have the peace of God ruling in your hearts. 
Then the disciples said they would leave all to follow Him. 

HOW TO KEEP OURSELVES IN GOD'S LOVE 

The Apostle Jude admonishes, "Keep yourselves in 
the Love of God." Here the Apostle is addressing those 
who have passed from the condition of the world into 
this special love of God— those whom He has brought 
into His family, as His children by adoption, through 
Christ Jesus. God does not love us because we are doing 
great and wonderful things. His special love for us began 
when He begat us, because of the consecration we had 
made— because we had entered into the Covenant of 
Sacrifice. And the Father delights in all those who desire 
to be sealed with His Spirit— who desire to become His 
children. He began thus to love us as babes in Christ, 
and He loves us as we grow stronger, and He will love 
us to the end! 

The Apostle intimates that there is a growth in us. 
We are babes at first, and then children, then young men, 
then more fully developed. As we learn the principles 
of justice which permeate the Heavenly Father's character, 
we are to rejoice in these, and to have no other 
standards before our mind. We are to say, That is our 
Father's instruction, our Father's standard. So we become 
transformed more and more, and all standards other 
than those of the Heavenly Father become more and 
more displeasing to us. 

As we journey along, we need to keep ourselves in 
the Love of God. It is necessary as babes that we should 
keep ourselves in His Love; it is necessary as children; 
it is necessary when still further developed. How can we 
do this? By keeping His commandments. Thus we bring 
the body into subjection to the perfect will of God in 
Christ. Whoever does this finds himself growing. Day 
by day we are to grow and increase and become more 
and more Godlike; so we are more and more transformed 
as the days go by. Thus are we to keep ourselves in 
His Love. 

But if at any time during the race we should drop out 
and cease to cultivate these qualities, cease to be obedient 
to God, then we would cease more and more to have His 



Love, until finally we would cease to be in His Love, and 
the curse, the wrath of God, would abide on us. Thus we 
would be in a far worse condition than at first, because 
in the second case it would be a matter of knowledge, 
whereas in the first case it was a matter of ignorance, 
a matter of heredity. In this worse condition God would 
have no sympathy for us at all. 

Thus it will be with the world in the future, when they 
will be brought in God's providence to a full knowledge 
and full opportunity, when they shall come to understand 
God and His righteousness. If they do not seek to be in 
harmony with Him, they will be destroyed in the Second 
Death. --I Tim. 2:4; Acts 3:22,23. 

OUR HIGHEST AMBITION 

The Lord Jesus said, "This is life eternal, that they 
might know Thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, 
whom Thou hast sent." Our love for God and God's Love 
for us are two different matters, of course. We reverence 
God even before we love Him. We do not know enough 
about Him at first to love Him. We know that we have 
very little power of ourselves, that we are surrounded 
by difficulties here, and that the Adversary has beset us 
on every side. And so this is the beginning of Wisdom, 
that we should have a reverential fear of God. 

As we come to know God more and more, we see that 
He would not wish to do harm to any creature. And as 
we grow in our knowledge of God, our love for Him increases 
accordingly. We grow in our knowledge of 
how much He loves us. We did not know this 
at first. God is not pleased to reveal Himself to any 
except those who have His Spirit; therefore the very 
highest ambition any of us could have would be that we 
might know Him, that we might know more of His wonderful 
Love, His wonderful peace, because to have this 
knowledge draws us nearer to God. As St. Jude says, 
we must continue to keep ourselves in the Love of God. 

Whoever would come to a full knowledge of God must 
first come to an appreciation of His Word and must 
follow a line of obedience such as would enable him to 
love the Lord and to appreciate His Plan. And all things 
working together— love, appreciation, desire to be obedient 
—lead onward and upward to the goal which the Lord has 
set before us. 

WHAT CONSTITUTES GOD'S LOVE 

The expression Word of God is sometimes used when 
speaking of the Bible, and sometimes when meaning a 
message of God. Our allegiance is due to the One from 
whom we have received every good and every perfect 
gift. There is an eminent fitness in the thought that the 
One who has given us life should have our attention to 
His Word, our obedience to it. Some are disposed to be 
self-willed; some disposed to regard the words of man, 



the creeds of man. Such do not pay sufficient attention 
to the Word of God. 

God's Word is the great Standard by which all of His 
people should regulate their lives. We might have some 
thought respecting the Divine Plan, or others might make 
suggestions to us respecting God's will. But any suggestions, 
whether from ourselves or others, are all to be 
subject to investigation in the light of God's Word. Of 
course, we are first to ascertain that the claim of the Bible 
to be the Word of God is supported by really good evidence; 
then we are also to notice whether various portions 
are interpolations, or additions, that we may have the 
Word of God as pure as possible. But having found the 
Word of God, we should keep it, in the sense of reverencing 
it and obeying it. We should strive to regulate 
our lives and all of our doings by that Word. Whoso 
keepeth God's Word will as a result find that God's Love 
is perfected in Him.— I John 2:5. 

The question then arises, What is God's Love? and in 
what sense can it be perfected in us? The Apostle John 
evidently refers to that love which is most perfectly represented 
in God— that love which is pure, free from all 
selfishness, from all stain— God's Love, because it is the 
right principle, the very underlying principle of His character. 
And all those who are keeping God's Word must 
have the same kind of love that He has. 

At first we had a duty love. We knew that God had 
done great things for us, for which we should be very 
thankful. There was a debt of obligation on us in that 
respect. Then, too, we loved God because He has indicated 
that He will give His favor to those who love 
Him. Therefore a measure of selfishness would be in our 
love for a time. But we believe it is possible for us to 
have this perfect love of God. If it were perfect works 
of the flesh that were required, we might doubt our ability 
to have perfection. But since it is a matter of the 
heart, it is possible for us to attain it; for we can be pure 
in heart. So as our hearts become more and more free 

R5276 : page 215 

from selfishness and sin, more and more will this proper, 
high standard of Love be appreciated by us and perfected 
in us. Our minds will be influenced by this Love; and all 
of our conduct, our thoughts, will come under the same 
regulation. 

To have, then, this Love of God perfected in us, would 
seem to indicate that we would have the very highest ideal 
—that we love as God loves. We love our neighbor— we 
realize that he has certain rights which we are glad to 
respect. We would rather help our neighbors forward 
than to do anything which might hinder their progress in 
any way. God is not an envious, jealous, hateful God, 
but the God of Love. God is the true God, and not the 
one who is set up in our creeds. 

As we appreciate the Word of God, it gives us the 



necessary instruction and guidance. All sin is selfishness, 
and all selfishness is sin. As the child of God comes to 
see the character of God more clearly, as he is desirous 
of being taught of God, he will come under the influence 
of God's Spirit. And he will study the Word and get 
clearer insight into it. Thus we grow in the knowledge 
of God. It is a progressive matter. God wishes all of 
His intelligent creatures to be animated by the spirit of 
His Word— Love. 

LOVE BASED ON FAITH 

We see that the love above described would not be a 
love based on ignorance. On the contrary, it is a love 
based on a clear knowledge of God, on an undissembled 
faith, a faith fully appreciating what He has said. For 
instance, one might have a certain love for God, and by 

R5277 : page 215 

and by a clearer understanding of God's character might 
shake that kind of love. God's intention is that mankind 
shall understand His arrangements thoroughly; and if 
they then appreciate His character, they will have the 
undissembled faith, and a love that appreciates all the 
features of His Plan. 

We all see that in our experiences God gives us instruction 
respecting Himself. As we come to know Him, 
and to love Him because we know Him, we are proportionately 
getting this faith in Him of the undissembled 
kind. It is a faith based on a knowledge of God's character 
and Plan. An angel may be said to have faith— 
a well rounded out faith. "The Father seeketh such to 
worship Him as worship Him in spirit and in truth." And 
God wishes that all of His intelligent creatures shall worship 
Him from this standpoint of undissembled faith— 
a faith that is genuine, a faith that is well rounded out, 
knitted together, a consistent faith. Therefore God wishes 
to have all men come to the knowledge of the Truth.— 
I Tim. 2:4. 

God's arrangement is that we first make use of what 
truth we have, and thus have more appreciation; then 
more knowledge, and then more appreciation. A well 
rounded out knowledge is not yet possessed by any except 
the Church, and we do not have full knowledge. But it 
is God's will that we shall all come to an appreciation of 
the Truth. It is not to be merely a knowledge, but a full 
entering into it that we may the more appreciate it. "This 
is life eternal, that they might know Thee," that we should 
become personally and intimately acquainted with the 
Lord. In order to this, it is necessary that we apply 
our hearts to this Wisdom, that we grow in grace, grow 
in knowledge, that we may know His Love. 

This will also be the procedure in the next Age. The 
object of Christ's Kingdom will be to bring mankind to 
a full, clear appreciation of God's character. Such as 



attain this and sympathetically enjoy God's character will 
appreciate the principles of Justice, Love and Mercy 
represented in Him. Only as one appreciates these qualities 
in his own heart can he appreciate them in God. 
Only those who appreciate them will have everlasting life. 
Even though such should enjoy the full thousand years, 
they still might not be of the class to whom God would 
give everlasting life. 

THE END OF THE LAW IS LOVE 

It is not merely faith that is necessary— not even the 
well rounded out faith— there must be a pure heart also. 
We could not get the well rounded faith unless we had 
a pure heart. A pure heart would be a fully consecrated 
heart— the whole mind given up to the Lord's will. Such 
a condition is necessary before we can enter into and 
make progress in the Lord's way. God would not accept 
us at all unless we had love and purity of heart. And 
even more than this is necessary. We must maintain it 
with a good conscience. Our consciences must be able 
to say, "I have not only a good wish respecting the right, 
but I have good endeavors." We should not only be able 
to say, "I did right," but our consciences should be able 
to say, "I did the very best I was able to do." Anything 
short of this would not be pleasing to God. 

So, then, the end, or intention, of the Divine Law is 
to develop in us this love— a love fully consecrated to the 
Lord, a love like His, a love that will be in accord with 
a good conscience and an undissembled faith— a faith that 
is well founded on the teachings of God's Word, a faith 
that is anxious to know God's will, and that searches the 
Scriptures and delights in God's Law, and that can say 
as the Psalmist has expressed it prophetically, "I delight 
to do Thy will, O my God!" 

A man may discern the principle of justice and say, 
"There is the standard one must go by." Another sees 
love, and says, "There is the best standard! Is not that 
grand? I wish to conform to that fully!" A third recognizes 
that perfection is the standard of the Divine Law, 
and having consecrated himself unreservedly to do the 
will of God, says, "Thy Law, O God, is my delight." This 
one delights in God's Justice, he delights in God's Love. 
He sees more than merely, Thou shalt, and Thou shalt 
not. He sees things from God's standpoint. He sees the 
principles of God's character which govern the universe. 
So all who will ever come to an appreciation of everlasting 
life must learn to view matters from the standpoint 
of Love. 



R5287 : page 215 

WATCH AND PRAY! 



Watch and pray, the storm clouds hover over, 

Fierce billows gather near with threat'ning shock; 

Watch and pray, no harm can e'er come nigh thee 
If thou art safely anchored to the Rock. 

Watch and pray, the powers of night and darkness 
Determine to engulf thee in their sway; 

But swift the answer cometh from our Tower, 

"I still am with thee, loved one— watch and pray." 

Watch and pray, temptations round thee gather, 
Cling to the Rock— its shelter hideth thee. 

Tho' thousands fall, thou'rt safe if thou art watching, 
Safe, in its shelter, from the angry sea. 

Watch and pray, trust fully, thou wilt never 
Be swept away, then, by the seething foam. 

A little while, the storms will all be over, 

Then, child, a loving God will take thee Home. 
-W. H. BUNDY. 



R5277 : page 216 

CROSSING THE RED SEA 

-AUGUST 17.-EXODUS 14:19-31.- 

"Before they call, I will answer."— Isaiah 65:24. 

THE Bible story of Israel's miraculous crossing 
of the Red Sea, which later overwhelmed 
the Egyptian army, has long been 
questioned by agnostics, who also question 
the large number ascribed to the Israelites 
-600,000 men, implying a total of 2,000,000 
or more. However, the Bible finally is 
triumphing. Mistranslations and failure 
properly to interpret figures of speech were 
the basis of our misunderstandings. 

Prof. Flinders Petrie calls attention to the fact that 
the Hebrew word alaf is used in the Scriptures sometimes 
to mean a thousand and at other times to signify a 
group, families, or tents, very much in the same way that 
we use the word regiment as signifying a group of a 
thousand men, yet often far less in number, especially 
after a battle. Thus understood, the record, "Judah 
74,600," would read, "Judah, seventy-four families, or 
tents, with six hundred men in all"; "so they set forward, 
every one after their families, according to the house of 
their fathers."— Num. 2:34. 

Thus reckoned, the entire hosts of the Israelites who 
left Egypt— men, women and children— might be estimated 
at about 30,000. Even this was a goodly host to be 
the descendants of Jacob in but little more than two 



centuries. That the Israelites were very prolific was 
evidenced by the Egyptian decree which sought to destroy 
their children, fearful that eventually they would 
outnumber the Egyptians. 

NECESSITY OF THE MIRACLES 

A miracle is not necessarily a violation of a law 
of Nature. A wonder, an unusual occurrence, indicating 
an interposition of Divine Power in human affairs, 
would be a miracle, even though it conformed to natural 
laws. God rarely works miracles except where there is 
a necessity. 

Three roads led out of Egypt in the direction of Palestine; 
but as a military wall extended from the Mediterranean 
Sea to the Red Sea to protect against invading 
armies, these roads had access into Egypt only through 
strong and guarded iron gates. 

One of these roads led through the country of the 
Philistines, to pass through which so large a body of 
people would have been prohibited. The second road led 
through a sandy desert and would have been entirely unsuitable, 
furnishing no provender nor water. The third 
road was the one which the Israelites took, leading 
through the wild mountain regions of Sinai, where they 
found pasturage. 

After the death of Egypt's first-borns and the beginning 
of Israel's Exodus, several days elapsed before they 
reached the Red Sea. Meantime, Pharaoh and his people 
had measurably received from their mourning. Pharaoh 
perceived that the Israelites, while given the opportunity 
of leaving Egypt, had wandered about as though undecided 
which road to take. He concluded that they would 
be weary of their new freedom and their travelling, and 
that it would be an easy matter to bring them back. The 
gates of the wall were ordered closed, and several hundred 
chariots and footmen were sent to pursue. 

Meantime, the Israelites had passed between two 
mountain ranges, up against the northern arm of the Red 
Sea— the Gulf of Suez. Apparently the Israelites had 
gone into a pen, from which there was no escape. Divine 
providence arranged that a heavy pillar of cloud, or fog, 
hovered over the camp of the Egyptians, while there was 
a bright light in the camp of the Israelites. Thus the 
Egyptians were delayed, and the Israelites moved on until 
they came to the Sea, and beheld that they were hemmed 
in. Then they cried to the Lord and to Moses, discouraged, 
requesting to be permitted to return to Egyptian 
bondage. They favored a surrender on good terms rather 
than a conflict. 

But the word of the Lord through Moses was that 
the people should be of good courage, and that soon they 
would see that Jehovah God would bring them deliverance 
from their troubles and from their enemies. Meantime, 
the wind had begun to blow from the north, and 
gradually the waters receded to the southward, uncovering 



a ledge and sand bar, upon which the Israelites 

crossed to the other side. The befogged Egyptians followed 

them, possibly without realizing that they were 

passing on land usually covered by water. 

As they progressed into the moist sand, the Egyptians 
experienced fresh difficulties. Chariot wheels became 
clogged, horses went more slowly, then balked, wheels 
broke, etc., until the Egyptians began to reason the matter 
out and decided that, in the figurative language of 
that time, God had looked upon them with an evil eye 
out of the pillar of cloud. Possibly there was some manifestation, 
such as a lightning flash. They concluded to 
turn backward and give up the chase. Meantime, the 
direction of the wind had changed, and it was now coming 
from the south. Before they could extricate themselves, 
the water was upon them; they were in a quagmire, 
and were soon overwhelmed. 

R5278 : page 216 

There is nothing in this account to stagger faith. The 
United States Government Reports show that the waters 
of Lake Erie have varied as much as fifteen feet at 
Toledo, by reason of the change of wind, and without 
any special hurricane. The thing that has staggered our 
faith in the past was the statement that the Sea constituted 
a wall on either side of the Israelites as they 
crossed over. But the word wall in its broadest sense 
merely signifies barricade. In the same sense we might 
say that the United States has the Atlantic Ocean as a 
protective wall on one side and the Pacific Ocean on the 
other. 

Thus we see that if the Bible is interpreted with a 
little common sense it is entirely reasonable. More and 
more Bible students are learning not only of its reasonableness, 
but also of its wealth of riches of knowledge 
and wisdom from on High. 

THE ANGEL OF THE LORD 

The cloudy pillar, or mist, which gave light to the 
Israelites at night, but darkness to the Egyptians, is 
spoken of as being the Angel of the Lord, or as though 
the Angel of the Lord were in it. We are to bear in 
mind, however, the broad meaning of the word angel. It 
signifies messenger. In general, spirit beings are Jehovah's 
messengers in human affairs. Sometimes, however, 
human beings are His messengers, as for instance, 
the Apostle declares that all of God's consecrated people 
are God's ambassadors, ministers, servants. 

But the word angel is Scripturally used in a still 
broader sense— as signifying the exercise of Divine Power 
in connection with human affairs. Thus St. Paul 
writes that God "maketh His angels spirits, and His 
ministers a flame of fire." (Heb. 1:7.) Thus, for instance, 
the messenger of the Lord smote the army of Sennacherib 



with death, as this lesson recounts that Pharaoh's 
army was smitten. 
It matters little whether the Scriptures refer to the 

R5278 : page 217 

forces used as being the angel of the Lord, or whether 

they mean that the angel of the Lord had charge of and 

used the forces which operated. The effect would be the 

same in either case. God's Power would be equally manifested, 

whether directly through the elements of nature or 

through the intermediary of a spirit being, commanding 

the forces of nature in the name and power of Jehovah. 

There are valuable lessons for the Christian in connection 
with the manifestations of Divine Power on behalf 
of typical Israel. These lessons suggest that the 
same God is no less willing and no less able to deliver 
the Spiritual Israelites from their bondage to sin and 
Satan, and is no less able to provide a way of escape, even 
through bloody seas of difficulties. 

There is a lesson, also, for us in respect to the interpretation 
of God's Word. As we see it beginning more 
and more to open up unto us with clearness, simplicity, 
beauty, let it increase our faith in God and in the revelations 
which He has made through the Prophets of old, 
as well as through the words of Jesus and the inspired 
Apostles. 

As God had already arranged Israel's affairs before 
they knew about their difficulties, and perceived that they 
were hemmed in on every side, so the same God foreknows 
all of our difficulties and has arrangements made 
for our relief and deliverance, and is merely waiting for 
us to appreciate the situation and to cry unto Him in 
faith. "Before they call, I will answer." Another 
thought is, sometimes we come to the very end of all 
human possibilities. Then, and not till then, should we 
apply the words of Moses to ourselves: "Stand still, and 
see the salvation of Jehovah." 



R5278 : page 217 

THE MANNA FROM HEAVEN 

--AUGUST 24.-EXODUS 16:2-15.- 

"Jesus said unto them, I am 
the Bread of Life."— John 6:35. 

REALIZING their deliverance from bondage, 
and the Divine Power exercised in their behalf 
in the overthrow of the Egyptian army, 
the Israelites were joyful. Moses, their 
great leader, composed a poem of much 
force and beauty and of recognized high 



standard. The men chanted it after Moses; 

and the women, under the leadership of 

Miriam, the sister of Moses and Aaron, 

took timbrels, or tambourines, and joined in a refrain, or 

chorus, their bodies swaying and their feet moving 

rhythmically in what is described as a dance: 

"Sing ye to the LORD [Jehovah]; 

For He hath triumphed gloriously." 
Singing songs of praise constitutes one of the most 
interesting and most profitable methods of worship. But 
we may be sure that they are acceptable to God only as 
they come from the heart and truly represent its sentiments. 
We fear, alas, that many hymns, like many prayers, 
never go higher than the heads of the offerers; indeed, 
we have sometimes feared that careless, irreverent 
singing might really be resented by the Lord as profanity 
—taking His holy name in vain. If so, the results would 
be of course the very reverse of a blessing, and that in 
proportion as the singer comprehended the impiety of 
his course. "The Lord will not hold him guiltless that 
taketh His name in vain." 

We do not mean by this that any unjust or cruel 
torments, future or present, would be the penalty, but we 
do believe that such a course reacts upon the irreverent 
heart to make it colder, more indifferent, and less susceptible 
to the influence of the Divine Message of grace. 
Ah! if all Christians sang with the spirit and with the 
understanding also, and if none others sang hymns, the 
earthly sounds might be more discordant than they are; 
but their Heavenly echoes and fragrance would be the 
more acceptable to God. 

BITTER WATERS, THEN AN OASIS 

The journey toward the Land of Promise began. At 
length, fatigued and thirsty, they came to a fertile spot, 
where there was an abundance of water, but alas, it was 
bitter, or brackish! The disappointment was great. The 
song of reverence was forgotten; the mighty power of 
Jehovah in bringing them through the Red Sea was forgotten; 
even the taskmasters of Egypt were forgotten. 
The people murmured against Moses for bringing them 
away from the fertile fields of Egypt and its abundance 
of good water. They declared that it would have been 
better if they had remained in Egypt, or even if they had 
died there. They declared that Moses and Aaron had 
misled them into leaving the land of plenty, and had 
brought them into the wilderness, to die there of hunger 
and thirst. 

The Lord's Wisdom guided Moses to a certain kind of 
tree, which, put into the water, made it sweet and palatable. 
Moses explained to the people that in murmuring 
against him they were really murmuring against God, 
for he was merely God's agent in the matter. A further 
journey for a season, and they were far from the bitter 
waters— at Elim, a delightful spot, where they rested 



and were refreshed. 

The Scriptures explain that God had a special purpose 
and object in this leading of Natural Israel. He was 
teaching them lessons which would be helpful to them 
and, if rightly received, would prepare them, through 
faith and obedience, for Canaan. "And thou shalt remember 
all the way which the Lord thy God led thee 
these forty years in the wilderness, to humble thee, to 
prove thee, to know what was in thine heart, whether 
thou wouldstkeep His commandments, or no."— 
Deut. 8:2. 

The lesson to Spiritual Israel is a still more important 
one. If the Natural Israelites needed heart development 
and faith as a preparation for the earthly Canaan, how 
much more do Spiritual Israelites require for the Heavenly 
Canaan, toward which they journey from the time 
they leave Egypt— the world, and its bondage to sin! 
Can we wonder, then, that God permits many trying experiences 
to come to Spiritual Israel— trials of faith and 
of patience, "bitter waters"? 

Any saint of God may have tears in the trying experiences 
of the journey in the narrow way, but none is excusable 
for murmuring. Rather, each should say with 
the Master, "The cup which My Father hath poured for 
me, shall I not drink it?" To those who approach the 
springs of bitterness with the proper faith in God as did 
Moses, the Lord makes known precious promises, which 
"Steal the Bitter from Life's Woes." 

As the Israelites were led from the bitter waters to 
Elim and its rest and shade, so God's Spiritual Israel are 
not tempted and tried above what they are able to bear. 
With every temptation the Lord provides a way of escape, 
when frequently He revives the souls of His saints 

R5279 : page 218 

by granting them seasons of refreshing and comfort, preparing 
them for their trials in the wilderness state of the 
present life.— I Corinthians 10:11-13. 

"IT IS WHAT?"-IT IS MANNA 

When the Israelites murmured against God and 
Moses, His mouthpiece and servant, it was because of 
insufficient faith. Those who truly believed in the Divine 
providences which had preserved them from the plagues 
of Egypt, and which had brought them out across the 
Red Sea, would reason assuredly that God would not 
leave them to starve in the wilderness. But the majority 
evidently were murmuring through a lack of faith. 

And so it is today. As St. Paul declares, "All men 
have not faith." We do not blame them for this. Evidently 
conditions of environment or heredity have very 
much to do with our possibilities along the line of faith. 
Some by birth, early training and larger experiences 
have therefore a great advantage over others, so far as 



the present Age is concerned; for God has ordained that 
the Message of the present time shall be for those who 
have the ear of faith. "He that hath an ear to hear, let 
him hear." Whoever has an ear for God's Message and 
can exercise faith has a great blessing, in the sense of an 
opportunity which others do not have— an opportunity of 
making his calling and election sure under the call of 
this Gospel Age. 

We thank God that His Word teaches of an Age to 
come, wherein Messiah will bless with precious opportunities 
those who have not the ear to hear and a responsive 
heart in the present time. We thank God that 
His Word expressly declares that in that coming Age, the 
Millennial Age, all the blind eyes shall be opened and all 
the deaf ears shall be unstopped. Then will be fulfilled 
the Scripture that Jesus is the true Light which must 
eventually lighten every man that cometh into the world. 
(John 1:9.) But the opportunities of the Millennial Age 
will not make possible so high a blessing as the High 
Calling of this Age sets before whoever has the ears to 
hear and the eyes to see it. 

In answer to the murmuring of the Israelites, God 
sent them that same night a great quantity of quail. If 
they had hungered for the flesh pots of Egypt, they 
should see that God was able to give them flesh in the 
wilderness. One of the accounts of this wonderful supply 
of quail has been found fault with by some agnostics 
who thought that it meant that the quails covered the 
entire ground to a depth of nearly five feet. The explanation 
is that quail, flying across the Gulf of Suez, in 
their weariness flew close to the ground— within about 
five feet— and thus were easily captured by the Israelites 
in great numbers. 

God promised that on the following day the Israelites 
should have plenty of bread. In the morning the ground 
was covered with small particles, whitish in appearance, 
a little larger than mustard seed and tasting like a honey 
wafer. This was to be their daily supply. It required 
gathering; and this gave them all employment, without 
which they would not have been happy. It required preparation. 
There was a certain amount apportioned to each 
individual. 

A lesson of generosity went with the manna; for 
whatever portion was kept over to the following day corrupted. 
Nothing of the kind was known to the Israelites; 
and they asked, "What is it?" and this became its 
name— "What is it"— or "that manna." The gathering 
of it helped them to remember the Sabbath also, for none 
fell on the Sabbath, but a double portion on the day preceding, 
and what was kept over that night did not corrupt. 

THE BREAD FROM HEAVEN 

Jesus reminded His followers of that manna given in 
the wilderness, and declared that it typified Himself, the 
true Bread. As the Israelites would have perished without 



food, so the Spiritual Israelites would not have sufficient 
strength for the journey without the Heavenly food. 
Jesus gave Himself the title of the Truth. Whoever 
therefore eats of this Bread from Heaven partakes of 
the Truth. "Sanctify them through Thy Truth; Thy 
Word is Truth." Only by partaking largely, regularly, 
daily, of our Lord, His merit and His gracious arrangements 
for us, can we become strong in Him, and prosecute 
the journey faithfully and enter into the spiritual 
Canaan. 

As every Israelite was required to gather manna for 
himself, so each Christian is required to gather and appropriate 
the Truth. We must do our own part along 
spiritual lines, as well as along earthly lines. The graces 
of the Holy Spirit cannot be expected to come to perfection 
without preparatory planting, pruning, cultivating. 
Some one has well said, "Rooming at a college does not 
make a scholar, nor occupying a pew in church make a 
Christian." To grow strong in the Lord and in the power 
of His might, we must feed upon Him daily— we must 
appreciate and appropriate the merits of His sacrifice. 



R5279 : page 218 

CONVENTION-TRAIN REPORT 

BROTHER DR. JONES, with his Special Train 

of Conventioners, starting from Chicago, 

stopping at St. Louis and at Hot Springs, 

received the Editor most cordially at Hot 

Springs, Ark. The conventioners numbered 

240 and represented thirty-four States. 

Some of them we had previously met, 

others we knew by correspondence; but almost 

without exception they were brethren 

in Christ and consecrated Bible Students. 

Nearly all of them paid their own way; while a few, we 

understand, have been financed by their friends or relatives 

in order to give them the spiritual opportunities of 

this Convention Tour, as well as physical rest. 

From Hot Springs the party went south to Texas. The 
Editor saw them at the different meetings and greeted 
them there with others, and also had a nod or a word with 
some occasionally on the train. But his time was occupied 
with literary work, in which he was assisted by two 
brethren who are stenographers. 

Dallas, Texas, June 8, was our next stop. Here, also, 
we had a hearty reception from the Bible Students' Class. 
The morning and evening services were for the Bible 
Students, and proved interesting. The Auditorium was 
well filled— capacity about 500. The afternoon service 
for the public at the Opera House was also well attended, 
notwithstanding hot weather and rain. Attendance 1,200, 
interest good, applications for more literature, 54. 



San Antonio, Texas, June 9.— The entire morning was 
devoted to testimony, symposiums, etc. The Editor addressed 
the interested in the afternoon, to the number 
of about 500. In the evening his public address was 
heard by about 1,300, ninety-two of whom manifested interest 
and desired further reading matter. Altogether the 
Special Train Conventioners had a happy day here, one 
long to be remembered, and their number was increased 
by two at this place. Thence we sped onward to— 

El Paso, Texas, June 1 1.— There are very few Bible 
Students here. We trust that the number will be greatly 
increased shortly. The public attendance was estimated 

R5279 : page 219 

at 1,700, of whom 156 left their addresses requesting 

more reading matter along the lines of the subject discussed, 

which was, "BEYOND THE GRAVE." 

At Tucson, Arizona, June 12, by special request of the 
local Board of Trade, our Convention Committee had arranged 
for us to stay over one day at this thriving little 
city. When the invitation was extended, it was with the 
expectation that the local ministers would give us the 
"glad hand"; but when it was not forthcoming, and on 
the contrary, opposition was made, the business men advised 
us that they thought it unwise to have a public 
address. They did, however, treat us most cordially, and 
showed our entire party around the city in automobiles. 

Meantime, also, the Conventioners, by a distribution of 
literature, got the Message all over the place; and the literature 
informed the public as to why the ministers were 
opposed; namely, because they feared the truth of the 
Bible coming in contact with the errors of their creeds. 
We have reason for believing that some good will come, 
having done our best. The results are with the Lord, 
and we left, well contented. 

At Los Angeles, June 13, where a five-days' Convention 
of Bible Students had been arranged, the Convention 
was already in session when our party arrived. The 
People's Temple was over-crowded, capacity about 1,000. 
The Editor spoke twice, once to the Bible Students, 
numbering 1,000, and once to the public in general. The 
audience at the public service was estimated at 4,000. 
Splendid attention was given, and 475 requests for further 
literature were handed in. The local class of Bible 
Students has been growing considerably within the last 
year. The old friends and the new gave our party a 
hearty welcome. 

San Diego, California, June 14.— Here, as at Hot 
Springs, the ministers made an attack endeavoring to 
prevent our meeting; but here also the Lord raised up 
for us friends amongst the public, who reproved the ministers 
for their unchristian course and Dark Ages' methods. 
The Mayor and a company of business men received 
us cordially, and took us about their city in autocars. 
We appreciated their hospitality and cheerfully 



acknowledged that their city has fine prospects, amongst 
others one of the best harbors on the Pacific and their 
climate par excellence. 

We had interesting meetings with the Bible Students 
here, and a fine public meeting, attendance at which was 
estimated at 2,000. There were 199 addresses handed in, 
expressing interest and desiring reading matter. We believe 
that some of the prejudice has been broken down. 
The public came out freely, notwithstanding an attack 
made by the ministers through a local newspaper. The 
Lord raised up a defender who answered the malicious 
slanders of the ministers, which were merely rehashes 
from the Eagle. This reply published in the same paper 
the next day, we trust offset the evil intended. Additionally, 
the Train Conventioners circulated freely the 
special issue of the Bible Students Monthly which explains 
the attitude of the ministers, and which is circulated 
only in places where there are evidences of a concerted 
endeavor to prejudice the public. 

Santa Ana, June 15, came next— a Sunday morning 
service. The principal Opera House here had been engaged 
for our use; but somebody had influence enough to 
have the building condemned as unsafe, although it had 
never previously been thought unsafe, even when crowded 
to the limit. The friends surmised that this was a strategic 
move on the part of the ministers to prevent our 
meeting— to prevent Bible Students from calling the attention 
of the public to the real teaching of God's Word. 
However, since the Lord was pleased to allow the meeting, 
the Bible Students were quite content, and took the 
next best auditorium available. It was crowded beyond 
its capacity— 1,200— while an overflow meeting of several 
hundred Bible Students was held in another building. 
There were 200 addresses handed in, expressing interest 
and requesting literature. 

Pasadena was reached the same afternoon. Its theater 
capacity was crowded, 1,300 being present, with 
splendid interest. Here 183 addresses for literature were 
handed in. 

San Francisco was our next stop. Here a three-days' 
Convention was in progress. The Train Conventioners 
participated during the day of our stop, Monday, June 
16. The Editor addressed the Bible Students in one semi-public 
service. Approximately, 700 were present. Then 
came the evening meeting for the public, with an estimated 
attendance of 4,000, and 408 requests for more 
literature. 

Tuesday, June 17, was spent in journeying from San 
Francisco to Portland, Oregon. We had no opportunity 
for public service, but had the pleasure of meeting a 
goodly group of Bible Students at Ashland. The train 
remained there fifteen minutes. The friends were on the 
platform awaiting its arrival. They loaded us with 
flowers and good wishes. Some of their number journeyed 
with us to the next station, bidding us Godspeed. 
They sang to us and we to them, "God be with you till 



we meet again." 

Portland, Oregon, June 18.— Here we found the Bible 
Students quite alert, and growing both in numbers and in 
spirituality. We had an enjoyable meeting with the 
Bible Students, exhorting them to love and loyalty, and 
held up before them the cross and the great reward promised 
to those who overcome. The attendance was approximately 
500. Then came the evening service for the public. 
Notwithstanding a heavy rain storm, the audience 
numbered about 3,500 and gave good attention, 271 leaving 
their addresses, requesting further literature. 

Tacoma, Washington, June 19.— More brethren, more 
fellowship, more encouragement, fresh manifestations of 
love and zeal, an excellent meeting with the interested, a 
splendidly attended public meeting— 1,800; 275 gave in 
their addresses, as indicating interest and a desire for 
further literature. 

Seattle, June 20.— The Seattle class of Bible Students 
appear to be making good progress, not only in numbers, 
but also in development of the fruits and graces of the 
Holy Spirit. Here, also, we had a very enjoyable season 
with the friends, giving them one address. The attendance 
at the public address in the afternoon represented 
the capacity of the theater, including the stage— 2,300. 
Requests for further literature from the interested numbered 
283. 

Victoria, B.C., June 21.— Here we had more good 
times with the Bible Students with an attendance of 500. 
Then came the evening service, with an estimated attendance 
of 1,000. The Bible Students gave place to the public, 
and assembled in another building, as an overflow 
meeting. The interested strangers to the number of 156 
left their addresses, requesting further literature. 

Vancouver, B.C., June 22.— We had a grand time 
here. The Spirit of the Lord operating in the Canadian 
mind gives blessed fruitage, similar to that found elsewhere. 
An all-day program had been arranged. We 
were met at the boat-landing and escorted to the place of 
meeting, where a public address of welcome was given. 
To this we responded, assuring the brethren of our appreciation 
of their cordial welcome and of our realization 

R5280 : page 220 

that by the same spirit all the Lord's people have been 
buried in the one Body— the Body of Christ, the "Church 
of the First-borns," whose names "are written in 
Heaven." Then came a testimony meeting with further 
addresses. 

The afternoon service was for the public. The attendance 
was estimated at 4,500, but other hundreds of 
late-comers were turned away; for, owing to the construction 
of the building, the late-comers would have disturbed 
the others by reason of the noise of their shoes. The 
audience was especially fine and the attention excellent. 
Addresses to the number of 224 were handed in requesting 



further literature. 

When it is remembered that the majority of the meetings 
here noted were held on week-days, the attendance 
surely indicated that the people had not lost their interest 
in the Bible and in religion, and that the falling off in 
the general Church attendance is therefore properly 
chargeable to another cause. We believe that the decrease 
in Church attendance, of which we hear so much, 
is chargeable to the fact that the public have lost their 
faith, as well they might, in the creeds of the Dark Ages. 
They are receiving no spiritual food. When the ministers 
preach to them along the lines of sociology, or astronomy, 
or science, the pews, as well educated and as well informed 
along these lines as are the pulpiteers, care little 
for the minister's dissertation. 

Oh, that the ministers of today, instead of feeling 
angry against the Truth and fighting it, would investigate 
it thoughtfully and prayerfully! Then indeed they 
would be a power in the earth, in this, our wonderful 
day, in which God is sending out His Light and Truth 
to be the guide of His people, to guide them to His Holy 
Hill— the Kingdom of Messiah! What a power these 
ministers might be, if backed by the truth of God's Word! 

How pitiable it seems that men so well equipped 
would be not only useless as respects the advancement of 
Christ's cause, but be really the leaders of the opposition 
thereto— ignorantly serving the Prince of Darkness! All 
the more, however, the Truth must be spoken. The 
shackles of the creeds of error must be broken. The 
beauty of the Truth must be exhibited; for it is the Power 
of God for the calling and electing and perfecting of the 
Bride class to be the Lamb's Wife. 

But while we must oppose the error, and must uncover 
its very foundations in our efforts to "show forth the 
praises of Him who called us out of darkness into His 
marvelous light," nevertheless, let us all the more speak 
the Truth in love, without harshness, without personalities. 
Our dear brethren are deluded, deceived, not 
intentionally opposing the Truth, we believe. How glad 
we shall be for the day when the great Adversary, who 
deceived us all and is still deceiving so many, will be 
bound for a thousand years, as promised!— Rev. 20:1-3. 

WORDS OF CAUTION 

This may be as good an opportunity as any for a few 
words of caution. We are all in danger of going to extremes, 
and all should remember the Apostle's words, 
"Let your moderation be known unto all." At one place 
we found that a spirit of antagonism had been aroused 
by means of immoderate statements on the part of a few. 
They had suggested that Brother Russell and his writings 
are divinely inspired, as were the Apostles of old. What 
a great mistake! No wonder such statements were resented! 
When asked if such were our opinion, we 
promptly assured the dear friends to the contrary. 



The view we have always presented, and still hold, is 
that the Lord Jesus appointed only twelve Apostles, St. 
Paul being the one to take Judas' place. The words of 
these would be so supervised by Divine Power that whatsoever 
they would declare binding on earth, the Church 
would know would be bound in Heaven, and whatsoever 
they would declare on earth to be loosed or not binding, 
they might know would not be obligatory in the sight of 
Heaven. In other words, those twelve Apostles were the 
special mouthpieces of the Lord to His Church. They 
still speak to us. We need no others; we expect no others. 

The most we have ever claimed for our own presentations, 
written or oral, is that they are in line with the 
words of the Apostles, that they harmonize with them— 
that we keep so close to the words of the Apostles and 
the words of our Lord that our Message may be said to 
be their Message, except in respect to the particular words 
used and the arrangement of them. In the STUDIES IN 
THE SCRIPTURES we have classified the various presentations 
of Jesus, the Apostles and Prophets into different 
studies or topics; and this is what we meant when we 
declared in an old WATCH TOWER that, on this account, 
whoever reads the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES is really 
reading the Bible in an arranged form— topically. In no 
case have we ever presented anything as of ourself. In 
every instance we have fastened our presentations to the 
Scriptures on which they depend and rest. 

Our claim has been, and is, that because we are living 
in the dawn of the New Dispensation, it is the Divine will 
that the Mystery of God should now be finished, in the 
sense of reaching a completion, or unfolding. This we 
hold comes to us, not through special inspiration to speak 
or to write new things, but by the promised guidance of 
the Holy Spirit, enlightening us and directing us to the 
Lord's Word, and assisting us to see the proper application 
of the same. The wonderful light of our day upon 
every subject undoubtedly inures to these ends. 

Because it is due time, the Lord would send the light 
to His people, and as usual, would send it through some 
earthly instrumentality. If, in the Divine providence, we 
have been used or shall be used of the Lord, it will be in 
making clear the sayings of inspiration already written, 
and not in making any new revelations or prophecies. 

We take this opportunity, also, to guard the dear 
friends against the report that we are making any different 
presentations by letter than we have made in THE 
WATCH TOWER and the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. If 
any claim to have such letter, ask to see the letter, and 
refuse to receive as from me anything contradictory to 
the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES and THE WATCH TOWER. 
If we ever see it necessary to make changes, we will preferably 
do this in public print rather than in private letters 
or in private conversation. Let us stick to the written 
Word in the Scriptures as well as THE WATCH 
TOWER publications. 



R5283 : page 220 

"My soul be on thy guard; 

Ten thousand foes arise; 
The hosts of sin are pressing hard 

To draw thee from the prize. 

"O! watch, and fight, and pray 
The battle ne'er give o'er; 

Renew it boldly every day, 
And help Divine implore. 

"Ne'er think the vict'ry won, 
Nor once at ease sit down; 

Thine arduous work will not be done, 
Till thou hast gained thy crown." 



R5281 : page 221 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
SISTER SEIBERT TO HER FRIENDS 

DEARLY BELOVED IN THE LORD: 

Your recent letter of loving sympathy is received and 
deeply appreciated at this time. I want to assure you that 
your prayers on my behalf have been most wonderfully 
answered, and I am enjoying a peace of mind and heart which 
almost frightens me. I say to myself, "I did not know the 
Father loved me so!" His grace has been more than "sufficient," 
so that I have been enabled to comfort other bereaved 
ones in this sad experience. 

I am counting my blessings every hour. I am so thankful 
my dear one was not taken ill three or four years ago, when 
I was so weak myself. Again I am so glad that he did not 
suffer any pain, which was very remarkable when we consider 
the nature of the disease, cancer. But this was my constant 
prayer, that, since he could not recover, the dear Lord would 
not permit him to suffer any more pain than was best for 
him and for me. I was more grateful than words can express 
because of the fact that we had the means to give my dear 
husband every comfort. I spared neither money nor skill 
nor science in order to do everything that could be done to 
cure him, as he was so anxious to get well. And lastly, but 
chiefly, I am so thankful that the dear Lord has seen fit to 
hide my dear one in the grave until "the time of His wrath 
be overpast," and that he has spared him the agony of witnessing 
my painful and probably ignominious death, if I 
prove faithful to Present Truth. 

And thus, while I count my blessings, I do not sorrow as 
do others, but throughout these after-days I seem to hear a 
chime of silver bells every moment sweetly ringing the refrain, 



"All that Thou sendest me, In mercy given!" 

The physicians would not tell my husband his real condition 
and it fell to my painful lot to refer to the matter on 
two occasions. I felt it was terrible to allow him to go down 
into death unconscious of his true condition. Yet, on the 
other hand, I realized I had witnessed to him daily, hourly 
almost, for nearly twenty years, without apparent effect. 
Nevertheless I determined to do what I could to help him. 
And therefore, about two hours before he died, when I knew 
he was failing rapidly, I said to him, "You are so tired, dear, 
wouldn't you like to sleep for a whole week? And how 
would you like to go to sleep and not waken until after the 
time of trouble is over?" He replied, "Oh, don't talk to me 
about death, I'm going to get well, I'm going to get well, I'm 
going to get well!" Then I said gently, "No dearheart, you 
are not going to get well; the doctors knew it from the beginning 
but would not tell you, and now I must tell you. 
Can't you thank the Lord for his goodness in saving you 
from pain and letting you just go to sleep? Can't you say 
a little prayer? Say, Lord Jesus, into Thy hand I commend 
my spirit?" No reply. "You are not afraid, are you, 
dear? Death is only a sleep. The Lord is going 
to let you sleep a little while and then in His due 
time He will call you to awake out of sleep, and the whole 
earth will be as the Garden of Eden, no more pain, no more 
tears, no more death." Still no reply. (Poor dear, perhaps 
he was too far gone, yet when I asked him if he knew me, he 
replied, "Of course, I know you, dear.") 

I held both his dear hands while the cold death-stream 
crept higher and higher, and his breathing grew softer and 
softer until with a sigh he just fell asleep like a weary child 
upon its mother's breast. I caressed the beloved form and 
turning away, said, "Sleep well, dearheart, sleep well, no 
dreams disturb this sleep!" 

He fell asleep on May 23, and on the 29th I laid him away 
amid the love and admiration and sorrow of the whole community, 
without a stain upon his reputation. I was alone, and 
had everything to arrange with respect to the undertaker and 
the services, but I tried to do everything as I believe he would 
have wished it done, without ostentation or extravagance, yet 
withal in good taste and of the best and most enduring quality. 
I have nothing to regret, I believe I have faithfully discharged 
every earthly mortgage, and I trust the dear Lord 
will see fit to give me some further service for Him and His 
during the "little while" that remains for the feet members 
of His body! 

I wished to make the funeral services my final witness for 
the Truth in this community, and requested that the Society 
send me our dear Bro. Woodworth to officiate. Services 
were held in the Presbyterian Church at Mount Union, Pa., 
where Mr. Seibert's family had lived. The Presbyterian minister 
read Scriptures selected by Bro. Woodworth. Prayer 
was offered by the Methodist minister, to whose church my 
husband's family had belonged, and to which he left a bequest 
of $500. Our dear Sisters Detwiler and Virginia Noble from 
"Bethel" then sang "Nearer my God to Thee," my dear one's 



favorite hymn, and as I listened I could not help saying to 
myself, "Oh, that he might hear them, for he never heard 
that beautiful hymn so touchingly sung by human voice before!" 
(I used to sing it for him, but I am not a gifted 
singer.) Then our dear Bro. Woodworth followed with his 
discourse on two texts, "The Lord gave and the Lord hath 
taken away," and "The ransomed of the Lord shall return," 
suggested by me. It was very impressive, and the audience 
of more than a thousand listened most attentively. I had 
arranged for a stenographer to take down as much as possible 
of what he said, and we have had it printed in the "Mount 
Union Times"; some of you have copies. 

While the friends and audience were viewing the body, I 
had arranged for the two sisters to sing some sweet hymns 
very softly, so as to break that awful silence, that saddest 
moment of the whole service. They sang without the organ, 
"There is rest for the weary," and afterward they requested 
the organist to play softly our beautiful hymn, "Many sleep, 
but not forever." My dear one was a lover of peace, and 
"a peacemaker." To me one of the most touching incidents 
of the funeral was the presence of two editors, who had been 
sworn enemies when Mr. Seibert came to Orbisonia several 
years ago, walking side by side among the honorary pallbearers. 
He had brought them together in the bonds of 
peace and good-fellowship. Surely he will have little difficulty 
in walking up the grand "Highway of Holiness," especially 
with the assistance of so many dear Truth friends 
who appreciated his nobility of heart! 

I used to tell my husband that it was pride which kept 
him out of the Truth, and his invariable reply was, "Why, 
what have I to be proud of but you!" 

The floral offerings were the most lavish and beautiful 
ever seen in the town. At the cemetery dear Bro. Woodworth 
offered the most exquisite prayer I ever heard on such 
an occasion. Many persons referred to it afterwards, and 
also spoke favorably of the discourse. I trust that some good 
may have been done, some blind eyes opened, some weary 
hearts comforted that day. Both ministers asked Bro. Woodworth 
for some printed matter dealing with his subject. And 
a letter from the Methodist minister to me declared that my 
"manifest faith and trust had been a help to everybody." 
This greatly encouraged me. And further, I learned that all 
my acquaintances in the community expected that I would 
bear up differently from others, "because of my faith and my 
religion!" So I thanked the Heavenly Father for His marvelous 
fulfilment of His promises, "As thy days thy strength 
shall be," and "My grace is sufficient for thee," and for this 
opportunity to show forth the power of the TRUTH! 

I cannot refrain from quoting here our dear Pastor's 
words to me. He writes, "You have my sincere sympathy. I 
know that you appreciated your husband very highly, as evidenced 
by your patient and continued devotion, not only in 
his illness, but at all times. I am glad that you have had 
the privilege of being with him to the last. I am confident 
that you can look forward to the future with good assurance 
that he was a noble man, and that God loves such characters, 



even as Jesus declared of the young Hebrew who said that he 
had kept the Law to the best of his ability from his youth up. 
Of him we read, 'Jesus, beholding him, loved him.' We may 

R5282 : page 221 

be sure that the Lord has a sympathetic love for all the members 
of the race who have a desire for righteousness. We 
are so glad that the time is hastening when all such will be 
brought to fullest opportunity for knowing the great Redeemer 
and experiencing the fulness of His restitution power." 

Please continue to pray for me that I may be faithful in 
doing His will even until He shall say, "It is enough, come up 
higher." 

With fervent Christian love, yours in our Redeemer and 
King, GERTRUDE W. SEIBERT.-Orbisonia, Pa. 

June 7, 1913. 



HIDDEN PEARLS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: 

Grace, mercy and peace be unto you. My heart daily overflows 
with joy and gratitude when I consider our Father's 
abundant blessings to us. Help is provided, through the 
appointed channel, for every step of the way. 

How eagerly we welcomed the Resolve, as just the assistance 
we need! I have it written on a post card— the vow on 
the other side— and keep it under my pillow, where I can read 
it as soon as I awaken. How it fortifies and helps one to be 
ready for every emergency! And what a grand beginning it 
makes to each momentous day— the wonderful, amazing days 
in which we live! 

But I desire to tell you of the great help the little Question-books 

R5282 : page 222 

have been. I used them in study with another sister- 
all the class we have in our isolation. Some way I had looked 
upon them as for class study, and not for use in my private 
reading of ten pages a day in the STUDIES. But the Father 
opened my eyes to their full use. 

I was unable to keep my mind fixed upon my reading as I 
desired; it seemed to me I was losing so much. A dear 
sister suggested to me, when I was out at a local convention, 
at Easter, to use the Questions. She was doing so with great 
profit. That was the key to the whole situation. There was 
the proper help provided, and I was not using it; hence not 
receiving the full blessing. 

After that my thoughts were completely on my study, and 
I was not missing the point of each paragraph. I have been 
astonished to find what beauties of Truth— pearls of great 
price— were hidden in the paragraphs, that refreshed, and 
strengthened and cleansed me daily. So now I am eager for 
other dear ones to share the blessings, and whenever our 



Father gives me the privilege (and of late He is graciously 
giving me many such privileges) of meeting with His dear 
people, I desire to testify as to the blessing that lies in those 
little books. 

Words fail to express the joy of fellowship we experience 
through the columns of THE WATCH TOWER. God bless you! 

With Christian love and greetings, 

HOPE TATE.-Ont. 



SEEKING TO SERVE 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY. 
GENTLEMEN: 

The writer had the pleasure of hearing Mr. Rutherford 
deliver a lecture in our city, Atlanta. Since then, I have 
bought of one of your agents a set of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. 
I am very much interested in them, as well as your 
work before the public, and will say, if you will furnish me 
with free Literature of any kind on this great work, it will be 
a pleasure for me to place it in the homes as I visit the sick 
each day. I feel that you are doing a great work, and one 
that is much needed in every home. If I can help you in any 
way I am at your service. I am delighted with the lectures 
and will appreciate any literature you may care to send. 
Very truly, 

L. W. WIGGINS, M.D.-Ga. 



page 222 

THE RESULTS OF ZEAL 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY. 
DEAR BRETHREN: 

We are very glad to know that you can serve us with more 
public meetings. We would be sorry to have them stop, as 
they are becoming interesting for the public. The audience 
is increasing at every meeting and more names are being 
handed in each time, and besides that, we are enjoying the 
work; so it is real harvesting and we are rejoicing in it. 

In regard to the financial part, we feel that we are going 
to be able to meet it. It is wonderful how much we can do 
when the Lord is with us, and our hearts are filled with His 
Spirit. So, send us the brethren and the advertising matter, 
and we will try to do the rest. 

Much love and best wishes to you all. We pray for you 
all, as we are sure you do for us. 

Your brother in Christ, 

J. L. MILLER. 



R5282 : page 222 



FINDS HELP IN VOW 

PASTOR C. T. RUSSELL, BROOKLYN, NEW YORK. 
DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST: 

I have often thought of writing you of my experience in 
connection with the special Vow unto the Lord, but have refrained, 
because I knew that your time was so fully taken up. 
My first thought was, It is a needless addition for the consecrated, 
but there can be no harm in it. How surprised I 
was to find what a real help it proved to be! I recommend it 
to all. 

While our opportunities for service in this Present Truth 
have been limited, we have had the pleasure of seeing some 
brought to rejoice in the Truth, and to a full consecration in 
the Truth. 

I append a brief history of my search for Truth: 

Nineteen years ago, while associated with the Free Will 
Baptist people, through a study of the Scriptures, I was led 
to a complete consecration to the Lord, and while I kept my 
membership with them, there was such evident lack of consecration 
and the knowledge of God, that I refused to accept 
a pastoral work among them, working with them in evangelistic 
work, also with the Methodists, United Brethren, Presbyterians, 
and visiting among the Holiness people and the Christian 
Alliance people, being urged by each denomination to accept 
work, but not being able to do so. 

I met one brother who had read the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
and believed them, but he had such a wrong conception 
of their real teaching, that I thought they did not contain 
what I was looking for. Then I met the Adventist people, 
and as they discredited the Hell Fire teaching, and taught 
the truth about the nature of man and the state of the dead, 
I associated myself with them, and accepted a work with 
them, feeling that there was no need to look further; that I 
should have to go through alone if I did. Here I first saw 
that God was doing His work on time; and the thought became 
fixed in my mind that every true doctrine must magnify 
the name of God, and reveal the beauties of His character. 
With this thought I soon found it impossible to give myself 
wholly to their teachings, and as the Truth dawned on my 
mind and became clear to me that the Church is the Temple 
of God, I was convinced that the Adventist institution, with 
all other man-made ones, was Babylonish, and I sent my man-given 
credentials as a minister to those who had granted them. 

This brought me to a very real sense of dependence on the 
Lord. I felt very much alone, but for Him. But providentially, 
a few days before this, a magazine copy of the DIVINE 
PLAN (WATCH TOWER form) was handed to me by a faithful 
colporteur sister. Because of the mental struggle I was undergoing 
in breaking previous ties, I paid no attention to it, but 
went and put it into the stove. Fortunately there was no fire 
in the stove, and after the step was taken that set me free. 
I went to the stove, pulled out the WATCH TOWER, and found 
that it was sent of God for just such a time. 

I shall never be able to express my gratitude for the help 



the Lord has given me through the SCRIPTURE STUDIES, to you 
His servant; but the Lord will reward. 
With much Christian love, your brother in Christ, 
WM. H. BATTERSON.-Neb. 



LUXURIOUS TRAVEL AND SACRIFICE 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: 

Before anything else let me thank you humbly and gratefully 
for your clear teaching on the Scriptures, and for giving 
it out to the world, at prices that almost any one can afford 
to pay. 

I had practically left the English Church, and had almost 
given up everything, when in 1908, some copies of PEOPLES 
PULPIT were put into my reluctant hand. Since then, through 
the six volumes of STUDIES, a little more light has been coming 
to me all the time; and I have been trying to lead a life 
more acceptable to our Lord. I have been almost alone in 
this neighborhood, as regards believers in Present Truth, but 
the members of the Victoria class have held out helping hands 
to me. Your teaching was so new to me, that for some time 
I was almost afraid to accept it, as we are warned about false 
teachers in the latter days. But all your teaching is based on 
the Bible and far from smoothing or widening the narrow 
way, it shows us we can expect nothing else on this side of 
the Veil; far from teaching we can be Christians in name 
only, it points out that we must be Christlike in deed and 
thought; far from expecting popularity, we must recognize 
that we are a peculiar people, to be despised like our Master, 
and that our own individual responsibility increases, as He 
gives us light, and that we cannot attempt to go hand-in-hand 
with the world; therefore I now endeavor to lead others to 
read the STUDIES. 

I want in all humility to ask you, How can we reconcile 
the description of the luxurious train, the hotel on wheels, and 
its places to lounge, its chef de cuisine, its corps of waiters, 
etc., with the example given us by Jesus of Nazareth? Is it 
not, dear brother, a pandering to the worldly spirit? It seems 
to me, that if Jesus had conducted such a tour, He would have 
chosen a clean emigrant car, containing necessaries but not 
luxuries. How, too, can we reconcile the fact that when on 
earth He had no place to lay His head, with the fact that His 
chief earthly shepherd (whom He has honored as He has you, 
on account of your faithfulness and humility) should stay at 
the best hotels instead of with His humble followers? On 
page 31, Vol. IV, you point out that some of the reformed 
churches did not succeed because they "have made many compromising 
overtures to the world for smaller favors." Is not 
this a repetition of the same kind of thing? I am told that 

R5283 : page 223 

the newspaper men arrange these things for you, but you remind 
us that responsibility rests on each individual. God can 



take care of His work in the future, as in the past, without 
depending on newspaper men. I cannot understand it all, 
brother, and I long for a few lines from you, who have helped 
me so much hitherto. Vol. I, p. 199, "the consecrated, the 
transformed, in addition to the effort to subdue sin, must 
sacrifice the present good things." Vol. I, p. 203, "The transforming 
influences lead to present sacrifice and suffering." 
Yours very gratefully, 



THE EDITOR'S REPLY 

DEAR SISTER: 

Yours dated June 15,1 am reading on the train. I thank 
you for its frank statements and queries. 

It is true that there were no fine hotels in our Lord's day, 
true that there were no railroads, and that His locomotion 
was accomplished partly by little ships, partly on foot and 
partly on an ass. Were we to follow the Master's footsteps 
literally, the possibilities of the present Harvest work would 
be much decreased. It is our thought that the Harvest of the 
Jewish Age was merely confined to the little country of Palestine; 
whereas the Harvest of this Age, world-wide, is to be 
accomplished in a similar length of time— forty years. 

We believe that the wonderful conveniences of our day 
are preparations for the Millennium, and that the Lord is not 
displeased with us for using these in connection with His 
service. Quite to the contrary, it is rather our thought that 
God is providing these wonderful conveniences for the very 
purpose of facilitating the Harvest work. 

In this connection, we remember the Apostle's words 
which assure us that all things were given unto us richly to 
enjoy— to use, but not to abuse. We have an illustration of 
this in conjunction with our visit to India. The chief interest 
there appears to be in the western part, which has almost no 
railroad facilities. We were debating how we could procure 
some kind of conveyance to permit such a visit as we thought 
would be in the interests of the Lord's cause and not require 
too much time. Our queries were answered when we learned 
that just about ten days before our arrival, an automobile 
omnibus line had been established instead of a railroad. 

As respects hotels: In the present instance I had no real 
need for a hotel because I could have stopped quite comfortably 
on the train. But the newspaper people handling my 
sermons are interested in making these somewhat of a spectacle, 
so that they can draw that much more attention to the 
sermons which they publish. In the world's estimation, a 
public man who is great or well thought of would be treated 
to the best that his friends possessed. From their standpoint, 
a very humble entertainment would be a low appreciation; 
and if his friends have a low estimation of him, the 
newspapers, representing the public, would size him up proportionately 
small, and his sermons would not be published. 

The newspaper people surely deserve some consideration 



from me. It is estimated that my sermons weekly, through 
2,000 papers, reach 15,000,000 readers. To accomplish these 
results by advertising would cost millions of dollars yearly. 
For the privilege of preaching the glorious Gospel of the 
Love of God in Christ, I am not only willing to please the 
newspapers by going to good hotels and by long journeys to 
Panama, around the world, etc., but I am willing, also, to 
endure slanders and misrepresentations of jealous ministers 
who seek to prevent the publication of my sermons and the 
gathering of large audiences by slanderous misrepresentations 
of my character. Looking beyond the present, I am hoping 
and I am waiting for the Master's approval— "Well done, 
good and faithful servant, enter into the joys of thy Lord; 
thou hast been faithful over a few things." 

We see no wrong in thus allowing the newspaper interest 
to have a say in respect to our earthly conditions when principle 
is not compromised. If they demanded that we should 
violate our conscience in respect to the publishing of the sermons, 
the case would be different. Conscience is not to be 
sold at any price. But when they arrange to give us additional 
comforts, we see no sin connected therewith. Rather, 
we remember that our Lord did not hesitate to wear a "seamless 
robe" in a time in which such a garment was considered 
extravagant, far beyond the means of the common people 
with whom He usually companied. 

We remember, also, that while Jesus had no definite home 
of His own, one of His disciples, St. John, did have a home. 
So did St. Peter. We remember, also, that our Lord had a 
home whenever convenient at Bethany with Lazarus, Martha 
and Mary. We remember that they honored Him with a 
sumptuous feast and with an alabaster box of ointment, very 
costly. We remember that when Judas found fault with the 
extravagance, our Lord rebuked him and justified Mary. We 
remember that our Lord, on one occasion, at least, attended 
a wedding, and on another occasion was the guest of a rich 
Pharisee in one of the best homes of that time. 

Respecting the luxurious train, with cooks, or chefs, attending 
to the food supplies: It is customary for newspaper 
people to use considerable latitude of language in their descriptions. 
It is not wrong that they call the cooks by the 
French name "chef"; and if anybody gets the thought that 
these cooks got fabulous sums for their services, as we hear 
that the chefs of the Vanderbilts, Goulds, etc., receive, he 
would be mistaken. The chefs, or cooks, on this train were 
brethren who availed themselves of the opportunity of a 
month's vacation, a convention tour, and meanwhile of the 
opportunity of serving the brethren on the train. 

The train was described by the newspaper artist as "De 
luxe," and yet it was just such a train as everybody uses when 
travelling. Some of the cars were of the ordinary standard 
Pullman, and some of them Tourist, or cheaper sleeping cars. 
Of course, as your letter suggests, these friends might have 
gotten the use of a common box car cheaper, or they could 
have travelled afoot still cheaper. If they had gotten box 
cars and fitted them up for their use ever so crudely, with 
plain, wooden bunks and straw, the expense would have been 



nearly as great, if not quite as great, and the inconvenience 
much greater. 

However, dear sister, I had nothing whatever to do with 
the making up of the train. I arranged for visits to the 
Bible Students of the Far West, whom I rarely have opportunity 
to see. My visit was in response to requests that I 
would come and hold public meetings. It was my intention 
to take the usual train service; but Brother Dr. Jones, learning 
of the tour, asked whether I would like to have company. 
I assured him that I would be glad of this. 

Brother Dr. Jones then got into communication with the 
brethren, with the result that a train-load of friends journeyed 
with me. Some of them took the opportunity of meeting 
friends on the Western coast. All had the opportunity of 
fellowship with each other on the train, and at the various 
meetings served. They participated in the work, too. Two 
of them served as stenographers; Prof. Read freely gave of 
his professional ability in connection with the singing; and 
others served as ushers; while all did their best to cheer and 
encourage the local Bible Students in the various cities visited. 
Additionally, considerable volunteering with free literature 
was done. 

We are in danger, dear sister, of getting a wrong view of 
what is meant by suffering with Christ. If we merely think 
of the Master's sufferings as those of weariness of the flesh, 
wearing sandals instead of shoes, and walking instead of 
riding, we shall be gradually led up to the same extremes of 
error which prevailed during the Dark Ages, and which to 
some extent still prevail amongst our Catholic brethren. 
Some of these attempt to have greater sufferings than Jesus 
had by going barefooted, or by whipping themselves torturously 
and then wearing hair-cloth jackets to increase the pain, 
as the hair jags the sore flesh, causing it to fester. These, 
they think, are sufferings of Christ. 

Gradually both Catholics and Protestants are seeing to the 
contrary. Jesus used the best roads and best means of His 
time. His sufferings were especially through the opposition 
of His foes in that He was despised and rejected of men. He 
was slandered, and "when He was reviled, reviled not again." 
He endured these things patiently for the Truth's sake, and 
thus set us an example to walk in His steps, similarly enduring 
worldly contradictions, oppositions, slanders, for the sake 
of the brethren. 

I trust, dear sister, that you will not stumble over the 
means which the Lord is using in this Harvest time to promulgate 
the Message of the hour, one to awaken His people and 
to guide them to better methods of Bible study. But even if 
you cannot see eye to eye with us, do not stumble yourself, 
but remember that to his own Master each servant stands or 
falls. Take all the blessings from our ministry that you can 
get, and leave the remainder of the matters which you cannot 
understand to God. In other words, let us more and more 
realize that God Himself is guiding His own work; and that 
whatever blessing we may obtain we should be thankful to 
Him for the same. 

With much Christian love, 



Your brother and servant in the Lord, 
C. T. RUSSELL. 



page 225 

VOL. XXXIV AUGUST 1 No. 15 
A. D. 1913-A. M. 6041 



CONTENTS 

The Peace of God 227 

God's Emotional Nature 227 

God's Peace Compatible With Sorrow 228 

Our Rich Legacy of Peace 229 

Cultivation of Unwavering Faith 230 

Why There Is Diversity Amongst God's 

People 231 

Doctrines More or Less Important 231 

God's Covenant at Mount Sinai 232 

The Royal Priesthood Proffered 232 

Typical of New Covenant 233 

Deliverance (Poem) 233 

God's Ten Commands 234 

God's Original Law to Man 234 

The Church and the Law 234 

Who Is My Neighbor? 235 

Trans-Continental Tour 236 

Four Great Conventions 237 

An Interesting Letter 239 

Berean Questions in Scripture Studies 239 

page 226 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



POEMS OF DAWN 

This book of 286 pages contains nearly three hundred 
beautiful poems of consecration and encouragement for 
Christians. It makes an excellent gift for any friend or 
relative not in the Truth, although most appreciated by 
the saintly. It is topically arranged, but you could not 
open at random and read without being refreshed, comforted, 
drawn nearer to God. The Karatol-bound edition 
is exhausted, but we still have a good supply on hand of 
the cloth-bound edition, 25c, and the India paper, leather 
bound, 50c. 



PRIZE PUZZLES 

We still have Prize Puzzles for judicious use. Order 
only so many as you can use, free. Lay a few each week 
on hotel writing tables and in other conspicuous places, 
where they will come under the eye of intelligent and 
good people. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR SEPTEMBER 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. 
At the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns 
for September follow: (1) 235; (2) 333; (3) 128; (4) 40; (5) 
163; (6) 299; (7) 272; (8) 312; (9) 330; (10) 259; (11) 112; 
(12) 307; (13) 109; (14) 304; (15) 249; (16) 165; (17) 15; 
(18) Vow; (19) 313; (20) 209; (21) 42; (22) 155; (23) 4; (24) 
238; (25) 82; (26) 16; (27) 12; (28) 3; (29) 25; (30) 166. 



R5284 : page 227 

THE PEACE OF GOD 

"And the peace of God, which passeth all understanding, shall 
keep your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus."— Phil. 4:7. 

PEACE is defined to be a state of quiet, or 
tranquility, freedom from disturbance or 
agitation— calmness, repose. Such a state 
of mind our text affirms of God. His is a 
mind tranquil, calm, undisturbed, never agitated, 
nor even wearied nor perplexed by 



any of the cares of His vast dominion. Yet 

this perfect peace of God, the Scriptures 

show, is due neither to the fact that there 

are no disorders in His vast domain, nor 

yet to any stoical indifference to pain or pleasure, but 

rather to that perfect poise of His glorious attributes 

which makes Him Master of His situation as Sovereign 

of the whole universe. 

Have we admired the coolness and calm self-possession 
of a great general, such as Grant or Napoleon, in 
the midst of the confusion and smoke of battle? or of a 
great statesman, such as Gladstone or Bismarck, in the 
midst of national perplexities and perils? or of skilled 
physicians or others in critical times and places? These 
are only faint illustrations of the peace of self-possession 
and self-confidence which rules in the mind of God. He 
is never confused, bewildered, perplexed, anxious or 
care-worn, nor in the least fearful that His plans will 
miscarry or His purposes fail, because all power and wisdom 
inhere in Him. 

The scope of His mighty intellect reaches to the utmost 
bounds of possibility, comprehends all causes and 
discerns with precision all effects; consequently, He 
knows the end from the beginning, and that, not only 
from philosophical principles, but also by intuition. As 
the Creator of all things and the originator of all law, 
He is thoroughly acquainted with all the intricate subtleties 
of physical, moral and intellectual law, so that no 
problem could arise the results of which are not manifest 
to His mind. "God is light, and in Him is no darkness 
at all. "-I John 1:5. 

God, the Creator of all things, is also the competent 
Sustainer of all things. In silent grandeur, from Age to 
Age, the whole physical universe fulfils His will, without 
a suspicion of disorder or mishap; and the same 
Power is pledged for its sustenance throughout the eternal 
future. 

Thus from His own vast, inherent resources of Power 
and Wisdom, springs the peace of God. But not from 
this source alone is the Divine peace; for peace is the 
certain concomitant of inherent goodness. God is the 
impersonation of every virtue and every grace; and consequently 
He has the blessed satisfaction and peace of 
conscious moral perfection as well as inherent Wisdom 
and Power. 

GOD'S EMOTIONAL NATURE 

Yet we find this peace of God coexisting with much 
of disorder and trouble. As a Father He shows us that 
He bears a father's love to all His intelligent creatures 
—"the whole family [of God] in Heaven and in earth"— 
and that for His "pleasure they are and were created." 
(Eph. 3:15; Rev. 4:11.) He created them in His own 
likeness— with the same mental and moral attributes, so 
that He might have communion and fellowship with them 



as sons, and they with Him as a Father, that thus, in 
mutual fellowship and communion, the Creator and the 
creature might find pleasure, happiness and delight. 

This likeness of God includes in all not only the same 
mental faculties, but also the free exercise of the same 
in the formation of character. A creature incapable of 
thus forming character would not be in God's likeness. 
And for the purpose of developing character, the alternative 
of good and evil must be placed before him. The 
right and the wrong principles of action must be discerned 
and the individual left free to his own choice in 
the matter, that the pleasure of God may be realized in 
the virtuous character resultant from the free choice of 
righteousness. 

Since the love of God for His newly created and innocent 
creatures is akin to, but much stronger than, the 
love of an earthly parent for an innocent infant; and 
since that loving interest and solicitude does not grow 
cold as the creature advances in years, but earnestly 
watches for the development of the principles and fruits 
of righteousness, it is manifest that, like an earthly parent, 
God experiences the sense of either pleasure or pain, 
according as His free, intelligent creatures choose the 
right course or the wrong. Of this we are fully assured, 
not only by thus reasoning from the fact of His Fatherhood, 
but also by all of those Scriptures which speak of 
some things as abominable, displeasing, hateful and despicable 
to Him and as giving Him no pleasure; which 
say that His anger burns against them, and that His indignation 
and wrath wax hot, even to their destruction. 
Other Scriptures speak of His pleasure, love, joy and 
delight in pleasing things— in the principles of righteousness 
and those who obey them— the appreciation of 
pleasurable emotions of an opposite character, for pain 

R5284 : page 228 

and pleasure may properly be considered the ebb and flow 
of the same emotion. 

These exhibitions of the mind of God indicate clearly 
an emotional nature in the Divine Being, of which fact 
we might also judge from the realization of our own 
emotional nature, since man was created in God's image. 
No, dear friends, God is not a God of stoical indifference, 
insensible to the emotions of pleasure and of pain; but 
the perfect poise of His attributes preserves the equilibrium 
of peace under all circumstances, whether of 
pain or pleasure. 

GOD'S PEACE UNBROKEN BY EXTERNAL DISCORD 

With this thought, then, let us consider the circumstances 
under which the marvelous Peace of God has 
been perpetually maintained. The deep-laid Plan of God 
in all His creative works required long aions [ages] for 
its accomplishment. Across the vista of ages He saw in 



His purpose the glory of an intelligent creation in His 
own likeness, established in righteousness and worthy of 
His gift of eternal life. He therein saw the mutual 
pleasure of the Creator and the creature, and with a 
peaceful patience He resolved to wait for the glorious 
consummation. 

As the Plan developed and time rolled on, the free 
moral agency of His creatures, misused by some, was 
enabling them to develop evil characters. By this means 
discord was introduced into His family— "the family [of 
God] in Heaven and in earth"— all His creatures, angels 
and men; and the family was divided, some holding to 
righteousness and some choosing to do evil. But such 
a contingency was one of the foreseen necessities of the 
far reaching Plan, the glorious outcome of which, was, 
in the Divine judgment, worth the cost of all the trouble 
and loss which He foresaw. 

What a dreadful thing is family discord! How a 
prodigal son or a wayward daughter often brings the 
gray hairs of the human parent down with sorrow to the 
grave! Ah, the Heavenly Father knows something of 
such sorrow; for He saw Satan, one of His sons (Isa. 14:12), 
an angel of light, fall as lightning from Heaven. 
(Luke 10:18.) For six thousand years, at least, that son 
has been in open, defiant rebellion against God, and most 
actively and viciously engaged in inciting further rebellion 
and wickedness. He saw many of the angels leave 
their first estate (Jude 6) and become the allies of Satan, 
and then He saw also the whole human race fall into sin. 
Did ever any human parent find such a conspiracy— so 
virulent and hateful— spring up in his family? Surely 
not! 

Then God found it necessary to perform the unpleasant 
duties of discipline. In His Justice He must disown 
the disloyal sons and deal with them as enemies. Though 
all the while His Fatherly Love was preparing to bless 
the deceived and fallen ones when the purposes of redemption 
should restore the repentant to His favor, Love 
must be veiled, while only stern, relentless Justice could 
be manifested. This has been no happifying duty, nor 
has the attitude of the sinner been pleasing to Him. 

Consider the Love against which these recreants 
sinned. Though from God cometh every good and perfect 
gift, His favors have been despised, His love spurned, 
His righteous authority conspired against and defied, His 
character maligned, misrepresented, made to appear 
odious, hateful, unrighteous and even despicable. Yet, 
through it all the peace of God continues, and for six 
thousand years He has endured this contradiction of sinners 
against Himself. And still, O wondrous grace! His 
Love abounds; and it is written that He so loved the 
world, even while they were yet sinners, that He gave 
His Only-Begotten Son to die for them; and that through 
Him judgment (trial) is also to be extended to those 
angels that fell, with the exception of Satan, the leader 
and instigator of the whole conspiracy— the father of 



lies.-John 3:16; I Cor. 6:3; Jude 6; Heb. 2:14; 
Rev. 20:10,14. 

GOD'S PEACE COMPATIBLE WITH SORROW 

This gift of Divine Love was another indication of 
the cost to our Heavenly Father of His great and marvelous 
Plan. Not only did He behold the fall into sin of 
a large proportion of His family, but their recovery cost 
the sacrifice of the dearest treasure of His heart, and the 
subjection of this beloved One to the most abject humiliation, 
ignominy, suffering and death. Again the illustration 
of a parent's love assists us in comprehending the 
cost of this manifestation of Jehovah's Love. With what 
tender and yearning emotions of Love must He have made 
this sacrifice of His beloved Son, in whom He was well 
pleased! In addition to all the graces of character manifested 
since the very dawn of the being of the Logos, 
was now added the further grace of full submission to 
the Divine will, even when the pathway pointed out was 
one of humiliation and pain. 

Ah, did the Father let Him go on that errand of 
mercy without the slightest sensation of sorrowful emotion? 
Had He no appreciation of the pangs of a father's 
love when the arrows of death pierced the heart of His 
beloved Son? When our dear Lord said, "My soul is 
exceeding sorrowful, even unto death," and again, 
"Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from Me: 
nevertheless, not as I will, but as Thou wilt," did it touch 
no sympathetic chord in the heart of the Eternal? Yea, 
verily; the unfeigned love of the Father sympathetically 
shared the Lord's sorrow.— Matt. 26:38,39. 

The principle taught in the Divine Word, that true 
love weeps with those that weep and rejoices with those 
who rejoice, is one which is also exemplified in the Divine 
character. The immortal Jehovah could not Himself die 
for us, His Divine nature being proof against death. 
And even if He could have died, there would have been 
no higher power to raise Him out of death. Thus all 
creation would have been left forever without a Governor, 
and only disaster and ruin could have ensued. But 
God could and did sacrifice at great cost to His loving, 
fatherly nature, the dearest treasure of His heart; and 
thus He manifested (I John 4:9) the great Love wherewith 
He loved His deceived and fallen creatures. If this 
sacrifice cost Him nothing, if it were impossible for His 
mind to realize any painful emotion even under such a 
circumstance, then the gift of His Son would be no manifestation 
of His Love; for that which costs nothing, 
manifests nothing. 

Our Lord Jesus also manifested His great sympathy 
for the Father in the misrepresentation of His character 
which He has so patiently endured for ages. It was the 
one effort of His life to glorify the Father and to rectify 
among men the false impressions of His glorious character 
—to show to men His goodness, benevolence, love 



and grace, and to lead them to love the merciful God who 
so loved them, even while they were yet sinners, as to 
seek them out and to plan for their eternal salvation. 

GOD'S PEACE SELF-CENTERED 

Yes, there has been great commotion in the disrupted 
family of God— commotion in which the Lord declares 
He has had no pleasure (Psa. 5:4); but, nevertheless, 
the Peace of God has never been disturbed. In the full 
consciousness of His own moral perfection, His unerring 

R5284 : page 229 

Wisdom, His mighty Power, and with the fullest appreciation 
of Justice and the keenest and most ardent love 
of the beauty of holiness, patiently and peacefully, and 
even joyfully in the midst of tribulation, He has endured 
the contradiction of sinners against Himself for six 
thousand years. 

But during the seventh millennium, according to the 
Divine purpose, it will be the joyful privilege of our Lord 
Jesus fully to manifest to all creatures in Heaven and in 
earth the Father's glorious character. Then will the Father 
rejoice in the grandeur of His finished work and in the 
everlasting peace and happiness of His family in Heaven 
and on earth, "reunited under one Head."— Eph. 1:10. 
-Diaglott. 

This blessed consummation will not be realized, however, 
until the incorrigible fallen sons of God, disowned 
and disinherited because they loved unrighteousness and 
would not be reclaimed, shall have been cut off. This 
will be the last unpleasant duty of the Creator and Father 
of all, who positively declares that it is a sad duty, yet 
nevertheless one which He will have the fortitude to 
perform in the interests of universal righteousness and 
peace. Hear Him: "As I live, saith the Lord God, I 
have no pleasure in the death of the wicked; but that the 
wicked turn from his way and live; turn ye, turn ye from 
your evil ways; for why will ye die?"— Ezek. 33:11. 

Thus we see that the Peace of God is compatible with 
great commotion and with sorrow and pain of any kind; 
for it is not dependent upon outward circumstances, but 
upon the proper balancing of the mind and the conditions 
of a perfect heart. Such peace— the Peace of God— was 
enjoyed also by our Lord Jesus in the midst of all the 
turmoil and confusion of His eventful earthly life. And 
this brings us to the consideration of our Lord's legacy 
to His disciples, when He was about to leave the world, 
as expressed in His own words: 

"Peace I leave with you, My peace I give unto you: 
not as the world giveth [in stinted measure or in perishable 
quality], give I unto you. Let not your heart be 
troubled, neither let it be afraid."— John 14:27. 

OUR LORD'S LAST WILL AND TESTAMENT 



Thus with abounding compassion and tenderness, did 
our Lord, on the last night of His earthly life, bestow 
upon His beloved disciples His parting blessing, His legacy 
of Peace. It was the richest legacy He had to bequeath, 
and was one of priceless value. It was the 
promise of that tranquility of soul, that rest and ease of 
mind, which He Himself possessed— the Peace of God. 
It was the same peace which the Father has Himself 
always enjoyed, even in the midst of all the commotion 
which the permission of evil has brought about; but it 
was not derived from the same source. In Jehovah this 
peace was self-centered; He realized in Himself the omnipotence 
of Power and Wisdom; while the peace of 
Christ was centered, not in Himself, but in God, by faith 
in His Wisdom, Power and Grace. So also if we would 
have the Peace of God, the peace of Christ— "My peace" 
—it must, like His, be centered in God by faith. 

Yes, the peace of Christ was a priceless legacy. Yet 
how quickly the stormcloud of trouble, which was even 
then growing very dark, burst in its fury upon the heads 
of those very disciples to whom the words were directly 
addressed. It followed almost immediately the gracious 
bequest, and struck consternation, bewilderment, confusion, 
to their hearts and shook their faith from center to 
circumference. Then, where was the peace? While the 
Lord was speaking the words, the foul betrayer, Judas, 
was out on his murderous errand. Then followed the 
agony in Gethsemane, and the terror and consternation 
among the disciples as they began to realize the fate of 
their beloved Lord. Soon their almost breathless suspense 
deepened into more fearful forebodings as He stood alone 
before His merciless accusers and persecutors in the Hall 
of Pilate and the Court of Herod, while they were powerless 
to shield Him. Then came the tragic end— the horrors 
of the crucifixion. 

WHAT HAD BECOME OF THE PEACE? 

Where was the promised peace under such circumstances 
—when, overcome with fear and dread, they all 
forsook Him and fled; and when St. Peter, although anxious 
to defend Him, was so filled with fear that three 
times he denied his Lord and with cursing declared that 
he never knew Him? The explanation is, that the peace 
had not yet come; for as the Apostle Paul tells us, "Where 
a testament is, there must also of necessity be the death 
of the testator. For a testament [a bequest] is of force 
after men are dead; otherwise it is of no strength at all 
while the testator liveth." (Heb. 9:16,17.) But as soon 
as the tragic scene was over and the cry, "It is finished," 
fell upon their eager ears, strange as it may seem, there 
is evidence that peace began to steal into their grieving 
hearts. The darkened heavens, the quaking earth, the 
rending rocks, the torn veil of the Temple— all spoke to 
them a message of comfort which the world could not 



receive. 

To the world (Jews and Gentiles, both participating 
in the crime) the language of these events was that of 
Divine wrath and indignation against them. And as fear 
fell upon the people, and the clamor and excitement of 
that awful day died away, they smote upon their breasts 
and returned to their homes. The Roman centurion and 
they that were with him, fearing greatly, said, "Truly this 
was the Son of God!" 

But to the disciples of the Lord these events spoke a 
very different language. The cause of their blessed Master 
was their cause and it was God's cause. To them 
these supernatural demonstrations were evidences that 
God was not regarding this matter with indifference; 
and though through the veil of darkness they could not 
read His bright designs, in these events there was to them 
a whisper of hope. 

Three days later hope was revived by the news of our 
Lord's resurrection, confirmed to them by His appearance 
in their midst. Again forty days later hope was strengthened 
by His ascension after His parting counsel and blessing 
and promised return, and the instructions to tarry in 
Jerusalem until they received the promise of the Father, 
the Comforter, the Holy Spirit of adoption, not many 
days thence— at Pentecost. Then the peace of Christ, 
the Lord's rich legacy, began to be realized, and the tarrying 
days of prayer and expectancy were days of abiding 
peace— peace which flowed as a river. But when on the 
day of Pentecost the promised Comforter came, the river 
of their peace found a deeper bed; and their joy knew 
no bounds! 

"Like a river glorious is God's perfect peace, 
Over all victorious in its glad increase. 
Perfect; yet it floweth fuller every day; 
Perfect; yet it groweth deeper all the way." 

OUR RICH LEGACY OF PEACE 

But not alone to the early Church was this legacy of 
peace bequeathed. It is the blessed inheritance of the 
entire Church, even to the end of the Age. The Lord 
showed His thought for us all on that very day, when 
in His prayer He said, "Neither pray I for these alone, 

R5284 : page 230 

but for all those who shall believe on Me through their 
word."— John 17:20. 

The peace promised, observe, is not the short-lived 
peace of the world, which is sometimes enjoyed for a 
little season— while fortune smiles and friends abound 
and health endures, but which quickly vanishes when 
poverty comes in and friends go out, when health fails 
and death steals away the treasures of the heart. "My 
peace," the peace of God which Christ Himself by faith 
enjoyed, who, though He was rich, for our sakes became 



poor, who lost friend after friend, and in His last hour 
was forsaken by all of the few that remained— His peace 
endured through loss, persecution, scorn and contempt, 
and even amidst the agonies of the cross. This peace is 
something which none of the vicissitudes of the present 
life can destroy, and which no enemy can wrest from us. 

What richer legacy could the Lord have left His beloved 
people? Suppose He had bent His energies during 
His earthly life to the accumulation of money; and that 
in so doing He had amassed an immense fortune to leave 
in the hands of His disciples wherewith to push forward 
the great work of the Age when He should be taken from 
them; money to pay the traveling expenses of the Apostles 
and to defray the numerous expenses incidental to the 
starting of the work in various places, such as the renting 
of lecture rooms, the payment of salaries to traveling 
brethren, etc., etc. How soon would it all have vanished, 
and how poor would be our inheritance today! "The 
Man of Sin" would surely have gotten hold of it in some 
way, and not a vestige of the legacy would have reached 
this end of the Age. But, blessed be God, His rich legacy 
of peace still abounds to His people! 

The peace promised is not such as the world can always 
recognize and appreciate; for the possessor of it, 
like the Lord Himself, and like the Heavenly Father as 
well, may have a stormy pathway. Indeed, that it must 
be so to all the faithful until the purposes of God in the 
permission of evil are accomplished, we are distinctly 
forewarned, but with the assurance that through all the 
storms this peace shall abide— "In the world ye shall have 
tribulation, but in Me ye shall have peace." 

FAITH THE BASIS OF PEACE 

If we would know the foundation and security of this 
abiding peace which is able to survive the heaviest storms 
of life, we have only to look to the teaching and example 
of the Lord and the Apostles. What was it that held 
them so firmly and gave them such rest of mind while 
they suffered? It was their faith— their faith in the 
Love, Power and Wisdom of God. They believed that 
what God had promised, He was able also to perform, 
and that His righteous and benevolent Plan could know 
no failure. By the mouth of His Prophets He had declared, 
"My counsel shall stand, and I will do all My 
pleasure.. ..Yea, I have spoken it and I will bring it 
to pass; I have purposed it, I will also do it." "The Lord 
of Hosts hath purposed, and who shall disannul it?" 
(Isa. 46:9-11; 14:27.) On the assurances of God they 
rested. In Him their faith was anchored; and it mattered 
not how fiercely the storms raged or how they were 
tossed by the tempests of life while their anchor still held 
fast to the Throne of God. 

The language of our Lord's faith was, "O righteous 
Father, the world hath not known Thee; but I have 
known Thee." He had been with the Father from the 



beginning, had realized His Love and His goodness, and 
had seen His Power, and had marked His righteousness 
and His loving kindness and Fatherly providence over all 
His works. And so it is written, "By His knowledge 
shall My righteous Servant justify many; for He shall 
bear their iniquities." (Isa. 53:11.) The knowledge 
which He had of the Father gave to Him a firm footing 
for faith in all God's purposes concerning the future. 
Hence He could and did walk by faith. And that faith 
enabled Him to overcome all obstacles and to secure the 
victory even over death. 

So also it is written for our instruction— "This is the 
victory that overcometh the world, even our faith"— that 
faith in God built, in our case, upon our Lord's testimony 
of the Father; and again it is written that, "Without faith 
it is impossible to please God." It is only through steady, 
unwavering faith that the peace of God— the peace of 
Christ— will abide with His people. While the Lord was 
with His disciples, and they saw in Him the manifestation 
of the Father, their faith was strong and they had 
peace in Him, as He said, "While I was in the world I 
kept them." But not until after He had left them was 
their faith anchored in God. After Pentecost they experienced 
the same peace that Christ had enjoyed— the 
blessed peace that came from a knowledge of the fact 
that God acknowledged them as sons and heirs, and joint-heirs 
with Christ, if they would continue faithfully to 
follow in the steps of the Redeemer. 

CULTIVATION OF UNWAVERING FAITH 

Herein is also the basis of our peace. No matter how 
fiercely the storms of life may assail us, we must never 
let go our anchor and allow ourselves to drift, but always 
remember that "the foundation of God standeth sure"; 
that "His Truth is our shield and buckler"; that "what 
He has promised He is able also to perform," notwithstanding 
our human imperfections and frailties; that covering 
these we have the imputed righteousness of Christ, 
our Surety and Advocate; and that "the Father Himself 
loveth" us, "He considereth our frame and remembereth 
that we are dust," and so has compassion for the sons of 
His Love and is very pitiful and of tender mercy. Indeed, 
"What more can He say than to us He hath said," 
to assure our faith and to steady and strengthen our 
hearts to patient endurance in the midst of the trials and 
conflicts of the narrow way of sacrifice. 

There is nothing which puts the Christian at greater 
disadvantage in the presence of his foes than for him to 
let go, even temporarily, his grip upon the anchor of faith. 
Let him do so for a moment, and of necessity darkness 
begins to gather round him. He cannot see the brightness 
of his Father's face; for "without faith it is impossible 
to please God"; and while he grapples again for 
the anchor, the powers of darkness fiercely assail him 
with doubts and fears. These attacks are generally based 



upon his human imperfections, which he should ever bear 
in mind are covered by the Robe of Christ's righteousness. 

If we would have the peace of God reign in our hearts, 
we must never let go our anchor, "nor suffer Satan's 
deadliest strife to beat our courage down." The language 
of our hearts should always be, "Though He slay me, 
yet will I trust Him." With this faith the peace of God, 
the peace which the Master bequeathed to us, ever abides. 
Thus "the peace of God which passeth all understanding 
will keep our hearts and minds through Christ Jesus"; 
for it is written again, "Thou wilt keep him in perfect 
peace whose mind is stayed on Thee." 

In the midst of the Christian warfare let our hearts 
be cheered and our minds be stayed, not only with such 
assurances that all the Divine purposes shall be accomplished, 
but also with such promises of personal favor as 
these: 

"Like as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord 

R5284: page 231 

pitieth them that fear Him; for He knoweth our frame; 
He remembereth that we are dust." "Can a woman forget 
her sucking child?... Yea, they may forget; yet 
will I not forget thee. Behold I have engraven thee upon 
the palms of My hands." "The Father Himself loveth 
you," and "It is the Father's good pleasure to give you 
the Kingdom." "Such as are upright in their way are 
His delight." "Delight thyself also in the Lord, and He 
shall give thee the desires of thine heart"— the peace of 
God, even in the midst of storm and tempest. 



R5284: page 231 

WHY THERE IS DIVERSITY AMONGST GOD'S PEOPLE 

"Who maketh thee to differ from another? And what 
hast thou that thou didst not receive?"— 1 Cor. 4:7. 

WHILE it is true that all men are born with 

inalienable rights and privileges, yet no man 

is born without sin. The Scriptures very 

properly declare that the race in Adam was 

sold under Sin six thousand years ago. In 

this sense, therefore, we were not born free, 

but slaves of Sin. Neither are we born 

equal. No two persons are exactly alike in 

opportunity, talent and ability. We differ 

from one another. God did not create some 

better and some worse— some more richly endowed and 

some less richly endowed. We are to take the Bible 

statement of the origin of humanity, and understand that 

God made Adam perfect. All the imperfections which 

encumber the human race are the results of the dying 



process. Sin has made us all to differ, then, from the 
original image and likeness of God. Satan brought about 
this difference through Mother Eve. 

In our text, however, the Apostle Paul has in mind 
a New Creation in Jesus Christ— a new order— amongst 
whose members there is a difference. Some in the Church 
have many talents, others, few talents; some have special 
talents, others have ordinary talents. But Satan is not 
charged with having given the greater or lesser talents 
to these. The Apostle says that it is God who has set 
the various members in the Body as it has pleased Him; 
and that both this setting, or apportioning, of the different 
members of the Body and the bringing forth of the 
different degrees of fruitage are manifestations of God's 
grace in our hearts. Thus we are made to differ from 
each other. 

CAUSE OF DIVERSITY OF ATTAINMENTS 

The matter of growth in the Holy Spirit is one that 
is dependent in large measure upon each one's zeal to 
know, to do, the will of God. We are put into the 
School of Christ to learn of Him. Some learn more 
rapidly, others less rapidly. In proportion as they learn, 
they have greater opportunities and blessings. All are 
granted a measure of the Holy Spirit— all granted some 
blessing. Those who are anxious to know the will of 
the Lord and to study it grow the more rapidly, and 
thus have more of the Holy Spirit. These are zealous 
to do the Lord's will. Their progress is not attributable 
wholly to themselves, but especially to the favor of God. 

The Apostle goes on to say, Ye are God's workmanship; 
"it is God which worketh in you both to will and 
to do of His good pleasure." We could not do this 
work ourselves. The power that is working in us is of 
God. He is preparing a glorious Temple. He has provided 
who shall be the chief corner-stone of this Temple, 
and who shall be the members of the Temple class. We 
could not choose the place for ourselves. But in God's 
providence we each responded to the call to be a living 
stone. The stones were first cut out of the dark quarry, 
and now they are being shaped and prepared for places 
in the glorious building. 

DIVERSITY OF ANOTHER KIND 

The great Master-Workman is doing a work upon us. 
He is chiseling and fashioning us. He is making us what 
we are. Consequently there is to be no boasting. There 
is a certain amount of personality connected with each 
one, however, and if there is too much cross-grain in 
the stone it will be abandoned. As the Apostle Peter 
exhorts, we are to humble ourselves under the mighty 
hand of God, that He may exalt us in due time. The 
same Apostle also reminds us that we should look up to 
God and give Him praise for all that we have and 



are.-IPet. 5:6; 4:11. 

We are colaborers with God. We give God the praise 
that He has made us to differ from our former selves, 
that He is making us thus to differ more every day, and 
that He will continue the good work as the days go by 
and as we seek to do His will. What have we of ourselves? 
Nothing ! We were wholly dead through Father 
Adam's disobedience; we were born in this condition, 
having no right to everlasting life. But God has a Plan 
which is world-wide in its scheme of blessing. He has 
proffered the blessings of the highest feature of this 
Plan to us, and invited us to come to Him in advance 
of the world. And this we receive through His grace. 



R5284: page 231 

DOCTRINES MORE OR LESS IMPORTANT 

THERE are certain features of the doctrine of 

Christ which are fundamental and indispensable, 

and without which none would 

be recognized of the Lord as one of His followers. 

There are other features which 

would seem to be useful, helpful, blessed, but 

not fundamental— not essential to membership 

in the Body of Christ. The fundamentals 

have been enjoyed by good, saintly 

ones from the Day of Pentecost until now. 

We, the same class now, have the same fundamentals, 
and are permitted to have other privileges, truths, "meat 
in due season," for our strengthening. These latter are 
not necessarily essential to our membership in the Body of 
Christ; otherwise our forefathers who did not have them 
would not have been members of Christ, and there would 
have been no Christ Body for centuries. 

The fundamental theory of the Atonement is as 
follows: 

(1) All men— all of Adam's children— are sinners. 

(2) None can be reconciled to God without a Redeemer's 
sacrifice. 

(3) Jesus came into the world to be that Sacrifice— 
and later to apply that Ransom-price for the sins of the 
world. 

(4) On the basis of faith in the Redeemer's work, the 
believer may consecrate himself to the Divine service, in 
acceptance of the Divine invitation, "Present your bodies 
a living sacrifice." 

(5) So doing, the believer may— up to the time of the 

R5284 : page 232 

completion of the Elect number— exercise full assurance 
of faith that his sacrifice will be accepted of the Father; 
and that he will receive a share of the anointing of the 



Holy Spirit— the begetting. 

(6) Such as meet these conditions are to be accepted 
as brethren in the highest sense of the term. This much 
would seem to have been always necessary, and more than 
this we believe is not necessary today. But if by reason 
of our favorable day we have more knowledge, we may 
also have corresponding trials, which our greater knowledge 
will offset. 

Our advice to the Lord's dear people everywhere is that 
they put no yoke upon each other, beyond the fundamentals 
specified above— that otherwise they stand free, and leave 
each other free, and fellowship and agree as much as they 
can with each other. 

If there be a disposition to crowd each other on more 
than this basic faith, and if it be considered necessary to 
separate in order to the progress of either of the parties, 
then doubtless rather than a continual contention a 
separation would be the wise course. 

We are not criticising the views of any one. Each 
has a perfect right to hold whatever he believes the Bible 
to teach, and our views are doubtless well known to all of 
our readers. Briefly stated, they are as follows: 

(1) That the one that sinned was Adam, and that he 
and all his posterity were involved. 

(2) That a Redeemer was necessary, that Jesus became 
that Redeemer, and "gave Himself a Ransom for all." 

(3) That God has invited some of the redeemed sinners 
—not to be the Ransom-price, nor to redeem anybody else, 
but— to be associates of the Redeemer, members of His 
Body, His Bride. 

(4) The terms and conditions upon which these may 
have fellowship are that Jesus as the great Advocate shall 
accept them as His members— their flesh as His flesh— 
and that He shall impute to them the share of His merit 
which would be coming to them as members of the Adamic 
race. Then they are legally justified from all the shortcomings, 
weaknesses and imperfections inherited by them; 

and their own wills and all their remaining powers and 
talents being consecrated, their sacrifice may be acceptable 
to God— as part of the Sin-Offering by the great High 
Priest. 

(5) Sharing thus in the Redeemer's death, these are 
privileged to share in His life, by the First Resurrection. 
The Redeemer does not now make application of His merit 
to the world, aside from the newly-accepted and added 
members. He will carry out the Divine Program, and 
sacrifice all His members before presenting, at the end of 

R5285 : page 232 

the Age, the merit of His sacrifice on behalf of the sins 

of the whole world, and will thereby seal the New Covenant 

for them. 

In our judgment many err in attaching too much value 
to the Church's sacrifice; whereas other dear brethren err, 
we think, in that they do not see any value in the Church's 



sacrifice, nor that she is permitted a share in the Master's 
sacrificings at all. To us it seems like the swing of the 
pendulum from one extreme to the other; whereas our 
view lies in the center, as we have stated the matter. 

If after fully considering these matters, a class finds 
that it cannot agree, and would make better progress as 
two classes, we would concur in that conclusion as a wise 
one, as much as we would deplore the necessity of a division. 
Such a separation would not necessarily alienate 
either class from the Lord's people, nor from the Society, 
because both acknowledge Jesus as their Redeemer, and 
both acknowledge that His blood is primarily efficacious. 



R5285 : page 232 

GOD'S COVENANT AT MOUNT SINAI 

--AUGUST 31. --EXODUS 19:1-6.- 

"Let us have grace, whereby we may offer service well-pleasing 
to God, with reverence and awe."— Hebrews 12:28. R.V. 

TWO months after the Passover deliverance, 
the Israelites arrived at Mt. Sinai, but on 
their way they had two valuable lessons 
respecting God's Grace and Power. When 
they reached the Valley Rephidim, they 
were thirsty and found no water. Here 
Moses, in the name of the Lord, smote the 
rock with his rod, and from it gushed water, 
abundantly refreshing Israel at this time, 
and as a rivulet following them through 
much of their subsequent journey. 

St. Paul, by inspiration, points out to us that that rock 
represented Christ, that the smiting of the rock represented 
the putting of Christ to a shameful death, but that 
only by this means is the Water of Life provided for those 
who desire to be the people of God. As the waters of 
that rock followed the Israelites, so the stream of God's 
favor, through the sacrifice of Christ, refreshes Christ's 
disciples throughout their wilderness journey. 

Refreshed in body and in faith, Israel journeyed onward, 
but encountered new obstacles. The Amalekites, a 
warlike people, considered the coming of Israel as an 
invasion of their country, and attacked them in battle. 
A people used to peaceful pursuits, as the Israelites had 
for centuries been, would naturally be at a disadvantage 
in a conflict with such opponents. Yet God gave them 
the victory. He indicated, however, that it was not by 
their prowess or skill, but of His grace that they 
conquered. 

Moses, stationed upon a high hill, lifted up his hands 
in prayer to God for the people. While he did so, success 
was theirs; but when he ceased thus to pray, the Amalekites 



were the victors. Perceiving this, Aaron and Hur 
assisted in holding up the hands of Moses until the battle 
terminated with success for Israel. God thus indicated 
that Moses was the advocate or representative of Israel, 
and that without him they could do nothing. 

In the antitype, we realize that Spiritual Israelites 
have conflicts with enemies too mighty for them without 
the Lord's assistance. The world, the flesh and the Devil 
make common cause against all who are seeking the 
Heavenly Canaan. We who are followers of Jesus have 
success in our warfare only as we have Him as our Advocate 
—"We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus 
Christ the Righteous." Through Him we may come off 
conquerors, yea, more than merely conquerors, victors 
in the highest sense— "through Him who loved us and 
bought us with His precious blood." 

THE ROYAL PRIESTHOOD PROFFERED 

All of God's dealings with the Israelites were in accord 
with His great Covenant made with Abraham, and 
certified with the Divine Oath— "In thee and in thy Seed 
shall all the families of the earth be blessed." Neither 
Moses nor any of those who followed him could possibly 
have understood the full import of this great oath-bound 
Promise; for it is a double Promise, the spiritual portion 
of which was hidden until God's due time— at the First 
Advent. Even since then, St. Paul assures us, it is a 

R5285 : page 233 

hidden mystery, appreciated only by the very few. "The 
secret of the Lord is with them that reverence Him, and 
He will show them His Covenant." 

The Promise is divided into three parts: (1) Abraham 
himself (and all the Ancient Worthies, whom he represented) 
was to have a share; (2) Abraham's Seed was 
to be the chief agent, or channel, of blessing; and (3) all 
the families of the earth were to be blessed as recipients 
of God's favor through these channels. But only by the 
light of the Holy Spirit during this Gospel Age are these 
lengths and breadths and heights and depths of the Abrahamic 
Covenant made manifest. 

When inviting the Israelites to come out of Egypt, 
God did not explain the Covenant to them nor tell them 
which portion they might have a share in. But when 
they had come to Mt. Sinai, God made inquiry as to 
whether or not they could keep the Divine Law, and thus 
prove themselves eligible to the highest favor included in 
that Covenant. 

In other words, the Lord said to them at Mt. Sinai, 
Are you ready now to enter into a Covenant of full consecration 
to do My will? You have seen how I dealt 
with the Egyptians in delivering you. You have seen 
how, ever since then, I have borne you on eagles' wings 
over all the trials and difficulties of your journey to this 



place. Have you faith? Have you loyalty? Do you 
wish to enter into a Covenant? "If ye will obey My 
voice indeed, and keep My commandments, then ye shall 
be a peculiar treasure unto Me above all people... 
and ye shall be unto Me a Kingdom of priests and an 
holy nation." 

While the Israelites knew that they were the favored 
seed of Abraham, the natural heirs of the promises, it 
was proper that they should know also that they would 
be unsuitable for the Lord's use in blessing the other nations 
with His Law unless they themselves were able to 
keep that Law and to instruct others how to keep it. With 
this understanding, that they were ready to do the Lord's 
will and thus to be separated by Him to be the kings and 
priests of the whole world, a Law Covenant was made 
with them, and Moses was appointed its mediator. Whoever 
would keep those commandments might live forever; 
and in proportion as he kept them he would be entitled to 
earthly favors. 

TYPICAL OF NEW COVENANT 

St. Paul, in Hebrews 12:18-24, points us to the antitype 
of today's Study. As Israel was delivered from Pharaoh 
and his hosts, so ultimately all mankind is to be delivered 
from Satan and his hosts, the fallen angels, and 
from all evil influences. As the journey to the Promised 
Land brought the Israelites to Mt. Sinai and the Law 
Covenant, so the journey of God's people will ultimately 
bring all the willing, obedient and faithful to the antitype 
of Mt. Sinai; namely, Mt. Zion, God's Kingdom, for 
which Jesus taught us to pray, "Thy Kingdom Come; Thy 
will be done on earth, as it is done in Heaven." 

Meantime, Jesus has become the antitypical Moses and 
Leader of the people, and in harmony with Jehovah's 
program, He has been selecting the members, or associates 
and joint-heirs. St. Paul explains this to us, saying, 
"God gave Jesus to be the Head over the Church, 
which is His Body." St. Peter explains that this great 
antitypical Moses must be raised up from amongst the 
brethren first, before the blessing of Restitution can come 
to mankind in general.— Acts 3:22,23,19-21. 

This entire Gospel Age has been devoted to the gathering 
of the members of the Christ Body. And when the 
last member shall have made his calling and election sure, 
this Age will end, and the more glorious work of the 
Messianic Age will begin. 

SHAKE HEAVENS AND EARTH 

The antitype of our lesson will be the inauguration of 
the New Covenant, at the Second Advent of Jesus. The 
basis of this new and better Covenant was completed at 
Calvary by our Lord's sacrifice of Himself. He has since 
been completing His "better sacrifices" by presenting the 
bodies of His saints, holy and acceptable, to God (Rom. 12:1). 



Soon the "better sacrifices" will be completed, and 
the greater Mediator will have been fully raised up from 
amongst the brethren. Then everything will be ready for 
the inauguration of the New Covenant, to bless the world 
of mankind with knowledge, and with opportunity for 
Restitution to earthly blessings and perfection. 

St. Paul points out that this is what we are coming to 
—approaching— "the General Assembly and Church of 
the First-born," whose names are written in Heaven. He 
declares that we may expect an antitype of the stirring 
scenes mentioned in our lesson. As at Mt. Sinai the literal 
mountain shook, lightnings flashed, and the voice of 
God was heard as the sound of a great trumpet, so here 
the antitype will come. The great trumpet here will be 

R5286 : page 233 

the seventh trumpet, the trump of God. The storm and 
tempest and shaking here in the antitype will mean the 
shaking of the ecclesiastical heavens and the social, political 
and financial earth. 

The Apostle prophetically assures us that everything 
shakeable will be shaken to its destruction, that only the 
unshakeable things will remain. That is to say, the Messianic 
Kingdom then to be established will completely 
overturn everything not in harmony with righteousness, 
justice and truth. This is merely a prelude to the great 
blessing of the Abrahamic Covenant then to be fully ushered 
in, for the blessing of all the families of the earth. 

THE HEIRS OF THE KINGDOM 

The Body of the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, of which 
Christ Jesus is the Head— His faithful, saintly followers- 
are now being tested as respects their worthiness for so 
high a station. St. Paul's words in our Golden Text are 
very forcefully applied to these: "Let us have grace, 
whereby we may offer service well-pleasing to God, with 
reverence and awe." 



DELIVERANCE 

"Still o'er Earth's sky the clouds of anger roll, 
And God's revenge hangs heavy on her soul; 
Yet shall she rise— though first by God chastised— 
In glory and in beauty then baptized. 

"Yes, Earth, thou shalt arise; thy Father's aid 
Shall heal the wound His chastening hand hath made; 
Shall judge the proud oppressor's ruthless sway, 
And burst his bonds, and cast his cords away. 

"Then on your soil shall deathless verdure spring. 
Break forth, ye mountains, and ye valleys, sing! 



No more your thirsty rocks shall frown forlorn, 
The unbeliever's jest, the heathen's scorn. 

"The sultry sands shall tenfold harvests yield, 
And a new Eden deck the thorny field. 
E'en now we see, wide-waving o'er the land, 
The mighty angel lifts his golden wand, 

"Courts the bright vision of descending power, 
Tells every gate and measures every tower; 
And chides the tardy seals that yet detain 
Thy Lion, Judah, from His destined reign."— Heber. 



R5286 : page 234 

GOD'S TEN COMMANDS 

-SEPTEMBER 7. -EXODUS 20:1-11.- 

"Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with 
all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind." 
-Luke 10:27. 

GOD'S COVENANT with Israel at Mt. Sinai 
was that if they should keep perfectly the 
Decalogue— the Ten Commandments— they 
would thereby demonstrate that they were 
perfect men, worthy of everlasting life. 
Then it would be possible for them to attain 
the chief blessing under the Abrahamic Covenant 
—to become the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, 
through whom God had promised that 
He would bless the world. 

St. Paul represents to us the spirit of the worthiest of 
the Jews, who were anxious to do God's will and to obtain 
the blessing, as crying out in anguish of soul, "O wretched 
man that I am, who shall deliver me from this dead body!" 
Their minds were certainly alive to the promises and 
prospects, but their flesh was imperfect, depraved through 
the fall— like that of all other people. "Ye cannot do the 
things that ye would."— Gal. 5:17. 

Bible students look in amazement at the simplicity of 
the Decalogue, and at first wonder which of its features 
the Jews and others were unable to perform fully, satisfactorily. 
The whole matter seems very simple indeed, 
just as it did to the Jews, until we perceive that the wonderful 
Law of God, represented by the Ten Commandments, 
has a depth of meaning not seen on the surface. 

The lengths and breadths and heights and depths of 
the meaning of this Law were apparently seen by none 
until Jesus "magnified the Law and made it honorable." 
He says that hatred toward a brother is incipient murder, 
and that adulterous desire in the heart is a violation of 
the seventh commandment. This throws a new light on 



the whole matter, and explains to us why none of the 
Jews or Gentiles have ever been able to keep this Law, 
except Jesus, since the fall of Adam. 

The Great Teacher also explains that the first table of 
the Law, appertaining to man's duties toward his Creator, 
means more than merely avoiding image worship and profane 
swearing. It means that the True God shall be recognized 
and have first place in the human heart. It means 
"Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, 
and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with 
all thy mind." Any division of the heart or strength or 
mind or soul violates this commandment. 

GOD'S ORIGINAL LAW TO MAN 

God's Law to man was not originally given at Mt. 
Sinai. Indeed, the Mt. Sinai statement of the Law was 
given not to mankind in general, but merely to the Jewish 
nation— as a statement of the terms upon which they 
might become God's Royal Priesthood for the blessing of 
all nations. 

God's original Law to man was given in Eden, when 
man was created. God's Law was written in Adam's 
heart, in the sense that he was created in the Divine image 
—with attributes of mind and heart fully in accord with 
his Creator. He loved righteousness, and would have had 
a hatred for iniquity, had there been any to hate. But 
up to that time there was none. 

We marvel at the change that has come, under which 
the children of Adam are not in God's image and do 
not love righteousness, but on the contrary, love sin. As 
the Prophet declares, "They go astray from the womb." 
He tells us where the change came in, saying, "Behold, I 
was shapen in iniquity; in sin did my mother conceive 
me."— Psalm 51:5. 

After the fall of man, the work of degeneracy progressed 
so rapidly that Adam's first-born son, Cain, became 
a murderer. Doubtless the chagrin of Mother Eve in the 
loss of Eden, and in the battling with the thorns and 
thistles of the earth under the curse, embittered her mind, 
arousing anger and resentment, which marked her child. 
From then till now the course has been downward in 
general, with occasionally a well-born child less seriously 
marked by sin— less depraved. Still the Scriptures inform 
us that "there is none righteous, no, not one." 

THE HOPE OF THE FUTURE 

The experiences of the whole race for six thousand 
years forbid that we should expect that any could commend 
himself to God upon the terms of human perfection 
and of ability and willingness to keep the Divine Law. 
Jesus alone has kept that Law, and He, because His life 
was not derived from Adam— because His life was from 
the Father directly. He became a man by a change of 
nature. Because thus begotten miraculously He was 



"holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners." 

God refuses to grant everlasting life to any except the 
perfect, who will keep His law perfectly and gladly. 
What hope then is there for our race? There is one 
hope for the world in general, and another different hope 
for the Church of Christ, instituted at Pentecost. The 
hope for the world is that God in His own due time will 
establish the Messianic Kingdom. It will be a righteous 
Kingdom, its rulers and judges being the Royal Priesthood. 

This Messianic Kingdom will begin by deposing the 
Prince of this world, and binding him for a thousand 
years. Speedily the iniquities of earth will be set aside, 
and the rule of the "rod of iron" will begin. Everything 
opposed to righteousness will be dashed to pieces. Instead 
of darkness, ignorance, superstition, doubt and fear, will 
come in the light of the knowledge of the glory of God. 
Soon it will fill the entire earth. Under its influence 
everything sinful will be discouraged by chastenings, and 
everything righteous will be encouraged by rewards of 
blessing. The judgments of the Lord will be abroad in 
the earth, and the inhabitants of the world will learn 
righteousness.— Isa. 26:9. 

As a result, soon every knee will be bowing to God 
and every tongue confessing His praise. But all of the 
wilfully rebellious, lovers of sin, will be destroyed in the 
Second Death— "everlasting destruction." Under that administration, 
the world will reach again the condition of 
human perfection from which Adam fell. The privilege 
to thus return to the image of God with His Law rewritten 
in their hearts, was secured for all by the sacrifice 
at Calvary. "Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted 
death for every man."— Hebrews 2:9. 

These all, being perfect again as Adam was at first, 
plus the experiences of good and evil gained during the 
seven thousand years, when finally approved of God will 
have everlasting life, nor be in the slightest danger of 
ever again mistakenly choosing sin as the road to 
happiness. 

THE CHURCH AND THE LAW 

The Church of Christ is selected from mankind, who 
were born in sin. The members are not put under the Law 
of Sinai in the sense of being required to keep it perfectly 
in order to get everlasting life. "Ye are not under the 
Law, but under grace." (Romans 6:14.) Nevertheless, 
the Law is very precious to the Church; for, looking at 
the spirit of it, she sees what she ought to be if perfect, 
sees what she ought to strive for to the best of her ability, 

page 235 

sees how far short of perfection she is in the flesh, and 
sees, additionally, how the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ 
covers her fleshly imperfections. So fully is all this true, 
that the Apostle declares that the righteousness (true 



import, or spirit) of the Law is fulfilled in us, who are 
walking not after the flesh, but after the spirit— 
Romans 8:4. 

In other words, those who consecrate their lives to 
follow Jesus, sacrificing all of their earthly rights in order 
to do the will of God, are doing more than the Law could 
require. The Law required no man to lay down his life 
for another, but merely to love his neighbor as himself. 
Hence Christ and the Church, walking in the narrow way 
of sacrifice, are fulfilling the requirements of the spirit 
of the Law, and more, even though in the flesh of the 
Church, because of inherited weaknesses, there is no perfection. 
These having sacrificed the earthly nature are 
dealt with by the Father as New Creatures, and judged, 
not according to the flesh, but according to the spirit- 
according to their heart intentions. 



R5287 : page 235 

WHO IS MY NEIGHBOR? 

-SEPTEMBER 14.-EXODUS 20:12-21.- 

"Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself."— Luke 10:27. 

THE Ten Commandments delivered to Moses 

were written upon two stone tablets. One 

bore the first four commandments, which 

appertain to God; the other bore the remaining 

six, which appertain to humanity. 

The essence of these last six, constituting 

the Study of today, was expressed in Jesus' 

words, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself." 

The "thou shalt nots" might be multiplied 

indefinitely to fit the thousands of 

occurrences in daily life, but the one "thou shalt" covers 

the entire situation. Whoever loves his neighbor will not 

intentionally injure him, in act, in word or in thought. 

Hence love expresses the full measure of the Law's requirements. 

(Rom. 13:10.) Love is at liberty to do more 

than the Law requires, but it cannot do less. 

While only Christians are credited by the Lord with 
fulfilling the requirements of the Law— and they only because 
of the allowance made for their weaknesses on 
account of their relationship with Christ— nevertheless, 
the Jews and many others have obtained partial blessings 
in proportion as they have endeavored to fulfil the Divine 
Law. The natural man, not spirit-begotten, and therefore 
not a son of God, but still in alienation, receives a blessing 
of character-development in proportion as he recognizes 
the principles of righteousness and seeks to conform to 
them. Hence it is wise and proper at all times and before 
all people to lift high the Divine standards. 



HONOR FATHER AND MOTHER 

No matter how old, or ignorant, or stupid, or vicious, 
parents may be, they are deserving of consideration from 
their children. Yet, of course, the kind or degree of respect 
must depend upon the character of the parent to 
some extent. With disobedience to parents rank and 
rampant everywhere, it may seem a hard saying, but we 
believe it a true one, that the disobedience is due to the 
parent, or the guardian, of the child. 

The child may have been ill-born. Discontent and 
rebellion in the mind of the mother during the period of 
gestation may have marked the child before its birth, so 
that no amount of training may ever fully recover it. 
In such a case, the parents may well be patient and long-suffering 
with such unhappy, disobedient dispositions in 
their children. 

And perhaps the parents were only partially to blame; 
perhaps their minister preached not the laws of God, their 
human operation and the penalties of their violation, but 
instead, gave flowery essays and anecdotes containing 
neither food for the spiritual nature nor assistance in 
understanding and combating the weaknesses of the human 
nature. Perhaps the fault was not wholly the mother's. 
The father may have forgotten that he, too, had a duty 
toward his offspring, chiefly served by assisting his wife 
at the critical period to thoughts of kindness, gentleness, 
nobility, etc. 

At any rate, the conscientious parent has a wonderful 
task to train the perverted child in the nurture and admonition 
of the Lord. Those who strive faithfully in 
this direction cannot be too much appreciated and encouraged; 
and more and more we should think of esteeming 
the parents of every noble man and woman of our 
acquaintance. And if strangers should appreciate the 
parents, much more should the child. 

THE EFFECT OF SUNDAY SCHOOLS 

A modern writer of considerable force and influence 
holds that Sunday Schools, while accomplishing good in 
one direction, may have done considerable harm in another 
—by weakening the respect of the children for their 
parents, and by releasing the parents from an appreciation 
of their responsibilities toward their children. The 
parents are, in the Divine arrangement, the priests of 
God, particularly in respect to their children. To whatever 
extent they shirk this responsibility, or to whatever 
extent the honor of this station is ignored, their 
influence over the child is lost; and one hour's time per 
week in a Sunday School class can never take the place 
of a continual parental supervision. 

Statistics show that boys of from sixteen to twenty 
years of age constitute about one-third of all the dangerous 
criminals, and that their proportionate number is increasing. 
Hence all benevolent people should be on the alert 



for the right training of the rising generation. All should 
especially co-operate with the Divine commandment by 
urging and encouraging parental authority and obedience 
thereto. Long life and prosperity were the rewards 
promised to the Jews under this commandment. 

"THOU SHALT DO NO MURDER" 

Nothing in this commandment forbids the killing of 
animals when necessary to the interests of the human 
family, either to abate pests or to sustain life. Neither 
does it forbid the execution of criminals; for thus it 
would be in conflict with the Divine Law elsewhere expressed, 
and practised under the guidance of Moses and by 
Divine direction. 

This commandment, however, does teach that life is to 
be prized, not jeopardized. The spirit of this commandment, 
Jesus declared, includes the thought that we are 
not to have an angry spirit of murder, restrained merely 
by fear of consequences. We may thus see that the spirit 
of this commandment would make it incumbent upon those 
who employ labor or who have any supervision of their 
fellowmen to take all reasonable precaution for safeguarding 
against accidents of any kind. To allow self-interest 
or a love of money to perpetuate dangerous conditions 

R5288 : page 236 

would be to lack the proper spirit of obedience to 
this command— unchristian. 

COMMIT NOT ADULTERY 

One result of the fall has been a depravity of the 
sexual appetites. The result is impurity, unchastity, a 
lack of self-control. All of these tendencies lead away 
from God, from righteousness and from true happiness. 
The family unit of one husband and one wife, originally 
established by the Almighty in Eden, seems to be a cornerstone 
of righteousness, in the family and in national life. 
Purity, no adulteration, is the Divine requirement. 

"THOU SHALT NOT STEAL" 

To steal is to take from another his possessions. Had 
not inventions in the line of electricity and steam kept 
pace with our increase of knowledge, the world today 
would be a thieves' paradise. But while buccaneering, 
piracy, robbery, burglary are reprobated by all intelligent 
people, many have a chance for a more subtle form of 
stealing, through stock speculations, organization of fake 
companies with glittering prospects, according to description, 
but really organized to take advantage of the less 
informed or weaker minded. This is stealing. 

Making false returns to tax assessors is stealing. Attempt 
to smuggle without proper payment of customs duty 



is stealing. Failure to give agreed upon services for 
wages received is stealing. But the worst form of stealing, 
the one that does more harm than all the rest combined, 
is the one indicated in Shakespeare's words: 
"Who steals my purse, steals trash, 

But he who filches from me my good name 
Robs me of that which not enriches him, 
And leaves me poor indeed." 
The Scriptural instruction to "speak evil of no man" 
seems to be comparatively unknown. As a result, many 
defile their own characters ignobly, blight the happiness 
of others and add to the distress of the already groaning 
creation. 

"BEAR NO FALSE WITNESS" 

In a thousand ways the spirit of this injunction may 
be violated, and is violated every day, not only by misrepresenting 
the goods we sell, or the goods we wish to 
buy, but in a thousand ways of slandering a neighbor. 

"THOU SHALT NOT COVET" 

Covetousness comes in first before the stealing, before 
the murdering, before the injury of slander. Covetousness 
is a heart disease which has to do with every other crime; 
for all sins have their basis in selfishness, and selfishness 
is covetousness. Well is this placed at the conclusion of 
the list. Whoever would keep the spirit of God's Law 
must guard his heart against covetousness. 



R5288 : page 236 

TRANS-CONTINENTAL CONVENTION TOUR 
CONTINUED FROM OUR LAST 

We left Vancouver, B.C., near midnight, June 22. 
Many of the dear friends accompanied us to the train, 
loading us with flowers and bidding us God-speed. The 
journey to Calgary, Alta., required a day and a half. It 
afforded beautiful views of the Rocky Mountains and the 
glaciers, at the same time giving the Editor and his stenographer 
opportunity for literary work. 

Calgary, June 24.— We were warmly welcomed by the 
brethren here and greatly enjoyed fellowshiping with 
them in the afternoon. The great interest centered in the 
evening meeting, which had been well advertised. We 
were not disappointed in the results. Approximately 1,500 
heard with the closest attention the story of the Love of 
God— His wonderful provision for His Elect Church on 
the Heavenly plane, and His Restitution provision for the 
non-elect world on the earthly plane. 

While pointing out the blessings of the coming Age 



for the world of mankind, at the hands of the glorified 
Redeemer and the saintly Church, His Bride, we failed not 
to call special attention to the great privilege of the present 
time— the only opportunity that will ever be offered 
to any for attaining glory, honor, immortality and joint-heirship 
with the risen Master, as "partakers of the Divine 
nature." (2 Pet. 1:4.) We considered the attendance 
very remarkable for a week night and a religious subject. 
That considerable interest was developed was manifested 
by the fact that 270 addresses were handed in making request 
for literature. 

Edmonton, Alta., was our next stop. It was our most 
northern appointment, and was our first visit to that city. 
Out of a total population of 55,000, the attendance at our 
public address included 2,000 adults; very astonishing results 
for a week night religious meeting. Who will say 
that the public has no interest in religion! More and 
more we are convinced that may souls are hungering because 
unwilling to feed upon the chaff of human speculations 
evolved into creeds and nonsense of the Dark Ages. 
The real Message of the Gospel, "good tidings of great joy 
which shall be to all people," has a charm, an attraction, 
for intelligent, thinking people. Here we had 372 addresses 
handed in expressing desire for further 
information. 

We spent a pleasant time with the friends here also, 
and left them apparently encouraged, as we, of the Excursion 
party, were encouraged also by meeting them. We 
had another long ride to Regina, Sask. The mountain 
scenery was gone and, instead, we traversed vast prairies. 
A full day's journey afforded another good opportunity 
for literary work. 

Regina we should have reached at 5 p.m. Our schedule 
at Regina was, too, a limited one. The meeting had 
been arranged for 8 p.m. Anxiety increased as we ascertained 
that the train would be an hour, and yet another, 
and another, late. We could not hope that an audience 
assembling from 7:30 to 8 o'clock would remain long under 
such uncertainties, especially not until 10 o'clock! We 
were disappointed, and wondered why the Lord had 
allowed matters to be so. But on arriving we were met 
by some of the friends who advised us that the meeting 
was waiting for us! Street cars and automobiles soon 
hurried us to the place of meeting. 

We were pleasantly surprised to find that the Editor 
of the local newspaper had taken the platform in our interest; 
this had helped to entertain the audience during 
the waiting period. Already we were introduced before 
going on to the platform. Without preliminaries— other 
than a brief supplication for the Divine blessing— we 
proceeded with the topic announced, BEYOND THE GRAVE. 
Our audience numbering altogether about 800, remained 
to the close, 11:30 p.m., and handed in 168 requests for 
further information. 

We considered the meeting a very remarkable manifestation 
of interest. The very Editor who presided explained 



that some time ago he had published our sermons 

weekly, but under certain arrangements made with him 

by local ministers he had discontinued them. The ministers 

had not been able to point out anything wrong with 

the sermons, but they had taken up certain slanderous misrepresentations 

R5288 : page 237 

regarding "Pastor Russell," and shot out 

at him their evil "arrows, even bitter words."— Psa. 64:3. 

Brandon, Manitoba, was reached the next morning. It 
was not a favorable time for a public meeting, but was 
the only time at our disposal and the friends there had 
arranged for a public meeting at 10:30 a.m., Friday, June 
27, in the Sherman Theater. We were surprised at so 
good an audience as 900, with 88 requests for further information 
handed in. For a small city, on a week-day and 
for a religious topic, was not that a wonderful attendance 
at a morning meeting? Thus it seems to us. Our Convention 
party constituted nearly 200 of the above number. 

Winnipeg, Manitoba, was reached the same afternoon, 
and a public address was given at the new Convention 
Hall. The attendance was estimated at 3,000. Closest of 
attention was given and 314 requests for further information 
were handed to the ushers. On the next day we had 
quite an interesting little Convention at Odd Fellows 
Temple. These meetings were not advertised and were 
attended only by already interested Bible Students. The 
friends were very enthusiastic and appeared greatly to 
enjoy the addresses, not only from Brother Russell, but 
also from several of the Convention-Train party. 

Saturday evening when we were leaving, many of the 
local Bible Students crowded about the Convention-Train 
of eleven cars, singing hymns to us and we to them, respecting 
the precious tie that binds our hearts in Christian 
love, and praying in song, "God be with you till we meet 
again!" 

Sunday, June 29, brought us to Minneapolis for the 
afternoon meeting and to St. Paul, the sister city, for the 
night meeting. A wave of hot weather met us there and 
much decreased the attendance at both meetings. In the 
afternoon we had approximately 1,200; in the evening 
about 900— a phenomenal attendance for such extremely 
sultry weather. We were not discouraged, nor were the 
dear friends who had worked very earnestly and faithfully, 
expecting cooler weather, in which event the attendance 
at these meetings would have been at least 
3,000; 290 requests for further information were handed 
to the ushers. 

At midnight we left for the Madison, Wisconsin, 
Eight-Day Convention; a car-load of Minneapolis and St. 
Paul friends accompanied us. We stopped but one day 
at Madison, and then the Convention-Train made its next 
appointment at Rockford, Illinois. Here, approximately 
1,000 of the public gave us the closest attention, after 
we had been introduced by His Honor, the Mayor. Requests 



for further information here handed in, numbered 

74. The Convention-Train then returned to Madison, terminating 

thus our Trans-Continental Convention Tour. 

Almost the entire party declared that Dr. L. W. Jones, 
the conductor and manager of the Excursion and train, 
deserved great credit for the way in which he handled 
every detail of the trip. They agreed, as with one voice, 

R5289 : page 237 

that the Convention Tour had been one of the greatest 
events of their lives— spiritual from first to last. Their 
association with the dear friends at different points on 
the way had done them good, and their endeavors put 
forth to refresh and encourage others had also done them 
good. 

The Editor expressed to Dr. Jones special thanks for 
his many kindnesses en route— among other things, putting 
at his disposal for the entire journey a most comfortable 
compartment. This latter not only conduced to rest and 
refreshment as to sleeping, but the better enabled him to 
utilize his time in dictation during the journey. And for 
all this the doctor refused to receive compensation, declaring 
that it was a privilege to be thus permitted to 
serve the Lord's Cause. 



R5289 : page 237 

FOUR GREAT CONVENTIONS 

We believe that the result stamps approval on the 
method adopted this year of having a number of Conventions, 
instead of one or two. We have already reported 
General Conventions at Pertle Springs, Missouri; 
Hot Springs, Arkansas; Los Angeles, California, and 
San Francisco, California. They were all large enough 
to be good, deeply interesting, spiritual, profitable. The 
four we are now reporting, being more favorably located 
as respects population and railroad facilities, had larger 
attendance, yet were not too large for comfort, and 
afforded abundant opportunities for social entertainment 
and spiritual fellowship. 

MADISON, WISCONSIN, JUNE 29-JULY 6 

The Madison Convention seemed to be greatly enjoyed 
by all in attendance— about 1,400. We have never 
had a Convention more comfortably situated than was 
this. Madison itself is a beautiful little city, surrounded 
by small lakes. The Convention grounds being just across 
one of these lakes from the city, were in every way 
ideal. Little gasoline launches conveyed the Conventioners 
to and from the grounds, which were supplied 
with a fine auditorium, well adapted for Convention 



purposes. The auditorium is owned by the city, and was 
placed at our disposal, gratis, when the invitation to hold 
the Convention at Madison was given. 

Following the custom of the last few years, we avoided 
evening meetings. The full day was spent in Convention, 
with merely an adjournment for luncheon, which was 
supplied nearby at moderate price. There were about six 
addresses daily, during the Convention— eight days. The 
public doubtless wondered at the enthusiasm of the friends 
—as they always do— not knowing, generally, what it 
means to have a real live religion; one which has for its 
center and inspiration "exceeding great and precious 
promises," from an exceedingly wise, all-powerful, just 
and loving God. 

Brother W. E. Van Amburgh served as chairman during 
the entire eight days' Convention. The Conventioners 
surely had a grand, though quiet season of spiritual refreshment. 
There were no side attractions or disturbances. 
Every day was a quiet, joyful, happy Sabbath, and 
there was surely a "feast of fat things." The evenings 
were spent in the city with the parties with whom the 
friends were lodged. Some were invited to go out with 
their hosts for a boat ride on the lake; some took automobile 
rides; others went to give Chart Talks and explain 
the Divine Plan. Still others of the friends visited with 
each other, renewing former acquaintances and cementing 
new friendships. 

We heard some very complimentary remarks passed 
in respect to the Conventioners. The owner of the gasoline 
launches was heard to say that there never had been 
such a Convention there before. Some of those who entertained 
the friends, meeting the sisters who had engaged 
the rooms, thanked them for sending such nice people, 
and said they had appreciated them much. Surely this was 
only as it should have been. As the Apostle Peter questioned, 
"What manner of persons ought we to be in all 
holy living and Godliness?" 

If those who have a true knowledge of God and who 
have consecrated their lives to the service of righteousness, 

R5289 : page 238 

and to opposition of iniquity do not manifest the 

fruits of the Spirit— meekness, gentleness, patience, longsuffering 

brotherly kindness, love— then where, pray, 

should we expect to find these graces exemplified? 

Those who attended the Madison Convention unanimously 
declared it to be the "best ever!" Yet this is the 
same general sentiment attaching to our Conventions. 
The last always seems to be the best. And why should it 
not really be so? If the Lord's people are growing in 
grace, knowledge and love daily, as we trust is the case, 
then each Convention should be a little better than its 
predecessor. 

SPRINGFIELD, MASSACHUSETTS, JULY 13-20 



Brother J. F. Rutherford served as chairman during 
the eight delightful days of this Convention. The list of 
speakers was excellent, numbering in all about forty. 
Several dear friends were heard to remark that this was 
the "sweetest" Convention they had ever attended, in that 
everything passed off so quietly, comfortably, happily. 
Our comfortable meeting place undoubtedly contributed 
greatly to the charm of this Convention. The city of 
Springfield invited the Conventioners to be their guests, 
and placed at the disposal of our Association for the period 
of their sojourn their elegant new Auditorium, just finished. 
It is handsomely decorated in white and gold, is 
spacious and the acoustics are good. 

Our Convention attendance averaged about 2,000, the 
Sunday service running the attendance up to 2,400 or 
3,000. The Convention proper, without the public, numbered 
about 1,800. The majority of the Bethel family 
attended this Convention and were the guests of the 
Springfield Class of I.B.S.A. Thus being left free, the 
Bethelites had all the better opportunity for rendering 
service to others. But, indeed, this spirit of service seemed 
to pervade all the dear friends in attendance. Each 
seemed on the lookout to see in what manner he or she 
could serve others and make them more happy or more 
comfortable. As a result, all were happy. A sweet spirit 
of peace and order prevailed, which reminds us very much 
of the Great Convention which we are all hoping soon to 
attend. 

Although the Convention Hall is in the very center of 
the city, it is so roomy and of such excellent construction 
that it was pleasantly cool and was in every way a delightful 
place for a Convention. The people of this city 
treated us very cordially, although not very many of them 
attended our meetings, of course; nor did we expect them 
so to do. These Conventions are particularly intended to 
give opportunity for Bible Students to become specially 
acquainted with each other, with their Bibles and with 
its great and glorious Plan of salvation, which more and 
more appeals to their hearts, and assists them in making 
their calling and election sure. 

TORONTO, ONTARIO, CONVENTION, JULY 20-27 

We have had a Convention in Toronto before. Indeed, 
the city, so far as respects the attendance of our Canadian 
brethren, is very centrally located. Favorable railroad 
rates are always granted. This year's Convention 
surprised us by its size— about 1,200. We had not expected 
nearly so many when the appointment was made. Of this 
number about one-half were from the United States, the 
friends taking advantage of some of the low priced 
excursions. 

Notwithstanding certain adverse conditions, stirred up 
by those Scripturally termed "sons of Belial," the Convention 
was in every way a success. If some of the public 



had their minds poisoned by slanderous misrepresentations 
and were thus hindered from availing themselves 
of the opportunity of sharing the blessed privileges 
afforded them, others, we are sure, were profited thereby. 
Some attended this Convention largely because they perceived 
that an evil spirit of slander and misrepresentation 
was for some reason endeavoring to do injury to a religious 
work. Satan and his blinded and misguided servants 
overdo in their endeavors to injure the Lord's cause. 
Sometimes the Lord overrules the wrath of man for His 
own praise and for the forwarding of the Truth. As for 
instance, in the case of a man who, being told that Pastor 
Russell was Antichrist, went to see what Antichrist might 
look like. Hearing the joyful Message of the Gospel, his 
heart was captured and now he rejoices. 

Brother A. I. Ritchie served as the chairman of the 
Toronto Convention. A strong corps of speakers was 
provided, and the more than forty addresses at the Convention 
were up to a high standard, both for grace and 
truth, spirituality and power. That "It is good to be here" 
was surely the sentiment of many hearts; and the season 
of refreshing undoubtedly provided blessings not only for 
those in attendance at the Convention, but for other thousands 
at their homes, upon whom doubtless was poured 
forth a share of the blessings. The Lord arranges it so 
that those who give out to others grace and truth received 
by themselves have an increased supply, even as with 
the widow's cruse of oil. 

ASHEVILLE, N.C., CONVENTION, JULY 20-27 

All in attendance at the Asheville Convention will 
surely agree that the Auditorium so kindly placed by the 
city at the disposal of the Association furnished a delightful 
Convention hall. Situated high up in the mountains, 
Asheville has a delightful climate greatly enjoyed by the 
visitors, who were estimated at 1,200, the larger attendance 
at the public meeting being principally made up of 
people from the city and immediate vicinity. The railroads 
gave us specially good terms, as gradually they are 

R5290 : page 238 

learning that our Conventions are quite worth their while 
—larger than the majority of Conventions and always up 
to advance statements. 

If some of our enemies did seek to poison the minds 
of the public in advance, the prejudice easily broke down 
as the hosts became acquainted with their visitors. There 
is a power to the Truth, and it gives the spirit of a sound 
mind, which surely commends itself to all thinking people. 
It gives moderation, meekness, gentleness, brotherly kindness, 
love. These graces of the Spirit are growing, developing, 
ripening amongst the Lord's people, and proportionately 
their influence is stronger, deeper, better. We 
feel sure that the people of Asheville have received a quiet 



testimony from their visitors which will be helpful to 
them, just as at the other Convention places. We feel 
confident, too, that the inhabitants in all these places 
would make us very welcome should we desire to return at 
a future time. 

This Convention was a model one in every respect. 
Brother C. J. Woodworth served as chairman, and a fine 
corps of speakers gave, approximately, fifty addresses. 
They were spiritual, Biblical, uplifting. The hearers were 
certainly refreshed, and undoubtedly carried with them to 
their homes a blessing to be poured in turn upon those 
who were not privileged to be in attendance. 

As was expected from the first, it was especially a 
Southern Convention. It gave opportunity for some of 
the dear friends, who had never before had such a privilege, 
to attend a Convention. Indeed this was true respecting 
all of this year's Conventions. On the whole we 
feel sure that the Father was glorified, that the Savior 
was honored, and that many of His followers were refreshed, 
as Bible Students, in grace, knowledge and Truth. 

R5290 : page 239 

The Editor remarked that at one Convention this 
year he shook hands with three men the same day, who at 
one time in their lives had been sadly blinded and were 
under the control of the Adversary. Now they were all 
clothed in their right minds— safe and sane, saints, jewels, 
children of the Highest. Two of them are Church Elders 
and leaders of Berean Bible Study classes; the third may 
be one also, but of this we are not positive. 

The brief history of these three men shows the transforming 
power of the Truth. One was a highway robber. 
The Truth reached him in prison. Another was an 
Atheist and his wife a Catholic. He kept a liquor saloon 
in connection with a railroad contractor's gang. The third 
was also at one time a saloon keeper and his wife was a 
Catholic. The wives of all three are with them fully in 
the Truth. 



"It may not come to us as we have thought, 
The blessed consciousness of sins forgiven; 

We may not hear a voice that shall proclaim 
Our title clear to the sweet rest of Heaven. 

"But like the winter merging into spring, 

Or gently as the trees put forth their leaves, 

May come to us the impulse of that life 

Which God bestows on those sin truly grieves. 



R5290 : page 239 



AN INTERESTING LETTER 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

When passing through Dayton the other day, I was delayed 
in the station long enough to serve the people going out on 
two trains. With one or two exceptions all seemed very 
glad to get the BIBLE STUDENTS MONTHLY. The thought 
occurred to me, Why could not every station in the large 
and small cities in the country be served at every train 
time? In some of the cities I have observed Methodist 
Deaconesses rendering assistance to incoming and outgoing 
passengers. Maybe railroad companies would grant such 
privileges to Deaconesses of the I.B.S.A.? 

When at last winter, Sister told me about 

the successful work done at a booth conducted by the I.B.S.A. 
at the big Fair held in that city. The booth was 
rented at a nominal sum and was under the immediate 
charge of that very zealous and clever Sister. The booth 
was made very attractive by great piles of SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
in the various bindings, Mannas in many styles, Bibles galore 
and Tracts treating a variety of subjects. In this way everybody 
entering the Fair grounds could be served with some 
memento of the I.B.S.A. Would it not be a good thing 
if every Fair in the country could have an I.B.S.A. booth, 
conducted by either a local or a nearby class or by some 
representative of your selection? 

I am still serving the trains with good success. Conductors 
have occasionally objected, saying something like 
this: "A rule of the company prohibits the distribution of 
advertising matter on trains." A ready reply to this effect, 
has with one or two exceptions silenced the objection: 
"This is not advertising matter— it is a little religious paper." 
I have always gone on then, as if that settled the matter. 
The opposition of one of the two hardest conductors I have 
run up against was turned into friendly support when he 
observed my zeal in getting out at every station in a run of 
over 100 miles on a local train. I gained the impression, from 
a very fine conversation I had with him toward the end of 
the journey, that he had sneakingly read something he liked 
in one of the Tracts. My stop was the end of his run and he 
invited me to his hotel to have supper. 

Much love and many prayers for you and for all the 
Madison Conventioners. In His dear name, 
R. H. HIRSH. 



page 239 

BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
Series VI., Study XV. 

THE FOES AND BESETMENTS OF THE NEW CREATION 
SEPTEMBER 7 



Read p. 642 to p. 646, par. 1. 

LOVE RIGHTEOUSNESS-HATE INIQUITY 

(62) How shall we understand the philosophy of God's 
dealings with the New Creation in subjecting them to such 
peculiar and fiery trials? P. 642; P. 643, par. 1. 

(63) What illustration in nature may help us to understand 
God's providential dealings with the New Creation, 

and what hope have we in the ultimate overthrow of evil 
when it has served the Divine purpose? P. 643, par. 2. 

(64) What special purpose have sin and sickness served 
in the case of the world, as well as in that of our Lord and 
His "little flock"? P. 644, par. 1. 

(65) Since the New Creation was typified by natural 
Israel in many respects, why should they not expect to be 
free from the trials and difficulties of the world, even as 
Israel escaped them? P. 645, par. 1. 

(66) What special consolation do the Scriptures offer 
New Creatures who suffer divers afflictions and fiery trials? 
P. 646, par. 1. 

SEPTEMBER 14 

Read p. 647 to p. 654, inclusive. 

(67) Should our confidence in the Lord's protecting care 
lead us into indifference with regard to temporal matters? 
And how should we examine ourselves when physical or 
financial calamities come upon us in spite of our best endeavors? 
Pp. 647, 648. 

(68) How may we prove that the Scripture, "Who 
healeth all thy diseases," (Psa. 103:3) does not apply to 
physical diseases of the New Creation? P. 648, par. 1. 

(69) How does the foregoing harmonize with Mark 16:9-20? 
P. 649, par. 1. 

(70) What were the experiences of our Lord and the 
Apostles with respect to physical infirmities? Pp. 650 to 
652, bottom of page. 

(71) Do we have any record of the Apostles' using 
Divine Power for their own relief or that of other consecrated 
followers of Christ? How should we accept and 

follow their example? Pp. 653, 654. 

SEPTEMBER 21 

Read p. 654 to p. 657, par. 1. 

THE NOMINAL CHURCH AS AN ADVERSARY OF THE NEW 
CREATION 

(72) How is the Nominal Church distinguished from the 
True Church of Christ? P. 654. 

(73) Is a wide difference between these two classes disadvantageous 
or beneficial to the True Church? P. 655, par. 1. 



(74) What has always been the position of the truly 
consecrated while in the nominal systems, and what service 
has "Babylon" rendered unto these? P. 655, par. 2. 

(75) In what manner is the New Creation continually 
subject to temptation from the Nominal Church? P. 656, par. 1. 

THE ARMOR OF GOD 

(76) What is the exhortation of the Apostle with respect 
to the Armor of God? What is this armor, and why is it 
necessary to put on "the whole armor" in the present day? 
P. 657, par. 1. 

SEPTEMBER 28 



Read p. 657, par. 2, to p. 658, par. 2. 



(77) What does the Girdle represent? P. 657, par. 2. 

(78) What does the Breastplate signify? P. 657, par. 3. 

(79) What do the Sandals represent? P. 657, par. 4. 

(80) What is the Shield, and why is it absolutely indispensable? 
P. 657, par. 5. 

(81) What is the Helmet of Salvation, and why is it so 
especially important in this day? P. 658, par. 1. 

(82) What is the only piece of offensive armor possessed 
by the New Creation? And how can it be obtained and 
used? P. 658, par. 2. 



page 241 

VOL. XXXIV AUGUST 15 No. 16 
A. D. 1913-A. M. 6041 



CONTENTS 

God Manifest in the Flesh 243 

Our Lord's Beauty of Holiness 244 

Incarnation Theory Not Scriptural 245 

The New Covenant 245 

Sealing the New Covenant 246 

The Sin Unto Death 246 

Future Rewards and Punishments 247 

The Church Not Under the New Covenant 247 

Typical Distribution of Blessings 248 

"The Spirits of Just Men Made Perfect" 248 

Spiritual Promises to Natural Israel 249 

Fear a Cause of Great Nervous Tension 250 

Individual Conquest of Our Inheritance 250 

The Conquest of Canaan a Type 25 1 

Practical Lessons From the Life of Eli 251 

The Flaw in Eli's Character 251 

The Golden Calf 253 



"Keep Yourselves From Idols" 253 

Tables of the Law Replaced 254 

An Interesting Question 255 

page 242 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



MOTTO TEXT CARDS 

The last consignment of beautiful motto cards with a 
pretty design of grapes, the cup and the loaf, and bearing 
the text, "What shall I render unto the Lord for all His 
benefits toward me? I will take the Cup of Salvation, and 
call upon the name of the Lord," has arrived. We suggest 
that these make an excellent gift to any friend or 
relative not in the Truth, although most appreciated by 
the saintly. We have a good supply on hand, and are now 
prepared to fill orders in any quantity— singly at 5c, by 
the dozen 50c, postpaid. 



NEW BOOKLETS IN SPANISH AND ITALIAN 

We have a good supply of new booklets— in Italian on 
"Our Lord's Return" (His Parousia, Apokalupsis and 
Epiphania); in Spanish, "Our Lord's Return" (His Parousia, 
Apokalupsis and Epiphania); also "The Sabbath Day." 



These booklets can be procured at the uniform price of 
5 cents each, or 50 cents per dozen, postpaid. 



FREE LITERATURE IN FOREIGN LANGUAGES 

JAPANESE, GERMAN, NORWEGIAN, 
ITALIAN, POLISH, FRENCH, 
SPANISH, HOLLANDISH, FINNISH, 
HUNGARIAN, WELSH, ARABIC, 

SWEDISH, GREEK, PORTUGUESE. 



R5290 : page 243 

"GOD MANIFEST IN THE FLESH" 

"Great is the mystery of godliness: God was manifest in the 
flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of angels."— 1 Timothy 3:16. 

GOD, the great Origin, or Fountain, of Life, is 
pleased to manifest Himself in various creations. 
And all of His intelligent creations 
which He recognized as sons were in His 
likeness. The Logos, the beginning of God's 
creation, was in the Divine likeness. Not 
only was He a spirit being (and God is a 
Spirit), but more than this, He was a spirit 
being in the character likeness of His Father, 
His Creator. 

Moreover, when the Logos became the active agent of 
the Father in creating the various orders— angels, cherubim, 
seraphim— they were all created in the image of the 
Father. The angel sons of God sang together and shouted 
for joy as they saw the different creations. When it came 
time to make a still different order of creatures, an order 
that had never before existed, namely, human beings, God 
carried out through the Logos His purpose of creating 
man in His own image, His own likeness. And God declared 
Himself well pleased with man. 

A description of the first man is given us in the Eighth 
Psalm: "Thou hast made him a little lower than the angels, 
and hast crowned him with glory and honor. Thou 
madest him to have dominion over the works of Thy 
hands; Thou hast put all things under his feet; all sheep 
and oxen, yea, and the beasts of the field, the fowl of the 
air, and the fish of the sea." Adam was the master or king 
of all these. He represented something that the angels 
did not represent; for none of them were ever set over 
anything. God Himself is the Ruler of all, and Adam and 
the Logos were the only ones who were in any sense of 
the word set over anything. 

When God made man, He made him like Himself in 
this particular— that he had a dominion. When the angels 



were created, they were God manifest in different orders 
of beings— cherubim, seraphim and the lower orders of 
angels. When it came to the creation of man, he was 
made in God's image. God was manifest in flesh. But we 
cannot say that God is manifest in fallen flesh now. The 
original likeness to God has been obliterated by sin. The 
reign of Sin and Death has to a considerable extent erased 
these traces of God's image. And the Scriptures plainly 
show us that we have lost this image and likeness of the 
Creator. 

Adam was called a son of God because he was in covenant 
relationship with God; but when he became a sinner, 
he lost this relationship. None of the Jews were sons of 
God. Abraham was styled a friend of God. Although 
God had approved of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, the Prophets 
and others in Israel, and indicated that a great blessing 
would be theirs, they could not be treated as sons. God 
said, in substance, when speaking to Abraham, My friend, 
I will make with you My Covenant. "In thy Seed shall 
all the families of the earth be blessed." 

GOD MANIFEST IN PERFECT HUMANITY 

But everything must wait until that great antitypical 
Seed of Abraham should come. We have the record of 
how this One would come who was to be the Deliverer, 

R5291 : page 243 

the Antitypical Seed of Abraham. After reasoning about 
the Logos— how He was made flesh and dwelt amongst 
them— St. John declares that Jesus had the glory of the 
Only Begotten of the Father, full of grace, full of truth. 
This was the way above all others in which God was manifest 
in the flesh. 

When the lower animals saw Adam, they saw the very 
best representation of God possible to them. Nothing 
could be made in the flesh that would be more like God. 
And when the time came for God to send His Son into 
the world, He set before Him the great privilege of being 
man's Redeemer. And when He was made flesh, all those 
who beheld Him saw the glory of the Only Begotten of 
the Father. When any looked upon Him, they saw the 
Father in the most absolute sense in which it would be 
possible for them to see Him. 

God said to Moses, "No man shall see My face and 
live." Saul of Tarsus merely had a glimpse of Jesus glorified, 
and yet the glory was so great that if he had had a 
full look he would not have lived. Jesus was the express 
image of the Father. Jesus is the express image of the 
Father. And if no man can see God and live, then he 
cannot see the glorified Jesus and live. 

GOD MANIFEST IN THE PRINCES 

But God has made a provision that when Christ's 



Kingdom shall be established amongst men, there will be 
earthly representatives through whom Messiah will govern 
and uplift mankind during the thousand years. God 
has just such a class prepared and ready for this work- 
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and the other Ancient Worthies. 
These are to be counted worthy of an instantaneous 
awakening to human perfection. These experience no 
change of nature in their resurrection, because they were 
not begotten of the Spirit. There was no one begotten of 
the Spirit until Pentecost, except our Lord at Jordan. 
"The Holy Spirit was not yet given, because that Jesus 

R5291 : page 244 

was not yet glorified." Therefore those Ancient Worthies 
had merely the testimony that they pleased God. Because 
of their loyalty to God and the principles of righteousness, 
some of these Ancient Worthies "were stoned; 
some were sawn asunder; some were tempted; some were 
slain with the sword; they wandered about in sheepskins 
and goatskins; being destitute, afflicted, tormented; of 
whom the world was not worthy."— Hebrews 11:37,38. 

These, although they had received God's Promise, received 
not the things promised them. For instance, God 
had promised Abraham, "All the land which thou seest will 
I give unto thee." Abraham must have a resurrection in 
order for God's Word to come true. He must get that 
land. But there was no suggestion to Abraham of glory, 
honor, and immortality— no suggestion to him of becoming 
a partaker of the Divine nature and a joint-heir with 
Jesus. See Acts 7:5; Hebrews 11:8-10,17,39,40. 

This began with Jesus. Christ has not only brought to 
men the knowledge of life and immortality, but also that 
there is a privilege of gaining this life with Him: "Which 
salvation began to be spoken by our Lord, and was confirmed 
unto us by them that heard Him." (Hebrews 2:3.) 
But the Ancient Worthies had the faith to believe God, to 
trust His Promise and to wait for the fulfilment of that 
Promise. They merely had the intimation that God would 
roll away the curse. And Abraham's Seed was to be the 
glorious channel of God's blessing— "In thee and in thy 
Seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed." So 
St. Paul tells us that they received not the things promised 
them, "God having provided some better thing for us [the 
Gospel Church], that they without us should not be made 
perfect."— Hebrews 11:40. 

The Ancient Worthies cannot get their blessing before 
we get ours. The Bride must be glorified, and then the 
faithful of the past can come in and get their blessing. 
Then forthwith the Kingdom will be established. And 
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and all the other Worthies will 
be the first children of Christ. Instead of being the 
fathers, they will be the children, and He will make them 
princes, rulers in all the earth. (Psalm 45:16.) Being 
resurrected perfect men, they will be the perfect images 
of God. In each one of these Ancient Worthies God will 



be manifest in the flesh. They will be princes at that time 
and will rule the earth, under Christ's Kingdom. 

Jesus corroborated this thought when He said, "Ye 
shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the 
Prophets, in the Kingdom of God." (Luke 13:28.) Of 
Himself He said, "Yet a little while, and the world seeth 
Me no more." (John 14:19.) If we should not be 
changed to spirit conditions by the power of our resurrection, 
we would not see him any more than will others who 
will continue on the human plane. Those who have died 
in Christ, and those "who are alive and remain," will, at 
His manifestation, be made like Him, be "changed, in a 
moment, in the twinkling of an eye." At the moment of 
our change we shall see not only our Lord, but all the holy 
angels— all on the spirit plane, who are now invisible to us. 
They can see humanity, but humanity cannot see them. 

God was manifest in the flesh; first, in the case of 
Adam; secondly, in the case of Jesus; and thirdly, He will 
be manifest in the flesh of those Ancient Worthies, who 
will be reckoned deserving of a better resurrection than 
the rest of the world. 

OUR LORD'S BEAUTY OF HOLINESS 

When in derision the soldiers placed upon the head of 
our Lord a crown of thorns, and arrayed him in a purple 
robe, and led Him into the judgment hall, Pilate looked 
upon Him in admiration, and exclaimed, "Behold the 
Man!" or (see Strong's Concordance) "Behold the countenance!" 
I am a Gentile and not of your race, but here 
you have sent to me for sentence the most glorious Jew 
on earth! None can have a really beautiful character 
without the inner beauty being reflected in the face. If 
a man be a vicious character, he cannot hide it from his 
features. If he be of a loving disposition, it will show in 
his face. What, then, shall we think of our Lord! His 
face must have been one of marvelous beauty! No wonder 
the people flocked to see Him because of His graciousness 
of speech and His wonderful beauty— the image of 
God! 

The Psalmist has asked, "What is man, that Thou art 
mindful of him? and the son of man, that Thou visitest 
[carest for] him? For Thou hast made him a little lower 
than the angels, Thou hast crowned him with glory and 
honor." (Psalm 8:4,5.) But man has fallen into sin, 
alienation, darkness! The Satanic influence works sin 
and has brought about man's fall from the image of his 
Creator. It is God's great purpose to bring humanity back 
from sin and imperfection. He will uplift all those who 
desire to be righteous. 

"We see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the 
angels for the suffering of death, crowned with glory and 
honor [the perfection of human nature]; that He by the 
grace [favor] of God should taste death for every man." 
(Hebrews 2:9.) We see the broad basis of God's Plan 
laid in the redemptive work at Calvary. We see that it 



must be the Redeemer's life that would be the price of 
human redemption. "For since by man came death, by 
man comes also the resurrection of the dead. For as all 
in Adam die, even so all in Christ shall be made alive. 
But every man in his own order; Christ [the Anointed, 
the Messiah class], the first fruits; afterwards they that 
are Christ's at His Coming [Greek, during His presence]." 
(I Corinthians 15:21-23.) Jesus says, "Blessed and holy 
is he that hath part in the First Resurrection." Such 
shall be kings and priests of God and of Christ, and shall 
reign with Him a thousand years.— Rev. 20:6. 

So, then, "God manifest in the flesh" was clearly exhibited 
in the Man Christ Jesus, in His perfection. But 
God was specially and more particularly manifest in the 
flesh of Jesus when He presented Himself to John at Jordan, 
as He reached the period of thirty years of age, and 
there gave Himself sacrificially. "Lo, I come (in the volume 
of the Book it is written of Me) to do Thy will, O 
God." There He offered Himself without spot, in harmony 
with God's will. And the Divine acceptance was 
indicated in the form of a dove coming upon Him— not 
that the Holy Spirit is like a dove, but that God gave the 
outward manifestation so that John would have some 
means of identification of the Messiah, so that he could 
say, "I saw the Spirit descending from Heaven, like a 
dove, and it abode upon Him." 

From the time of Jesus' baptism God dwelt in Him in a 
peculiar manner; as the Apostle John says of the 
Church, God dwelleth in us and we in God. (I John 4:16.) 
The Father took up His abode in Jesus, and qualified 
Him to make known the Divine Plan. Our Lord said, 
"The Spirit of the Lord God is upon Me, because He hath 
anointed Me to preach the Gospel to the poor; He hath 
sent Me to heal the broken-hearted, to preach deliverance 
to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set 
at liberty them that are bruised, to preach the acceptable 
year of the Lord."— Luke 4:16-21; Isaiah 61:1-3. 

OUR LORD'S TEMPTATION IN THE WILDERNESS 

From the time when Jesus received the Holy Spirit, 
we read that the Heavenly things were made known unto 

R5292 : page 245 

Him. For as the Apostle says, "The natural man receiveth 

not the things of the Spirit of God. ..neither 

can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned." 

When Jesus, therefore, received the begetting 

of the Holy Spirit, He received spiritual discernment. 

He came to see how the types of the Old Testament fitted 

to Himself. He saw that the serpent in the wilderness 

represented Himself. 

When He saw these things, we remember that He was 
in the wilderness. He had the entire Scriptures in His 
mind. From childhood He had been in the habit of attending 



the synagogue; and with His perfect mind, the 
Scriptures would be thoroughly engraved there. He could 
quote any Scripture ad libitum. And when Satan quoted 
the Scriptures, Jesus understood them. 

At the end of the forty days, when Jesus was weak 
from fasting, was the most favorable time for the Adversary 
to tempt Him. When He had before Him the 
thought of all the shame and ignominy connected with 
His sacrificial death, it would be enough to make any one's 
heart quail! The moment when He realized that He was 
to be counted as a blasphemer, and contrary to God, was 
the most opportune moment for Satan. And the Father 
permitted Him to be tempted— permitted the Adversary to 
tempt Him at this particular time. 

Then Satan addressed himself to the mind of our Lord: 
I know you very well. We had a long acquaintance in 
the past, and I know the mission on which you have come. 
You do not realize, I know, the power that came upon You 
when You were baptized. I beheld how the power of 
God came upon You. You have need only to command 
these stones to be turned into bread. I realize that You 
can do a great work, and I would like to join with You in 
the matter. But first of all, You should have something 
to eat. 

Jesus knew Satan— He knew that Satan was Lucifer, 
who had rebelled against the Divine Government, and 
who was imprisoned on this planet. When Satan appeared 
to Jesus, we may be sure that he tried to appear as 
an angel of light, and to pretend that he wished to be on 
God's side, and that he now wished to co-operate with 
God. But Jesus knew that His power was not given Him 
for the purpose of sustaining His life, and He would not 
yield to the temptation. 

Therefore Satan next took Him to a high mountain— 
this was in the spirit of their minds— and showed Him 
how he— Satan— was "the prince of this world" and all the 
kingdoms thereof. And he said, You see, then, that I have 
the power to help You. Can You afford to be without 
such assistance? I am in sympathy with You. You will 
save mankind and deliver them all from death. Instead of 
your having to suffer, as God's Plan is, we will work together, 
and You shall not have to suffer. But first, You 
must acknowledge me. That was the way I started out. 
I wanted to show what kind of a kingdom I could set up. 
I said, "I will ascend into Heaven, I will exalt my throne 
above the stars of God: I will sit also upon the mount of 
the congregation, in the sides of the north: I will ascend 
above the heights of the clouds; I will be like the Most 
High," I will have an empire of my own. I advise You to 
come in and share with me. I will give You all the glory 
You could ask. I intend to be the prince of this world. 
Do You not see that everything is in my hands? 

But in these temptations Jesus conquered. And the 
victory was so complete that Satan thought it not worth 
while to tempt Him again! He thought that if He could 
not move Jesus when He was on the verge of starvation, 



it was of no use to try any further. So he never made 
another attempt, so far as the record goes. 

THE INCARNATION THEORY NOT SCRIPTURAL 

After this, as Jesus went about doing good, healing the 
sick, and preaching to the people, everything was in perfect 
conformity to the Father's will. If the Father had 
been there incarnated in a fleshly body, He could not have 
done His own will more perfectly. But Jesus was not 
incarnated. The incarnation of our Lord is only a theory 
invented during the Dark Ages. For He humbled Himself 
to become a man, and "became obedient unto death, 
even the death of the cross. Wherefore God also hath 
highly exalted Him, and given Him a name which is 
above every name: that at the name of Jesus every knee 
should bow (both in Heaven and in the earth)... and 
every tongue confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the 
glory of God the Father."— Philippians 2:8-11. 



R5292 : page 245 

THE NEW COVENANT 

"Behold the days come, saith the Lord, that I will make a 
New Covenant with the House of Israel, and with the House of 
Judah."— Jeremiah 31:31. 

THE New Covenant is the Scriptural name for 
the new arrangement between God and man, 
by which God purposes to receive mankind 
into harmony again with Himself. Harmony 
with God was the covenant relationship 
which Adam originally enjoyed, but 
which he lost by His disobedience, and 
which was renewed typically at Mt. Sinai 
with Israel, although they could not get the 
blessing of life out of it. 

The mediation of the Law Covenant was effected 
through Moses. (Exodus 19:3-9; 24:3-8.) God agreed 
that if Israel would keep His Law they should have everlasting 
life. The inauguration of that Law Covenant was 
effected by the mediator, Moses, through the sacrifices 
which he offered. In the typical arrangement of the old 
Law Covenant, these Atonement Day sacrifices were repeated 
year by year continually. 

While the mediation of the old Law Covenant brought 
Israel into typical relationship to God, the mediation of 
the New Law Covenant will bring all mankind into actual 
Covenant relationship, into a position of Divine favor, provided 
that they will continue to keep the Divine Law. 
God will introduce this New Law Covenant through the 
Mediator of the New Covenant, in whom the whole arrangement 
centers, and through whom it will be carried 



out. For a period of one thousand years this Mediator 
will do a work for mankind. As a Priest, He will uplift 
humanity; as a King, He will rule them in righteousness. 
It will take a full thousand years to bring the people out 
of their degradation, and restore them to the image and 
likeness of God, lost by Adam in Eden. 

The basis of mediation on the part of the better Mediator 
will be the better sacrifices of this Gospel Age. In the 
antitypical arrangement these sacrifices will never be repeated. 
Through the better sacrifices, the antitypical 
Mediator will have the power to start the people with a 
clean slate, as it were. So it is written, "Their sins and 
their iniquities will I remember no more." (Hebrews 8:12.) 
Again, "I will take away the stony heart out of 
your flesh and give you a heart of flesh."— Ezekiel 36:26. 

Thus Adam's sin and condemnation, which came to mankind 

R5292 : page 246 

by heredity, will no more be remembered by anybody. 
But the work of taking away the stony heart will 
be gradual. The disciplinary processes of the Kingdom 
will gradually relieve mankind of hard-heartedness, and 
make them tender-hearted and affectionate. All who 
enter that new condition of things will no longer be held 
accountable for Adam's sin. We read in Ezekiel 18:2-4, 
"The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the children's 
teeth are set on edge." Under the new order of things he 
who dies will die for his own sin. 

Since all mankind are in a condition of imperfection, 
all will still be liable to sin. The only arrangement by 
which they can attain everlasting life will be by their 
adoption into the family of the Mediator— The Christ. He 
will quicken their mortal bodies. No Divine condemnation 
will hold over against them from the past. Only such 
as come into this relationship will receive the Divine blessings. 
Under the New Covenant, the special favors of the 
Lord will be only for the obedient. Whoever rejects the 
opportunities for upbuilding will be destroyed from among 
the people.— Acts 3:23. 

SEALING THE NEW COVENANT 

God cannot enter into a covenant with people who are 
under His own sentence of death. Therefore, under the 
typical arrangement of the Law Covenant, the death of 
bulls and goats was accepted as a sacrifice to God. This 
did not mean that the blood of bulls and goats was sufficient 
to take away sin; but the it was a typical representation 
of the real sacrifices, under the real Covenant. 

If the New Covenant were now sealed, then all the 
blood of the Covenant must have been previously prepared. 
If this were already shed, then we could have no 
chance of sharing in the death of Christ. It is evident, 
then, that the New Covenant is not sealed. The antitypical 
Bullock has been slain, and His blood taken into 



the Most Holy. The antitypical goat is in process of being 
slain. When its sacrifice shall have been completed, 
all of the blood will be in the hands of the great High 
Priest. Then will come the application of the blood as an 
offset to Adam's sin. At the end of this Gospel Age the 
great Mediator will be ready to do the work assigned to 
Him. 

The first work of the New Dispensation will be the 
antitypical application of the blood in the antitypical Most 
Holy, upon the Mercy-Seat, to make a reconciliation for 
the sins of all the people. Until that shall have been done, 
the New Covenant cannot be inaugurated. Our High 
Priest has been commissioned to inaugurate the New 
Covenant. The application of the blood will be the sealing 
—the making valid. 

The New Covenant has been promised for centuries, 
but it has not yet gone into effect. As soon as this Blood 
of Atonement shall have been applied for the sins of all the 
people, the New Covenant will be inaugurated. We see, 
then, that the blood is to be applied in cancelation of the 
sins of the whole world as an offset for the sin of Adam— 

R5293 : page 246 

which includes his race. 

At the beginning of the New Dispensation the world 
begins life anew, so to speak— not individually, not personally, 
but collectively, through the Mediator. The merit 
of the Mediator is to be applied. It is the Mediator who 
makes satisfaction for the sins of the world; and all the 
resulting blessings come through the Mediator's hands. 
Throughout the Millennial Age whoever would have life 
must get it through the Lifegiver, who will give it under 
the terms of the New Covenant. (I John 5:12.) None can 
get his share of the blessing except by acceptance of the 
terms of the New Covenant, and by endeavor to live up to 
them. All who do so will be helped, and granted grace 
sufficient through the Mediator. 

While the sprinkling of the blood upon the Mercy-Seat 
on behalf of all the people takes place before Restitution 
begins, or before the right to live can be given to any of 
the Ancient Worthies, nevertheless, those who would get 
God's blessing, His uplifting influence, must become 
Israelites— that is, become believers in God, by believing in 
the Mediator, who will be God's Representative. This 
Law will be applicable to the whole world. If mankind 
would get everlasting life, they must accept Christ and 
join themselves to this earthly Kingdom class. Christ's 
Kingdom must rule the earth until all the wicked are destroyed. 
-I Corinthians 15:24-26. 

NEW COVENANT BENEFITS WORLD-WIDE 

All mankind will receive some benefit from the New 
Covenant, irrespective of acceptance of Christ. That 
benefit will be that they will be awakened from the tomb. 



As the Scriptures tell us, as by one man condemnation 
passed upon all, so likewise through one man justification 
to life is to pass upon all. (Romans 5:12,18.) Therefore, 
we would say that the benefits of the New Covenant 
will be applicable to everybody. If God had foreseen that 
nobody would adopt this arrangement, that fact no doubt 
would have altered His Plan. 

All of the accounts against humanity having been canceled 
by Justice, mankind will be turned over to the 
Mediator. If man were not put under the Mediator, if he 
were kept under Divine Justice, he would immediately be 
condemned, because of his inability to do right. Therefore 
the Father will not take cognizance of sinners. They 
will be left to the Mediator. All who will be obedient will 
receive the blessings of the Kingdom, and those who do 
not become obedient under those conditions will go into 
the Second Death. 

THE SIN UNTO DEATH 

During the Gospel Age, the only ones who can commit 
the sin unto death, blasphemy against the Holy Spirit, 
are those who have been enlightened of the Holy Spirit. 
St. Paul says, "As touching those who were once enlightened 
and tasted of the Heavenly Gift, and were made 
partakers of the Holy Spirit, and tasted the good Word 
of God, and the powers of the Age to come, and then fell 
away, it is impossible to renew them again unto repentance." 
(Hebrews 6:4-6. R.V.) Their sin would be wilful, 
otherwise called "blasphemy against the Holy Spirit." 

Therefore only the Church are on trial now. We who 
have been begotten of the Holy Spirit are on trial for life 
or death. Those who now die the Second Death will have 
no opportunity in the future. If these begotten of the 
Holy Spirit are faithful, they will be granted to be of the 
Little Flock class. Those of the spirit-begotten class who 
fail to attain a place in the Little Flock, will, if overcomers 
eventually, receive life on a lower plane. They will be the 
Great Company. But if they fail to attain either of these 
positions, the only thing remaining for them is the Second 
Death. 

As for the world, their Day of Judgment has not yet 
come. The world is still in condemnation through Father 
Adam— not recognized as having any rights at all. Some 
of the world are excellent people; but even these have 
neither part nor lot in the salvation of the present time. 
The blessed arrangement for them is in the Millennial 
Age, when all of their sins and iniquities will be forgotten. 

Just as our sins are now canceled, so likewise will the 
whole world go free from the condemnation of sin absolutely, 

R5293 : page 247 

when the world shall have accepted of Christ, the 
great Mediator. 
But they will, nevertheless, suffer certain judgments, 



or punishments, or stripes, for the deeds of this present 
life. This will not be because Justice will hold over anything 
against them, but because the weaknesses of human 
nature will have left wounds in their flesh. With them 
also it will be true that if they shall sin against the spirit 
of holiness, the Holy Spirit, knowingly and wilfully, the 
penalty will be condemnation to the Second Death. 

Our Lord Jesus said that all manner of sin should be 
forgiven except blasphemy against the Holy Spirit. But 
the Pharisees, to whom these words were addressed, could 
not commit this sin, because they had not the fulness of 
knowledge. --Matthew 12:31,32. 

FORGIVENESS OF SIN ABSOLUTE 

When God recognizes the satisfaction of Divine Justice 
and cleans the slate so far as sinners are concerned, 
this does not mean that He has merely transferred the 
account to Jesus, who will hold it against them. Our 
Lord Jesus will not hold against mankind the things which 
the Father has forgotten. On the contrary, as the Representative 
of the Father, the Lord will be glad to give mankind 
the benefit of that forgiveness, merely holding them 
at a distance from the Father— standing between as 
Mediator— to give them time for restoration, development 
of character, etc., taking away the stoniness of their 
hearts. 

The Lord says through the Prophet, "Their sins and 
their iniquities will I remember no more." The Apostle 
Paul calls attention to this statement. He points out that 
under the Law Covenant this was not done, but that the 
sins remained; for atonement was made afresh for them 
year by year. The inferior sacrifices could not take away 
sin, but the original sins remained. (Hebrews 10:1-4.) 
This New Covenant in Christ, however, will absolutely 
take away sins. See Jeremiah 31:31-34; Ezekiel 36:25-29. 

FUTURE REWARDS AND PUNISHMENTS 

The Scriptures tell us that "out of Zion shall go forth 
the Law, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem." 
(Isaiah 2:3.) The Ancient Worthies are to be made 
princes in all the earth. (Psalm 45:16.) This, of course, 
would appeal first and primarily to the Jew, who would 
naturally be the first to come under the new regulations. 
We may not say that all of the Jews will do so, but we 
believe that a considerable number of them will. In 
time others will join them. There are many good people 
who have not taken the vow of consecration to the Lord, 
but who would like to help rather than to hinder others. 
Such will in due time attach themselves to the Kingdom, 
which shall be "the desire of all nations." 

In the case of the Ancient Worthies their freedom 
from imperfection will make them conspicuous. As the 
world comes to know about these, they will say, Are not 
these God's people? Mankind will perceive that God has 



rewarded the Ancient Worthies by giving them a better 
resurrection, and will learn that their better resurrection 
was given because of faithfulness in the past. 

COVENANT RELATIONSHIP WITH GOD CONDITIONAL 

Christ, having laid down the price of the sins of the 
whole world, will eventually hand that price over to Justice. 
The price having been accepted by Justice, the sins 
of the whole world will be remitted; and everything will 
be turned over to the great Mediator. After the inauguration 
of the New Covenant, it will be the part of the 
people to strive to come up to the requirements of that 
Covenant; although if they then unwittingly violate God's 
Law, they will not be amenable to that Law, during the 
Mediatorial Reign; for the Mediator will stand between 
them and the Law. 

The Mediator will not hold against any one the transgressions 
of this present life. This does not mean that 
mankind will have bodies which will give them no trouble; 
but that under the arrangements of the New Covenant, 
this better Mediator purposes to help them out of the difficulties 
that are theirs by reason of their fallen condition. 
He will help the people to understand the requirements of 
the New Covenant. 

The satisfaction of Justice is necessary before any one 
can experience Restitution. Even the Ancient Worthies 
cannot be blessed without this satisfaction of Justice. 
After the Mediator has made satisfaction to Divine Justice, 
and has been privileged to inaugurate the New Covenant, 
the Ancient Worthies will be the first to be blessed 
under it. They will have in their resurrection complete 
Restitution to human perfection; for during their lifetime 
they had this testimony, that they pleased God.— Heb. 11:5. 

The Ancient Worthies cannot, of course, enter into 
the New Covenant arrangement until they shall have 
been awakened from the sleep of death; therefore, as 
stated in the foregoing, the claims of Justice must be met 
before they are awakened. As soon as God will have 
made the New Covenant with them, these Ancient 
Worthies will form the nucleus of the earthly phase of 
the Kingdom. The earthly seed of Abraham will be 
added to, from all the different families, or nations, of the 
world. 

Covenant relationship with God means perfection. 
Mankind will be reaching this perfection during the 
thousand years of Christ's Kingdom. But they will not 
enter into it until the end of the thousand years, when 
the Mediator will turn them over to God. At the close of 
that time, they will be privileged to enter into this Covenant 

R5294 : page 247 

relationship with Jehovah. Then they must stand 

or fall individually. As we read, at the end of the thousand 

years Satan shall be loosed for a little season; and all 



that love unrighteousness will be deceived by him. The 
remainder of mankind, having passed their test successfully, 
will be received into everlasting life. Then they 
will be in covenant relationship with God— without a 
Mediator— just as Adam was in covenant relationship 
with his Creator before sin entered into the world. 

THE CHURCH NOT UNDER THE NEW COVENANT 

The Church is not under the New Covenant; therefore 
it is not proper to speak of the Church as being 
blessed by the New Covenant. But the Church receives a 
great blessing and privilege in respect to the New Covenant. 
If there were to be no New Covenant, there would 
be no need of a Mediator, or of the Better Sacrifices 
whereby it is to be instituted. 

St. Paul states that God has made us able ministers of 
the New Covenant, thus indicating that we have something 
to do with the preparation for it. (2 Corinthians 3:6.) 
Unless there were Better Sacrifices, there would 
be no basis for that New Covenant. The sufferings 
which the Church undergo at this present time are a 
blessed privilege to us; for we are ministers of that New 
Covenant, in the sense that we are serving it by training 
for future service— after it shall have been inaugurated. 

Suppose that there was a great building in process of 
erection. The men working upon the construction of that 
building might be said to be greatly benefited by that 
building— not that they would be benefited in the future, 

R5294 : page 248 

when the building is in use, but they are being benefited 
during its construction. So now the Church class receives 
certain blessings and privileges in connection with 
the New Covenant. Later, the entire world will be 
blessed thereby, in a very different way. 

During this Gospel Age, God is dealing merely with 
the Church, not with the world. There is, however, some 
resemblance between the blessings of God now coming 
upon the Church and those coming upon the world by and 
by. Then the Lord will rewrite His Law in the hearts of 
mankind, as it was originally written in Adam's heart. 
At the end of the thousand years, all mankind will be 
fleshly images of God, except those found unworthy and 
destroyed in the Second Death. 

The Church are said to have new hearts now— right 
views of things. In the case of the Church, however, 
there is not a taking away of the stoniness of heart, but 
there is a new nature, a new heart. This, of course, has 
something to do with the flesh, since the flesh has something 
to do with the New Creature. The Law of God is 
recognized in the flesh, under the compulsion of the New 
Creature. 

TYPICAL DISTRIBUTION OF BLESSINGS 



The New Covenant is the blessing which the Church 
gives to mankind. It is God's Covenant, of course. God 
promised to arrange this matter; and He has so arranged 
that it shall go to the world through Christ the Head and 
the Church, His Body. It is by the Better Sacrifices that 
the giving to the world of this New Covenant blessing is 
possible. 

If, then, the Church are to give these things, they must 
first have had them. No man can give away what he did 
not first possess. This thought that the New Covenant is 
a testament, or gift, of Christ to the world is made very 
prominent in the Scriptures. It is a gift in which the 
Church shares; for "If we suffer, we shall also reign 
with Him; if we be dead with Him, we shall live with 
Him"; and all things are ours because we are His. 

These things are clearly set forth in the Old Testament 
types. St. Paul explains that Isaac was the heir of 
Abraham, and was typical of The Christ. Isaac did not 
receive his inheritance by a New Covenant, but by the 
primary, or original, Covenant. This Covenant was not 
the Law Covenant. 

In Micah 4:1-4 we read that in the last days, "the 
mountain [Kingdom] of the House of the Lord shall be 
established in the top of the mountains [kingdoms], and 
many people shall flow unto it. And many nations shall 
come, and say, Come, and let us go up to the Mountain of 
the Lord, and to the House of the God of Jacob; and He 
will teach us of His ways, and we will walk in His paths." 

The succeeding verses of the chapter show the influence 
that will be exerted. The blessings and prosperity 
will then be with those who will be in harmony with God. 
But now it is different. "All that will live godly in Christ 
Jesus shall suffer persecution." (2 Timothy 3:12.) They 
"shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for My 
name's sake." (Matthew 5:1 1.) These things indicate 
that those faithful to God during this Age will have more 
hardship than have those who are unfaithful. 

Many of the worldly, even the wicked of the world, 
have great prosperity at the present time. (The world 
thinks that we are making our lives miserable by the course 
which we pursue. But we are not doing this; on the contrary, 
we are enjoying ourselves and are having a good 
time. We have much advantage every way.) In the 
future, God tells us, it will be different. Then, whoever 
does wickedly shall suffer; and whoever does righteously 
shall receive blessing. When that time comes, the blessing 
of Restitution will be of God; and the only way to 
gain that blessing will be by coming into harmony with 
the new order of things in the Kingdom of Messiah. 



R5294 : page 248 

"THE SPIRITS OF JUST MEN MADE PERFECT" 



"But ye are come unto Mount Zion, and unto the City of the 
living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable 
company of angels, to the General Assembly and 
Church of the First-born, which are written in Heaven, and 
to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of 
just men made perfect."— Hebrews 12:22,23. 

THE Apostle is here addressing the Church, 

and is pointing down to the end, or consummation, 

of this Age. The context indicates 

that at the end of this Age everything that 

can be shaken will be shaken— all will be 

shaken out except that which is unshakeable. 

And the unshakeable thing is the Kingdom, 

which will then be ushered in. The Apostle 

likens the time of its inauguration to the 

inauguration of the Law Covenant at Mt. 

Sinai, when all the people heard the thunderings, and the 

noise of the trumpets, and saw the lightnings and the 

mountain smoking; and when Moses "drew near unto the 

thick darkness where God was"; and Moses went up into 

the mountain. All of this was typical— the sealing of the 

Law Covenant at the hands of the typical mediator, 

Moses. -Exodus 20:18-22. 

The antitype is what we are approaching— what will 
be reached by the Church at the end of this Age. There 
will then be commotion, strife, in the world— thunderings, 
lightnings. And as in the type, so in the antitype, the 
people will be discouraged, and in great fear and trouble. 
By the end of the time of trouble, the New Covenant will 
be inaugurated. The Mediator will be Jesus the Messiah, 
as the glorified Head, and the Church His Body. 

The Apostle says [see Diaglott rendering] that we are 
approaching the General Assembly of the Church of the 
First-borns. In this will be included Christ, the Head, 
and all the faithful of this Age, of the past and of the 
present. It will include both the Little Flock and the 
Great Company; for together they constitute the Church 
of the First-borns, whose names are written in Heaven. 
Consequently this demonstration will be made after the 
Little Flock shall have been gathered. We are every day 
approaching nearer to this time— are getting into it somewhat 
even now. 

The Apostle also says we are approaching the place 
where "the spirits of just men" will be made perfect. It 
would not be reasonable to suppose that he would first 
mention the Church of the First-borns, including them 
all and then mention a part of them. Hence we conclude 
that this phrase refers to another class. Our minds naturally 
go out in inquiry, thinking of the Ancient Worthies 
—a class who are merely waiting until the Church shall 
be glorified. Thus these come in here in proper course, 
or order. So after telling about the assembling of the 
Church of the First-borns, St. Paul tells of this other 
class— "the spirits of just men made perfect." But there 



is another reason why these could not be the Church, and 
would be the Ancient Worthies— and that is that neither 
the Church nor the Great Company will be "men made 
perfect." The very condition on which the Church become 

R5295 : page 249 

of the spirit class is that they give up the human 
nature. 

But how shall we apply this expression to the Ancient 
Worthies? We do this by the transposition of a few 
words, thus: "We are coming to the perfect men whose 
spirits are just." And the Ancient Worthies were just, 
although they had fleshly imperfections. The Apostle 
has referred to this class and told us that they will have a 
better resurrection, though not so good a resurrection as 
the Church will receive. The Ancient Worthies will attain 
the better resurrection in that they will be perfected 
flesh when they come up from the tomb. As they were 
just in spirit, so will they be perfect men in the beginning 
of the Restitution time. 

The figure of a mountain is one commonly used in the 
Scriptures for a kingdom. Mount Zion represents the 
Kingdom of God. This Mount Zion Kingdom is to include 
the whole earth. This Kingdom is about to be established. 
Its establishment is what the Apostle is discussing. 
A kingdom is in figure also called a City; but 
strictly speaking, a mountain represents the nation, and a 
city represents the government of that nation. This 
figure of speech is very common today. If we read that 
Berlin does thus and so, we know that the German Government 
is referred to; or if we read of St. Petersburg's 
doing thus and so, it means the Russian Government; 
similarly, Washington would represent the Government 
of the United States, and London, the British 
Government. 

Our text has reference to the holy Kingdom of God. 
And then, not to lose its identity, but to carry the thought 
that the City represents the whole Kingdom, the Apostle 
speaks of the City of God as the Heavenly Jerusalem. 
Thus he carries our minds to the thought that as the 
literal Jerusalem was the capital of the typical Kingdom 
of God, so there will be a New Jerusalem— a higher Government 
—which is to be God's Kingdom to rule over the 
whole earth. Thus these various pictures are used to 
show us the antitype of the kingdom of earthly Zion, of 
Jerusalem. Then follow the other statements, and the 
one that appertains to the righteous in spirit made perfect. 
These were already righteous in spirit, and now they will 
be made perfect, by having this better Resurrection which 
the Lord has promised. 

In connection with this we have the statement, "an 
innumerable company of angels." These we think will be 
the spiritual angels of God, who have had to do with so 
much service for God. We think they are the same 
angels of whom our Lord spoke when He said that He 



would confess us before His Father and before the Holy 

angels— those who have been ministers to the saints all 

the way down through this Age. It is very fitting that 

they should meet us, and that they should see our introduction 

to the Father. 



R5295 : page 249 

SPIRITUAL PROMISES TO NATURAL ISRAEL 

IN THE Scriptures the word spiritual is generally 

used in a particular way referring 

to those who have been begotten of the 

Holy Spirit, as our Lord and all those 

who accept Him and consecrate themselves 

to do the will of God. All promises and all 

things which appertain to these are particularly 

classified and styled as spiritual promises 

and spiritual things. "The natural man 

receiveth not the things of the Spirit of 

God: for they are foolishness unto him; neither can he 

know them, because they are spiritually discerned." 

(I Cor. 2:14.) So, then, if God gave anything spiritual 

to the Israelites before the Spiritual Dispensation, they 

did not appreciate it, since none could do so except 

through spirit-begetting. 

Nevertheless, there were spiritual things given to 
Natural Israel, which they were unable to receive. The 
Apostle says, "The Law is spiritual, but I am carnal, 
sold under Sin." (Rom. 7:14.) That Law given at Sinai 
came from the Spirit Being of the highest order— God 
Himself. It did not take hold merely of the fleshly instincts, 
and control the body alone, but it took hold of 
the heart, the mind, the will. None of the Jews could 
keep that Law because they were sold under Sin. It 
was a spiritual Law that could be kept only by a spirit-begotten 
person or a person in the image of God. 

SPIRITUAL LESSONS IN THE LAW 

Certain of the lessons of the Law were spiritual, also; 
as, for instance, the rock in the wilderness, which, when 
smitten, gave forth water abundantly, and the manna, each 
afforded a spiritual lesson. But Israel did not understand 
anything about the Spiritual Rock or the Spiritual Water 
of Life. So of the Law that was given to them: they 
could see only the outer part, or shell. Nor could any 
see further until the due time for the begetting of the 
Spirit. We may say, then, that a great many spiritual 
things were given to Israel, but only such of them as 
were Israelites indeed, and in harmony with God would 
be made able, in due time, to see these. 

The spiritual things were in the Law all the time, but 
they were not disclosed, not manifest, not seen by the 



Jew, because of his own condition of mind; and the first 
Israelite who was permitted to see spiritual things was 
Jesus Himself, after He was begotten of the Spirit and 
able to appreciate these things. But the Jewish nation, 
not coming up to the required standard, was not able 
to appreciate them. Certain ones who desired to walk 
in Jesus' steps received through Him a covering, and they 
also were begotten of the Holy Spirit and could appreciate 
spiritual things. Thus the Apostle says that the 
righteousness of the Law is "fulfilled in us, who walk 
not after the flesh, but after the Spirit." We cannot keep 
the Law in our flesh, but in our hearts, our minds. "With 
the mind I serve the Law of God."— Rom. 8:4; 7:25. 

BASIS OF SPIRITUAL INSIGHT 

When God made a Covenant with Abraham, saying, 
"In thy Seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed," 
He said that Abraham's seed should be as the stars of 
heaven and as the sand of the seashore. This is a 
spiritual Promise, which, of course, the Jews at that time 
were not able to appreciate, as the Apostle Peter intimates. 
When realizing that as a nation they had crucified 
the Son of God, many said, What shall we do? St. Peter 
said, "Repent... for this Promise is unto you, and 
to your children." (Acts 2:38,39.) It was a spiritual 
Promise and belonged to them, but on condition that 
they would take certain steps. 

Only a few of the Jews were in the proper attitude 
to meet this condition. "He came unto His own, and 
His own received Him not. But as many as received 
Him, to them gave He power [the privilege, the right] to 
become the sons of God. (John 1:11,12.) And these, 
coming into the relation of Spiritual Israelites, were enabled 
by this begetting of the Holy Spirit to appreciate 

R5295 : page 250 

the spiritual things given to such Israelites. All the 
truths that we have are drawn from those things God 
gave to the Natural Israelites. And we can understand 
them, though the Natural Israelite could not. The Apostle 
says, "Israel hath not obtained that which he seeketh for; 
but the Election hath obtained it, and the rest were 
blinded." (Rom. 1 1:7.) So then, they were seeking for 
the spiritual, whether they understood it or not. Except 
the few, however, they did not attain the spiritual, because 
of an improper condition of heart. But the spiritual 
must have been there for them to seek after, else they 
could not have sought it. 



R5295 : page 250 

FEAR A CAUSE OF GREAT NERVOUS TENSION 



"The Lord is My Helper, and I will not fear 
whatman shall do unto me."— Hebrews 13:6. 

FEAR is one of the greatest evils in the world, 

causing much nervous tension and distress. 

It is a result of man's being out of harmony 

with the Creator. We may be sure that 

the angels have no fear. God maintains 

them in their peaceful condition because 

they are in harmony with Him. We may 

be sure, also, that this was the case with 

our first parents. When they were created 

they had no fear. Divine protection was 

over them. But when sin came in, the curse followed. 

Being for six thousand years under the reign of Sin and 

Death, man has become very fearful. He realizes that 

there are forces outside of himself with which he cannot 

cope. And this knowledge robs him of much of the 

pleasure of life. 

There are a few people who have lost this fear, but 
these are the exceptions. Our text tells us of some who 
do not fear, and shows us why this is a reasonable condition. 
They no longer fear what man can do unto them, 
because the Lord is their Helper. The fear of man is a 
greater fear than the fear of beasts. As the poet wrote, 
"Man's inhumanity to man 
Makes countless thousands mourn." 
On account of sin many have become murderers. Though 
they are restrained by the law from committing the overt 
act, they have the murder spirit, the selfish spirit. This 
leads to all kinds of wrong-doing— unrighteousness. Those 
who will not actually take life, may commit murder by 
the use of slanderous words. Thus they inspire fear in 
the minds of others. 

THE SOURCE OF RELIEF 

The Psalmist speaks of some who had gotten rid of 
this fear of man— of such were Abraham, Isaac, Jacob 
and the Prophets. And what was true of them should 
be true of the consecrated Body of Christ. The reason 
for this peace of mind is that these have come into special 
relationship with God. By the Covenant of Sacrifice, 
made possible to them by the Savior, they have become 
sons of God; "and if children, then heirs; heirs of God, 

R5296 : page 250 

and joint-heirs with Christ," their Lord. God thus being 
their Father has a deep interest in them; and so they 
learn to trust His Love and Wisdom and Power. 

With this confidence in God, then, these have no fear. 
He has assured them that He is able to make all things 
work together for their good. If at first they found that 
as followers of Jesus they had more trials, more difficulties 



from the world, the flesh and the Adversary than any 
other people in the world, this realization may have filled 
them with alarm and intimidated them. But as they have 
gone to the Father in the spirit of prayer and hearkened 
to the message which He has sent through the Prophets 
and Apostles, they have learned that He is dealing with 
them as New Creatures. Gradually they learn that "no 
good thing will He withhold from them that walk 
uprightly." 

The Father will not withhold anything necessary for 
the proper development of His children. He also promises 
that we shall not be tempted above that we are able 
to endure, lest some injury come to us. Thus we see that 
He is supplying all our needs, enabling us to lay down our 
earthly lives. And as we learn the proper lessons from 
our experiences, we find that perfect love casts out all 
servile fear of our Heavenly Father; for we love and 
trust Him. We have no fear of the Adversary, because 
we know that the Lord will not permit the Adversary 
to injure us, if we keep close to Him. And if God permits 
us to have experiences of trial from the Adversary 
and our fellowmen, He does so to the intent that these 
may work out good to us. 

"My God, I set my seal that Thou art true, 

Of Thy good promise not one thing hath failed!" 



R5296 : page 250 

INDIVIDUAL CONQUEST OF OUR INHERITANCE 

"Be thou strong and very courageous."— Joshua 1:7. 

THE words of our text were addressed by the 
Lord to Joshua, who was leader of Israel 
after the death of Moses. He had special 
need of these encouraging words. The 
Israelites were a stiff-necked generation. It 
was difficult for any one to be their leader. 
Especially difficult was it because Moses had 
been for many years with them. It is always 
difficult for a smaller man to take a 
larger man's place. 

In some respects it was easier to direct Israel while 
they were anticipating the coming into the Promised 
Land, before they had entered it. During the forty years 
in the wilderness they had learned to depend on the Lord. 
In a few brief words we have given us quite a clear idea 
of the Lord's manner of dealing with His people during 
these forty years. Moses, in exhorting the people to fear 
and love the Lord, and in recounting their provocations of 
Him, tells them that they shall possess the Land, and 
adds, "And thou shalt remember all the way which the 
Lord thy God led thee these forty years in the wilderness, 
to humble thee and to prove thee, to know what was 



in thine heart, whether thou wouldest keep His commandments, 

or no. And He humbled thee, and suffered 

thee to hunger, and fed thee with manna, which thou 

knewest not, neither did thy fathers know; that He might 

make thee know that man doth not live by bread only, 

but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of 

the Lord doth man live. 

"Thy raiment waxed not old upon thee, neither did thy 
foot swell, these forty years. Thou shalt also consider 
in thine heart, that as a man chasteneth his son, so the 
Lord thy God chasteneth thee." (Deut. 8:2-5.) Israel 
had very few battles during the time of their wandering. 
The Amalekites had had some little skirmishes with them, 
but on the whole they had experienced very little trouble, 

R5296 : page 251 

and yet they had rebelled against the Lord and against 
Moses more than once. 

Now, their enemies were entrenched in the Land of 
Canaan, and it would require strength and courage to 
take the Land. Their instructions from the Lord were 
that they should occupy Canaan. God was taking the 
land from the Canaanites because, like the Sodomites, 
they had gone as far in their wickedness as Divine Wisdom 
saw best to permit. Instead of taking the Canaanites 
away as the Sodomites had been taken away, the Lord 
caused the Israelites to conquer them and to wrest the 
land from them. 

THE CONQUEST OF CANAAN A TYPE 

In Israel's taking possession of the land of Canaan, 
we believe there was a typical significance. In some 
respects the Israelites, warring against the Canaanites, 
typified the war that the New Creature has with the flesh. 
In proportion as the New Creature takes possession of 
the entrenched positions of the old creature, it overcomes 
and gets possession of the land. The New Creatures, 
God's people, are under the leadership of the antitypical 
Joshua. They are to overcome the weaknesses and meannesses 
of the fallen nature, to the best of their ability. 

In the case of Natural Israelites with the Canaanites, 
the latter were strongly entrenched in the land, and they 
were not to be overcome without many battles. The 
Canaanites had their mountain fastnesses, to which they 
could retreat. These typify the fastnesses in our nature 
to which the fallen inclinations retreat when we find it 
impossible as New Creatures to vanquish them. As St. 
Paul says, "Ye cannot do the things that ye would." 
(Gal. 5:17.) But our ability to gain the victory will be in 
proportion to our faith in God and our reliance on Him. 

Thus it was with the Israelites. In proportion as they 
trusted the Lord, they had success in getting possession of 
the land, conquering their inheritance. With the exception 
of the tribe of Levi, a certain inheritance was given 



to each tribe. So with us as individual New Creatures. 
There is a certain inheritance to be apportioned to each 
of us. We cannot conquer for each other. Each must 
conquer his own inheritance individually. 

The words of our text were addressed to Joshua, the 
leader of Israel. The words can be understood as referring 
to all the Israelites, but especially to Joshua because 
he was their leader. The word Joshua means 
savior, deliverer. The Greek form of the Hebrew word 
Joshua is Jesus. As Joshua was to deliver the Lord's 
people, and give them possession of the Land of Promise, 
so Jesus is to deliver God's Spiritual Israel, and give 
them their inheritance. 

The words of our text then implied that there would 
be trials and difficulties connected with the conquest of 
Canaan: "Be thou strong and very courageous." Those 
trials and difficulties would require strength and courage 
in the typical Israelite. Likewise this is true of all who 
would be sharers with our Lord in the antitypical Promised 
Land. 

There is a difference between being strong and being 
courageous. One might be strong, invulnerable in the 
position he has taken, and yet not be courageous for further 
conquests. The difference between these two qualities 
is particularly illustrated in the Little Flock and the 
Great Company. The Lord's true people should be strong 
in their determination to lay down their lives in self-sacrifice, 
that by laying down the earthly life they may 
become partakers of the Divine life. God has no blessing 
for those who will not put forth earnest effort. 

Even the Great Company must be strong, or they will 
not get the palms of victory. The difference between the 
Little Flock and the Great Company is that while the 
Great Company will finally overcome, with the Lord's 
help, yet they will not have been very courageous. Therefore 
they cannot be of the Little Flock, who are close followers 
of the great Leader, our Joshua, in battling for 
their life, gladly laying down their lives in the service 
of Jehovah. Joshua represents the "more than conqueror" 
class. The strength of the Lord is supplied to this 
class. Therefore they are very courageous in overcoming 
everything that is in opposition to the Divine will. 



R5296 : page 251 

PRACTICAL LESSONS FROM THE LIFE OF ELI 

"It is the Lord; let Him do what 
seemeth Him good."— 1 Samuel 3:18. 

THROUGH Samuel the Lord had sent Eli a 
message indicating that disaster would come 
to his house. The words of our text were 
spoken when he heard that the calamity was 



intended of the Lord, and indicate therefore 
submission before the disaster rather than 
afterward. So these words represent humility 
on the part of Eli. 

Eli had been a judge in Israel for many 
years; and so far as the record goes, he was 
thoroughly exemplary himself— just, in all his dealings. 
But his sons were styled "sons of Belial"— they were 
wicked in various ways. While, therefore, Eli's own influence 
was for the benefit of the nation of Israel, here 
was a contrary influence which grew up under his 
protection, under his sanction. Had these evil-doers 
been others than those of his own family, doubtless 
Eli would have dealt with them according to his authority 
as a judge. We have here an illustration of 
a man who, though godly himself, was weak as the 
head of his family. As the head of his household he 
should have trained up his children in the way they 
should go. He should have trained them up in righteousness; 
otherwise they should have ceased to be members 
of his household, and should have come under certain 
restraint, which he, as a law-giver, should have enforced. 

R5297 : page 25 1 

THE FLAW IN ELI'S CHARACTER 

From this story we may draw a lesson as to what God 
expects of us and our families. If a child were meddlesome, 
thieving, immoral or otherwise an injurious person, 
the Christian parent should not allow such things to 
go on. He is obligated to bring the matter to some kind 
of termination. If, however, a child has a thought different 
from our own as to what constitutes reverence to 
God, we are not to assume that he should be brought under 
restraint. 

We are to recall that this message came to Eli through 
the boy Samuel. Samuel had, after the manner of a 
Prophet in those days, heard the voice of the Lord calling 
him and speaking to him. Thinking it was Eli's voice, 
he had gone to him and asked, What will you have? And 
Eli replied that he had not called him, and directed him 
to lie down again. This was repeated three times, and 
Eli perceived that the Lord had called the child. He 
therefore instructed Samuel again to lie down, but that 
if the call was repeated he should answer, "Speak, Lord; 
for thy servant heareth," indicating his readiness to do 
Him service. Samuel did as he was directed, and the 

R5297 : page 252 

Lord told him that because of Eli's carelessness in respect 
to the doings of his family, they should be cut off from 
the priesthood. 

ELI'S BEAUTIFUL SUBMISSION 



It was quite a remarkable thing that Eli should manifest 
no resentment against the channel the Lord had 
used! Eli had received Samuel into his family when the 
child had been consecrated by his parents. Now, finding 
that apparently God was passing him by and communicating 
with him through the child, the circumstance would 
have furnished sufficient cause for a proud spirit to rise 
up in resentment. But Eli's course proved that his own 
heart was tender. He answered, when Samuel explained 
what the Lord had told him, "It is the Lord; let Him do 
what seemeth Him good." It is the Lord's judgment. It 
is surely right! surely good! Let the Lord do what 
seemeth to Him good, even though it means disaster to 
my own family, even though it means the cutting off of 
my own family from the priesthood. 

This cutting off from the priesthood would mean that 
the sons of Eli would die, for they were the priests in the 
regular lineal order of the Aaronic priesthood. This is a 
very beautiful example of absolute submission. If Eli 
was weak in some respects, he was strong in others, as is 
shown in his humility and submission. Those who are 
meek and teachable themselves, often find great difficulty 
in being sufficiently positive in their dealing with others 
who are properly under their control. The quality of 
character which would tend to make them meek and submissive 
toward the Lord, would tend to make them kind 
and lenient toward others. But it is good to be able to 
carry out with firmness the will of the Lord in respect to 
others, and at the same time be meek and submissive in 
respect to the Lord, His providence and arrangements. 

LESSONS FOR THE CHRISTIAN 

As Christians we may learn valuable lessons from this 
incident. We should make sure as to our willingness to 
receive the Truth in whatever way the Lord is pleased 
to send it to us, whether from the mouth of a little child, 
or whether unlearned men, like St. Peter and St. John, 
may bring it. 

It may have been difficult for the priests of the Apostles' 
day to hear those unlearned men speaking with 
power the Message from God; and they would say, Surely 
God would not speak through such stammering lips! 
God would surely not pass us by— we who have spent 
years in study, and who are recognized as priests of the 
Divine order! Being in this wrong attitude of heart and 
mind, they rejected not only those humble men with their 
Message, but also the Lord Himself. 

This is also the spirit of the world. Whoever is faithful 
in speaking the Word of God from the Bible will have 
less and less attention from the worldly-wise. An ever-increasing 
number of people are thinking of the works 
of creation as having come about by processes of Evolution. 
More and more they are thinking that the Bible is 
not the Word of God; but that the Apostles were merely 



deluded men, deceived men; that Jesus Himself did not 
know what He was doing. They think that He was a 
good man, that doubtless God Himself was with Him, 
because of the good that flowed from His teaching. And 
yet they think that they could give forth better wisdom— 
these great teachers who would like to make a new Bible 
after their own heart! 

In our own day, the worldly-wise are looking from the 
wrong standpoint. They are looking in the wrong direction, 
they are not looking to see the New Dispensation 
now coming in. They will not recognize what is now 
taking place until the sunlight of Truth begins to flood 
the world. Then, turning about, they will perceive the 
real Sun of Righteousness, and begin to grasp the whole 
situation. We are glad that they will turn about and take 
a view of matters from a different standpoint. But all 
who are God's true children are ready to receive God's 
Message from whatever source it may come to them. 

A specially important thought in our text is that Eli 
was submissive to the calamity. This was a good condition 
of heart for him. Thus, not striving against the 
Divine will, but meekly bowing to it, he showed that his 
trouble was merely that of weakness of the flesh. We 
find that there is now a similar condition existing. It is 
the duty of the Lord's people today to recognize that the 
present order of nominal church systems is passing away, 
and will presently be overthrown in the great time of 
trouble. This message naturally enough causes resentment 
in the hearts of a great many. They have been 
boasting of their great financial power, their strength, 
etc. And the mention of the fall of this would naturally 
awaken their opposition. We must not be surprised, 
therefore, that their anger is aroused against us, as we 
tell them of the time of trouble that is before us. 

HEART LOYAL, BUT WEAK 

To Eli, this message that his family would be cut off 
from the priesthood was a severe blow. And so our Message 
about the Royal Priesthood is not a palatable message 
to nominal Christendom. But some of the Lord's people 
among them today are not in sympathy with the trend of 
affairs. These are the ones who will say, "It is the Lord; 
let Him do what seemeth Him good!" 

This will be the attitude of the Great Company. They 
are weak in standing forth for the Lord, and yet submissive 
in the time of trouble, and loyal to the Lord's cause 
and the interests affiliated therewith. 

Samuel would seem to represent more clearly the Little 
Flock class, and Eli the Great Company class— the 
latter being weak in some respects, but loyal at heart to 
the Lord. But it is the Samuel type that we should seek 
to copy— so fully out of sympathy are we with unrighteousness 
and sin, and so fully in accord with righteousness. 
We are ready to speak God's Message, which must necessarily 
be a very unpleasant one. As it is unpleasant for 



us now to tell forth the approaching disaster that will 
involve both Church and State, so to Samuel it must have 
been a very unpleasant duty to go to his best friend, his 
benefactor, bearing from the Lord a message of disaster 
to himself and his family. 

We would do well to speak sympathetically of these 
things, rather than coldly, rather than exultingly. We do 
sympathize with them, both in the condition of things at 
the present time and also regarding the things we recognize 
to be coming upon them. More and more do we 
receive word of ministers, telling us that they perceive 
that the power of God is departing from their congregations, 
and that evidences are on every hand that they have 
been wrong doctrinally, and that the general trend of the 
present time is toward social unrest and upheaval. 



"O! teach me, Lord, the art 
With Wisdom to remove 

The errors that deceive the heart, 
And Truth to clearly prove. 

"O! arm me with the mind, 

Meek Lamb, that was in Thee; 

And let my fervent zeal be joined 
With grace and charity." 



R5297 : page 253 

THE GOLDEN CALF 

--SEPTEMBER 21. -EXODUS 32:15-20,30-35.- 

"Little children, keep yourselves 
from idols."— 1 John 5:21. 

THE Israelites experienced a severe trial of 
faith and obedience soon after they had entered 
into covenant relationship with God. 
In their trial they failed utterly. The Covenant 
was broken. However, after punishing 
them, God renewed the Covenant with them. 
This constituted a fresh manifestation of 
Divine Mercy. 

The circumstances of this testing are a 
part of this lesson. Moses, by Divine direction, 
after the making of the Covenant, went up into Mt. 
Sinai, taking with him Joshua as his servant. He was 
gone forty days— a comparatively long period, under the 
circumstances. The Israelites felt themselves very much 
like children in the hands of Moses. To them he was 
God's representative in a very special sense. His prolonged 
absence gave room for the cultivation of faith, 



patience, trust. 
R5298 : page 253 

They remembered the trying experiences through which 
they had passed. The Egyptians and slavery were behind 
them; the Amalekites, who already had attacked them, 
were still their enemies and might renew the attack. What 
would they do in the absence of Moses whose upheld 
hands had brought them God's favor and prosperity in 
battle? 

Here worldly wisdom came in. Aaron, the high priest, 
the brother of Moses and his representative in leadership, 
was perplexed as to how to keep the people from utter 
discouragement, fear, etc. They seemed to need and to 
call for a representative of God visible to their eyes. They 
apparently were unable fully to trust to the God whom 
they could not see, after His special representative, Moses, 
was out of their sight. 

The leaders of the people took counsel together and determined 
that they would make a representation of 
Jehovah— an image which the people, looking upon, could 
use as an instrument of worship. We are not to suppose 
that the Israelites recognized the golden calf as their God 
Jehovah, but used it merely as a symbol, or representation, 
just as the heathen use idols as representatives of their 
gods, and just as some Christians consider it proper to 
use the crucifix as a representation of Christ— not to worship, 
but merely to assist the faith and to hold the 
attention. 

Today's lesson seems clearly to indicate that God was 
greatly displeased with their symbolical representation of 
Himself. This was one of His commands given to the 
Israelites: "Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven 
image, or any likeness" of God, or of anything, to bow 
down before it and worship it as a symbol of God. 

MAKING THE GOLDEN CALF 

We are not to suppose that the calf was made of solid 
metal. It is not at all probable that all the jewelry of all 
the Israelites, gathered together, would have been nearly 
enough to make a calf of any size of solid metal. The 
supposition is that, after the manner of that time, the calf 
was made either of clay or wood and then laminated, or 
covered over with the molten metal— the gold which had 
constituted the jewelry of the people. This in turn doubtless 
was graven, or tooled. Having made the idol, the 
people rejoiced in it as an evidence of God in their midst. 
They gave themselves up to a season of frolic— singing, 
dancing, feasting. 

This was the condition of things at the end of the 
forty days spent by Moses in the mount with God. As 
he came down from the mountain with the tables of the 
Law, he heard the shouts of the people, and then beheld 
them worshiping the golden calf and offering sacrifices 



and incense to it. Moses was angry. He was the mediator 
between God and Israel— the representative of both. He 
had a right to be angry; for he was charged by God with 
the responsibility of that nation, and he realized that a 
serious crime against the Divine Covenant had taken place 
during his absence. 

Moses dashed the tables of stone— the tables of the 
Law— into fragments, indicating that the Covenant was 
broken. He went down to the people, angry against them, 
as God's representative. Armed with Divine authority, he 
let fall upon them a just penalty for their departure from 
God and rapid retrogression into sin. 

Still, as the representative of the people, Moses was a 
patriot of the highest order. He went to God in prayer, 
and besought that if the penalty of this sin was the casting 
off of his people he might be blotted out instead. This 
was in response to God's proposition that Moses alone 
seemed to be loyal, and that God would make of him the 
nation who should inherit the promises made to Israel. 
Such patriotism as Moses here evinced has surely not 
often been equalled. It meant loyalty to his work as 
Israel's representative and mediator, and at the same 
time loyalty to God, whom he also represented. 

"KEEP YOURSELVES FROM IDOLS" 

Let us now apply the lesson to Spiritual Israel. After 
the Christian has left the world, the slavery, the sin, 
after he has passed the bitter experiences of Marah, after 
he has had manifestations of God's favor, after he has 
partaken of the Bread from Heaven, after he has entered 
fully into Covenant relationship with God— there comes a 
time when he must walk by faith, and not by sight. He is 
being proved by the Lord. If he fails in this lesson, as 
the typical Israelites did, it will be a serious matter for 
him. 

We are not meaning to suggest that any Christian 
would be liable to make a golden image literally. We do 
mean to say, however, that this matter of making images, 
and of allowing them to divert and absorb our worship of 
God is one of the greatest trials and tests which comes to 
Spiritual Israelites. The golden calf which some set up to 
worship is business. They give themselves wholly to it, 
sacrificing their time and energy. They treat it as a god. 
The love of money and of the things which money can 
procure leads into idolatry, and thereby breaks their covenant 
with the Lord. 

Others idolize the opposite sex, and give all that they 
possess for its favor and fellowship. They worship the 
creature more than the Creator, as the Apostle explains. 
They are making a great mistake. Jesus declared this, 
saying, He that loves father, or mother, or children, or 
self or any other creature more than Me is not worthy 
of Me. 

Still another idol is to be noted— the idol of sectarianism. 
St. Paul warned against this idol, saying, "One 



of you says, I am of Paul; another, I am of Apollos; another, 
I am of Peter." (I Cor. 1:12; 3:4.) Then he inquires, 
Is not this reverencing of men a form of idolatry? putting 
it, "Are ye not carnal?" The same principle we may apply 
to ourselves today, and guard ourselves against sectarian 
worship. If one says, "I am of Calvin"; another, "I am 
of Luther"; another, "I am of Wesley"; etc., are not these 
evidences of carnality? And worse than this, is there not 
danger of worshiping the human institutions which bear 
these human names, and thus of having something to come 

R5298 : page 254 

between the soul of the Christian and his God? We 
believe that there is a serious danger along this line. 
We urge Spiritual Israelites that they cease to worship the 
creed idols, and that all God's children turn from idols of 
every kind, and worship and reverence God alone. 

The tendency to formulate and reverence the creeds 
instead of the Bible has been manifest ever since the first 
one was made— the Nicene creed— A.D. 325. Every creed 
tends to take the place of the Bible, just as the Talmud 
does with the Jews. Jesus spoke against this, saying, "Ye 
do make void the Word of God through your traditions." 

The creeds of Christendom are our Christian traditions 
respecting the Truth. God's intention evidently was that 
His people should have no creed except the Bible as a 
whole. They were to believe all of the Word of God and 
to search the Scriptures daily, to ascertain its teachings. 
Thus God's people were to grow in grace and knowledge, 
as would not be possible were creed idols to be set up and 
divert the attention of the Lord's people in various 
directions. 



R5298 : page 254 

TABLES OF THE LAW REPLACED 

-SEPTEMBER 28.-REVIEW.- 

"Thou art a God ready to pardon, gracious and merciful, slow 
to anger, and abundant in loving-kindness."— Nehemiah 9:17. 

WHOEVER fails to see that Moses and Israel 
and the Law were types fails of getting the 
real lesson out of them. Moses was not 
merely a type of Jesus; but as St. Peter explains, 
he was a type of the entire Church 
of Christ, of which Jesus is the Head— the 
Church of Glory. St. Peter's words are, 
"Moses truly said unto the fathers, A 
Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up 
unto you of your brethren, like unto me."— 
Acts 3:22,23. 



Jesus was raised up first, and since Pentecost the raising 
up from amongst the brethren has progressed. The 
work will be consummated when the full number of the 
elect Church shall have been found, tested, proven and 
accepted to glory. Then the antitypical Moses will begin 
His great work of delivering all of mankind who desire to 
come back into harmony with God— all of whom were 
represented in the twelve tribes of Israel. 

The Church of this Gospel Age is, as St. James declares 
(1:18), "A kind of first-fruits [to God] of His 
creatures." Otherwise it is called the Church of the First-borns, 
and was typically represented in the tribe of Levi, 
all of whom represented the first-borns of Israel, saved 
in the Passover. These first-borns were divided into two 
classes— the priests and their servants. The priests represented 
The Christ— High Priest and under priests. The 
Levites represented the remaining number of the 
overcomers. 

The antitypical Priests will be made a Royal Priesthood. 
Jesus, the great High Priest, invested with kingly 
honors, will have associated with Himself the faithful 
Little Flock, a Royal Priesthood, His joint-heirs. The 
remainder of the overcoming Church are colaborers on a 
less glorious plane, yet spiritual. The work of all will be 
primarily to bless the people of the earth desiring to come 
into harmony with God, and typically represented in the 
remaining tribes of Israel. 

THE FIRST TABLES OF THE LAW 

The first tables of the Law were prepared by the Lord 
Himself, as well as written by Him. This represents how 
man in his creation was a perfect image of his Creator, 

R5299 : page 254 

formed, created, in full accord with the Divine will and 
fully expressive of the Divine Law. Adam needed no 
further preparation, and he needed no other law than that 
which was in and of himself as a perfect being. 

But by reason of sin this Law was broken. Poor 
humanity no longer has a proper judgment respecting sin 
and righteousness. The original tables are shattered and 
have grown illegible. Man needs the great Mediator, to 
make reconciliation for his iniquity and then to rewrite 
the Law of God in his flesh. 

Moses was instructed to hew out the two tables of the 
Law. This would represent that The Christ of glory is 
fully commissioned to prepare the hearts of mankind for 
the rewriting of the Divine Law. To prepare man to obey 
God's Law will require that they shall experience Restitution 
—lifting up out of sin and degradation. This work, 
committed to Moses in the type, is in the antitype committed 
to Christ. 

The second coming of Moses down from the mountain 
with the two tables of the Law was peculiarly different 



from the presentation of the first tables, which were 
broken. Coming with the second tables, Moses' face 
shone; and it was necessary for him to put on a veil, which 
thereafter he wore when in the presence of the Israelites, 
but removed when going into the presence of God. 

This is understood to signify that Christ's work as 
the Mediator, at His Second Advent, will be accompanied 
by a veiling of His glory, so that the world will not see 
Jesus. This He declared, "Yet a little while, and the 
world seeth Me no more; but ye shall see Me." However, 
the Apostle explains that the Church will be prepared to 
see Christ in His glory by being changed from the earthly 
nature to the Heavenly nature. "We shall see Him as He 
is"; for "we shall be like Him"— "changed in a moment, 
in the twinkling of an eye"; for "flesh and blood cannot 
inherit the Kingdom of God." (I John 3:2; I Cor. 15:50-52.) 
We remember that Saul of Tarsus saw Jesus 
thus in His glory "shining above the brightness of the 
sun" at noonday. Seeing him unveiled, Saul was smitten 
to the earth and seriously blinded. 

The putting on of the veil (Exodus 34:1,4,28-35) 
represented that at the Second Advent of Christ, when He 
will accomplish His great work as Mediator for man and 
become their Leader into the Land of Promise— Paradise 
restored— He will veil His glory from mankind, and speak 
to them through the veil, and not directly from the spirit 
plane. While mankind will see Jesus no more, it will be 
to their advantage. Instead, they will see Him represented 
in the Ancient Worthies; as He declared, "Ye shall see 
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and all the Prophets."— 
Luke 13:28. 

Nor will that mean that mankind will merely see the 
Ancient Worthies as they were. Rather, the world will 
see them resurrected in human perfection, and therefore 
perfect, in the image of God, samples of what all mankind 
may attain unto, if they will but give heed to the words of 
the great Prophet— the antitypical Moses. 

St. Peter tells us of that time, saying, "It shall come 
to pass that the soul that will not hear [obey] that Prophet 
[The Glorious Messiah] shall be destroyed from amongst 
the people."— Acts 3:22,23. 

OTHER FEATURES OF THE TYPE 

The anointing of the priests of the Aaronic priesthood 
typified the anointing of Jesus and His Royal Priesthood. 

R5299 : page 255 

As in the type, sacrifices were necessary to be offered before 
the anointing and consecration to the offices were 
possible, so it must be in the antitype. Jesus needed to 
offer up Himself, and by that offer of Himself to show 
His devotion and loyalty to God by sacrificing even unto 
death. 
Similarly, those called to be members of the Body of 



Christ, the under priesthood, of which He is the High 
Priest, could consecrate to their office only by sacrifice. 
In the case of the typical High Priest the sacrifice was 
a bullock. The antitype was the Lord's own body. In the 
case of the typical under priests the sacrifice was the 
goat. The antitype is the flesh, the human nature of the 
Church. Thus when St. Paul exhorts the Church in 
respect to their portion, he says, "I beseech you, therefore, 
brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your 
bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, and 
your reasonable service."— Rom. 12:1. 

The same sacrifices which proved the loyalty of the 
typical high priest and the under priests became also 
sacrifices of atonement for the sins of the people— typical 
of the real sacrifices which are the basis for the forgiveness 
of the sins of the world and thus for the reconciliation 
of the world, in God's due time. These are the "better 
sacrifices," mentioned by St. Paul. (Heb. 9:23.) In other 
words, everything in the type was on a small scale, inferior 
to the antitype. The typical mediator offered 
typical sacrifices. The real Mediator offers "better sacrifices." 
The typical mediator led the typical tribes of Israel 
into the Land of Promise. The antitypical Mediator, during 
the thousand years of His Reign, will lead all who 
become people of God back to the blessings and privileges 
lost through Adam's disobedience, and redeemed by the 
Sacrifice at Calvary. 

A MERCIFUL, GRACIOUS GOD 

Our Golden Text describes the God who appeals to our 
hearts— the merciful One, gracious, ready to pardon, slow 
to anger, abundant in loving-kindness. It is difficult for 
us to imagine how much Christians and the world in general 
have lost through our miserable misconceptions of the 
character of God, handed down to us through the creeds 
of the Dark Ages. 

The thought that God has been intent upon torturing 
His creatures at the hands of demons throughout eternity 
has doubtless been the cause of much of the infidelity now 
prevalent, as well as a great hindrance to the cause of 
Christ amongst the heathen. Mankind of today cannot 
worship and appreciate Brother Calvin's misconception of 
the Almighty's character. The whole world should 
breathe freer since our Presbyterian friends have repudiated 
that feature of Calvin's doctrine which declared all 
non-elect infants bound for eternal torture. 

In the past, God manifested His mercy and kindness 
in a typical way to the typical people, merely chastening 
them for sins, but forgiving them, and permitting them 
to go on and try further. Yet God never fully manifested 
to the world His Love and Mercy until our Lord's First 
Advent. Of that great event we read, "Herein is manifested 
the Love of God toward us, in that He sent His 
Only Begotten Son into the world," that "whosoever believeth 
in Him should not perish, but have everlasting life." 



Up to that time Sin and Death had reigned without 
cessation for 4,124 years. The sending of His Son was 
the first expression of God's purpose of forgiveness. But 
He has not yet forgiven the world's sins. He has only 
made the proper provision for them through the death of 
His Son, that the sins of the world may be cancelled in 
God's own due time. The whole world is still "lying in 
the Wicked One"— slaves of Sin and Death. The world's 
hope lies beyond, in the glorious Reign of Messiah's Kingdom. 
It centers in Him as the antitypical Prophet, Priest 
and King. Messiah, as the Seed of Abraham, according 
to the Promise, will bless, uplift and assist back into 
harmony with God all the willing and obedient of all the 
families of the earth. 

The only work yet done is the calling of the Church 
to be Messiah's Bride, and joint-heir and co-worker with 
Him in that glorious Messianic Kingdom, for which we 
wait and pray, "Thy Kingdom come; Thy will be done on 
earth, as it is done in Heaven." In that Kingdom God's 
Loving-kindness, as well as His Wisdom and Power, will 
be abundantly witnessed to angels and to men. 



"The remnant saved from Israel's race, 
Redeemed from Israel's fall, 

Shall praise Him for His wondrous grace, 
And hail Him Lord of all. 

"Gentiles shall come, and coming sing, 
Throughout this earthly ball, 

Hosannas to our heavenly King, 
And hail Him Lord of all." 



R5299 : page 255 

AN INTERESTING QUESTION 
NOT BY RIGHT, STILL BY GRACE 

Question.— Did Christ's death give to every person a 
right to a resurrection? 

Answer.— No! Christ's death gave nothing to any 
person except to Christ Himself. Our Lord's faithfulness 
unto death gave Him a right to a better resurrection, according 
to the Father's promise. Having received that 
better resurrection, He no longer needs the earthly life 
and earthly rights, which He "laid down" in obedience to 
the Father's Program. However, since He did not forfeit 
those earthly rights, and did not give them away, they are 
still His. 

Not needing them Himself now, because He has the 
better, the spiritual, as His reward, the Lord has those 
earthly rights in the Father's hands to His credit on the 



books of Justice. He is holding that credit on the books 

of Justice, and intends, according to the Father's arrangement, 

to use it in due time for the purchase of the world. 

In the end of this Gospel Age, He will present the merit 

of His sacrifice "for all people." We are assured that 

R5300 : page 255 

it will be accepted by Justice and that all mankind will 
come forth, will be turned over to the Redeemer, who 
will then take unto Himself His great power and will 
reign for a thousand years, as the Mediator between God 
and man. This mediation will reach mankind through 
Israel, with whom the New Covenant will be inaugurated. 

While waiting for the time to come when He shall 
give His earthly rights as a Restitution blessing to mankind, 
the Redeemer in carrying out the Father's Program 
makes use of His merit in the interest of those whom the 
Father draws and calls to be the Church of the First-borns. 
To each called and obedient one who turns from 
sin and presents his body a living sacrifice to the Father, 
the Redeemer, as his Advocate, imputes a sufficiency of 
His Merit to make the sacrifice acceptable. Then, as soon 
as the sacrifice is accepted and completed, the imputed 
merit of Christ will be thereby freed and returned, so that 
in the end of the Age, after the Church has been assisted 
by the imputation of Christ's merit, the original amount 
in the hands of Justice will be unimpaired— sufficient for 
the sins of the whole world— sufficient to give Restitution 
blessings to Adam and all of his posterity. 



page 257 

VOL. XXXIV SEPTEMBER 1 No. 17 
A. D. 1913-A. M. 6041 



CONTENTS 

Superiority of the Original Abrahamic 
Covenant 259 

The Children of the Oath 260 

The Three Great Covenants in Brief 260 

"Laborers Together With God" 261 

Some Glaring Inconsistencies 262 

The Law of Retribution 263 

God's Work in Our Wills and Hearts 263 

Three Ways of Determining God's Will 264 

The Work Done in Our Hearts 265 

God's Supervision in World and Church 265 

World's Empires Illustrated Great 
Principles 266 

Matters of Church Discipline 266 

Graves of Greediness 267 

The Sin of Murmuring 267 

Selfish Prayers Answered 268 

Jealousy and Envy Punished 269 

Some Interesting Letters 271 

Berean Questions in Scripture Studies 271 

page 258 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 



SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



VOLUNTEER EXTENSION WORK 

The Volunteers this year are doing nobly and we have 
splendid ammunition. No doubt the results will be great. 
However, we must not hope to know the details until we reach 
the Kingdom. Meantime it is ours to do faithfully what our 
hands find to do— what our Lord privileges us to do. 

We suggest that Class Extension work find parallel in 
Volunteer Extension work. After you have served your place 
of residence, seek the Lord's blessing in an endeavor to extend 
the distribution of free literature to other towns and cities 
within a reasonable radius. The Society is pleased to 
supply the ammunition free of all charges. It merely wishes, 
with the order, the names of the places to be served and the 
assurance that the work undertaken will (D.V.) be promptly 
done— that the literature will not be permitted to lie by unused. 
Remember that census population includes infants and that a 
proper estimate of one paper to the family would be one to 
five of the population. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR OCTOBER 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. 
At the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns 
for October follow: (1) 165; (2) 166; (3) 305; (4) 179; (5) 
58; (6) 4; (7) 102; (8) 330; (9) 42; (10) 39; (11) 7; (12) 230; 
(13) 16; (14) 12; (15) 147; (16) 208; (17) 105; (18) 145; 
(19) 135; (20) 8; (21) 281; (22) 109; (23) 12; (24) 176; (25) 
160; (26) 222; (27) 293; (28) 101; (29) 235; (30) 244; (31) 168. 



R5300 : page 259 

SUPERIORITY OF THE ORIGINAL ABRAHAMIC 
COVENANT 

THE Scriptures mention three great Covenants, 
typified by the three wives of 
Abraham. These Covenants are represented 
in the order of those wives. Sarah was the 
first wife of Abraham— the only acknowledged 
wife. Then came Hagar, Sarah's 
maid-servant; and later Keturah. Sarah 
and Hagar each had one son, but Keturah 
had six. The Scriptures show that Abraham 
made Isaac his heir (Gen. 25:5), and 



that through Isaac both Ishmael and the sons of Keturah 
received their portion. The fact that Ishmael was born 
before Isaac did not alter the fact that Isaac was the heir. 

From the very beginning, the Covenant which God had 
in mind was the one which is in operation in the Church— 
the Abrahamic Promise, or Covenant. St. Paul declares 
(Gal. 3:8) that God preached the Gospel to Abraham in 
advance, saying, "In thee and in thy Seed shall all the 
families of the earth be blessed." (Gen. 12:3; 28:14.) The 
same Apostle also shows that the original Abrahamic 
Covenant mentions two seeds, represented in the statement, 
"I will multiply thy seed (1) as the stars of heaven, 
and (2) as the sand which is upon the sea shore." (Gen. 22:17.) 
As Abraham here typified God, the Promise 
shows two classes developed as God's children— (1) 
Christ and the Church, on the spirit plane; and (2) the 
Restitution class of mankind, on the human plane. 

St. Paul refers to these two seeds in Rom. 4:16,17, 
the one developed under Faith, and the other under Law 
and Works. The first, the Spiritual Seed, has been in 
process of development during this Gospel Age. The 
second, the seed according to the flesh, the Restitution 
class (with the exception of the Ancient Worthies, developed 
previous to the Gospel Age), will be developed 
under the New Covenant and by its Mediator, according 
to Law and Works, and not by Faith merely. 

The Law Covenant, made at Sinai, was a type of the 
New Covenant, and had for its mediator Moses, the man 
of God. This Covenant brought nothing to perfection, 
however, for its mediator, as well as the people, was imperfect. 
St. Paul explains that Israel, typified by Ishmael, 
did not receive the blessing, but that The Christ received 
it. Later, however, Israel is to receive a blessing, as the 
Apostle points out; and that blessing will be brought by 
the New Covenant, after the glorification of the Church. 

The question naturally arises, If the Abrahamic Covenant 
contained the Divine Promise to the full, both for 
the Church and for the world, why did God arrange for 
two other Covenants; namely, the Law Covenant, instituted 
at Mount Sinai with Israel, and having Moses for 
its mediator, and the New Covenant, which is to follow, 
and under which the whole world is to be blessed? 

PURPOSE OF THE ADDED COVENANTS 

We answer that these two Covenants were added to 
further elucidate the Divine Purpose, and to help us to 
appreciate the operation of Divine Love and Justice. 

(1) The Law Covenant was added to the Abrahamic 
Promise, or Covenant, as St. Paul explains, to fill up the 
time until the promised Seed should come, to whom the 
Covenant applied, and this was necessary because of sin, 
that the high Divine standard for the Seed might be shown. 
The Law Covenant with Israel rendered this very service; 
for it set up the standard which approved Jesus and condemned 
all others. It also helped to develop the Jewish 



nation toward God and righteousness, and to fit and prepare 
some of them for the glorious High Calling of the 
Gospel Age, which ultimately came to them, inviting them 
to Divine favor and joint-heirship with Messiah in the 
Millennial Kingdom. 

The Law Covenant also provided certain typical transactions 
and prophecies, which have been very beneficial 
to Spiritual Israel during this Gospel Age, illustrating to 
us in these types and shadows of the Law, and enunciating 
to us in the prophecies of the Old Testament, various 
matters appertaining to the blessing of the Church during 
this Age, and that of the world during the next Age. 

(2) Through the New Covenant— the second addition 
to the original, Abrahamic Covenant— the world is to get 
all of its blessings and favors of Restitution. This New 
[Law] Covenant has not yet been inaugurated; for the 
Mediator who is to inaugurate it, and to cause its blessings 
to reach every member of Adam's race during the 
Millennial Age, has not yet been completed. This New 
Covenant will be inaugurated in the end of this Gospel 
Age, and its work will embrace the entire period of the 
Millennium. 

Jesus, our Redeemer and Head, is the appointed Mediator 
of the New Covenant by virtue of the merit of His 
own sacrifice at Calvary. He could have sealed it and 
begun at once its operation, had not the Father "provided 
some better thing for US" (the Church, the Bride of 
Christ, whom God foreknew as Jesus' members), than for 
the Ancient Worthies. This is the Mystery— that the Gospel 
Age has been devoted to the development of the Body 
of the Mediator.— Ephesians 3:3-6; Colossians 1:27. 

R5300 : page 260 

THE CHILDREN OF THE OATH 

The Scriptures clearly show that our Lord was the 
Messiah, the long-promised Seed of Abraham. (Luke 1:32,33,55,72-74; 
2:11; John 1:41; 4:25,26.) "The 

Church, which is His Body," is also developed under the 
original Abrahamic Covenant, which God bound with an 
oath. St. Paul calls it "the hope set before us, which we 
have as an anchor of the soul, both sure and steadfast, 
and which entereth into that within the veil." (Heb. 6:13-20.) 
Again, he says to the Church, "Ye, brethren, as 
Isaac was, are the children of the Promise." (Gal. 4:28.) 
The Church are the children of the Oath. 

Our begetting Promise, through Christ, to the new 
nature, is very different from that by which the Jews 
were constituted the House of Servants, and wholly different 
from those promises by which restored Israel and 
all the families of the earth will be brought to human 
perfection through Restitution processes, as children of 
the Keturah, or New Covenant. Since our Lord was developed 
under the Abrahamic Covenant, the Church also 
must be developed under that Covenant; for the Spiritual 



Seed cannot be the child of two mothers. It is written, 
"In Isaac shall thy Seed be called."— Gen. 21:12. 

THE NEW COVENANT EVERLASTING 

It is very evident that the world does not enter into 
New Covenant relationship with God individually at the 
beginning of the Millennial Age, and will do so only at 
the end of that Age. Throughout that period, the matter 
will be strictly and solely in the hands of the Mediator. 
During that time He will uplift mankind, and make them 
individually and collectively (as many as are willing) 
worthy of God's everlasting life and blessing. So then, 
we see clearly that the end of the Millennial Age will be 
the end of the Mediatorship of Christ, and will mean the 
personal and individual New Covenant relationship of 
each one of the world. 

There is another view, however, which should have 
our consideration, and that is this: The same New Covenant 
that starts with the beginning of the Millennial Age 
will continue through all eternity. There is not to be 
an additional New Covenant at the end of the thousand 
years of Christ's reign. This New Covenant will be 
operated, not directly between God and man, but through 
the Mediator. In this Covenant, God agrees that He will 
remember the sins and iniquities of the world no more, 
that He will have nothing against them, and that they 
may have His blessings the same as though they were 
personally received of Himself. They will be received 
through their Representative, The Mediator, The Christ. 

The whole world during the Millennial Reign will be 
in Covenant relationship with God, in exactly the same 

R5301 : page 260 

way that Israel was in Covenant relationship with God- 
through the Mediator. The Law Covenant persisted after 
Moses died. So this New Covenant will continue after 
Christ shall have finished His work. The whole world 
will be under that Covenant arrangement. But before 
God finally accepts them, He will give them a test to see 
how many of them will be found worthy of everlasting 
life. Hence the test at the close of the thousand years 
is a test by Jehovah, a test to prove the worthiness of each 
to enter into everlasting covenant relationship with Him. 
They will not be tested as a nation or as a race, but each 
individual must establish his own right to this covenant 
relationship— a new covenant relationship in that the 
original, similar relationship was vitiated by Father 
Adam's disobedience. 

Throughout the thousand years of Messiah's Reign, 
He as Mediator has absolute control of the whole human 
family. His Law and His arrangements, in full harmony 
with those of Jehovah, will be the ones that will be operative. 
They will be more favorable than any arrangement 
Jehovah could directly make; for mankind being imperfect, 



would be incapable of perfect thoughts and words 

and deeds for awhile, and Jehovah's Law cannot recognize 

sin in any degree. 

The Mediator will have mankind fully under His control 
and regulations for the purpose of uplifting all who 
will. This will include the right, also, to destroy in the 
Second Death any who will not obey. He can exercise 
the full powers of an autocrat in the matter. No one will 
have any authority but Himself. The Son having bought 
the world, He will be an Autocrat for those thousand 
years. The Kingdom will be a Reign of compulsion. 
This will be necessary for the correction of the world 
in righteousness, with a view to their perfecting. 

A FULL TRIAL GUARANTEED TO ALL 

The Scriptures are clear in their declaration that God 
has purposed from the beginning that mankind shall have 
another, an individual, trial for everlasting life, wholly 
free from the injury received by them as a result of the 
failure of Adam in the first trial. Provision has been 
made for this, so that Justice can sanction the arrangement. 
To this end, Christ tasted "death for every man." 
He "gave Himself a Ransom for all, to be testified in 
due time." The due time for some is in the present Age. 
The due time for others will be in the Messianic Age. 

Those who die during the thousand years of Christ's 
Reign will be those only who will have had a full trial. 
They will be those who remain unconverted, those whose 
wills are not right. But God purposes that none shall 
perish because of ignorance, misunderstanding. Therefore 
God has made full provision for the enlightenment 
of all (I Tim. 2:3-6), and that all who will be obedient 
shall be saved; and this full opportunity will be brought 
to all through Christ's Kingdom. 

If, under the Messianic Reign, some will die a hundred 
years old, who are still imperfect, not fully restored 
to perfection, how can such be said to have had a full 
trial? The answer is that God's arrangement for every 
member of the race is that Christ in His Mediatorial 
Kingdom will help them out of their fallen condition, if 
they will. The condition required is that they shall accept 
and seek to obey the Divine will. After coming to a 
clear knowledge of the Truth, all such will be helped out 
of their weaknesses, allowance being made for all their 
failures through imperfection. But those who would sin 
wilfully under such knowledge and opportunity, would 
do the same if they had full knowledge and ability. 

This last class are spoken of as angels, or messengers, 
of Satan and Sin; for whoever wilfully and intelligently 
sins against the Divine arrangement is of Satan's spirit. 
All who develop such disobedient wills shall go into the 
Second Death. There is nothing further for them. The 
whole Plan of Salvation is with a view to rescuing those 
who with knowledge and opportunity will be glad to come 
into harmony with God and to walk in the ways of 



truth and righteousness. 

THE THREE GREAT COVENANTS IN BRIEF 

As heretofore stated, the Abrahamic Covenant is first 
in order of time and importance. This Covenant has 
two parts. The first applies to the Spiritual Seed of 
Abraham, The Christ, Head and Body— the antitype of 
Isaac, or, in another figure, of Isaac and Rebecca. These 
are the Seed of Abraham— the Seed of Promise— not 
fleshly, but Spiritual. 

R5301 : page 261 

The second part of the Covenant applies to the world 
of mankind— "all the families of the earth." These are 
to be blessed by the Spiritual Seed with an opportunity 
of becoming Abraham's natural seed, and heirs, with him, 
of the earth and the fulness thereof. The conditions upon 
which they may obtain God's favor, and a Restitution to 
all that was lost, are that they shall exercise faith, and 
render obedience to the Divine provision which will be 
represented in Messiah's Kingdom, when it shall be 
inaugurated. 

The Seed of Abraham— Jesus and the Church— is the 
legitimate Heir of this Abrahamic Covenant, wholly regardless 
of the Law Covenant which was made with 
Israel at Sinai, or of the New Law Covenant that is to be 
made with Israel at the close of the Gospel Age. 

This Abrahamic Covenant has no mediator; but the 
Law Covenant had Moses for its mediator, and the New 
Law Covenant will have Messiah, the Spiritual Heir of 
the Abrahamic Covenant, as its Mediator. 

The Abrahamic Covenant needs no mediator; for 
there are no terms and conditions upon which to base a 
mediation. In it God merely declared His purpose to find 
a Seed of Abraham, by certain selective processes of His 
own, and to bless and honor this Seed in connection with 
the remainder of mankind. This especially selected Seed 
of Abraham, as the Apostle points out, is Christ and the 
Church-God's Elect.-Gal. 3:8,16,29; Rom. 8:29,30. 

GOD'S SELECTION OF THE SPIRITUAL SEED 

God has taken certain steps whereby He is making a 
selection of those worthy and pleasing to Him, to constitute 
this Messianic company. His arrangement for finding 
these is shown by the Scripture which, referring to 
this call of the Gospel Age to membership in that Seed 
of Abraham, says, "Gather My saints together unto Me; 
those that have made a Covenant with Me by sacrifice." 
(Psa. 50:5.) This Covenant of sacrifice of the human 
will, and of all the rights and privileges and liberties of 
the flesh, proves a most drastic test, and demonstrates 
to the Lord the very peculiar people whom He desires to 
be the Spiritual Seed of Abraham. They become a Spiritual 



Seed by renouncing the flesh and all its rights and 
liberties— even unto death. 

The Head of this Seed is the portion which contains 
the life for the entire Body. All the members added 
to Him needed, first of all, to be justified by His 
merit. These were not justified under the Law Covenant, 
which made nothing perfect; nor were they justified under 
the New Covenant; for it is not yet completed. But 
the blood which by and by will be effective for the sealing 
of the New Law Covenant for Israel and the world, is 
effective now, in advance, for the justification of those 
accepted as the Body of the Mediator. This is possible 
because these Body members were selected from the 
same human family as the rest of mankind. Therefore 
the blood which by and by is to seal and make operative 
the New Covenant to the world, is the same blood, or 
merit of Christ, which justifies freely all those now called 
to be saints, and joint-heirs of Jesus. 

SECOND AND THIRD COVENANTS-TYPE AND ANTITYPE 

The Second Covenant, in order of time, was the Law 
Covenant. (Exod. 19:3-8.) This was an addition to the 
Abrahamic Covenant, which addition could not interfere 
with the original Covenant. It was typical. It had a 
typical mediator, typical sacrifices of bulls and goats, a 
typical Atonement Day, a typical Holy and Most Holy. 

The third and last is the New Law Covenant, to be 
instituted in the future. (Jer. 31:31-34; Heb. 8:6-13.) 
This cannot set aside, or make null or void, the original 
Abrahamic Covenant of Grace, any more than could the 
Law Covenant of Sinai. The New Law Covenant cannot 
be introduced, sealed, made operative, until the Abrahamic 
Covenant shall have brought forth the Seed of 
Abraham and invested Him with glory, honor and Divine 
majesty. Then this antitypical Moses, The Christ complete, 
Head and Body, will mediate between God and the 
world of mankind for a thousand years. 

The basis of this New Covenant's blessings will be 
the merit of Messiah; but this merit will not be presented 
on behalf of the world, or to seal the New Covenant for 
Natural Israel and mankind, in order to the Restitution 
blessings, until first the entire Seed of Abraham, Head 
and Body, shall have been completed; and it cannot be 
completed until all the sacrificing has been finished. The 
sacrifice of the Head was finished eighteen centuries ago, 
and was typified by the bullock, in the Atonement Day 
sacrifices of Israel. The sacrifice of the consecrated 
Church, His members, who have been accepted by Him, 
has been going on now for eighteen centuries, and was 
typified by the goat, in the sacrifices of the same Day of 
Atonement. 

Not until the Messiah shall have finished all of His 
sacrificial work of the Gospel Age, not until the last 
member shall, under His hand, have passed from the 
earthly condition of membership to the Heavenly condition, 



will the sufferings of The Christ be finished, will the 
sufferings which He left behind be filled up; and not 
until then will He usher in the blessings of the Messianic 
Kingdom. And those blessings will be secured to 
mankind by the great Mediator's applying the merit of 
His sacrifice on their behalf. 



R5302: page 261 

"LABORERS TOGETHER WITH GOD" 

"We are laborers together with God."— 1 Cor. 3:9. 

DURING this Gospel Age there has been a 

work of God, arranged for and carried on 

by Him. And that work is the selection 

of the Seed of Abraham. The first opportunity 

of being of this Seed was granted to 

the natural seed of Abraham— Israel after 

the flesh. The work succeeded so far as 

the gathering of an elect company from 

among them was concerned. And having 

accomplished this part of the work, God set 

the Jewish nation aside, while the further work of the 

selection of the Elect from among the other nations has 

continued for eighteen centuries. 

"Israel hath not obtained that which he seeketh for, 
but the Election hath obtained it, and the rest were 
blinded." The blindness is merely until the remaining 
members of the elect class have been found; and then 
God's favor will return to Natural Israel. "And so all 
Israel shall be saved: as it is written, There shall come 
out of Zion the Deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness 
from Jacob; for this is My Covenant with them, 
when I shall take away their sins." Israel made a failure 
respecting the Election, except a few. And yet they are 
still beloved for the fathers' sakes.— Romans 11:7,26-28. 

The one work of the Gospel Age has been the selection 
of the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, through whom all the 
families of the earth shall be blessed— shall become of 
the earthly seed. This Promise, that all the families of 

R5302 : page 262 

the earth shall be blessed, cannot be fulfiled until the 
Spiritual Seed shall first be completed. "If ye be Christ's, 
then are ye Abraham's Seed, and heirs according to the 
Promise." There has been but one work from first to 
last. And so we read: "One soweth, and another reapeth. 
I sent you to reap that whereon ye bestowed no labor; 
other men labored, and ye are entered into their labors." 
(John 4:35-38.) Whether it was at the beginning, or 
now at the close of the Age— the time of the reaping— it is 
all one work, and there is the one purpose being served, 



the gathering of the Elect. 

HUMANITARIAN WORK 

If asked as to the reason why we will not enter into 
and engage in humanitarian work, building hospitals, 
looking after the poor, doing slum work, etc., our 
answer would be, We are so engaged. We have agents 
all over the country attending to that very work. In every 
county in the state there is an almshouse. The hospitals 
are taking care of the sick and the blind. The money to 
do this with is provided by the state— and it is the money 
of the citizens which is used. If anybody assists in doing 
some additional work for the poor, he has that privilege, 
he has that right. 

We believe it to be our duty to be humanitarian, and 
our state laws are humanitarian. New York is a first 
class state. And if we were in Pennsylvania, we would 
be able to say the same. And so in respect to any state 
we know of in this country. As respects these humanitarian 
efforts, the reason we do not engage in them more 
particularly is that we think they are well managed by 
the "powers that be," according to the Government and 
the will of the people. And any one who thinks differently 
holds different views from the majority. We stand in 
with the majority as to the proper way of dealing with 
these questions. Why do we not more particularly take 
part in slum work? We understand that it is not for us to 
do. We cannot do better along this line than the majority. 
To interfere in these matters would imply that we have 
not confidence in the laws. We have no right to go about 
interfering with the laws. 

Why do we not engage in holding revivals? For the 
reason that those who engage in the holding of revivals 
are doing something that the Scriptures never instructed 
us to do. Nothing in the Bible says that we are to go 
and pull the people in to hear some one speak. Let each 
do as seemeth him best. If there is any one who thinks 
differently, and he can do any good, all well and good; if 
he does more harm than good, then that, also, is his 
responsibility. Our responsibility is to follow the course 
laid down by the Bible. And the Bible does not say 
anything about holding revival meetings. Those who 
wish to do this have the privilege of so doing. This is a 
free country. But we do not find that Jesus did this. To 
any one who thinks differently, we give full liberty to do 
according to his will, and find no fault with him. 

Why do you not take up collections for the missionary 
societies? is asked. We answer, You have a right to 
contribute to your missionary society. It is not ours, it is 
yours. You will be responsible to the Master for what 
you do, so you have full right and privilege to do whatever 
you think proper— and we have the same. What we 
are trying to do for the heathen is to show them that 
God is Love. 

We are trying to show them that the theory of 



eternal torment is not the Truth, and that if they 
really knew the teachings of the Bible, they would see 
that God is a God of Love, and they would love Him; 
and this would be a helpful thing to them. You have a 
right to create a missionary fund. We would not throw 
a straw in your way. By and by you will hear whether 
the Master says, "Well done!" to your work or to ours. 

As to why we do not engage in Socialism: Socialism 
is impracticable. We are glad that Socialism has done a 
great deal for the world. We are glad that we have a 
measure of Socialism— the street railways and cars, gas 
and water systems, etc. If, for instance, any family 
wanted to make its own gas and have its own plant for 
filtering water, etc., to do so would be quite an expense. 
And if each wanted to have its own street car lines, etc., 
the streets would be crowded up too much. But when 
Socialism goes on to tell us that it is the savior of the 
world, we dispute the claim. We hold that, on the contrary, 
Socialism is about to bring the world into anarchy. 
Not that Socialists wish to do so, but they are unwise. 

We would be very much inclined to favor many phases 
of Socialism, were it not that we see in the Bible that 
God has a very much better way of accomplishing the 
same results. However, the Bible assures us that there 
is a great time of trouble coming, before the blessings can 
come. But first God is gathering out a saintly company, 
and testing and proving them, so that He can entrust to 
them the government of the future. They will constitute 
the theocracy of God. 

We are fully convinced that the Bible is correct, that 
it is the Truth, and that nothing can bring about the 
desired result but the Kingdom of God. We are laborers 
together with God. He is working with us, and we are 
working with Him. What is the work? God's present 
work is finding the saintly, the true, and guiding them, 
fitting them for the spiritual Kingdom to be introduced. 
Therefore we are working for Socialism to an extent, but 
working in a different manner. Socialists are working 
according to their light, and we according to our light. 

SOME GLARING INCONSISTENCIES 

The various denominations represent Christian people 
with good desires, good intentions, and having certain 
fixed ideas respecting God and His will. No two of these 
agree. Many of their beliefs are thoroughly inconsistent. 
There are over six hundred different denominations. It 
is unreasonable for us to believe, as the Baptists do, that 
any one will go to a place or condition of everlasting 
torment for not having been put into water over his head! 
We cannot believe anything so unreasonable. And just 
the same with our Presbyterian friends and their doctrine. 
They are certainly sincere. They have taken hold of the 
doctrine of John Calvin. 

If John Calvin had had the proper view, he never 
could have signed the death warrant to burn his Christian 



brother Servetus at the stake. This fact teaches us that 
he was not a proper teacher of theology, however good 
he might have been in mind and heart. And when we 
come to look at his theology, that God fore-ordained that 
a little handful of humanity should be saved, not for any 
good that they had done, but of His sovereign will; and 
that He equally fore-ordained all the non-elect to an 
eternity of torture— if we believed such doctrine as this, 
we would believe that God was the veriest devil we could 
imagine— to cause hundreds of millions to come into existence, 
knowing that He had nothing for them but an 
eternity of suffering! That is a most devilish thought! 
We cannot believe that theory. If we did, we could not 
worship God! 

And then as to the Methodists, and their Free Grace! 
This does not give one much show. How could that 
Grace be free?— only one in ten thousand ever having a 
chance of getting it! We are sorry for them if that 

R5302 : page 263 

view appears to their minds as rational. We would not 
be a Methodist or a Presbyterian for a million dollars a 
year! Not that we do not love our Presbyterian, Methodist 
and Catholic friends, etc., but it would not be right 
for us to so believe. We find so much error in any one 
of their doctrines! We find that not one of them is in 
accord with the Bible. 

We prefer to stand by Jesus and the Apostles and all 
who are in harmony with them. We prefer to stand for 
what the Bible calls the Church of the First-born, and for 
whatever the Bible teaches. And when we thus take our 
stand, we find that the Bible teaches something beautiful 
—that God is indeed preparing a Church, to be associated 
with Jesus in His Kingdom; and we find that nobody is 
to be roasted eternally— quite to the contrary, they are all 
to be blessed with an opportunity to live forever. 

The Elect are the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, through 
whom all the non-elect are to be blessed. According to 
the Bible, the dead are all asleep; they do not know anything. 

R5303 : page 263 

"Their sons come to honor and they know it not," 
because "There is no wisdom, nor knowledge, nor device 
in Sheol, whither thou goest." We find that Jesus went 
to Sheol. We find that, having thus given the Ransom-price 
for Adam and his family, all that are in their graves 
shall hear the voice of the Son of Man, and come forth. 

We find that during the thousand years of Messiah's 
Kingdom, Christ and His Church will be reigning— not 
to oppress the world, but to lift them up, to break the 
shackles of sin and death. We find that under this blessed 
arrangement, all will be brought to a knowledge of the 
Truth; and that at the close of that thousand-year period 
Christ will have finished His work; and that as a result 



of His Reign, not only will all be destroyed who love 
unrighteousness, sin, and who refuse to live in harmony 
with God, but all who were willing to come into harmony 
will have bowed the knee. "Unto Him [Christ] every 
knee shall bow and every tongue confess." 

These are the reasons why we cannot work hand-in-glove 
with those who have opposite theories and opposite 
ideas. We cannot associate with systems and be bound 
up to creeds that are dishonoring to God and contrary 
to His Word, the Bible! 

THE LAW OF RETRIBUTION 

There will be many who will have their chance in the 
future who do not have their chance now. But whatever 
knowledge they have now will not do them any harm. 
A certain cast of mind cannot receive the things of God 
now. The Scriptures say that they cannot appreciate a 
God of Justice and Love. Therefore "none of the wicked 
shall understand" is the statement of the Scriptures. If 
they could understand, if they could get the right thought, 
they would see that every transgression, in proportion to 
its degree of wilfulness, will be punished in the future; 
hence they would know that they are treasuring up to 
themselves wrath. 

God has established, as a general law, the principle 
that whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he reap. Every 
step a man takes down must be retraced. If every one 
knew this, it would make mankind very much more careful. 
If a man knows that there is to be a just punishment, 
it will make him very much more careful than if he 
thinks it will be an unjust punishment. Our thought is 
that if the people could get the proper focus on the subject 
of the penalty for sin, it would be the most potent 
factor in convincing them of the propriety of righteous 
living. Furthermore, we might cite to the denominations 
the fact that with all their preaching of eternal torment, 
they succeed in driving but a comparatively small number 
into holiness of life— into becoming footstep followers 
of Jesus, character copies of God's dear Son. 



R5303 : page 263 

GOD'S WORK IN OUR WILLS AND HEARTS 

"Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling, for 

it is God that worketh in you both to will and to do of His good 

pleasure."— Phil. 2:12,13. 

IN EVERY instance where the Apostles use 
the word we, they evidently refer to the 
New Creation, the spiritual New Creatures 
in Christ. When St. Paul says, "Work out 
your own salvation," he is addressing the 



Church, not the world. The world is not 

now on trial for salvation. "Work out your 

own salvation; for it is God that worketh 

in you both to will and to do." But when 

addressing the New Creature we are to remember 

that the personality is still maintained. For 

instance, the Apostle says, "Ye were bought with a price" 

—before you became New Creatures. It is the same ego, 

the same personality as before. 

In the words, "It is God that worketh in you," the 
Apostle does not mean that God began to work in you 
when you were bought, but it means that from before 
the time of your begetting and quickening He has done so; 
for as the Scriptures elsewhere say, we were drawn of 
God, and we were called of God, before our consecration. 

GOD THE MAGNET TO LOVERS OF RIGHTEOUSNESS 

God is represented as the great Magnet, drawing all 
who love righteousness. He drew us before we became 
Christians at all— the truth and righteousness of our 
Heavenly Father was the magnet. Man having been 
originally created in God's image and likeness, a measure 
of this image and likeness still remains. And to whatever 
extent the natural man loves righteousness and truth 
and mercy, he has something that is approved of by God, 
who is the great Center of Righteousness, Justice, 
Truth and Mercy. 

Some of humanity have fallen so low that the drawing 
power of the Magnet has very little influence upon them. 
In others of our fallen race there is a larger measure of 
our Lord's character-likeness remaining. Such as have 
some love for righteousness, some degree of mercy, would 
realize a drawing toward the great Heavenly Father. 
Perhaps every one of us who are disciples of Christ felt 
something of that drawing before we came to the Father 
at all. The Lord Jesus says, "No man can come unto Me, 
except the Father which sent Me draw him." So we 
must first be drawn of the Father. 

But God has appointed only one Way for us to come 
unto Him— and this Way is Christ. Those who desire 
to come unto God, then, must come by this Way, and 
must learn the terms upon which they may come. They 
are told that they can come only by humbling themselves, 
and sacrificing self. "If any man will be My disciple, 
let him deny himself, and take up his cross and follow 
Me." So the Lord puts the barrier there, and none will 
come in except those who have a real, earnest desire. 
In the next Age, God has something to offer the rest of 
mankind. He will deal with them under different conditions. 
But now He is not looking for those who are 
merely feeling after Him. 

To those who seek the Lord there comes the question, 

R5303 : page 264 



Do you love God and righteousness? Will you surrender 
all human will and preference, and accept instead the 
Divine will? If they accept these terms, then they will 
become Jesus' disciples. If they say, No, I cannot go so far 
as that! then they cannot become His disciples. As one 
minister said not long since, "I have not taken my consecration 
so seriously as that yet." So it is with a good 
many. They would like to go to Heaven on flowery 
beds of ease. 

But those who make a full consecration of their lives, 
who through Christ come into vital relationship with the 
Father, are New Creatures. Does God cease to work 
in them after this step has been taken? No. God has 
provided further ways by which He works in them. It 
is the spirit of character-likeness to God— their love of 
righteousness— that so worked in them that they were 
willing to give up their earthly rights. That is a powerful 
working. God thus first works in us to will. All that 
we did, then, was to give ourselves to Him, through 
Christ. We willed that we would give ourselves up to 
God, if He would receive us. And He did receive us. 

THREE WAYS OF DETERMINING GOD'S WILL 

We receive the instruction to know the will of God 
through His Word, through His providences, and through 
all the experiences of life, in order that we may both 
will and do His good pleasure. When we made our 
consecration we willed to do God's will. But we did not 
see that will fully. As we go on, we see His will more 
and more distinctly. And as we see the leadings of His 
providence in all the experiences of life, we become more 
and more imbued with His Spirit— the Holy Spirit. Thus 
God gradually works in us to do. The willing comes 
first, then the quickening, energizing, doing. 

The power that works in us to do is the same power 
that works in us to will. Can we will perfectly? Yes. 
Can we do perfectly? No. Why can we will perfectly 
and not do perfectly? Because the will of God has become 
our will, our mind. The Apostle says, "With the 
mind I myself serve the Law of God, but with the flesh 
the law of sin." (Rom. 7:25.) The flesh has inherited 
various weaknesses and fallen tendencies; therefore we 
are unable to do perfect works, and the flesh continually 
needs the Robe of Christ's Righteousness. 

We need continually that the great Redeemer shall 
be our great Advocate, that we may come with courage 
to the Throne of Heavenly Grace and find mercy and 
help in time of need. So God is working in the New 
Creatures, first to will and then to do His good pleasure. 
And every promise of God is to this end— not merely 
that we should submit to His will, but that we should 
rejoice to do His good pleasure, that we should delight 
to do His will at any cost. Thus shall we work out 
our own salvation and please our Heavenly Lord. 



WORKING OUT OUR OWN SALVATION 

In order to appreciate our text we must study it in its 
proper setting, remembering that it is not addressed, as 
some people are inclined to suppose, to the world. It is 
addressed to a special class whose sins have been forgiven, 
and who through Christ have been brought into 
a special relationship with God, into the position of sons 
of God. And it is from this standpoint that they must 
work out their own salvation. Our salvation is to be 

R5304 : page 264 

brought unto us at the revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

No one has salvation now except in a reckoned sense. 
In this sense we have been saved, and can draw near to 
the Father. But we are still under the general dominion 
of Sin and Death. We are not actually saved as yet. 
We must work out our salvation. In this text the Apostle 
is showing how it is to be done. He shows this further 
when he addresses the Church as Beloved. He would 
not thus address vile persons, or those who had no knowledge 
of Christ— who were either heathen or worse. The 
Epistle itself shows that he is addressing saints of God. 

What kind of salvation is this of which the Apostle 
is speaking— that has to be worked out? It is not salvation 
in the general sense, out of sin and death back to 
human perfection, when conditions will all be favorable, 
when Satan will be bound for a thousand years, and 
when all the active influence of Messiah's Kingdom will 
be in operation. When the Apostle here says, "your 
salvation," he is particularizing the salvation peculiar to 
this Gospel Age— "so great salvation."— Heb. 2:3. 

As we enter more particularly into this matter, to see 
how great a salvation it is, we are more and more 
astonished at its depth and height. It is not merely a 
salvation from sin, but it is very much more. Not only 
is it to be everlasting, but it is a salvation to glory, honor 
and immortality, joint-heirship with Messiah in all the 
glorious things that are His in His exalted position, far 
above angels, principalities and powers and every name 
that is named. (Eph. 1:21.) The wider our eyes of 
understanding open to see the length and breadth and 
height and depth of this great salvation, the grander it 
appears. As we think of the possibility of obtaining it, 
we are filled with enthusiasm— and also with fear. For 
what if any of us should come short of so glorious a 
salvation— so high a calling! 

The Apostle says, "Let us therefore fear, lest a promise 
being left us of entering into His rest, any of you 
should seem to come short of it." (Heb. 4:1.) The 
slightest intimation that we are coming short of the 
glorious Divine standard should fill us with fear lest 
we miss the great salvation. This is not the fear of 
torment, begotten of ignorance and misunderstanding of 
God, such as the heathen have. They have a fear of 



God, a dread of God, which amounts to torment; as the 
Apostle John says, "Fear hath torment." But this kind 
of fear is cast out of us as we come to a knowledge of 
the Lord and are privileged to call Him Father. It is 
the holy fear that actuates us, altogether. We have no 
slavish fear, either of men or anything else. We belong 
to this special class, the Beloved, who have a special offer 
of a special kind of salvation. 

OUR GREAT PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY 

The expression, Work out, has a peculiar force and 
meaning. It suggests something that is difficult, that requires 
time and patience. The decision has already been 
made, or we would not be of this class. We settled the 
matter when we first made this determination. We have 
already presented our bodies living sacrifices. And now 
we are beloved sons of God; and this that we have undertaken 
lies before us. We see how our Master laid down 
His earthly life, and we see from the Scriptures that He 
is to be an Ensample to us. So we are to submit ourselves 
rejoicingly to all the providences of God— glad 
to have God's will done in us, whatever it may cost, whatever 
it may mean to sacrifice. 

It is by painstaking care that we work out our great 
salvation. God has provided the way— made all the 
arrangements for us. There is nothing lacking, so far 
as God is concerned. The whole matter lies with ourselves. 
God has begotten us of the Holy Spirit. All the 
influences necessary for us are at our command, because 
at His command, because we have been called, because 
we have been accepted, because we have been introduced 
into His family through the merit of the great Advocate! 

R5304 : page 265 

And so much the more are we disposed to feel a sense 
of fear and trembling as we think of all this! There is 
this great position— glory, honor and immortality! The 
result lies in my own hands! There is not another person 
in the universe responsible for my success or failure but 
myself! I must gain that great prize! The Lord will 
not gain it for me. He will merely assist me in the performing 
of this great Covenant. 

So it is very proper for us to have this fear, a realization 
of the fact that we are each making history for 
eternity. We are to be either on the great plane of glory, 
the Divine nature, or else on a lower plane, as the 
Levites; or we may go into the Second Death, and lose 
everything, from which there will be no recovery. 

THE WORK DONE IN OUR HEARTS 

As we realize these facts, it is no wonder that we 
tremble and fear, and feel our need of walking, as the 
Apostle says, circumspectly, and of weighing our thoughts, 



so as to be in conformity to the will of God in Christ. 
This is indeed a condition that might be called fear and 
trembling. It is a condition of great earnestness. There 
is no room for foolishness here, or lightness, or frivolity. 
God is testing every power we possess to see whether we 
know what we have said in our consecration vow, to prove 
whether we were sincere and meant it all, to prove 
whether to any extent we overstated ourselves and did 
not mean entire devotion to Him. 

If we were not wholly in earnest about this matter, 
then we shall show it. God has done His part in making 
all the conditions and in accepting us. Now everything 
is for us to work out. Surely we should have fear and 
trembling as we remember this. We know that it is God 
that is working in us. God Himself has begun a work 
in us. None of the angels ever had such a work take 
place in their hearts. None of the angels had the offer 
of this salvation. 

We who were of the Adamic family are being transformed 
and developed along the lines which the Father 
has marked out for us, that He may make of us a New 
Creation. It is He that first worked in us, through all His 
providences, to will. And then, after we had presented 
our bodies living sacrifices, He worked in us to do 
—not that we could do perfect works according to the 
flesh; God knew we could not, and is not expecting perfection 
in the flesh. But He is expecting perfect heart 
intentions. He says, My child has had the imperfections 
of the flesh to contend with, and by his good warfare with 
these he has shown his obedience to My will. If by and 
by I shall give to this child a perfect body, a spirit body, 
in the resurrection, then I am sure he will do My will. 
My Spirit has worked in him to will, and is now working 
in him to do. And he is showing Me, by doing to the best 
of his ability under present conditions, what he will do 
with a perfect body. Sown in weakness, this New Creature 
will be raised in power; sown a natural body, it will 
be raised a spirit body.— I Cor. 15:42-44. 



R5304 : page 265 

GOD'S SUPERVISION IN THE WORLD AND IN THE CHURCH 

"Promotion cometh neither from the east, nor from the west, 
nor from the south. But God is the judge; He putteth down 
one, and setteth up another."— Psalm 75:6,7. 

THE Scriptures declare that "The earth hath 
He [God] given to the children of men." 
Father Adam was the first great king of 
the earth. After his fall, this kingdom over 
the beasts of the field, the fish of the sea 
and the fowl of the air, was bereft of the 
power of the perfect man, because man had 



begun to deteriorate. This kingdom was 

also bereft of the Heavenly Father's guidance 

by His Spirit, because of man's disobedience. 

It was originally intended that humanity 

should have God's guidance in the affairs of the earth. 

But humanity became insane, or mentally unbalanced. 

This is their condition from the deterioration which sin 

and death have wrought. 

Satan has been blinding and deceiving and misleading 
mankind on various subjects, putting light for darkness 
and darkness for light. This power of Satan is spoken 
of in the Scriptures as being that of the "prince of this 
world." And we are told how he rules. By promoting 
sin, he promotes that which is in opposition to God. He 
"now worketh in the hearts of the children of disobedience." 
This work has been going on for centuries, 
and particularly since the time of the Deluge. Before 
that time Satan operated in a somewhat different manner, 
because men were more generally acquainted with the 
proper standard and less fallen than they have been since. 
Longevity before the Deluge was greater than now, the 
average length of life today being thirty-five years. 

Very rarely has God interfered with the arrangement 
which He put into the hands of man. As mankind look 
back they see the blunders that have been made. Being 
under the power of the "prince of this world," and allowing 
Satan to mislead them, they have fallen into various 
traps. Mankind has had a more severe experience with 
sin and death than would have been thought possible. 
The Apostle Paul calls our attention to the fact that 
man was not always in this degraded condition. He says 
that when man sinned, God gave him over and allowed 

R5305 : page 265 

him to take his own way— to lose himself in sin and the 
misguidance of the Adversary. 

Why should God do this? We believe that His intention 
was that thus, eventually, during the next Age, 
mankind shall see what the real nature and outcome of 
sin is; that they shall learn a great, permanent lesson- 
that any deviation from the Divine standard is injurious; 
and that that lesson shall be recognized by the angels— 
that they also shall see what is the result of sin, and that 
they shall have this great, horrible object lesson before 
them. One can hardly read in the pages of history what 
humanity has done in this course of sin without being 
disgusted and horrified. 

Then we see how humanity could have helped themselves 
by seeking to follow God's way. We see that when 
God gave man over to a reprobate mind, and did not 
hinder him from taking an evil course, it resulted in 
terrible excesses. (Romans 1:28-32.) We see that God 
merely intervened when, in the condition of things before 
the Deluge, to have permitted this course to continue 
would have been a serious wrong. The thoughts of men 



were evil, and only evil continually. Therefore God 
brought that condition of things to an end in the Flood. 
And He started things afresh with Noah and his family, 
who were saved in the Ark. God has interposed only 
here and there, as in the case of the Ninevites, the 
Sodomites and the Amalekites. In the case of the 
Sodomites, God rained down fire from heaven, setting 
forth an example, and the kind of destruction that would 
better conditions— not thereby settling the future of the 
Sodomites, but making them an example. 

R5305 : page 266 

WORLD EMPIRES ILLUSTRATED GREAT PRINCIPLES 

When the Babylonians essayed to be the rulers of the 
world, they apparently had good intentions, good sentiments 
toward mankind. They wished to give the world a 
good government. In some respects, perhaps, their rule 
was a benefit. At all events, it was not long before their 
success brought in a measure of arrogance. And then 
God permitted another nation to gain the ascendancy— the 
Medo-Persians. After them, the Grecians tried to rule 
the world, with a better government; and again, after 
them, the Romans. Each of these World-Empires, after 
a measure of success, toppled over and made wreck of 
their progress. 

And so God has in a general way been permitting 
things to go thus, keeping humanity within general bounds 
in their sort of loose governments, and has merely hindered 
them when they went too far and were likely to 
hinder the Divine Program. 

There was some promotion in some manner. The 
Scriptures say that Nebuchadnezzar became the head of 
gold— the head of the Gentile governments. Promotion 
came to him because God was pleased that Nebuchadnezzar 
should have this opportunity, because God permitted 
him to have it, and that nation to have the ascendancy. 
And thus with the other universal governments; and 
God had to do with the setting up and the pulling down. 
He thus permitted the world to have a variety of governments. 
As another instance, a certain Pharaoh was in 
power in Egypt at the time for Israel to be delivered 
from their bondage. According to the account given by 
the Apostle Paul, the Lord said to Pharaoh, "For this very 
purpose have I raised thee up."— Rom. 9:17; Exodus 9:16. 

Pharaoh thus was given an opportunity of illustrating 
certain great principles along the lines of which God was 
dealing. There are some who think that God worked in 
Pharaoh to make his heart hard and to make him a bad 
man such as he was. But this is not so! He was a bad 
man naturally. God may have let other heirs drop out 
so that this particular man would come to the throne at 
that particular time. God set him there at that time- 
not that He might influence Pharaoh to evil, but that He 
might show the influence of an unregenerate heart. 



The plagues came. "Let My people go," said the 
Lord. Thus after each plague had come, Pharaoh would 
entreat Moses, the servant of God; and when the plague 
was gone he would say, "Well, you did not have much 
to do with it. The plague has gone anyway." And so 
another plague would come. And time after time 
Pharaoh illustrated the mercy of God, who time after 
time lifted the plague and had mercy on the Egyptians. 

It was a lesson, not of God's working in a man to 
make him a bad man and make him do evil things, but a 
lesson of the hardening effect of God's Mercy— in taking 
away the plague— of its having only a bad effect, instead 
of softening the heart. And so it is with many in the 
world. They are told that God is willing to forgive them, 
and they think, "Well, then I can go on and sin more!" 
We learn from this a great lesson of God's Mercy and 
of His method of dealing with men. Finally came the 
last plague. Yet even after that Pharaoh and the Egyptians 
went out to capture the Israelites. The finale was 
that the Egyptian pursuers were drowned in the Red 
Sea.-Exodus 14:5-31. 

ACCORDING TO GOD'S WILL 

By faith we believe that God has a supervision of all 
the affairs of today. Therefore if we voted for a 
candidate at the last Presidential election, and if the one 
we thought the most suitable for election was not elected, 
we are not to believe it was a matter of chance. We are 
to assume that the Lord knew all about the election; and 
that in the Divine arrangement certain things were 
permitted to go in certain ways; and that therefore, the 
President, Mr. Wilson, was the most suitable as in 
harmony with the Divine arrangement. 

We are to believe that all things are working according 
to the counsel of God's will— not that God touches 
every thought or act of every individual. Not so ! But 
God is able so to regulate the winds of strife or contention 
that the results will come about not contrary to the 
Divine arrangement. We may be assured that so far as 
mere man is concerned, God does not care whether it is 
one or another. So far as the world is concerned, the 
Lord has no preference or favorites at all. It is along 
the line of principles that He is directing and ruling, to 
work out, eventually, good to all. 

Thus God is arranging that all the affairs of the world 
shall reach a crisis soon, whether He is permitting this 
king to rule, or that one; or this one to be President, or 
that one. All things are working in harmony with His 
great Program. God will set down the "prince of this 
world," Satan, and all the arrangements he has made- 
set them down by a severe fall, by a great overthrow, and 
will set up His own Kingdom, that will bring blessing to 
all mankind— His own Kingdom that will be the "desire 
of all nations." It will be the Kingdom of Messiah and 
His Bride, who is to be His Joint-heir in the Kingdom. 



It is the Kingdom for which we pray, "Thy Kingdom 
come; Thy will be done on earth as in Heaven." 

MATTERS OF CHURCH DISCIPLINE 

We would apply our text particularly to the Church— 
the Church being especially guided of the Lord, and those 
in which He is especially interested. In His arrangement 
He has provided for the setting of these members in the 
Church. "God hath set the members every one in the 
Body, as it hath pleased Him." "God hath set some in 
the Church, first, Apostles, secondarily, public orators, 
thirdly teachers, pastors, after that workers of miracles," 
etc.— indicating different stations in the Body of Christ. 
We are to remember that, as the Apostle says, God hath 
set the members in the Body. 

In proportion as twenty or thirty or three hundred or 
five hundred or a thousand put themselves in harmony 
with His will, He will set some to be Elders and some to 
be Deacons, etc. How will He set them? Through the 
voice of the Church. Whoever should receive the appointment 
to be a Deacon in the Church should be faithful 
to the Lord and to the brethren. And whoever should 
be appointed as an Elder should consider it a matter of 
privilege, and be faithful to the Lord and to the brethren, 
so that he might profit the Church and be pleasing to the 
brethren, and above all, be pleasing to the Lord. 

This is the thought the Apostle gives in his parting 
words to the Elders of Ephesus. (Acts 20:17-38.) He 
tells them to take heed to themselves that they may feed 
the flock. And he goes on to give varied advice— how 
they should take heed as those who should give account 
of their opportunities and responsibilities, which they must 
recognize as from both the Lord and the brethren. 

Sometimes in the Lord's permission— certainly not 
without His permission— the classes, in their endeavor to 
express the Lord's will, may say, This brother was chosen 
as Elder last time, and we will not choose him as an 
Elder this time. Or they may say, He was a Deacon last 
time, and we will not choose him as a Deacon this time, 
but we will drop him. What should be the attitude of 
the brother thus dropped? 

R5305 : page 267 

SUBMISSION TO THE LORD'S WILL 

We have had experience along this line— letters from 
those thus dropped, intimating that they think the Class 
has made a mistake in not recognizing their ability and 
not re-electing them. And our answer has been that we 
did not know what had been the thought back of the 
action of the Class, and we did not know whether the 
Class had acted wisely or not, but that our thought would 
be that the brother should accept this decision as from 
the Lord. 



Such a one should say to himself, I have been the 
servant of the congregation and have appreciated it very 
much. I recognize that such a promotion is of the Lord, 
and that the service given me was of the Lord. But now, 
in God's providence, I am not to be an overseer for a 
year, or six months, or what-not. Perhaps the Lord has 

R5306 : page 267 

a good lesson in this for me. Perhaps the Lord wishes 

to show whom He will set up and whom He will not. 

So instead of feeling hurt or miffed or moody over the 

matter, I am going to say, If I can see anything in which 

I was derelict in my duty, I will consider it a chastisement 

from the Lord. I will remember the words of the 

Scripture which say, "Let the brother... rejoice in that 

he is exalted, and let the brother... rejoice in that he 

is abased." I am glad to see that the Class exercise independence 

enough to do what they consider the Lord's 

will. At all events, I will try to recognize that promotion 

cometh not from the East nor West nor South, but that 

God is the Judge, the Decider, and that He putteth whomsoever 

He will over the affairs of the Church. 



R5306 : page 267 

GRAVES OF GREEDINESS 

-OCTOBER 5. --NUMBERS 11:4-34.- 

"The supplication of a righteous man 
availeth much in its working."— James 5:16. 

THE ISRAELITES remained at Mt. Sinai 

about a year. This was a time of preparation. 

The people were learning important 

lessons, as a result of their new conditions, 

so different from those of Egypt. The component 

parts of the Tabernacle were prepared, 

and it was set up as a meeting place 

between God and the people. God was 

represented in it by the pillar of cloud, 

which rested upon the top of the Tabernacle, 

and which at night had a flame like a torch at its top. 

God's presence on the inside of the Tabernacle was 
seen only by Moses and Aaron, in conjunction with their 
privileged services. He was represented by the glorious 
Shekinah brightness, which rested upon the Mercy Seat. 
Thus the Tabernacle became the center of the nation's 
life and interest in relation to their God, who was their 
Captain and Leader, and who communicated to them 
through the mediator of the Law Covenant— Moses. 

The people had flocks and herds; and these would 
necessitate their being at some distance from the Camp, 



but the pillar of cloud by day and its fiery torch at night 
would always indicate the center of the Camp, and always 
guide their minds to the thought that they were God's 
adopted people, to whom, by first right, belonged the 
gracious promises made to Abraham. 

Similarly, antitypical Israelites may realize that God 
has called them from the world to be His peculiar people, 
and may well exclaim, "God is in the midst of her, she 
shall not be disturbed"— overthrown! The center of our 
interest is our great Advocate, who on our behalf has 
entered into the Most Holy, and is proceeding with His 
great work of antitypical Atonement. 

THE SIN OF MURMURING 

Those who become the people of God, who accept 
Him as their Guide and Leader, should never murmur, 
never complain. To do so is to dispute the Divine Wisdom 
and the Divine promises, and to that extent to break 
their covenant of faith, obedience and loyalty. St. Paul 
reminds us that the murmuring of the Israelites on this 
occasion carries such a lesson to us (Hebrews 3:7-19; 
4:1-11), which appears great or small to us, according 
to our standpoint and standard. The Lord's dealings with 
the Israelites show us that justice, love, mercy, loyalty to 
God and to principle are in the Divine estimation the 
highest qualities, and violations of these the most serious 
crimes. If this is not the way we have looked at matters, 
it behooves us to change our viewpoint and to take 
that of the Almighty. 

This murmuring against the Lord was on the score of 
the manna, for which at first the people had been so 
thankful. They allowed their minds to grow so vexed that 
they wept like children as they thought of the meat and 
garlic and flesh pots of Egypt. They murmured against 
the Lord and against Moses in desiring that they might 
have back the conditions which they had left. Little did 
they comprehend the true situation. Had they been returned 
to the bondage in which they previously were, after 
even a year's experience in freedom, their lot would have 
seemed much more wretched than ever. 

It was with Israel, however, as often with us, "Distance 
lends enchantment to the view." As they looked 
backward, they forgot the trials and difficulties of the 
bondage of Egypt. As they looked about them, they forgot 
their comforts, privileges, liberties under Divine leadership. 
Like peevish children, they reasoned not clearly. 

MOSES TOO GREATLY BURDENED 

The result of the murmuring was severe upon Moses. 
He was the people's representative before the Lord, and 
the Lord's representative before the people. Murmuring 
against the Lord in their experiences meant murmuring 
against Moses also. Heart-broken, that Prophet sought 
the Lord, pleading that his burden was too heavy, that the 



people cried to him as children to a father, and that he 
could endure it no longer. He rehearsed that the Lord 
had promised to take this people as His people and to 
bring them to the land promised to Abraham, Isaac and 
Jacob. He urged, therefore, that if this burden must 
remain with him it would be better for him to die: "Kill 
me, I pray Thee, out of hand, if I have found favor in 
Thy sight; and let me not see my wretchedness." 

Then it was that God directed the institution of the 
Jewish Sanhedrin— seventy of the heads or the Elders 
of the people, to be the court of judges, responsible to 
the people and to deal with them, to hear their murmurings 
and to counsel them properly. In this arrangement, 
while Moses was still the head of the nation, the seventy 
Elders shared his responsibility before the people, and 
would more or less, therefore, be his defenders with 
the people. 

By Divine direction Moses made out the list of these 
Elders, and directed them to meet him at the Tabernacle. 
All but two of them came. There God manifested the 
honor he had bestowed upon Moses as the head of the 

R5306 : page 268 

people, by communion with him, and then, as foretold, 
placed a share of the responsibility of leadership upon 
the seventy. This was indicated by their miraculous 
prophesying. This prophesying became a sign to the 
Elders themselves and to all who heard it. Even the two 
who remained in the camp prophesied at the same time. 
The Lord thus indicated that they should be co-laborers 
with and under Moses in respect to the guidance and 
direction of the people. 

QUAIL IN OVER-SUPPLY 

God then sent word to the Israelites through Moses, 
the message probably being conveyed through the seventy 
Elders selected from all the different tribes, that He was 
about to send them flesh food, such as they had been 
murmuring for. He declared He would send a thirty-day's 
supply for the whole people. Even Moses was 
astonished, though he trustfully gave the message. Under 
the Lord's providence, a strong wind across the Red Sea 
drove thousands of small birds, quail, to the vicinity of 
Israel's Camp and for a considerable distance all around 
it. As a result, the people ate freely, and prepared dried 
quail for future use for a full thirty -days' supply, as the 
Lord had said. Two days and nights they ceased not to 
gather in the quail. 

Some agnostics have questioned this statement, thinking 
it to be a declaration that the birds fell in a solid mass 
two cubits high. The proper thought is that the birds, 
driven by the wind across the sea, were so fatigued by 
their flight that they flew low down, about two cubits in 
height above the ground, where they were easily caught 



with the hand or hit with sticks and captured. A writer 
on conditions in that vicinity says: 

"These quail cannot sustain themselves long on the 
wing when exhausted. They would be easily taken when 
they flew at a height of about two cubits (three feet) 
above the ground." 

Those who had been murmuring discontentedly suddenly 
got their desire for flesh food; and they ate it so 
greedily and so much of it that an insidious pestilence 
broke out amongst them, a fever from over-eating, called 
"a fire from the Lord." Many died and were buried there, 
and thus the place was called "Kibroth-Hattaavah," 
which signifies "Graves of Greediness." Thus did the 
Lord permit the murmurers, the unthankful, to do themselves 
injury and to cut themselves off from further opportunities 
for murmuring. 

The most happy condition of mind conceivable is the 
one of full rest and confidence in the Lord— satisfied with 
God's appointments and provisions. And this is especially 
appropriate to the Spiritual Israelites, and particularly the 
Royal Priesthood, who have made a full surrender to the 
Lord, a Covenant by sacrifice, which includes all earthly 
rights and interests. Happy is it for such if they can 
sing with the spirit and with the understanding also: 
"Content whatever lot I see, 
Since 'tis my God that leadeth Me." 

The spirit of discontent looks away from the Heavenly 
Manna of Divine provision, longing for other food of 
their own provision or of other earthly supply. The 
Lord grants such an opportunity of feasting to the full 
on what they are desiring, and as a result, the murmurers 

R5307 : page 268 

cease from being members of the Lord's family and have 
no further opportunity of partaking of the Manna He 
provides in sufficient quantity. 

To give an illustration: the Bible supplies the Manna 
of Divine Truth. The Truth needs to be gathered, and 
to be ground and to be baked, but it is God's provision. 
It is wholesome, it is nutritious, it is the very thing that 
we, as the people of God, need for our strengthening and 
perfecting. Yet some crave the flesh pots of Egypt— the 
world's theories. Then He allows these to come within 
their reach. They fill themselves with Higher Criticism 
and Evolutionary theories, and as a result perish as New 
Creatures, cease to be the people of God, cease to walk 
in the Master's footsteps. They are consumed by the 
fire, or fever, which the errors they crave produce. 

GRAVES OF GREEDINESS 

Greed, selfishness, stands connected with sin of every 
kind. It leads to every form of immorality, to satisfy its 
selfish propensities. It leads to injustice and untruthfulness 
in its endeavor to acquire a large share of the blessings 



of God. It leads to anger, malice, hatred, envy, 
strife and murder in its endeavor to get and to hold a 
superabundant share of this world's goods. Selfishness 
is thus unrighteousness, and "all unrighteousness is sin." 

As we think of the graves of greediness filled with the 
Israelites, we are reminded of how many Spiritual Israelites 
have made similar mistakes. Greedy for the things 
of this world, they have neglected their Covenant with 
the Lord and the higher interests of the life to come. 
Jesus said that the thorns that sprang up amongst the 
wheat and choked it were the cares of this life and the 
deceitfulness of riches; in other words, greediness. 

Oh, how much all the followers of Jesus should be on 
guard against this spirit of the world! It is not our suggestion 
that none should look out properly to have a reasonable 
share of the blessings and comforts of the present 
life. The danger is that of setting our hearts upon these 
things, coveting them and serving them, in an idolatrous 
manner, and thus causing our spiritual interment, over 
which might well be inscribed "Graves of Greediness." 

THE TEXT OF THIS STUDY 

The text assigned evidently is meant to apply to the 
prayer of Moses for help and relief. "The supplication 
of a righteous man availeth much in its working." God 
granted the prayer of Moses, which was of a proper kind 
in that it was requesting help whereby the will of God 
might be fully submitted to, that the people might be 
rightly instructed to bow to the Divine arrangements. It 
availed much; it brought the desired result; it was in harmony 
with the Divine will. 

On the other hand, the prayer of the unrighteous will 
avail much also in an opposite direction. The murmurings 
of the people were classed as their prayers. They 
got what they desired; but with it they got, not the Divine 
blessing, but a punishment. Let us take heed to how 
we pray, and that we pray for things in harmony with 
the Divine will. Thus will our prayers bring blessings 
upon our heads, and not injury. 

SELFISH PRAYERS ANSWERED 

We know of many prayers answered; some of these 
were uttered selfishly, not with the desire to know and to 
do the Lord's will, but with the desire to have the Lord 
do according to the human will and its selfish desire. 
Such prayers are always dangerous. God sometimes answers 
them. 

We note one instance told us by a mother. She was a 
true Christian woman and had given her son to the Lord; 
but when he fell seriously sick and lay at death's door and 
the physicians said that he could not recover, the mother 
went before the Lord in prayer and earnestly pleaded, not 
that God's will should be done, but that her will might be 
done— that her son's life might be spared. Almost miraculously, 



she says, her boy began to recover. For a time 
she rejoiced that she had had a triumph. 

R5307 : page 269 

Later on, however, she learned a very bitter lesson. 
The son grew to manhood, but was far from a comfort 
to her. He had a vicious character, which often brought 
the mother pain and tears. She said afterwards, "I have 
rued that prayer, which was contrary to God's will, and 
which He answered according to my will. I see better 
now. I have learned my lesson. Henceforth I will seek 
to know and to do the Lord's will, and will pray that His 
will, not mine, be done in all my affairs. My selfishness 
brought me years of misery, which I had assumed would 
be years of pleasure and comfort." How careful we 
should be to "abide in Him and in His Word"! 



R5307 : page 269 

JEALOUSY AND ENVY PUNISHED 

--OCTOBER 12.-NUMBERS 12.- 

"Love envieth not; love vaunteth not itself, is not puffed 
up, doth not behave itself unseemly."— 1 Corinthians 13:4,5. 

ST. PAUL includes envy, and therefore jealousy, 

in his enumerations of the works of 

the flesh and the Devil— together with 

anger, malice, hatred and strife. These are 

works of the Devil in that they are characteristics 

of Satan. According to the 

Bible account, Satan's ambition led him to 

envy the Almighty and ultimately to attempt 

to establish in the earth, with man 

as his subject, a rival empire to the Heavenly 

domain of Jehovah. His ambition and jealousy led to 

strife or opposition— led to a misrepresentation of the 

Divine character in order to deceive our first parents. 

The evil traits mentioned are works of the flesh in the 
sense that after our race, poisoned by Satan, had come 
under Divine sentence, the dying process, which Satan encouraged, 
included evil works, evil desires of every kind. 
More and more our race has become subject to these adverse 
influences, as it has become weak, dying, unbalanced. 

St. Paul urges all of the Lord's people to put off these 
Satanic characteristics and to adopt instead the Divine 
characteristics— those which have the Divine approval, 
and which work in us and make us more and more Godlike. 
These are described as meekness, gentleness, peace, 
long-suffering, brotherly kindness, love. We are assured 
that those who will ultimately become God's saintly people 
on the highest plane of Heavenly glory will have 



these characteristics well developed, dominant. The 
Apostle indicates that such will be granted an abundant 
entrance into the "everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and 
Savior, Jesus Christ."— 2 Peter 1:11. 

That Kingdom will not represent all the saved of 
humanity, but will be the Divine agency for carrying salvation 
to all the families of the earth. Nevertheless, 
only this one offer of salvation is now open; and only by 
following the prescribed course and cultivating these various 
qualities will any now be fit for, or be received into 
the everlasting Kingdom. Thus all the members of that 
Kingdom, as St. Paul declares, must be copies of God's 
dear Son, our Redeemer— not copies in the flesh, but 
copies in our hearts and in our intentions. This will 
mean to be as nearly perfect in the flesh, as nearly in 
harmony with the Divine requirements, as possible. 

Indeed, the Bible clearly teaches that all who will ever 
attain everlasting life and Divine favor, even on the 
earthly plane as perfect men in an earthly body, must entirely 
get rid of everything appertaining to the spirit of 
Satan and sin; that they must thus get back to the original 
image and likeness of God as exemplified in Adam 
before he sinned in the Garden. 

R5308 : page 269 

MIRIAM'S JEALOUSY AND ENVY 

The lesson of today's Bible Study tells us of a serious 
error made by Aaron and Miriam, the brother and the 
sister of Moses, both his seniors. We may safely conclude 
that while the two participated in the sin, Miriam's 
was the leading spirit. This view is fully justified by the 
outcome of the lesson, which shows that God's punishment 
rested upon her, and not upon Aaron. 

The start of the matter was a question of family pride. 
Moses had married an Ethiopian, or Cushite, woman. 
We know not if this was his first wife, whom he had 
married in the land of Midian, and who only now joined 
him as the Israelites were about to start on their journey 
toward Canaan. Some have surmised that Moses' 
first wife had died, and that Zipporah was his second 
wife. No matter which, the fact remains that at this 
time she came to live with Moses in the Camp of Israel, 
and thus became, as wife of the great and influential 
leader, the first lady of the nation. 

Previous to this, Miriam had undoubtedly filled the 
office of chief lady. It was but natural that she should 
feel the loss of her position and of the influence which 
went with it. She felt especially keenly upon the subject 
as she reflected that her new sister-in-law was of an 
alien race. This fact seemed to give Miriam's jealousy 
a religious footing; and she doubtless reasoned to herself, 
and convinced herself, that her hostility to her sister-in-law 
was not based upon jealousy, but upon a high 
moral ground, affecting the honor of God, the honor of 



His nation, Israel, and the future possibilities of Abraham's 
seed in the Land of Promise. 

We are to remember that it was this same Miriam 
who, as the little maiden, watched Pharaoh's daughter 
when she went to the bathing place on the Nile where 
Moses was found in the little basket of bulrushes. This 
same Miriam hastened to bring to the premises her mother 
to be the nurse for the foundling, Moses. This same 
Miriam, doubtless, with Aaron had enjoyed special privileges 
in the confidence of Moses in respect to all the affairs 
of Israel under the Lord's leadings. This same 
Miriam had been recognized of the Lord as a prophetess. 
She it was who, with her timbrels, after the crossing of 
the Red Sea by the Israelites and after the sea had returned 
with destruction upon their Egyptian pursuers, led 
the Israelitish women in the song of triumph. 

Thus seen, there was what we might call an excuse for 
Miriam's jealousy. Indeed, we cannot imagine any jealousy 
which could not find an excuse for its existence- 
good or bad. No good people can harbor jealousy, envy, 
etc., without in some manner deluding themselves into 
thinking that the peculiar circumstances of their case 
fully justify their attitude. 

After thinking slightingly of her brother as foolish in 
his course, Miriam became more and more convinced 
that God would not think of using especially in His 
service one who had thus lost caste with herself. Her 
poisoned mind began to see evidences that the Lord had 
forsaken Moses, and that otherwise he would not have 
fallen into what she was sure was a great mistake. She 
communicated her fears to her brother Aaron, and the 
two doubtless thought seriously and prayed much respecting 
the sad fall of Israel's leader and the necessity 
thus laid upon them to make good his dereliction. 

R5308 : page 270 

Aaron apparently must have been a weak character, 
and merely used and useful as the mouthpiece of Moses. 
He showed much weakness on this occasion, as he did 
during Moses' absence in the mountain, when in response 
to the persuasion of the Israelites he made for them the 
golden calf and assisted them in their idolatrous worship, 
which they desired. Miriam also probably assented at 
that time that such would be the only course to take to 
satisfy the rebellious spirit of the people. 

The text implies that Miriam began to spread her 
seditious suggestions throughout the Camp of Israel, referring 
to her brother Aaron as holding similar sentiments: 
The people were to be prepared and the Lord 
was to be helped, of course, by the primary suggestion 
that Moses was not the only leader of the nation, that 
Miriam and Aaron were also prophets and in relationship 
with the Lord in exactly the same manner and degree as 
Moses. This insidious preparation of the people would 
make ready for the expected time when God would entirely 



disown Moses and speak entirely through Miriam, 
Aaron being her mouthpiece. 

AND THE LORD HEARD IT 

Too often do the Lord's people and others forget that 
the Lord is not inattentive to His own business, the interests 
of His own cause, but is working all things according 
to the counsel of His own will. As Bible students, 
we should more and more learn to appreciate this 
great fact and to remember that prosperity in the Lord's 
work cannot come by might or human power or cunning, 
but only by and in harmony with the Lord's Spirit, the 
Lord's Power, the Lord's Will. 

The Lord nipped the conspiracy in the bud by suddenly 
calling Moses, Aaron and Miriam into His presence 
before the Tabernacle. All three obeyed the summons, 
Miriam doubtless supposing that now the moment 
had come when the Lord would show that she had rightly 
divined His intentions in ousting Moses from the leadership 
and appointing herself. The denouncement, however, 
was very different. God did, indeed, declare that Miriam 
and Aaron had to some extent occupied the place of 
prophets, in that God had been pleased so to use them; 
but with equal distinctness the Lord pointed out that His 
dealing with Moses was on a very much higher plane. 
To him God had spoken directly, not through dreams and 
visions, but in plain language. Thus the ambitions which 
were the grounds of the jealousy, envy and conspiracy 
and evil speaking, God promptly set aside. 

Additionally, however, God gave a punishment. As 
the Divine Presence, represented by the pillar of cloud, 
departed from them, Moses and Aaron beheld that their 
sister Miriam had been smitten with leprosy. Aaron recognized 
that all this signified that he had assisted and 
upheld his sister in a sinful course. He recognized that 
his brother Moses was indeed the chief of God's people; 
and to him Aaron uttered this cry of distress and prayer 
for relief, saying, "O my lord, lay not, I pray thee, this 
sin upon us; for that we have done foolishly, and for 
that we have sinned. Let her not be as one dead!" 

Then Moses cried unto the Lord, saying, "Heal her 
now, O God, I beseech Thee!" And God heard Moses 
and healed her then, but directed that she should be 
treated as every other person was treated whose leprosy 
was declared to be healed. All such were required to remain 
seven days outside the Camp, under inspection, to 
see that no further symptoms of the disease appeared, 
before they would be admitted to the Camp again. 

"THE LAW WAS A SHADOW" 

The Apostle explains to us that the various things 
commanded Israel under their Law Covenant were prophetic 
shadows illustrating higher things— things appertaining 
to Spiritual Israel. Thus, for instance, the disease 



of leprosy, practically incurable, except by Divine 
interposition, was a type of sin; and the seven days of 
excommunication from the favored people represented a 
full and complete period of tests as respects a putting 
away of sin, a cleansing, a return to harmony with God. 

Various lessons might be drawn from today's Study. 
But the one in which all can probably best agree is that 
jealousy, envy, based upon selfishness, is amongst the 
most deceptive of all sins and one very serious in the 
sight of God, whatever may be thought of it by others. 

The text supplied us is St. Paul's exhortation to the 
Church. And the Church, we must remember, is that 
special class called out from humanity in general by the 
Gospel Message to become followers of Jesus and joint-heirs 
with Him. Their call is to a sacrifice with Jesus 
of all earthly rights and claims, and to a full submission 
to the Divine will and arrangements in everything. 
Their covenant is to be fully submissive to the headship 
of the Savior and, like Him, to be loyal to every principle 
and arrangement of the Divine Program. 

This leaves no room for any work of the flesh or the 
Devil. All these are to be put off, discarded, as displeasing 
to God. On the contrary, the fruits and graces of the 
Holy Spirit are to be substituted, that thus the followers 
of Jesus, like Himself, might ultimately attain to the fulness 
of Divine favor and glory, honor and immortality— 
at His right hand of Power. 

While, therefore, all people should strive to throw off 
the works of darkness and to conform themselves to the 
Divine arrangements under the guidance of the Prince of 
Life, nevertheless, the Church, especially consecrated to 
God, should remember that all their hopes of glory, honor 
and immortality are associated with the development of 
right characters and the opposition of the wrong. Let us 
also remember that "Love envieth not; Love vaunteth not 
itself, is not puffed up, doth not behave itself unseemly." 
And Love, therefore, represents the full standard of the 
Golden Rule and the full character of God; for "God is 
Love."-I John 4:8. 

The prompt punishment of Miriam and its effect remind 
us of the fact that such prompt dealing with sin 
will be the regular order under the Messianic Kingdom 
and will bring prompt results then. All men realize to 
some extent that whosoever sins will suffer; but the penalties, 
or sufferings, resulting from sin are often so far 
removed as not to be identified by the sufferer. Hence 
with many the lesson is lost. 

Besides, our erroneous theology of the Dark Ages led 
many of us to misrepresent the punishment of sin as 
being eternal torture. Thus we directly contradicted God's 
arrangement, drew attention away from the present punishment 
and wages of sin, and made the future punishments 
so absurdly unreasonable that nobody believes 
them, or, believing them, are misled into the supposition 
that a dying prayer for forgiveness will permit an 
utter escape from their penalties. We cannot improve 



upon the Divine arrangement, "Whatsoever a man soweth 
that shall he also reap"— either in the present life or in 
that which is to come— but in no case a devilish and 
eternal torture. 



"Upon Thy Word I rest, 

So strong, so sweet, so sure; 

So full of comfort blest, 

So wonderful, so pure— 
The Word that changeth not, that faileth never! 
My King, I rest upon Thy Word forever!" 



page 271 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

I am noting a few incidents which transpired in this town 
last Autumn, which will interest you, I know. They are as follows: 
The pastor of the Episcopal Church at that time was 

the Rev. K ; of the First Presbyterian, Rev. M 

(there was another Presbyterian Church in town). The 
Wesleyan (official organ of the Methodist Church in these 
provinces) is published in this town. (You may recall that 
we sent you, last Autumn, quite a number of issues of the 
Wesleyan treating Pastor Russell and the Truth in a very 

unchristian manner.) Rev. K became very much excited 

because of the circulation of some volunteer matter, and 
concluded the best thing to do was to send for a sufficient 
number of copies of the Brooklyn Eagle to cover the town 
and considerable outlying territory, making the statement, to 
one of his parishioners, at least, that the circulation of our 
literature "must be stopped." He had some of the supply put 
into the hands of some other clerical brethren, and thus the 
distribution was made. 

About the same time Rev. M preached a very 

severe sermon against our Pastor and the work, calling attention 
to the "Vow," holding it up to ridicule. Within a few 

weeks Rev. K , who was a very dignified man (and 

apart from theological narrowness a very nice man), died one 
of the most undignified deaths possible. In making a call on 
a parishioner, in the fire house of the town, he missed the 
doorway and in some unaccountable manner attempted to 
enter through a window leading into the ash-pit. The window 
had been left open, but he had to step up some distance 
from the ground to enter— no one can understand why it 
should occur. He was found two hours later dead on the 
concrete floor of the pit, eight feet below, from a broken neck. 
Recently his son, in closing up his affairs, auctioned off his 
walking stick, and even his overcoat. He was for years, up 
to his death, Archdeacon for the province. 

Very shortly after, Rev. M 's Church was burned 



to the ground— he has left the town. The two congregations 
have voted to unite and rebuild (that is, the two Presbyterian 
congregations), but are now fighting amongst themselves. 
About the same time the pastor of the leading Methodist 
Church took sick and died. This means that through death 
and changes owing to the fire, half the ministers of a few 
months ago are gone. We wonder, in this Day of the Lord's 
judgments, how close may be the connections between these 
incidents. 

We are glad to report the work prospering in the town. 
Sister Black joins me in much Christian love to you all. 

Your brother in the Kingdom Hope, 

W. W. BLACK. 



MY DEAR FRIENDS :- 

I should like to be put on your mailing list. I am getting 
THE WATCH TOWER and I have your STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES; 
but I want your pamphlets also, as they come out, and 
the BIBLE STUDENTS MONTHLY. Please send me your booklet 
on "Spiritism," and any treatise you may have on Revelation. 
You will, of course, forward bill for any charge, and I shall 
remit at once. 

I enclose check for $5.00, which you may use as you see 
best in furthering the work. If possible, I shall send a like 
amount monthly. 

I want to advance the cause of the Kingdom. The Message 
as you put it appeals to me in such a way that I know it to be 
true. It accords with our blessed God's character and Word, 
and stands at once so reasonable and satisfying, and so full of 
promise to every creature, that it must be the Gospel. I believe 
in Jesus Christ as my personal Savior, and that, through 
His precious blood. And as surely as anything ever happened 
to a man, I have been called by Him. I cannot neglect "so 
great salvation." Will you help me to work in His vineyard- 
even though it is the "eleventh hour"? The wages matter 
not. Only to know Him is worth more than heart can dream 
of. To be like Him in character would be the greatest blessing 
of Heaven. 

Yours sincerely, 

A. MURRAY.-Calif. 



R5307 : page 271 

THE HARVEST CALL 

Come, labor on. 
Who dares stand idle on the harvest plain, 
When all around him waves the golden grain, 
And every servant hears the Master say, 

"Go, work today"? 

Come, labor on. 



The laborers are few, the field is white, 
No rest have they who labor for the right; 
From distant voices far, or near at home, 
The call is, "Come!" 

Come, labor on. 
No time for rest till glows the western sky, 
And the long shadows o'er our pathway lie; 
Then a glad sound comes with the setting sun, 

"Servants, well done!" 

Come, labor on. 
The toil is pleasant, the reward is sure; 
Blessed are those who to the end endure; 
How full their joy, how deep their rest will be 

O Lord, with THEE! Unknown. 



page 271 

BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
Series VI., Study XVI. 
THE PRESENT INHERITANCE OF THE NEW CREATION 

OCTOBER 5 
Read p. 659 to p. 661 par. 1. 

(1) What are the first-fruits of the Spirit— a foretaste of 
future blessings— which are possessed by the New Creation in 
the present life? P. 659, first 18 lines. 

(2) What is the nature of earthly hopes and joys? P. 659, 
18th line to end of par. 

(3) How do the joys, hopes, ambitions of the New Creation 
differ from those of the natural man? P. 660, par. 1, 2. 

TRUE VERSUS FALSE HOPES 

(4) When and for what purpose does Satan transform 
himself into an "angel of light"? P. 660, par. 3. 

(5) What false hope respecting the dead has been introduced 
by the Adversary? P. 661, par. 1. 

OCTOBER 12 

Read p. 661, par. 2, to p. 663, par. 2. 

(6) How has Satan deceived the Church by a false hope 
respecting the time for the rewarding of the Lord's faithful 
followers? P. 661, par. 2. 

(7) How have these false hopes been especially injurious 
to the Lord's people? P. 662, par. 1. 

(8) In view of the foregoing, what is the reason for our 



present hope of an instantaneous change for the faithful members 
of the New Creation? P. 662, par. 2. 

(9) What is our hope as respects the faithful of the entire 
Gospel Age prior to 1878, and of those who have died and 
are dying since that date? P. 663, par. 1. 

(10) How have the hopes of the New Creation become the 
dread of the "Christian World"? P. 663, par. 2. 

OCTOBER 19 

Read p. 664, par. 1, to p. 668, par. 1. 

(11) Why do nominal Christians dread the resurrection 
of the dead? P. 664, par. 1. 

(12) Note the joyful hopes of the Second Advent of 
Christ, and the Resurrection, as set forth in Scripture. Pp. 
664 to 666. 

THE THIEF IN PARADISE 

(13) What is the proper interpretation of the incident of 
"the Thief on the Cross"? Luke 23:42,43. P. 667, par. 1. 

(14) In order to properly understand this Scripture, how 

must we consider the circumstances, surroundings and connections? 
P. 667, par. 2, 3, 4. 

(15) Did the thief request the Lord to take him to Heaven? 
And how does changing the position of the comma clarify the 
whole subject? P. 668, par. 1. 

OCTOBER 26 

Read p. 668, par. 2, to p. 671, par. 1. 

(16) What further explanation might the Lord have given 
the repentant thief? P. 668, par. 2, 3. 

(17) What is the Scriptural significance of the word 
Paradise? P. 669, par. 1. 

(18) Explain why we have a perfect right to change the 
position of the comma, and cite other instances in which the 
word "today" is similarly used. P. 669, par. 2, to P. 670. 

ST. PAUL'S EARNEST DESIRE 

(19) How does the Emphatic Diaglott render Phil. 1:21-24, 
and how does this translation differ from the Common 
Version? P. 670, par. 1, 2. 

(20) How is the word Analusai, "return," used in Greek 
literature, and in the only other instance in the New Testament, 
namely, Luke 12:36? P. 671, par. 1. 



page 273 

VOL. XXXIV SEPTEMBER 15 No. 18 
A. D. 1913-A. M. 6041 



CONTENTS 

Mercy and Truth Component Elements of 
Christian Character 275 

Jewish Law Helpful to Christians 276 

Prayer the Vital Breath of the New Creature 277 

Some Things for Which to Pray 278 

Philosophy of Prayer 278 

Distinction Between Flesh and Spirit 279 

Special Season of Trial 279 

Lukewarmness Undesirable 280 

Report of the Spies 281 

Did God Encourage War? 282 

No Injustice to Canaanites 282 

A Good Man's Sin 283 

Smiting the Rock a Sin 283 

The London Convention— Aug. 1-4 284 

Literal or Symbolic Fire 285 

Signs of Dispensational Changes 285 

Question on Justification 286 

Tentative and Actual Sonship 286 

Are Suicides Morally Responsible? 287 

page 274 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



RE DEFECTIVE BOOKS 

Colporteurs and others who may receive books from us 
that are seriously defective will confer a favor by reporting 
the fact at once. Give particulars re time received. We want 
all our books to be right. 



RECEIPTS FOR WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTIONS 

Regular subscribers for THE WATCH TOWER receive a receipt 
on the wrapper— showing how far their subscription is 
paid. Thus, if you had been paid up to January, 1913, and 
sent in a dollar, renewing until January, 1914, we would 
merely add the figure 4. Such a figure 4, under such circumstances, 
would stand for the year 1914. 



THINGS YOU OUGHT TO KNOW 

Our new edition of DAILY HEAVENLY MANNA in purple 
cloth has gilt edges. The price remains the same, 35c. postpaid. 
Every reader of THE WATCH TOWER should have a 
copy of the Manna and should use it daily, for his spiritual 
nourishment. 

The same in De Luxe, purple leather binding, gold edges, 
$1.10 postpaid. 



PLEASE REMEMBER THESE THINGS 

Give your full address at the top of each letter you write, 
and please print it if you cannot write plainly. Please address 
your communications to the WATCH TOWER SOCIETY, whether 
in Brooklyn or London or Melbourne. Only very personal 
matters should be addressed to the Editor— Pastor C. T. 
RUSSELL. Our work here is different in the various departments; 
for instance, the Pilgrim Department, the Colporteur 
Department, the Volunteer Department, etc. In case 
the subject matter of your letter makes it specially 
appropriate to one or another of those Departments, 
please add the same to the address, but always make 
the main address the WATCH TOWER SOCIETY. 



R5309 : page 275 

MERCY AND TRUTH COMPONENT ELEMENTS OF 
CHRISTIAN CHARACTER 

"Let not mercy and truth forsake thee; bind them about thy 



neck; write them upon the table of thine heart." "What 
doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, 
and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy 
God?"-Prov. 3:3; Micah 6:8. 

MERCY and Truth are great principles of 

righteousness. Truth and righteousness are, 

we may say, synonymous. That which is 

right is true, and that which is true— firm, 

faithful, steady, genuine— is usually right. 

The record does not say that we shall bind 

justice about our neck. Justice is a quality 

which we are not permitted to exalt too 

highly, except in our hearts and minds, as a 

principle of the Divine standard. We are 

to remember that there is none righteous, no, not one— 

none perfect. Hence our course in respect to Justice cannot 

be the same as that of our Heavenly Father. He 

recognizes no lower standard than justice, up to which 

everything must measure. 

GIVE MERCY AND TRUTH PROMINENT PLACE 

If we are acceptable to the Father, it can be only by 
righteousness. And if we have not righteousness, it 
must be obtained from Christ; for God receives nothing 
short of perfection. Though imperfect in ourselves, we 
are to come up to the standard of justice as nearly as 
possible in our own personal conduct, but we are not to 
exact full justice from mankind. Since they have no one 
to make good for them, it is our duty to be benevolent 
toward them, and thus emulate the character of God, 
who is merciful. While He keeps the two qualities, Justice 
and Mercy, distinctly separate in His dealings, it is 
not for us to do so. 

For one to keep the principles of truth and of righteousness 
before his own mind, is to be a thoroughly upright 
man or woman, one in whom truth, purity, goodness, 
will be in control. But a person who has merely 
these principles in control should cultivate more and more 
the quality of mercy. We should bind these about our 
neck. The thought is that of a necklace, or ornamental 
band. As a man puts around his neck a cravat, with a 
jewel in it as an ornament, placed where it will be displayed, 
so these qualities of character are jewels. Give 
them a prominent place; for they will help to make you 
better, help to make you more acceptable to the Lord. 

The preferable place for the display of a jewel is the 
neck. There a jewel is especially conspicuous and ornamental. 
So we should fasten these noble qualities of 
character where they will be manifest in all the affairs of 
life. Whether we buy or sell, or whatever we do, we 
should wear these ornaments. They will show what is 
the character of the man or woman— right on the outside, 
in the very front. They should be seen as we meet 
others. There should be nothing mean, nothing contemptible, 



nothing niggardly about us. 
RE-WRITING MERCY AND TRUTH UPON THE HEART 

More than this, we are to write mercy and truth in our 
hearts. We are to remember that originally God wrote 
the Divine Law in Adam's heart. We know that in the 
Divine heart, the Divine character, are the quantities of 
Truth and Mercy. God is merciful, kind and loving. 
And as God has these traits of character, so when He 
made man in His own image, His own likeness, man was 
created with these qualities in his character. Man was 
not created an unrighteous, an untruthful being. 

But man fell from his original perfection. With the 
centuries of falling and imperfection of mind and body, 
and with every interest pressing for self-gratification at 
the expense of others, these principles of mercy and 
truth have become largely effaced from our hearts, just 
as the constant dropping of water, and the general wear 
and tear of the weather would tend to efface the original 
inscription on a stone. In time one could scarcely discern 
the characters. So we see in mankind that some have 
apparently lost all sense of justice, all sense of mercy, 
nearly all sense of patience, gentleness, brotherly kindness 
and love. All these qualities that belong to the 
heart, as originally placed there by God, have been more 
or less effaced— in some more than in others. 

PURPOSE OF GOD'S PROVIDENCES 

Under the terms of the New Covenant and through 
the ministrations of Christ's Kingdom, God purposes to 
re-write upon the heart of man the original character 
which was in his heart, and which has been effaced 
by selfishness. "Behold, the days come, saith the 
Lord, that I will make a New Covenant with the House 
of Israel, and with the House of Judah....I will 
put My Law in their inward parts, and write it in their 
hearts." (Jer. 31:31-33.) "A new heart also will I give 
you, and a new spirit will I put within you; and I will 
take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will 
give you a heart of flesh."— Ezekiel 36:26. 

God's Law is the Law of truth and mercy. Truth 

R5309 : page 276 

would include everything righteous, toward God and 
toward man. Mercy includes all the graces of character. 
The Millennium will be the time for the re-writing of 
these qualities in the character. And this work of re-writing 
the Divine character in the heart, which will 
progress in the world by and by, for a thousand years, is 
already begun in the Church. We write these qualities 
within our own hearts. The entering the School of 
Christ is voluntary, not compulsory. In the next Age 
mankind must write these qualities in their hearts, through 



the assistance of the Mediator. There will be stripes to 
bring mankind to righteousness. And if they are intentionally 
unwilling to obey the Laws of righteousness, they 
will be destroyed. 

But now obedience is a voluntary matter. We declare 
that we desire to have these lessons written in our hearts; 
and to attain this end, we enter the School and submit 
ourselves to the great Teacher. Then, by the various 
providences of our lives, He shows us where we have not 
yet engraved these qualities within our hearts. As we 
pray for patience, He gives us lessons of experience that 
will engender this quality in our hearts, and that will 
strengthen it more and more. As we pray for love, He 
gives us tests of love. As we pray that we may develop 
mercy, we find more opposition, which will develop mercy. 
Thus God gives us opportunities for the writing of truth 
and mercy in our hearts. 

We must attain to that condition of heart where we 
shall love truth and righteousness, and where we shall 
hate iniquity and unrighteousness. As the people of God, 
we have the first opportunity now to develop these traits. 
And the Lord tells us that if we prove faithful in learning 
our lessons, it is His intention to use us during the Millennial 
Reign, His intention to make us judges of the 
world— its rulers, teachers. 

THE JEWISH LAW HELPFUL TO CHRISTIANS 

The words of our second text were addressed to the 
Hebrew people and not to Christians; for there were no 
Christians at that time, of course. The words do not 
seem to be prophetic, but an exhortation to the people. 
Apparently the Jews thought that the Lord was asking 
too much of them; and since this was so, they felt that 
they should not take the Law too seriously. The Lord 
seems to bring the matter down to a specific statement: 
What is required of thee but three things; namely, to deal 
justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? 
This would seem to be the sum total of the Law. 

The Lord was looking to see Israel live as nearly up to 
the requirements of the Law as possible. And He purposed 
to bring them, in due time, the promised New Covenant, 
which would take away the stony heart out of their 
flesh and give them a heart of flesh, thus making them 
tender-hearted. But if now they would walk as nearly as 
possible in harmony with the requirements of this law, 
doing justly, loving mercy and walking humbly with their 

R5310 : page 276 

God, they would be blessed accordingly. 

While this Law was given to the Hebrews alone, 
nevertheless the principles inculcated therein are applicable 
to the whole world. Everybody who would have any 
standing with the Lord, is required to do justly, to love 
mercy, and to walk humbly. Therefore every statement 



of the Law, in that it gives the Christian a conception of 
God's standards, is helpful to the Christian; it shows him 
the standards of perfection. But the standard of a Christian 
goes higher than that of the Law. The Law is 
merely an amplification of the Golden Rule— Do unto 
others as you would that they should do unto you. Deal 
justly with others, if you would expect them to deal justly 
with you; and be merciful to others, if you would expect 
them to be merciful toward you. 

In thinking of these qualities and considering which 
should be put first, we decide that in our conduct toward 
another, we could not think for a moment of giving anything 
less than justice. Additionally we might be as merciful 
as the circumstances would permit. But nothing 
less than justice should be thought of. In our requirements 
of others, however, we are— as before stated— not 
to expect full justice. Remember that the whole human 
family are imperfect. If by the grace of God we are able 
to be more just or more merciful than the average, it is 
through God's Spirit. 

GOD'S STANDARD OF RIGHTEOUS CONDUCT 

To walk humbly with the Lord would imply that we 
were in that condition of mind in which we could be 
taught of Him, could appreciate His goodness and our 
own insignificance; that we were receiving whatever instructions 
He was sending. While God made our race in 
His image, we have largely lost that image. Therefore 
we should be very humble and teachable in all things. 

Comparing God's requirements of Israel, as given in 
the text, with His requirements of the Church, we would 
say that God requires nothing more than this from the 
Church. This is as much as justice could require from 
any creature. The peculiarity of the position of the 
Church is that it is not one of requirement, but of privilege. 
But we see operating in the Church a still higher 
principle than that of Law; namely, that of sacrifice. As 
Jesus loved the Father and loved righteousness, and sacrificed 
His earthly will and earthly ambitions and privileges, 
so He set us an example that we should walk in 
His steps. It was not required of Him that He should do 
more than justice, but He was permitted to do more. 
And so with the Church. We are not required to do 
more than justice, but are permitted to do more. If we 
present our bodies living sacrifices, and are faithful to 
the end, the Lord will count us among those to whom 
He will be pleased to give, very soon, the glorious 
Kingdom, the Kingdom for which we pray. 

VARIOUS DEGREES OF LOVE 

After we came voluntarily into this condition of sacrifice, 
it became a bondage to us in that we had taken vows 
to this effect, and we are bound by our own vows. We 
vowed that we would lay down our lives in harmony 



with the invitation: "Gather My saints together unto Me; 
those that have made a Covenant with Me by sacrifice." 
Still the Lord is not requiring more of us than justice. 
But He is waiting and watching to see to what extent we 
will be faithful to the agreement of our Covenant. If 
we are joint-sacrificers with Jesus, then we shall become 
joint-heirs with Him. At our consecration, we took His 
yoke upon us. Could we go back and take up the privilege 
of Restitution? No; this we gave up entirely! The 
only thing for us is to fulfil our Covenant of Sacrifice; 
and rebellion against that Covenant would mean the Second 
Death, everlasting destruction. 

There are various degrees of love. That degree to 
which we have consecrated ourselves is the sacrificing 
love, which goes beyond what would be just to a brother, 
a neighbor or an enemy. This is the Love of God, which 
is an all-absorbing, an all-comprehensive love. 

That the requirements of the texts are very reasonable 
will be conceded by all. That God could not require 
less from those whom He is educating for the future 
judging of the world, is evident, and yet all of these 
qualities specified through the Prophet are comprehended 
in the one word— Love. Love requires that we shall deal 

R5310 : page 277 

justly with our neighbors, with our brethren, with our 
families, with ourselves; that we shall seek to cultivate 
our appreciation of the rights of others— their physical 
rights, their moral and intellectual rights, their liberties; 
and that, appreciating these, we shall in no sense of the 
word seek to abridge or deny them. But, additionally, 
Love leads us to have the spirit of sacrifice that gladly 
lays down life itself for the brethren. 



R5310 : page 277 

PRAYER THE VITAL BREATH OF THE NEW CREATURE 

"And He spake a parable unto them to this end, that 
men ought always to pray, and not to faint."— Luke 18:1. 

JESUS spoke a parable, of which the gist, or 

import is, "That men ought always to pray 

and not to faint." That parable tells how 

even an unjust judge would, because of importunity, 

heed an appeal for justice and 

would finally yield to its demands, although 

he cared little for the principle itself. In 

the parable the woman was importunate in 

her petitions for justice against those who 

were doing her injury. The Lord seems to 

inculcate just such importunity in prayer, and gives this 

as an illustration of how His people should continue in 



their prayers; not that they should pray all the time, in 
the sense of never getting off their knees, or of never 
doing anything except to pray, but that they should continue 
in their prayers and not grow faint or disheartened. 

In order to pray properly, the child of God should 
know what he may pray for. Otherwise he might be asking 
for the wrong things, such as God would never be 
pleased to give him. How may we know what things are 
proper to pray for? The Lord gives us an intimation along 
this line, of what is proper. He says, If earthly parents 
are pleased to give good gifts to their children, how much 
more is the Heavenly Father pleased to give good gifts to 
His children. The things which earthly fathers give to 
their children are earthly things. The things that the 
Heavenly Father is pleased to give to His children are 
Heavenly things. The world of mankind are not permitted 
to call God their Father. He disowns them as 
children. There is only one way to come back into relationship 
with God, and that is the way that Jesus opened 
up by His death. 

Were not the Jews children of God before Jesus came 
and died? We answer, No. The very highest expression 
of God's favor toward any of them was shown in Abraham. 
And he was called only a friend. "Moses verily 
was faithful in all his House, as a servant." Those Jews 
who were not faithful were not even servants. But when 
Christ came, He made it possible for some to come out 
and pass from the House of Servants into the House of 
Sons. "He came unto His own, and His own received 
Him not. But as many as received Him, to them gave He 
power to become the sons of God." (John 1:11,12.) 
This privilege was not actually granted immediately, but 
merely in a reckoned way, up to the time when Jesus 
finished His course, ascended up into Heaven and poured 
out the Holy Spirit upon His followers. Then they were 
privileged to become sons of God. 

All down the Gospel Age those who receive Him have 
been privileged to become sons of God. All the good 
promises of God's Word appertain to these. This class 
includes not only Jews, but Gentiles, to whom the door 
of opportunity was thrown open, after the special opportunity 
which had been granted to the Jews came to an 
end. Thus we have become Spiritual Israelites and heirs 
of all the things God promised to this class of sons of God. 
So when we go to the Father in prayer, it is the privilege 
of prayer as a New Creature. Whoever has not ceased to 
be an old creature and has not become a New Creature 
has no privilege of prayer whatever. The only exception 
to this is in the case of the children of consecrated parents, 
and God's favor to them is only on account of their 
parents' spiritual interests. 

THE NEW CREATURE'S GREATEST NEED 

Our text means that New Creatures should be persistent 
in their petitions to God. These may know 



what is proper to pray for, by studying the words of 
Jesus and the Apostles and the Prophets of old. The 
spirit-begotten ones may thus understand what are the 
rights and privileges of sons of God. To these the Heavenly 
Father is more willing to give the Holy Spirit than 
earthly parents are willing to give good gifts to their 
children. --Matthew 7:11. 

The Holy Spirit is the one thing which the New Creature 
needs. The New Creature is on trial for the new 
nature— for glory, honor, immortality. And he can receive 
these only as he is worthy. The terms on which he 
is received into spiritual relationship with the Father are 
that he shall mortify, deaden, the earthly impulses and 
seek to have the spiritual impulses quickened. What, 
therefore, he especially needs to strengthen him and bear 
him up as a New Creature is the Holy Spirit of God. 
Consequently God is particularly willing to give us this, 
and especially pleased that we ask for it. This does not 
mean that earthly interests will be ignored. It means 
that our Heavenly Father knoweth what things of an 
earthly character we have need of, just as He knows what 

R5311 : page 277 

we have need of for our spiritual welfare. 

The Scriptures indicate that God has given us the 
instructions we need in His inspired Word, the Bible. 
This Word will make us more and more wise, as we grow 
in grace and knowledge and in His Spirit, so that in time 
we shall know exactly what things to pray for and what 
things not to pray for. At the beginning of our experience, 
we might not know this so well. The Lord said in 
speaking of prayer, that the heathen think they shall be 
heard for their much speaking, and that they use vain 
repetitions. Their prayers are all vain repetitions. The 
first petition was vain and all the subsequent petitions 
were vain, because they are not based upon the conditions 
necessary to acceptable prayer. 

THE MOTIVE AN IMPORTANT CONSIDERATION 

All who have come into the Covenant of Sacrifice with 
Christ may realize that they have the privilege of prayer. 
What may they pray for? They may not pray with definiteness 
for earthly things, as the Heavenly Father would 
not answer any petitions that would not be for the good 
of His children. St. James speaks of some who offer improper 
petitions. He says, "Ye ask, and receive not, because 
ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon your 
lusts."— James 4:3. 

The word lusts here signifies desires. We are not to 
ask to gratify fleshly desires. For instance, suppose we 
should pray to the Heavenly Father to send us a million 
dollars, telling Him that we knew what to do with the 
money, and how to use it in His work. The Lord probably 
would not give it— for we would probably be asking 



amiss. But it might be that we would think that we were 
asking wisely. Whenever we ask anything from the 

R5311 : page 278 

Lord, we should scrutinize our motives to see if there is 

any personality connected with the matter. In our own 

case we should ask ourselves: Do we want that million dollars 

in order that we may shine in the use of it? If so, such 

a prayer would be a grossly improper prayer. We might 

offer such a prayer at the beginning of our Christian experience, 

and the Father would not chide us for it. We 

would excuse a child for doing what we would not excuse 

in one of adult years. 

In respect to this matter of prayer our Lord gives us 
a cue. It is this: "If ye abide in Me and My Words 
abide in you, ye may ask what ye will, and it shall be done 
unto you." (John 15:7.) How broad a statement this is! 
It might seem at first as though we might ask for anything. 
But it has very particular limitations. Who are 
these who may pray thus? These are such as have already 
become members of His Body— such as have made 
a full consecration of themselves, and have received the 
begetting of the Holy Spirit. Furthermore, the word 
abide means not only that they have entered into this relationship, 
but that they are remaining there, dwelling 
there; that they are members of the Body of Christ in 
good standing with Him. 

"If My Word abide in you." For God's Word to abide 
in us implies that we have a knowledge of God's Word. 
This necessitates the studying of the Word of God, that 
we may know what to pray for. We should not hasten 
to offer petitions, and make a great mistake, and then 
say, I have made a mistake, and have asked for the wrong 
things. We should consider what the Word of God 
teaches on this subject, and if any one has become well 
acquainted with the Word of God, he should know 
whether or not he has met the conditions which will sanctify 
his prayer. It is only after he has come to this 
position that he may continue to make his request, nothing 
doubting. But very likely he will then find that he has 
not a very large list of petitions that he can present. What 
are some of the things we may ask for? 

SOME THINGS FOR WHICH TO PRAY 

One of the things for which we may pray is that God's 
Kingdom may come. We may go continually to the 
Throne of Grace, then, appreciating the fact that God 
has said that He purposes to have a Kingdom here on 
earth. And nothing doubting, we are to pray for that 
Kingdom. And as we pray, we are strengthening our 
faith more and more. What else may we pray for? We 
may also pray, "Give us this day our daily bread." But 
is not this something for the flesh? This is a necessity, 
and the Lord has warranted us in praying for our necessities. 



We are to use our judgment the best we may; 
yet we are not to trust to our own efforts alone, but to 
the Lord's supervising care. If, therefore, the temporal 
supply be scant, we are to learn the lesson of frugality 
and care of what we have. 

We should learn very early in life not to be wasteful. 
When Jesus fed the multitude with the loaves and fishes, 
and then instructed His disciples to take up the remainder 
of these in their baskets, He illustrated His economy. We 
are to eat with thankfulness what we have, if it is merely 
bread and water, or potatoes and salt. There is nothing 
to indicate that we are to ask for pie or cake or ice-cream, 
but for the necessities. If in God's providence 
He furnishes the necessities and withholds the luxuries, 
then we are to be satisfied, to be thankful. But we are to 
pray and not to be fearful. 

What if we do not get anything, tomorrow? Did you 
waste anything today? Did you eat too much today— 
twice as much as you had need for? If so, the Lord will 
probably teach you some lesson, and it will be for your good 
as a New Creature. But if you have used wisdom and economy, 
He will provide the things needful. As the Prophet 
says, "Bread shall be given him; his waters shall be sure." 

We may pray for deliverance from the Evil One. This 
should lead us to see that there is an Evil One, and that 
we are not sufficient of ourselves to resist his attacks 
successfully. We need the Lord's help at all times, and 
we need to pray continually and not to faint. 

We may pray for the forgiveness of our trespasses. 
What the Lord indicates in His model prayer is the forgiveness 
of our daily trespasses— "day by day." And 
these trespasses are the result of our fleshly imperfections. 
Our trespasses of the flesh today should be a great 
deal less than similar trespasses with us ten years ago 
or five years or even one year ago. 

It is best not to use any set form of words in 
prayer, but merely to think in advance what you desire 
of the Spirit— more faith, more patience, more meekness, 
more love. Of course, we shall want to express thanks 
for Divine care and to request a continuance of the same. 
With such prayers, however simple, the Heavenly Father 
is pleased. The prayers recorded in the Bible are generally 
not lengthy. God accepts as our prayers all the good 
thoughts and sentiments of our minds, as well as those 
expressed by our tongues. 

Other statements of our Lord and also of the Apostles 
seem to imply that we should not grow faint-hearted. 
After we have prayed for a certain thing, we should continue 
to keep it before our mind, and not conclude that 
because the prayer was not answered quickly God would 
never answer it. This would seem to apply to particular, 
individual things. Our text seems to include the thought 
that we should have in mind the advantages of prayer in 
all the affairs of life, coming repeatedly to the Throne 
of Grace to obtain the necessary aid. 



THE PHILOSOPHY OF PRAYER 

Will God forget us if we do not ask Him for things, 
and neglect to do the part of a Father? The answer of 
the Scriptures is, that this is not so. God has made abundant 
provision for His children. But we are so constituted 
that reverence for God and desire for prayer are 
among the highest qualities of our nature. The organs 
of veneration and spirituality lie at the top of our head. 
And those who are not enjoying the exercise of these 
highest qualities are not getting the proper blessing out 
of life. Instead of living in the parlor of their brains, so 
to speak, some people live in the basement. Our true enjoyment 
comes from the exercise of the highest faculties 
of the head. Here we can commune with God respecting 
the highest things, the noblest things, the best things. 

The natural tendency of some is toward the baser 
qualities of the human mind, rather than the higher ones; 
that of others is toward the nobler sentiments. But all 
are imperfect. Therefore when any have turned from sin 
and come into the School of Christ, they are instructed 
to pray, because this will enable them to get the best results 
from their own natural combination of faculties. By 
coming to the Lord with regularity in prayer they are 
enlisting the best qualities of their own minds. Thus the 
New Creature is using the highest faculties of the old 
nature to wean the old creature from the natural habits 
which he had cultivated through weaknesses of the flesh. 

BLIGHT FOLLOWS NEGLECT OF PRAYER 

There is a great blessing that comes from prayer! We 
see that if prayer be neglected, a certain amount of blight 
comes in; whereas if the New Creature persists in coming 
to the Lord in prayer, he thus uses the higher organs 

R5312: page 279 

of the mind. He brings out the highest qualities, which 
will make for Righteousness and Truth, and for the 
growth of the New Creature. And the New Creature, 
making use of the higher organs of the brain, makes 
progress in character-structure and in the Lord's service. 

Prayer is the vital breath of the New Creature. We 
cannot control, nor get the best out of our old bodies 
except we conform to our Lord's instruction to pray. If 
prayer was appropriate for our Lord, who was perfect, 
if He needed to go often to the Father in prayer, even so 
it is necessary for us to go to the Lord in prayer that we 
may be more and more transformed by the renewing of 
our minds. This does not mean that we should be always 
on our knees, but that we should go with regularity; 
if possible at least every night and morning. 

Some may prefer to stand when they pray, and some 
to kneel; some to have their eyes open, others to have 
them closed. In all this the Lord leaves us free to exercise 



our own judgment. But some formal approach to the 
Lord every day should be observed. Not only should we 
have special seasons of prayer, but we should have the 
spirit of prayer, which should be with us in all life's 
affairs. As we are going about the duties of life, we 
should think, Now I am looking for the Lord's will and 
way. What shall I do about this matter? And, not stopping 
to pray again, we think as to what would be the 
Lord's will. Thus we shall have the Lord's blessing and 
guidance on that day in everything that is good. 

Some persons of active mind have the tendency to 
make light of Divine guidance and to say, I know what 
to do. Nobody need tell me— neither the Lord nor anybody 
else. Such are likely to have this tendency grow on 
them, and to be unlikely to seek any special counsel. 

But the child of God should feel that it is a privilege 
to have the Lord's approval of every thought, every act 
and every word. What we do is God's work, not ours. 
And because it was done a certain way today, does not 
mean that it would necessarily be done so always. There 
are certain things that are as fixed as the hills, and others 
that are not. So with our experiences. The Lord may 
give us one experience today, and another tomorrow. Today 
He may be leading us by the still waters and in green 
pastures; tomorrow the pathway may be thorny and 
through rough places. Thus day by day we grow in 
knowledge and grow in love, and we should be ready for 
whatever experiences may come to us: 
"Content whatever lot I see, 
Since 'tis God's hand that leadeth me." 



R5312: page 279 

THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN FLESH AND SPIRIT 

"Watch and pray that ye enter not into temptation: the 
spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak."— Matt. 26:41. 

THESE WORDS were uttered by our Lord 

to His disciples at the close of His earthly 

ministry, when the hour was fast approaching 

in which He would be betrayed and 

crucified. He knew of this trial that was 

so close at hand; He had repeatedly mentioned 

the matter to His disciples; but outward 

appearances were so contrary to this 

that they could not appreciate His words. 

He had often spoken in parables and dark 

sayings (which they did not fully understand until after 

His resurrection, though they indeed got many lessons 

from His sayings). So when He told them that He 

would be crucified, they thought that it was another dark 

saying— one of the deep, hidden things, just as when He 

said, "Unless ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man and 



drink His blood, ye have no life in you." 

They did not understand these things. They saw no 
evidence that the Roman Government would take any 
hand in crucifying Him, and they knew that their own 
nation had no authority for crucifixion. While they knew 
that some of the Scribes and Pharisees were very indignant, 
yet they remembered how the people had cried, 
"Hosanna," and hailed Him as King. 

The disciples had been discussing the Kingdom, and 
questioning as to who should be greatest in that Kingdom. 
Two of them had made special requests at that 
time for seats next to Himself. Thus evidently their 
minds were far from the things that were approaching. 
When finally He said that some one should betray Him, 
one after another asked, "Is it I?" And finally St. Peter 
said, "Though all men shall be offended because of Thee, 
...though all should deny Thee, yet will I not deny 
Thee." But Jesus said, "This night, before the cock 
crow, thou shalt deny Me thrice." 

They thought that the Lord was acting strangely 
simply because they did not know what He knew of the 
things near at hand. So this night, in the garden, He 
said, "Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation"; 
He meant for them to be on the alert, for He knew 
the trying times just at hand for them. But they did not 
know the battle that was being waged between Christ, 
the Prince of Light, and Satan, the Prince of Darkness. 

They did not understand this in the way we do. They 
had not yet received the enlightenment of the Holy Spirit. 
The most that they could understand then was that there 
were temptations, and that they should be on the lookout, 
guarding themselves and being earnest of spirit— not 
drowsy nor frivolous, but on guard lest they should fall 
into some kind of temptation. They were not only to 
watch, but to pray. The praying would signify that they 
were watching, and that their own watching was not 
sufficient, but that they would need, additionally, Divine 
assistance. What they would be praying for they would 
be striving for. And the earnestness of the praying 
would help them in the watching. 

The events for which they were to watch included not 
only our Lord's betrayal, trial and crucifixion, but also 
their experiences of the subsequent days when the disciples 
met within closed doors, and those which they were undergoing 
when Jesus appeared and explained to them that 
He was risen from the dead. In various ways He manifested 
Himself to them. If they were in the attitude of 
watchfulness, in the attitude of praying for wisdom from 
on High to help them to know the will of God, it would 
be a very great blessing to them, and the Lord knew this. 
He knew that they would need help during those days 
of trial. If they had not had strong faith, the events 
of the next few days might have overwhelmed them and 
their faith in the teachings of Jesus. But they were kept 
in that time of special trial and testing. Jesus prayed 
for them, and they came off victorious— but some of them 



with scars, as St. Peter and St. Thomas. 

A SPECIAL SEASON OF TRIAL 

This lesson is applicable to us as respects watching 
and praying. We live in this favored period since Pentecost, 
in which God's people are privileged to have the 
leading and guiding of the Holy Spirit; therefore our 
watching and praying may be, and should be, still more 
earnest than that of the disciples at the time of our Lord. 

R5312: page 280 

And as they were then entering into a time of special 
temptation, so we in the end of this Age are living in a 
time of special trial regarding all that we have learned 
in the School of Christ as New Creatures, along the lines 
of meekness, gentleness, brotherly-kindness and love. If 
we be found short in these, so far as the heart is concerned, 
we would not be counted worthy to be of the 
Kingdom class, and therefore would be separated in some 
way from those who were found worthy. 

The Lord had temptations; and all of His faithful 
disciples must also have temptations. And the Apostle 
James assures us that the having of temptation and the 
resisting of temptation will bring us special blessing in 
our development of the character-likeness of Christ. The 
Lord, then, did not mean that by watching and praying 
we would not have temptations come to us, but that we 
would not fail in those temptations. We might even be 
ensnared, as St. Peter was, yet he wept bitterly and repented. 
We know not what his prayers were, but we 
may be sure that they were full of deep contrition that 
he had denied his Master. 

"The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak." 
This cannot be understood to mean what it would mean 
in our own case. The disciples at this time were not New 
Creatures in Christ. They did not receive the begetting 
of the Spirit until Pentecost. It means more to us than 
it did at that time to them. To them it merely meant 
that they were willing in spirit, in mind, in intention. 
These intentions were to be good. They were to demonstrate 
that they were "Israelites indeed," and that they 
were not hypocritical, even though their flesh was weak 
and had the depravity that had come down through the 
several thousand years since man fell into sin. Their intention 
was better than their ability to perform; consequently 
they needed specially to watch and to pray. 

THE NATURE OF THE BATTLE 

The same thing is true of the Church from Pentecost 
to the present time. We note, however, a special distinction 
between the spirit and the flesh. To the New 
Creature in Christ Jesus, old things have passed away 
and all things have become new. (2 Cor. 5:17.) But 



the New Creature is weak in one sense of the word, 
though strong in another sense. It must be strong in 
the sense that it is of strong determination to have no 
sympathy with sin or unrighteousness or evil-speaking. 

The New Creature represents the power of God, so 
to speak, that has become identified with us. We have 
accepted God's will as our will, and have been begotten 
by His Holy Spirit to a new life. We are therefore 
styled New Creatures by this begetting. As New Creatures 
we are at first represented as babes. The difference 
between the New Creature and the old creature is that 
the New Creature expects to attain the Divine nature- 
glory, honor and immortality— while the old creature desires 
earthly things and comforts of the present life- 
honor of men, etc.— and is continually pulling toward the 
things which it desires and craves. 

The New Creature must conquer the old creature and 
its desires, which more or less interfere with the New 

R5313 : page 280 

Creature's engagements in the Covenant of Sacrifice. 
Thus there is a conflict between the New Creature and 
the old creature. The New Creatures, who realize themselves 
to be at first but babes in Christ, must grow in 
grace— grow in the Lord and the power of His might- 
grow up into Him in all things. Thus gradually the New 
Creature becomes stronger and stronger. 

But, alas, there is often difficulty here. Many of the 
Lord's people have not been fed on the strong meat; as 
the Apostle says, "When for the time ye ought to be 
teachers, ye have need that one teach you again which 
be the first principles of the oracles of God; and are 
become such as have need of milk, and not of strong 
meat." (Heb. 5:12.) Many of these do not know what 
justification by faith means; many do not understand 
what consecration or sanctification means. 

They do not understand that they are merely babes. 
They have taken the first step, and there is a tendency 
to believe the word of the ministers, priests and bishops 
who have told them that they are not to know these deep 
things, but that their elders and pastors are to know them, 
and to do the thinking for them. This condition is quite 
contrary to God's Word. He wishes all of His people 
to be qualified for telling forth His Truth to others as 
they have opportunity. Therefore the Apostle advises 
that we "henceforth be no more children, tossed to and 
fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine," but 
that we become New Creatures in the Lord and thus 
prepare ourselves for the glorious things to which we 
have been invited by the Divine promises.— Eph. 4:14,15. 

The flesh is weak in that it is not up to the standard 
of righteousness. Father Adam was perfect, and his 
fleshly mind was a perfect mind, strong for righteousness. 
But as the fall brought our race lower and lower, mentally, 
morally and physically, this flesh gradually became 



weaker and weaker. Therefore all flesh is weak in its 

natural tendencies, the fallen nature strongly in the 

ascendency. But we are strong in proportion as the New 

Creature overcomes these tendencies, so that the flesh is 

kept as a servant of the New Creature, that the New 

Creature may be ultimately developed into the character-likeness 

of the Master. 

But people will say, "John ought to make a good business 
man; but he can talk or think of nothing but religion." 
Or in the social set, they will say, "Mrs. So-and-so 
was once very attractive, but now she can talk 
only about religion." And so it will be with everything 
else pertaining to the world, if we are true men and 
true women— performing our Covenant vows unto the 
Lord, walking faithfully in Jesus' footsteps. 

Yet every one is dissatisfied with those who are 
double-minded. "A double-minded man is unstable in 
all his ways." Jesus tells us that before becoming His 
followers we should sit down and count the cost of discipleship 
—the cost of serving God. If we do so and 
make the right decision and continue to serve in harmony 
with it, we shall get not only the future reward of everlasting 
life and Divine favor, with glory and honor, but 
we shall also have the present reward of the Lord's favor, 
the Lord's care, and fellowship one with another. 

LUKEWARMNESS UNDESIRABLE 

If after counting the cost of service you decide to 
serve Mammon, selfishness, then try to be a millionaire. 
If you desire to enter politics, aspire to be president. If 
you intend to enter social life, go into it with all your 
might. A man who is wishy-washy, who does not know 
what he is doing, does not accomplish much of anything. 
The Lord says that he likes men to be either hot or cold. 

If we are determined to be servants of the Heavenly 
Father, we are to recognize no other master. This does 
not mean that we are not to recognize headship. Some 
one may be master of much of our time. But the controller 
of our time is not master of our hearts, which are 
given to the Lord. We seek to use our time, energy and 
strength in the service of the great King. 

A certain portion of our time is necessary for providing 
for our physical needs and for the needs of those 

R5313 : page 281 

dependent upon us. In thus caring for our own we do 
not lose allegiance to the great God; for we should refuse 
to become servants of any earthly master if it would be 
in conflict with our service to the Heavenly Father. This 
would not interfere with the thought that in the Church 
of Christ there are varieties of service and activities, 
each department having its own organization and head. 
But the Body of Christ working together is to recognize 
Jesus as the Head over all things, and to seek to know 



each his own part in all the affairs of the Body. 

We read, "One is your Master, even Christ." And 
yet Christ is not the one referred to here in our text— 
"No man can serve two masters"; these are God and 
Mammon. Jesus said, "I delight to do Thy will, O God." 
"I came not to do Mine own will, but the will of the 
Father who sent Me." So, then, in serving Jesus and 
recognizing Him as our Master, we are not ignoring the 
Father. Likewise in recognizing order in the Church we 
are not ignoring the Father or the Son. And in serving 
an earthly master, we are not to think of this service as 
conflicting with the service of our Heavenly Father and 
of our Lord Jesus Christ. We are to see that we have 
been directed to provide things honest and decent in the 
sight of all men.— Romans 12:17. 



R5313 : page 281 

THE REPORT OF THE SPIES 

-OCTOBER 19. -NUMBERS 13:1-3,17 TO 14:25.- 

"If God be for us, who can be against us?"— Romans 8:31. 

THE first journey of the Israelites was from 

Egypt to Mt. Sinai, where they remained 

about a year. Their second journey began 

after the appointment of the seventy Elders, 

and after Miriam had been received back into 

the Camp. The start was with some ceremonial 

—the blowing of silver trumpets, the 

leading of the pillar of cloud and fire, and 

Moses' invocation, "Arise, O Lord, and let 

Thine enemies be scattered, and let them that 

hate Thee flee before Thee." This was the morning call 

of the Israelites; and in the evening, as the host rested for 

the night, Moses prayed, "Return, O Lord, unto the many 

thousands of Israel." In other words, "Abide with us." 

Their journey led through a waste, barren wilderness, 
scorched by the sun, very different from Sinai's valleys, 
in which they had recuperated and rested. The journey 
to Kadesh-Barnea, on the border of the land of Canaan, 
was approximately 160 miles. It was beset with unknown 
dangers— serpents, wandering bands of Arabs, lack of 
water, etc. The Israelites, including women, children, 
household goods, cattle and sheep, etc., necessarily journeyed 
slowly. Apparently one or two months were spent 
on the journey, as they arrived at the time of the first 
ripe grapes— July. 

Kadesh-Barnea, their objective point, is a delightful 
place, well watered, and is a sharp contrast with the Desert 
of Paran. Here they rested and refreshed themselves, and 
looked toward the mountains north of them, their Land 
of Promise; for they were on the south border. 



TIMIDITY OF THE ISRAELITES 

Moses, full of faith, proposed that they should forthwith 
proceed— enter the land of Canaan, the Land of 
Promise, full of faith in God, who already had manifested 
His favor toward them in so many ways— in their deliverance 
from Egypt; in the crossing of the Red Sea; in the 
sweetening of the waters of Marah; in giving them the 
victory over their enemies, the Amalekites; in sending 
them the manna, and later the quail; in manifesting His 
favor toward them in the Covenant at Mt. Sinai, and in 
the manifestation of His presence with them in the Tabernacle 
and in the pillar of cloud by day, and the pillar of 
fire by night. 

But the Israelites were timid. They had no knowledge 
of war, excepting a little experience with the Amalekites 
near Mt. Sinai; and they had been worsted until God 
helped them while Moses' hands were uplifted in prayer 
on their behalf. Their caution over-balanced their faith. 
They urged upon Moses the sending of the twelve spies. 
These apparently were divided under two leaders, Caleb 
and Joshua. One party went the full length of the land, 
and returned in the short space of forty days; the other 
took a shorter journey, and returned sooner. The spies 
were cautious men, and gave a truthful report of the 
land, declaring that its cities had high walls and would 
be difficult to overcome, especially without up-to-date military 
equipments. They reported also that they had seen 
giants, probably some of the same families afterwards 
represented by Goliath, whom David slew in battle. The report 
of these ten is described as an evil report, because they 
presented the matter from the viewpoint of its difficulties, 
as in contrast with the report made by Caleb and Joshua, 
which is styled a good report, because it was encouraging. 
These two emphasized the favorable features— the fruits, 
the honey, the fertility of the country. Their report was 
backed by faith, while the adverse report was backed by 
fears, which forgot the Divine providences and leadings. 

The spies really should have considered themselves a 

R5314: page 281 

committee on ways and means for entering the land of 
Canaan rather than a committee to decide whether it was 
possible to enter it or not. The possibilities were already 
determined by God's promises, hence Joshua and Caleb left 
these out of account. If God could deliver them from the 
Egyptians and from the Amalekites, could give them water 
in the desert and bread from Heaven, He surely could 
do all that was necessary to fulfil His promise to bring 
them into possession of Canaan. 

THE LESSON FOR SPIRITUAL ISRAELITES 

Various lessons may be drawn by Spiritual Israelites 



from the experiences of the typical people. If we view 
the matter from the personal standpoint, we may see that 
each Christian has from the Almighty a special invitation 
to enter into Canaan's rest and to take possession of 
the blessings promised by the Lord. He turns his back 
upon Satan and the world, typified by Pharaoh and the 
Egyptians. By faith he puts between him and the Adversary 
a firm resolution for righteousness and obedience 
to God, through whose providential leadings he reaches 
the place of making the covenant. 

Thenceforth as a New Creature he journeys on, beset 
by the trials of the wilderness journey, until he comes to 
the position of an advance soldier of the Cross. There he 
perceives the new life, the new experiences before him, 
in harmony with God's promises. He would at once with 
faith and courage enter in and possess himself of all the 
good things of the spiritual life. 

The enemies of the land to him would represent the 
weaknesses of the flesh and the oppositions of his fallen 
nature, all of which are to be overcome. To the extent 
that he can overcome these, he enters into and possesses 
and enjoys his inheritance promised of the Lord. Some 
can do this promptly, by reason of faith; others make 

R5314: page 282 

investigation of the trials and alas ! too often become discouraged, 

fearful, distrustful, murmurers— sometimes 

wishing that they had not left the world at all, and that 

they could return thither. 

The reports of the spies represent the different viewpoints 
from which the promises of God may be seen. To 
the eye of faith, all things are possible; to the eye of 
unbelief, all things, in the way of the conquest of the 
flesh, are impossible. Let us go up and possess the Land! 
Let us be of good courage and fight the good fight! 
God will be with us and give us the victory, with the 
proper exercise of faith! 

DID GOD ENCOURAGE WAR? 

In studying this lesson, remembering that the Israelites 
were invading a land possessed by other people, remembering 
that this invasion meant the loss of many lives 
amongst the Israelites, as well as amongst the people of 
Canaan, many are perplexed. They say, It does not seem 
reasonable to believe that God gave such a message to 
Moses and to the Israelites. They say, Contrast this with 
the Scriptural declaration that Jesus is the Prince of 
Peace, and that God "will make wars to cease unto the 
ends of the earth." Agnostics inquire, How are these 
things reconciled? Where is the justice of commissioning 
the Israelites to steal the lands of the Canaanites, yea, to 
murder them? And according to some Scriptures, they 
were to utterly exterminate all the peoples of the land, 
Canaanites, Hittites, Perizzites, Jebusites, etc. 



We reply that to understand the Bible we must view 
it from the Bible's own standpoint, and not from the 
standpoint of our creeds formulated in the darker days, 
nor from the standpoint of our own imperfect reasoning. 
The Bible is consistent, beautiful, Godlike, only when 
viewed in its own light. 

In the first place, we must remember that the Bible entirely 
antagonizes the theories of our creeds, which tell 
us that all those slaughtered Canaanites went straight to 
an eternity of torture, and are suffering there yet, because 
they did not know the true God and Jesus Christ, whom 
He sent to be the Savior. The Bible tells us that those 
people and all the people in the whole world are children 
of Adam, and all perishing because of the death sentence. 
When they die, they are not alive anywhere. They are 
dead. Whether they die by pestilence, or famine, or consumption, 
or pneumonia, or otherwise, it is all the same. 
They are suffering the penalty that God pronounced; 
namely, "Dying, thou shalt die."— Genesis 2:17, margin. 

It matters not, therefore, in what way we die, or very 
much whether our experiences be longer or shorter. In the 
case of the Amalekites and other peoples of Canaan, God 
declared that their iniquity had come to the full. That 
is to say, Divine Justice determined that for them to live 
longer would not be to their advantage, nor to anybody's 
advantage. They were merely cumbering the earth. 

God was using the Israelites as a typical people, 
through whom He was making types and shadows of 
coming blessings. He would give Canaan to Israel, and 
thus make another type of how the antitypical Israel will 
enter and possess the antitypical Canaan. He would make 
the slaughter of the people of the land to illustrate the 
destruction of the works of the flesh and the Devil which 
His people are to accomplish in themselves by fighting the 
good fight of faith and overcoming the evil tendencies 
which have become intrenched in their own flesh. 

NO INJUSTICE TO THE CANAANITES 

Although God is not bound by Justice to give any 
future life to anybody, He has arranged so to do. To 
this end Christ already has died for the sins of the whole 
world— including the Canaanites, as well as the Israelites. 
Aside from this Plan of redemption the whole race would 
have perished under the death sentence. By God's grace, 
however, we are not to perish, but to be recovered from 
the death sentence. So we read, "God so loved the world 
that He gave His Only Begotten Son, that whosoever believeth 
in Him might not perish. " — John 3:16. 

As all the world came into the death condition by one 
man's disobedience, so all are to be rescued from death 
conditions by the obedience of another One, "The Man 
Christ Jesus, who gave Himself a Ransom for all"; "As 
by a man came death, by a man also comes the resurrection 
of the dead"; "As all in Adam die, even so all in Christ 
shall be made alive"— the Church the First-Fruits.— 



I Corinthians 15:21,22; Revelation 20:6. 

In a word, God's proposal is that Messiah's Kingdom, 
the members of which are now being selected from the 
world— the Church, the Bride— will for a thousand years, 
with the Redeemer, bless and uplift and restore all the 
nations of earth— from sin, degradation, death, the tomb. 

Jesus explains that the Sodomites will be of this class 
to be restored by resurrection processes, and so also will, 
with those Canaanites, be subjects of Restitution.— Ezekiel 16:55; 
Mark 6:11; Acts 3:19-21. 

DEAF EARS TO BE UNSTOPPED 

Nobody will receive God's blessing except through 
faith in the Lord Jesus as the Redeemer. But the promise 
of God is that He as the true Light shall yet enlighten 
"every man that cometh into the world." The Canaanites, 
the Sodomites, and all the people that lived before Jesus' 
day must have an equal chance with others to hear the 
Message of God's favor— the opportunity to believe in 
Jesus as the Redeemer and to obey His voice. 

The same will apply to all the heathen of our day, and 
the thousands of millions from Jesus' day until now. And 
the same will apply to the great mass of heathen who have 
lived in Christian lands, but whose eyes and ears have 
been holden by Satan— by false doctrines— so that they 
could not understand and appreciate the Message of the 
Love of God. The assurance of the Scriptures is that all 
the blind eyes shall be opened and all the deaf ears unstopped, 
and that the knowledge of the glory of God 
shall fill the whole earth. 

The Church, under the Headship of Jesus, is the Spiritual 
Seed of Abraham, and in and through these will come 
the blessing of Messiah's Kingdom for a thousand years 
unto every nation, people, kindred and tongue.— Gal. 3:29. 

All men are to be rescued from the penalty of the 
Adamic death. All are to have a full opportunity of knowing 
about the Savior and of accepting Him. With the 
knowledge will come responsibility. Whoever willingly 
and knowingly rejects the grace of God, and chooses sin 
in preference to righteousness, will be esteemed a wicked 
sinner, unworthy of everlasting life or any further favors 
of God. Such, the Bible says, will die the Second Death. 
From it there will be no redemption; for Christ shall die 
no more. Hence from it there will be no resurrection. As 
St. Paul declares, they shall be punished with everlasting 
destruction. (2 Thess. 1:9.) As St. Peter declares, they 
shall perish like natural brute beasts.— 2 Peter 2:12. 

The present life does not end hope for any except 
those who have come to a clear knowledge of God and 
who have chosen sin with wilful deliberation. As for 
other trespasses, the Bible assures us that they will all 
receive a just penalty: "Whatsoever a man soweth, that 
shall he also reap." But the horrible doctrine of eternal 
torment, which has been driving so many away from God 
and the Bible, is not a Bible teaching, but a part of what 



St. Paul styles the "doctrines of devils."— I Timothy 4:1 



R5315 : page 283 

A GOOD MAN'S SIN 

-OCTOBER 26.-NUMBERS 20:1-13.- 

"Let the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart, 
be acceptable in Thy sight, O Lord, my strength, and my 
Redeemer."— Psalm 19:14. 

ISRAEL'S fortieth year after leaving Egypt 
was God's appointed time for them to enter 
the land of Canaan. Moses was in his one 
hundred and twentieth year, but yet quite 
vigorous. His sister Miriam had died previously; 
Aaron, his elder brother, still lived, 
but died the same year. For thirty-eight 
years the Children of Israel had resided 
in the wilderness, making Kadesh-Barnea 
their camp center, but really occupying 
a considerable portion of the wilderness with their 
flocks and herds. 

It was in April of the fortieth year that, by Divine 
command through Moses, they assembled at Kadesh, 
prepared to enter into the Land of Promise. But the 
water supply was scant. The people and their cattle were 
famishing. Murmurings arose, and inquiries if it were 
not as well to have perished in Egypt or elsewhere as to 
perish there from thirst. 

The burden naturally fell upon Moses, shared, however, 
by his brother Aaron. All leaders of honor and 
influence carry weighty responsibilities. Moses and 
Aaron in turn went to the Lord with the matter, not complainingly, 
but inquiringly— desiring guidance from on 
High— from the real Leader of Israel. Nor did they go in 
vain. The Lord graciously manifested Himself— "The 
glory of the Lord appeared unto them"— quite possibly 
also manifest to the people of Israel, who looked on. This 
glory is surmised to have been a ray of light emanating 
from the Mercy Seat in the Most Holy. 

They were to take the rod, presumably "Aaron's rod 
that budded," and that was kept in the Ark in the Most 
Holy. That rod would be a reminder to the people of the 
Lord's special acceptance of Aaron as the High priest 
and assistant of Moses. It would be a sign to them of the 
Divine favor which hitherto had guided their nation, and 
which still would continue to guide all who would trust 
in the Lord and in the power of His might. 

SMITING THE ROCK A SIN 

The Lord particularly directed that Moses should 



speak to the rock, and that in response to the word waters 
would rush forth. On a previous occasion, about thirty-eight 
years before, in a similar experience near Mt. 
Sinai, Moses had been instructed to smite the rock; but 
in this case the rock was not to be smitten. Here Moses 
and Aaron sinned. "The meekest man in all the earth" 
forgot himself, and allowed a spirit somewhat akin to 
pride, self-sufficiency and anger to control him for the 
moment. Smiting the rock, he cried aloud to the people, 
"Ye rebels, must I bring you water out of the rock?" 

The water indeed came forth, as the Lord had promised. 
The people indeed got the blessing needed, but one 
of the most illustrious men and servants of God there fell 
under Divine disapprobation. The Lord's decree was that 
neither Moses nor his brother should enter Canaan. 
Moses, however, was permitted to go with the people to 
the end of their journey, and then from Mt. Nebo to see 
the land across the Jordan. 

This condemnation does not signify the Divine reprobation 
to eternal torment or to any lasting dishonor. 
Moses got his entire punishment then and there, before 
death, as do all of God's saintly ones. Whatever stripes, 
chastisements, punishments, of the future shall be meted 
out to mankind in general because of wrong doings in 
the present life, there are none reserved for the saints. 
The Apostle explains that they are chastened in the present 
life, that they may not come into condemnation with 
the world by and by. 

THEY DRANK OF THE ROCK-CHRIST 

St. Paul points out to us that the smiting of the rock 
was symbolical. As the manna, the bread from heaven, 
represented Jesus, so the smitten rock represented Him 
also. The refreshing water from the rock symbolized the 
blessings which flow from Christ's sacrifice. The smiting 
of the rock at the beginning of Israel's experience was 
authorized of God. It was necessary that upon Jesus 
should fall the rod of affliction, even unto death: 

(1) "The Lord laid upon Him [the death penalty 
for] the iniquity of us all"; 

(2) "By His stripes we are healed."— Isaiah 53:5,6. 
St. Paul's words are, "They did all drink the same 

spiritual drink: for they drank of that spiritual Rock that 
followed them: and that Rock was Christ."— 
I Corinthians 10:4. 

Just what was symbolized by the second smiting, which 
God did not authorize, is not explained by St. Paul. The 
fact that this second smiting was punished tells us that it 
was wrong, and that it symbolized some improper course 
on the part of the professed people of God. Two suggestions 
come to us, either or both of which may be 
applicable. 

(1) This second smiting, at the end of the forty years 
and just as the people were about to be led into the Promised 
Land, may symbolize a smiting of the people of God 



—the Body of Christ which is the Church. A number of 
Scriptures appertaining to the Gospel Age give the inference 
that some of the saintly members of the Body of 
Christ in the end of this Age will be put to shame, or, perhaps, 
put to death— and thus enter into glory, as did the 
Master, when He was smitten. In His case the high 
priest declared that it was expedient that one should 
suffer, rather than that the entire Jewish people should 
perish as a nation.— John 11:50. 

The religious rulers conspired against the Master— as 
they supposed, for God's glory. The suggestion has been 
offered that similarly, in the end of this Gospel Age, 
religious leaders, moved by similar motives of self-preservation, 
may conspire for the smiting, the injury, of some 
of the Lord's followers. If this be a proper interpretation 
of the type, it indicates that under the Divine providence 
blessings will flow from the wrong course, yet 
no greater blessing than might have come by pursuing 
the right course— of speaking to the rock, asking for the 
water, the Truth, the refreshment, instead of smiting it. 

(2) The other thought, closely related to this one, 
is that any denial of the Redeemer on the part of His 
consecrated followers would signify a crucifying afresh, 
a putting to open shame, a smiting of the rock the second 
time. St. Paul explains that such a repudiation of the 
Word of Christ by those who have once been enlightened 
and have tasted of the Heavenly gift and of the powers 
of the world to come, etc., would mean for them an unworthiness 
of any place in the Heavenly Kingdom— that 
they would die the Second Death.— Hebrews 6:4-7. 

The fact that both Moses and Aaron participated in 
the type, and that neither entered the land of Canaan, 
signifies that the very highest dignitaries and most enlightened 
members of the Royal Priesthood might be in 
danger of committing the sin typified, or pictured, in the 
second and unauthorized smiting of the rock. On the 

R5315 : page 284 

contrary, those who smote the antitypical Rock the first 

time— those who crucified Christ— the Scriptures assure 

us did so ignorantly and merely fulfilled the Divine intention. 

"I wot, brethren, that in ignorance ye did it, as did 

also your rulers"; "for if they had known, they would 

not have crucified the Lord of glory."— Acts 3:17; 

I Corinthians 2:8. 

LESSONS FOR SPIRITUAL LEADERS 

If "the meekest man in all the earth," after long years 
of training and experience, made such a failure, even 
typically, the lesson to all spiritual leaders should be an 
impressive one. It says to us in inspired words, "Let him 
that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall." The 
Lord declares (v. 12) that the sin of Moses and Aaron 
was one of unbelief, "because ye believed Me not— to 



sanctify Me in the eyes of Israel." 

It did require faith in God for Moses to smite the 
rock. Apparently his lack of faith was in the people. 
Apparently he wished to produce a dramatic effect— to 
impress upon them a lasting lesson, "Ye rebels, must I 
bring you water out of the rock by a blow from this 
rod?" The effect may have been dramatic. The people 
may have stood in awe of Moses, but all the same, that 
was not the best way for dealing with the matter; for it 
was not God's way. Better would it have been for Moses 
to have hidden himself— humbled himself— and to have 
asked water from the rock in Jehovah's name. 

Class leaders, Elders, ministers in the Church of 
Christ, will do well to remember that the blessings which 
God has arranged shall flow to His people from the 
smitten Jesus and will come for the asking; and that they 
are not authorized either to smite the "rock" or to pose 
dramatically before the people of God as necessary to the 
supply of the streams of grace and Truth. 

On the other hand, the Lord's people, Spiritual Israel, 
thirsting for grace and Truth now due, are to feel a great 
deal of sympathy for those who occupy teaching positions. 
There never was a time surely when the honesty 
and the faithfulness of the Lord's servants were more 
severely tested than now. What all need is meekness, patience, 
longsuffering, brotherly-kindness, love— loyalty to 
God— faithfulness to their Covenant. 

EDOMITES, MOABITES, MIDIANITES 

The various nations inhabiting the Promised Land, 
whose iniquity had come to the full and who were to be 
dispossessed by Israel, were not related to Abraham; but 
the Edomites, Moabites and Midianites, who dwelt to the 
south and the east of the Promised Land, were of blood 
relationship to Israel. The Midianites were children of 

R5316 : page 284 

Abraham by Keturah. The Moabites were children of 

Lot, Abraham's nephew. The Edomites were the descendants 

of Esau, Jacob's brother. The Divine Program 

was that Israel might leave these related peoples unmolested, 

except when they made the attack. 

When the time came to enter Canaan from Kadesh, 
the nearest route would have been through Edom. The 
Israelites asked permission to cross Edom without injuring 
their people, and offered to make good any damage of 
any kind. They were refused permission, and, in harmony 
with the covenant between Esau and Jacob, Israel's 
host detoured to the south and passed through the land of 
Moab— the land of the children of Lot. 

This detour of so vast a company through the desert 
was disheartening, "and the soul of the people was much 
discouraged." Again there came murmurings against 
Moses, who really represented God to them. Their murmurings 



were promptly punished— they were not protected 
from the serpents prevailing in that vicinity. The 
result was terrible. Many died from the serpents, until 
Moses made a brazen one and erected it on a pole. 
Throughout all the Camp went messages, directing the 
people to look to the brazen serpent, exercise faith and 
be healed of their sickness. 

POINT THE SIN-BITTEN TO THE SAVIOR 

Thus not only were the Natural Israelites corrected, 
chastened, punished, but a lasting lesson was written for 
the benefit of Spiritual Israelites. We see that the fiery 
serpent of sin has bitten our race, that we are all dying, 
and that only by the exercise of faith in the Crucified 
One can any be healed. Our mission has been during the 
reign of Sin and Death to point the sin-bitten to the 
Savior. "As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, 
even so must the Son of Man be lifted up." "And I, 
if I be lifted up, will draw all men unto Me," said Jesus. 
-John 3:14; 12:32. 

In the present time, comparatively few hear the Message, 
or see with the eye of faith the Crucified One. The 
great mass are dying in heathen darkness; only the few 
have had opportunity to exercise faith in Christ. Thank 
God, the day is nearing when He who was lifted up at 
Calvary, and afterward lifted up in resurrection power, 
will be manifested in power and great glory— "the true 
Light which will lighten every man which cometh into the 
world!" If they do not respond, the fault will be their 
own. (Matthew 24:30; John 1:9-11.) That glorious condition 
will come through Messiah's Kingdom, for which 
still we are praying, "Thy Kingdom come; Thy will be 
done on earth, as it is done in Heaven." 



R5316 : page 284 

THE LONDON CONVENTION- AUGUST 1-4 

THERE is necessarily a considerable difference 

between a Convention held in a great city 

and one held in a country-side. There is 

also a slight temperamental difference between 

the blended English character of 

America and Canada and the composite 

English of Great Britain; hence there is 

always a slight difference between the Conventions 

held on opposite sides of the Atlantic. 

But the oneness of spirit of all the 

dear Conventioners is manifest to everybody who has attended 

both. And how reasonable this is! All spirit-begotten, 

all children of the one Father, all patterning 

themselves after the same glorious Savior, these 

dear ones must have many wonderfully harmonious characteristics. 



"By one Spirit we were all baptized into one 
Body."— I Corinthians 12:13. 

Find the members of that one Body where we may 
we find them of that one Spirit. It is always beautiful. 
It is always separate from the world. It is always showing 
forth the praises of "Him who called us out of darkness 
into His marvelous light." It is always striving to 
let its light so shine before others as to glorify the Father. 

The world-wide Harvest Message could have no more 
potent testimony than this— the oneness of spirit manifested 
among the members of the Body of Christ. It 
is gathering the wheat class to the Lord, to His 
Word and into sympathy with each other. Some of 
the wheat is more and some less ripe, but gradually 
the glorious sunlight of Truth is producing a ripening 
and separating effect. Wherever it enters it rests, abides. 
This is one reason, we believe, why it is so generally 
said on every occasion that the last Convention is the 
best. All of our joys, all of our spiritual blessings, are 

R5316 : page 285 

largely what we make them; or, rather, what the Lord 
is able to make them for us. We can be filled with His 
Spirit only in proportion as we become emptied of self 
and fully submitted to Him. We can be taught in the 
School of Christ only in proportion as we realize our 
own insufficiency and need of guidance in the ways of 
the Lord and submit ourselves to the Master's 
instruction. 

The Convention just closed has been a most interesting 
and profitable one. So far as we know the sentiment 
of all present was, "It is good to be here." Although 
not as abundantly furnished with able speakers as the 
American Conventions usually are, it was nevertheless 
admirably served, and a number of very able addresses 
were given along various lines of Bible study. Helpful 
thoughts and ennobling impulses were started which, it 
is hoped, were carried to the homes of many and then 
scattered further around, to the glory of the Lord and 
to the comfort of His people. The spiritual fellowship, 
which is always one of the chief features of the blessing 
of a Convention, seemed to be thoroughly enjoyed and 
participated in by all. 

The total number in attendance from outside the London 
Tabernacle Congregation was about nine hundred, 
the most of these from nearby towns and cities, though 
some of them came from Germany, Denmark and Sweden, 
besides an American representation. One hundred and 
sixty-nine symbolized their consecration by water immersion, 
symbolized their immersion into Christ's death.— 
Romans 6:3-5. 

Brother Russell arrived in good time for the beginning 
of the Convention, and was with it throughout. 



R5317 : page 285 

LITERAL OR SYMBOLIC FIRE? 

"But the heavens and the earth which are now, by the same 
Word are kept in store, reserved unto fire against the Day of 
Judgment and perdition of ungodly men."— 2 Peter 3:7. 

WE HAVE been asked whether this prophecy 

may be expected to be fulfiled in some 

way with more or less literalness as, for instance, 

by electrical displays of lightning, by 

storms, or in connection with the zone of 

electrical energy which some scientists believe 

is approaching the earth, etc., and 

whether this thought, if accepted as true, 

would be in line with Exodus 9:23: "And 

the Lord sent thunder and hail, and the fire 

ran along upon the ground; and the Lord rained hail upon 

the land of Egypt." 

We still think that the great fire that the Lord mentions 
through St. Peter, Zephaniah, the Prophet David and 
others is to be a symbolic fire. The Prophets declare that 
the fire of that great Day shall burn up the wicked— root 
and branch. And it would seem to signify that God's 
Justice, indignation, will burn against every one who is 
wicked, and that this fire will go on all through the Millennial 
Age— "that Day," the thousand-year Day. It will 
leave of the wicked neither root nor branch. 

HUMAN MIND BROADENING TO RIGHTEOUS PRINCIPLES 

The fire begins in the beginning of that Day, in the 
great time of trouble. The fire here would seem to be of 
this same kind. The judgments of the Lord will be abroad 
in the earth, and the inhabitants of the world will learn 
righteousness. The Lord spoke of a fire being already 
kindled in the Jewish nation. Trouble came upon them 
until their entire polity passed away— in the year A. D. 
70. And so we see now that more or less there are fires 
burning here and there, exposing, to some extent, the 
evil-doers.— Isa. 26:9; Luke 12:49. 

This has been going on for some time, and is to a 
certain extent broadening the human mind to the principles 
of justice and injustice. This is taking hold on 
business methods in a way that was never before known. 
We hear a great deal about the political chicanery of the 
present, but the world has never had so righteous, so just 
and equitable business arrangements as at the present 
time. And this is not because the people are more righteous 
than their forefathers, but because they are coming 
to see better methods of business. But present conditions 
will eventuate in a great time of trouble, in which the 
Capital element and the Labor element will each seek to 
burn the other up— and it will, no doubt, be a great conflagration. 



The whole structure will be involved in 

anarchy, which, however, will be only temporary, because 

of the establishment of Messiah's Kingdom. 

WATCH, RATHER THAN SPECULATE 

As the Apostle Peter seems to imply that the "heavens" 
will be on fire and the "earth" also, the conflagration 
might possibly have its beginning in the Church. We see 
more or less of an excitement now amongst theologians 
and all classes. We see that people are more or less losing 
confidence in their leaders of the past, and it looks as 
though the "heavens" will pass away with a great deal of 
struggle and great commotion. Just now they are having 
a little diversion with special attacks on us. They do not 
yet have so much to do against each other, because they 
are all busily engaged in doing what they can against us. 

All this will not interfere with the facts presented in 
STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES-re the change of Dispensations. 
We have the assurance from the Scriptures that 
Messiah's Kingdom will bring the world great blessings, 
and we wonder how these blessings will come. There will 
be a new arrangement of things in the affairs of the earth, 
but just what will be the nature of the physical changes, 
or how these will be brought about, we do not know. We 
are not to suppose that there will be another canopy of 
water to make another Deluge, for the Lord has declared 
that there will never be another world-wide flood. 

It would be very unwise for us to speculate on anything 
not revealed in the Bible. We prefer to keep our 
eyes open and not allow our minds to specially dwell on 
any one theory. Our confidence is not in any one method, 
but in the ONE who has all power. We feel sure that all 
He has promised will be fulfilled. It is not necessary to 
decide the point in our own mind even, let alone mentioning 
it to others. 

SIGNS OF DISPENSATIONAL CHANGES 

Then it is to be borne in mind that Joel's account of the 
Pentecostal blessing is divided into two parts— the blessing 
upon the servants and handmaidens, and that upon 
all flesh. According to this, the servants and handmaidens 
of the Lord have special blessing at the present time. 
With the conclusion of the blessing of the servants and 
handmaidens comes the fulfilment of the other prophecy— 
the pouring out of the Spirit upon all flesh. This evidently 
refers to the blessing of the whole world by the Church 
during the thousand years. And in this connection we see 
that the Lord will show signs and wonders, clouds, "blood 

R5318 : page 286 

and fire and pillars of smoke." We have no positive 
knowledge that this language is symbolic. It may refer to 
social upheaval and combustion, political troubles, financial 



troubles, and also some great physical manifestations of 
Divine Power in connection with the time of trouble. 

But all this is only suppositionary. We are expecting 
a change; and if this change shall be accompanied by 
physical disturbances, now is the time for them to be 
coming. For the Lord says, "They shall not hurt nor destroy 
in all My holy Mountain"— Kingdom. The supposition 
that there would be catastrophe then would be out of 
harmony with this prophecy. Rather, the appropriate time, 
if there are to be such calamities and changes, physical 
or electrical, would seem to be just now— just at the time 
when, as the Lord forewarned, there is to be "a time of 
trouble such as never was since there was a nation"— at 
the time, apparently, when the "four winds," the fallen 
angels, will become loose. 

All of these things together will constitute the "time 
of trouble such as never was." And from this time of 
trouble, "Watch ye, therefore, and pray always, that ye 
may be accounted worthy to escape." Watch that ye may 
"escape all these things that shall come to pass, and to 
stand before the Son of Man."— Luke 21:36. 



R5316 : page 286 

QUESTION ON JUSTIFICATION 

QUESTION.— Have you changed your views 
respecting the justification of the Church, 
so that the presentations of STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES, Volume I, on this subject no 
longer represent your thought? 

Answer.— Surely not! If we have, why 
would we continue to publish and circulate 
the Volume? "The path of the just is as 
the shining light, that shineth more and 
more unto the perfect day." So the subject 
of our justification is clarifying daily to many of the 
Lord's dear people. Features of justification not previously 
discerned by them are now very clear. For instance, 
many failed to see in the past, and some still fail 
to see, that justification by faith is a gradual process. 
Each step of faith brought us nearer to the climax. 

But the climax was not wholly reached until our faith 
manifested its perfection by our obedience and full surrender 
in consecration to the Lord. Then our great 
Advocate accepted our consecrated bodies and imputed to 
them of His merit, absolutely justifying them in the sight 
of Justice— the Heavenly Father. Then it was that the 
Heavenly Father accepted that completely justified soul by 
the begetting of the Holy Spirit. Thenceforth he was a 
New Creature, and a son begotten to the spirit plane. 

During the period of progress in faith, justification 
was being gradually approached, and the individual had 
more and more of the Divine favor. But not until the 



final step was taken did he become fully justified to 
human nature— a son on the earthly plane. And only for 
an instant did he there remain. Then the begetting of the 
Holy Spirit indicated the acceptance of the sacrifice of 
the perfected one, and started him as a New Creature. 

TENTATIVE AND ACTUAL SONSHIP 

All this is indicated in the Chart of the Ages. Plane 
N represents the justified condition in its various steps. 
Thus Abraham and others of the Old Testament times 
were justified before God by their faith. They were not 
justified to life, not justified even to sonship. They were 
justified to God's friendship, favor and supervisory care. 
After Jesus had died, risen, ascended and made application 
of His merit on the Church's behalf, He became the 
Advocate of all this class, desirous of walking in His steps 
in full consecration. The imputation of His merit constitutes 
for each one the work of justification, and this 
makes it possible for God to accept his sacrifice and to 
beget him to the new nature. 

Abraham was styled God's friend, because of his faith 
and desire for harmony with God. So was John the 
Baptist, of whom we read, "The friend of the Bridegroom 
...rejoiceth greatly because of the Bridegroom's 
voice." The term "servant" is in the Bible specially applied 
to those Jews who were under the Mosaic Law 

R5317 : page 286 

Covenant. By that Covenant they enjoyed God's care and 
blessing, and were permitted to be His servants. Although 
many of them, as well as Abraham, were friends of God, 
and would have been fully qualified for all the sonship 
privileges, nevertheless it was not possible, in harmony 
with the Divine arrangement, for them to be recognized 
as sons. For, as the Apostle explains, a "son abideth 
forever," and not until Christ's sacrifice had opened the 
way for the cancellation of sin and death, could any be 
received to Divine sonship. 

Likewise our standing even now as sons of God is 
tentative. If we abide in God's love, we shall abide as 
His sons and be perfected in due time. But if any man 
draw back to wilful sin and its service, he will lose his 
sonship. His name will be blotted out of the Lamb's 
Book of Life. The Advocate with the Father would 
cease to recognize him. He would have no standing with 
the Son, and another would be permitted to take his place 
as a member of the Body of the Anointed. 

Thus the Apostle declares, "Now are we the sons of 
God [in embryo], and it doth not yet appear what we 
shall be; but we know that, when He shall appear [our 
Redeemer, our Head], we shall be like Him, for we shall 
see Him as He is." (I John 3:2.) That is to say, our 
present sonship is tentative. The actual sonship will begin 
after we shall have passed our probationary trial. As 



many as shall prove acceptable by their faith and loyalty 
will be made sons in the fullest sense, by the glorious 
resurrection change. Thus we see that as none are fully 
received to plane N until they have gone the full length 
of consecration, so none will be fully received to sonship 
until they shall have reached plane L. 

THE "BETTER RESURRECTION" 

Although the Ancient Worthies, Abraham, Isaac, 
Jacob, Moses, the Prophets, etc. (Hebrews 1 1:38-40), 
could not be styled sons of God, and were not so named, 
it was not because they were not worthy of such a station 
and such a name. The Apostle draws our attention to 
this, assuring us that they "pleased God," and nothing 
pleases Him short of perfection of heart. The only thing 
which hindered their acceptance as sons was the necessity 
that first the Atonement blood should be presented on 
their behalf. In the "better resurrection" which the Ancient 
Worthies will experience, they will, we understand, 
come forth perfect men. They will be perfect as was 
Adam before his sin, and with minds, hearts and wills 
developed, exercised, tested, proved loyal to God. In that 
perfect condition they will be samples of what all mankind 
may attain by obedience during Messiah's Reign. 

From the moment of their resurrection, these perfect 
men would have the same right to come to God as had 
Adam, and would be as fully entitled to be called sons of 
God as was Adam, except for one thing. And that is, that 

R5317 : page 287 

the Ancient Worthies, as well as the rest of mankind, will 
be in the hands of the great Mediator of the New Covenant 
for the thousand years of His Messianic Kingdom. 
And, according to the Scriptures, not until the end of that 
period will He deliver up the Kingdom to the Father. 

Hence we understand that the Ancient Worthies will 
have no direct dealing with the Father as sons, and no 
direct recognition from Him as such, until the end of 
Christ's Reign, when He will deliver over to the Father 
all things, that He may be "all in all," and that all may be 
directly subject to Him. During the thousand years, 
however, under Christ's Mediatorial arrangements, the 
Ancient Worthies, perfected, and all others, in proportion 
to their attainment of perfection, will enjoy privileges and 
blessings, because they will no longer be under a reign of 
sin and death and of Satan, the "Prince of this World," 
but under the Prince of Life and His reign of Righteousness, 
unto Life. 



R5318 : page 287 

ARE SUICIDES MORALLY RESPONSIBLE? 



Question.— Please give the correct idea as to the end 
of one who commits suicide. Will he be punished for it? 
Or is death his punishment? 

Answer.— The theory that suicides are hopelessly lost 
was formulated during the Dark Ages. The thought was 
that self-murder, being a sin committed as a last act, indicated 
a mind and heart out of accord with God's arrangement 
to the last moment of life. The thought that 
death ends all hope clinched the theory that eternal 
torment is the wages of suicide. This, we believe, is 
thoroughly wrong in every way. The proper view according 
to the Bible is this: 

(1) Adam was disobedient, was sentenced to death. 
Thus his race was born under unfavorable conditions, 
mental, moral and physical; in degeneracy, some more, 
some less; some in very poor physical health, some of 
very low moral status, some with very weak mental 
powers. A suicide often has all three of these inducing 
causes as provocations to such an act. Surely he was 
either mentally weak or uninformed, ignorant; else he 
would not take his own life. His trouble, then, was 

weakness of mind and judgment caused by Adam's transgression. 
He was a sharer of Adam's penalty— the death 
penalty; and when he died— no matter how— he came 
fully under the effect of that penalty— nothing more. 
Eternal torment is not in any way intimated in the death 
penalty. "The soul that sinneth, it shall die." 

(2) God had mercy upon Adam, not in the way of 
abrogating the decision of the Divine Court and clearing 
the guilty one, but in another way— by providing redemption 
through the death of Christ. Jesus' death, by Divine 
appointment, is to cover the sin of Adam— not only his 
original transgression and its penalty, but all the transgressions 
of his children, the world, which have resulted 

from his mental, moral and physical impairment. 

(3) This provision of God includes not only mental 
sickness, but moral sickness and physical sickness. All 
mankind are redeemed by the precious blood of Christ. 

(4) The redemption of the world implies its eventual 
release from the condemnation of death. The time 
Divinely appointed for the release of all is the thousand 
years of Christ's Reign— the Millennium. All mankind 
will then be liberated from the original condemnation, 
and will be granted a full opportunity for the recovery 
of all that was lost. The mentally sick, the morally sick, 
and the physically decrepit— all will have opportunity for 
a full return to human perfection. 

(5) The only exceptions to this rule of restoration to 
Adam's original perfection will be those who during this 
Gospel Age— from the death of Christ to His Second 
Coming— are called out of the world, invited to become 
New Creatures in Christ, and made associates with Jesus, 
sharers in His exaltation to the Divine nature and in 

His office. These are justified (reckoned perfect) by 
faith in Christ's redemptive sacrifice, and then given the 



opportunity to present themselves as living sacrifices.— 
Romans 12:1. 

(6) As Christians, during this Gospel Age, might sin 
wilfully and thus forfeit all relationship to God and die 

the Second Death, so in the coming Age, during the Millennium, 

the world in general, after having been brought 

to an accurate knowledge of the Truth, may by wilful 

sin forfeit all relationship to God, and die the Second 

Death. 

(7) In thus declaring that not only the sins of the 
Church class, but the sins of the whole world, are covered 
by God's arrangement through the sacrifice of Christ, 

we are not to be understood as meaning that the sinner 
is exempted from all punishment. On the contrary, each 
one has a responsibility for his own actions, even if he 
has but imperfect knowledge. His responsibility, as Jesus 
pointed out, is in proportion to his knowledge. 

The Master declared that he that knows his Master's 
will, and does it not, shall be punished with many stripes- 
severe punishment; and he who knows less of his Master's 
will, and does it not, shall be punished with fewer stripes- 
less punishment. Sometimes those stripes, or punishments, 
come in the present life. With the Church class 
it is uniformly so. But often the punishments are not 
meted out in the present life; however, they will be administered 
justly in the life to come. So the Apostle 
declares, "Some men's sins are open beforehand, going 
before to judgment; and some they follow after."— 
I Timothy 5:24. 

(8) Along the above lines, we would not be inclined 

to hope that any suicide could be a member of the glorified 
Church of Christ, but, at most, a part of the world— to 
have trial with the remainder of the world for life or 
death everlasting under the favorable conditions of 
Messiah's Kingdom. However, even upon this point we 
may not dogmatize, remembering that some, apparently 
saintly, have been permitted of the Lord to lose their 
reason to a greater extent than some of the world who 
have committed suicide. 



R5326 : page 287 

STILL THERE IS ROOM 

Day is declining and the sun is low; 

The shadows lengthen, light makes haste to go; 

Room, room, still room! Oh, enter now! 

The bridal hall is filling for the feast; 

Pass in, pass in, and be the Bridegroom's guest. 

Room, room, still room! Oh, enter now! 

It fills, it fills, that hall of jubilee! 

Make haste, make haste; 'tis not too full for thee. 



Room, room, still room! Oh, enter now! 

Pass in, pass in! That banquet is for thee; 
That cup of everlasting Love is free. 
Room, room, still room! Oh, enter now! 

Louder and sweeter sounds the loving call- 
Come, lingerer, come; enter that festal hall! 
Room, room, still room! Oh, enter now!— H. Bonar 



page 289 

VOL. XXXIV OCTOBER 1 No. 19 
A. D. 1913-A. M. 6042 



CONTENTS 

The Race-Course of the Age— Its "Cloud 
of Witnesses" 291 

What Constitutes Weights? 291 

The Two Parts to Sanctification 292 

Trials Proportionate to Strength 294 

Acceptable and Unacceptable Worship 294 

Spirit of Service Spirit of Discipleship 295 

Humility Indispensable to God's Service 295 

A God-Fearing Bad Man 296 

A Double-Minded Man 296 

Consider One Another 298 

Let Us, Then, Judge Ourselves 298 

Oblivion Not Annihilation 299 

Actual or Reckoned New Creatures? 300 

Difference Between Soul and New Creature 301 

Dual Souls-Not Dual Minds 301 

Secret of Self-Control 301 

Acquaint Yourself With God 301 

The Editor's Foreign Tour 302 

Berean Questions in Scripture Studies 303 

page 290 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:-All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



BROOKLYN TABERNACLE AND WASHINGTON TEMPLE 

The following are Pastor Russell's appointments: 

Washington Temple Oct. 5, 19, Nov. 2 

Brooklyn Tabernacle Oct. 12, 26, Nov. 9 

Preaching services at 3 p.m. Evening meetings as usual. 

Baptismal opportunities at Washington, October 5; at Brooklyn, 
October 12. 



BEREAN QUESTION BOOKLETS 

We have Question Booklets in stock for Volumes I., II., III., IV., and 
V. of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, and also for TABERNACLE SHADOWS. 
Price 5c. each— 50c. per dozen, postpaid, brings them within the reach 
of all. Order freely according to your needs. 

Many of the Classes find these questions very helpful. The difficulty 
with many Classes in the past has been that not every one has the 
teaching ability to draw the information of the lessons from the Class. 
The successful class leader has little to say except as he sums up the 
answer to each question after it has been discussed by the Class; or, 
if the question be not understood by the Class, he may often render 
assistance by paraphrasing it and, if possible, simplifying it. 

Excellent as public preaching is we believe that the Lord's people 
learn more in Berean Classes than by listening to any sermon. Thought 
is stimulated, quickened. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR NOVEMBER 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
November follow: (1) 163; (2) 310; (3) 87; (4) 43; (5) 39; 
(6) 109; (7) 8; (8) 38; (9) 259; (10) 307; (11) 105; (12) 325; 
(13) 299; (14) 279; (15) 285; (16) 236; (17) 107; (18) 113; 
(19) 322; (20) 47; (21) 58; (22) 99; (23) 3; (24) 273; (25) 
102; (26) 4; (27) 179; (28) 145; (29) 168; (30) 190. 



R5318 : page 291 

THE RACE-COURSE OF THE AGE-ITS "CLOUD OF 
WITNESSES" 

Wherefore, seeing we also are compassed about with so great 
a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside every weight and the 
sin which doth so easily beset us, and let us run with 



patience the race that is set before us."— Hebrews 12:1. 

THE opening words of this text direct our 

minds back to the preceding context, as 

though St. Paul were saying, In view of 

the great things, accomplished by these 

faithful characters of the past, who manifested 

such faith and confidence in God that 

they were willing to deny themselves all 

earthly rights and privileges— seeing that we 

are thus encompassed with so great a cloud 

of witnesses— martyrs— let the inspiration 

of their example spur us to the greatest faithfulness in 

running our race. 

The Apostle speaks of the Ancient Worthies as a 
"cloud of witnesses." He does not use the word witnesses 
in the sense in which it is used often today— in the sense 
of on-lookers. Originally, the word witness was used in 
the sense of a witness to the truth, or a martyr. Therefore, 
the text would seem to mean: Seeing that you 
have many surrounding you of those whose lives testified 
to the truth— martyrs, who were cut off from home privileges 
and from life itself— it should have a strong influence 
upon you. These Ancient Worthies, through the 
achievements of their lives, are looking down upon you. 

The fact that the Ancient Worthies were even then 
dead need not detract from the Apostle's figure of speech. 
This style of expression is commonly used by us all. As 
an illustration, we recall that on one occasion Napoleon 
addressed his army saying, "My men, thirty centuries look 
down upon you!" While, strictly speaking, centuries cannot 
look down, yet in one sense of the word they can; 
for we can look back into the past and realize matters 
that are thirty centuries old and more. 

The Apostle wishes us to remember that this "cloud of 
witnesses" is surrounding us, and that therefore we should 
run this race faithfully. While those noble characters 
will not obtain the prize for which we are running, they 
are, nevertheless, to have a prize. As we recall how 
faithfully they endured and achieved what was set before 

R5319 : page 291 

them, how careful we should be in running the race set 
before us— a race for glory, honor and immortality! 

This "cloud of witnesses" continually surrounds us. 
The experiences of the Ancient Worthies are our experiences. 
At every step of our journey we find encouragement, 
strength, from the contemplation of their course. 
The Apostle, in giving us the picture of our text, indicates 
that we are to consider ourselves as running a race. 
We are to view the affairs of the present life as from a 
race-course. 

No doubt St. Paul had before his mind the popular 
Grecian games of his day, especially the races. So his 
suggestions to those in the race for glory, honor and immortality 



are based upon that mental picture. As the runners 
in those races would strip themselves of all that was 
not absolutely necessary, so the Christian should lay 
aside all possible weights and hindrances in his course, 
and run with patience the race set before him. 

WHAT CONSTITUTES WEIGHTS? 

The weights to be cast aside might differ in different 
persons. One person might have inherited titles, honor, 
position. St. Paul himself was one of these. He was 
born a Roman citizen— an honor of great distinction in 
his day. This prerogative he laid aside when he entered 
the Christian race-course. He did, however, refer to his 
Roman citizenship when the interests of the Truth made 
it advantageous for him to do so. But he never tried to 
follow a middle course— to benefit himself and please 
worldly acquaintances a part of the time and then fellowship 
with the Lord's people at other times. One thing 
alone he did, as he tells us in these words: "Brethren, I 
count not myself to have apprehended; but this one thing 
I do, forgetting those things which are behind, and 
reaching forth unto those things which are before, I 
press toward the MARK for the Prize of the High Calling 
of God in Christ Jesus."-Phil. 3:13,14. 

Another weight might be wealth. One possessing 
much money might be hindered in the race by fostering 
the thought that he must occupy a large house, keep many 
servants, and live as do others of his class, but that 
nevertheless he would attend the meetings of the Lord's 
people. Still another weight might be talent along some 
line. Another might be love of the approval of men, etc. 

He who desires to win in the race for glory and 
honor eternal should lay aside all those weights and 
any others which he may recognize as such; otherwise 
he will be so handicapped that he will not run well. 
Some runners will be more than overcomers and will receive 
the prize. Others will barely be saved, because of 
handicaps, and will receive inferior positions. 

St. Paul tells us how much he valued these earthly 
possessions— ambitions, honors, etc. He weighted them 
and compared them with the Prize of the High Calling 

R5319 : page 292 

of God in Christ. His judgment in regard to these 
earthly honors was that they are but loss and dross. 
Therefore he threw them all away. 

Of those who retain their hold on earthly things the 
Lord declares, "How hardly shall they that have riches 
enter into the Kingdom of God?" These riches are not 
merely of gold, but may be of honor, position, power, 
approbation of men, etc. All these are likely to prove 
a hindrance in the race upon which we have been invited 
to enter for the Prize. 

As we look back to the faithful witnesses of the past, 



we find that they carried very few weights along with 
them. They cast their weights aside, and ran with patience 
the course before them. 

Not all weights and hindrances are to be cast aside, 
however. A man who enters the race with a wife and 
children must not throw these aside. If he has a child on 
each shoulder, then he must run with them. But if one 
who is unmarried is thinking of engaging in this race, he 
will do well to consider carefully how many children he 
should have on each shoulder, or whether he should have 
a wife on his shoulders. Some would be hindered with 
a wife, while others might be hindered without a wife. 
Each must decide for himself what is best. We are not 
trying to lay down rules. 

INHERITED WEAKNESSES AND BESETTING SINS 

Let us now consider that part of our text which deals 
with besetting sins. Another translation says the close-girding 
sin— the sin which wraps itself closely around us. 
Some sins are like a loose-flying garment, and others 
wrap themselves tightly about us. With these hindrances 
the runner is obliged to stop now and then to disengage 
himself, and so loses time. 

We are to avoid sin in every sense of the word. No 
one has the right to sin. If we cannot rid ourselves entirely 
of our close-girding sin, we must put it off to such 
an extent that it will not interfere with our running. 
If this sin be an inherited weakness, a part of one's very 
nature, what then? Then he shall run in the race— not 
walk, not sit, but RUN, bending all his energy to win, 
straining every muscle, every power of his being. This 
is what the Apostle sets before us in our text. 

The Lord has set this subject clearly before us in the 
Bible. The race is not an imaginary race, but a real one. 
It is a race that the Lord has arranged, and He has definitely 
stated the terms, the assistance to be expected, and 
the Prize at the end of the course. We thank God for 
the explicit information given in the Scriptures and for 
all the helps and encouragements of the way, as well as 
for this great cloud of witnesses surrounding us. And 
by the Lord's grace we will run with patience; for without 
this grace of the Holy Spirit one would soon fall out 
by the way, would soon lose all. 

CONSTANT VIGILANCE NECESSARY 

Any one might run a few steps; but when some of 
these find all the affairs of human life hindering them, 
and realize that they must drop all unnecessary weights, 
they begin to think that there is no use to try— the sacrifice 
is too great. So the Apostle encourages us to have 
patience; for all these trials, difficulties, etc., rightly borne, 
are developing character. The Lord wants true, loyal 
characters, established in righteousness, and these cannot 
be developed and demonstrated except by just such 



experiences as He gives His people. 

The Apostle well knew the terms and conditions of 
the race in which he had engaged, and that it would be 
impossible for him to win unless he lived up to those conditions. 
He knew that the closest attention and most untiring 
vigilance would be necessary to reach the goal on 
time, and during the race there would be more or less 
uncertainty as to who would get the victory— the crown 
of life. In the Olympic and other Greek games it was 
always uncertain as to who would receive the much-coveted 
laurel crown. 

The Christian is running a much greater race than any 
earthly course could ever exhibit. We know the goal 
toward which we run, and we have a sense of security— 
that if we run faithfully we shall gain the Prize of our 
High Calling. Ours is not a race merely to the strong, 
and a victory to the swift. It is a race in which each 
one, according to the earnestness of his effort, will be 
rewarded. If one runs with all his soul and strength 
he will surely gain the Prize. And never before was there 
such a race! never one so remarkable! never one so 
glorious as this race set before us! 



R5319 : page 292 

THE TWO PARTS TO SANCTIFICATION 

"Sanctify them through Thy Truth; 
Thy Word is Truth. "-John 17:17. 

THE prayer recorded in the 17th chapter of 
St. John's Gospel was offered while our 
Lord was on the way from the Memorial 
Supper to the Garden of Gethsemane. From 
the prayer we learn that it was offered for 
the Apostles and all those who through the 
Word of the Lord should become His disciples, 
or followers. 

The word sanctify has the significance of 
set apart, made holy. There are two parts 
to this work of sanctification. The first is that which we 
do, in the very beginning, when we set ourselves apart, 
with the desire to know and to do the will of God. The 
second is that part which comes gradually— the teachings 
and instructions which set before us things 
that we did not perceive before— certain principles of 
righteousness which we did not previously recognize. 
This is a deeper setting apart, and is done by God, inasmuch 
as it is done by the Father's arrangement. 

This deeper meaning of sanctification is the one signified 
in the text. Hence, our Lord prays the Father 
to do this work. The disciples had left all to follow Jesus, 
and were set apart in the sense that they desired to know 
and to do the will of the Father. Our Lord prayed that 



the work of Divine instruction might go on in them, as 
it is written: "They shall all be taught of God." The 
Master desired that the disciples should come under Divine, 
providential instruction, which He indicated would 
come through the Word of God. 

At that time the Word was not the Bible as we have 
it now, for the New Testament had not then been 
written. The Truth presented in the New Testament, 
however, is not God's Word in full, nor all of the Truth, 
but merely a portion of it. Our Lord did not pray that 
truth in general along different lines should be the portion 
of His followers, but rather that they should have 
knowledge of the Divine Plan and purposes. 

There may be more or less truth coming into a man's 
life, which will awaken his mind. It may be the truth 
concerning chemistry, or it may be other scientific knowledge. 
There is truth respecting geology, truth respecting 
the sun, etc. These may influence the mind and 
lift a man somewhat from his fallen condition. But these 
are not the Truth, to which our Lord refers, and which is 

R5320 : page 293 

far more necessary than is the knowledge of the weight 
of the earth or the distance of the stars. 

All the various truths which come to the world in 
general, which lead them to think, and which finally point 
some to their need of the Redeemer, are preparatory. 
But not only do these latter have such a drawing of God, 
but they must also set themselves apart. And these general 
truths, which are more or less clear, may bring the 
individual to the real school. These we may term a preparatory 
course. There must be such a preparation before 
the real course of the School of Christ is reached. 

THE FIRST PART OF SANCTIFICATION 

There is a sanctifying that takes place before the real 
sanctifying begins. The Lord said to the people of Israel, 
"Sanctify yourselves and I will sanctify you." This 
would be their setting of themselves apart by a certain 
hope. But the setting of one's self apart is one thing, 
and God's sanctifying him is another. Concerning the 
call of this Age, no man cometh unto the Father but by 
the Son, and no man cometh unto the Son except the 
Father shall previously have drawn him. 

First comes the drawing of the Father through the 
natural mind. Man's brain is so constituted that there is 
a natural drawing— a desire to know the Creator. This 
we see manifested in the heathen, who have never known 
God and have never had the Bible. These people have 
a natural inclination or desire to worship God. Those 
who have this natural inclination of the brain not too 
much perverted by the fall, are in our Lord's providence 
guided to the Truth, the Light, without which no man 
can come to Him. Perhaps they find Jesus through a 



hymn or a tract or a book. 

Willingness to receive God is merely the first step, 
as it were, in response to this natural drawing. As they 
come to enter the way, they learn that it is narrow, difficult, 
and that the "gate" is low. Of course, many are 
turned away. God is not seeking all. He is seeking a 
very special class; and therefore He is not seeking those 
who would be discouraged at the narrowness of the way 
and the lowness of the gate. These conditions are made 
so for the very purpose of turning such away. 

Formerly, we thought that those who turned away because 
of the narrowness of the way and the lowness of 
the gate would go to eternal torment. Now we see that 
God is seeking a special class to do a good work— those 
who are seeking to do His will. Whoever does not manifest 
the proper degree of zeal would probably be injured 
if he endeavored to go on. Therefore, the Lord says, 
Consider the terms, count the cost, weigh the matter, 
before you decide to be My disciple. Then, if you decide 
to be My disciple, come and follow Me. 

After one has become a disciple of the Lord, he comes 
into the condition of the class represented in our text by 
the word them. In this class were the twelve Apostles, 
the five hundred other brethren whom St. Paul mentions, 
and all who throughout the Gospel Age have accepted 
our Lord in sincerity and faithfulness of heart. To all 
such the prayer applies— "Sanctify them through Thy 
Truth; Thy Word is Truth"! 

Strange to say, this which we thought to be the end 
of the way is but the beginning of it. Formerly we 
thought that to accept Jesus was all that there was to do. 
Our friends said, You have heard of Jesus; you have 
accepted Him. That is all there is of it. Now tell some 
others about Jesus. 

But after we come to know of the Truth, we need to 
know more. If each of us were to cast his mind back 
and try to recall how much he understood at first, he 
would realize that he knew that he was a sinner and that 
if he came to Jesus the Father would set him apart. This 
is what St. Paul refers to when he says, "We are His 
workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works." 
(Ephesians 2:10.) This setting apart the Father does 
through His Truth, as before pointed out. 

TRUTH THAT SANCTIFIES 

This sanctifying Truth is not to be viewed from the 
standpoint of general knowledge, for this Truth is not 
for the world— is not intended for them. It is for the 
consecrated— for those who have become God's children. 
It is the kind of truth that God gives His family. The 
Apostle Paul says that God has called us according to 
His purpose, that in the end He might show the exceeding 
riches of His grace in His kindness toward us through 
Christ Jesus. (Ephesians 2:7.) God has a purpose, 
which will be fully exhibited in future Ages in the further 



development of His great Plan. 

God had a special purpose when He called and set 
apart a special class. The special Truth which does that 
sanctifying work is the Truth of His great Plan of the 
Ages. He does not make all this known at once. The 
revelation of His Plan has been going on for centuries. 
Some of these revelations have come to us through the 
Prophets, some through Jesus and some through the 
Apostles. These revelations constitute the Heavenly provision 
for sanctification. 

It is necessary, however, that we have the Plan, and 
something more than the Plan also. Various other things 
are to be considered, although this Truth is the channel 
of sanctification: "Sanctify them through Thy Truth; 
Thy Word is Truth." If one were caring for a babe, for 
instance, she would think about its food, fresh air, exercise, 
etc. So it is with God's people. Truths are gradually 
opened up to their observation. Our Father leads us out 
into various experiences in order to have our senses exercised. 
Our experiences and providences cause us to 
think, to appreciate, to study, to inquire; and as we do 
so, we develop by means of these experiences and providences. 
We are led to consider, What does this experience 
mean, and what does that one teach? 

While God's Word is the basis for all our instruction, 
yet it is not our only source of knowledge. There are 
various lessons to be learned through the varied experiences 
of life. The child that would merely receive food 
and then lie still— merely eating and sleeping, never 
having a chance to toddle around— would not know 
how to walk. So it is with God's child. 

THE SECOND PART OF SANCTIFICATION 

We see that God called us with a new call. We are 
to have a new nature. Ours is not to be an earthly nature. 
The real object and purpose of our call is to fit and prepare 
us to be His New Creation, superior to men and to 
angels. We are to be Divine channels of blessing to all 
creatures— angels and men— for the development of all 
God's Universe, including other worlds, as they come to 
have inhabitants. As we come to see the scope of God's 
Plan, we see a reason why God is giving us trials, experiences. 
Our Lord Jesus was to be a merciful High 
Priest; hence His experiences, His sufferings. And if 
it was necessary that our Lord Jesus, the Shepherd of 
the Flock, should suffer, how much more is it necessary 
to our perfecting that we should suffer! 

We should have a great deal of trial, suffering, temptation, 
and, being succored in these, we should know how 
to succor others. Those who are faithful amongst the 
Lord's people now, become especially developed in character-likeness 
to the Master. They are privileged to become 
elders, that they may feed the young, that they may 

R5320 : page 294 



instruct the Flock, that these may grow in the fruits and 
graces of the Spirit— meekness, gentleness, patience, 
long-suffering, brotherly-kindness— love. Therefore, the 
chief qualification of those who would stand as monitors 
amongst the Lord's people is that they be faithful, loyal, 
and manifest, not a lordly spirit, but a humble spirit, a 
spirit of service. 

Sanctification is a gradual work, lasting throughout 
the Christian's life. It is not a point which he reaches 
only at death, but which he should attain soon after consecration. 
Consecration opens the door and gives him 
the standing, gives him the relationship, gives him the 
backing and encouragement of the Divine promises, and 
puts him in the way, therefore, to cultivate the various 
fruits of the Spirit, and finally to attain joint-heirship 
with our Lord in the Heavenly glory. But to maintain 
this standing in the Body of Christ, requires that fruits 
shall be produced, evidences of love and devotion. 

Testings will come thereafter as to the degree of 
faithfulness in service, and to see how much of besetments 
he would endure— how strong a wind of false doctrine 
he could stand, how much of the assaults of the flesh and 
of the Devil he could bear without being unsettled and 
driven away from the Truth. 

The Scriptures tell us that the Lord knows our frame, 
that He will, with each temptation, provide a way of 
escape. We shall all be tried. If the fire becomes so 
hot that to go any further would destroy us, the Lord will 
prevent this. By and by we become stronger. Then He 
may give us even greater testings. So "the Lord your 
God doth prove you, to know whether ye love the Lord 
your God with all your heart and with all your soul." 

TRIALS PROPORTIONATE TO STRENGTH 

A metallurgist tries his metal— proves it. He tests it, 
to separate the dross from it. After he has separated 
some of the alloy, he puts in another flux, to remove other 
dross; and then another flux, etc. So the Lord is taking 
away our dross. He does not take away all of the dross 
of our flesh; for it is the New Creature that is being 

R5321 : page 294 

perfected. As the dross in our minds becomes apparent 
to us, we as New Creatures will more and more co-operate 
with God in its elimination. 

So the Lord's people are to be more and more sanctified 
through the Truth. The word sanctify, then, conveys 
the thought of making saintly, holy. Every day of 
our lives should make us more sanctified— more fit for 
God's service in the future. 

It is not necessarily true that the one having the most 
trying experiences would have the most dross. Our Lord 
Jesus had more trials than any of His followers, and He 



was perfect. As St. Paul intimates, these trials work out 
for us "a far more exceeding and eternal weight of 
glory." And the brightness of our future will depend 
upon the heart-development and character-development 
attained now. Our Lord Jesus will have the highest position 
because of greatest faithfulness under trials. Some 
of the Lord's brethren will have high positions because 
of having proved faithful under great trials. These 
trials are to fit us for a high position, both in the present 
life and in that which is to come. 

"Yes, in God's furnace are His children tried; 

Thrice happy they who to the end endure! 
But who the fiery trial may abide? 

Who from the crucible comes forth so pure 
That He whose eyes of flame look through the whole, 
May see His image perfect in the soul? 

"Not with an evanescent glimpse alone, 

As in that mirror, the Refiner's face; 
But, stamped with Heaven's broad signet, there be shown 

Immanuel's features, full of truth and grace; 
And round that seal of love this motto be— 
'Not for a moment, but eternity!'" 



R5321 : page 294 

ACCEPTABLE AND UNACCEPTABLE WORSHIP 

"God is a Spirit, and they that worship Him must 
worship Him in Spirit and in Truth."— John 4:24. 

WORSHIP is that outward manifestation of 

reverence for holy things which is pleasing 

to God, if done in a proper manner and 

from the right motive. But it is possible to 

assume the attitude of worship, and yet not 

offer worship that would be acceptable to 

God. In His conversation with the Samaritan 

woman, our Lord is declaring the manner 

of worship which the Father would 

accept. One might worship and bow down, 

and yet not be acceptable to the Father. And so the 

Lord indicates here that acceptable worship is that which 

is offered to God in Spirit and in Truth. 

Our Lord makes a distinction between worship in 
Spirit and worship in Truth. We might have the Truth 
and know a great deal about the Lord; but if we did not 
go to Him in Spirit— in the right attitude of heart— our 
worship would not be acceptable, no matter how much we 
might know. On the other hand, a man might be a 
heathen and yet have a great deal of the Spirit of worship, 
but he could not render acceptable worship unless 
he had the Truth. Take, for example, Cornelius, the centurion. 



He prayed often and gave much alms to the 

poor, but he was a Gentile. He had the real heart intention 

to come near to God, but God did not accept him at that 

time. Why not? Because he did not have the Truth, and 

could not receive it until the due time for the Gentiles. 

But we find that when the right time came, this 

Gentile was the first one to receive from God the knowledge 

of the Truth, so that he might worship, not only in 

Spirit, but in Truth also. He received the assurance 

that his prayers were now accepted by God. 

The Truth which was sent to Cornelius is the essential 
thing that we must all have to come near to God and be 
acceptable. This Truth necessary to Cornelius was that 
though he was a sinner, God had provided in Jesus a 
Redeemer, a satisfaction for sin. He learned that by becoming 
a follower of Jesus and seeking to do the will 
of God as expressed by Jesus, he would be in harmony 
with God's arrangement. This was the great Truth made 
known to Cornelius. He received the Holy Spirit, and 
came into the family of God. 

The same principle holds good today. There are people 
in heathen lands who have the Spirit of worship, but 
they are without the Truth respecting Jesus. And this 
Truth must be known to the person before he can be a 
worshiper of God in the proper sense. 

This was true also in respect to the Samaritans, to 
one of whom the words of our text were addressed. The 
Samaritans were a Gentile people, who worshiped God 
in Mount Gerizim, the mountain of Samaria. And they 
took delight in thinking that God was their God. When 
this woman of Samaria inquired of Jesus she said, We 
worship God in this mountain of Samaria, but you Jews 
say that the only place to worship God is in Jerusalem. 

Jesus explained to her, saying in substance, Ye worship 
ye know not what, but we Jews have the Truth on this 
subject— we know what we worship. We Jews may worship 
God because, under the Divine Covenant made with 

R5321 : page 295 

our nation, we have the privilege of coming to God in 
prayer, and of having God hear and answer prayer. We 
are worshiping according to God's directions. And He 
might have added, Many of you have the spirit of worship, 
but you do not have the Truth on the subject. It 
would have been possible for the Samaritans to become 
proselyte Jews. But they did not know the necessity for 
this; hence they did not come in. 

During the Gospel Age we, through Christ, have the 
privilege of becoming joint-heirs with Him. Some have 
thus come into God's family. If, however, we should come 
with this Truth, but not in the proper spirit, our prayers 
would not rise above our heads. It is those only who 
have come into proper relationship with God as children 
of the Father through Jesus Christ our Lord, who can 
worship in Spirit and in Truth. These and these only 



will receive the fulfilment of the exceeding great and 
precious promises. 



R5321 : page 295 

THE SPIRIT OF SERVICE THE SPIRIT OF DISCIPLESHIP 

"Whosoever will be chief among you, 
let him be your servant."— Matt. 20:27. 

PROPER aspirations are very beneficial, both 

to the person himself and to those with 

whom he comes in contact. Our Lord had 

an aspiration. We read of Him that He 

"for the joy that was set before Him, endured 

the cross, despising the shame." 

(Heb. 12:2.) There are worthy incentives; 

otherwise the Father would not have set 

one before His Son. The thought which 

should inspire us is that if we are faithful 

in the things of this present time, the Lord will make us 

ruler over many things. So the ardent desire to obtain 

these things which God has reserved for those who love 

Him, is laudable; for these blessings are of God. 

Every New Creature has high aspirations. In fact, 
every one should have an ideal toward which he is striving; 
and having this wish to attain it indicates that 
there is a motive behind the desire. It is altogether 
proper to have incentives before the mind, and it is proper 
to know what kind are worthy of our efforts; otherwise 
wrong ones might lead us astray. In our text a most 
laudable aspiration is placed before us. 

The Church, which is the representative of Christ, is 
the Body of our Lord in the flesh. And the Apostle Paul, 
speaking of ambitions, advised the Church that they 
should have the more profitable aspirations, that they 
might be teachers, instructors of the flock; for this is 
the most useful office in the Church. It is known that 
one gift of St. Paul's time was speaking in an unknown 
tongue. It was a very remarkable gift. But the Apostle 
pointed out that to speak in an unknown tongue was not 
so much to be sought after as some gift that would be 
useful in the Church. 

We do not have these miraculous gifts in the present 
time, but we have the Word of God, and the desire to 
be able to make known the Truth of the Lord. Therefore 
the gift of oratory is still a desirable one. The 
Apostle proceeded to point out that we should desire to 
have the fruits of the Spirit— that they may have a controlling 
influence upon us. 

RESPONSIBILITY UPON EACH ECCLESIA 

As respects positions in the Church, the Lord indicated 



that He would do the setting. "Now God hath set 
the various members in the Body as it hath pleased Him." 
God ordained that there should be in the Body this setting; 
for instance, the service of the eye. As the eye member 
assists the human body, so the eye member in the Church 
may be very assistful to the Body of Christ. Also there 
are ear members, foot members, hand members and tongue 
members. These different members have unlike services 
to perform for the welfare of the whole body. The hand 

R5322 : page 295 

is not to say to the foot, "I have no need of thee," or 
vice versa.— I Corinthians 12:14-31. 

If the body tries to walk on the hands, it is not the 
Divine order. The body should walk on the feet. So it is 
in a congregation. But if the congregation lays too much 
on the feet members, it is depriving the hand members 
of their use. The various members should be in the 
positions where they can render the most efficient service. 
In other words, the congregation should seek to know the 
service God has evidently prepared each individual to 
perform. They are to seek to use their best judgment, 
to place the right person in the right position. 

We see congregations occasionally where they try to 
make all walk on the hands and not on the feet. That 
congregation loses in not putting every member into the 
place for which Divine Providence has especially qualified 
him. To do so is the responsibility of the congregation. 
However, if it tries to make the Body walk on 
the hands instead of the feet, it will learn in time, probably, 
to get the hands to exercise themselves in their own 
position, and likewise the feet in theirs; and each member 
will finally do the service for which he is fitted. 

HUMILITY INDISPENSABLE TO GOD'S SERVICE 

Not only is it to the disadvantage of the congregation 
for the members to be in the wrong positions, but 
it is also wrong for the members to try to do other services 
than those which they should be doing. It is not 
in our power to change ourselves from what we are by 
nature. Only Divine Power could prepare us for service 
in another part of the Body. Our proper attitude should 
be to really serve the Body of Christ, to serve the Lord. 
We should notice wherever there is a service to be rendered 
which we can do. "Do with thy might what thy 
hands find to do." 

The difficulty with many in the Church is that they 
desire to do what somebody else is doing— something that 
they admire. They are not looking around to see what 
they can always do— do good unto all men, as they have 
opportunity, but especially unto those who are of the 
household of faith. They have not the proper spirit of 
discipleship. Therefore the injunction of our text should 
lead them to say to themselves, My highest ambition 



should be to serve the Lord acceptably, and let Him take 
care of the place where I may serve. Here is a little 
place; there is a little corner. I will try to do the thing 
which is needful in my position. If the Lord shall open 
the way, and show me something else which seems to be 
more important, I will take that. But I will do with my 
might what it is my duty to do— whether it is sweeping, or 
engaging a hall for a meeting. Whatever comes as an 
opportunity to me, that I will do. 

This does not mean that we have no aspirations. The 
controlling impulse is to serve the Church. Here we 
have a laudable motive, a proper desire. But it seems 
that some are ambitious— seek to be chief. Our own ambition 
(and we believe it would also be the Spirit of the 
Lord) is not to help one who aspires to the chief place, 
into the position which he seeks. To assist him in such 
a course would do injury both to him and the cause. But 
if we find any one seeking to do with his might what his 
hands find to do, we may be sure that this will be approved 

R5322 : page 296 

of the Lord; and perhaps the Lord will later give 
him some more important work in recognition of his 
faithful service to Him. 

SELF-SEEKING TO BE DEPRECATED 

Each is to be content with what the Lord's Providence 
opens up to him. He is not to be self-seeking. "He that 
exalteth himself shall be abased; and he that humbleth 
himself shall be exalted." (Luke 18:14.) He that exalteth 
himself is not to be exalted by the Church; for he 
will not be exalted by the Lord. He that humbleth himself 
will be exalted, either by the vote of the congregation, 
or by the Lord's will. 

As the matter is stated in our text, we think the Lord 
meant this: There will be some of you who necessarily 
will be recognized as chief. There are various kinds of 
service, and it is necessary to have a chief in connection 
with the services of each congregation. God has recognized 
this Himself. He made Jesus a Chief. He passed 
by Satan, who was self-seeking. He chose Jesus, and 
made the road very narrow to Him! But after Jesus had 
proved His humility, then the Father gave Him the high 
exaltation, gave Him the great reward promised. 

The Father is seeking now those who will have the 
same spirit of humility, the same spirit of service, that 
the Lord Jesus manifested. We look at Him, and we 
see that, while the Father held out the condition of being 
chief, He also held out the condition of being servant. 
Jesus, we see, was the Servant of all. Therefore God 
exalted Him and gave Him a name above every name. 

So it should be with each little congregation of the 
Church. It is the Lord's will that not every one 
who would be its chief servant should be recognized as 



the chief. But the Lord will recognize the one who 
will show himself humble-minded, as He has shown 
Himself to be, in doing anything for the brethren. Let 
such be your servant. Each should consider that the chief 
honor amongst you, amongst the Lord's brethren, is to be 
servant. And the one who is most faithful should be 
given the opportunity to serve. In that sense he would 
be your chief. 



R5322 : page 296 

A GOD-FEARING BAD MAN 

-NOVEMBER 2.-NUMBERS 22:1 TO 23:10.- 

"A double-minded man is unstable 
in all his ways."— James 1:8. 

AFTER the Israelites had entered Canaan and 

were fully recognized as God's holy nation, 

it would appear that all dealings between 

God and the Gentiles were discontinued. 

Before that, apparently men of faith in God 

were more or less recognized by Him— for 

instance, Abraham, Job, Melchizedec and 

Balaam— the latter constituting the central 

figure of today's lesson. Balaam lived on 

the Euphrates River, in the country which 

Abraham left when he came to Canaan. He was known 

far and near as one whose messages either for good or 

for evil were sure to come to pass. In other words, he 

was considered an oracle. 

When the king of the Moabites perceived the Israelites 
conquering all with whom they battled, he greatly feared 
them, even though they had not molested the Moabites. 
He conferred with the ruler of the Midianites, and then 
sent messages four hundred miles to the Euphrates to get 
Balaam to come to pronounce a curse against the 
Israelites. A considerable reward was offered. 

The Prophet Balaam inquired of the Lord whether or 
not he should go on this mission. The reply was, No; 
Israel was blessed of the Lord, not cursed. Balaam gave 
the decision, and the messengers returned. Balak was 
all the more insistent and sent fresh messengers of higher 
station, intimating higher rewards. Balaam knew the 
mind of the Lord on the subject, but was a money-lover 
and somehow hoped for a chance to get some of the 
rewards of unrighteousness. In response to this second 
inquiry, whether or not he could go with the men, he 
obtained permission to go. 

It was on this journey that Balaam was reproved by 
his ass. An angel of the Lord stood in the pathway, in 
a narrow place where the ass, seeing the angel, could not 
pass him. Balaam's eyes not being opened, he saw not 



the angel. The ass, being beaten, remonstrated. Even 
this miracle did not stop Balaam's money-lust. He 
coveted the wealth, and would do anything in his power 
to obtain it— merely stopping where he must. 

Balaam was received by Balak, king of Moab, with 
honor. He directed that altars be built and sacrifices be 
offered to God. He would have a form of godliness, 
even while desiring to do contrary to the Divine will, 
which he already knew. The sacrifices offered, he began 
his prophecy, which the king hoped would be a curse, but 
which was really a blessing, the words being Divinely 
inspired. As wrote St. Peter, "Holy men of God spake 
as they were moved by the Holy Spirit." (2 Peter 1:21.) 
The king complained that instead of a curse would come 
a blessing. Balaam remonstrated that he had said from 
the beginning that he would be powerless to utter anything 
except the Divine message. 

The disappointed king, fearful of Israel, sought the 
exercise of black art in some manner against them. He 
took the Prophet to another viewpoint and urged the 
curse of at least this many of the host. Altars were 
built again; sacrifices were offered again. And again the 
hoped-for curse instead of blessing did not come. Getting 
desperate and angry, the king insisted that at least a 
portion must be cursed, and led the Prophet to another 
standpoint, from which a still smaller wing of the host 
of Israel was visible. But here again the results were 
blessings, not curses— for the third time. 

A DOUBLE-MINDED MAN 

The double-mindedness of the Prophet, Balaam, was 
abundantly manifested by his course, as we have examined 
it. He wished to be a Prophet of the Lord and to 
speak His Word in His Name; but he also wished riches, 
and the honor which would accompany them. He wished 
for what God's providence had not seen best to give 
him. Right and wrong— God's way and the way of riches 
—both were before him. Which would he choose with all 
his heart? He chose neither one. He tried to have 
both— to be a servant and mouthpiece of God, and to gain 
the rewards of an opposite course.— 2 Peter 2:15,16. 

Alas, how many in every age have had the Balaam 
spirit! Jesus warned against this spirit, saying, "Ye 
cannot serve God and mammon." How many have found 
the Master's words true! How many have found that the 
Lord would reject from His counsels and His fellowship 
those who regard iniquity in their hearts; and who, if 
they would not love to serve it, at least would love its 
rewards. Let us remember that God looketh upon the 
inward parts— the heart. Let us remember how it was 
written of Jesus: "Because Thou hast loved righteousness 
and hast hated iniquity, therefore God, even thy God, 

R5323 : page 297 



hath anointed Thee with the oil of gladness above thy 
fellows."— Psalm 45:7. 

In God's dealings with our Redeemer, He has exemplified 
the principles of His righteous Government. A 
double-minded man is unreliable in every way— not pleasing 
to God, not acceptable to Him. 

THE HEART WITH THE TREASURE 

The Master said, "Where your treasure is, there will 
your heart be also." Those who set their affection 
chiefly upon earthly things can with difficulty avoid the 
snares that go with them. Balaam's only safe course 
was in heart loyalty to God. Knowing the mind of the 
Lord on the subject, he should have delighted himself 
therein, and should to the fullest have rejected every 
overture looking in an opposite direction. The nobles 
who took King Balak's second proposition should have 
been kindly, but firmly, told that the Divine will was the 
law of Balaam, the Prophet; that he would not for a 
moment consider anything to the contrary of the Divine 
will; that money, wealth and honors as inducements to 
a course of opposition to God's will would be an insult. 
Let us each apply this lesson in life's affairs. Let God 
be first in our hearts, as well as in our words and acts. 

But if, overtaken in a fault, Balaam had gone so far 
as to start on the journey with the hope of somehow 
gaining the evil reward, he should have been thoroughly 
aroused by the incident of the ass. Even an ass knew 
better than to attempt to go contrary to the Higher Power. 
Evidently the greater reasoning power and courage of 
humanity above that of the brute may be used to great 
advantage. 

We see that Balaam's heart was wrong. He still 
continued to be a Prophet, but was ceasing to be a holy 
Prophet every minute that he toyed with the tempting 
wealth, the reward of unrighteousness. Alas, how his 
mind was debased, debauched, by the love of money! 
While outwardly he still remained loyal to God in that 
he would not utter a false message, yet inwardly his 
harmony with God was gone. The infection, from being 
a mere speck of a wish for the money, spread rapidly 
until it swallowed up everything noble and true in the 
man. The rot or blight which started in his heart, like 
the blight at the core of a beautiful apple, spread until 
nothing remained but the outward form. 

The professed man of God groveled in the mire of 
sin in his desire to obtain Balak's proffered wealth. He 
said to the king, The reason I am not permitted to curse 
Israel is that they are blessed of the Lord; but I will 
explain to you that the Lord's blessing is with them because 
they are His consecrated people, in covenant relationship 
with Him, seeking to obey His Law. The only 
way in which you could bring a curse upon Israel would 
be by tempting them to disobedience to God. 

Guided by Balaam, King Balak communicated with 



the leading people of the Midianites, and urged that their 
wives and daughters should apparently fall in love with 
the Israelites, and introduce them to the sensuous religious 
rites practised by Midian. In proportion as they 
would succeed in ensnaring the Israelites into sin and 
idolatry, in that proportion the curse of Israel's Law 
would fall upon Israel. How sad it is, and yet how true, 
that knowledge is a dangerous thing to those who misuse 
it! How true it is today that none can make so successful 
tools of Satan as those who have some knowledge 
of God! 

GOD PERMITTED THE LESSON 

God could have hindered all those evil machinations, 
as He could hinder evil deeds and evil plans today. But 
He allowed matters to take their course, and a great 
lesson thus to be taught— for then as well as for now and 
intermediately. The scheme was successful. Some of 
the leading wives and daughters of the Midianites attracted 
some of the leading men of Israel to adultery, 
and to idol worship and orgies. Forthwith a plague 
started amongst the Israelites, according to their Covenant 
with God at Sinai, Ebal and Gerizim. 

God's Covenant with Israel was that while they 
would be loyal to Him and His Law, their enemies could 
not prevail against them. They should be His people. 
They should be blessed in their every temporal interest. 
But if they would neglect His statutes and engage in 
idolatry, He would bring upon them various plagues. 
This course not only would punish them for their wrong 
doings, but serve as a lesson, a warning, to restrain them 
from excesses such as were common amongst the heathen. 

We must remember that the death of thousands of 
Israelites on such occasions was the whole penalty for 
their sin. They did not drop into a hell of eternal torment, 
but merely fell asleep, to await the better Day of 
Messiah, the Antitype of Moses, when they will be 
awakened from the sleep of death and be brought to full, 
clear knowledge of those things which, at very most, they 
then enjoyed only in a typical way. 

Not only did God punish the Israelites according to the 
terms of their Law Covenant, but He also punished the 
Midianites and Balaam. Under Divine direction Moses 
called for a thousand armed men out of each of the 
tribes. This army completely wiped out the Midianites as 
a nation, including Balaam, the Prophet, who, to secure 
the rewards of his nefarious advice, had evidently remained 
to oversee the work of iniquity. 

Our glorified Redeemer, in His last message to the 
Church, foretold that some of His followers would imitate 
Balaam and, for earthly advantage, put a stumbling-block 
in the path of the brethren. The intimation is that 
the harlotry and false worship would be on a higher 
plane than that which stumbled Natural Israel— even as 
everything in this Christian Dispensation is antitypical. 



BALAAM'S WONDERFUL PROPHECY 

Several passages in Balaam's prophecy are very striking 
in their fulfilment. For instance: 

"For from the top of the rocks I see him, 
And from the hills I behold him; 
Lo, it is a people that dwell alone 

And shall not be reckoned amongst the nations." 

* * * 

"Blessed be every one that blesseth thee 

And cursed be every one that curseth thee." 

* * * 

"I behold Him, but not nigh; 
There shall come forth a Star out of Jacob, 
And the Sceptre shall rise out of Israel. 
And One out of Jacob shall have dominion." 

Surely we see fulfilled the declaration that Israel shall 
be separate from all other nations. What other nation 
of that day remains a people of preserved identity? 

How true the statement that those who have cursed, 
or injured, Israel have brought injury upon themselves! 
As we scan the whole field of the world, we find that 
every nation which has dealt harshly with Israel has 
received severe chastisement or blight. On the contrary, 
Great Britain and the United States, nations which have 
blessed the Jew, have in turn received great blessings. 

The lines referring to Messiah's Kingdom are equally 
true. The Sceptre did rise out of Israel. The One who 
is to have the dominion of earth is of Jacob's posterity, 
according to the flesh. As the bright and morning Star, 
He is leading on to a glorious sunrise— the dawning of 
the Messianic Day, which is to scatter earth's night and 
to bring blessings instead of the curse. 



R5323 : page 298 

CONSIDER ONE ANOTHER 

-NOVEMBER 9. -ROMANS 14:7-21.- 

"It is good not to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor to do anything 
whereby thy brother stumbleth."— Romans 14:21— Diaglott. 

THIS lesson makes, perhaps, the strongest appeal 
of anything in the Bible in favor of 
total abstinence from the use of intoxicating 
liquors. True, it is addressed only to Christians, 
as is the entire New Testament. 
Nevertheless, many who have not become 
followers of Jesus can appreciate the argument 
here, and to many such it will appeal 



—not along the highest Christian lines, but 
along the lines of the Golden Rule. 

To make a distinction between the Golden Rule, the 
acknowledged standard for all mankind, and a Christian's 
rule of life will be considered by many, doubtless, as a 
distinction without a difference. But this is not true. 

R5324 : page 298 

The Golden Rule, that one should do to others as he 
would be done by, is a simple rule of justice. All should 
recognize it. All should follow it, as none will dispute it. 

The rule for Christian living, as taught by the Master 
and exemplified by Him, is far more exacting than the 
Golden Rule, which is applicable to all men. Those who 
become followers of Christ are, of course, subject to the 
Golden Rule, but they voluntarily place themselves under 
a far more stringent rule. Their Covenant with the Lord 
is that in the doing of His will— the doing of righteousness 
—they will ever stand ready to sacrifice everything, 
even life itself. This is what the Apostle meant when 
he declared that Christ pleased not Himself. Even though 
His will was a perfect one, He renounced His rights, privileges, 
liberties, that He might serve humanity, and thus 
lay the foundation for carrying out the Heavenly Father's 
glorious purposes respecting our race. 

The present call of the Church is for those who have 
the "same mind which was also in Christ Jesus." It is a 
call for sacrificers. As St. Paul declares, "I beseech you, 
therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present 
your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto 
God, which is your reasonable service." (Romans 12:1.) 
This sacrificing is not to be done in a foolish or aimless 
way. We are not to sacrifice the things that are right 
and proper, simply that we may suffer. Right and proper 
things we may enjoy, except as God shall open our eyes 
to see privileges and opportunities for self-denial which 
would enable us to forward His cause, and to minister 
grace and truth to those for whom Christ died. 

"NONE OF US LIVETH TO HIMSELF" 

Let us first consider our lesson from the standpoint 
of the consecrated people of God, and afterwards from 
the standpoint of others who love righteousness, but who 
have not, as yet, joined the Lord and His faithful, self-sacrificing 
band of followers. 

As for the world, they do live to themselves and die 
to themselves. That is to say, their own personal interests 
stand first with them. Only to Christ and the Church 
could these words apply; for none others than these have 
entered into such a Covenant of self-renunciation, giving 
up the present with all of its privileges and interests in 
exchange for a promise of a spiritual life hereafter, in 
the resurrection. 

All these, by the terms of their Covenant, are to live 



unto the Lord— to do His will and not their own will, to 
serve Him and not to serve self, to lay down their lives 
in fighting a good fight against sin. All these, when they 
die, will be dying unto the Lord, in the sense that they 
are counted as members of the Body of Christ, every 
member of which must die to the flesh before the entire 
Body complete can be glorified beyond the veil. To these, 
therefore, apply the words, "Whether we live or die, we 
are the Lord's." 

This being true, the Christian is to have no will of 
his own as respects his living or his dying, or any of his 
affairs. Everything is to be fully committed and submitted 
to the great Head of the Church. Christ's death on behalf 
of all is efficacious, not only for the dead, but also for the 
living. All who recognize Him, and are fully consecrated 
to His service, trust Him fully, in life and in death. 

The Apostle proceeds to show that we who constitute 
the Church which is the Body of Christ are not judges 
one of another, that all judgment is vested in the Head, 
the Redeemer of all. Each one now accepted as a member 
of the Church must ultimately stand the inspection of 
the Head of the Church; for our present membership in 
His Body is a probationary one. Loyalty, faithfulness 
to the Head of the Church now, will bring to us eventually 
membership in His glorious Body, the Church beyond 
the veil— His joint-heirs in the Kingdom— His Bride. 

The Apostle's argument, then, is that we should avoid 
condemning one another, and content ourselves with encouraging 
each other in the good way. Since it is written 
that every knee shall bow and every tongue confess to 
God, this proves that our final accounting as members of 
the Church of Christ will be to God, or to our Lord Jesus 
as His Representative. 

LET US, THEN, JUDGE OURSELVES 

The Apostle's argument also is that, instead of judging, 
condemning, fellow-members of the consecrated Body, 
we should be full of sympathy for them. We should realize 
that we do not know thoroughly their trials, their difficulties, 
their environments, their heredities. This should 
make us very sympathetic towards all the brethren. Our 
keen sense of justice, our love of righteousness, our 
hatred of iniquity, should find its principal exercise in 
self-criticism, and in watchfulness not to do anything that 
would stumble a brother— not to do anything that would 
discourage a brother or cause him to fall away from the 
faith and the works which the Lord requires. 

What a wonderful lesson is this in battling against 
self, rather than against enemies! How many find it 
easy to excuse their own weaknesses while they are very 
captious and critical as respects the shortcomings of 
others! How the Lord warned His people against such 
an attitude saying, "With what [soever kind of] judgment 
ye judge [a brother], ye shall be judged" [yourself of 
the Lord]. -Matthew 7:2. 



If you are hypercritical and wish to measure others 
up to the full standard of perfection, you are thus recognizing 
a high standard, and that recognition on your part 
will make it proper for the Lord to measure you by that 
high standard. If we could but remember this— that the 
merciful will obtain mercy— how glad we all would be to 
be extremely merciful to others, extremely lenient in our 
judgments and reproofs, hoping that the Lord would be 
correspondingly lenient with us!— James 2:13. 

The Lord is not in this establishing a low standard, 
and wishing His people to think lightly of their own weaknesses 
and failures, and those of others. He is, on the 
contrary, setting up a high standard of love, sympathy, and 
kindness. Love is the principal thing, in God's sight. 
Whoever, therefore, has love and sympathy most highly 
developed, the Lord may well esteem as highly developed 
along the lines most essential in His sight, most essential 
for a place in His Mediatorial Kingdom. 

NOTHING UNCLEAN OF ITSELF 

"I know and am persuaded of the Lord Jesus, that 

R5324 : page 299 

nothing is unclean [unholy] of itself," writes the Apostle. 
The Apostle is referring not to filthiness of clothing or 
person, but to foods which were to the Jew made improper, 
ceremonially unclean. In other words, while the 
Jew was forbidden the use of swine, rabbits, oysters, etc., 
it was not that these foods would make him actually impure 
or evil in God's sight, but that the restrictions were 
imposed as tests of his loyalty and obedience to God, just 
as the forbidden fruit of Eden was thereafter unclean to 
Adam and Eve. 

The Apostle's argument is that to the Jew who died 
to all hope of attaining eternal life through keeping the 
Law Covenant, and who became united to Christ, the restrictions 
of the Law Covenant would no longer be binding. 
And, of course, to the Gentile, who never was under 
the Law Covenant, its restrictions would have no application 
when he accepted Christ. 

Having stated this broad ground, the Apostle admits 
that if any man had his reasoning faculties so twisted on 
the subject that he thought himself under obligations, he 
would be responsible according to his mind or judgment 
on the subject. If, for instance, a Christian thought 
that he was obliged to avoid eating pork, that thought in 
his mind would constitute an obligation; for for him to 
violate his conscience would mean that he had willingly, 
knowingly, committed sin; for he would be wrong in 
doing what he thought was wrong, however harmless the 
matter might be in itself. 

But now comes the final argument: Anybody realizing 
his own liberty, as the Apostle did, might eat freely, 
according to his convenience, without any reproof from 



his conscience or in the sight of God. But the brother 

still in the dark respecting his liberty should have consideration 

—should not be urged to violate his conscience. 

Rather, the brother of enlightened mind should yield to 

the other, and abstain from using his liberty, lest he 

should tempt his brother to violate his conscience. 

This question of eating ceremonially unclean meat, or 
meat theoretically unclean because it had been first waved 
before an idol, is a question which no longer is a live 
issue among Christians; for general intelligence on the 
subject has gained the mastery everywhere. 

The special application of this lesson to Christians 
is along a still different line. For instance, suppose 
that one brother had from childhood been accustomed 
to drinking beer, ale, etc., and that in his estimation 
it did him no injury. But suppose a number of 
brethren, less strong than he, physically and mentally, 
could not touch intoxicants without harming themselves; 
and suppose that the example of the drinking brother 
would continue to be a temptation to the others. What 
should be his course? 

The argument of the Apostle would seem to be that 
the brother who is strong, mentally, morally and physically, 
should gladly abstain from anything that would 
stumble his brother, or anybody else upon whom he exercised 
an influence. "Destroy not him with thy meat, for 
whom Christ died." (Romans 14:15.) If Christ loved 
the world so much as to leave His Heavenly riches and 
glory to die for sinners, should not we, in proportion as 
we have His Spirit, be glad to lay down our lives for 
the brethren, as the Apostle elsewhere exhorts us? And 

R5325 : page 299 

if so, should we not be much more ready to abstain from 
the use of comparatively trifling liberties for the sake of 
our weaker brother, for whom Christ died? This is a 
strong argument. Who can deny it? 

"Let not then your good be evil spoken of." Your 
knowledge, your appreciation, of your liberties is a good 
thing, a desirable thing; nevertheless, you should so 
govern your exercise of that liberty that none will misunderstand 
it, and think you an evil-doer. Rather restrain 
yourself of your liberties, preserve others from the temptation 
too strong for them, and increase your own influence 
by faithfully abstaining from everything that might 
appear to be an evil in the sight of others, however right 
it might be in your own sight, and however correct your 
own judgment of the Divine Law on the subject might be. 

"NOT MEAT AND DRINK" 

The Apostle adds another argument (v. 17). He remarks, 
For the advantages connected with our membership 
in the embryo Kingdom of God consist not in the 
greater privileges and liberties we have in eating and 



drinking, but consist rather in the righteousness and peace 
and joy in the Holy Spirit which are ours because we are 
probationary members of this Kingdom Class. He who 
thus serves Christ is well pleasing to God and is approved 
of men. "Let us, therefore, follow after the things which 
make for peace and things whereby we may edify one 
another. Overthrow not for meat's sake the work of God. 
All things indeed are clean; but evil for that man who 
eateth with offense. It is good not to eat flesh, nor to 
drink wine, nor to do anything whereby thy brother 
stumbleth." 

The application of the Golden Rule on the part of the 
world would seem to be a settlement of many questions 
of the present time. Do unto others weaker than yourself, 
in precept and example, what you would have them do 
for you in precept and example, if you were the weaker 
and they the stronger. 



R5327 : page 299 

OBLIVION NOT ANNIHILATION 

Question.— Is it correct to speak of the condition in 
Hades as being a condition of oblivion, or of annihilation? 

Answer.— The word annihilation would be a very improper 
one to use in respect to the condition of a man in 
death, except it be the Second Death. The thought connected 
with annihilation is that of being absolutely wiped 
out of existence. Hence annihilation would be an improper 
term in respect to the Hadean condition. The 
word oblivion is not the same as annihilation. Oblivion 
means the condition of absolute unconsciousness; for instance, 
when a man falls into a sound sleep he goes into 
oblivion. He might say, I was wholly oblivious for an 
hour. He was ignorant of the things taking place. 

It is well for us, so far as possible, especially in speaking 
along the lines of the Bible, to use the right term, to 
avoid any possible confusion. The Bible is written in 
very good form. Our Common Version contains very 
beautiful language. It is a marvel in the purity of its 
English. We do well to keep ourselves within the terms 
of the Bible and to use the language which the Bible uses, 
and thus we shall not be in danger of misunderstanding 
or of being misunderstood. And if any one thinks we 
have not a wide enough range, we shall know at least 
that we are avoiding misunderstanding and misrepresentation 
of the Word of the Lord. In the case of Hades, 
Sheol, these words are not in the Common Version Bible, 
but they have been brought into the English language during 
the past few decades. Therefore it is proper that we 
should use these words, because they have become naturalized 
—common words. 

Question.— What would be the difference between the 
expressions used in the Old Testament: "They shall be as 



page 300 

though they had not been," and "They shall be utterly 
destroyed," and the word annihilation? 

Answer.— We would understand them to have the same 
meaning. These Scriptures have reference to the Second 
Death only. They might be used as showing what the 
first death would have been, had there been no redemption 
from it. But God's proposition was otherwise from 
the beginning; and the Redemption-price has been given. 
But the expression, "They shall be as though they had not 
been," is used in connection with certain systems of the 
present time, which shall utterly fall, shall go down completely. 
The same expression might be applicable to 
humanity. Those who sin wilfully now and die the Second 
Death, and those who will sin wilfully during the 
Millennium and die the Second Death— these will be 
blotted out of existence, annihilated. 

But to use any of these terms in respect to the first 
death is a mistake. The most we can say is, that as it is 
with the brute, so would it be with man, if God had not 
provided something better. God assured our first parents 
that the Seed of the woman should bruise the serpent's 
head. Thus early He gave a vague promise of a future 
redemption. There is no recovery from annihilation; it 
is the end of all hope. 



R5325 : page 300 

ARE WE ACTUAL OR RECKONED NEW CREATURES? 

"If any man be in Christ, he is a New Creature; 
old things are passed away; behold, all things 
are become new."— 2 Corinthians 5:17. 

OUR information on this subject of the New 

Creature comes from the Word of God. It 

is the Spirit of the Truth that bears the 

witness. "If any one be in Christ, he is a 

New Creation; the old things have passed 

away; behold! they have become new." 

[Diaglott Translation.] Apparently, then, 

if old things have passed away from us, and 

we are New Creatures in Christ, we are 

now receiving the blessings. There is nothing 

said about being reckonedly New Creatures. The 

change is actual, bona-fide. When God accepts the human 

will, He does not hold the New Creature responsible for 

any of the deeds done previous to consecration. The 

whole account is a new one. 

We are New Creatures in the sense that God has 
begotten us of the Holy Spirit. God has given us Heavenly 
promises instead of earthly promises. We are no 



longer striving to see whether we can attain a higher position 
in the world. We have new ambitions. Our aim is 
to live pleasing to God. And in every way this change 
of sentiment indicates a transformation of mind. 

Transformation means to form over again, across, different, 
in an opposite way. So we have been changed by 
reason of this change of our will. God has made us the 
promise that, if we make this change, or transformation, 
He will no longer count sin to us, that we shall have 
standing henceforth no longer as sinners, but as holy 
ones. The world does not know that we are children of 
God. They do not realize how fully we have given up the 
earthly hopes and are seeking a different prize from that 
which the world seeks. 

The fact that this change is merely in the mind and 
not in the body does not alter this matter at all. According 
to science, every seven years a complete change takes 
place in our bodies, the new matter coming on as the old 
matter sloughs off. But one is not a new man because 
his body has changed. If this were so, we would have had 
several changes by this time. So far as the mind is concerned, 
personality is not changed. If we had lost a hand, 
we would still be the same personality; or if we were to 
lose a hand and a foot, the loss would not change our 
personality. 

Our personality would not change in this event, because 
the personality is the mind, the ego. And so when 
the ego, the mind, is changed, that New Creature is distinctly 
separated from the other. The fact that it does 
not yet have a spirit body does not matter. The New 
Creature is the New Creature, only now he is the New 
Creature under adverse conditions; whereas by and by 
he will be the New Creature who has entered into that 
condition which God has promised— the Divine nature 
and everlasting joy— and in which he will abide forever. 

OUR STANDING FROM GOD'S VIEWPOINT 

We are now spirit beings in human bodies. The Apostle 
says, "If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things 
which are above." It is not the body that is risen, but the 
New Creature. It was not the New Creature that died, 
but the old creature. It is not the life of the old creature 
that "is hid with Christ in God" (Colossians 3:3), but the 
life of the New Creature. The Apostle declares, "Ye are 
not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of 
God dwell in you." He says also that we are not only to 
reckon ourselves dead, but to reckon ourselves as though 
we had been raised from the dead. "Reckon ye yourselves 
to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God 
through Jesus Christ our Lord!"— Romans 6:11. 

The body is not the New Creature, but it belongs to 
the New Creature. It is the servant of the New Creature. 
The New Creature is the only one that God recognizes at 
all; for He knows us not after the flesh. And we should 
live in the Spirit, and view ourselves and all of our affairs 



from this standpoint. We should "walk not after the 
flesh, but after the Spirit." (Romans 8:4.) Our viewpoint 
should be this: As New Creatures, we merely inhabit 
these bodies for awhile. 

These bodies are our slaves and we are to use them 
as our slaves. The environment is unfavorable for the 
New Creature at the present time. But it is the New 
Creature that God is looking at. "If any man be in 
Christ, he is a New Creation; the old things have passed 
away; behold, they have become new." If he now fails to 
make good his consecration, fails to be an overcomer, he 
will have no resurrection; for all his earthly rights have 
been abrogated. 

"Ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit." We do, 
as New Creatures, have the fleshly bodies. But the flesh 
is not we; that is, not our kind, not our nature. It is only 
as the New Creature that we can inherit the Promise. 
Jesus was put to death in the flesh; that is to say, He 
sacrificed the flesh— He gave up His claim on the flesh 
at His consecration. And it was on the basis of His giving 
up His rights that the Father begat Him to the new 
nature. Therefore He said, My will is to do My Father's 
will. The Cup that My Father hath poured for Me, I will 
drink! -John 18:11. 

Jesus would not stand for His earthly rights. His 
dying was not merely at Calvary. It was begun at Jordan 
three and a half years before. In the type, the high 
priest slew the bullock, which represented the Man Jesus. 
Our Lord gave up His life completely— His human life. 

R5325 : page 301 

The High Priest was another person. He went inside 
and ministered in the Holy while His human nature was 
sacrificed upon the altar, and His body burned outside 
the camp, but in sight of the camp. 

DIFFERENCE BETWEEN SOUL AND NEW CREATURE 

Every New Creature is a soul. The word soul is used 
in the Scriptures, in a very broad manner indeed, as signifying 
any sentient being, any being that has sensibility, 
intelligence. A fish has intelligence; therefore the Bible 
describes a fish as being a soul (See Genesis 1:20, margin). 
A dog, a cow, a horse, is each a soul. An angel 
is a soul, or being. God is a soul, or being— the Bible 
says so. The Scriptures say that "If any man draw back, 
My soul shall have no pleasure in him" (Hebrews 10:38) 
—this means God's soul. 

This broad use of the word, therefore, in connection 
with any kind of sentient being, assures us that as New 
Creatures all of us are souls— intelligent beings. We 
might be understood to be double souls in the sense that 
we were human souls to begin with, but that God has 
through Christ made a special arrangement for us whereby 
we are begotten again to be New Creatures. This begettal 



is of the mind; and only in this way are we New 
Creatures now. 

This New Creature is not yet perfected. This new 
soul has not yet reached that condition which God intends 
that it shall have. The Apostle tells us that we have this 
treasure of the new mind in the old body— the earthen 
vessel. The new mind must do the Father's will, irrespective 
of the will of the body, or of the friends of the 
body, and what they might desire it to do. The new mind 
is to do God's will under all circumstances. 

A spirit-begotten child of God may speak of himself 
as already possessing eternal life, which he does possess 
by faith. But the New Creature, the new soul, is not yet 

R5326 : page 301 

completed. God's promise is that when this new soul 
shall have been completed, we shall have a body like 
Christ. We shall be like Him. We shall see Him as He 
is and share His glory. We shall be souls on the Divine 
plane, whereas formerly we were souls on the human 
plane; now we are reckoned as in the transitional state. 

DUAL SOULS-NOT DUAL MINDS 

When we speak of being dual souls, we do not mean 
that we are dual-minded; for that would be a reprehensible 
condition. We are single-minded. Our duality consists 
in the fact that we have the mind of one nature and 
the body of another. A perfect soul results from the 
union of life-principle with an organism. It is thus with 
a fish, a dog, a horse. There is an organism, and there 
is vitality, a spark of life, before there can be a soul. 
The Lord's people were human souls, or had the powers 
common to all mankind, to begin with. Then they were 
begotten again. And the new will, the new mind, has at 
present an organism not adapted to its needs. 

In the resurrection the New Creature will have an 
organism fully adapted to its requirements. But now it 
is a soul that is neither perfect in the flesh nor perfect 
on the spirit plane. And since the nature goes properly 
with the mind, the will, therefore the flesh is counted as 
being that of the New Creature, and the New Creature is 
held responsible for this flesh. 

The Apostle suggests to us that not only our old minds, 
or wills, are dead, and that we reckon also our bodies 
dead, but that we go further, and reckon our bodies quickened, 
or made alive, from their dead and sin-disposed condition, 
that they may be fully our servants as New Creatures, 
that they may serve our purposes— "quickened by 
the Spirit of God that dwelleth in you." That is to say, 
so long as the indwelling power of the Holy Spirit is 
ruling in our hearts and minds, it controls and energizes 
the physical body. 

THE SECRET OF SELF-CONTROL 



God deals with us as New Creatures from the time we 
are begotten of the Holy Spirit. He has no dealings with 
the flesh. The flesh is under condemnation. God dealt 
with the flesh of Father Adam, condemning it to destruction. 
Then He provided a way in Christ by which 
the race may be rescued from destruction. The Church's 
relationship to God is purely as New Creatures. From the 
time, then, that we become New Creatures, accepted of 
God, He takes these mortal bodies of ours, which are consecrated 
to His service, as a part of the New Creature. 
So if we suffer, it is the New Creature that suffers. And 
in this sense God takes cognizance of our flesh from the 
time of our consecration. "Precious in the sight of the 
Lord is the death of His saints." 

Because our human bodies are vehicles for His service, 
God takes note of them. In proportion as we become 
strong in the Spirit of the Lord, we have the power to 
make the mortal body do what the new mind wills. But 
we are weak in ourselves. We cannot properly control 
our mortal bodies. God, therefore, gives us of His Truth. 
And the more we receive of the Truth, of the Spirit, the 
more fully sanctified we should be, the more fully in harmony 
with the Father's will, and the greater control we 
should have of our mortal bodies. 



R5326 : page 301 

ACQUAINT YOURSELF WITH GOD 

"Strong meat belongeth to them that are of full age, even those 
who by reason of use have their senses exercised to discern 
both good and evil."— Heb. 5:14. 

IN THIS text the Apostle uses a well-known 

physical truth to illustrate an important 

spiritual truth. As human babes would be 

choked or have their digestion ruined by 

the stronger kinds of food which they could 

when older use to advantage, so, as the 

Apostle says, spiritual babes have need of 

the simpler truths, that they may grow 

thereby and develop character, as well as 

learn to appreciate the Divine Plan. That 

strong meat belongs to them that are of full age is an 

unquestionable fact. Adults may exercise discretion as 

to which foods would be expedient for their use— which 

would be palatable, which would be productive of the 

best results— that they may choose wisely. We all find 

that certain foods that agree with one do not agree with 

another. The food that is palatable to one would not be 

palatable to another. 

In proportion as one appreciates and uses the food 
that is best for him, he will find development and gain 



strength. So with those in Christ. There is such abundance 
spread on the table of the Lord that when we come 
to the table each may find the food adapted to his particular 
need at the time. Some may need faith; some, 
patience, some perseverance, etc. As each one comes 
to a considerable development in Christian knowledge and 
Christian experience, he should be able to determine which 
features of the Word of Truth are necessary for the supplying 
of the deficiencies of his own character. At the 
beginning of his Christian experience one is unable to 
discern clearly good and evil. A childish mind might 
misinterpret Scripture, or might combine texts so as to 

R5326 : page 302 

arrive at erroneous conclusions, separating them from 
their respective contexts. But a mature mind would see 
that such putting together of Scriptures would do harm. 

DEFICIENT APPRECIATION OF GOOD AND EVIL 

Some Christian people stumble over Bible Truths, and 
make evil out of them. For instance, our good Brother 
Calvin evidently did not have a sufficiently clear appreciation 
of good and evil. As a result, instead of getting 
good out of the doctrine of the Election of the Church, 
he brought out of it a very evil doctrine, namely, that 
all those who are not elected are damned. His new mind 
was not sufficiently developed to rightly divide the Word 
of Truth. (2 Timothy 2:15.) Any one who appreciates 
God's character sufficiently would have known, in spite 
of wrong teachings, that God would not deliberately doom 
our race to eternal torture before they were created. 

Many people of today have not their senses sufficiently 
exercised by reason of use. They charge the Almighty 
with something that no human being would even think of 
doing. This expression, "have their senses exercised," 
does not refer merely to minds, but includes the heart 
also. Brother Calvin had a very able mind, apparently; 
but the thing lacking was a proper heart-fellowship with 
the Lord; for if he had known the character of the Lord, 
he would have known that the doctrine of everlasting torture 
was contrary to every element of the Divine character. 
-See Jeremiah 7:31; 19:5. 

So far as we can judge, Brother Wesley must have 
been considerably developed along the line of spiritual 
appreciation of the Lord's character. We doubt whether 
Wesley was any more logical than Calvin— perhaps less 
so— but evidently he was in heart-harmony with God. 
Wesley very properly concluded that it would be impossible 
for God to make any such plan as that set forth by 
Calvin. In our own cases, we know that we might have a 
surface knowledge, and yet not have this spiritual development 
—the heart knowledge of God. We are to seek 
not only to have an intellectual knowledge of the Bible, 
or a familiarity with the words of the Bible, but also to 



appreciate the sentiment, the spirit, that lies behind the 
words— the character of our Heavenly Father and our 
Lord Jesus Christ— the spirit that They are of, and that 
we also would be of. 

DEEP STUDY PROFITABLE 

When the people of our day speak of Bible study, they 
very rarely mean a study and appreciation of the deeper 
spiritual truths there presented. Rather, they seem to be 
content with a study of the geography, the history, the 
psychology, etc. As we see these conditions, we are forced 

R5327 : page 302 

to the conclusion that the majority of Christian people of 
today, just as in the Apostles' day, have need that some one 
teach them again what are the first principles of the doctrine 
of Christ. 

The Apostle Peter (I Peter 2:2) says also, along the 
same line, "Desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye 
may grow thereby." We all have need of the simple 
things. But the spiritual babe that does not grow will 
never reach manhood's estate. He will never be a king 
and priest. We need a real acquaintance with God. "And 
this is life eternal, that they might know Thee, the only 
true God, and Jesus Christ whom Thou hast sent!— not 
merely know about God, and know about Jesus Christ, 
but that they might know Them in the sense of being personally 
acquainted with Them— know Them by having 
the same Holy Spirit, and growing therein— know them 
by a study of "the deep things of God." 



R5327 : page 302 

THE EDITOR'S FOREIGN TOUR 

(CONCLUDED.) 

THE evening following the close of the London 

Convention found us at Plymouth, where 

we had the pleasure of addressing an assemblage 

of eleven hundred, who manifested 

deep interest in the Message. 

The next evening (Wednesday, August 
6) we were at Exeter, and addressed an 
audience numbering about six hundred and 
fifty. Of these, seventy-two handed in their 
addresses for further literature, and otherwise 
manifested an interest in the Gospel of the Kingdom. 

Next came Cheltenham (Thursday, August 7), eight 
hundred being present at the public meeting, seventy-four 
of whom gave their addresses for additional literature 
along the lines of our discourse. 



The following Sunday (August 10) found us again 
with the London Tabernacle Congregation, morning and 
evening. The attendance was good and the interest deep, 
as usual. No attempt was made to reach the public, as the 
capacity of the Tabernacle is only about twelve hundred. 
During this trip abroad the efforts for the public were in 
the smaller cities. 

Lincoln was our next appointment for a public service. 
A large auditorium had been secured, and the number 
present was estimated at fifteen hundred. Of these, one 
hundred and sixty-eight handed in their addresses for 
further literature. 

Next came Hull, where the public meeting drew out 
one thousand, of whom one hundred and seventy-nine 
left their addresses for further reading matter. 

On Wednesday evening, August 13, a public meeting 
was held at Wakefield, the attendance being estimated at 
nine hundred. Seventy-eight gave their addresses for 
further literature. 

Next came York, Thursday, August 14— attendance 
fifteen hundred; addresses for further literature, two hundred 
and seventy-two. 

Friday, August 15, we visited Tunbridge Wells. There 
we were greeted by an audience of six hundred, seventy-four 
of whom handed in their addresses after meeting, requesting 
further literature. 

Sunday, August 17, we again had the pleasure of meeting 
the London Congregation at the Tabernacle, and 
again had two enjoyable services, breaking to them, to 
the best of our ability, the Bread of Life. 

Monday, August 18, found us at Walsall. Here a 
public gathering to the number of nine hundred and fifty 
gave earnest heed to the Message of the Kingdom. One 
hundred and forty-one of the audience gave their addresses 
after the service for further literature. 

Chester was next on the list, Tuesday, August 19. The 
hall was small; but about five hundred were present, one 
hundred of whom left their addresses for literature. 

Blackburn came next, August 20— a larger hall, eleven 
hundred present, and one hundred and ninety-six addresses 
given in for further literature. 

Bolton came next, the splendid Town Hall of which 
was secured. A deeply interested and intelligent audience 
of sixteen hundred were present. Of these, four hundred 
and twelve left their addresses and requests for further 
literature. 

We visited Preston Friday, August 22. Again we had 
a good hall and an attentive audience of fifteen hundred, 

R5327 : page 303 

four hundred and fourteen addresses being left, requesting 
further literature. 

The Glasgow Three-Days' Convention opened August 
23. It was a fine crowd, numbering about eight hundred 
to nine hundred— chiefly from Scotland, with visitors also 



from Ireland and England. We always enjoy our visits 
to Glasgow. Our Scotch brethren and sisters manifest a 
warmth and zeal of Christian love, which is impressive 
and inspiring. We addressed the Convention four times 
on things pertaining to the Kingdom— how we shall make 
our calling and election sure to a share therein; also respecting 
the value of Bible Study as an aid to character-building, 
etc., etc. 

The Sunday evening meeting at Glasgow was for the 
public. St. Andrews Hall, the largest in the city, had 
been obtained. It is said to seat forty-five hundred. Every 
seat was taken and some stood. In a nearby hall an 
overflow meeting, addressed by Brother Hemery, had an 
attendance of about nine hundred. The amount of interest 
may be judged to some extent by the fact that seven 
hundred and fifty-nine addresses were handed in at the 
larger meeting and sixty-nine at the overflow meeting. 

Following the Glasgow Convention, we visited Sterling, 
there addressing an audience estimated at one thousand. 
Two hundred and two requests for literature were 
handed in. 

Next came Coatbridge, with an audience of about one 
thousand, and one hundred and seventy-eight requests for 
literature— Wednesday, August 27. 

R5328 : page 303 

Thursday, August 28, found us at Kilmarnock, with 
twelve hundred in attendance and one hundred and 
eighty-two requests for literature. 

Southport was reached on Friday, August 29. The 
small hall available was crowded, some standing, about 
six hundred in all. We left on the night train for Paris, 
failing to learn the number of requests for literature. 

Sunday, August 31, found us in Paris, France. Here 
we met the little Convention of about seventy earnest, 
zealous brethren and sisters, some of whom had come as 
much as a thousand kilometers— from Belgium, Switzerland, 
Germany, and various parts of France. They represented 
little classes of Bible Students, and were full of 
the same loving zeal manifested amongst other 
nationalities. 

The intelligent interest of these dear friends was 
manifest in their faces and manner and in their testimonies, 
although we were not able to understand the latter, 
except with our eyes. We addressed the little Convention 
through one of the brethren, who acted as interpreter. 
Altogether we greatly enjoyed the Paris Convention. 
No public service was arranged for. 

We arrived back in London September 2, attended to 
some affairs connected with the work there, and left for 
Liverpool on the 3d, embarking the same day on the 
steamship "Tunisian." 

We had a pleasant homeward voyage, with good opportunities 
for literary work, reaching Brooklyn on Friday 
morning, September 12. 



page 303 

BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
Series VI., Study XVI. 
THE PRESENT INHERITANCE OF THE NEW CREATION 

NOVEMBER 2 
Read p. 671, par. 2, to p. 674, par. 4. 

(21) What circumstances gave rise to this desire of St. 
Paul? P. 671, par. 2, 3. 

(22) What alternative is suggested, if we refuse the foregoing 
explanation? P. 672, par. 1, 2, 3. 

"OUR EARTHLY HOUSE" AND "OUR HOUSE FROM HEAVEN" 

(23) To whom is the Apostle writing in 2 Cor. 5:1-10, and 
what does he mean by "our earthly house"? P. 673, par. 1. 

(24) Why does the New Creature groan in this earthly 
tabernacle, and does it desire to be "unclothed"? P. 673, 
par. 2, 3. 

(25) What is the "earnest of the Spirit," mentioned in 2 Cor. 5:5? 
And why are we "always confident," as expressed 

in verses 6 to 9? P. 674, par. 1 to 3. 

(26) To what end, therefore, are we striving? P. 674, par. 4. 

NOVEMBER 9 



Read p. 675, par. 1, to p. 677, par. 2. 



(27) What is the significance of 2 Cor. 5:10, and when 
must we "all appear before the judgment seat of Christ"? 
P. 675, par. 1. 

(28) Do all mankind have a duality of nature? What 

other Scriptures refer to the New Creation as having an outward 
man that perisheth, and an inward man being renewed 
day by day? P. 675, par. 2. 

THE TRANSFIGURATION SCENE 

(29) How and when was fulfilled the Lord's promise to 
His disciples that some of them should not taste death until 
they had seen the Son of Man coming in His Kingdom? 

P. 675, par. 3; P. 676, par. 1. 

(30) Was the Transfiguration scene an actual occurrence? 
How do we know that Moses and Elias could not have personally 
appeared on the Mount? P. 676, par. 2, 3. 

(31) Explain the significance of this "vision." P. 677, par. 1, 2. 

NOVEMBER 16 



Read p. 677, par. 3, to p. 680, par. 1. 
PRESENT JOYS OF THE NEW CREATION 

(32) How does consecration unto death appear to those 

outside the household of faith, and to the consecrated, respectively? 
P. 677, par. 3. 

(33) Upon what do the present joys of the New Creation 
depend? P. 678, par. 1. 

"ASK AND YE SHALL RECEIVE, THAT YOUR JOY MAY BE FULL" 

(34) What is the relation between prayer and the perpetuation 
of our present joys? And what is the object of proper 
prayer? P. 679, par. 1. 

(35) What suggestions with regard to prayer were given 
by our Lord Jesus as recorded in Matt. 6:7,8,25-34, and why 
did He so admonish His disciples? P. 679, par. 2. 

(36) What are the two most important conditions of 
acceptable prayer? (John 15:7.) P. 679, par. 3; P. 680, par. 1. 

NOVEMBER 23 



Read p. 680, par. 2, to p. 682, par. 1. 



(37) Does the world in general have access to the Throne 
of Heavenly grace? P. 680, par. 2. 

(38) What was the position of Cornelius, and how does 
his experience illustrate the necessary steps to be taken by 

every person before he can use the privilege of prayer-communion? 
P. 681, par. 1. 

(39) How does the Apostle Paul express this same 
thought in Hebrews 10:17-22? P. 681, par. 2. 

(40) To what extent do the simply justified members of 
the "Household of Faith" enjoy the privilege of prayer? 
P. 681, par. 3. 

(41) How shall members of the "Household of Faith" be 
admonished as respects their limited privileges of prayer and 
the greater privileges possible to them? P. 682, par. 1. 

NOVEMBER 30 

Read p. 683, par. 1, to p. 685, par. 2. 

(42) Is it proper to recognize a distinction between the 
merely justified and the consecrated, and between believers and 
unbelievers? P. 683, par. 1. 

(43) What would be the special advantage to these classes, 
if such distinctions were clearly recognized? P. 683, par. 2. 
P. 684, par. 1. 

(44) What privileges of prayer belong to the children of 
believers? P. 684, par. 2. 

(45) What is the one thing for which all the consecrated 
should specially pray? Quote Scriptural authority for your 
reply. P. 685, par. 1. 



(46) Summarizing, in what manner and for what things 
should we pray in order that we should not "ask amiss"? 
P. 685, par. 2. 



page 305 

VOL. XXXIV OCTOBER 15 No. 20 
A. D. 1913-A. M. 6042 



CONTENTS 

Resume of the Ending of the Times of 
the Gentiles 307 

Noah's Day Similar to the Present Day 307 

"Strong Man" Must Be Put Out 308 

Church Glorified Before Lease Expires 308 

The Present Outlook 308 

Good Courage Required for Overcoming 309 

Different Kinds of Courage 309 

Courage Proportionate to Faith 310 

Test of the Apostles and Its Lesson 311 

Trial and Victory in Gethsemane 311 

Patience a Cardinal Grace of Character 312 

Purpose of Our Testing 313 

Fervency of Spirit Necessary to 

Overcoming 314 

Who Shall Be Able to Stand? 314 

God Buried Moses, His Servant 315 

Israel Under a New Leader 317 

Choosing Elders and Deacons 318 

Some Interesting Letters 319 

page 306 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:-All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 



each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



R5338 : page 306 

CLASS DEPOTS FOR BIBLE STUDENTS 

Some of the larger classes have found it very convenient 
to appoint one of their number as Literature stock 
Keeper. He is supplied from the local Treasury a sufficiency 
of money for such a stock of books as the class 
will probably use during a month or more. This he keeps 
under his charge, and supplies to anyone desiring literature 
at the same rate as though he himself ordered from 
Brooklyn or London. He also is usually given charge of 
the Volunteer matter, and special free literature, dealing 
with interesting subjects. From him, at meeting times, 
the class can supply themselves with literature, and thus 
often use much more than if they had been obliged to 
order from headquarters. 

We recommend the plan as having some good features, 
and worthy of consideration by all classes. 

We advise the selection of a brother or sister for this 
service who has some acquaintance with business, and, if 
possible, one who has access to a typewriter. 

Keep a fair supply on hand. Order in good time, for 
express charges are much higher than freight rates— we 
should be economical in the use of the Lord's money. 
Supplies for "Pilgrim Meetings" should be ordered at least 
four to six weeks in advance, according to distance. 



PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION 

Unexpected difficulties have from time to time arisen 
hindering the presentation of the drama. Perhaps the Lord's 
time for it has not yet come. The present outlook for it is not 
favorable for public work before the first of the coming year. 

We have on file the applications of those who desire to 
serve in this Department of the Harvest work. More applicants 
have already sent in their names than we shall probably 
be able to use for some time. Should more help be desired, 
mention of the same will be made in these columns. 



R5336 : page 306 



MORE ABOUT THE GREAT PYRAMID 

Brother Morton Edgar has recently issued a very neat 
little book dealing with the Pyramid, and corresponding in 
size and shape to the Karatol and India paper STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES. It is on India paper, cloth-bound, two shillings 
(fifty cents.) We are informed that it treats the passages 
of the Pyramid very critically and finds that many of the 
measurements are closely corroborative of the time features 
of the Divine Plan presented in the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. 
We are advised that it gives seven different corroborative 
proofs that the close of the year 1914— namely, about October, 
1914— will mark the closing of the Times of the Gentiles, and 
the beginning of the Messianic Reign. Many of the dear 
friends are rejoicing in these corroborations. 

Any desiring to procure these books can send their orders 
to our office, or directly to Morton Edgar, 224 W. Regent 
street, Glasgow, Scotland. 

We wish still, however, to reiterate what we have said 
from the first respecting the date of the close of the Times 
of the Gentiles; namely, that the calculations as we presented 
them in Vol. II, STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, are the Truth to 
the best of our knowledge and belief. Nevertheless, there is 
enough uncertainty about the matter of chronology to make it 
a matter of faith rather than of positive knowledge. We remind 
our readers that our consecration to the Lord is not to 
October, 1914, nor to any other time except that mentioned 
by the Savior— "Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give 
thee a crown of life."— Rev. 2:10. 



page 306 

"SCRIPTURE STUDIES "-POCKET EDITION 

We have the Karatol edition of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
in stock, 25c. each, postpaid. 

We have a new edition also on thin paper, red cloth binding, 
35c. per volume— $2.00 per set of six, in neat cloth holder. 
The set with THE WATCH TOWER for one year, to any address, 
$2.65. 

Colporteur rates the same as on our regular cloth bound 
edition. 



R5328 : page 307 

RESUME OF THE ENDING OF THE TIMES OF THE 
GENTILES 

WE THINK of October, 1914, as, in round numbers, 
the ending of the Gentile Times. As a 
matter of fact, however, the first day of 



October is not the end of the Jewish year, 

which varies at its closing, just as at its beginning. 

It is regulated by the moon, instead 

of the sun. The Jewish calendar can never 

depart from this fixed arrangement of regulation 

by the moon. The date 1914 is not 

an arbitrary date; it is merely what the 

chronology of the Scriptures seems to teach. We have 

never said positively that the Scriptures do so teach— that 

the Jewish favor will begin exactly at that time, or that 

the Gentile Times will end exactly at that time. 

We say that according to the best chronological 
reckoning of which we are capable, it is approximately 
that time— whether it be October, 1914, or later. Without 
dogmatizing, we are looking for certain events: (1) The 
termination of the Gentile Times— Gentile supremacy in 
the world— and (2) For the inauguration of Messiah's 
Kingdom in the world. The kingdoms of earth will come 
to an end, and "the God of Heaven will set up a Kingdom." 
(Daniel 2:44.) The Scriptures do not say that 
the trouble will come in an hour, or in one day, or in one 
year. The intimation is that the catastrophe coming upon 
our civilization will be a very sudden one. (Revelation 18:8,10,17,21; 
I Thessalonians 5:3.) But it will be 

very sudden if it comes within twelve months. The Flood 
required many days to come, and many days to assuage. 

NOAH'S DAY SIMILAR TO THE PRESENT TIME 

Our thought in connection with the inauguration of 
Messiah's Kingdom is that there is a similarity between 
the ending of "The world that then was," and the ending 
of this Gospel Age. It is not our thought that the events 
associated with the inauguration of Messiah's Kingdom 
will all be momentary, instantaneous— in a literal hour, or 
day; rather, we are to expect that it is to be a gradually 
increasing trouble. It is to be a culmination of trouble— 
"such as never was since there was a nation." 

Then it will take a certain time for the bringing in 
of God's favor— the peace, the blessing. It will be some 
little time before this peace will be developed, as represented 
by the dove's returning to the ark, unable to find 
rest for its foot. The dove was again sent forth, and this 
time it returned with an olive twig, indicating that the 
blessing of the Lord was bringing about vegetation again. 
Thus Noah knew that the waters were considerably abated. 
We do not undertake to say that the trouble will all be 
over in a year; but, with the kind of trouble that the Bible 
seems to picture to our minds, we cannot see how it 
could last more than a year, and yet any of mankind be 
left alive. There would be no flesh saved— all would be 
destroyed. The Lord intimates that unless these days be 
shortened such would be the fact— Matthew 24:22. 

LIGHT FROM THE PROPHECY 



The Elect will constitute the Kingdom before that time. 
On the Divine plane they will then begin the work of 
blessing and Restitution; and this will have the effect of 
bringing the strife and trouble in the world to an end. 
Thus the difficulties will not be so prolonged. The olive 
branch will sprout, the dove will find a resting place, and 
the New Dispensation will be fully inaugurated. 

When we look through the prophecies relating to the 
Times of the Gentiles, we find that there are two promises 
—one appertaining to the Jews and the other to the 
world. During this period of 2,520 years, known as the 
Times of the Gentiles, the Jew was to have more or less 
tribulation from the Gentiles. He was not to be free— he 
would be more or less under subjection to the "Powers 
that be." At the close of this period the Church will be 
glorified. The Kingdom will not be established until that 
time. At the end of the Gentile Times Messiah will appear 
and set up His Kingdom. 

Referring to the last king of Israel, Zedekiah, we read, 
"Thou profane, and wicked prince of Israel, whose day 
is come, when iniquity shall have an end; thus saith the 
Lord God, Remove the diadem and take off the crown; 
...I will overturn, overturn, overturn it; and it shall 
be no more, until He come whose right it is; and I will 
give it to Him." (Ezekiel 21:25-27.) If this period of 
overturning be rightly understood to be 2,520 years, it 
would seem to end with the Second Coming of Christ and 
the setting up of His Kingdom. The Gentile supremacy 
was to pass from nation to nation until the time of the 
establishment of Messiah's Kingdom. That would prove 
that the treading down of Jerusalem would then cease- 
it would not continue after the end of these Gentile Times. 

The lease, or permit, to govern the world was given to 
the Gentiles at the time it was taken away from the 
Jews in the days of Zedekiah— 606 B. C. And during the 
2,520 years in which the Jews were to have no government 
of their own, the Gentiles were to have the privilege 
of maintaining such governments as they could. One 
nation after another has tried to govern the world— first 

R5328 : page 308 

the Babylonian, then the Medo-Persian, then the Grecian, 
then the Roman— including Papal Rome— which was the 
fourth to attempt universal empire. We are waiting for 
the time to come when the government of the world will 
be turned over to Messiah. We cannot say that it may 
not be either October, 1914, or October, 1915. It is possible 
that we might be out of the correct reckoning on the 
subject a number of years. We cannot say with certainty. 
We do not know. It is a matter of faith, and 
not of knowledge. "We walk by faith, not by sight." 

"STRONG MAN" MUST BE PUT OUT 

But when these Gentile Times expire, we are not to 



expect that the transfer will come as a flash of lightning. 
For instance, about May 1, when it is moving day here 
in New York, the one whose lease has expired is to move 
out. Then the new tenant will move in. This requires 
a little time. So it will be with the great change now 
imminent. He who bought the world is going to take 
possession. The kingdoms of this world are going to 
move out. In the world, when moving day has arrived, 
some may say, It is time now to move. And they may 
move out in the morning of May 1 . Some may have 
moved on the day previous. And there are some who 
may stay in until noon of the day of the expiration of 
the lease. Others, brazen in the matter, will say, This 
moving makes us a lot of trouble; and they make a great 
deal of fuss about moving; and when they go, they leave 
the house in bad order. 

We rather think it will be so at the close of the Gentile 
lease of power. The putting out will not be done before 
the expiration of the lease. Suppose you were a landlord 
and your tenant were upstairs, and should refuse to get 
out. What would be done? You would have to get an 
officer to put him out. So the officer comes and puts him 
out, and sets all his things in the street. We think such 
a procedure is a picture of how the "Prince of the world," 
being slow to move out, will be put out— that he will have 
to be bound hand and foot. (Matthew 12:29.) We think 
there is going to be a great deal of trouble. But we shall 
know fully a little later. 

"I will overturn, overturn, overturn it,. ..until He 
comes whose right it is, and I will give it Him." (Ezekiel 21:27.) 
The new King will not set up His Kingdom in 
a minute or an hour or a day. He has already come, and 
will take possession in due time. He is getting 
ready to take the House, and its present occupant is not 
quite sure as to whether he has to go out or not. We 

R5329 : page 308 

think he will have to be put out of the House. The Lord 
said that, if the strong man had known, he would have 
watched and not have allowed his house to be broken up. 

CHURCH GLORIFIED BEFORE LEASE EXPIRES 

As we understand this matter, the Church will be 
glorified before that time. When the lease expires, it 
would seem that the new tenants will be ready to take 
possession. And we cannot see how the new tenants could 
be ready to take possession unless they were glorified 
beforehand. If they were still in the flesh, they would 
not be ready to take possession. So if the Church is here 
in 1915, we shall think that we have made some mistake. 
We do not understand how they will all die between now 
and the close of 1914— how so many people, all over the 
world— people of one mind— will all pass beyond the veil 
in so short a time. 



But we can see how the Lord might purposely leave 
us in a measure of ignorance in this matter. We do not 
know positively that the month of October, 1914, will see 
the Church all glorified, and the time of trouble ushered 
in. We merely say, Here are the evidences. Here are 
the proofs. Look at them for yourself and see what you 
then think. It is for each to accept or reject the facts. 
(See STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, Vol. II.) 

So far as we can reason, this chronology is reasonably 
correct— a good basis for faith. "We walk by faith, and 
not by sight." God did not tell us that we should know 
the exact hour. But we have certain valuable information, 
and events seem to be fulfilling our expectations 
more and more as the days go by. 

THE PRESENT OUTLOOK 

When we began to publish information respecting these 
dates and began to describe what was to be expected in 
the near future— the fulfilling of Revelation 12 and 13, 
for instance— there was no sign of such things. We 
pointed out that there would be a Federation of Churches, 
a general union of all Protestants, and that the Catholics 
would not unite with them. And at that time nothing 
seemed less likely than that the Protestants would all 
unite. Years before, the Evangelical Alliance had been 
formed; but various denominations were urging that it 
was far better for these different denominations to exist. 
Competition is the life of business, they said, and was the 
life of the Church also. That was their argument. 

Now, however, that sentiment has all gradually given 
way, and they are unifying. But, from politeness, they 
do not like to throw away the name, the door-plate, the 
coffin-plate, of the different sects; hence they hold on to 
the names. The Federation is coming nearer every week, 
every day. But it is true that we thought that the 
"fire would come down from heaven" much more rapidly 
than it has come. 

The Federation is, however, not yet so well organized 
that it can do very much persecuting. In various 
cities it has hindered the publishing of the sermons in 
the newspapers. Some of the newspapers have been 
forced to give them up. This has been done by ministers 
going in a body to newspaper offices and saying, We will 
boycott your paper. Some editors have said, Go ahead 
and boycott! Other editors, however, have said, Well, 
we do not want to run against so many denominations. 
To these latter, this opposition movement looked large, 
because it represented so many ministers. These editors 
did not stop to think that comparatively few of the people 
think enough of these ministers, even to go to hear them 
preach on Sunday! But the preachers have been trying 
to exercise power— and are trying more and more. 

The time is surely coming when every effort that we 
can put forth will be throttled. But we intend to keep 
pushing the door open at every step as long as we can. 



We are not going to lie down, are we? These conditions 
have been coming gradually— and are coming on time- 
though not so rapidly as we were expecting. God's movements 
are usually very slow. But in this case we have 
expected something to come suddenly— something to indicate 
a very abrupt termination— an overturning of the 
present order of things. And we reason that, if this 
"Beast" is to have power (Revelation 13:11-17), it should 
be coming very soon. 

Now, of course, all this can take place yet— it could 
easily be brought to pass, we see. There may be a temporary 
reign of prosperity, a co-operation with Catholicism. 
The Federation may continue to prosper for a 
year yet, and accomplish everything that they are to accomplish 
before October, 1914; and the fall of Babylon 
will follow shortly after that date. That is one of the 
things due to come to pass at that time. 

Another thing we have been expecting is the return 
of the Jews to Palestine. There is more and more now 

R5329 : page 309 

being said about the Jews returning to Palestine, and 
more interest is being aroused in the matter. When we 
first began to draw attention to this subject of the return 
of the Jews to the Holy land, there was no movement 
at all of this kind. It has all come since. It has not as 
yet reached as great development as we might have expected, 
but it is coming. So when October, 1914, comes 
or October, 1915, or some other date (the Lord knoweth) 
and the Gentile Times terminate, it does not follow that 
there will be an outburst that will revolutionize the world, 
all in a day. But we believe that it will do so not very 
long thereafter. 



R5329 : page 309 

GOOD COURAGE REQUIRED FOR OVERCOMING 

"Be of good courage, and He shall strengthen your 
heart, all ye that hope in the Lord."— Psa. 31:24. 

THE Scriptures everywhere encourage the 
Lord's people to be full of faith, hope, confidence, 
trust. As we look out into the world 
we see particular reasons why this should 
be so. The majority of the world are full 
of fear, apprehension, distrust, worry. For 
this reason they fail to get the best out of 
the opportunities they have. They know 
of pitfalls of sin and trouble in different 
directions, and therefore they have reason 
to be distrustful, to be fearful. 
But the Lord's people have come into special relationship 



with Him and He with them. He has assured them 
that He will have a supervision of their affairs, as would 
not have been their experience had they not come into 
relationship with Him. They are, therefore, to hope in the 
Lord, to trust in Him. They are to heed the things which 
He has said, and to take courage in the thought that their 
affairs are under His supervision. 

God's people have stepped out from the world and 
joined the standard of the Lord Jesus Christ— the standard 
of righteousness, truth, holiness, opposition to sin and 
the Adversary. They will be beset by powerful enemies. 
Against them will be arrayed Satan himself, who will 
seek to oppose them, as he has opposed all of God's plans. 
He can make no direct attack upon the Lord, but he can 
attack His Plan and those who believe in God. He it is 
who instigated the riots, the tumults and the persecutions 
in the days of the Lord, and subsequently instigated the 
persecution of the Lord's people. 

Satan has not done these things with His own personal 
touch, but through his deluded servants. He has 
ever opposed righteousness and all those who love righteousness. 
On this account the Lord's people need to have 
great courage; for if they allow the Adversary to beat 
their courage down, he will soon put them out of the 
battle entirely. A retreating soldier is of no more good 
than one who has not gone out to battle. Instead of losing 
courage we are to resign our earthly interests to our 
Father and trust Him that in the present life He will 
guide us, will overrule everything for good to those who 
are "the called according to His purpose." 

Besides the Adversary, we have the general spirit of 
the world to oppose us. The world considers us foolish in 
thinking that we have any special Divine supervision— 
that God loves us. They say to us, God has made all the 
worlds, the thousands of angels, etc. Do you imagine 
that He has any special interest in you? They tell us 
that if there is a God, He is so great and we so small that 
He cannot take any notice of us. Thus they would beat 
our faith down. And this is the sentiment of the world, 
even when it is not expressed. And whenever we come 
in contact with worldly people we find, as it were, a wet 
blanket thrown on our simple trust, even though they say 
not a word to us. We need to have good courage and 
to hope in the Lord, as our text enjoins. 

Then, additionally, we have our own flesh. Each of 
us has in himself, in his own body, an opponent. The 
Scriptures represent that when we gave ourselves to the 
Lord and He gave us His Holy Spirit, we there passed 
through a transformation and became embryo spirit beings, 
the embryo having this mortal body in which to 
develop until the moment of resurrection, when we shall 
pass from the earthly to the Heavenly condition. "It is 
sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption; it is sown 
in dishonor, it is raised in glory; it is sown in weakness, 
it is raised in power; it is sown a natural body, it is 
raised a spiritual body."— I Corinthians 15:42-44. 



But while we are in the flesh, we have all the motions 
of the flesh. We as New Creatures have disowned these. 
We have turned our backs upon sin. We have exchanged 
the earthly interests and hopes for the Heavenly interests 
and hopes. By our daily experiences the Lord is testing 
us. We must be on guard to overcome the flesh. It requires 
a great deal of courage to fight down the tendencies 
to sin. And it requires still more courage that, after battling 

R5330 : page 309 

with the weaknesses and frailties of the flesh, and 
conquering it, we should additionally force our human 
bodies to sacrifice, to abandon the earthly things, and to 
serve the Lord. It requires a great deal of courage; 
therefore we are of ourselves insufficient. 

DIFFERENT KINDS OF COURAGE 

But we are exhorted to put our trust in the Lord, and 
assured that we "can do all things through Christ, who 
strengtheneth us." (Phil. 4:13.) His is a power sufficient 
for us. It requires all our courage, all our hope— 
every helpful element that we can put into the fight— in 
order to bring about the most successful issue. But the 
Lord supplies sufficient grace so that we may be overcomers. 
This does not mean that any one will live a 
perfect life; and he may not fully exercise this good 
courage. He may make partial failures from time to time. 
But our Lord is leading us on, and we learn valuable lessons 
from our failures. 

Some, having stronger faith and hope, having their 
minds fully centered on the Lord, have gone forward 
courageously. This is called good courage in the sense 
of being strong courage, proper courage. We might also 
associate with our text the thought that this hope in the 
Lord is to be backed up by a good courage, a right kind of 
courage, a godly courage. 

There is a courage that is born of pride, which would 
say: Do not back down. Do not let anybody get ahead 
of you. In a battle the soldiers will vie with one another, 
each having a desire to do something especially conspicuous, 
which will bring him the applause of his fellows. 
They need something to inspire them— desire for fame, 
love of country, music, etc.— in order to give them courage 
to run the risk of losing their own lives, or to take 
the lives of other human beings. And this is the kind of 
courage that will help them to gain the victory in their 
battle, even though it be an unworthy motive for inspiring 
courage. 

But a courage from right principles, based on faith in 
the Lord, is not one of bragadocio, but a courage that is 
noble and pleasing to God. It has its source in a realization 
that God has promised, and that God is watching, 
and desires us to be joint-heirs with His Son in His 



R5330 : page 310 

Kingdom. He is merely testing us to see whether we will 
prove faithful. And this courage with us must also be 
to do things in the right way. 

THE EXHORTATION APPLIES TO ALL STATIONS 

This exhortation affects us in everything in life, 
whether we are in one station or another. It would apply 
to a king on his throne— that he should be courageous 
enough to do the right thing— the thing understood to be 
the Lord's will. Such courage would say to us, Do 
your duty, whatever may be the Lord's will for you. 
Hope in the Lord, even though your motive will be misunderstood. 
We should have the good courage to stand 
for what is right, whether our reward be in this life or 
in that life which is to come. 

This exhortation is for the business man who is a 
Christian. His worldly friends may say, You will fail 
in your business. You cannot advertise your business. 
If you tell the truth, the people will not patronize you; 
they will go to a place where a host of lies will be told 
them. If he takes their advice, he will do a larger business, 
but he will make a failure of the chief affair of 
his life, he will lose the great Prize. 

It will apply to workingmen— that they may advocate 
right principles, and be not faint-hearted and fearful to 
express the truth. This does not mean that a man should 
be cantankerous and take a different view of every question 
from that of others, but that, after conceding every 
point that may be yielded with wisdom, where there is a 
principle at stake he should take his stand and say, My 
thought is thus and so, and I shall be obliged to maintain 
my position. However, I recognize that each of you has 
a duty to perform according to his own conscience; and 
I will content myself with doing what I feel is my duty, 
not wishing to coerce the remainder of you. But at any 
cost I will be faithful to principle. I hope that you will 
not misunderstand me, and think that I am trying to 
oppose you and to turn the matter my way. I have my 
rights and my conscience, and you have yours. I am 
merely telling you what I must do according to my judgment 
and my conscience. You must do what you think 
right according to your judgment and conscience. 

Thus even those who would think differently would 
know that the one speaking to them had a conviction, and 
that he was of good courage. This would apply to the 
humblest walk in life— to a day laborer, or to a washer-woman 
—any person. 

COURAGE PROPORTIONATE TO FAITH 

There are trials and difficulties in the life of each one, 
great and small. The right kind of courage finds an opportunity 
to exercise itself in each of God's children. 



And this is what the Lord is looking for. He is looking 
for this kind of courage, a courage such as must be found 
in overcomers. It is only to overcomers that any place 
will be granted in the Kingdom. Whoever has not good 
courage will not be in the Kingdom at all. Hence the 
lesson of our text is, BE OF GOOD COURAGE; for this is the 
way in which we shall demonstrate our faith in the Lord. 
He who hopes in the Lord and is loyal to the Lord will 
be courageous in proportion to his loyalty and his faith. 

This kind of courage will stand by us in all circumstances. 
For instance, our Lord in addressing His disciples 
on one occasion said, "Ye shall be brought before 
governors and kings for My sake;. ..take no 
thought [beforehand] how or what ye shall speak; for 
it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall 
speak." (Matt. 10:18,19.) The Lord's people, whatever 
circumstances may arise, will have such faith and trust 
in God that they will conduct themselves courageously, 
relying on God's power. The Greek here seems to give 
the thought: Do not be worried when you shall be 
brought before kings and judges. 

The way in which God will give us a mouth and wisdom 
may vary according to circumstances— perhaps by 
suggestions from another; perhaps in the hearing of the 
testimony of some one else; or it may be that a text of 
Scripture that would be especially helpful would come to 
our mind. But the thought is that our trust is in the Lord, 
and that we are not to be in fear and trembling. 

The Lord addressed these words to His disciples— the 
ignorant and unlearned. For them to be brought before 
kings and magistrates and judges would naturally cause 
them much apprehension. What should they say? How 
could they answer those men— those great, learned men! 
They were very humble, and they realized their ignorance; 
but the Lord guided them. Education was much less 
general then than now. Today, practically all are educated 
to some extent. The assurance of the Lord would, 
therefore, apply less forcefully to us today, than it would 
to the disciples then living. 

But if we are in any straits, any difficulties, we are 
to remember that the Scriptures assure us that "The 
angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that 
fear [reverence] Him, and delivereth them." (Psa. 34:7.) 
This thought should tend to make us cool and collected 
in our minds, and should enable us to conduct ourselves 
courageously, feeling ourselves in this close relationship 
with Him, and having the confidence that this thought 
would give us. Furthermore, we realize that we are not 
wise enough to know just what God's purposes respecting 
us may be. We know not, therefore, just how the Lord 
may prefer to have this or that matter eventuate. 

"FAITH CAN FIRMLY TRUST HIM" 

The early disciples, thinking of Jesus and what He had 
said to them, thought: Jesus is certainly a good man; God 



would not allow any disaster to befall Him. Thus they 
pondered, as they thought of the things that Jesus had 
predicted for Himself. St. Peter said to Him, "Thou art 
the Christ, the Son of the Living God!" (Matt. 16:16.) 
And they thought, How could God allow any harm to 
come to Him? So the disciples concluded that these 
things He had said must be figures of speech, just as 
when He said, "You must eat My flesh" and "drink My 
blood." So now when He said that the Son of Man 
would be crucified, they thought it was one of His peculiar 
sayings that they could not understand. 

Hence they were quite perturbed, wondering and astonished, 
when He was arrested and taken before the 
Jewish Sanhedrin, and when, instead of using His powers 
and His eloquence, He was dumb, and allowed Himself 
to be contradicted and maligned. Then He was taken 
before Pilate. Now, the disciples thought, Jesus surely 
will not hesitate before him ! Hence the surprise and 
astonishment of the disciples again when things turned 
out so contrary to what they had expected. But such a 
course on our Lord's part was necessary in the Heavenly 
Father's Plan, not merely for the Lord Jesus, that He 
might suffer and then enter into His glory, but necessary 
also for the world, because the redemption price must be 
laid down, must be in the hands of Justice. 

We see that the Lord has declared that His people 
shall not be especially protected along earthly lines; and 
if in His Wisdom it is best in any way to bruise us and 
put us to shame, as was done with our Master, we are 
to be of good courage, and He will strengthen our hearts, 
because we trust in Him, we have confidence in Him. 
We know that He is too wise to err, and that there must 

R5331 : page 311 

be a motive, a reason for the permission, whatever it 
may be. We know assuredly that the saintly ones are 
precious in the sight of the Lord— are as the apple of 
His eye; and thus we know that all things are working 
together for good to us. 

So we do not necessarily anticipate that a certain form 
of words will be given to us, before either judges or 
princes. We are not necessarily free from worldly 
condemnation. We are to remember that these words of 
the Master were applicable to our Lord Himself and to the 
Apostles; that Jesus was condemned and crucified; that 
the Apostles were condemned and were put into prison 
and received stripes on several occasions. And later 
most of them were killed. 

Whatever may be the outcome of any matter to us, 
we are to accept it as from the Lord, whether we are able 
to discern the reason for it or not. We are to have faith 
and hope, even though the way is rough, and even though 
things might seem to be the very reverse of what we expected. 
"Wait on the Lord; be of good courage, and He 
shall strengthen thine heart; wait, I say, on the Lord."— 



Psalm 27:14. 



R5331 : page 311 

TEST OF THE APOSTLES AND ITS LESSON 

"Watch and pray, lest ye enter 
into temptation."— Mark 14:38. 

WE RECOGNIZE these as words spoken by the 

Master in the Garden of Gethsemane on the 

night in which He was betrayed. They 

were addressed especially, and with much 

force, to the eleven Apostles who were with 

Him, and more particularly to the three 

whom He had called apart to be a little 

nearer to Him, as He went a little further 

on in the Garden to pray. The Master 

seemed to realize that wonderful events were 

to take place that night. But the Apostles did not grasp 

the situation. Their ears were dull of hearing. They 

were not without loyalty— it was not a matter of indifference 

with them, but they did not comprehend. 

We are to remember that at this time the Apostles 
were not begotten of the Holy Spirit, and could not, 
therefore, so fully watch with the Lord and pray with 
Him as if they had been spiritually enlightened. Jesus 
had told them that He would be crucified, but they had 
taken this statement as one of His dark sayings. They 
had heard very many of the parables which He had given 
to the people, which they were not able to understand. 
He had told them that when the Holy Spirit should come 
it would guide them into all Truth and show them 
things to come. 

Amongst those dark sayings Jesus had told them that 
He was the Bread that come down from Heaven. This 
they did not understand, nor how He was like unto the 
Manna of olden times; neither did they understand how 
the eating of this Bread would give them life. These 
things had been so mysterious that they could not accept 
them, and, as a result, many of those once interested fell 
away from Him. They said, How could the whole world 
eat His flesh or drink His blood?— it is ridiculous! So 
they walked no more with Him. But the Apostles and 
a few hundred brethren continued to have faith in Him. 
They said, There is some deep meaning in His words, 
and some hidden reason for His strange course; perhaps, 
as Jesus says, we shall in time understand. We see so 
many evidences that He is the Son of God that we 
must not stumble over these things. Thus they continued 
to believe in Him, and to hold these obscure statements 
in abeyance in their minds. 

IMPULSIVE PETER'S MISTAKE 



So, when Jesus told them that the Son of Man must 
go up to Jerusalem, and that the Jews would crucify 
Him, and that the third day He would rise again from 
the dead, they could not understand. He had already intimated 
that all the glorious promises referring to Messiah 
were applicable to Him. How, then, could He be crucified? 
Accordingly Peter began to upbraid Him, saying, What 
strange things you speak! It shall not thus be done 
unto Thee. But Jesus said unto him, "Get thee behind 
Me, adversary; thou art an offense unto Me; for thou 
savorest not the things that be of God, but those that be of 
men. "--Matt. 16:23. 

Peter, of course, recognized the rebuke and knew that 
he had made a mistake. He had thought that some evil 
might happen to the Master, but no such thing as that 
He would be crucified. A few days before a multitude 
of people had cried, "Hosanna to the Son of David! 
Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the Lord! 
Hosanna in the highest!" (Matt. 21:9.) There were 
a million or more Jews in Jerusalem who had hailed 
Him as King. Therefore the Apostles thought that the 
chief priests would not dare to do anything against Him. 
And now they had partaken of the Passover Supper, and 
Jesus had said to them that He desired to eat the Passover 
with them before He should suffer. Peter had declared 
that, though all should deny him, yet would he 
never deny his Master. Evidently Peter said to himself, 
What would there be to make me deny Him? I could 
not think of doing such a thing ! 

The disciples had thought that everything was propitious 
—so much so that Jesus found them disputing 
amongst themselves as to who would be the greatest in 
the Kingdom. And they had been so engrossed with these 
things they were discussing that they could not think 
of washing each other's feet. Then the Master and the 
Apostles had walked across the brook Kidron and to the 
Mt. of Olives. After they had entered the Garden of 
Gethsemane, Jesus took Peter and James and John with 
Him and said, "Tarry ye here, while I go and pray 
yonder." Then He had returned to them, and finding 
them asleep had said, "Watch, and pray, that ye enter 
not into temptation." But they could not think of any 
temptation into which they could enter in that peaceful 
spot. 

TRIAL AND VICTORY IN GETHSEMANE 

Jesus had agonizing experiences in the Garden. He 
was fearful lest in some way He might have violated 
the Law. He feared lest He had made some mistake and 
had not come up to the standard— the full requirements 
of the Father, in respect to the new life which He had 
begun. In such case His whole human life would be a 
failure, not for Himself only, but for the world of mankind 
whom He had come into the world to save from sin and 



death. After the Lord had passed through His trial-experiences 

in the Garden, God sent Him special help. 

An angel came and ministered unto Him. We do not 

know the nature of this help; but if we can read between 

the lines, the angel gave Him the assurance that He had 

fulfilled His part— He had rendered full obedience to 

the Father's will. 

Just as soon as Jesus received this assurance, He became 
very calm. If He had the Father's favor, the 
Father's blessing, He could pass through any experience, 
no matter what it might be! Then he returned to His 

R5331 : page 312 

disciples intimating that He had gotten the victory. He 

was no longer in trouble. He had said, "My soul is exceedingly 

sorrowful, even unto death." But now confidence 

had come, in the assurance God had given Him. 

No longer would it be necessary to watch and pray, so 

far as He was concerned. 

RESISTING TEMPTATION AUGMENTS STRENGTH 

We note that to the disciples this exhortation was 
specially needful at that time. With such peculiar trials 
and testings before them, if they had been watching and 
praying to God for wisdom and grace, lest they should 
fall in their temptations— enter into them— they would 
have had help to resist them. They would have fallen 
into temptation the same, but they would not have entered 
into it. Temptations may be presented to us many times 
a day, and when they come we may be deceived and 
misled. But a temptation resisted makes us so much 
the stronger to resist the next. And so the Apostle James 
says that we are to "count it all joy when we fall into 
divers temptations." (James 1:2.) But no one could 
count a temptation a joy if, when it should come upon 
him, he would fall in it— enter into it. 

St. Peter could never look back without regret to the 
moment when he denied his Master. If he had been 
watching and praying for guidance, he would have come 
off conqueror when Jesus was arraigned before the 
tribunal; he would not have thought of denying his Lord. 
He would have been stronger when the temptation came, 
and would have said, No, I will never deny the Lord! 
I will cast in my lot with Him! Afterward he might 
have said, I tell you, brethren, it was a tight place! But 
I am rejoicing that I fell into that temptation and was 
yet able to come off conqueror in that terrible hour! 

But Satan was desiring to have him, to sift him out, 
as it were. If, after he had denied the Lord, Peter had 
said, I will not back down now, I will give the Lord up 
entirely, and pass right out! then he would indeed have 
lost everything. But, although he was caught in the 
temptation, he ultimately gained the victory. It was cock-crowing 
time, and Peter, hearing the cock crow, said to 



himself, There, that is just what Jesus said— that before 
the cock should crow I would deny Him thrice. So St. 
Peter went out and wept bitterly; and, after he had it 
out with God in tears and prayers, he started again in 
the good way. And so our entering into temptation may 
not mean our utter rout. But the more we resist temptation, 
not allowing it to overcome us, the stronger characters 
we will become. 

TEXT NOW APPLICABLE IN A SPECIAL SENSE 

The experiences of the disciples in connection with 
this text have been, in the broad sense of the word, 
applicable to all of God's people throughout this Gospel 
Age, but they are particularly so today. Now is the time 
for the Church to be specially on the alert, to be attentive, 
to fortify themselves against the wiles of the world, the 
flesh and the Adversary. As the poet Longfellow has 
expressed it, 

"Be not like dumb, driven cattle; 
Be a hero in the strife!" 

We might be in the Lord's army and yet be like driven 
cattle. But we are to be intelligent. The Lord has 
given us an understanding of His Plan. In this we 
have at the present time an advantage over the Apostles, 
for they had not yet seen the great Divine Plan of the 

R5332: page 312 

Ages and the significance of the sufferings of the Church. 
We have much advantage in this way. Jesus had explained 
to them about Himself: "Thus it behooveth the 
Son of Man to suffer and to enter into His glory." And 
He had opened the Scriptures to them as far as they 
were able to understand, and had indicated the necessity 
of His suffering. Still they could not clearly understand. 
But we have an advantage in that we know what the 
Lord's Plan is; and so the words of our Lord are more 
forceful in their application to us than to the early Church. 

Let us be watchful, active, alert, and co-labor with 
God and with the Lord Jesus Christ. We are to consider 
the offer made to us— the great High calling— the most 
wonderful thing ever known in all creation! We shall 
never have another opportunity of showing God and our 
Lord Jesus our zeal for righteousness and our earnestness 
of spirit. The present opportunity is a special one. God 
has made it possible for all of us, who are in harmony 
with Him, to grow in grace and in knowledge, and thus 
to be more intelligent in our service. And we are to pray 
in harmony with that intelligence. 

What may be the character of the temptations which 
shall come upon us, we may not clearly discern in advance; 
for if we knew all about them beforehand, they 
would be but slight temptations and easily overcome. 
Watch, therefore, and pray always. The only safe way 
is to be always prepared; for our Adversary, the Devil, 



is seeking whom he may devour. He knows our weak 
points better even than we do, and is ever ready to take 
advantage of them. Each of us needs the Spirit of the 
Lord in his heart, as well as His "grace to help in time 
of need," if we would be overcomers. Our daily exhortation 
to self should be, 

"My soul, be on thy guard, 

Ten thousand foes arise; 
The hosts of Sin are pressing hard 

To draw thee from the prize." 



R5332: page 312 

PATIENCE A CARDINAL GRACE OF CHARACTER 

"Ye have need of patience [cheerful endurance], that 
after ye have done the will of God, ye might receive the 
[fulfilment of] the promise.— Heb. 10:36. 

THE Apostle is addressing the Christian Church 

—You who have left the world, who have 

accepted Christ as your Standard-bearer, as 

well as your Redeemer, and who are seeking 

to walk in His steps, and have made 

consecration of your life to the Lord— "Ye 

have need of patience." To a certain extent 

you did the will of God when you made 

your consecration to be dead with Christ. 

But that will of God was more deeply impressed 

upon you when you began to realize more than 

at first what this sacrifice would mean, and that only those 

who suffer with Christ shall reign with Him. 

"After you were illuminated" you saw the matter 
clearly, and "endured a great fight of afflictions." This 
was well. But St. Paul goes on to show in the context 
that some, after having demonstrated their zeal for a 
certain time, become cold. They become weary in well 
doing. And he tells us that these thus cut themselves off 
from the favors, privileges and blessings belonging to the 
Church of Christ. His exhortation is that those who are 
still loyal to God at heart continue so and exercise patience, 
remembering that this is one of the cardinal graces 
of Christian character. Many have naturally a little love, 
a little gentleness, a little patience, a little meekness, etc. 
But after we begin to grow in the graces of the Holy 

R5332: page 313 

Spirit, we need patience to control the flesh, the spirit of 
the world, the spirit of selfishness. 

The will of God is in one sense of the word the standard 
of God— full perfection— that we should be like our 
Father which is in Heaven. But God remembers that 
we are fallen creatures, and that we cannot do perfectly. 



Our text does not mean that we must do the will of God 
in the perfect and complete sense; but rather, as the 
Apostle elsewhere says, ours is a reasonable service. When 
we present our bodies living sacrifices to God, it is our 
reasonable service. God does not expect us to do that 
which is impossible. 

THE PURPOSE OF OUR TESTING 

What is this will of God? Stated in concrete form, 
"This is the will of God [concerning you], even your 
sanctification." (I Thess. 4:3.) As the Apostle teaches, 
consecration is a full and complete setting apart. If we 
do such a setting of ourselves apart at the beginning, then 
the Father sanctifies us— begets us as New Creatures, and 
sets us apart. So we have, first of all, our setting of 
ourselves apart; and then God's acceptance by our begetting 
of the Holy Spirit as New Creatures, and His 
continued work in us. 

We are doing the will of God when we fully consecrate 
ourselves to Him, and attain a place in the New 
Creation. But He wills to put us to the test. How much 
do we love God? How sincere are we? A soldier in an 
army might be loyal in time of quiet, but how would he be 
in time of stress? Would he desert the flag then, or 
would he prove himself a good soldier? He would need 
a great deal of patience. If he says he loves his country, 
his endurance and faithfulness will be tested in her time 
of need. He must go on picket duty; he must sometimes 
do menial work. He must endure wearisome marches, 
and many privations. All these things are required of a 
faithful soldier. If he is faithful, he is likely to be promoted, 
honored, for his faithful service. 

So we are tested as to our loyalty. What are we willing 
to endure for Christ's sake? How fully are we submitted? 
How deep does our submission go? Are we 
wholly in harmony with the will of the Lord? Is our 
interest merely superficial, or does it enter fully into our 
hearts? The question is not merely, Shall we make the 
consecration?— but after the Christian has taken all of 
these preliminary steps, to what extent will he manifest 
patient endurance and obedience and loyalty? 

God puts us to these tests because He has great honors 
to bestow on those who will be overcomers. They are to 
be a select company, and these will receive the Promise. 
As the Apostle says, it is after we have proved our loyalty 
to the very last, that we shall receive the Promise; i.e., 
its fulfilment. 

THE ESSENCE OF THE PROMISE 

When, where, what is the Promise? Undoubtedly the 
promise will be received in the resurrection. The promise 
includes all that God has in reservation for them that love 
Him— that love Him more than they love houses and 
lands, or children, or parents, or friends, or husbands or 



wives, or self, or any other thing. 

The particular promise that the Apostle refers to here 
is The Promise. All our hopes and blessings are centered 
in the original Promise made to Abraham, when God 
brought him out of the land of Chaldea into the land of 
Canaan. God promised Abraham that in His Seed should 
all the families of the earth be blessed. That has been 
the great Promise for encouragement to the Seed, to 
give them patience and fortitude. This is the essence of 
the Promise— that those who receive the Promise shall 
be the Seed of Abraham to bless the world. The faithful 
in Christ will be associated with Him in His Kingdom- 
will have the honor of blessing all the families of the 
earth under this Kingdom. Every creature of God shall 
then be brought to a knowledge of His Truth, and shall 
have the opportunity of being restored, if he will, to perfection, 
to all that was redeemed on Calvary. 

Now the opportunity is different. Now the selection 
is being made of those who will inherit the Promise as 
the Seed of Abraham. "If ye be Christ's, then are ye 
Abraham's Seed, and heirs according to the Promise." 
The Apostle is in our text urging that we continue to be 
Christ's and to abide in Him. All those who thus remain 
in Him to the end will be glorified with Him. In order 
to remain faithful, we must have His spirit of devotion. 

NOTABLE EXAMPLES OF PATIENT ENDURANCE 

St. James exhorts the Church saying, "Take, my 
brethren, the Prophets, who have spoken in the name of 
the Lord, for an example of suffering affliction, and of 
patience." Those whom the Apostle addressed already 
knew of the sufferings of Jesus. They already knew of 
the faithfulness of the Apostles. And now he was calling 
the attention of their minds to something additional. 
He is urging, Look back into the past, and see that patient 
endurance has been characteristic of all who have lived 
holy lives. These examples should be lessons of encouragement 
to us, in addition to those we have in the living 
brethren around us ! 

Then there is always something to be gained in casting 
the mind backward. The things close at hand are too 
near to be seen in their proper light. It was fitting that 
the Apostle should call attention to those faithful ones 
of the past, so that we might be encouraged to note what 
God desires. In those who are His, He desires a willingness 
to endure patiently and loyally, thus manifesting 
true character, that which greatly pleases Him. 

As we look back over the Old Testament record of 
the Prophets, we notice that many of them displayed this 
very quality referred to by the Apostle as loyalty to the 
Lord, a willingness to suffer afflictions for His sake, and 
not as experiences brought through chance upon them by 
the people. We see Moses— how willing he was to suffer 

R5333 : page 313 



affliction because of his faith in the Promise made to 
Abraham and his conviction that the Promise would come 
true. He preferred to suffer with the people of God 
rather than to live at ease in the royal family of Pharaoh, 
into which he had been adopted. 

We see in Job another example of patient endurance 
of tribulation and of strong opposition for a considerable 
time. We see the same in Jeremiah— how much his faithfulness 
cost him of hardship, and how patient he was. 
We see the same in Daniel the Prophet— his faithfulness 
to the Lord, his patient endurance of whatever God permitted 
to come against him. And so with others of the 
Prophets. And we read that their experiences were written 
for our admonition, our instruction. Although they belong 
to one Dispensation and we to another, yet their experiences 
furnish us good lessons.— I Cor. 10:6,11. 

PERSONAL APPLICATION OF THESE LESSONS 

Applying these lessons to ourselves, we may say that 
to whatever extent we may be privileged to speak the 
Word of God and to suffer persecution therefore, if we 
take it with patience, it will bring us a corresponding 
blessing and commendation from the Lord. But we cannot 
think it would be pleasing to Him if, when we suffer, 
we think, Oh, how terrible, terrible, terrible! Such an 
attitude would not be taking His Word for it, that "All 
that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution," 

R5333 : page 314 

and that all things shall work out for our good.— 
2 Tim. 3:12; Rom. 8:28. 

When Job was rich, prosperous, God tested him by 
taking from him all his family, all his wealth, his health, 
and even allowing his wife to turn against him. Yet in 
all this Job did not turn against God. He did indeed 
express wonder, but he looked to the Lord in faith and 
said, "Though worms shall destroy this body, yet in my 
flesh shall I see God." I shall yet receive the manifestation 
of His favor, and learn what He means by these 
experiences, these afflictions, coming upon me. "Though 
He slay me, yet will I trust in Him."— Job 13:15. 

After his testings had been accomplished, God gave 
him back children, houses, lands, friends. And these 
coming in abundance shadowed forth the blessings of 
Restitution— how the tribulations of mankind will eventually 
work out for good to those who will love God. If 
those who are now suffering affliction because of their 
loyalty to the Lord, because of their trust in His arrangements, 
will take afflictions and trials joyfully, these will 
surely work out good to them— "a far more exceeding 
and eternal weight of glory." 



R5334: page 314 

FERVENCY OF SPIRIT NECESSARY TO OVERCOMING 

"Not slothful in business, fervent in 
spirit, serving the Lord."— Romans 12:11. 

THIS text might very properly be transposed 
to read: "In serving the Lord, be not 
slothful in business, but fervent in spirit." 
The primary thought, the central thought, 
is that the Lord is to be served, and on this 
account we are to be careful to learn what 
kind of service is acceptable. 

We ask first, Why should the great 
Creator of all things, the Upholder of all 
things, need our service? And the Bible 
answers us that God needs no service whatever, that He 
is quite competent to carry out His own Plan, but that 
He is pleased to have the co-operation, the sympathy, of 
His own servants— not only of the human family, but also 
of the spiritual family— that God is not making an exhibition 
of His own power, but that all of His intelligent 
creatures are permitted to become more or less participants 
in the one Plan of which He is the Center. 

This is particularly true of the earth. God permitted 
the Adversary to overturn things, and has permitted sin 
to have its course, in order to illustrate certain great 
principles that operate in the universe, according to certain 
laws. Whoever violates the principles of righteousness 
will have proportionately an unsatisfactory experience, 
as sin is contaminating and contagious. And so what 
might appear as God's inability to control sin and its evil 
influences will ultimately be seen from a different standpoint 
—illustrating His Justice, Wisdom, Power and Love. 

As some great business firm might say, Now we do 
not need any capital, but we will hold the balance of 
stock, and allow some to go out amongst the employees, 
so that each one may be associated in the business— have 
an interest in the business; just so God makes use of 
capital, having plenty otherwise Himself. God therefore 
arranged the Plan just as it is. 

In God's Plan, the Logos was to have the first opportunity 
of becoming man's Savior and of bringing 
everything earthly to a condition of full perfection. God 
so arranged the matter that it would require a death to 
redeem mankind. God could have imposed a different 
penalty. He could have put a penalty of ten years of 
disfavor, or what not, for the first act of disobedience. 
But He did not. He put the penalty of death. And then 
He made the proposition to the great Logos that if He 
would carry out His Plan of being the Redemption-price 
for Adam and his race, which would cost Him His life, 
He would be granted still greater honors. 

So the Logos left the glory that He had with the 



Father and humbled Himself to become a man and to die, 
even the death of the cross. "Wherefore God hath highly 
exalted Him." In this way our Lord Jesus was permitted 
to be a co-laborer with God. He was required to be faithful, 
zealous in spirit, fervent in spirit. And we read of 
Him, "The zeal of thine House hath consumed Me." He 
was to be self-sacrificing and not self-seeking. 

The pictures of these things were given aforetime— 
before He came into the world. As Moses lifted up the 
serpent in the wilderness, so should the Son of Man be 
lifted up, etc. It required a great deal of fervency of 
spirit to carry our Lord through all the bitter experiences 
of His earthly existence. He needed to have a great 
deal of faith in the Father and a great deal of devotion 
to the Father. And the fact that He overcame the difficulties 
shows that He had the faith and the fervency. 

WHO SHALL BE ABLE TO STAND? 

But our Heavenly Father's Plan is even broader than 
this. He planned that Jesus should have associates. And 
so the Apostle declares that God, who foreknew our Lord 
Jesus as the great Shepherd of the sheep, foreknew us 
also by Him— with Him. And if we partake of His 
sufferings in this present time, we shall also share with 
Him in the glories to follow. This was premeditated in 
God's Plan from before the foundation of the world. 

This feature of the Plan began to operate at Pentecost. 
Those who had already believed in God as a Savior, and 
who had tendered their hearts to the Lord, could not be 
accepted until Jesus ascended up on High and made 
application of His merit for them— on behalf of all such. 
The Holy Spirit was given at Pentecost. Immediately 
they were privileged to begin a service for the Lord— 
a service that was made necessary in God's arrangement. 
He could have done without this service, but He did not 
—He arranged to have this very service. He purposed 
that a witness should be given to the world, to gather 
out a people for His name, and that those who should 
give the witness should show their faithfulness in the 
trials and tests that would come to them. 

The Father is seeking such to serve Him as serve Him 
in spirit and in Truth. Therefore He allows the way 
to be made narrow by the opposition of the Adversary, the 
flesh and the world, so that none but those who are 
fervent in spirit will stand the tests. Others will not enter 
this work, or will fall out by the way. They will say 
that it is too hard. If you are God's servant they will 
say all manner of evil about you. They will say that 
you are a hypocrite, etc. God does not cause the Adversary 
to do this, but He permits it, not because He 
is limited in Power and could not cause it to cease, but 
because He is testing all who would be followers of 
Jesus. And He wishes to have no others in that Elect 
company than those who are fervent in spirit. Therefore 
are there such services and such tests. 



THE CAUSE OF OPPOSITION 

The great business in life of those who would honor 
and serve the Lord is to serve the brethren and the 
Truth. Everything that represents the Truth these 

R5334: page 315 

soldiers of the cross are to uphold— everything that is 
right, just, true. They will give their approval to such 
things and their disapproval to other things. This is what 
causes the opposition of the flesh and of the world and 
of the Adversary. 

So, then, Christians have become dead to the world 
and alive toward God. Having thus been received and 
counted in as a member of Christ, every such one has as 
his special business the service of the Lord, the brethren 
and the Truth. And according to his abilities and opportunities 
is he to engage in this business. And this is 
to be his mind or disposition— to serve the Lord. And he 
is to be fervent in spirit, not indifferent, not lukewarm. 
As the Lord Jesus was fervent in spirit, even so are we 
to be. The fervency of His spirit for God and His 
arrangements consumed His life. So it must be with 
all those who serve God— those who walk in the Master's 
footsteps. This must be, necessarily, the chief business 
in life for these people of God. 

R5335 : page 315 

HOW TO REDEEM THE TIME 

It is necessary for us to engage in some kind of 
occupation in order to secure a livelihood. God has so 
arranged in order to prove our faithfulness. Further, as 
other people are engaged in these same occupations, 
laboring for the comforts of life, we are compelled to 
compete with these to some extent. But as we see that 
we have a nobler business, we shall see to it that all these 
secular things in life are cut off, as far as possible, in 
order that we may have the more time for the Lord's 
service. The old ambition to gain earthly things would 
lead us to lay up treasures on earth. But the hope set 
before us in the Gospel leads us rather to lay up treasures 
in Heaven, "where moth doth not corrupt," etc. 

So this class do with as few luxuries in life as possible, 
in order that they may lay down their time and strength 
in His service. And the more they do this, the more 
they become copies of God's dear Son. Thus, if any one 
is engaged in the carpenter business— the same in which 
our Lord engaged when He was a youth— he will say, 
How can I minimize the affairs of life so that I can 
give more of my time to the Lord and less to earthly 
matters? And so it will be his endeavor to cut off the 
desire for earthly luxuries. More and more he will count 



the affairs of this life as loss and dross in comparison 
with the glory of the life beyond. 

In proportion, therefore, as we imbibe the Truth, in 
that same proportion will be our desire to be fervent in 
spirit— in that same proportion we shall be striving to sacrifice, 
to cut off, to devote to the Lord this time and talent 
and energy. We do not think that the Lord would wish us 
to be too particular regarding earthly things and waste 
valuable time. For instance, we might say, I will keep 
this house as unto the Lord. And we might give too 
much of our time and attention to different matters about 
the house. But the Lord is inviting us to choose the 
better part and not to give too much time and attention 
to procuring and caring for ornaments and bric-a-brac. 
Whoever would give too much time to the housework or 
to other earthly affairs would show that he did not appreciate 
the privilege of the Lord's service. 

When we look about us, we find that all men need so 
much and the Household of Faith need so much. "What 
do they need?" They need the Truth. "Is the Truth, 
then, to go now to the world?" Yes, to all who have the 
hearing ear. There is a satisfaction and a blessing in 
having the mind properly sustained. We would rather 
be without all the luxuries of life, and have this Truth. 
We would rather suffer the loss of everything else than 
suffer the loss of our being. 

If everything else in life were taken from us, and 
we were without a penny in the world, we would still be 
rich toward God if we had the Truth. And so we all 
are needy in respect to this intelligence, this knowledge. 
When we perceive this, how could we be indifferent to 
the telling forth of the praises of Him who has called us 
out of darkness into His marvelous light! So, then, God 
has so arranged this matter that all those who believe 
and become children of God may have a share with Him 
in His great work. And since we know these things, they 
become a test of our loyalty and our love. And the Lord 
seeing or not seeing this character in us will determine 
whether or not we shall be associated in the honorable 
work on the other side of the veil. 



R5333 : page 315 

GOD BURIED MOSES, HIS SERVANT 

-NOVEMBER 16.-DEUTERONOMY 34:1-12. 

"Precious in the sight of the Lord is 
the death of His saints."— Psalm 116:15. 

MOSES is one of the grand characters on the 
pages of history. His nobility looms up as 
a great patriot, general, judge and ruler of 
his people; and still more grand does he 



appear in his relationship toward God. He 

was the personification of obedience and 

loyalty as a servant of Jehovah. In this he 

typifies the "greater than Moses," Messiah. 

As we read, "A Prophet shall the Lord your 

God raise up from amongst your brethren 

like unto me" (Deuteronomy 18:15)— I am a diminutive 

picture or representation of that great Teacher, Leader 

and King whom Jehovah will anoint to be the real Deliverer 

of Israel and the world from the bondage of Satan, 

sin and death.— Hebrews 2:14,15. 

Any one may discern something of the greatness of 
Moses from the records. Any one may perceive that it 
required great patriotism to forsake the courts of Pharaoh 
to cast in his lot with his brethren, the Jewish nation, and 
to become their leader out of bondage to the Land of 
Promise. Any one can note the patriotism of the man 
when, as mediator for his people, he pleaded with God 
for the forgiveness of their trespasses, declining the proposal 
that the nation be cut off and that he and his 
family inherit the promises instead. Any one can see 
that great faith in God was necessary for the position 
occupied by Moses. But only comparatively few see the 
real depths of Moses' character; for only a few grasp the 
real situation and realize the Divine call to the nation 
of Israel and the work of Moses as their mediator. 

MOSES, THE SERVANT OF GOD 

We cannot help feeling sympathetic toward this grand 
servant of God— "the meekest man in all the earth"— in 
respect to the particular cause which, as a penalty, barred 
him from entering Canaan with his people and made him, 
in a typical way, a representative of those who die the 
Second Death. After so many years of patience and longsuffering 
and loyalty to God, in an unguarded moment 
Israel's great mediator failed in meekness and in loyalty. 
Directed by the Lord to speak to the rock, which on a 
previous occasion he had smitten, Moses petulantly smote 
the rock the second time, saying to the people, "Ye rebels, 
must we bring you water out of this rock?" 

The rock whence came the life-giving stream represented 

R5333 : page 316 

the Rock of Ages— Messiah, who was to be smitten 
once more. Compare Hebrews 6:6. 

The fact that Moses was used as a type of the Second 
Death class in no sense implies that he experienced the 
Second Death, nor that he cut himself off from Divine 
favor. The punishment which he received merely 
helped to complete the typical picture— he might not 
enter Canaan— he might not enter the Promised Land. 

CANAAN VIEWED FROM MT. PISGAH 



Pisgah is one of the peaks of Mount Nebo. From it 
Moses got a considerable glimpse of the Promised Land, 
toward which his eye of faith had looked for eighty years 
and toward which he had laboriously guided the nation 
of Israel for forty years. This grand old servant of 
God, fully resigned to the Divine will and arrangement, 
was put to sleep by the Lord whom he served. The Jews 
have a saying that the Lord kissed him there. His place 
of sepulchre was hidden— doubtless to prevent anything 
of the spirit of idolatry. The New Testament declares 
that Satan strove for possession of the body of Moses, 
doubtless with a view to using it in some idolatrous 
way, but Jehovah forbade. 

MOSES DIED AND WAS BURIED 

We are not to overlook the fact that Moses died, and 
that he will not live again until the Divinely-appointed 
time when, under Messiah's Kingdom, he will be resurrected. 
Meantime he has slept with his fathers, as the 
Bible generally records of all who died. 

The account of the transfiguration of our Lord and the 
appearance of Moses and Elias with Him in that vision 
must not be made to contradict the statement that Moses 
died, and that the only hope for anybody is by a resurrection 
from the dead. (I Cor. 15:13,14.) We have 
Jesus' own word for it that neither Moses nor Elias 
went to Heaven. He declared, "No man hath ascended 
up to Heaven." (John 3:13.) Jesus explained that what 
the disciples saw on the mountain was not a reality, but 
a vision— just as the trumpets, beasts, etc., of Revelation 
are not realities, but visions. "Tell the vision to no man." 
(Matthew 17:9.) St. Peter, who witnessed the vision, 
declares that it was a representation of Messiah's Kingdom. 
(2 Peter 1:16-18.) Moses represented one class 
and Elijah another, as participators with Jesus in His 
Messianic glory— in the Kingdom which is to bless the 
world, the Kingdom which, established on earth, will 
quickly correct wrong and effect the accomplishment of 
God's will as completely as it is done in Heaven. 

GOD'S PROMISE TO ABRAHAM 

At the foundation of all of God's dealings with Natural 
Israel and with Spiritual Israel lies His great Promise 
made to Abraham and bound with an oath— "In thee and 
in thy Seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed." 

God purposed from the very beginning that the curse 
of death should not be an everlasting curse on the race. 
From the beginning He purposed in Himself the healing 
of sickness, sorrow and pain, and that the time would 
come when He would roll away the curse. From the 
beginning He premeditated sending the Lamb of God, who 
by redeeming the world should take away its sin, lift the 
curse and bring in a blessing to mankind in its stead. 
Yet the first clear statement of this Divine purpose was 



made to Abraham— that himself and his posterity should 
be associated with God in the great work of human 
uplift and blessing. 

Although God knew that no member of the human 
family could perfectly keep the Divine Law, nevertheless 
it was expedient that this matter should be exemplified. 
Hence, before God was ready to bring in the Messianic 
blessing, He made a proposition to Abraham's posterity 
through Jacob— suggesting to them that if they would 
show their loyalty by keeping the Divine Law God would 
be ready to use them as the promised Seed of Abraham 
for the blessing of all nations. Israel's sixteen centuries 
of endeavor under the Law are summed up by St. Paul, 
saying, "By the deeds of the Law shall no flesh be justified 
in God's sight."— Romans 3:20. 

PREPARATION OF THE SEED 

This led up to Messiah's time. The Logos, by virtue 
of a special birth, became Jesus and sacrificially laid down 
His life, in harmony with Divine foreknowledge. To 
Him were gathered such of the natural Israelites as were 
saintly at heart, to be His disciples— to share in His sufferings 

R5334: page 316 

and death and to be made partakers of His glory 
and exaltation to the Divine nature. These Elect, or 
select, ones are with Jesus to constitute the antitypical 
Moses. To this end they were called, or raised up from 
amongst their brethren, as Moses prophesied. Not enough 
of such "Israelites indeed" being found, Divine Wisdom 
has been calling and selecting others throughout this Age 
from amongst the Gentiles— from every kindred, nation, 
people and tongue. 

Thus gradually God has been preparing the great 
Prophet, Priest, King and Judge, who during the thousand 
years of Messiah's Kingdom will be the Mediator between 
God and all who desire to draw near to Him and to 
receive His blessing. These will be related to the repentant 
world as the priests of Israel were related to 
their nation; but their work will be efficacious, and not a 
failure, because based upon the "better sacrifices" for sins 
(Heb. 9:23), and therefore backed by Divine Power in 
the forgiveness of sins and the deliverance of the willing 
and obedient out of bondage to sin and death into the 
glorious liberty of the children of God. This grand antitype 
is before us and will, we believe, soon have its 
glorious accomplishment. 

The Messiah whom God is thus preparing, composed 
of Jesus the Head and all the Elect of Israel and of 
the whole world, the Body of Messiah, will, like the type, 
be very faithful, loyal, patriotic toward God and toward 
the people. Indeed, it is one of the tests of these that 
they shall be willing to lay down their lives for the 
brethren and be faithful to the principles of the Divine 



character even unto death. 

MOSES' MESSAGE TO ISRAEL 

The Book of Deuteronomy may in a general sense be 
said to be the dying message of Moses to Israel. It is 
supposed to have been uttered within a few days of 
his death. 

The first address begins with Chapter 1 :6 and concludes 
with Chapter 4:40. 

The second address begins with Chapter 5 and extends 
to the end of Chapter 26. 

Third address, Chapters 27, 28. 

Fourth address, Ratification of the Covenant, Chapters 29 
and 30. 

Joshua appointed to be the successor of Moses, 
Chapter 31:1-8. 

The Song of Moses, Chapter 32— "The Rock of Israel" 
—delivered on the very day in which his summons came. 

The Blessing of the Tribes, Chapter 33, on the 
same day. 

The tenor of these addresses was hope toward God, 
faith in the promises and loyalty to their Covenant 
engagements. 



R5335 : page 317 

ISRAEL UNDER A NEW LEADER 

-NOVEMBER 23. -JOSHUA 1:1-9.- 

"Be strong and of a good courage."— V. 9. 

ISRAEL spent thirty days in mourning for 

their great leader, Moses, yet with one accord 

accepted Joshua as their new leader by 

Divine appointment through Moses. Like 

other Bible heroes, Joshua was renowned 

for his faith and his loyalty to God. At the 

time of taking Moses' place he was in his 

eighty-third year, yet full of vigor, and evidently 

the best qualified man for the position. 

He and Caleb only had been of mature 

years when the Israelites left Egypt. They only had been 

witnesses of God's marvelous dealings with His people. 

They two had been the spies who brought an encouraging 

report of Canaan, which the people refused and on account 

of which refusal the adults died during the succeeding 

forty years of wilderness journeying. 

The fact that Moses was vigorous at one hundred and 
twenty, and Joshua at eighty-three, speaks loudly to us in 
confirmation of the Bible's teaching that Adam was 
created perfect, and that the entire race has since been 
fallen in sin and death— sharing Adam's penalty, "Dying, 



thou shalt die." The intelligence of these men, as well as 
their vigor, quite contradict the Evolution theory; for this 
very Joshua had been one of the slaves in Egypt. 

ISRAEL'S REAL LEADER--GOD 

Not for a moment are we to lose sight of the fact 
that God had adopted the nation of Israel and entered 
into a special Covenant with them; and that, therefore, He 
was their real Captain and Leader— Moses, Joshua and 
others being merely His representatives and mouthpieces. 
We have already referred to the reasons for the adoption 
of Israel by the Almighty, and in a subsequent lesson will 
consider them more fully. 

THE NEW LEADER'S NAME 

Joshua's name was originally Hoshea, the same as that 
of the Prophet Hosea, signifying salvation. To this was 
prefixed (Numbers 13:16) Je, an abbreviation representing 
the word Jehovah. Thus the name became Jehoshua, signifying 
Jehovah's salvation. This was shortened to 
Joshua and Jeshua. (Nehemiah 8:17.) The Greek form 
of this word in the Septuagint is Jesous— Jesus. 

For twenty-seven years Joshua was the leader of 
Israel, faithful to God and to the people. He not only led 
them through Jordan and directed in the conquering of 
city after city, but he divided the land amongst the tribes 
and governed the people with great acceptance, dying at 
the age of one hundred and ten. 

It would not do for us to contrast Joshua with Moses 
as a leader; for they were men of totally different types. 
Indeed, any one contrasted with Moses would be disadvantaged, 
so high did that great statesman tower above 
the average of humanity then or since. But while Joshua 
could not be Moses, the leader, commander, law-giver, he 
was faithful as a follower of Moses, as one who obeyed 
the Divine Law, and whose faith and influence with the 
people were helpful to them. He was just what God 
wished him to be, and whoever is worthy of such a testimony 
is truly great. 

The Lord's command to Joshua was, "Moses My servant 
is dead; now therefore arise, go over this Jordan, 
thou, and all this people, unto the land which I do give 
to them, even to the children of Israel. ...There 
shall not any man be able to stand before thee all the 
days of thy life; as I was with Moses, so I will be with 
thee: I will not fail thee nor forsake thee. ...Have 
not I commanded thee? Be strong and of good courage; 
be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed: for the Lord thy 
God is with thee withersoever thou goest." 

THE LAND OF PROMISE 

That Joshua and Israel in conquering Canaan should 
take forcible possession of it is called in question by some. 



They ask, By what right might one branch of the human 
family destroy another and seize their land? Where is 
the justice of such a course, not to mention the absence 
of love? How could the Golden Rule be applied to such 
a course— do unto others as you would be done by? 

There is but one answer to this query; and, rightfully 
seen, it is a satisfactory answer. The Lord declares that 
the earth is His, that He gave it to the children of men, 
as represented by Father Adam. (Psalm 1 15:16.) But 
the gift was conditioned upon obedience and loyalty- 
disobedience, disloyalty, being punishable by death. Adam 
incurred this penalty; and his children, under the laws 
of heredity, shared it with him, because born in sin and 
shapen in iniquity. Thus all human right in the earth 
was abrogated by the death sentence upon the sinner. 

God purposed in Himself the recovery of Adam and 
his family from the curse of death— through Messiah- 
through His death and by the power of His Messianic 
Kingdom, not yet established. In preparation for these 
blessings to come, God laid hold upon the nation of Israel 
and blessed them by making a Covenant with them. Although 
they could not fulfil the terms of the Covenant 
and obtain the choicest blessing of God, nevertheless the 
Israelites were greatly blessed by their Law Covenant, 
and many of them were fitted and prepared by it for cooperation 
with Messiah in His Kingdom in due time. 
Meantime, the experiences of Israel were overruled by the 
Almighty, to make of them types and symbols illustrative 
of the Divine Plan as it will be finally outworked on a 
higher plane.— I Corinthians 10:11. 

In carrying out this arrangement with Israel, God 
promised them and gave them Palestine. He explained to 
them, nevertheless, that this gift was not because of their 
worthiness, but because of His favor toward them in 
pursuit of His own great plans previously outlined to 
Abraham. He further explained that the people of Canaan 
were not making progress, and that their further continuance 
would be neither for their good nor for the 

R5336 : page 317 

Lord's glory— as with the Sodomites, whom God took 
away as He saw good.— Ezekiel 16:49,50. 

TO SHEOL, NOT TO TORMENT 

It is well that we should remember that the Bible hell, 
to which the Canaanites went when they were slaughtered, 
is not the hell of torment pictured to us in the creeds. 
Their destruction by the Israelites sent them to Sheol, to 
Hades, to the tomb, where "there is neither wisdom nor 
knowledge nor device." (Eccles. 9:10.) There they sleep 
with their forefathers— just as we read of all the good 
as well as of all the evil ones of that time. Abraham 
slept with his fathers, who were heathen men. 

All through Bible history we read that both good and 



bad, dying, were gathered to their fathers— slept with 
their fathers. There they are still, waiting for the glorious 
resurrection Morning, when Messiah's Kingdom, having 
inaugurated a reign of righteousness, will bring the earth 
to its Edenic condition and bring back eventually every 
man in his own order— all that sleep in Hades, in Sheol, 
in the tomb.— I Corinthians 15:21-29. 

Death with humanity is totally different from death 
with the brute, because of the Divine promise that there 
shall be a resurrection of the human dead, the just and 

R5336 : page 318 

the unjust; and because in fulfilment of that promise God 
has already sent His Son. Jesus already has died for 
human sin, thus opening up the way for the resurrection— 
that God might be just and yet be the Justifier of those 
accepting Jesus. 

True, few have accepted Him as yet, because few have 
come to a knowledge of the Truth. The great masses of 
the world are still blind and deaf, and know not. The 
glorious promise is that in Messiah's Day not only shall 
all be awakened from the tomb, but the knowledge of the 
glory of God shall fill the whole earth. Then all the blind 
eyes will be opened and all the deaf ears will be unstopped. 
All will have the opportunity of returning to Divine favor 
under Messiah's Kingdom. Those refusing to come into 
harmony will be classed as wilful rebels, and will die the 
Second Death. 

The nation of Canaan, like all other nations, will have 
a share in that glorious time when Jesus, the Light of the 
world, will lighten every man which shall come into the 
world.— John 1:9. 

From this viewpoint, the taking of Palestine from the 
people who were using it to no profit themselves, and the 
giving of it to Israel for the enactment of types of good 
things to come, was not injustice, but wisdom. And taking 
away by the sword the people already condemned to death 
was just as proper as if they had been taken away by 
famine and pestilence. In any event, the Divine provision 
for them all through Christ is a blessing, which will reach 
them in Messiah's Day, when the earth shall be free from 
the curse. Then the curse will be rolled away and the 
blessing of the Lord shall be rolled upon them, when the 
enlightened will love righteousness and hate iniquity. To 
all such there will be no more sighing, no more dying, no 
more crying. Wilful evil-doers will be destroyed; and all 
the earth having been brought to perfection, God's will 
shall be done on earth as perfectly as it is done in Heaven. 



R5336 : page 318 

CHOOSING ELDERS AND DEACONS 



NUMEROUS inquiries have come to us indicating 
that some of the brethren have difficulty 
in applying the suggestions given in Vol. VI, 
on the subject of election of servants for the 
Classes— elders and deacons. 

It was not our thought there to lay down 
an invariable rule on the subject. The Bible 
gives none, and no one else has a right to 
establish such a rule. Our suggestion was 
that wherever possible the election should 
be unanimous, and unless seventy-five per cent, of the 
Class, or more, favored a brother's election, it would be 
rather unwise for him to accept the office— the service. 
We did not by this mean that a minority of twenty-five or 
thirty per cent, should be encouraged to obstruct the Class 
and hinder an election. 

Strictly speaking, a majority of one in a Class would 
decide any matter except as love might come in to urge a 
consideration of the sentiments of others. If, for instance, 
a Class numbered one hundred, fifty-one of these would 
have a right to decide respecting who should be the servants 
of the Church, and the other forty-nine should very 
quietly acquiesce, recognizing the fact that they constitute 
only a minority, and should loyally strive to support the 
will of the majority. 

Only the spirit of love and the best interests of all 
in the Class suggests more than fifty-one per cent. Love 
should strive for a unanimous vote. But how might this 
be obtained? We will offer a suggestion. 

Suppose that in a Class of one hundred six Elders were 
considered necessary for the service. A, B, C, D, E, F 
would represent available candidates of more or less 
ability. A might have a hundred votes; B, ninety; C, 
eighty; D, seventy; E, sixty; F, fifty. Under a strict 
voting on the lines of preference only two would be 
selected on a ninety per cent, basis; but our thought would 
be that the entire six might be unanimously elected, if 
they were on the average as good material as the Class 
possessed, and if nothing were known derogatory to their 
moral characters. 

It is a mistake to think that the standards established 
by St. Paul are to be taken literally, for no one would be 
found fully up to all the requirements. The Apostle has 
stated what the ideal Elder would be. Each voter should 
have this ideal before his mind in thinking of the will 
of the Lord; but the Class is not to be left without an 
Elder unless there are serious blemishes. 

Our Lord similarly set a perfect standard before us 
when He said, "Be ye perfect, even as your Father which 
is in Heaven is perfect." (Matt. 5:48.) Who is perfect 
in the sense that God is perfect? "There is none righteous; 
no, not one." (Rom. 3:10.) The Master evidently 
meant that we should not measure ourselves by a low 
standard, but by the perfect standard, that thus we would 
be assisting ourselves up to the grandest ideals in respect 
to our own lives and characters and in respect to those 



chosen to be Elders and ensamples to the Flock. 

Be it always remembered that none are to vote except 
those professing full consecration, manifested by the usual 
symbol— immersion in water. Such as have not symbolized 
their consecration are not to be disowned as 
brethren, but should be considered so immature as not to 
be competent to express an opinion in respect to who 
would be qualified to serve the Church, and, of course, 
would not be qualified to be servants themselves. 

Another question which here and there is obtruding 
itself is, Should any one be chosen as a servant of the 
Church who has not taken the special Vow which so many 
of us have found very helpful, and which has been recommended 
to all? We cannot make the Vow a test of 
brotherhood, for, even though we believe that the Lord 
has specially brought it forth at this time, and that to a 
certain extent He intends it to serve as a test amongst the 
consecrated, nevertheless the Bible does not authorize us 
to make this a test of brotherhood. It is a matter of judgment 
rather than of Divine direction, just as the candidate's 
misuse of the English language, or uncouthness of 
manner might properly enough be taken into consideration, 
although not mentioned in the Bible amongst the 
qualifications for eldership. 

It would rejoice us greatly to know that all the dear 
Elders and Deacons amongst the Lord's people everywhere 
could see eye to eye with respect to the reasonableness 
of the Vow, and its harmony with the Divine Word 
and with our consecration Vow, to which it is, as it were, 
a blue fringe, or border and finish. One can scarcely refrain 
from wondering what objection any Christian 
brother or sister could have to that Vow. To some of us 
it seems as though it would imply either something wrong 
as respects their heart intentions or something defective 
in their reasoning faculties. However, we are not competent 
to judge so closely. The Master said, "Judge not." 

Our thought is that in selecting Elders or Deacons a 
preference might well be given to those who have taken 
the Vow and who see eye to eye on this subject. Nevertheless, 
if the brethren who are competent to lead Classes 

R5337 : page 319 

are acceptable in every other way and are not opposers of 

the Vow, they might be chosen. This would be especially 

true of those who declare that they are living up to 

all the requirements of the Vow to the best of their ability, 

and merely decline to take it because of fear that somehow 

or other the taking of this simple Vow might injure them 

while it helps others. We may not understand the processes 

of their reasoning, nor the attitude of their hearts, 

but we may under such circumstances pass over what we 

cannot understand nor appreciate. 



R5337 : page 319 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
PROSPEROUS MEETINGS IN GERMANY 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Brother and Sister Rutherford have just left for Zurich. 
The eight public meetings were quite a success: 

Addresses reed. 

Hamburg ....2,500; hundreds turned away 616 

Berlin 3,000; 500 of these in a second hall... 620 

Dresden ....1,600; 750 turned away 700 

Leipzig ....1,500; several hundred turned away 442 

Elberfeld ..2,500; 740 

Siegen 800; 200 turned away 288 

Coin 2,000; several hundred turned away 346 

Stuttgart ..4,000; 1,232 



17,900 4,984 

Together with the 16,000 addresses received in the last 
few months in connection with my discourses this makes 
21,000. We will do what we can to feed these through our 
few able Colporteurs. They all received a copious supply of 
literature. Where it seems impossible to canvass these addresses 
soon, we will send them a handsome little circular 
illustrating the volumes. 

Surely, the hungry ones can have food for thought and 
heart! We are much encouraged. 

We are having a local convention here today and another 
public meeting tomorrow evening. I will do all I can to encourage 
the friends in the work and to show them the great 
privilege of service. 

With much love in the Lord, O. A. KOETITZ. 



THE WORK IN HUNGARIA 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

The work in Hungary is much more difficult than in 
America, because the friends, with few exceptions, are very 
poor, and the work must be done on a much smaller scale. 
All would gladly work if they could find work to do. (This 
evidently refers to labor conditions.) We were obliged to 
give a number of the books free, and we were glad to be 
privileged thus to serve the Lord. 

Last year I had 50,000 PEOPLES PULPITS and also 400 
volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES in Hungarian. These 
are all out now, and more are ordered. 

There are at present forty-two small classes in various 
counties, in which we are received with gladness, and they 
rejoice with us in the revelation of Present Truth. The 
eleventh and twelfth of May we had a little convention, about 



100 being present. How good and how pleasant it was to be 
there! (Psa. 133:1.) Some strangers were among us that 
gave evidence of being interested. 

Seven brethren were elected as workers and servants of 
the Truth— Brother Kis, myself and five others. We have 
conventions semi-annually, and spend the time in building 
one another up and studying the Divine Plan. We rejoice 
in spirit with the brethren at a great distance, with whom 
we seldom come in contact. We had a baptism service, at 
which seventeen brethren and ten sisters symbolized their 
consecration into Christ's death. About 1,000 people were 
present at this service, even the police, and it was a blessing 
that they were there, for somebody wanted to create a disturbance, 
but the police quickly restored order. Praise the Lord! 

We believe that none of these blinded men will be able to 
destroy the work of the Lord, but rather that all things will 
be done after the counsel of his own will. One of those who 
are now opposing the Truth was with us for two years and 
was very zealous in spreading the Truth; he gave up a paying 
position to be more fully used in the service, and because 
of his activities was cast out of the Baptist church. I received 
much help from him financially, and through his efforts 
I was privileged to lecture in the Baptist church. Now, however, 
he has turned against us. 

There is great need at present for a brother who can 
speak both Roumanian and Hungarian, to help the friends 
and to aid in building them up to the full stature of a man. 
(Eph. 4: 13.) Pray the Lord of the Harvest to send more 
laborers into the vineyard.— Matt. 9:37,38. 

The pastors and priests of various denominations have 
sought to stop our work in a legal way. We were haled 
before the court. We have been able so far to defend our 
course. We hope also in the future to be able to hold high 
the Divine banner, going forth and following the living 
Captain of our faith, as well as his honored servant, our beloved 
Pastor C. T. Russell, and say with the Apostle Paul, 
"We are not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ." 
KARL SZABO.-Hungaria. 



SOBERNESS, DIGNITY, REVERENCE 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

My attention was attracted by a peculiar little laugh that 
accompanied a brother's effort to lead a meeting. This "little" 
laugh kept up through all his talk, but seemed to be more 
pronounced when he seemed to feel he had given a "deep" 
thought, when he would "heh-hah, heh" in a very peculiar 
way. This was about three years ago. I have noticed it in 
different brethren and upon many occasions since, and more 
particularly during the past year. To me it seems very undignified 
and has got to where it is very disgusting to me. 
The serious thing about it is, it seems to be "catching," often 
involving several in the class, and the meeting is made 
peculiarly strange. Even with strong resistance I find myself 



indulging to my shame, sometimes. Even other brethren who 
seem to be more dignified and modest than I are often affected 
and I notice they seem to realize it. Those who practice it 
don't seem to realize it, but seem to use it as a kind of 
emphasis to what appears to them to be a very deep thought 
or explanation. . 



LITTLE POLISH CONVENTION 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

Thinking that news of the welfare of the Polish friends 
would be gladly received, as well as of all of the saints, I 
desire to mention something of the results of our efforts 
to be built up in the most holy faith and in fellowship and 
in love. 

The two classes of Polish friends (one in Milwaukee, 
Wis., and one in Chicago) arranged for a two-days' convention, 
or union meeting, which was held August 31 and 
September 1, 1913, in Kenosha, Wis., midway between the 
two localities. A program was arranged for, calling for nine 
discourses and two symposiums and a testimony meeting. 
Two of the discourses were for the public in the same hall; 
one, "The Plan of God," and the other, "Baptism." There 
were also symposiums on the "Fruits of the Spirit," and on 
the "Attributes of God." All the friends were much refreshed 
and encouraged to run on in the narrow way. A 
good time spiritually was had. It was hard for the friends 
to depart, and nearly all of the faces expressed a desire 
to continue the convention and special fellowship with God, 
for our Heavenly Father blessed our meeting wonderfully. 

Arrangements were made for the giving of an opportunity, 
to those desiring, to symbolize their consecration unto death 
to do the Heavenly Father's will and to follow the Lamb 
whithersoever He goeth. There were twelve immersed, six 
brethren and six sisters. The immersion took place in the 
lake. Although the lake was quite rough, the friends, and 
especially the sisters, who would never venture into the water 
under other circumstances, went bravely and yet with a 
dignity that characterizes all immersion services of the true 
saints of God, showing under a picture their death with 
Christ. While the friends were being immersed the remainder 
stood on the shore and sang in Polish, spiritual 
songs prepared for the occasion, such as "Happy Day," and 
"Our Best Friend," to the tune No. 134 in the hymnal, and 
several others which made the service very impressive and 

R5338 : page 319 

upbuilding for the singers and the immersed ones. That 
moment of witnessing will be long remembered by all present. 
A love feast was arranged for on the order held at the 
general conventions of the I.B.S.A. After this all went 
back to their duties, filled with the Lord's Holy Spirit. 
Such a wonderful blessing was realized that it would be 



almost impossible not to say something about it. 

Praying for further blessings on these and the saints of 
God everywhere and with Christian love, I am, 
Your brother in the One Hope, 
W. K.--I11. 



page 321 

VOL. XXXIV NOVEMBER 1 No. 21 
A. D. 1913-A. M. 6042 



CONTENTS 

The Dawn of the Morning 323 

Signs of the Dawning 324 

"The Last Day" 324 

How to Overcome Fleshly Weaknesses 325 

Religious Intoxication 326 

Our "Cup of Blessing" 327 

"Drink Ye All Of It" 327 

Church's Part in the One Loaf 327 

Unforfeited Earthly Life Right 328 

Significance of Eating Our Lord's Flesh 

and of Drinking His Blood 328 

Most Valuable Food and Drink Known 329 

How Israel Crossed Jordan 329 

Entering Into Canaan Rest 330 

The Fall of Jericho 331 

"Captain of the Lord's Host" 331 

Mammon the Principle of Selfishness 332 

Holiday Remembrancers 333-334 

Some Interesting Letters 335 

Berean Questions in Scripture Studies 335 

page 322 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:-All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



WACO, TEXAS, CONVENTION 
-NOVEMBER 14, 15, 16- 

The Waco Cotton Palace Exposition will secure very 
special railway rates; and the brethren of that vicinity are 
anxious to take advantage of the cheap rates and hold a Convention 
November 14, 15, 16. Brother Russell had expected 
to be present; but, finding this impossible, he has delegated 
two of the Pilgrim Brethren to represent the Society. One 
of these will act as Chairman at the Convention. 

We trust that this will be a very profitable Convention, full 
of spiritual power— the spirit of the Truth. It will be convenient 
for considerable numbers, we believe. We suggest 
that Brethren who are unable to attend give the Convention 
the support of their prayers at the Throne of Heavenly Grace. 

The Young Men's Business League has granted us the 
use of their hall during the Convention. It is located at 711-1/2 
Austin Ave., convenient to all the railway stations. 

Arrangements have been made for board and lodging at 
from $1 to $3 per day. Requests for accommodations should 
be sent promptly and must be explicit as to number, sex and 
color. Address A. B. Landrum, Secretary I.B.S.A., 1917 
Grace St., Waco, Texas. 



"THE WATCH TOWER" FREE TO THE POOR 

We are now following the usual custom of sending a subscription 
blank on the expiration of each subscription. The 
Post Office law is particular re the wording of these, 
and will not allow us to explain that any of the Lord's 
people desiring it, but too poor to pay, can be supplied 
free by us. 

We again assure all such that a postcard stating their continued 
desire for THE WATCH TOWER and their continued 
inability to pay, will renew their subscription for another 
year. These subscriptions are paid for out of a fund specially 
provided for the purpose. 



R5338 : page 323 

THE DAWN OF THE MORNING 

"The night is far spent, the day is at hand; let us therefore 
cast off the works of darkness, and let us put on the armor of 
light. Let us walk honestly as in the day; not 
in rioting and drunkenness."— Romans 13:12,13. 



FOR A long time the world had been more or 

less in darkness, in sin, in ignorance, in 

superstition. By one man's disobedience 

sin entered the world. This darkness still 

continues. "Darkness covers the earth, and 

gross darkness the people." The Bible accounts 

for this condition of things by explaining 

that man by heredity is born in 

sin, and that additionally Satan takes advantage 

of the situation, with a view to 

further alienating mankind from the great Creator, and 

thus, if possible, preventing any reconciliation that might 

ever be undertaken. 

Satan is called the Prince of Darkness, and he is working 
in the children of disobedience. The children of disobedience 
being far more numerous than the children of 
obedience, it follows that the present is a dark time. 
The Bible tells us that God will not leave mankind always 
in this darkness; but that the curse shall be rolled away 
and all the darkness shall be dissipated, and instead, shall 
come His blessing, His light. The light of the knowledge 
of the glory of God shall cover the earth as the 
waters cover the great deep. (Isa. 11:9; Hab. 2:14.) 
Provision for this recovery was made in the Divine Purpose, 
before the foundation of the world. 

THE LIGHT OF THE WORLD 

About nineteen hundred years ago God began to take 
steps to bring to pass the things which He had promised. 
The first step was the sending of His Son, that He might 
be the Redeemer of man. Our Lord is spoken of as 
being a great Light, in the same sense that the Heavenly 
Father is called the Father of Lights. Jesus said, "I am 
the Light of the world." Mankind, under the influence 
of Satan and their own imperfect judgments, became 
twisted in their minds, and are in a state of darkness, 
so that they cannot reason correctly. The majority are 
not able to see the desirability of the Truth, and so they 
live in darkness— "darkness covers the earth." 

However, we have every reason to believe that there 
are a choice few in the world, who love righteousness 
and hate iniquity. And this class God desires to take out 
first. The selection of this class has been going on 
throughout the Gospel Age. The majority of the world 
would doubtless prefer right rather than wrong if all the 
conditions were favorable. If they could be as comfortable 
financially, as popular socially, etc., by serving 
the right as by serving the wrong, they would much prefer 
to serve the right. 

These are really good people. They have a preference 
for the right. They are very moral, very just. And 
yet their preference for the right is not so strong that 
they would be willing to lay down their lives for the 
right. It is one thing to say, I love the cause of God; and 



it is another thing to say, I will devote my time, strength, 
fortune, all, to it. 

But it is only the latter kind that God is calling now— 
those who are willing to take up the cross in the interest 
of Truth and righteousness. And to these God gives encouragement, 
assuring them that He appreciates their 
love of righteousness: and that if they persist in the 
course of faithfulness they will be made associates with 
Christ in His Kingdom. He tells them that He is seeking 
just such a class. And these are encouraged and inspired 
to keep on, as God sets before them the glorious hope of 
the Gospel— the Divine nature and glory. 

RESPONSIBILITY PROPORTIONATE TO LIGHT 

But all this is going on in the night time; for, although 
Jesus came into the world, and is to be the Light 
of the world, this Light has not yet illumined mankind, 
nor scattered the darkness. The Jewish people had the 
light of the moon, in the sense that the Law Covenant 
and its promises were like the moon, which shines with 
a light reflected from the sun, a light not its own. They 
had the light of the moon, if they wished to walk in its 
light. But they often went from the light of their Law 
and walked in the shadows. The Jews also had stars- 
Abraham, David and the Prophets. These were luminaries 
that shed more or less light upon their pathway. 

But when Jesus came, He was the great Light of the 
world; i. e., He was the one chosen of God to be the Light 
of the world. But Jesus as a man was not this light to 
all. The Light that shone from Him while He was in the 
flesh was very local. And even to many of those upon 
whom it shone, His light was obscure, because of their 
ignorance, blindness. Jesus intimated that some could see 
the light and others could not: "Blessed are your eyes, 
for they see!" (Matt. 13:16.) He also intimated that 
some of the Jewish leaders saw to some extent, and were 
responsible for what they saw. 

Our Lord presented to them the true light. They had 
been hoping to attain the blessing God promised in His 
Covenant with Abraham. They knew from the teachings 

R5338 : page 324 

of the Law that they must be holy. But they did not realize 
how high is the true standard. Consequently they 
thought they could keep up a certain standard of outward 
conduct, and thus become the Seed of Abraham. And 
when Jesus said to them. You are so careful to keep the 
letter of the Law that you would strain out a gnat from 
your drink, and swallow a camel, He intimated that they 
were very careful about the small things, and would let 
great matters, important things, pass by! 

Jesus told them they would devour widows' houses; 
that is, that they would take advantage of this or that technicality 
of the Law to take possession of a widow's substance. 



And in thus doing, they were violating God's 
Law, which is a law of justice and love and mercy. It 
was only the few, therefore, who were Israelites indeed. 
And these would be the true Seed of Abraham— the select 
few of that nation. -Rom. 9:6; Gal. 3:16,29. 

R5339 : page 324 

THE TRUE LIGHT-BEARERS 

So the selection went on, and the faithful ones, having 
the right spirit, the same spirit that Christ had— love 
for justice, love for God and God's Law— these were 
selected— the Elect of that people. These not being a 
sufficiency, God continued to select others from different 
nations. To His disciples Jesus said, "Let your light 
shine before men"; and again, Put not your light under a 
bushel; but put it on a candlestick, that it may be seen of 
others. And so all of God's people have been lights. 
Those who have the Holy Spirit are the only true light-bearers 
in the world. Others may have various lights- 
science, geology, chemistry— but much of their light is 
darkness. Our Lord, however, was referring only to the 
light on God's Plan. 

Some who have light on morality, say that they will 
not become intoxicated, will not use profanity, etc. They 
may have light in those directions, but this is not the 
true light. Much of the true light has been lost on the 
whole world, though they have still some of the original 
light remaining, as is evidenced in man's conscience and 
moral sense. Saul of Tarsus had some of this light, and 
yet persecuted the Church. Conscience is not a sufficient 
guide. We need the light of God's Word. 

The Holy Spirit is the light of the Church, by which 
we are being specially guided into the Truth. St. Peter 
tells us that we have a more sure Word of prophecy, 
whereunto we do well that we take heed as unto a light 
that shineth in a dark place. (2 Peter 1:19.) The light 
on the path of the just "shineth more and more unto the 
perfect Day." We are still in the dark place, and shall 
be until the darkness gives way and the Day is here. 
And so, as St. Peter says, we have need of this Word of 
prophecy "until the Day dawn." Thus we find that one 
Scripture helps to elucidate another. 

Apparently many of our Christian friends have the 
thought that the Apostle meant that the Lord might come 
at any hour, on any day. But when we come to understand 
the Scriptures, and know that God has fixed times 
and seasons, and when we learn more about God's Plan, 
we see what He has revealed respecting the length of the 
night and the time for the dawning of the morning. The 
Apostle had sufficient knowledge to realize that the morning 
was coming and that the night would then have an 
end. He knew that Christ at His Second Coming would 
be the Sun of Righteousness. We also know this. He 
knew that Christ would be the Light of the world. We 



likewise know this; and that the glorified Church will 
be, with Jesus, the Sun of Righteousness, which will arise 
with healing in its beams, and will enlighten the world, 
and lift it up and bless it. 

SIGNS OF THE DAWNING 

We know something of God's times and seasons. 
There is a great difference, however, between knowing 
the day and the hour and knowing the times and the seasons. 
You might know that your Pastor intended to go 
sometimes this season to Great Britain. When the season 
arrives you might say, Well, this is the season. Yes, but 
you would not know what steamer he would take. You 
say, We know the time he will reach London, but do not 
know just the day the boat sails. And thus the Lord has 
guaranteed that His people shall not be left in darkness— 
that we shall have light and knowledge sufficient— that 
we shall not be in darkness with the world. 

Just so surely as we are of the Brethren, just so surely 
that Day will not come upon us as a thief. We shall know 
how to expect it. We shall know about the time. Those 
who think that the Apostles had no knowledge of the 
matter have, we think, taken a superficial view of some 
of the Scriptures. Take, for example, the text under 
discussion. "The night is far spent, the Day is at hand." 
They have thought this meant that this Day might dawn 
that very year, or the following year. 

ST. PAUL HAD SPECIAL INFORMATION 

The Apostle evidently had no such idea; for he goes 
on to explain, in one of his Epistles, how that Day would 
come, and that there would be a time of trouble, and that 
the Lord would permit a strong delusion; that the man 
of Sin must first be revealed. He assured the Church 
that the Day would not come until first there was a great 
falling away. He reminded them: You have been told 
about an evil system arising. Know now that this Day 
of the Lord absolutely cannot come, until the Abomination 
of Desolation has been set up, as noted in the prophecy 
of Daniel. And he warned, "Let no man deceive you 
by any means."— 2 Thess. 2— entire chapter. 

In one of his Epistles to the Church at Corinth, St. 
Paul said, "We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be 
changed." (I Cor. 15:51,52.) The early Church thought 
that St. Paul meant that they would not sleep. But St. 
Paul was referring to the Church as a whole— instructing 
them that some of the Church would remain until the Day 
of Christ. St. Paul and St. Peter both intimated that they 
were not of those who would remain to be changed in a 
moment from the earthly body to the Heavenly. 

So, coming back to our text, we are to recognize that 
the Apostle Paul had special information from the Lord. 
He tells us so. He says he had visions and revelations 
more than all the other Apostles. And he declares that the 



Lord revealed to him things not proper to be uttered at 
that time. He must not explain these visions; their 
meaning was a secret intrusted to him. (2 Cor. 12:4.) 
The Apostle's mind being thus illuminated, he was able 
to write with great intelligence, clearness and power, so 
that we, with the increasing light upon the Holy Scriptures 
now due, might be able to see a depth to his writings, 
and get a grasp on the Truth, not otherwise possible. 
And we do. Nearly all of our knowledge of the deep 
things comes from St. Paul's Epistles, because he had 
this light and it permeated all that he wrote. So we today 
are able to explore and to understand many things which 
were secrets, known only to the Apostle Paul in his day. 

"THE LAST DAY" 

The Day spoken of in our text is the Last Day. 
Martha said of Lazarus, "I know that he shall rise again 
in the resurrection at the last day." (John 1 1:24.) 
Which is the Last Day? It is the great Seventh Day. 
This Day will not be a time of darkness, but a time of 

R5339 : page 325 

daylight. That being so, the other six Days represent 
the night of darkness and sin. In the morning of the 
new Day, the reign of the Prince of Darkness is to be 
overthrown by the Prince of Light; and thus the Day 
will be ushered in. From this standpoint of the six great 
Days of a thousand years each, we are to remember that 
the Apostles and the early Church were living in the 
Fifth Day— there was only one more Day to intervene 
before the Seventh Day, and then would be due the great 
shining forth of the glory of the Lord. From this standpoint 
the Apostle's words are clear. 

During the Dark Ages God's people were permitted to 
have only a measure of light, a measure of knowledge. 
Yet they had certain great landmarks. And so when the 
Papacy was developed, God's people said, This is that 
Man of Sin— this is that falling away which was predicted. 
Thus they could locate themselves. We see that 
in the Dark Ages there was quite a clear understanding 
that the Papacy was the Man of Sin. Still it was not 
God's intention to guide the Church into the fulness of 
Truth until the due time. And we are not claiming now 
that we know the day (the day in the shorter sense) and 
the hour of the setting up of the Kingdom. But we are 
not ignorant of the times and seasons. 

"PUT OFF THE WORKS OF DARKNESS" 

In view of this knowledge of the wonderful Day about 
to dawn, how shall we who are hoping to be of the Kingdom 
class of that Day deport ourselves now? How shall 
we live? Ah! says the Apostle, if we are "children of the 
Day," we are to show it. We are God's representatives 



and ambassadors. We are to tell the people about the 
light and knowledge and glory of God that is to come 
so soon, that will fill the whole earth, by and by. We are 
to help them to contrast the present with the glorious 
conditions that will then exist, so that all who love the 
light may take heed to the Word of God and get ready 
to be members of that Kingdom class. 

What must we do? We must put off the works of 
darkness, everything that is selfish and sinful— for that 
which is selfish is sinful, and that which is sinful is 
selfish. We are to put these off because we belong to the 
new order of things. The works of darkness would be 
any works whatsoever that would not stand the fullest 
investigation; that would not stand approved in the light 
of the New Dispensation, if it were fully ushered in. 
Let us remember that we belong to the New Dispensation, 
and not to the old, and should, therefore, live in accordance 
with our citizenship and our responsibilities toward 
the Prince of Light and in opposition to the Prince of 
Darkness, his works and his ways. 

"PUT ON THE ARMOR OF LIGHT" 

We have enlisted with Christ, and we will fight against 
the enemies of our new nature. We will be worthy children 
of God and strive earnestly, that we may be associated 
with the Lord in His Kingdom of Righteousness. 
And when we have put off the darkness, what must we 
do? We must put on the armor of light. What is the 
armor of light? It is the armor which protects from the 
darts of the Adversary, and includes the helmet of salvation 
—the protection of our intellects through a knowledge 
of the Truth, from the attacks of our great foe. 

As the Apostle urges, let us "Stand therefore, having 
our loins girt about with truth, and having on the breastplate 
of righteousness; and our feet shod with the preparation 

R5340 : page 325 

of the Gospel of peace; above all taking the shield 
of faith, wherewith we shall be able to quench all the 
fiery darts of the wicked. And take the helmet of salvation, 
and the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of 
God." (Eph. 6:14-17.) This is the armor with which 
we are to withstand the attacks which appeal to the evil 
tendencies of the fallen nature, that we may come off 
"more than conquerors" through Christ, that we may be 
of that glorious band of overcomers who will be made 
kings and priests of God in that glorious Day— in the 
dawning of the Morning. 

LIGHT MANIFEST IN PURITY OF INTENTION 

The Apostle continues the figure of speech which refers 
to the on-coming Day, in contrast with the night time 
of sorrow, sin and death, during which evil and sin have 



prevailed. The Scriptures declare that evil-doers prefer 
that it be dark, in order that their real aims and objects be 
not known; for they do that in secret which they would 
not wish to have known in the light and open to the public 
in general. 

Then the Apostle discusses what should be the attitude 
of the Church. "Let us walk honestly, as in the 
Day"— honestly, in the sense of conscientiously, openly- 
having nothing that we would need to secrete from the 
whole world, if they were able to understand our motives. 
They would know we had no evil purposes, but only 
pure, honest, good intentions. Our Lord was the great 
Light of the world. But He was misunderstood and misrepresented. 
So all of His followers, in proportion as they 
are light-bearers, will be subject to attacks from Satan, 
who seeks to perpetuate his hold upon mankind. 

Nevertheless, whether it cost us much or little, our 
whole course of life is to be honest, upright. Our lives 
are to be devoted to the cause of righteousness— we are 
to see to it that we do nothing contrary to the principles 
of righteousness. Sincerity, honesty of purpose, should 
make all our life as open as the Day when everything 
wicked is to be disclosed. By showing the right and 
exposing the wrong deeds, thus making known the 
character of these, the Lord will put men on test as to 
which they love. 

For those who love evil, wickedness, after they see it 
in its true colors, after they see where it leads and all its 
consequences, and shall have had full opportunity to know 
and to choose between right and wrong, light and darkness 
—for such God's portion will be death— Second Death. 
The only final reward and punishment for evil is destruction. 
"All the wicked will God destroy." 

So during the Millennial Day, the Day of Christ, the 
Day of the Lord in the largest sense, the light will prevail, 
and all the hidden things of darkness will be exposed. 
Those who love these things are the ones who will suffer 
disadvantage; while all who love the light will be blessed 
and will make progress toward human perfection. 

HOW TO OVERCOME FLESHLY WEAKNESSES 

Those of the Church— those who are hoping to be 
kings and priests and to reign with Christ and to be judges 
of the world— their conduct should be as far as possible 
in accord with God's standard. Everything should be 
open, honest, subject to the investigation of the Lord or 
of anybody. In thus living we shall be proving our faithfulness 
to the Lord. We must demonstrate our loyalty to 
Him by being willing to suffer rebuffs and adversity. We 
must strive most earnestly to overcome our human weaknesses 
and imperfections, and thus manifest our love for 
righteousness and for God. We see that our Lord Jesus 
is the embodiment of these glorious principles for which 
God stands; and we are to be like Him, our Pattern. 

We are to be so in love with God's gracious character 



and God's methods that we shall greatly prefer to be on 
His side, under the banner of light, rather than to be 
children of darkness, whatever its present reward. So 

R5340 : page 326 

let us walk as the children of the light— the children of 
the Day, and thus we shall be laying up treasures above, 
and shall prepare ourselves for the glorious things which 
the Lord has in reservation for those that love Him— for 
those who are seeking to walk in the Master's footsteps. 

"He will never fail us, He will not forsake; 
His eternal Covenant He will never break; 
Resting on His Promise, what have we to fear? 
God is all sufficient for the coming year. 
Onward, then, and fear not, children of the Day, 
For His Word shall never, never pass away." 

GROSS FORMS OF RIOTING AND DRUNKENNESS 

The Apostle's use of the first person— we, our, us— 
in the verses preceding our text, would seem to indicate 
very clearly that he is speaking to the Church, including 
himself. Indeed, the introduction to the Epistle shows 
this to be the case. St. Paul is here showing what should 
be the course of the Church, as in contrast with the attitude 
of the world. When he says, "Let us walk," he 
means, Let us daily progress— walk not along the lines of 
rioting and drunkenness. He does not say that the Lord's 
people may not occasionally be overtaken in a fault. But 
if they are thus overtaken, they are to know that they 
are not then walking in the footsteps of Jesus, but are for 
the time being walking in the opposite direction. 

We are to remember that the Church are at this time 
imperfect, in an embryotic state— not fully developed. 
The New Creature has as yet no body of its own, but is 
merely given possession of this earthly body, which 
is an enemy of God. The New Creature is obliged to use 
this instrumentality. As a New Creature, he will ultimately 
be judged, not according to the flesh, but according 
to the spirit, for the Lord will make up for unintentional 
blemishes. But these bodies which have been the 
instruments of sin, are to be put into the service of 
righteousness. All of our present experiences must be in 
the flesh, because we have no other instrument of service. 

Now, the Apostle says, we are to beware of rioting 
and drunkenness, for all excesses are of the world. We 
are living in a time when the bacchanalian orgies of the 
past are disapproved by the community in general. Many 
may continue to practise some of these in secret, but they 
think that it is not wise to let it in any way be public. 
And those who sympathize with liquor interests, brewers, 
saloon-keepers, etc., realize that they can no longer do as 
formerly— they can no longer continue to sell liquor to a 
person until he has reached the condition of beastly intoxication. 



All of these evils will be banished when the new 
Kingdom shall have sway. 

THE LORD'S SPIRIT A SPIRIT OF SOBRIETY 

The true Christian has the mind of the Lord, and the 
Lord's mind is thoroughly in opposition to anything in 
the nature of drunkenness of any kind. The Spirit of the 
Lord gives a sober mind, a thoughtful mind, a reasonable 
mind. All rioting and drunkenness are the result of 
inebriation, befuddling the mind. We are not to suppose 
that any New Creature would have any sympathy with 
anything of the kind. The Apostle's suggestion is not that 
some New Creatures may think this the proper course, 
but that some New Creatures may become careless in 
their walk. As the New Creature grows and has more 
experience, he should learn that the only proper course 
is to avoid all places and conditions tending to excess 
and to worldliness. He should study to have new entertainments 
for his mind, study how to turn his mind in a 
new direction, toward Heavenly things. 

While it is true that we have comparatively few of 
the orgies of olden times, it is also true that the world 
today has a more refined kind of rioting and drunkenness. 
There are social functions that might be called riotous, 
in the sense that they are unreasonable and disorderly. 
We might apply this criticism even to nominal Christianity. 
There is a certain kind of rioting mentioned in 
Revelation. We read that great Babylon made drunk the 
inhabitants of the earth with her wine. This might, in 
some cases, be a stupefaction of the mind; in other cases, 
a crazed condition. 

We once believed many things without any real ground 
at all for believing. For example, we have believed in 
fire-proof devils, eternal flames, the roasting of humanity, 
etc. Now we find that we were merely having the hobgoblins 
of nightmare. God is not using His mighty 
power for the injury and useless torture of His creatures. 
We find that we were very seriously intoxicated with the 
wine of false doctrine. We are now becoming sober. 
The people are beginning to wink and blink, and to try 
to overcome the effects of the stupefying drafts of error. 

Some have gotten out of these errors. But there are 
some who still have a kind of frenzy of mind, and some 
of these are attacking us. They launch forth as though 
they would demolish us, and they battle for the error as 
though it were the Truth. In their warfare they use the 
weapons of slander, malice, hatred, strife, and various 
other works of the flesh and of the Devil. Their choice 
of weapons is a proof that they are under a delusion, 
blinding them through false doctrine. 

RELIGIOUS INTOXICATION 

Sometimes there is rioting, even to the extent of 
hilarious conduct in meetings. We were once present at 



a religious meeting where there were all sorts of rioting, 
evil spirits and demonism. Yet the people were apparently 
sincere and honest. This occurred some years ago. 
The preacher hammered the pulpit, while two or three 
men tried to pray, etc. It was a regular pandemonium. 
The young people would go there and eat peanuts and 
snicker and giggle, seeming to consider the service a kind 
of circus. These people were evidently "drunk"— it was 
from a bad kind of "liquor," too. 

R5341 : page 326 

This principle might apply to some of those who have 
gotten free from the errors of the past. There is a spirit 
of anarchy, a lack of orderly behavior with some who 
have come into the Truth. Sometimes it will manifest 
itself in one of a Bible-Class, who will try to have his 
own way and to override the rest. He is simply rioting; 
he has not gotten rid of the wrong spirit; he has not applied 
the principle of righteousness— the Lord's Spirit, the 
spirit of a sound mind— to his conduct. 

Then sometimes it is the leader of the Class who shows 
a riotous spirit. The Scriptures very clearly set forth 
what would be proper in such a case. Each has a perfect 
right to his own opinion on any subject, but no one has a 
right to override others and try to force his opinions on 
them. To do so is contrary to the Lord's Spirit. We 
should not walk that way. We should walk prayerfully 
and carefully along the lines of the Golden Rule, doing 
unto others as we would that they should do unto us. 

Let us walk as becometh saints, showing forth more 
and more "the praises of Him who hath called us out of 
darkness into His marvelous Light." 



"Watchman, tell me, does the morning 

Of fair Zion's glory dawn? 
Have the signs that mark its coming 

Yet upon thy pathway shone? 
Pilgrim, yes! arise! look 'round thee! 

Light is breaking in the skies! 
Gird thy bridal robes around thee; 

Morning dawns! arise! arise!" 



R5341 : page 327 

OUR "CUP OF BLESSING" 

"The cup of blessing, for which we bless God, is it not a 
participation of the blood of the Anointed One? The loaf which 
we break, is it not a participation of the Body 
of the Anointed One? Because there is one 
loaf, we, the many, are one Body."— 



1 Cor. 10:16,17.-Diaglott. 

THE CUP of blessing, for which we bless 
God," is indeed a cup of blessing in many 
respects. It represents the blessed privilege 
of suffering with Christ, and the 
blessed things which will come as a reward 
of those sufferings. The Lord declares 
that the promise will have fulfilment 
in the Kingdom, when we shall share 
the Kingdom joys. 

The Church is represented as being a 
part of the great Vine which God has planted; as Jesus 
says, "I am the Vine, ye are the branches." (John 15:5.) 
Our Lord tells us of the precious fruit of this Vine, the 
development of which represents the sorrowful part of 
our experience. There is a sense in which the cup represents 
the joy which we shall have when we shall have 
passed beyond the sufferings of this present time and 
shall have entered into glory. (Matt. 26:29.) The expression, 
"for which we bless God," may be understood 
to mean, for which we give thanks and praise to the 
Lord. Whoever receives the cup without thankfulness of 
heart, without appreciation, will not get the great reward. 
In order to receive the blessing designed, we must receive 
the cup with thankfulness for this great privilege of suffering 
with Christ. 

In considering this question of the Apostle, "is it not 
a participation [common union] in the blood of Christ?" 
we should have a double thought before our minds: first, 
of the literal cup to which he refers, the literal fruit of 
the vine, which represents the blood of Christ; and second, 
the fact that we have the privilege of partaking of 
His cup, the sacrificial cup. We have the privilege of 
sharing in His death, sharing in His sufferings. This 
thought is borne out in other Scriptures— that Jesus is 
the Head of the Church which is His Body, etc. He is 
to be the great Prophet, Priest, King, Judge and Blesser 
of the world. 

According to the Scriptures, the great Head was glorified, 
after having endured the sufferings even unto death, 
after having laid down His life for the world. And He 
has adopted us as His members— members now in the 
flesh, to be His members shortly in glory. We use the 
word members in the sense that we speak of members of 
the House of Parliament. The body of Parliament has 
many members, and so the Body of Christ has many members. 
The terms on which they may make their calling 
and election sure are that they shall believe in Christ and 
shall give themselves to God. Then our Lord will adopt 
them as His members, members now on earth and afterwards 
members of Him in glory. 

"DRINK YE ALL OF IT" 

On condition, then, that we drink faithfully of this cup 



(Matt. 26:27), we shall make our "calling and election 
sure." (2 Peter 1:10.) The injunction, "Drink ye all 
of it," had a double signification: first, it must all be 
drunk before the end of the Gospel Age; and secondly, all 
who would be members of His Body must drink of it. St. 
Peter spoke of the sufferings of The Christ, Head and 
Body, which have now been going on for more than 
eighteen centuries, and of the glory that shall follow. (I Peter 1:8-12; 
4: 1 ; 5 : 1 .) As soon as the last member shall 
have passed into the Heavenly condition, all the sufferings 
of The Christ will be over, and none others will have the 
privilege of sharing in the "sufferings of Christ," even as 
some others will have the privilege of sharing in His 
glory and becoming His "Bride, the Lamb's Wife." 
It is one cup, though it contains the juice of many 
grapes; and it is one loaf, though made from many grains. 
The grains cannot retain their individuality and their life 
if they would become bread for the world. The grapes 
cannot maintain themselves as grapes if they would constitute 
the life-giving spirit. Thus we see the beauty of 
the Apostle's statement that the Lord's people are participants 
in the one loaf and the one cup. There is no other 
way by which we may attain the new nature than by accepting 
the Lord's invitation to drink His cup, and by 
being broken with Him as members of the one loaf; by 
being buried with Him in baptism into His death, and 
thus attaining with Him a resurrection to glory, honor 
and immortality, attaining unto the First Resurrection. 

THE CHURCH'S PART IN THE ONE LOAF 

The loaf represents primarily the Lord Jesus' body, 
which is broken for us and for the world in general. In 
a larger sense it includes all the Body of Christ, all who 
become His members. Thus the breaking of the loaf, the 
breaking of the Body, has continued for more than 
eighteen centuries. 

We read that in the institution of the Lord's Supper 
Jesus broke the loaf. As a matter of fact, He was the 
only one at that time who could break the loaf. All others 
of mankind were unjustified in God's sight until Jesus by 
His sacrifice and exaltation made good the deficiency of 
a certain class. So Jesus was the first to break the loaf. 
Today, as the unleavened bread at the Memorial season 
is passed to each of us, and as each takes a portion of 
it, he breaks it for himself. 

The fact that our Lord first broke the bread does 
not mean that we should not have our individual part. 
We recall that the Heavenly Father had to do with the 
breaking of our Lord's body. As it is written, "It pleased 
Jehovah to bruise Him; He hath put Him to grief." 
(Isa. 53:10.) This was not done against our Lord's will. 
While the Heavenly Father had to do with His breaking, 
so, in harmony with the Divine arrangement, the breaking 
of our share of the loaf. 

The Apostle's statement in the succeeding chapter, "Ye 



do show forth the Lord's death," applies exclusively to 
the death of Jesus. The setting of the words indicates 
that it is the Lord Jesus personally who is mentioned: 
"As often as ye eat this bread and drink this cup, ye do 
show forth the Lord's death till He come." (V.26.) 
"He is thy Lord, and worship thou Him." (Psa. 45:11.) 
The Church is never spoken of as the Lord. 

Furthermore, we are to remember that Jesus said, 
"This do in remembrance of Me." (Luke 22:19.) He 
did not say, This do in remembrance of yourselves— in 
remembrance of your own share in the sacrifice. We are 
to be dead with Him. We remember that we must share 
with Him in the sufferings of this present time if we 
would share in the glories to follow. The Father gave 
Him to be the Head— "God blessed forever."— Heb. 3:1; 
Rom. 8:17,18; 9:5. 

THE LIFE IS IN THE BLOOD 

The Scriptures say that the life is in the blood. (Lev. 17:11.) 
In harmony with that statement, the Jews were 
bidden to always refrain from eating the blood. The animals 
must be bled before they were permitted to eat the 
flesh. Nor was any stranger sojourning with them to eat 
any blood. (Lev. 17:10-14.) In this way, God would 

R5342 : page 328 

seem to say that life is a very sacred thing. This life 
principle that He gave to man, seems to reside in the 
blood. As long as the blood is passing through the organs 
of circulation, there is life; but when the blood is 
shed, the being dies. 

When our Lord laid down His earthly life, He did not 
retain a right to that earthly life in the sense of using it 
for Himself. He tells us in the parable that all who would 
gain "the pearl of great price" (Matt. 13:45,46), must sell 
all that they have; that is, all that they enjoy of earthly 
life or privileges. Our Lord had a perfect earthly life. 
He gave up that life. "He poured out His soul [life] unto 
death." (Isa. 53:12.) On what basis? On exactly the 
same basis He has put before us; if we would live, we 
must die; if we would reign, we must suffer; we must be 
dead with Him. (2 Tim. 2:1 1,12.) So we who follow 
in His steps do the same that He did. 

If we, as His disciples, lay down our life for the 
brethren, we are doing what Jesus did. This is all to be 
applied for the world. He took that earthly life, not to 
keep it, but to turn it over, eventually, to all mankind. 
The right to human life is still in His control. He is the 
One who, as the great Mediator, will give to the world of 
mankind the life He poured out. 

He now imputes His merit to the Church, that we may 
share with him in His suffering and in His glorious Kingdom, 
on the spirit plane. This cup, then, represents the 
full renunciation of earthly life and of all claim thereto. 



Our Lord's earthly life was not forfeited, but merely laid 
down. (John 10:17,18.) The intention in laying it 
down was to abandon it, personally, forever, that humanity 
might get it. He has not yet accomplished this, in 
the sense of turning life over to them, but He gave up 
His life with that purpose in view. 

UNFORFEITED EARTHLY LIFE-RIGHT 

Our Lord undertook to accomplish the Divine will in 
the redemption of the world, and He has proceeded in the 
accomplishment of it, but has not yet completed the purpose. 
He laid down His life, but did not forfeit it. When 
He was raised from the dead He still had a right to that 
earthly life, with the understanding, however, that He 
was not to use it for Himself, but that He would give that 
life to all the world who were willing to receive it, assigning 
it to them at the end of His Reign of a thousand years, 
during which His Church will Reign with Him. 

So then, His life was not taken from Him; for His 
life could be taken from Him only by His disobedience. 
(Lev. 18:5; Ezek. 20:11; Luke 10:28; Rom. 10:5.) He 
laid it down voluntarily, in harmony with the Divine 
will. He laid it down that it might become an asset in 
the hands of Divine Justice, so that when the time should 
come He might use that asset for mankind.— John 6:51. 

In the beginning it was the Divine purpose that our 
Lord's human life should be laid down forever, that He 
should not take it again. He consecrated His life at 
Jordan and finished the sacrifice at Calvary. Throughout 
the Gospel Age He has been sacrificing His Mystical 
Body. Just as soon as He shall have finished the sacrificing 
of all these Body members, then their life-right, 
which belongs to the great High Priest, will be used for 
the purchase, the redemption, of the world, by the sealing 
of the New Covenant. Immediately after this, His Kingdom 
will be established. This further application of His 
merit, His life-right, which will not be made until the 
whole Church has passed beyond the veil, is symbolized 
by the sprinkling of the Mercy Seat with the blood of the 
goat. The blood of our Lord and the blood of His Body, 
is all one blood. It is one Priest of many members. It 
is one Atonement for all— for the sins of the whole 
world.— I John 2:2. 

The blood represents not only the death of Christ, but 
also the death of all the members of His Body, to whom 
merit is imputed. This the Apostle expresses in the same 
connection, saying, "The cup of blessing which we bless, 
is it not the communion [common union, or participation] 
of the blood of Christ? The bread [loaf] which we 
break, is it not the communion [common union, participation] 
of the Body of Christ?" that is to say, a union 
in common with Him, a partnership, as represented in the 
cup and in the bread [loaf]. The whole matter has its 
origin in Him. But we are celebrating also our own individual 
share as members of the Church in the sacrifice of 



the flesh, in our participation in the sufferings of Christ. 



R5342 : page 328 

SIGNIFICANCE OF EATING OUR LORD'S FLESH AND OF 
DRINKING HIS BLOOD 

"Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and 
drink His blood, ye have no life in you."— John 6:53. 

IN THIS chapter the Lord is addressing the 
Jews, who believed not on Him, but murmured 
because He told them He was the 
true Bread from Heaven. His expression, 
"eat the flesh and drink the blood," had a 
deep spiritual significance which none but 
Israelites indeed could receive. And this 
is still true today. The world, when dealt 
with in the next Age, by Jesus, will indeed 
have the opportunity to eat of His flesh- 
to appropriate the merits of His sacrifice; but they will 
have no opportunity of sharing in His Cup— of drinking 
His blood. Symbolically, the Cup signifies the sacrificed 
life. The world will have no share in the sufferings of 
Christ, represented in the Cup. 

Our Lord's words imply, If you accept My proposition 
of the Gospel Age, you may have life, and have it more 
abundantly than man has ever had it or could have it. 
You may have inherent life— "life in you." 

THE TWO SALVATIONS PICTURED 

There is a difference, we believe, maintained in the 
Scriptures between the bread, which symbolizes the Lord's 
flesh, and the wine, which symbolizes His blood. The 
Church, in order to be accepted of the Lord as members 
of His glorified Body, must share in both of these by 
participation. The loaf, as the Apostle explains, not only 
represents to us our Lord, as the Bread of Life necessary 
for us, but it also represents us as His members to be 
broken as our Lord was broken; and the wine represents 
not only our Lord's blood, but also the blood of the 
Church— that we are sharers with him in His sacrificial 
sufferings.— I Cor. 10:16,17. 

The privilege of sharing our Lord's Cup is not for the 
world. They will not share in the sufferings of Christ, 
because all opportunity to share in His sufferings and 
glory will have ended when the Church is glorified. The 
Lord said, "Drink ye all of it"— drink it all. There will 
be none for the world to drink. And we who are of the 
Church class "fill up that which is [left] behind of the 
afflictions of Christ."-Col. 1:24. 

"The flesh of the Son of Man" represents Restitution 
to human privileges, i. e., the means to its attainment, and 



R5342 : page 329 

restores to man the life which he had forfeited— the life 
lost in Adam— human life, earthly life. It will be the gift 
of God through Christ. But the supplying of this Bread 
will not be sufficient. The world will need to eat of the 
Bread and to have the assistance the Lord will give them 
through His Kingdom. Jesus said (V.51), "I am the 
living Bread which came down from Heaven; if any 
man eat of this Bread, he shall live forever." 

From one viewpoint the world may be spoken of as 
not dead. They have lost their right to life, but God has 
made arrangements through Jesus by which that life will 
be restored. It was lost in Adam, but will be restored 
through Christ, the second Adam. During these six 
thousand years the world has been in a starved and fallen 
condition. But God has provided this Bread and it will 
be for them in the Millennial Age. 

It is not shown symbolically anywhere in the Scriptures 
that the world will partake of the blood, and thus 
participate in the sufferings of Christ. Only a few are 
represented as partaking of the blood. This is shown in 
Leviticus 16. The blood sprinkled the second time on the 
Mercy-Seat is for all the people, thus satisfying Justice. 
This represented the release of all humanity from the 
sentence of death, giving all an opportunity to eat of the 
Bread and not die. 

In another picture, we find the blood used representing 
man's acceptance of the Divine arrangement. In the sealing 
of the Law Covenant, which is a type of the New 
Covenant, Moses first sprinkled the books of the Law, 
representing the satisfaction of Justice. Then with the 
same blood he afterwards sprinkled all the people. (Heb. 9:19; 
Exod. 24:8.) The sprinkling of the books of the books of the 
Law required only a few seconds; but the sprinkling of 
the people required a long time. 

At the beginning of the Millennial Age— as soon as the 
Church is joined to her Head beyond the veil— the blood 
will be sprinkled to satisfy Justice for the world. Then, 
as the Mediator, Christ will proceed to do a work for all 
who will receive it. And that work is symbolically represented 
as sprinkling the people with the blood. In other 
words, every member of the race will be privileged to 
come into Covenant relationship with God through the 
Mediator, by accepting the terms which He will hold forth 
during the Millennial Reign. 

MOST VALUABLE FOOD AND DRINK KNOWN 

If they meet the requirements during Messiah's Reign, 
by the close of that period they will be perfect; and He 
will present them before the Father, and all will be received 
into full covenant relationship with Him, who endure 
faithfully the test then applied. 

In our context (V.54), we read, "Whoso eateth My 



flesh, and drinketh My blood, hath eternal life." Our 

R5343 : page 329 

Lord's statements in many instances are made so broad 
that they cover, not only the Little Flock, but the Great 
Company as well, and therein show great wisdom. In this 
verse the Lord does not say, "hath eternal life" in him; 
for of those who now make a Covenant of sacrifice, and 
become sharers of the Cup as well as of the Bread, there 
are some who will not attain to inherence of life— immortality 
—but who will come through great tribulations 
and attain life on a lower spirit plane. They will not have 
inherent life, though it will be everlasting life. Those 
who attain immortality will have eternal life, on the highest 
plane. Those of the Great Company will have eternal 
life, but not immortality— not life in themselves. 

When our Lord said, "For My flesh is meat indeed, 
and My blood is drink indeed" (V.55), we understand 
Him to mean that this is the most valuable food and drink 
ever known. No other bread has such value, and no 
other drink could be so precious as this, by the partaking 
of which one may attain to glory, honor and immortality 
—the Divine nature, life in itself. 

ANTITYPICAL SHOWERS OF MANNA 

The Bread from Heaven was our Lord's flesh, which 
He was to give for the life of the world. And Jesus explains 
this to be what was typified by the manna that 
fell in the wilderness. He said, "Your fathers did eat 
manna [in the wilderness], and are dead. He that eateth 
of this Bread shall live forever." He also said (John 12:24), 
"Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and 
die, it abideth alone; but if it die, it bringeth forth much 
fruit." And He did fall into the earth and die. And we 
become sharers with Him in His death. We participate 
in His sufferings and death, which the world will never 
do. They share in its outcome. 

All the work of this Gospel Age, is the getting ready 
of the food for the world, and of the blood which will be 
sprinkled upon them. But the Message of our Lord in 
our text was not intended for the world. As He tells us, 
"Unto you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom 
of Heaven." 

It is only a special class who could know anything 
about the Mystery of God all through these nineteen 
hundred years— the two millenniums. These things have 
been hidden from the world in general. But now we believe 
that the time is here when they are to be given to 
the world, making the world conscious of the blessing that 
God has in store for them soon. The Scriptures tell 
us that the Mystery will be unfolded during the sounding 
of the seventh trumpet— which is now sounding. This 
making of these truths known, therefore, would seem to 
be the showering of the manna. 



R5345 : page 329 

HOW ISRAEL CROSSED JORDAN 

--NOVEMBER 30.-JOSHUA 3:7-17.- 

"Fear thou not; for I am with thee."— Isaiah 41:10. 

UNDER Divine direction, the hosts of Israel 

removed from the high bench of the Jordan 

Valley down to the river three days in advance 

of the time appointed for the crossing. 

The Jordan River, as usual at this 

season, was overflowing its banks. Ordinarily 

about ninety feet wide, it is supposed 

to have been about five hundred feet wide 

at this time. 

The Canaanites in general and the people 
of Jericho in particular, although expecting an invasion, 
would not expect it at a time when the river was 
impassable and when bridges were little known. The 
Israelites, too, must have had various opportunities for 
exercising faith or doubt in respect to soon entering 
Canaan. The fact that nothing is mentioned respecting 
doubts or fears or murmurings implies that their experiences 
in the wilderness had taught them valuable lessons 
of faith in God and trust in Divine appointments. 

The crossing day came, and Joshua, by Divine instruction, 
directed the priests to bear the Ark and to go before 
the people, proceeding to the brink of the river until their 
feet were in the water. As their feet touched the water, 
it began to recede and they to advance, until finally they 

R5345 : page 330 

stood in the middle of the stony bed of the Jordan, still 
bearing the Ark of the Covenant, which represented the 
Divine promise under which they had left Egypt and were 
hoping for grand results. 

The hosts of Israel, lining the banks of the Jordan for 
miles, crossed over from Moab to Canaan. Thus the 
crossing was entirely accomplished. Twelve large stones, 
representing the twelve tribes, were taken from the bed 
of the Jordan and piled on the shore as a monument or 
memorial of God's aid, while twelve stones from the 
shore were placed in the bed of the river as a similar 
memorial. Finally the priests followed the people to the 
Canaan shore, and shortly thereafter the waters began to 
return to the river bed, as before. 

HOW THE MIRACLE WAS DONE 

The fact that we may now know with considerable 



certainty just how this miracle was performed should 
not in the least detract from its value. With God nothing 
would be a miracle, since He of His own power is able 
to accomplish His will in every respect. Many things are 
miracles simply because we do not understand the Divine 
processes. We are miracles ourselves, fearfully and wonderfully 
made. The growth of the plant, the flower, or 
even a blade of grass, is a miracle to us— something wholly 
beyond our power, and in a general way considerably 
beyond our comprehension as a process. 

The account tells plainly that the heaping up of the 
waters was in the direction of Adam. This place has been 
located with considerable certainty by Prof. Wright as 
situated seventeen miles above Jericho, on the Jordan. 
The waters became in a heap, a lake, the Professor 
assures us, by reason of a land-slide which choked the 
narrow passage in the river, where there were steep banks. 
The character of the soil in that vicinity would be favorable 
to the blocking of the narrow channel of the Jordan 
there by the slipping of the hillsides. Indeed, history tells 
us that a similar slide took place in the same vicinity in 
A.D. 1267, damming up the Jordan for several hours and 
leaving the bed of the river below quite dry, the waters 
draining off to the Dead Sea. 

Prof. Wright says, "So striking is this conformity of 
the facts to the conditions indicated by the Biblical account, 
that geologists can find but little difficulty in believing 
the written record. At the same time the written 
record is so precise itself, and so free from fantastic 
elements that the literary critic cannot well consider it 
as anything but the original, unvarnished tale of an 
eyewitness." 

The marvel of the story is that the Divine marching 
orders were so timed as to suit the circumstances and 
conditions exactly. 

THE LESSON WAS IMPRESSED 

The memorial stones were to bear witness to future 
generations of this great act of Divine providence on 
behalf of Israel. Joshua admonished, "When your children 
shall ask their fathers in time to come, saying, What 
mean these stones? then ye shall let your children know, 
saying, Israel came over this Jordan on dry land. For 
the Lord your God dried up the waters of Jordan from 
before you, until ye were passed over, as the Lord your 
God did to the Red Sea, which He dried up from before 
us, until we were gone over: that all the people of the 
earth might know the hand of the Lord, that it is mighty; 
that ye might fear the Lord forever."— Joshua 4:21-24. 

ENTERING INTO CANAAN REST 

St. Paul, in Hebrews 4:5-8, gives us the suggestion 
that Israel's entrance of Canaan under the leadership of 
Joshua typified the entrance of the Church into the rest 



of faith and special privilege under the leadership of the 

antitypical Joshua, Jesus. The Israelites had rest from 

their wilderness journeyings. It was a wonderful change 

for them, a blessed change, yet it was not the full realization 

of all that God had promised them. That full realization 

will be attained only in Eden itself, and as a result 

of Messiah's glorious work of Restitution. Following the 

Apostle's lead, we perceive that the experiences of Israel 

up to the time when Moses died represented the Law Dispensation, 

which ended at the Cross. The Gospel Dispensation, 

beginning at Pentecost, is typified by the crossing 

of Jordan and the taking possession of the land, 

Canaan signifying rest. 

"We who believe do enter into rest"— in proportion to 
our exercise of faith. He who exercises much faith may 
have much rest, and may conquer, and possess quietude. 
He who has less faith will have less rest and will be able 
only partially to enter upon his privileges. The storming 
of Jericho and the other cities of Canaan typified the warfare 
of the New Creature, begotten of the Holy Spirit, 
against the things of the flesh, the desires of the flesh, 
the weaknesses and depravities of the flesh. The Lord's 
word to those who would enter into His rest is, "Be 
strong and of good courage. Be not afraid, neither be 
thou dismayed. The Lord thy God is with thee, whithersoever 
thou goest." 

Those lacking faith entered not at all into Canaan, but 
died in the wilderness. So we read, "Israel hath not 
obtained that which he seeketh for, but the Election hath 
obtained it, and the rest were blinded." Only the faithful 
will constitute God's Elect. Only these can pass from the 
old to the new conditions. Only these pass from death unto 
life without actually dying. Throughout this Gospel Age, 
God has been making up Israel's deficit by calling a similar 
class from all nations, peoples, kindreds and tongues. 
Each one is called upon to exercise faith and cross over 
Jordan, in the sense of beginning a new life— a life of 
devotion to God, a life of warfare against sin and the 
entrenched weaknesses of his own flesh. 

We agree with the Apostle's words that "We who believe 
do enter into rest." All of God's consecrated people 
can testify that they have a rest, a peace, a joy, a blessing, 
which the world can neither give nor take away— 
and this in proportion to their loyalty and faithfulness. 
Yet even all this is not sufficient. God has in reservation 
something far better. Respecting this the Apostle declares, 
"There remaineth, therefore, a rest for the people 
of God. "--Hebrews 4:9. 

That Heavenly rest will be entered by the perfecting 
of the New Creatures in the First Resurrection. Their 
loyalty and faithfulness having been demonstrated in 
fighting the good fight of faith against the world, the 
flesh and the Adversary, the Lord promises them a glorious 
change, "in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye"— 
a share in His own resurrection to the perfection of the 
Divine nature, "far above angels, principalities and 



powers" and in association with Himself in the glorious 
Messianic Kingdom, by which the world of mankind is 
also to be blessed.— Luke 12:32. 

THE SABBATH OF THE LORD 

St. Paul intimates that the seventh day of the Law 
Sabbath typified the present condition of the Lord's people 
enjoying rest, peace and Divine favor even under imperfect 
conditions; but the true Sabbath will come for 
us when we shall have experienced our resurrection 
change. Then we shall have rest from sin. We shall 
also have rest from our own weaknesses and imperfections; 

R5346 : page 331 

for all of these will be gone. The New Creatures 
will be beings without flaw, blameless and irreprovable. 
"It is sown in weakness; it is raised in power. It is sown 
in dishonor; it is raised in glory. It is sown a natural 
body; it is raised a spiritual body." 

The weaknesses of others will no longer cause us 
unrest. The rest of the glorified condition of the Church 
will be perfect. But before we can enter into that rest, 
we must here show our worthiness by fighting the good 
fight of faith and by laying hold on eternal life, upon 
the conditions which are offered us, walking faithfully in 
the Master's footsteps. 



R5343 : page 331 

THE FALL OF JERICHO 

-DECEMBER 7.-JOSHUA 6:8-1 1,14-20.- 

"All things are possible to him 
that believeth."-Mark 9:23. 

JERICHO was a walled city situated about five 
miles from the Jordan. It was small, as 
cities are now estimated; but its wall was 
a necessity, owing to frequent incursions 
from Syria on the one side, and Egypt on 
the other; and because it was situated on 
one of the main lines of travel leading to a 
mountain pass. It is described as having 
been very rich, not only in precious metals, 
but also in expensive fabrics, clothing, etc. 

The Lord's decree in respect to Jericho and all the 
other cities of Canaan was that they were devoted— 
cherem. The Israelites were not led into Canaan to do 
a pillaging work. They were to be the executioners of 
the Divine decree against the people of Canaan, who 
were divided up into little principalities, each city constituting 



the center of a principality. According to history, 
they were continually at war with each other, and 
atrociously corrupt, after the manner of the Sodomites. 
They were to be destroyed as no longer advantageous in 
the conditions in which they were living, either to themselves 
or others. God took them away as He saw good. 

In the great prison-house of Sheol, the tomb, they 
would wait for the more favorable time of Messiah's 
Kingdom and the release and assistance out of degradation 
and death promised to all mankind through Abraham's 
seed: "In thy Seed shall all the families of the earth 
be blessed." 

The Israelites, as executioners of the Divine decrees, 
were to destroy the cities of Canaan and all their inhabitants, 
their animals and all their property. The exceptions 
were the things of metal; and these were not 
to be appropriated by the Israelites to their own use, but 
were consecrated in advance to the Lord for the furnishment 
and adornment of the Tabernacle and the Temple. 

"CAPTAIN OF THE LORD'S HOST" 

After crossing Jordan, the Israelites encamped about 
midway between the river and Jericho, the latter city 
having shut up its gates tightly, expecting to endure a 
long siege. Joshua was aware that the first place of 
attack was Jericho, but evidently was not aware of the 
character of the siege and of the way in which it 
would be overthrown. While reconnoitering in the vicinity 
of Jericho, he came upon an armed soldier, and at 
once inquired whether he was a friend or a foe to Israel. 
The answer was that he was the Captain of the Lord's 
host. One of the angels had been commissioned to 
materialize— to appear as a human being and to wear 
human garments and armor— for the purpose of communicating 
the Divine plans to Joshua. 

We are to remember that the Bible relates frequent 
manifestations of this kind— spirit beings hiding their 
personality while assuming human bodies, human clothing, 
etc., in which they ate, talked, etc., as men. We remember 
that it was after this same manner that the Lord 
Jesus after His resurrection appeared to His disciples in 
various forms, sometimes similar to His crucified body, 
but more often otherwise— as the gardener, a way-farer, 
etc. Similarly, three spirit beings appeared to Abraham 
on one occasion— not only in human bodies, but wearing 
human apparel. And they ate and talked with Abraham 
(Genesis 18:8,9), and he knew not that they were angels 
until subsequently they revealed their identity. 

Through this Heavenly messenger the Divine plan for 
the capture of Jericho was revealed to Joshua. He immediately 
put it into execution. Every day there was 
a solemn procession around the doomed city. First went 
a military escort from the various tribes. Next followed 
a company of priests blowing rams' horns, making shrill 
noises. Then came a further procession— a rear guard— 



presumably warriors. In harmony with explicit directions 
not a voice was raised, not a threat nor a shout. Everything 
connected with the matter was most solemn and 
funeral, except the blowing on the rams' horns, which 
were the same as were used in announcing each new year, 
but especially and peculiarly used in the Jubilee year. 

These solemn funeral processions encompassed Jericho 
once every day for six days. Then on the seventh day 
they went about the city seven times, the last time 
vociferously shouting— the seven priests blowing upon the 
rams' horns. When they had made the seventh circle of 
the city they stopped in front of it, still blowing; and 
forthwith the wall of the city crumbled and fell. The 
translation of our Common Version, "down flat," seems 
too strong a statement to represent properly the original. 
The walls of the city crumbled and fell immediately in 
front of the Ark. But not all the wall fell; for the account 
tells that the portion of the wall where Rahab's 
house was built did not fall. (Cf. Joshua 2:15-19.) The 
wall fell to such a degree that Israel's soldiers were able 
easily and quickly to surmount it and accomplish the work 
of destruction which the Lord had commanded. 

Is it suggested that such an event would be preposterous? 
If so, we reply that everything in the Divine 
purpose can easily enough be accomplished under the 
Divine supervision. Quite probably the tremor of an 
earthquake, under Divine direction, caused the fall of 
Jericho's wall in front of the Israelites. When we consider 
all the circumstances as related in the Bible, it does 
not seem at all impossible that God thus intervened for the 
carrying out of His own purposes. 

Prof. Wright declares, "The 'mediate' cause of the 
fall of the wall was some subterranean earthquake, which 
shook down the walls of the part of the city where the 
men were standing, or undermined them so that they 
sank. This is easily possible in that region of earthquakes." 
Prof. Lawson describes similar results from 
earthquakes near San Francisco, saying, "The earth waves 
which passed through the highly elastic rocks swiftly 
with a small amplitude seem in this material to have been 
transformed into slow undulations of great amplitude, 
which were excessively destructive." 

Prof. Wright adds, "All the chimneys of the place 
[Oakland] were thrown down, and the bricks were scattered 

R5344 : page 332 

around over the yard as grains of wheat would be 

when falling from the hands of the sower. The record 

is that at the appointed time the walls [of Jericho] fell; 

and we are free to believe that the catastrophe was connected 

with an earthquake, which was made to synchronize 

with the final blasts of the rams' horns. In the light 

of history and geological conditions of this region, the 

story bears every mark of being a genuine and authentic 

account of an event so remarkable that it could not have 



been modified by tradition without rendering it fantastic 
and incredible. To the geologist who believes in God, 
it is perfectly reasonable. To the textual critic, the freedom 
from fantastic comment marks it as having been 
unadorned by tradition." 

There seems to be a typical significance connected 
with the capture of Jericho. In a sense it is made to 
represent all the cities of Canaan as their capital. The 
six days of the quiet marching around the city, with 
nothing accomplished except the witnessing, represents 
the six great Days of the larger Week— each Day a 
thousand years long. During the world's history, Sin 
has been entrenched and impregnable. The Lord's people 
have merely given witness against it— blowing the trumpets 
—giving forth the Bible Message that ultimately Sin 
shall be destroyed— "All the wicked will God destroy." 
They shall perish "like natural brute beasts." "They shall 
be punished with everlasting destruction"— "the Second 
Death. "-Psalm 145:20; 2 Peter 2:12; 2 Thessalonians 1:9; 
Revelation 20:14. 

But little has resulted from all the witnessing. We are 
waiting for the great Seventh Day— the thousand years 
of Messiah's Reign. In it the citadel of evil will be surrounded 
seven times, or completely. The shout of victory 
will go up; and the strong walls of sin and error, of 
Satan's falsehood, of human deception, will fall. Satan 
shall be bound a thousand years, to deceive the world 
no more, and every evil thing and principle and all who 
love sin will be forever destroyed in the Second Death. 
Thus will be ushered in the glorious epoch for which 
we so long have waited and prayed, in which there shall 
be no more curse, no more sighing, crying or dying. 

That victory will be under the guidance and direction 
of Immanuel, the Captain of the Lord's host, the Captain 
of our salvation. Christ and the Church will then be 
beyond the veil in the glory of the Kingdom on the spirit 
plane; but there will be representatives of the Kingdom 
on the earthly plane, though their rule and direction will 
be under the guidance and instruction of the spiritual 
ones— of the glorified. The Scriptures are very clear in 
their indication that none will belong to the Heavenly 
company in the resurrection except such as have been 
begotten of the Holy Spirit during this Gospel Age- 
beginning with Pentecost. 

The glorious characters who preceded Jesus and the 
Church, like John the Baptist, may be friends of the 
Bridegroom and friends of the Bride class, but themselves 
belong to another class. Since no one was begotten 
of the Holy Spirit before the Sacrifice of Calvary, none 
could possibly be born of the Spirit previously. St. Paul 
declares that glorious blessings are coming for all those 
noble characters of the past, such as Moses and others 
whom he enumerates in Hebrews 11. He concludes the 
story of their life and blessing by assuring the Church 
that these Ancient Worthies apart from us (the Church) 
shall not be made perfect. God has provided some better 



thing for us (the Church). Our better portion is the 
attainment of the spirit nature, like unto the angels, but 
far above angels, sharers with our Redeemer in His 
glory and immortality. 

The reward of the Ancient Worthies, however, will be 
glorious. Brought back from the tomb perfect as human 
beings, they will be grand ensamples to the world of what 
Restitution will mean to all who will come into harmony 
with Messiah's Kingdom. And their portion and honor 
will be to represent that Kingdom as Princes or Rulers 
in all the earth.— Psalm 45:16. 

How munificent are the Divine arrangements! Our 
great Creator is the Fountain of blessings, pouring out 
His mercies and favors on every hand. Our Lord Jesus, 
the great Captain of our salvation, who manifested His 
loyalty to the Father even unto the death of the cross, 
has already attained the highest position, next to Jehovah. 
The faithful Church, walking in the footsteps of the 
Redeemer in the narrow way of self-sacrifice, will be 
next to Him in His glory and Kingdom. Then, on every 
man in his own order, the Divine blessings will shower 
for a thousand years, to the uplifting of all out of sin 
and degradation back to the perfection of Adam in his 
Edenic home. The result will be "glory to God in the 
highest, on earth peace, good will amongst men"; for all 
contrary-minded shall be destroyed from amongst the people 
in the Second Death.— Acts 3:23. 



R5344 : page 332 

MAMMON THE PRINCIPLE OF SELFISHNESS 

"No man can serve two masters."— Matt. 6:24. 

A MAN may endeavor to serve two masters, 

or more, but no one can be a satisfactory 

servant to more than one master. 

No two interests are so completely one that 

the service of either would not more or less 

detract from the service of the other. The 

Lord explained this matter in His Sermon 

on the Mount. He tells us that one of the 

masters to whom He refers in our text is 

God, the Heavenly Father, and the other 

is Mammon— selfishness and sin, together with all that 

is connected with unrighteousness— everything contrary 

to God and His righteousness. 

As a matter of fact, we are born in slavery to Sin. 
The Scriptures inform us that we were sold into this 
slavery by the disobedience of our first parents. Sin, 
therefore, has a hold upon the entire world of mankind. 
They are all slaves. It is impossible for them to deliver 
themselves from the thraldom of this slavery; for it is 
everywhere— the world around. 



Some are loyal to the interests of evil; but the great 
majority are at heart disloyal to Mammon, realizing that 
in serving self they are opposing God. But at the same 
time, those who serve Mammon, selfishness, get the best 
in the political sphere, the best in the ecclesiastical sphere, 
the best in the social sphere, and the best in the financial 
sphere. Selfishness succeeds at the present time. All 
human arrangements are along the lines of selfishness. 
Whoever, then, works along these lines serves himself 
better than if he were not selfish. Otherwise he would 
have his fellow-creatures in opposition to him, misunderstanding 
him, etc. 

But Jesus inaugurated a new order of things. He 
declared that God is ready to receive back to Himself 
those who forsake sin and believe on Him. He tells 
them that He will redeem them; and that as many as will 

R5344 : page 333 

accept His gracious arrangement will be set free. "If 
the Son shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed." 

SELFISHNESS CHARACTERISTIC OF SATAN 

Most people have selfishness so ingrained in their own 
natures and so mixed up in all with which they have to 
do, socially and otherwise, that to the majority of those 
who heard our Lord the Message seemed foolish. It was 
foolishness to them that our Lord should lose His life, 
that He should waste His life, and accomplish nothing. 
Consequently they thought it a waste of energy for any 
to become His companions, and they continued to serve 
Mammon, not knowing that they were serving the Devil. 

The Mammon principle, the selfish principle, is of 
Satan. But he carefully hides his cloven foot, and makes 
himself to appear as an angel of light. When he is inviting 
people to take his way, the way of selfishness, he 
is at the same time misrepresenting God. And all those 
who take our Lord's way are held up to ridicule; for the 
Prince of this world has much power. Those who serve 
him cannot see that any other way would be reasonable 
or proper. Hence the difference between the children 
of light and the children of darkness. 

Satan sets himself up as an angel of light; but his 
servants cannot see this, and thus he has them continually 
at a disadvantage. He says, "You need not serve Mammon; 
but be moderate in your course. Serve the present 
things. Do a little on this side and a little on that." 
And they say, "We will really in our hearts serve God; 
but outwardly we must serve Mammon. Otherwise we 
shall have trouble in continuing to be worldly-wise— if 
the world sees that we are serving God." Many have 
attempted this double course. This principle has been 
manifested all through the Gospel Age. If there had been 
no cause for Jesus to use these words, we may be sure 
He would not have used them. Jesus is here telling us 



that we cannot be faithful and acceptable servants to the 
world if we would be loyal to God; and we cannot be 
satisfactory to God if we give our hearts to Mammon. 

The majority of Christian people are in this attitude 
today. They try to serve God; and yet they try to be 
worldly-wise, and to shape their conduct and their affairs 
of the present life in harmony with the present order of 
Mammon. The Lord would have them know that it is 
impossible to serve God and Mammon. He has promised 
to pay wages to those who serve Him. They must know 
that there can be no middle course, so far as God is concerned. 
Mammon might be willing to give a partial reward 
for partial service. But so far as Jesus is concerned, 
our service must be undivided. 

Whomsoever the Son makes free will be free indeed. 
In the world they will have tribulation. But they will have 
the peace which passes all understanding. Others cannot 
appreciate their blessings, their real condition. If any 
one should try to serve two masters, his heart would go 

R5345 : page 333 

out to the one or to the other; for he would more and 

more detest his condition. If he were liberated by the 

Son, and fully enlisted in His service, he would come 

more and more into sympathy with the Divine arrangement, 

with the Justice, Wisdom and Love exercised by 

the Heavenly Father in His gracious Plan; and the appreciation 

of this would more and more fill him, so that he 

would have no time for worldly things. 



page 333 

HOLIDAY REMEMBRANCERS 

OUR gifts should in some sense of the word 
always represent ourselves. All who recognize 
themselves as New Creatures should 
have this in mind at this season of the year. 
We refresh your memories by the following 
brief announcements of items we carry in 
stock, additional to our general stock of 
Bibles and Bible Study Helps mentioned 
on the reverse side of this page of THE 
WATCH TOWER: 

"Studies in the Scriptures." India paper edition, fine 
leather binding, gold edges, light, small, beautiful, $4.80 (1L), 
postpaid. 

"Studies in the Scriptures." Morocco, over boards, gold 
edges, but on paper the same as the ordinary cloth edition, 
suitable for book-shelf, $3.60 (15s) per set of six volumes, 
postpaid. 

"Studies," Volume I., with Pyramid Chapter added. This 
special edition is very suitable for presentation to uninterested 



friends. Many have had their interest awakened by the reading 
of the Pyramid Chapter. We recommend this Volume 
for gift purposes. Postpaid 50c. (2s Id), but, to stimulate 
its wide circulation, we offer ten copies for $3.50 (14s 7d), 
postpaid. 

"Poems of Dawn." Nearly three hundred very choice 
poems topically divided, the very thing each should have near 
him for a leisure moment. The value of these as spiritual 
stimulants is inestimable. They can be appreciated by all 
Christians, though of course especially by those possessing a 
knowledge of Present Truth. Postpaid in cloth binding 25c. 
(Is); leather-bound 50c. (2s Id). 

"In the Garden of the Lord." This little booklet is a 
choice poem from the pen of Sister Seibert. It contains sixteen 
colored illustrations, twenty-four pages. Postpaid 6c. 
(3d) each; per dozen 65c. (2s 8d). 

"The Sweet Briar Rose." A poem by Sister Seibert, with 
a commendation of "The Divine Plan of the Ages." Postpaid 
2c. (Id) each; per hundred 50c. (2s Id). 

Choice Motto Cards for home embellishment and spiritual 
refreshment. 

Packet Mz, containing fifteen small cards with different 
texts, postpaid 50c. (2s Id). 

Number Mv, containing eight small and three large-sized 
cards, 50c. (2s Id). 

Number Ma, containing fifteen small and six a little 
larger sized cards, $1 (4s 2d). 

Number Mb, containing six small, six a little larger and 
three medium-sized motto cards, $1 (4s 2d). 

Number Mc, containing six small and six medium-sized 
cards, $1 (4s 2d). 

Number Md, containing six small, six a little larger and 
three large cards, $1 (4s 2d). 

Number Me, containing four large cards, $1 (4s 2d). 

Where $5 (LI lOd) worth of these are sent to one address 
the saving in package and expressage would be 50c, making 
the price $4.50 (18s 9d). Order by number only. 

Postcards. Assorted mottoes and designs, 15c. (7-l/2d) 
per dozen; $1.15 (4s lOd) per hundred. 

Memory Cards. We have two different sets of these— 
No. 1 and No. 2. Colors of the cards indicate the topic. As 
for instance, purple represents royalty and the Kingdom, 
garnet represents the redeeming blood, etc. On one side of 
the cards are texts appropriate to the color. On the reverse 
side of the card is the citation of where it is found. Fifty 
cards to the pack, 25c. (Is Id) per pack, postpaid. These can 
be used personally or with a company of friends. The design 
is to commit the text to memory and its citation. Many have 
found these very useful. 

Jerusalem Remembrancers of Olivewood. Brother Russell 
purchased a quantity of these on the occasion of his last visit 
to Jerusalem. We still have some remaining— paper knives 
and paper weights made of olivewood highly polished. Postpaid 
10c. (5d) each. In quantities, 80c. (3s 4d) per dozen. 

ASSIST US BY REMEMBERING TO: 



Write your letters and your full address very plainly. 

Write your orders on a separate sheet of paper. 

If answering a letter marked File A, File R, or otherwise, 
refer to it in the opening paragraph of your letter. 

The Editor thanks you for clippings received from time 
to time, but requests that in every case the articles be marked 
to indicate the name of the paper in which they appeared, 
and the date. 



page 334 

"I.B.S.A." BIBLES AND OTHER BIBLE STUDY HELPS 

First in this list we mention the several volumes of 
"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" SERIES 
[SEE OVER] 

We commend also, as aids, the following publications (not all our own), 
which we supply at specially low prices because of the assistance they 
lend to the study of God's Word. We mention these somewhat in the 
order in which they seem to us to be desirable aids. 

OUR SPECIAL "I.B.S.A." BIBLE 

Hereafter to distinguish our own special edition from other 
Bibles, we will refer to it as the "I.B.S.A." Bible. This Bible is 
becoming more and more indispensable to all readers as they learn 
how to use it. The translation, of course, is not at all different from 
that of other Bibles of the Common Version. 
We specially recommend it for its smallness 
of size, lightness of weight, and good-sized 
print, and above all for the helps to Bible 
students and teachers bound with it; printed 
on India paper; excellent press work. Its 
special feature, distinguishing this Bible from 
all others, is 

BIBLE TEACHERS' MANUAL. 
Parti. 

Biblical Comments from Genesis to Revelation, 
with references to the STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES and others of our publications 
showing the page where the text is more 
fully discussed and elaborated. We can 
scarcely imagine anything more helpful than 
these for Bible study. It is so easy to turn 
to the reference and ascertain if the matter 
has been treated and where and how. It represents 
four hundred and eighty-one pages 
of matter. 

Part II. 



INSTRUCTORS' GUIDE TEXTS. 

This is a topical arrangement of Bible 
subjects specially convenient for those who 
have opportunity for teaching others the 
Divine Plan of the Ages. Its various Topics 
are arranged under distinct headings and the 
various texts bearing upon the subjects are 
collated. With this help a novice has at his 
command, well-furnished, "the Sword of the 
Spirit." It is in condensed form, very convenient, 
and consists of eighteen pages solid 
matter. 

Part III. 

BEREAN TOPICAL INDEX. 

The Berean Topical Index, alphabetically 
arranged, presents a large variety of subjects 
showing references to the STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES and others of our publications 
treating the same. This feature covers twenty-eight 
pages. 

Part IV. 

DIFFICULT TEXTS EXPLAINED. 

SPURIOUS PASSAGES NOTED. 

In this, specially difficult texts are brought 
to the attention and references given showing 
where they are treated in our publications. 
Following this is a full list of various 
interpolations and spurious passages of the 
Scriptures not in the original MSS., as 
proven by the oldest Greek MSS.— fifteen 
pages. 

These four features, representing five hundred 
and forty-two pages, are not to be found 
in any other Bibles on earth and, in our 
opinion, they are of almost priceless value. 
One of our interested readers if he could not 
procure another would not sell his copy for 
a hundred dollars— many of them surely 
would not take thousands for it. 

All of our "I.B.S.A." Bibles contain the 
above, and some of them, the numbers of which end with a nine, contain 
additionally Bagster's Bible Study Helps, including an alphabetical 
index of proper names and Bagster's Bible Concordance and Maps— a 
total of one hundred and eighty-six pages. 

We not only supply these Bibles at cost price, but, because of 
the large quantities ordered at a time, we are enabled to secure a 
cost price which is really phenomenal. The very low prices must not 
lead you to think that these are manufactured in any slipshod manner. 
They are first class in every particular. The prices are, many of them, 
less than one-half of what you pay for such books almost anywhere else. 

So great is the demand for these "I.B.S.A." Bibles that hereafter 



we purpose carrying no others in stock except pocket Bibles and 
large type Bibles for the aged. We will still, however, be pleased to 
serve anyone who desires other Bibles. We can procure for these 
wholesale rates, usually twenty-five per cent, off, plus postage. 

DESCRIPTION AND PRICES-"I.B.S.A." BIBLES 

1918, price $1.65, postage prepaid, is a beautiful book. It is small 
and light. Size 4-3/4 x 6-3/4 inches. It has minion type, red under gold 
edges, divinity circuit, French Seal. Looks like the genuine sealskin, 
but it is in reality good sheepskin. 

Number 1919, price $1.75, postage prepaid; the same book, the 
same Bible; the same every way except the addition of Bagster Helps, 
Concordances, etc., making this size a trifle larger. 

Number 1928, price $2.65, postage prepaid. This is the same 
book exactly as number 1918, except that it has genuine morocco binding 
leather-lined. 

LITTLE LARGER, IONIC TYPE, SELF-PRONOUNCING 

Number 1939, price $1.95, postage prepaid. This is the same book 
as 1919, the same binding and contents, but it has a coarser print and 
is a little larger book. Size, 5-1/2 x 7-1/2 inches. 

Number 1959, price $3.65, postage prepaid. This is the same book 
as 1939 except that it has splendid morocco binding, is calf-lined and 
silk-sewed. Bibles similar in quality and finish are listed in many 
catalogues at $8. 

The sale of these books is not restricted to WATCH TOWER readers. 
They are valuable aids in Bible study, and open to the public. 

Remit with order. We can secure such prices only by paying spot 
cash and must sell on the same terms. Registry, 10c. additional. 

Anyone ordering patent index on any of these Bibles should so 
state and should add twenty-five cents to the price. 

Should any desire other Bibles we will be pleased to supply 
publisher's catalogue, giving full description and prices. 
We are usually able to secure a discount of 25 per cent, on 
the publishers' list prices. 

BIBLE STUDY HELPS (BOUND SEPARATE) 

These are the same as in the latest "I.B.S.A." Bibles, described 
above. Leather, $1; postage prepaid. 

DAILY HEAVENLY MANNA 

FOR THE HOUSEHOLD OF FAITH 

The demand for this publication increases year by year. 

Our present edition of the "Manna" contains the same texts 
and comments as all former editions. Every alternate leaf is blank -ruled, 
for use as an autograph and birthday record. Its value increases 
as additional autographs of friends are secured. It is printed on 
fine bond paper. We now have it in three different grades of binding, 
at very reasonable prices, considering the class of workmanship. 

The following wholesale rates postpaid are granted to all WATCH 
TOWER subscribers: 



Purple cloth, silver embossed $0.35 

Dark blue cloth, silver embossed, German 35 

Leatherette, gold edges 50 

" blue edges, Swedish 35 

" gold edges, " 65 

Genuine Morocco, gold edges 1.10 

We hope this little book will find a place at every breakfast table; 
that spiritual refreshment may thus be enjoyed with the natural food. 

THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT 

This very valuable work, published under the author's copyright 
by Fowler & Wells Co., New York City, has been sold by them at $4 
in cloth and $5 in half leather binding. For several years a friend, an 
earnest Bible student, desirous of assisting the readers of our Society's 
publications, has supplied them through us at a greatly reduced price; 
now he has purchased the copyright and plates from the Fowler & 
Wells Co., and presented the same to our Society as a gift that the poor 
of the Lord's flock may have this help in the study of the Word. 

REDUCED PRICES. --These will be sold with THE WATCH TOWER 
only. In cloth binding $1.50 (6s. 3d.)— includes postage and, as a 
Premium, one year's subscription new or renewal, to THE WATCH 
TOWER. On thin paper, in full morocco leather, divinity circuit, red 
under gold edges, silk sewed, leather lined, $2.50 (10s. 6d.)— includes 
postage and one year's subscription to THE WATCH TOWER. 

THE TISCHENDORF NEW TESTAMENT 

This is the ordinary Common Version in cloth binding. As footnotes 
it gives the reading of the three oldest Greek MSS., Sinaiticus, 
Vaticanus and Alexandrine, wherever these differ from the Common 
Version. This is a very valuable little work, published in Europe, 
which we specially import. Price, 50c, including postage. 

LEESER'S TRANSLATION OF THE OLD TESTAMENT 

This is the standard translation amongst English reading Hebrews, 
by one of their own rabbis. It is not perfect, but is a valuable aid 
in critical study of the Old Testament. Our special price, in leather 
binding, including postage, is $1.10. 

ANALYTICAL CONCORDANCE TO THE SCRIPTURES 

In English, Hebrew and Greek, by Prof. Young (Presbyterian). 
A valuable work for all critical students. We are not permitted by the 
publishers to cut their price, but we may and do give in addition, postage 
free, any four volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, cloth binding 
with each Concordance, or six volumes if purchaser pays expressage. 
Postpaid, cloth binding, $6. 

EXHAUSTIVE CONCORDANCE TO THE SCRIPTURES 

In English, Hebrew and Greek, by Prof. Strong (Methodist). 
This is also an able work and useful in critical study. It has some 
advantages over Young's; after getting used to it we prefer it. 
Special reduced prices— in cloth binding, $3; half leather, $5. Carriage 



prepaid, 96c extra. 

CRUDEN'S CONCORDANCE TO THE SCRIPTURES 

A valuable work, but scarcely necessary to those who have either 
of the above mentioned. English only. Cloth binding, $1, delivered. 

SMITH'S BIBLE DICTIONARY 

This is one of the most desirable editions of Prof. Smith's work. It 
is a large volume of 1,020 pages. Cloth binding, $1.30, including postage. 

"BIBLE TALKS IN SIMPLE LANGUAGE" 

This is the best book of its kind we have ever seen. It presents 
the Bible stories in simple, but not childish language, and seems 
remarkably free from the bad theology so common in this class of 
books. All Christian parents should have a Sunday Bible lesson with 
their children, and this book furnishes interesting topics, to which may 
be added as much concordant "Present Truth" as the age of the 
children will justify. Parents are responsible for their children's 
training in theology as well as in morals. 

624 pages, 250 illustrations; cloth sides, leather back and corners, 
gilt edges. A subscription book at $3. Our special price, 75 cents, 
plus 25 cents postage. 

MISCELLANEOUS 

Hymns of Dawn, with music (cloth) $0.35 

Hymns of Dawn, without music (flexible) 06 

Poems of Dawn (leather) 50c; cloth 25 

Memorizing Text-Cards (100 in pkg.— two assortments, Nos. 1 and 

2), per pkg 25 

Scriptural Post Cards (assorted) per doz 15 

CHARTS (Blue Prints, soft cloth): 

Plan of the Ages, 5 ft, $1.00; 8 ft 1.50 

Chronology of the Bible, 8 ft 1.50 

Tabernacle of the Wilderness, 8 ft 1.50 

BINDERS for THE WATCH TOWER: 

Spring Back (holds 1 yr.) 50 

String " (holds 2 yrs.) 50 

CROSS & CROWN PINS (Gold, with red enamel): 

1/2" and 5/8" (ladies' or gents' style) each $1 and 1.15 

5/8" celluloid, per doz. 25c; each 03 

Missionary Envelopes, per hundred, 25c; per M 2.00 

Vow Bookmarks (paper) 25c per 100; (silk) each 05 

Booklets (on Hell, Spiritism, Evolution, Tabernacle Shadows, Our 
Lord's Return, Jewish Hopes); also Berean Question Booklets on 

each Vol. of SCRIPTURE STUDIES; each 5c; per doz 50 

Report on Foreign Missions, each 05 

THE BIBLE STUDENTS' MONTHLY, per year 12 

Tracts in all languages FREE 



R5346 : page 335 



SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
SUCCESSFUL SCANDINAVIAN MEETINGS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I wish to send you an expression of our appreciation of 
the helpful visit of Brothers J. F. Rutherford and A. N. 
Pierson, as your representatives, granted us recently. I will 
also use this opportunity to thank you most heartily for your 
kindness to me in London, during your own physical weakness, 
and for your recent letter. 

Perhaps it will interest you to have a report from me concerning 
the meeting for which you put the responsibility in 
my care. 

From August 13 to September 3, Brother Rutherford held 
eighteen splendid meetings in Norwegian, Finnish and Swedish 
cities, with a total attendance of 25,800 adults and other thousands 
turned away for lack of room. 

He also gave twenty-four encouraging talks to the Truth 
friends in these places, and in connection we had a good convention 
in Helsingfors, Finland, visited by about 250 friends, 
and another convention in Stockholm, attended by about 
400 friends. 

As one proof of the interest in Brother Rutherford's public 
lectures here, not fewer than 1,818 volumes of STUDIES IN 
THE SCRIPTURES were sold in Sweden and Norway-672 of 
these being sold at a single Sunday morning meeting in Stockholm, 
at which the attendance was 3,300, with 700 turned 
away for lack of room, first receiving free literature. Besides 
this, we received thousands of addresses requesting further 
information re subjects discussed. At the Orebro meeting 
alone, attended by 2,200 adults, with many outside who could 
not gain entrance to the hall, 586 address-cards were received. 
Notwithstanding the fact that in every city we had rented the 
largest halls obtainable, no one of them was large enough 
to hold the crowds. 

For advertisement of Brother Rutherford's meetings in 
Sweden and Norway we distributed 217,500 copies of BIBLE 
STUDENTS MONTHLY. Many papers published very good reports 
of his lectures, reaching other thousands of Swedish 
people. We earnestly desire that you send him to Sweden 
again, as soon and for as long a time as possible. We promise 
you that we will have the largest halls all over the land, 
crowded every night to hear him. 

Meanwhile we are striving to do the best we can, by the 
Lord's grace, to carry on the good work in which we have 
received so many blessings and which every day becomes 
more dear to our hearts. The Colporteur work and all other 
branches make good progress continually. During about five 
weeks before us we have arranged for twenty mass-meetings 
in the largest cities and towns of Northern Sweden, which 
Brother Rutherford could not visit. In these I shall be the 
speaker, D.V. 

We pray that the Master of the Harvest may guide us 
and give wisdom and strength to do all in harmony with His 



will and to the Glory of His name. We shall highly appreciate 
the privilege of being continually included in your prayers 
to this end; we never forget you in our petitions before 
the Throne of Grace. 

With most sincere Christian love and greeting to you, our 
beloved Pastor and brother, in which all the dear helpers at 
this office join, I remain, as ever, 

Your humble co-laborer in the Lord's Harvest, 
AUG. LUNDBORG. 



page 335 

DESIRES TO GAIN THE VICTORY 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

The Ecclesia extend to you their Christian love and 

greetings, and we always delight to bear your name up to the 
"Throne of Grace" that you may find help in every time of 
need, so that through your loving ministry we also may be 
enabled to "make our calling and election sure." 

At a recent business meeting it was unanimously voted 
"That Brother Charles T. Russell be officially recognized as 
That Servant,' to whom the Lord promised He would give 
all His storehouse of 'Present Truth,' if faithful, and that 

he serve as Pastor to the Ecclesia at , until the completion 

of the Age." We are pleased to accept the sermons 
and WATCH TOWER as your personal service to us. 

Remember us all when at the "Throne of Grace," that we 
also may make our calling and election sure, especially remembering 
the writer, who is the least of the Lord's dear 
brethren, that I may gain the victory over the things that 
especially beset me. 

Yours in the love and service of our dear Redeemer, 
M. L. WOLF. 



page 335 

BEREAN QUESTIONS ON SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
Series VI., Study XVI. 
THE PRESENT INHERITANCE OF THE NEW CREATION 

DECEMBER 7 
Read p. 686, par. 1, to p. 688, par. 1. 

(47) What more could we ask respecting the Lord's provision 
for the future glories and present joys of the New 
Creation? P. 686, par. 1. 

(48) What more could we think of or ask for on behalf of 
the world than God has already arranged? P. 686, par. 2. 



(49) Do any of the varying conditions which surround us 
limit our privileges of access to God in prayer? P. 686, par. 3. 

(50) What is our privilege of prayer for personal use? 
P. 687, par. 1. 

(51) What are the privileges and blessings of family 
prayer? P. 687, par. 2. 

(52) What are the blessings of prayer in the Church? 
P. 687, par. 3. 

(53) Why is it essential that every meeting of the Lord's 
people for study and up-building should be opened and closed 
with prayer? P. 688, par. 1. 

DECEMBER 14 

Read p. 688, par. 2, to p. 691, par. 2. 

FAITH A FRUIT OF THE SPIRIT AND A PART OF THE PRESENT 
INHERITANCE OF THE NEW CREATION. 

(54) Is that faith, which is a fruit of the Spirit, the same 
faith which was ours before we were justified? If not, explain 
the nature and source of the faith which justified us? P. 

688, par. 2. 

(55) What is the difference between faith and credulity? 
P. 689, par. 1. 

(56) Describe the logical and progressive steps of the 
growing faith that leads to our begetting of the Holy Spirit? 
P. 689, par. 2. 

(57) Describe the further results as respects the faith-development 
of the spiritually enlightened ones. P. 690, par. 1, 2. 

(58) Explain how this Spirit-begotten faith is in reality 
the basis of all the New Creation's present joys and hopes. 
P. 691, par. 1. 

(59) What does the Apostle James say about the necessity 
for faith? And how shall we increase our faith? P. 691, par. 2. 

DECEMBER 21 

Read p. 693, par. 1, to p. 695, par. 3. 

Series VI, Study XVII. 

THE RESURRECTION INHERITANCE OF THE NEW 
CREATION 

(1) What pre-requisites are necessary to any appreciation 
of the New Creation's future inheritance? P. 693, par. 1. 

(2) Even with the fullest attainment of faith and spiritual 
sight, will the New Creation be able perfectly to comprehend 
the things of the future? P. 693, par. 2. 

(3) To what extent did our Lord lift the veil and give us 

a brief glance at the future conditions, as recorded in 1 Cor. 15:41-44, 
and why is this entire chapter specially interesting 
to the Church? P. 694, par. 1. 

"AS ALL IN ADAM DIE, EVEN SO ALL IN CHRIST SHALL BE MADE ALIVE. 



1 COR. 15:22. 

(4) What is the Apostle Paul's argument, of which the 
above text is the conclusion? P. 695, par. 1, 2. 

(5) What is clearly the Apostle's argument in 1 Cor. 15:21? 
P. 695, par. 3. 

DECEMBER 28 

1. 



Read p. 696, par. 1, to p. 699, par. 



(6) Why is the Common Version translation of 1 Cor. 15:22 
manifestly erroneous? P. 696, par. 1. 

(7) What is the full significance of the phrase, "Be made 
alive," in this text? P. 697, par. 1. 

(8) What is the proper rendering of 1 Cor. 15:22? P. 

698, par. 1. 

(9) What is the distinction between being "in Adam" and 
"in Christ"? And why will not all who were in Adam be 
fully "made alive" through Adam's redemption? P. 698, par. 2. 

(10) What is the Apostle Paul's declaration as respects 
the order of the Church's resurrection? P. 699, par. 1. 

(11) Briefly, to what class does the "after resurrection" 
apply, and what one exception is there to this order? P. 

699, par. 2. 



page 337 

VOL. XXXIV NOVEMBER 15 No. 22 
A. D. 1913-A. M. 6042 



CONTENTS 

Because We Love the Brethren 339 

Principles of Church Government 340 

The Ecclesia Superior to its Servants 340 

What Course Should We Take? 341 

A Clearer View of Prophecy 342 

The Image of the Beast 342 

Important Step Toward Federation 343 

Electing Elders and Deacons 344 

The Sin of Covetousness 345 

Covetousness in the Consecrated 345 

The Logos Made Flesh 346 

"The Light of the World" 347 

Christ in the Heart (Poem) 347 

"Choose Ye This Day" 348 

"Testified in Due Time 348 

Marriage is Honorable 349 

Some Interesting Letters 349 

Evil Spirits and the Editor's Comment 349 

"The Tower" Grows Deeper and Sweeter 350 



Berean Questions in Scripture Studies 351 

page 338 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:-All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



"HANDWRITING ON THE WALL" 



We have on hand a large quantity of the BIBLE STUDENTS 
MONTHLY, the foremost article of which is entitled, "The 
Handwriting on the Wall." It is very opportune literature, 
we believe. We printed more than we needed apparently 
and have more than a million on hand. Undoubtedly there 
are many places where they have not been distributed. Here 
is an opportunity for some to preach the Gospel. The papers 
will be sent free, charges prepaid, in whatever quantities you 
can use. In estimating quantities, remember that census reports 
include children; hence the census figures should be 
divided by six to allow one paper for each family. Order 
accordingly. 

We also have a considerable quantity of the "Creed Smashing" 
and "Fire and Brimstone" issues. These we also offer 
free, prepaid. 



R5353 : page 338 



FREE LITERATURE IN THIRTY LANGUAGES 



We can supply literature on Present Truth in any of the 
following languages: English, German, French, Swedish, 
Danish, Norwegian, Finnish, Welsh, Polish, Hungarian, Hollandish, 
Spanish, Portuguese, Italian, Greek, Russian, Armenian, 
Arabic, Tamil, Malayalam, Zulu, Esperanto, Maori, 
Gujarati, Marathi, Telugu, Urdu, Chinese (Wenli and Mandarin), 
Korean and Japanese. 

Also literature for the English-reading blind in American 
Braille, English Braille and New York Point; likewise literature 
for German, French, Swedish and Danish-reading blind 
people. 

We do not always have all of these in stock at Brooklyn, 
but usually have the main supply nearest the point of demand. 
However, communicate with us if you are in the vicinity of 
any of the above mentioned peoples and we shall be pleased 
to co-operate with you by supplying the desired literature as 
quickly as possible. 

page 338 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR DECEMBER 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for December 
follow: (1) 165; (2) 18; (3) 160; (4) 145; (5) 303; (6) 
44; (7) 14; (8) 229; (9) 186; (10) 315; (11) 168; (12) 235; 
(13) 230; (14) 327; (15) 119; (16) 233; (17) 60; (18) 12; (19) 
53; (20) 7; (21) 166; (22) 197; (23) 54; (24) 163; (25) 180; 
(26) 221; (27) 103; (28) 273; (29) 26; (30) 38; (31) 307. 



R5346 : page 339 

"BECAUSE WE LOVE THE BRETHREN" 

"We know that we have passed from death unto 
life, because we love the brethren."— 1 John 3:14. 

WE are glad to testify that both from personal 
contact and through correspondence we 
have every reason to believe that the Bible 
Students, who constitute the large majority 
of our readers, have been growing in grace 
lately— during the past few years. Contrasting 
the present with three, six or ten 
years ago, we notice a great increase in 
spirituality— the Spirit of the Lord— the 



Holy Spirit of Love. 

Not only is this manifested in activities in the service 
of the Truth, but also in broader sympathies one for 
another and for all Christians— and, indeed, for the entire 
groaning creation. This is just what it should be 
every year; every week, indeed, should mark progress in 
Christ-likeness, as we remember that, "If any man have 
not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of His," and therefore 
will have no part in the Kingdom— whatever inferior 
blessing he may obtain under stripes and disciplines 
necessary to the development of the proper character. 

We remember further the Apostle's statement that the 
Divine predestination respecting the Church is that we 
must each individually in character become copies of our 
Lord. (Romans 8:29.) Surely such clear statements of 
the Divine will and of the terms upon which we may 
make our calling and election sure should be stimulating. 

Nevertheless, notwithstanding all the progress noted, 
many of the little classes are experiencing friction, which 
causes more or less concern and unhappiness. As the 
Truth makes us free and opens the eyes of our understanding, 
it enables us to see our own imperfections and 
the imperfections of the brethren and of the world more 
clearly than ever. Unless there be a large amount of 
love, this will mean a disposition to find fault, to criticize. 

We may safely give ourselves considerable liberty 
along these lines in dealing with our own character. We 
may find fault with ourselves and criticize ourselves often 
to advantage. Yet even this should not be carried so far 
that we forget the Lord's gracious promise that He will 
judge us according to our heart intentions and not according 
to our imperfect attainments. We are, perhaps, 
better able to appreciate our own shortcomings, and how 
they were unintentional; but when the shortcomings are 
those of others, it tests our love, patience, brotherly-kindness, 
meekness, gentleness, etc. Yet such testings are 
very profitable. We pray that the Lord will assist us in 
growing in the graces of the Holy Spirit. Let us 
remember that the only way to assist us would be by 
giving us testings along these very lines. Our strength 
of character, our development in these graces, will be in 
proportion as we receive these testings in the proper spirit. 

PROOF OF RELATIONSHIP AS NEW CREATURES 

Our text seems to imply that the love of the brethren 
is one of the most beautiful experiences of the Christian. 
Whoever finds that he has full love for all the brethren, 
full sympathy for them, therein has a specially strong 
Scriptural proof that he himself is a New Creature— 
that he has passed from death unto life. And whoever 
has any other sentiment than love to any of the brethren 
surely lacks proof, or demonstration, along this line of 
his relationship to God as a New Creature. 

If we keep this always in mind, how valuable an 
assistance it will be to us! Do we not frequently desire 



to reassure ourselves of the Lord's favor and of our 
continued relationship to Him as New Creatures, passed 
from death unto life? If we do, here is the text, the 
application of which, if we are in the right condition, 
should bring peace and joy. And if we are in the wrong 
condition, it should bring alarm for our personal safety 
as New Creatures. 

One of the points of friction in many of the classes 
is the relationship between the class and its servants. 
So far as we can judge, the fault is sometimes with the 
one and sometimes with the other. We are frequently 
asked in respect to the duties of the Elders, the responsibility 
of the classes, etc. In general, we prefer to 
refer all such inquiries to our very full discussion of 
the subject in the sixth volume of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. 
We know not how to improve on the suggestions 
there made. We believe that if what we have written 
were thoroughly studied, the recommendations there 
given would be found ample for every case. 

On doctrinal matters we prefer not to write personal 
letters; for in a few cases we have found that the persons 
receiving the letters have either misunderstood 
them, or only partially communicated their contents to 
others when discussing the matter. Again, some have 
said, "Brother Russell wrote thus and so in STUDIES IN 
THE SCRIPTURES, but we have a later letter which intimates 

R5347 : page 340 

that he has changed his mind." We wish the 
dear friends to feel assured that if our judgment changes 
respecting any important truths we will put the change 
before all THE WATCH TOWER readers as speedily as 
possible. Until you see such changes mentioned in THE 
WATCH TOWER give no credit to them; esteem the statements 
of the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES just as though 
they were written yesterday and direct to yourself. 

PRINCIPLES OF CHURCH GOVERNMENT 

Briefly summarizing the principles governing the 
Church of Christ, let us say: There are two views 
prevalent amongst Christians respecting Church 
government: 

(1) The Episcopal view, which holds that the Church 
is to be ruled and governed by bishops, because of the 
claim that these are Apostolic bishops; that is, that they 
are successors to the Apostles, and invested with Apostolic 
wisdom and inspiration and authority for the regulation 

of the Church and its affairs. This view is held 

by Roman Catholics, Greek Catholics and Episcopalians. 

(2) The other view is the Congregationalist, and 
holds that each congregation of the Lord's people is a 
unit, and has the right to govern itself and to make its 
own regulations for its own welfare, subject to Divine 
guidance. Congregationalists, Baptists and some others 



claim to be governed by this view. Other denominations, 
with more or less confusion and indecision, divide 
authority between the ministers and the laity. 

We hold that the Bible arrangement combines the 
Episcopal and the Congregational views. Thus the 
Scriptures teach that the twelve Apostles were and still 
are the Episcopate— the only inspired and authoritative 
Apostolic Bishops. Whatsoever these declared to be 
binding on earth is binding amongst the Lord's people. 
Whatsoever they declared loosed, or not binding, would 
not be obligatory upon the Church in the sight of 
Heaven. From this viewpoint, the words of Jesus respecting 
all other so-called apostolic bishops are quite 
pointed. He declares that they are "false apostles and 
do lie"— they are not apostles in any sense of the word. 
(Revelation 2:2; 2 Corinthians 11:13.) Hence we are 
not to give heed nor to in any manner recognize the 
claims of these bishops, whom Satan has deluded into 
thinking that they have Apostolic power— Apostolic 
succession. 

As the people of God have the original Episcopacy, 
the twelve Apostles of the Lamb, for authority and direction, 
they are thus organized under an Episcopal government, 
or government of the Apostolic Bishops— nevertheless 
their organization is properly congregational. 
Each company of the Lord's consecrated people is entirely 
free, and should have its own faith in the Bible 
and all the precious truths of the Bible. No congregation 
and no individual can properly be bound by the 
vows of other congregations or other individuals. 

The Congregation, Ecclesia, Church, coming together 
to act as one, to worship together, to serve God's Cause 
together, should do so because of their mutual appreciation 
of the Divine character and Plan. They are not 
under anybody's government, or rule, except that of the 
Bible Episcopate— the Apostolic teachings. As for the 
Elders and Deacons of each Congregation, they are to 
be chosen by the Congregation from their own number, 
in accordance with the instructions of the Bible. No 
earthly power has a right to intervene between the instructions 
of the Divinely-appointed twelve Apostles and 
the companies of the Lord's people who choose to assemble 
themselves in harmony with the Apostolic instructions. 
This at one stroke wipes out all papal 
authority and the authority of all apostolic bishops 
falsely so-called. 

Since the Deacons and Elders, Pastors and Teachers, 
are lifted to their places of service and honor by the 
votes of the brethren, it places the Congregation in 
greater authority than its servants. But the Congregation, 
in turn, is bound not to force its preferences, but 
merely to act loyally in harmony with the Divine direction 
given by the Apostles in the Bible. Thus we see 
that the truth on the subject from the Divine standpoint 
has been measurably lost sight of for centuries, to the 
disadvantage of the Church— some taking one part of 



the Truth and some another— few, if any, recognizing 
the whole. Indeed, this is what we find to have been 
the case in respect to nearly every doctrine. 

While particulars have been set forth in STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES, Volume VI, yet in what we have above stated 
lie the principles involved. Whoever thoroughly grasps 
the principles should be able to appreciate the details. 
And it would be only a question of thought and patient 
deliberation to settle all the details of the affairs of any 
little Class, in accordance with the Scriptures. Thus 
while the Class gives certain authority and service into 
the hands of those chosen to be its Elders, and appoints 
others to assist them in the work as Deacons, or servants, 
nevertheless, both Elders and Deacons are answerable 
to the Congregation, to the ecclesia. 

THE ECCLESIA SUPERIOR TO ITS SERVANTS 

In case of any dispute, the judgment, or decision, 
of the Congregation should stand as the right thing for 
the time being. If it prove later to have been unwise, 
the Lord is able to overrule the error of judgment for 
good— for instruction. To illustrate: Should the judgment 
of the Class at any time differ from the judgment 
of the Elder or Elders, the proper course would be for 
the Elders to submit to the higher authority, which is 
the Class, the Church, the Ecclesia; for he who appoints 
is superior to him who is appointed. Our Lord's arrangement 
for the Classes, or Ecclesias, is, "Wherever 
two or three of you are met in My name, there am I." 
The Lord has promised to be with the Class. He has 
not said, Wherever there is an Elder, there am I, and 
to him shall the Class gather; but, Wherever there is a 
Class there am I; and it may appoint an Elder, whom I 
will recognize and bless as its representative and for its 
good, in proportion as he shall strive to be a suitable 
vessel to be My servant in blessing that Class. 

This appreciation of the true relationship between the 
Elder and the Class should help the Elders to cultivate 
those fruits and graces of the Holy Spirit described by 
St. Paul as meekness, gentleness, patience, brotherly 
kindness, long-suffering, love. But, on the other hand, 
the Congregation, Ecclesia, having chosen one of its 
number to serve it as an Elder Brother and to look out 
for its interests, should hope that they had wisely chosen 
in harmony with the Lord's Word and providences. So 
hoping, they should be prepared to give support and encouragement 
to the Elder, in proportion as they see him 
striving to know and to do the Lord's will and faithfully 
to lay down his time and talents in the service of the 
Class. Should they subsequently find that apparently 
they had not fully discerned and followed the Apostolic 
instructions respecting the selection of the Elder, they 
should still be kind and gentle toward him, remembering 
that the fault was theirs in electing him— a fault to be 
rectified at the next election— and trusting and praying 



R5347 : page 341 

that they may know the will of the Lord more perfectly 
and be wiser in their selection. 

DUTIES OF THE ECCLESIA 

From this viewpoint the Congregation has everything 
to say in respect to the number of meetings to be held, 
where they are to be held, by whom they are to be conducted, 
the character of the lessons or studies, etc. 
Nothing of this kind is for the Elder to decide, though 
as a member of the Congregation he has the same right 
to be heard that the others have. In proportion as he 
is esteemed highly, his opinion will have weight with the 
Ecclesia, Class, or Congregation. Nevertheless, the 
Class should never forget the thought that however 
highly the Elder may be esteemed, he is not their guide. 
The Elders and all others are to be heeded in proportion 
as they are seen to wisely interpret the teachings of the 
Holy Scriptures. 

We believe that with these principles seen, approved 
and looked up to, there will be less and less friction in 
the Classes. The Elders, in just their proper sphere 
and conscientiously seeking to serve in harmony therewith, 
will be restrained from doing and saying many 
things out of their province and likely to stir up difficulties 
among the members of the Classes. 

A POTENT FACTOR IN ALL DISPUTES 

It will generally be found, we believe, that pride is a 
potent factor in all Church disputes. Sometimes the 
Elder undertakes to do for the Class more than it wishes 
him to do and more than it has authorized him to do. 
Or, misguided by the sentiments prevalent among all 
denominations of Christendom, he thinks of his Eldership 
as an office of authority over the Church, and not 
as an honorable service, the authority being vested in the 
Class. Sometimes the difficulty is with some member 
of the Class, who, seeking to preserve the rights and 
authority of the Class, goes to an extreme, and unnecessarily 
harries the Elder, criticizing him for doing 
the right thing, but not doing it exactly the way this 
well-intentioned brother thinks he should do. 

Love should apply the Golden Rule. We should be 
willing to give the Elder as much reasonable liberty of 
action as we would like to enjoy if we were in his place 
—provided, of course, that this liberty should be in full 
harmony with the Word of God. Furthermore, we 
should remember that the Elder is the servant of the 
whole Class, and not the servant specially of any one 
member of it. Any criticism, therefore, of his conduct 
should come from the Class and not merely from an 



R5348 : page 341 

individual member of it. If an individual member has 
an important thought which the Elder ignores he should 
be at liberty to ask the judgment of the Class on the 
subject for his own instruction and for the instruction 
of the Elder; but no individual member should undertake 
to criticize the Elder or to find fault with his procedure. 

If the Class approves of the Elder, the individuals 
thinking differently are at liberty still to think as they 
please, but should yield to the majority. In other words, 
peace and order in a class are items of great value in 
respect to all progress in Bible study. Nothing should 
be done to disturb the peace and order unless there be 
something positively wrong, unscriptural, connected with 
the matter. Then the brother or the sister calling attention 
to the matters which he considers unscriptural, 
should say little about his own opinion and deal chiefly 
with the Scriptural injunctions which he believes are 
being violated. 

"LET BROTHERLY LOVE CONTINUE" 

These suggestions are intended to increase and promote 
peace and unity amongst the Lord's brethren 
wherever this journal goes. We have confidence that all 
who are begotten of the one Spirit, the Holy Spirit, are 
desirous of knowing and doing that which is right- 
that which is pleasing and acceptable to God and for the 
best interests of His Cause. "By one Spirit we were 
all baptized into one Body." "If any man have not the 
Spirit of Christ, he is none of His." Our thought is that 
all being one with the Lord— of one heart, of one will— 
our difficulties lie almost entirely in our heads, in our 
misapprehension of some of the principles governing the 
Divine arrangement. And these principles, we may be 
sure, are perfect, right. In proportion as we can come 
into harmony with these principles, we shall be at peace 
one with another, joyfully assisting each other toward 
the Kingdom, in which we shall have a share with our Lord. 

Let us continually remember that love for all the 
brethren is a sure indication that we love as New 
Creatures. And love for the brethren means that we 
will do them no injury, that we will speak no evil respecting 
them unless of absolute necessity; and, finally, 
that we will not even surmise evil in respect to their 
words and deeds. "Love is the fulfilling of the Law." 
"He that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God (by 
His Spirit dwelleth) in him." For though we should 
give all our goods to feed the poor, and though we should 
even sacrifice our bodies to be burned in the interests 
of righteousness, yet if we have not love— the Spirit of 
love— we are nothing in God's sight.— Romans 13:10; 
I John 4:16; I Cor. 13:3. 



R5348 : page 341 

WHAT COURSE SHOULD WE TAKE? 

WE HAVE received two letters inquiring about 
the practical bearing of our October, 1914, 
hopes on the affairs of this life. It occurs 
to us that others who have not written may 
have the same thought; so we give to you 
all a digest of our answers. 

The Brother who wrote us suggested 
that he is a farmer, and that if sure that the 
Church would be gathered before October, 
1914, or that the great Time of Trouble 
would there begin, he would in either case 
be inclined to quit farming and to spend the year in the 
Colporteur work, as he would have sufficient money to do 
this if he were to mortgage his farm or sell it. 

In our reply we advised the Brother that if he had a 
wife or family dependent upon him for support, we 
thought that this suggestion would not be a wise one at 
all, but that if he were unincumbered, we would consider 
the thought a very good one. He would be merely giving 
a year to the Lord's work, and at the close of the year 
might hope in any event to be in reasonable health and as 
capable as ever of earning a living. 

We believe that a year spent in the Colporteur work 
would prove an excellent schooling in perseverance and 
self-denial, in service of others, and in thinking upon and 
handling holy things. Yet even in this case we believe 
that some allowance should be made for temperament and 
capability for Colporteur service. While few, if any, have 
no talent whatever for such work, there are some who 
have so little talent that they might merely discourage 
themselves without accomplishing much in the interest of 
others. We must use all wisdom in respect to what we 

R5348 : page 342 

attempt to do, that our time and strength— mental and 
physical— shall render us as good results as possible to the 
Lord's praise. Each should seek wisdom from on High 
to guide him in such matters. 

Another letter received inquired respecting the proper 
treatment to be given to a member of the Class who insisted 
on opposing the chronology and denouncing all faith in October, 
1914, either as respects the gathering of the Church 
or the inauguration of the world's great Time of Trouble. 
Our reply may be applicable in other cases. It is to the effect 
that nobody should be specially encouraged in such an 
opposition; for a bad spirit is always objectionable, injurious. 
However, we should not denounce those who in 
a proper spirit express their dissent in respect to the date 
mentioned and what may be there expected; nor should 
we feel aggrieved toward them. We should recognize the 



individual rights of all, and treat everybody according to 
the Golden Rule. Nor should we feel at liberty to express 
our views more dogmatically than we would think right 
for others to do in expressing their views. 

THE SIGNS OF THE TIMES 

The fact is that, notwithstanding the strength of our 
position and our hope that it may be true, it is nevertheless 
of faith and not of knowledge. To some, faith in the matter 
may become almost as strong and convincing as knowledge. 
Nevertheless, it is not knowledge, it is faith. We 
must admit that there are possibilities of our having made 
a mistake in respect to the chronology, even though we do 
not see where any mistake has been made in calculating 
the Seven Times of the Gentiles as expiring about 
October 1, 1914. 

If others feel equally convinced respecting some other 
date which does not appeal to us, we should not on that 
account reject them as members of the Body of Christ. 
Rather, we should say, Whether you or we have the date 
correct, we must all agree that the signs of the times as 
we read them indicate clearly that the Master is nigh, 
even at the door; and that His Kingdom is soon due to 
begin to take control. This means that, whether within 
one year or within ten or twenty years, the things which 
we are expecting will surely be accomplished. The Church 
will be gathered, the Messianic Reign of Righteousness 
will begin, preceded, as foretold, by the great Time of 
Trouble. 

The general facts are much more valuable and important 
than merely the day or the year respecting these facts. 
"Let brotherly love continue!" Suffer not any dispute 
over a day or a year to break the most precious bond of 
love which binds us to the Lord and to all who are truly 
His. Be specially careful on this point when the subject 
of discussion is one respecting which we have no positive 
knowledge. The rupture of fellowship may sometimes be 
necessary, when we "contend earnestly for the faith once 
delivered unto the saints"— faith in the Divine Plan, in the 
Redeemer, in the efficacy of His death, etc. These matters 
are positively stated in the Bible— not left to deduction, as 
in the case of chronology and all matters based upon 
chronology. 

A CLEARER VIEW OF PROPHECY 

From time to time the Editor has assured the friends 
that as features of the Truth become more and more distinct 
to him he would surely give THE WATCH TOWER 
readers the benefit of this clearer view; in other words, he 
would keep nothing back. 

We have presented in THE WATCH TOWER, for thirty-three 
years past, the fact that great Babylon will receive 
her judgment before the nations receive theirs. The statement, 
"Judgment must begin at the House of God," while 



applying especially to the real, or consecrated Church, we 
believe has also a bearing upon the nominal systems. It 
will be after the fall of Babylon, her casting as a great 
millstone into the sea, that the great distress of nations 
will come, apparently. 

Nevertheless, we have all probably been inclined to 
think more particularly of the world's Time of Trouble- 
to look for it, to expect it daily, or by October, 1914, as 
one result of the closing of the Gentile Times, or years. 
Perhaps we have neglected to some extent the fact that 
great Babylon apparently is dealt with before that world-trouble 
comes. The thought has been borne in upon the 
Editor very forcefully during the past two weeks that to 
expect the world's great trouble to begin on or before 
October 1, 1914, would be to expect astounding things during 
the intervening months. 

St. Peter describes the great Day of Wrath, intimating 
that it will begin with the nominal church class— the 
heavens. "The Day of the Lord will come as a thief in the 
night, in which the heavens shall pass away with a 
great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat; 
the earth also, and the works that are therein, shall be 
burned up." (2 Peter 3:10.) Understanding the earth 
here to represent the present social order, and the 
heavens to represent the ecclesiastical order of affairs, we 
find that the ecclesiastical heavens are to pass away with 

R5349 : page 342 

a great noise, a great commotion, a great confusion, and 
their elements or component parts will be melted in the 
fervency of the heat and strife of that time; and that then 
the earth, or social order, will follow it in the combustion 
or consumption of the trouble of that Day— destroying 
the present social fabric— overthrowing all law and order 
in anarchy. If, then, we should expect that the trouble 
would reach society in general within a year, this would 
seem to mean that before that time the present religious 
institutions would collapse. Will they? 

THE IMAGE OF THE BEAST 

Revelation, 13th Chapter, we interpreted in THE 
WATCH TOWER as far back as 1880. We there suggested 
that in symbolic language a beast represents a government 
—that the ten-horned beast represented the Papal government, 
which for a time ruled over all Europe, then the 
Roman Empire. Although Papacy has no such political 
influence now, it still claims that it has the right, or authority, 
to rule all nations, as the representative or vicegerent 
of Messiah. 

We pointed out the two-horned beast as represented 
in the Church-nation of Great Britain and Ireland; for it 
also is a government which combines Christianity and 
civil power. The Bishops sit in Parliament and the King 
is officially the head of the Church of England. The symbol 



tells us that as an ecclesiastical power this is a harmless 
one, "its two horns being like those of a lamb"— not 
intended to do injury. "But it spake as a dragon." The 
dragon represents purely civil power and the Government 
of Great Britain, though nominally religious, speaks, or 
governs as a dragon, or purely civil power. 

We also called attention to the fact that "the Image of 
the (Papal) Beast" was formed in 1846 A.D. In that 
year the Protestant denominations, especially in the United 
States, allied themselves as the "Evangelical Alliance." 
Their alliance ostensibly was for peace and harmony and 
noble objects of co-operation; but really the organization 
would appear to have been intended as an attempt to give 
dignity and authority to all of the various Protestant sects, 
and as far as possible to hinder the formation of any new 
sects by excluding them as unorthodox. 

The Alliance endeavored to establish a standard of 
orthodoxy and to give a mutual support and backing to all 
the different creeds identified with it— Baptists, Methodists, 

R5349 : page 343 

Lutherans, Presbyterians, etc. This attempted authority, 

or power, constituted it an Image of the Papal Beast, or 

Government. They saw the power of the Papal argument, 

that it is the Church, and that all others are heretical. 

So the Evangelical Alliance undertakes to say for its constituent 

members of all denominations: "All these are 

orthodox; all others are heretical." In this sense it was a 

copy, or image, of the Papal institution. It has been 

merely an Image without life or power for now more than 

sixty years. 

However, the Lord's symbolic prophecy, which we are 
now considering (Revelation 13), tells us that in the close 
of this Age the Image will receive life, vitality, energy, 
power. No longer will it stand as a mere Image. It will 
become as active as the Beast. Moreover, it will not be 
antagonistic to the Beast, but sympathetic, and cause that 
all shall either worship the Beast or the Image— all must 
be in harmony either with Catholicism, or with the Protestant 
system, of which the Evangelical Alliance was the 
primary organization or Image. The Protestant Church 
Federation will be the outcome as soon as it receives the 
vitalizing breath. 

AN IMPORTANT STEP TOWARD FEDERATION 

The vitality of the Image is to come from the two-horned 
Beast; that is, the Church of England. We have 
been waiting for this consummation more than thirty 
years, and have seen it draw nearer and nearer. A few 
years ago the Episcopal Church took an important step 
toward vitalizing the Church Federation movement, which 
it is favoring and backing. That important step was the 
recognition of the ministers of the denominations represented 
in the Evangelical Alliance. Previously no minister 



not ordained by the laying on of hands of a Catholic 

or an Episcopalian bishop was allowed to preach from an 

Episcopalian pulpit. 

Perhaps this recognition of the Image is all the vitalization 
the Image needs, but we are inclined to expect 
more. For years the Episcopalians have proffered reordination 
to the ministers of the different denominations 
represented in the Evangelical Alliance. And they still 
proffer it. We have been inclined to expect that the ministers 
would finally concede the point and accept a reordination 
at the hands of an Episcopal bishop. But we 
are not sure of this. It is possible that, to meet the requirements 
of the case, some other way will be found by 
which the Episcopal Church will recognize the Church 
Federation without obligating the ministers to be reordained. 
We are waiting for this. 

As, we understand this Chapter of Revelation, the 
Image, as soon as vitalized, will very promptly use its influence, 
prestige, power, in every way to "make fire come 
down from heaven" (Rev. 13:13); that is, to punish in 
the name of the Lord those who in any sense of the word 
it shall consider to be its opponents. Speedily none will 
be allowed to buy or sell, in the spiritual marts, except 
those who have either the mark or the number of the 
Beast, or of the Image, either in the right hand of co-operation 
or in the forehead of public confession. 

This will mean that the INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS 
ASSOCIATION and all others not in affiliation with 
the Alliance will be subjected to radically coercive measures. 
Truth shall fall in the streets. Righteousness will 
be unable to enter under the stress of the new order of 
things. For a time it will appear as though a great Christian 
victory had been won, shared equally by Papacy and 
federated— Protestantism— no longer protesting. Already 
we see these two divisions of the heavens rolling together, 
approaching one another, sympathizing with each other- 
rolling together for mutual protection. 

But the triumph of that new order of things will be 
short. The masses of the people, no longer ignorantly 
stupid as during the Dark Ages, will awaken to the true 
situation, and will execute upon Babylon the Great— 
already repudiated by the Lord— the judgment foretold. 
She shall be cast like a great millstone into the sea, never 
to rise again. The sea represents the masses of the people, 
especially a restless opposition class. The two-horned 
Beast apparently loses its personality when it gives 
life to the Image by becoming a member of the Federation. 

THE PRESENT OUTLOOK 

Now the question arises: Can all these things take 
place within a year? We answer, Yes; it would be possible. 
A second question is, Is it likely? Is it probable? 
And the answer is, No; it seems scarcely probable that so 
much would be accomplished in one year. Now, there 
we have the question— each must exercise his own judgment 



in respect to the matter. We certainly see a very 

rank spirit of anger, malice, hatred and strife developing 

in many quarters, amongst the very ones who constitute 

the members of the federation. And these slanderous oppositions 

come usually from the ministers of these 

denominations. 

If they do these things in a green tree, what shall be 
done in the dry? (Luke 23:31.) If such bigotry and 
bitter falsification are practised and such hatred is manifested 
before the Evangelical Alliance has any life, how 
arrogant might we suppose the same persons to become 
after the Image would receive life? And how quickly 
might the spirit of rancorous persecution be developed? 

Let us make the matter clear. According to the old, 
but erroneous, thought handed down for centuries, the 
bishops of the Church of England and of the Church of 
Rome are "apostolic bishops," or successors to the Apostles, 
according to the old theory of apostolic succession. 
According to that same theory, no one on earth has one 
particle of right to teach and to preach, except as those 
"apostolic bishops" shall grant their permission by laying 
on their hands. 

According to this rule, then, Methodists, Baptists, 
Lutherans, Presbyterians and all such are preaching without 
authority. When they talk about ordination, they 
merely mean that each sect ordains its own ministers. 
The Alliance is attempting to get around this difficulty 
and to have the sects recognize each other's ordination. 
The Federation is building upon this general recognition 
of orthodoxy, and is about, in some manner, to be given 
life, virility, power, dignity, by something which the 
Church of England will do for them which will recognize 
their ordination as ministers. 

We may be sure that they will make the road to the 
preaching and teaching of the Gospel a very narrow one 
to all attempting to preach without their recognition and 
ordination. These will be trying times upon us and upon 
all who will refuse to worship the Beast and his Image, 
or to receive the mark of the Beast upon the forehead or 
upon the hand.— Revelation 13:15-17. 

OUR ATTITUDE TOWARD ONE ANOTHER 

The special point we are now emphasizing is that if 
we find it difficult, though not impossible, to see that these 
things could be accomplished within a year, we should feel 
and act most kindly and tolerantly toward others of the 
brethren who feel positive that these things will not take 
place within a year, or who think that they see flaws in 
our chronological views. "Let brotherly love continue." 
"Abhor that which is evil. Cleave to that which is good." 
Thus will the grace of God be with us, to guide us, to bless 

R5350 : page 344 

us, to cause all of our experiences to work for good, even 



though some of those experiences should be disappointments 
in respect to fulfilments of prophecy within the 
next few months. 

The Episcopal Church Conference has just passed an 
amendment to the Church constitution, providing for the 
choice of one of their number to be Presiding Bishop- 
much the same as the Archbishop's office in the Church of 
England. After some sharp discussion they also authorized 
their Mission Board to co-operate with mission 
boards of other Christian bodies. Some bishops objected 
that this would violate their "priestly vows," but they 
were outvoted. This co-operation with other Protestants, 
in conjunction with the action previously taken, permitting 
other Protestant ministers to participate on invitation 
in Episcopal Church services, is practically a recognition 
of the Evangelical Alliance or Church Federation. How 
much more may be necessary to give LIFE and POWER to 
the Image we must wait and see. 

Our statement in October 15th issue that we have 
never mentioned October, 1914, as an infallibly sure date, 
either for the ending of the "Times of the Gentiles" or 
for any particular occurrence, has been called in question 
by one of our readers. We are cited to the following 
words of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, Vol. II.: 
"Now bear in mind the date already found for the beginning 
of these Gentile Times, viz., 606 B.C., while we proceed 
to examine the evidence proving their length to be 
2520 years— ending A.D. 1914. ...In view of this 
strong Bible evidence concerning the Times of the Gentiles, 
we consider it an established truth that the final end 
of the kingdoms of this world and the full establishment 
of the Kingdom of God will be accomplished at the end 
of 1914." 

We hold that nothing in these quotations declares the 
infallibility of the theories we suggested respecting 1914. 
In these statements, and in all of our statements, we have 
merely informed our readers respecting our views and the 
processes of our reasoning on the Scriptures which we 
have brought to their attention. Thus we have asked 
each reader to think and judge for himself, and to agree 
or disagree with us according to his own judgment of 
the facts. 

Notice that in the above quotations no dogmatic statement 
is made, but that the reader is requested to use his 
own intellect. For instance, note the words, "bear in 
mind"; again, "while we proceed to examine the evidence"; 
again the reference to "Bible evidence." In the 
last sentence the author sums up his own views, declaring 
what he considers to be the truth established by the evidences 
which he sets before his readers. 

In this respect we believe that THE WATCH TOWER 
presentations differ considerably from others. We state 
with positiveness the opinions of the writer and the reasons 
therefor, but leave the final decision with each head 
and heart in all matters, without attempting more. 



R5350 : page 344 

ELECTING ELDERS AND DEACONS 

IT WAS a slip of the pen on the part of the 

Editor when he recently intimated that the 

only ones who would properly be entitled 

to a vote at Church meetings would be those 

believers in the Atonement who had made 

full consecration and who had symbolized 

that consecration. The error was in including 

the symbolization. Many of us were 

truly Christians, truly accepted of the Lord, 

truly members of "the Church of the Firstborns 

whose names are written in Heaven" (Hebrews 12:23), 

before we saw the real force and significance 

of water immersion. We have always held (See 

Vol. 6, STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES) that all such are entitled 

to vote at Church elections— yea, that it is their duty 

to vote— to express the Lord's will in respect to the 

servants of the Church, according to their judgment. 

But what we meant to emphasize is that any brother 
who had not as yet accepted the Bible teachings respecting 
the proper symbolization of his consecration would 
not be far enough advanced to be properly appointed to 
be either a Deacon or an Elder in the Church. It was altogether 
by an inadvertence that we included with this the 
thought that such should not vote. 

Difficulty has been experienced by some classes in respect 
to nominations. When a call for nomination is 
made, a brother is nominated as an Elder or as a Deacon, 
without proper consideration of his qualifications. His 
nomination is seconded; and the whole class, loving the 
brother, feels disinclined to vote against him lest they 
should be misunderstood. 

There should always be a reason for the choice of anybody 
to any service in the Church. An elder should be 
an able teacher, of a broad mind, able to give assistful advice 
to those who need it, of deep insight into the Word 
of God, of good influence in the Church, and a wise counselor. 
No one, probably, could have all of these good 
qualifications in equal measure. Some might possess more 
of one, and some more of another qualification; but all 
should possess some of them or there would be no excuse 
for his election. Likewise a Deacon should have time at 
his disposal and some aptitude as a prospective Elder, and 
also an inclination to serve the Church. 

What seems to us a very good plan of nominating 
Elders, Deacons, etc., is by ballot, particularly if there 
has been any difficulty or if to a majority such a nomination 
might seem desirable. To put this plan into operation 
pieces of paper and pencils would be required. Each 
one entitled to a vote should write, "I nominate the following 
to be Elders of the Class for the ensuing 



months." Then should follow as many names as 

there are Elders at the time the election was taken. If 
the Class desire to either increase or decrease the number 
it can be done after the nomination at election time. 

After the ballots have been collected the results should 
be tabulated and announced publicly to the Ecclesia. The 
Class should then decide how many Elders it would properly 
need. If it decided that the number should be three, 
then the six brethren receiving the largest number of 
nominating ballots should be voted for. The three receiving 
the largest number of votes with outstretched 
hands should be considered the choice of the Class. Or 
another way would be to accept all the nominated ones 
who received ballots equal to one-third of the entire number 
of voters and to elect all such by, as nearly as possible, 
a unanimous vote, this arrangement being intended to 
give minorities a representation amongst the Elders. 

The thought always to be borne in mind is that, so far 
as possible, the judgment of all the Class should have 
recognition. While a majority might rule, it is always 
preferable that they yield something to the minority, so 
that the eldership of a Class might reflect the sentiment 
of the entire membership. No matter how this result be 
reached, we are doing wisely; and no matter how any 
other result be reached it would be unwise, as endangering 
the peace and harmony of the Class. Brotherly love 
always represents sympathy, kindness, love and a desire to 
yield something wherever no vital principle is involved. 



R5350 : page 345 

THE SIN OF COVETOUSNESS 

-DECEMBER 14.-JOSHUA 1 .- 

"Be sure your sin will find you out."— Numbers 32:23. 

THE Israelites, full of faith and flushed with 

the victory over Jericho, proceeded with the 

conquest of Canaan. Spies were sent to Ai. 

These, returning, advised that the place was 

small, and that a force of two or three thousand 

men would be quite sufficient for its 

capture. Indeed, from the experiences of 

Jericho they anticipated that none of the 

Israelites would be killed— that their enemies 

would be so terror-stricken as to render 

little or no defense. But the experiences at Ai were the 

reverse. Thirty-six Israelites were slain; and Israel's 

army, perceiving that they had not the Lord's favor, fled 

before their enemies. 

Joshua and his associates, the Elders of Israel, were 
bewildered at this. They prostrated themselves before 
the Ark of the Covenant, bewailing the trouble and especially 



fearful of the influence which the defeat would 

have upon their enemies— encouraging them and discouraging 

Israel, who were God's typical people. 

THE ACCURSED OR DEVOTED THING 

In our Common Version, accursed has been used where 
devoted would have been preferable. The Lord informed 
Joshua that Divine favor was not with Israel because of 
their unfaithfulness. When Jericho was captured, a portion 
of the spoils had been appropriated by one of the 
soldiers. But according to the Lord's arrangement all 
the spoils were devoted in advance; hence this was a 
breach of their agreement, and Israel's armies could have 
no blessing until the matter was rectified. 

In order that the lesson might be learned by the entire 
people, the Lord directed that the representatives of all 
the tribes should appear before Him and lots be cast, and 
that thus would be indicated the tribe to which the guilty 
one belonged. In like manner the different families of 
that tribe were tested, and the family found. Thus step 
by step the matter came down to Achan, who was the 

R5351 : page 345 

one indicated as guilty— the cause of the trouble. 

"And Joshua said unto Achan, My son, give, I pray 
thee, glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make confession 
unto Him; and tell me now what thou hast done; 
hide it not from me. And Achan answered Joshua and 
said, Indeed I have sinned against the Lord God of Israel, 
and thus and thus have I done: When I saw among the 
spoils a goodly Babylonish garment, and two hundred 
shekels of silver, and a wedge of gold of fifty shekels 
weight, then I coveted them, and took them; and behold, 
they are hid in the earth in the midst of my tent." 

THE PENALTY UPON ACHAN 

The penalty upon Achan was death by stoning, and 
after the stoning the corpse was burned— the burning indicating 
symbolically that there was no hope of a future 
life for him. It is our thought, however, that this was 
a part of the general allegory, and that really Achan, as 
a member of Adam's family, must ultimately have a share 
with all the remainder of the race in the redemption provided 
through Jesus' death. Thus also the Sodomites 
were destroyed by fire from heaven— in a figure representing 
the class which will die the Second Death. But none 
can die the Second Death without being first released in 
some manner from the condemnation of the first death— 
Adamic death. These were merely types, or foreshadows, 
of the wilfully wicked class and of the everlasting destruction, 
as brute beasts, which will come upon them. 

As the Sodomites experienced no knowledge nor blessing 
through Jesus, so Achan had none. As the Sodomites, 



redeemed by the merit of Jesus' sacrifice, will be awakened 

from the sleep of death during the Messianic Age, and 

their experiences will be more tolerable than those of the 

people of Chorazin and Bethsaida, so it will surely be 

with Achan. As the Apostles declare, these typical experiences 

of the past were set forth as an ensample of 

the destruction which will be the ultimate punishment of 

all who wilfully, knowingly and intelligently reject the 

Lord's ways.— I Corinthians 10:11; Jude 7. 

COVETOUSNESS IN OUR DAY 

Perhaps at no time in the world's history was there 
ever so much covetousness as in our day. How few 
comparatively in any city, in any nation, would do very 
differently from what Achan did! If all such were to 
be stoned to death and to be burned, the world would be 
one vast funeral pyre. True, they are not deterred by 
fear of any such punishment. Nevertheless, a large proportion 
of them profess to believe that for all such sins 
the penalty is eternal torture. Yea, many who are ready 
to condemn the curse of Joshua and the Israelites in the 
stoning of Achan, are ready to believe that the God of 
Love, the God of all Grace, the Father of all Mercies, 
would do ten times worse by Achan and by practically 
the entire human family— all except saintly ones who have 
come into vital relationship with the Redeemer. 

Alas, how twisted our minds have become! How 
glad we are that the true light is now shining, and chasing 
away to some extent our hobgoblins of error and false 
doctrine handed down to us from the Dark Ages, and 
wrongly supposed to be teachings of the Bible! 

COVETOUSNESS IN THE CONSECRATED 

When we remember that Jordan represents consecration, 
and that those who crossed Jordan typically represented 
those Christians who have entered into a Covenant 
with God and who have been begotten of the Spirit; and 
when we remember that the conquests of Canaan represented 
the spiritual battles of the consecrated and the 
subjugation and possession of the citadel of the heart, the 
sin of Achan has a new force and meaning. It corresponded 
closely to the sin of Ananias and Sapphira. They 
had devoted, or consecrated, their property to the Lord's 
service, and then attempted to take back a portion of the 
devoted wealth. They would rob God. They would steal 
back that which they had given to Him. This class seems 
to be especially represented in Achan. He stole, not from 
his brethren, but from the Lord, things which had been 
devoted to the Lord. 

The name Christian today has a very wide application, 
and in general signifies a civilized person. But the term 
Christian really belongs only to a comparatively small 
class of humanity— to those who, believing the Message 
of Jesus, have made consecration of their lives to be His 



disciples, His footstep followers. These have accepted 
His terms— "If any man will be My disciple, let him 
deny himself and take up his cross and follow Me." 
This is the class, typified by Israel, who have entered 
the antitypical Canaan, who are fighting the good fight 
and who would recognize all the spoils of their warfare 
as consecrated to the Lord. 

It is for these to inquire respecting their own faithfulness, 
loyalty. Each of them should inquire, Am I 
keeping and holding as my own any portion of what was 
consecrated to God? If they are keeping back as their 
own any portion of that which was devoted to the Lord, 
they are in danger of being part of the antitypical Achan. 
They are in danger of exercising an injurious influence 
on others of the Church; and not only so, but they are 
in danger of that fate which was typically illustrated in 
Achan's case— in danger of the utter destruction of the 
Second Death— everlasting destruction. 

R5351 : page 346 

"COVETOUSNESS, WHICH IS IDOLATRY" 

The Apostle declares that "Covetousness is idolatry." 
It puts first and most prominently the thing which is 
coveted; and when this coveted thing is contrary to the 
Divine will, it signifies that the coveted thing is esteemed 
more than God— is desired more than the Divine favor. 
From this viewpoint the whole world is full of idolatry 
today. The idols most worshiped are wealth and pleasure. 
These occupy the time and the attention of nearly everybody. 
Time and strength, honor and manhood and 
womanhood, are poured out lavishly for these "idols." 
On the contrary, the true God, from whom comes every 
perfect gift, receives but slight attention from the masses 
of His creatures. His laws and His will, His pleasure and 
His favor are scarcely thought of. 

What is the result? Has the worship of mammon 
been real joy or peace and satisfaction to the hearts of 
humanity? Has the pursuit of pleasure and the devoting 
to it of time, talents and money brought real pleasure of 
soul to the masses? This question must be answered in 
the negative. Wealth is being pursued and bowed down 
to on every hand, yet grants its favor to only a comparatively 
small number, and even the favored ones find 
bitterness mingled with their sweets. The possession of 
wealth brings not the joy and peace which they had hoped 
and believed. It has brought care, perplexity and still 
greater hunger, which they know not how to satisfy. 

So it is with the worship and pursuit of pleasure. It is 
an ever-continuing chase and seeking for pleasure. The 
grasping of it seems to bring, not joy, but discontent and 
heart-hunger. As a result the worshipers of mammon 
and pleasure are unhappy. The world is discontented, and 
apparently growing more so as the days pass by. 

Man is so constituted by nature that his finest and 



noblest sentiments, which bring him the most satisfaction, 
joy and peace, rest and happiness, are the exercise 
of his mind and talents God-ward. According to St. Paul, 
all men by nature should be feeling after God, desiring to 
find Him. But, alas, many of the noblest of God's people, 
who have found rest and peace through a knowledge of 
the length and breadth and height and depth of 

"Love Divine, all love excelling," 
are not only not helping the world to find the true God, 
but, on the contrary, actually misdirecting them! 

The monstrous misrepresentations received by us from 
the Dark Ages we have heartily repudiated. And yet 
we are holding up these misrepresentations of the Divine 
Character and Plan before the world, and in so doing 
are turning them away from God and from the Bible— 
to seek rest of soul and peace and joy in the worship of 
mammon and the pursuit of pleasure, which can bring 
only disappointments. Alas, how long will it be before 
we openly acknowledge to the world that we have repudiated 
the monstrous teachings of our creeds and have 
accepted the teachings of the Bible that God is Love, 
and that He has a gracious Plan whereby through Jesus 
all who will may be recovered and enter into rest! 



R5351 : page 346 

THE LOGOS MADE FLESH 

-DECEMBER 21. -JOHN 1:1-18.- 

"And the Logos became flesh, 
and dwelt among us."— V.14. 

OUR Christmas Study is one of the most beautiful 
in the whole Bible. Genesis goes back 
to the beginning of things earthly; but this 
lesson goes back to the beginning of all 
beginnings, when God was alone. The very 
beginning of Divine operation was the 
Logos— "the Beginning of the creation of 
God"— "the First-born of every creature."— 
Revelation 3:14; Colossians 1:15. 

Logos signifies mouthpiece, or special 
messenger. Not only so— not only was the Logos the 
beginning, or Alpha— but He was also the last, the Omega, 
of Divine creation, as He Himself informs us. (Revelation 1:11; 
21:6.) The first and only begotten Son of 
Jehovah was given an exclusive place, so that "all things 
were made by Him, and without Him was not anything 
made that was made." (V.3.) Thus highly did the 
Father honor Him as His Agent in all the creative work, 
both as respects angels, cherubim and men. 

The Greek text is not fully represented in our Common 



R5352 : page 346 

Version. Accurately translated it reads, "The Logos was 
with the God and the Logos was a god; the same was 
in the beginning with the God." Here the majesty of 
our Redeemer in His prehuman condition is fully set 
forth, and yet He is distinctly shown to be the Son and 
not the Father— to be a god and not the God. 

The word god signifies mighty one; but there is only 
one God whose name is the Almighty. St. Paul affirms 
this great truth, saying, "To us there is one God, the 
Father, of whom are all things; and one Lord Jesus 
Christ, by whom are all things, and we by Him." (I Corinthians 8:6.) 
Again, the Apostle writes, "The head of 
every man is Christ; and the head of the woman is the 
man; and the Head of Christ is God." (1 Corinthians 11:3.) 
This is the claim that Jesus made for Himself— 
not that He was the Father, or Jehovah, but that He was 
the Son of God, who came to do the will of His Father 
in Heaven. 

The so-called doctrine of the Trinity, put into the 
Nicene Creed by Emperor Constantine, A.D. 325, has 
been the cause of much of our confusion when studying 
the Bible, which contains neither the word trinity nor any 
suggestion of it, except in the one passage acknowledged 
by all scholars to be spurious, namely, I John 5:7. This 
passage is not found in any of the old Greek manuscripts. 

The Redeemer was not deceitful when He prayed to 
the Father with strong cryings and tears, "My God! My 
God!" Neither was He deceitful when He declared to 
Mary after His resurrection, "I have not yet ascended to 
My Father and to your Father, to My God and to your 
God." He declared His oneness with the Father, and 
desired that a similar oneness should prevail amongst 
His followers— oneness of spirit, of purpose. Therefore 
He prayed for His Church, "That they all may be one, 
even as I, Father, and Thou, are one."— John 17:21-23. 

"THE LOGOS BECAME FLESH" 

St. Paul tells us of how He who was rich on the spirit 
plane for our sakes became poor, leaving the Heavenly 
comforts for the scenes of this world, darkened by sin 
and death. (2 Corinthians 8:9.) And so our lesson tells 
us also. (V.14.) "The Logos became flesh and dwelt 
among us, and we beheld His glory, the glory as of the 
Only Begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth." 
St. Paul also corroborates this, declaring that our Lord 
stooped from His high position, took the bondman's form 
and was found in fashion as a man, of the seed of 
Abraham. (Philippians 2:7,8; Hebrews 2:16.) But lest 
we should get the wrong thought, that He had become 
a sinful man, we are guarded by the assurance that He 
was "holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners." 
(Hebrews 7:26.) We are also assured that His body 
was especially prepared, separate and different from 



R5352 : page 347 

others of our race, all of whom were of Adamic stock 
and all tainted with sin and the seeds of death.— 
Hebrews 10:5-9. 

But, on the other hand, we are to guard ourselves 
against the thought that the Logos remained a spirit being 
and merely materialized, or appeared in human form. 
This unscriptural thought is the one held by many, and 
styled incarnation. The angels incarnated, or got into 
flesh, when they materialized from time to time, as described 
in the Old Testament Scriptures. Our Lord Himself 
incarnated, or appeared in the flesh, to Abraham in 
company with others; and He talked with Abraham, who 
knew not that he was entertaining Heavenly beings, mistaking 
them for human travelers. 

Similarly Jesus after His resurrection appeared in 
various forms of flesh. That is to say, He materialized, 
or incarnated, for the purpose of teaching certain lessons 
to His disciples, because after His resurrection He was 
a spirit being, as He was before He was made flesh. 
As a spirit being, He appeared and disappeared, the 
doors being shut. Thus He taught His disciples a 
double lesson: 

(1) That He was no longer dead, but risen; 

(2) That He was no longer a human, but a spirit 
being— "put to death in the flesh, but made alive in the 
spirit."— I Peter 3:18— Emphatic Diaglott. 

A RANSOM, OR CORRESPONDING-PRICE 

As Bible students we are learning that we must strive 
more earnestly than we have done to keep close to the 
Word of God. It was the perfect man Adam who sinned 
and was sentenced to death, and under the Divine Law 
he could be redeemed only by the sacrifice of a perfect 
man. The Law declares, "An eye for an eye, a tooth 
for a tooth, and a man's life for a man's life." Hence 
the blood of bulls and goats could never make atonement 
for Adam's sin; for they did not correspond. It was 
not a bullock nor a goat that had sinned and was to 
be redeemed, but a perfect man. 

Because all of the human family were children of 
Adam and sharers in his death sentence, therefore, "no 
man could give to God a ransom for his brother." (Psalm 49:7.) 
God so shut up the matter that Adam and his 
race could not have been redeemed except by the finding 
of a perfect man who would be willing voluntarily to 
die on their behalf. It was because there was no such 
man that God arranged with the Logos, His only begotten, 
that he should become a man and be the Redeemer 
of the race— Adam and all his children. 

But even this might not be demanded of the Logos. 
The Heavenly Father, therefore, as St. Paul points out, 
set before His Son, the Logos, a great proposition; 



namely, that if He would demonstrate His faith and 

loyalty to the extent of becoming man's Redeemer, the 

Father would still more highly exalt Him and make Him 

partaker of the Divine nature, far above angels and 

every name that is named. (Hebrews 12:2; Philippians 2:5-11.) 

The Logos, full of faith and obedience, heartily 

entered into the proposition, was made flesh, consecrated 

His life, kept nothing back, finished the work at Calvary, 

and was raised from the dead by the Father to the 

Heavenly nature and glory and honor. 

"THE LIGHT OF THE WORLD" 

The Logos was made Jesus. The work of Jesus in 
the flesh, however, is not the completion of the Divine 
Plan, but merely the beginning of it. His death constitutes 
the basis of all future blessings to the Church and 
to the world. According to the Father's Plan, an elect 
class was to be gathered out of Israel and out of every 
nation to be the Church of Christ, His Bride, associates 
with Him in His Throne, glory and work. 

With the completion of the Elect, the Kingdom for 
which we pray, "Thy Kingdom come," is to be established. 
Satan is to be bound; all evil is to be brought to 
an end; every good influence and enlightenment is to be 
shed; and He who died for the world is thus to become 
the Light of the world. He has not yet been the Light 
of the world, but merely a light to His people. As St. 
John declared, His light shined in darkness, and was 
not appreciated. Similarly the light of Truth upheld by 
His consecrated Church will not be appreciated, so strong 
are the powers of the Prince of Darkness influencing 
the minds of the world, which, as yet, lies in the Wicked 
One. -I John 5: 19.-Diaglott. 

But the Prince of Life and His Kingdom will cause 
the light of the knowledge of the glory of God to fill 
the whole earth, as the waters cover the great deep 
(Habakkuk 2:14), so that none shall need to say to his 
brother, Know thou the Lord, for all shall know Him, 
from the least to the greatest. (Jeremiah 31:34.) Thus 
according to His promise Jesus eventually will be "the 
true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into 
the world." (V.9.) The great mass of humanity have 
never seen nor even heard of this true Light— not merely 
the heathen millions, but the masses in civilized lands. 

The resurrection of the just will be necessary to bring 
the Church to glory and joint-heirship with her Lord. 
But the resurrection of the unjustified, which includes 
practically all humanity, will be for the very purpose of 
permitting them to see the true Light, which God has 
provided in His Son and which will be shed abroad during 
His Millennial Kingdom. Only those who refuse the light, 
preferring the darkness, will die the Second Death. 

"POWER TO BECOME SONS" 



John the Baptist was a messenger sent to call attention 
to the Light, but he was not the Light. He was not 
even one of the Church class, of whom Jesus said, "Ye 
are the light of the world"; for John the Baptist did not 
continue to live to the time of the begetting of the 
Spirit, after our Lord's sacrifice. 

The world recognized not the great One who was in 
it, the Logos, by whom it was made. His own nation 
recognized Him not, but crucified Him. Yet some then 
and some since have received Him, and to such He has 
given the power, the right, the liberty, the privilege, to 
become children of God. No such privilege was given 
to the Jews, nor to any of the fallen race, until Pentecost 
—after Jesus had appeared in the presence of God 
to make atonement for our sins. 

These sons are all begotten of the Holy Spirit. Theirs 
is not a fleshly sonship. Their birth of the Spirit will 
be the resurrection change, when they shall be made like 
their Master, see Him as He is and share His glory. 



CHRIST IN THE HEART 

As some rare perfume in a vase of clay 
Pervades it with a fragrance not its own, 

So when Thou dwellest in a mortal soul, 

All Heaven's own sweetness seems around it thrown. 

The heart alone, like a neglected harp, 

Grows out of tune, and needs Thy hand Divine; 

Dwell Thou within it, tune and touch its chords, 
Till every note and string shall answer Thine. 
MRS. H. B. STOWE. 



R5353 : page 348 

"CHOOSE YE THIS DAY" 

-DECEMBER 28. -JOHN 3:16.- 

"For God so loved the world that He gave His only-begotten 
Son, that whosoever believeth in Him should not perish, 
but have everlasting life." 

THE closing of the year and the opening of a 
new one is properly considered an opportune 
time for an inventory or balancing of the 
books and the carrying forward of profit 
and loss, and the determination of advantageous 
policies for the future. It would be 
a pity and a shame for all of us if we should 
be thus prudent in respect to earthly matters, 
and careless as respects higher interests. 



We may safely say that no human 

soul can strike a thoroughly satisfactory balance of accounts 

at the close of this year unless Jesus has been a 

partner and counselor and guide. And every one dissatisfied 

with his status of affairs at the close of the 

year— every one who finds himself weary and heavy-laden, 

perplexed and discouraged— we would like to have 

know how to begin the new year aright by entering into 

covenant relationship with the Redeemer, who declares, 

"Come unto Me, all ye that labor and are heavy-laden, 

and I will give you rest." 

Today's Study is full of helpful instructions. The 
very first lesson that all need to learn is that "God so 
loved the world." No other message than that has any 
attraction for thinking people. The difficulty with the 
world and with the Church in the past has been that we 
have not emphasized the Love of God. How could we 
do so when our eyes of understanding were misdirected 
by our creeds away from the God of the Bible to a creedal 
image which pictured the Heavenly Father in most 
Satanic colors— more loveless, more unjust, more diabolical 
than any human being we have ever known and than 
any demon we can possibly imagine! It is well for us 
as Christians that we have tried to forget those horrible 
pictures and instead to fill our minds with precious 
Scripture texts such as the one of today's lesson. 

But while we have thus gotten away from the "doctrines 
of devils," as St. Paul calls them (I Timothy 4:1), 
we forget that Christendom is still holding up those terribly 
slanderous creeds before the world, hindering them 
from getting even a glimpse of the length, breadth, height 
and depth of the "Love of God which passeth all understanding 
and giving them, instead, awful misrepresentations 
—of the height and depth and length and breadth 
of Divine injustice. We have thus been unintentionally 
driving the world away from God, instead of helping them 
in their endeavor to feel after a Friend, the true God. 

But the people of God are awakening to the Truth, 
and gradually gaining courage to assert it and to "show 
forth the praises of Him who called us out of darkness 
into His marvelous light." We are now met with the difficulty 
that the world has so thoroughly believed our 
blasphemy of the Divine character that they can scarcely 
believe the gracious Message of the Bible when we 
bring it to them— the message of great joy. 

"MIGHT NOT PERISH" 

The very text we are considering illustrates our 
bondage, our blindness of the past, and tells us of God's 
righteousness. It does not say, as we once supposed, 
that God gave His only begotten Son to save us from 
eternal torture. Quite to the contrary, it declares that 
His mission was and is to save from perishing. We know 
what perishing signifies. The brute beasts, when they 
die, perish, because God has made no provision for their 



resurrection. And mankind under the death sentence, 
"Dying, thou shalt die," would have perished like the 
brute beast, without hope, had it not been for God's 
mercy and provision in Christ. "Christ died for our 
sins"— "tasted death for every man"— to the intent that, 
the sentence of death having been thus satisfied, all men 
might have a resurrection. 

Without the death of Jesus our race would perish like 
the brute beast. Because of His death there is to be a 
resurrection, not only of the just who now come into 
harmony with God through faith, but also of the unjust— 
the unjustified, who have not yet come to a knowledge of 
God, whose eyes of understanding have not yet been 
opened to see the grace of God and its length and breadth 
and height and depth. Thus we read that "as all in Adam 

R5354 : page 348 

die, so all in Christ shall be made alive." Even "as by a 
man came death, by a man also [Christ Jesus] comes the 
resurrection of the dead"— "every man in his own order." 

It is St. Paul himself who particularly points out to 
us that, unless there be a resurrection of the dead, there 
is no hope of a future life, but all who have fallen asleep 
are perished. It is he who points out that, because Jesus 
died for our sins and has been raised from the dead by 
the Father, we have an assurance that all who sleep in 
Jesus— all who were purchased by the redeeming blood— 
the whole world of mankind— will God bring from the 
dead with Him. Therefore we need not sorrow as those 
who have no hope— even in respect to our friends and 
relatives who are not in Christ and have not the hope of 
the Church.— See I Corinthians 15. 

THE "BETTER RESURRECTION" 

The chief resurrection to glory, honor and immortality 
is only for those who are called during this Gospel Age, 
who receive the call into honest hearts, and who lay aside 
every weight and run the race for the prize with patience. 
These saintly ones Jesus declares will constitute the Royal 
Priesthood, who, in association with Himself as the Royal 
Chief Priest, will be engaged in blessing the world, restoring 
the world, resurrecting the world from sin and death, 
during the thousand years of his Messianic Reign. 

The resurrection of the Church begins in the present 
life with believers, who in their minds rise in newness of 
life into Christ. (Colossians 3:1.) These will be perfected 
by the instantaneous change mentioned by the 
Apostle, "When this mortal shall put on immortality," 
they "shall be changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an 
eye"; for "flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom 
of God."— I Corinthians 15:50. 

"WHOSOEVER BELIEVETH IN HIM" 



The Divine Plan is purposely arranged so that none 
can obtain everlasting life except through a personal 
relationship to Christ, the Redeemer, and the exercise of 
faith in His redeeming blood and obedience to His counsels. 
This being true, none of the heathen are saved yet. 
None of those who lived before Jesus came into the 
world are saved. And the great mass of our friends and 
neighbors, yea, of our own families, are still unsaved, 
because they have not come into vital relationship with 
the Savior. "He that hath the Son hath life"; "he that 
hath not the Son shall not see life."— I John 5:12; 
John 3:36. 

"TESTIFIED IN DUE TIME" 

St. Paul, commenting upon the fact that Jesus died 
for all— a Ransom-price for all— declares that this is to 
be testified in due time. (I Timothy 2:5,6.) God's due 
time for the testimony to reach the world evidently has 
not yet come. The testimony began when Jesus "brought 
life and immortality to light through His Gospel." As 
we read, "So great salvation began to be spoken by our 
Lord."— Hebrews 2:3. 

Since then, a few here and there have had the hearing 

R5354 : page 349 

ear, have heard of the grace of God and have seen something 
of His Divine providences. Jesus congratulated 
this class, saying, "Blessed are your eyes, for they see, 
and your ears, for they hear." The great mass of mankind 
see not and hear not, because, as St. Paul explained, 
the God of this world hath blinded the minds of those 
that believe not, that thus he might hinder them from 
seeing the true light of the grace of God, as it shines 
in the face of our Lord Jesus.— 2 Corinthians 4:4-6. 

God has permitted this blindness, but declares that it 
will soon end; that under the blessed influences of 
Messiah's Kingdom the true light shall shine everywhere; 
and not only so, but He also assures us that "all the blind 
eyes shall be opened, and all the deaf ears shall be unstopped. 
What a blessed vista this opens before us on 
behalf of the poor world! We see that God has special 
grace and blessing for His faithful Church, the Little 
Flock, the saints; but now we perceive that He has a 
blessing also for the world, although a different blessing 
from that which He has provided for the Church. 

Our text tells us of this, assuring us that God not 
only loved the Church, but also loved the world— not only 
redeemed the Church, but also redeemed the world. All 
will have an opportunity that, by believing, they may 
attain everlasting life. The life provided for the world, 
however, according to the Bible, will be very different 
from that provided for the Church. The latter are to 
have life on the Divine plane, being made partakers of 
the Divine nature; and they are to be sharers of the 



glory, honor and immortality of the Master. The world, 
by faith and obedience during the Messianic Kingdom, 
will be privileged to re-attain the earthly life and perfection 
which Adam lost, and which Jesus redeemed for the 
world at Calvary. 

All the willing and obedient may thus come into relationship 
with the Life-giver and obtain the everlasting 
life, the eternal life, which was given to Father Adam 
conditionally and lost by disobedience. Nevertheless, all 
who will refuse this grace of God in Christ and fail to 
come into vital union with Him will perish. But they 
will not perish in the first, or Adamic death, from which 
all were redeemed and will be rescued by the Master. 
Their perishing will be in the Second Death, for their 
own wilful sins, and there will be no hope of recovery; 
"for Christ dieth no more." None will be redeemed from 
the Second Death. 



R5353 : page 349 

"MARRIAGE IS HONORABLE" 



NO MATTER what others may say or do, each 

one of the Lord's people is to be guided in 

his judgment by the letter and spirit of 

God's Word, the Bible. It declares, "Marriage 

is honorable in all, and the marriage-bed 

not impure." (Hebrews 13:4.) St. 

Paul recommended that such of the Lord's 

people as desired to give themselves, completely, 

to the Divine service would doubtless 

be able to accomplish their sacrifice 

joyfully by remaining unmarried. He tells his reason 

for this argument; but he does not say that the 

marriage state is unholy or impure or in any way contrary 

to God's law. He merely declared that the married 

man, properly enough, would seek to please his wife, 

and that the married woman would, naturally and properly, 

seek to please her husband. 

Thus, to be in the married condition would more or 
less take away from the singleness of purpose with 
which the individual would be able to serve God in body 
and in spirit. (1 Cor. 7:32-35.) St. Paul reminds the 
Church that he had found the single, or celibate, condition 
advantageous— that he was able to accomplish 
greater service than if he had been more or less mortgaged 
by the care of a companion and the necessary duties 
toward that one. 

But St. Paul points out distinctly that there is no law 
of God to prohibit brothers and sisters in the Lord from 
marrying if they find, in their judgment, that this is 
the necessary or preferable thing in their cases— if they 
believe that thereby they can carry out their consecration 
vows the more acceptably. 



We mention this because in some instances brethren 
and sisters, in counseling the unmarried, have been going 
beyond what is written— laying upon them burdens 
which the Lord has never declared— telling them that 
to marry means to lose the prize of our High Calling. 
Good intentions cannot justify one in such a course. 

Additionally, we heard recently of a dear couple who 
have an infant child, which properly they very dearly 
love. The mother was shocked by some sisters intimating 
to her that it should be considered a disgrace to 
be a mother, in view of our expectation of great changes 
shortly. 

We believe that those dear sisters made a mistake. 
They, of course, have a right to think for themselves and 
to shape their own courses in life according to their best 
judgment of the Lord's will. But they have no right to 
censure others for having a different opinion on the subject. 
To his own Master each servant stands or falls. 
Nothing in the Bible speaks disrespectfully of either 
fatherhood or motherhood— quite to the contrary. 

If, as the Apostle suggests, some of the Lord's people 
mutually agree to live celibate lives, it is a matter of 
their own concern. If they thus make themselves 
eunuchs in the interests of the Lord's cause, that they 
may have the more opportunity, energy and means to 
invest in the service of God, it is their sacrifice at their 
own option, and they are to look to the Lord for such reward 
as He sees best. But if it is their option and 
they are to be rewarded, we should remember that others 
have an equal option and may, if they think proper, take 
an opposite course without condemnation from us, and, 
indeed, without our feeling that we have even the least 
right to interfere with their social rights and privileges. 

The Golden Rule is very helpful to us in our dealing 
with the brethren as well as in our dealings with the 
world. We should do toward others as we would that 
they should do toward us. We should grant them the 
same liberties that we think proper for ourselves. 

We fear that some of our readers have not given 
sufficient attention to Chapter xii. of Vol. VI. of 
STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, which examines this subject 
in detail. 



R5354 : page 349 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
EVIL SPIRITS AND THE EDITOR'S COMMENT 

DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

Greetings in the name of our dear Redeemer and King. I 
take this opportunity of reporting to you what, to my mind, is 
a most remarkable manifestation of the fallen angels. 

Some six weeks ago I started to do some Extension work in 



a private way, there being no class here. 

Much interest was aroused, and four symbolized their consecration. 
Among these was a young man, Brother J. He 
grew rapidly, and gave all the evidences of begetting of the 
Holy Spirit. 

One day he asked Brother B. if he had ever been bothered 
by the fallen angels. Brother B. said no; he never gave them 
an occasion, and asked Brother J. if he had ever been troubled. 

R5354 : page 350 

He said no; but thought he had seen something at his window, 
remarking that he had not been to the Lord with the matter. 

That evening the friends were to have a testimony meeting 
at Brother B.'s house. Brother B. invited Brother J. to have 
supper with him. He did so. In the meantime they went out 
to do some chores, and while they were out Brother J.'s father 
came in and told those in the house that his son was going 
crazy. Brother J. went in and soon after was told what his 
father had said. He went back to Brother B. and told him 
about it. Then he stepped away out of sight to pray. When 
he came back he said it was all right. 

The two then returned to the house, and Brother J. asked 
them if they thought they had ever had a trial. They said, 
Yes. He told them they had had no trial. He stepped away 
and lifted his hand as if to pray and said, "Listen!" 
Then he came back to them and said that they should not 
worry, everything was all right. 

They then went to supper and Brother J. was asked to invoke 
the blessing. He had no more than finished when he 
jumped from the table and began to bounce over the room and 
scatter the furniture and to talk in an unknown tongue. This 
lasted about two minutes and then it left him. He said, "Isn't 
this awful? they are trying to break down the Truth." All 
suggested that they pray, and did so, Brother J. joining in. 
But he broke right out again. 

When he is rational he says that it is the fallen angels; but 
his people think him crazy. He warned his wife against the 
evil spirits and said that they were very cunning, and he could 
not resist doing the things they told him to do. He remembers 
all he has done, but is in a stupor much of the time. 

The whole country is worked up, and people have suddenly 
become very bitter against the Truth. Do you think this 
might be permitted more extensively, thus bringing reproach 
upon the Truth and the Lord's people? 

Should you have any suggestions to make, we would be 
very pleased to hear from you. 

Your brother by His grace, BEN H. BOYD. 

THE EDITOR'S REPLY 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

Your letter is before me. The case you relate is a sad one. 
I fully agree with you that Satan and all the fallen angels 
would be specially desirous of gaining an influence over those 
who espouse the cause of Present Truth. In proportion as 



we have the Truth and present it, we are their enemies, even 
as they are the enemies of the Lord and of the Truth. The 
only safe course for anybody, and especially anybody accepting 
Present Truth, is to follow the suggestions of the Vow. Whoever 
recognizes that there are only two masters— Christ and 
Satan— should resolve to have nothing whatever to do with 
anything that is of Satan. 

Such should be as speedily as possible informed respecting 
the fallen angels and their constant endeavor to misrepresent 
the Truth and to injure humanity— especially the "children of 

R5355 : page 350 

the light." They should be shown that all occult, spiritual 

influences are evil; that the holy angels indeed have a charge 

concerning the saints, but not to give them instruction of any 

kind. The Bible most explicitly declares that the Word of 

God is sufficient that the man of God may be thoroughly furnished. 

(2 Tim. 3:16,17.) We are not therefore to expect 

visions or revelations or any kind of communications from the 

Lord or the holy angels. We are to conclude that all such 

attempts to communicate with us are of the Adversary and to 

shun them accordingly. 

In the instance you mention, Brother J. evidently yielded his 
will to some extent; else he would not have been entrapped. 
While obedient to the Lord, we are entirely safe— then the 
evil spirits cannot do us injury. "The wicked one toucheth 
him not." But the slightest yielding of the will, as through 
curiosity, is dangerous, as those in insane asylums demonstrate. 
It is estimated that fully one-half of all those in 
insane asylums have no functional brain disorder, but are 
merely possessed of evil spirits. 

In a case like that of Brother J. no time should be lost in 
doing everything possible for him. A brother who is in 
close fellowship with the Lord should be for a time his constant 
companion, continually stimulating him to courage in 
the exercise of his will in resisting the evil angels and in 
joining with him in prayer. If in spite of all these assistances 
the evil spirits still get him under their control, we 
advise that said companion exorcise the evil spirit in the 
name of the Lord— saying, "In the name of the Lord Jesus 
Christ I command the evil spirit to depart from him and to 
enter him no more." 

Please read this letter to the brother and assure him of 
my sympathy. 

"THE TOWER" GROWS DEEPER AND SWEETER 

DEARLY BELOVED BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

The July 15th issue of THE WATCH TOWER has come to 
hand, and as usual it is full of helpfulness. I am unceasingly 
and increasingly thankful to the dear Father in heaven for 
the wonderful manner in which He has put His blessing upon 
you as you have sought to serve His flock through the pages 
of that precious journal. I count it a privilege to confess both 
privately and publicly that if I am one of those so favored 



as to be a sharer in the glory of the Kingdom, as I hope to be, 
the grace of God will have brought me there in large measure 
through the edifying influence of the articles in THE TOWER. 

THE TOWER grows grander and its messages deeper and 
sweeter. As the Lord makes me to grow in grace in spite of 
all those infirmities in my flesh which would hold me back, 
the uplift each succeeding number of THE TOWER gives me 
becomes more and more apparent, and my prayers are multiplied 
for you in your labor of love. We appreciate it, dear 
Brother, and better still the Lord appreciates it, too. 

In the current number of THE WATCH TOWER you quote 
some views which Prof. Flinders Petrie has given expression 
to, and I feared that some might infer that you wished to give 
emphatic endorsement to the Professor's ideas. My first impression 
was that this was a wonderful truth, but when I went 
to compare it with the Bible the erroneousness of it was 
readily apparent. However, I know that you are too busily 
engaged to find time to look thoroughly into the many matters 
of secondary importance brought to your attention, and in 
addition it would be natural that in a thing of this kind we 
would suppose that Prof. Petrie would have gone carefully 
over it before putting forth such a theory. But I fear that he 
gave his views without sufficient study. 

The extract from the July TOWER, page 216, is as follows: 

"Prof. Flinders Petrie calls attention to the fact that the 
Hebrew word alaf is used in the Scriptures sometimes to 
mean a thousand, and at other times to signify a group, families, 
or tents, very much in the same way that we use the 
word regiment, as signifying a group of a thousand men, yet 
often far less in number, especially after a battle. Thus understood, 
the record, 'Judah 74,600,' would read, 'Judah, 
seventy-four families, or tents, with six hundred men in all'; 
'so they set forward, every one after their families, according 
to the house of their fathers.'— Num. 2:34." 

Now it is true that the Hebrew word for a thousand is also 
sometimes used to signify a family or tribe, but it would be 
impossible to give it that application in the Pentateuch for the 
following reasons: 

In the second chapter of Numbers we have the number of 
each of the twelve tribes given, but there is also given the 
sum of the numbers of the three tribes on each side of the 
tabernacle. If you figure up these statements it will be found 
that they are figured on the basis of thousands. The following 
table will illustrate it: 

Tribe. Thousands. Hundreds. 

Numbers 2:18,19. Ephraim 40 500 

Numbers 2:20,21. Manasseh 32 200 

Numbers 2:22,23. Benjamin 35 400 

Numbers 2:24. Total 108,100 

But according to Professor Petrie the total ought to be 
107 families of 1,100 persons. 

Another passage will serve to further illustrate it, viz., 
Num. 3:42-5 1 . Here we are told that the number of the first-born 



are twenty-two thousand two hundred and seventy-three. 
Now it seems incredible that all the first-born were gathered 
together into twenty-two families; they must have been scattered 
all through the host of Israel. Then verses 46-50 indicate 
that there were 273 more first-born than Levites, but 
according to the interpretation of Prof. Flinders Petrie, 273 
would be the whole number of the Israelites. 

Other examples of this inconsistency are plentiful in the 
book of Numbers, but I believe these will suffice. 

Please consider this not in the nature of an attempt at criticism, 
but merely as an humble effort to present facts which 
your busy life may have prevented you from following up. 

The Lord continues very good to me in assisting me each 
day to glorify Him in the Pilgrim service. I realize that my 
efforts are very imperfect, but they are nothing like what they 
would be if I attempted this work in my own strength. Every 
day He is proving to me the faithfulness with which He 
keeps the promise that all things will be supervised by Him 
to our good, and that His grace will be sufficient. 

With much Christian love, and wishing you many spiritual 
joys even in the midst of your earthly trials, I remain, 
Yours by His favor, BENJ. H. BARTON. 

page 351 

TIME SHORT FOR CULTIVATION OF FRUITS 

DEARLY BELOVED BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

On my arrival here last evening, THE WATCH TOWER for 
October 15, was received. A little later I read, with much 
interest, the leading article: "Resume of the Ending of the 
Times of the Gentiles." 

The writer is very much interested in this matter: (1) 
Because we are sure that we are right at the end of that 
period; and (2) because so many of the friends are now, 
more than ever, discussing that wonderful event— the termination 
of the "Times of the Gentiles." 

It is only natural and reasonable that the brethren should 
now be particularly interested in this question; for we are 
very close to the fulfilment of the prophecies which relate 
to the ending of that period and to the winding up of the 
present order of things. 

Dear Brother, I wish to state here that your advice to 
WATCH TOWER readers in WATCH TOWER articles during 
the past two or three years, not to lay too much stress on 
any particular date, but to give special attention to character 
building, has had an excellent effect. Evidently the friends 
are coming to realize more and more that to cultivate the 
fruits of the Spirit is the principal thing; and that we need all 
the time remaining for that purpose— whether it shall prove 
to be one year, or two years, or less, or more. 

And in the event of the Lord's having permitted a slight 
mistake to be made, relative to the ending of the Gentile 
Times, or even the time when the last member of the Church 
shall be glorified, I do not think it would prove a stumbling-block 
to very many, if any, of the dear friends who are in 



Present Truth; for like you and myself, they are laying 
stress on their consecration to God for all Eternity— not to 
1914 or to 1915. 

Yours in His love, FRANK DRAPER. 



RESTITUTION SOLDIER BUGS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We have some of the beginnings of Restitution on our 
farm; and I thought that you might like to know about 
them. 

We have a bug which destroys the potato bug, which 
has been such a pest of late years. This bug is called the 
soldier bug, and is really a kind of beetle. I am sending you 
in this same mail a specimen in a small box. 

This "soldier bug" has red markings about the head, and 
a red shield-shaped mark on its back. It has a sword-like 
proboscis which it runs out, spears the potato bugs with, 
and sucks the juice out of them. It comes to the house to 
winter. There were several of these bugs on our potatoes 
this year. We had only a small patch, and we did not have 
to put a bit of Paris-green on them. 

We overheard, when traveling one day, a conversation 
between two commercial travelers concerning this bug. The 
one said that the other day he was in a store and a farmer 
came in. The store-keeper asked him how many pounds 
of Paris-green he should need this year. "Oh, not a pound," 
replied the farmer, "I have the soldier bugs at my place." 
This same farmer, so the store-keeper said, had other years 
taken several pounds of Paris-green. Surely, this is Restitution! 

This soldier bug is found here and there all through the 
country. It attacks the potato bug in both the larvae and the 
full-grown state. 

Your sister in Christ, BESSIE TATE. 



GARDEN PEA-BEANS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Last spring a brother in the West sent me a supply of pea-beans, 
assuring me "they are very good." I planted them in 
rows similar to pea-planting and find they bloom and bear 
continuously from early summer until cut by frost in the 
fall. We are still picking them for table use at this date, 
October 14. 

We have more seed than we need. Am sending you a supply 
for such of THE TOWER readers as have garden space and may 
desire some to plant next spring. Should they wish to pay 
the postage on as many as you could apportion, that would, 
of course, be their privilege; I donate them. 

I might state, the stalk resembles a bean stalk, but within 
the long pods are peas, and suitable for cooking in the pods 
green, or, after ripening, shelled. They are tender and taste 



unlike beans or peas. We all like them. Until nearly ripe 
the pods are stringless or nearly so. 
In Christian love, your brother and servant in the Lord, 
J. A. BOHNET. 



page 351 

BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 

THE RESURRECTION INHERITANCE OF THE NEW 
CREATION 

JANUARY 4 

Read p. 699, par. 3, to p. 703, par. 1. 

(12) After the resurrection of the Ancient Worthies, how 
may we expect the gradual resurrection of the world to proceed? 
P. 699, par. 3; P. 700, par. 1. 

(13) Will it not be necessary for every member of the 
human race to go down into actual death before experiencing 
the resurrection? P. 700, par. 2; P. 701, par. 1. 

(14) What reasonable suggestion has been made respecting 
the manner in which those of the world who have gone 
down into the tomb will be brought forth? P. 701, par. 2. 

(15) Explain why the real meaning of the word resurrection 
has been lost sight of. P. 702, par. 1. 

(16) From what Greek word is our English word resurrection 
derived, and what is its significance in the original? 

P. 703, par. 1. 

JANUARY 1 1 



Read p. 703, par. 2, to p. 706, par. 2. 



(17) Who were the only two human beings that ever possessed 
life? And how are all the rest of mankind regarded 

from the Divine standpoint? P. 703, par. 2. 

(18) What two conditions must be clearly kept in mind in 
order to fully appreciate the significance of the word 
anastasis? P. 704, par. 1. 

(19) Is this word anastasis ever used in connection with 
the mere awakening of the dead? P. 704, par. 2, first seven 
lines. 

(20) What is the popular but erroneous explanation of 
Hebrews 1 1:35, and what is the proper interpretation? P. 
704, par. 2, 3; P. 705, par. 1. 

(21) Does the word anastasis limit the resurrection process, 
to make it either instantaneous or gradual? Or does 
anastasis change the nature of the being resurrected? P. 
706, par. 1. 

(22) What was the experience of our Lord Jesus previous 
and subsequent to His anastasis, and what is the hope of the 
Church in this respect? P. 706, par. 2. 



JANUARY 18 
Read p. 707 to p. 710 par. 3. 

(23) What will anastasis signify in the case of the natural 
man? and how will the resurrection of the Ancient Worthies 
differ from that of the rest of mankind? P. 707. 

(24) What will be the process of anastasis as respects the 
Great Company? P. 707, foot note. 

(25) Upon what will the anastasis or re-standing of the 
world as individuals depend? P. 708, par. 1. 

(26) What Scripture clearly indicates how this passing 
from death to life will be accomplished? P. 708, par. 2; P. 
709, par. 1. 

(27) To whom does the expression, "They that have done 
good," apply? And what will be the nature of their resurrection? 
P. 709, par. 2. 

(28) Who are "They that have done evil"? And what 
kind of resurrection will they experience? P. 710, par. 1 to 3. 

JANUARY 25 



Read p. 711, par. 1, to p. 714, par. 2. 



(29) Will the world's trial correspond with the present 
methods of trying criminals in court? If not, how will it be 
conducted? P. 711, par. 1, 2. 

(30) At what time during the world's trial will obedience 
be required, and what will be the experience of those who 
positively refuse to make progress toward righteousness? 
P. 712, par. 1. 

(31) What is the significance of the Scripture, "They that 

shall be counted worthy to attain that world and the resurrection"? 
(Luke 20:35.) P. 712, par. 2. 

(32) What would be the disadvantages of an instantaneous 
resurrection to perfection for the world of mankind? P. 
713, par. 1,2. 

(33) Explain the reasonableness, beauty and harmony of 
the Divine Plan for the world's resurrection. P. 714, par. 1. 

(34) Would it be reasonable to expect the awakened ones 
to come forth in exactly the same physical condition as 
when they went into death? P. 714, par. 2. 



page 353 

VOL. XXXIV DECEMBER 1 No. 23 
A. D. 1913-A. M. 6042 



CONTENTS 

Dedication of "The Temple" 354 

A Race of Slaves 355 

Present Master of Mankind 355 

Principles of Good and Evil Eternal 356 

Little Ways of Doing Good to Others 357 

Kind Words and Smiles Potent for Good 357 

Character Likeness to the Lord 359 

Two Causes of Dissension 359 

Friction Minimized With Maturity 359 

Heights and Depths of Divine Law 360 

Perfection the Christian's Standard 360 

Editor at International Purity Congress 361 

Only God Can Grant Victory 361 

Satan, Sin and Death to Be Overthrown 362 

Seed-Time (Poem) 362 

Jesus and the Children 363 

Seventy Ministers Ordained 364 

Will the Earth Be Burned? 365 

Profitable Bible Study 366 

Some Interesting Letters 367 

page 354 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:-All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



R5365 : page 354 

DEDICATION OF "THE TEMPLE" -NEW YORK CITY 



The Contractors promise to have "The Temple" ready for 
our use on Sunday, December 7. The services for the opening 
day will be a little out of the ordinary. So far as the 
building is concerned it will be Dedication Day. As respects 
the Congregation it will be Thanksgiving Sunday. The program 
will include the entire day. The opening service will 
be at 10.30 a.m. The Pastor, Brother Russell, will give 
the address. 

At 2 p.m. there will be a Symposium in which several 
Brethren of the PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION will participate, 
the topic being "THANKFULNESS." Its various phases will be 
considered. 

At 4 p.m. there will be a general Praise and Testimony 
Meeting. 

At 8 p.m. the Pastor, Brother Russell, will give an address, 
closing what, we trust, will be a very pleasant and very profitable 
day of spiritual refreshment. 

As it is anticipated that numbers of THE WATCH TOWER 
readers will want to be present at these services, coming from 
surrounding cities and villages, it is proposed that no public 
advertising be done, so that we may have plenty of room for 
comfort and fellowship. Of course, the Brooklyn Tabernacle 
will be closed for the entire day. 

All WATCH TOWER readers and their interested friends are 
cordially invited to this house-warming. "Seats free and no 
collection." 

When sending remittances please remember to make them 
payable to Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society. 

page 354 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR JANUARY 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
January follow: (1) 151; (2) 217; (3) 165; (4) 144; (5) 299; 
(6) 133; (7) 14; (8) 26; (9) 20; (10) 24; (11) 8; (12) 6; (13) 
Vow; (14) 87; (15) 256; (16) 105; (17) 34; (18) 235; (19) 88; 
(20) 113; (21) 7; (22) 307; (23) 325; (24) 125; (25) 222; 
(26) 100; (27) 208; (28) 173; (29) 145; (30) 38; (31) 273. 



R5355 : page 355 

A RACE OF SLAVES 

"For we know that the Law is spiritual; but 
I am carnal, sold under Sin. "--ROMANS 7:14. 

THE Apostle's statement that we are sold under 

Sin implies that we as a race are slaves. 

And so elsewhere it is expressed that mankind 

are slaves of Sin. (Rom. 6:16,17. 

Diaglott.) We look back to see when we 

became slaves and how this condition came 

about. We find that Adam sold himself 

and incidentally all his race. What price 

was paid by the purchaser? What did 

Adam get when he sold himself and all his 

posterity to become servants of Sin? We reply, He got 

his own will. He got his choice of fellowship with his 

wife for a time in the course of disobedience, thus rejecting 

God and His will, His Law. For this price, this 

self-gratification, this measure of joy, he sold himself 

to Sin and was cut off from being a son of God. Then he 

became a slave of Sin and, as a result, a slave of death.— 

Romans 5:12. 

Sin, the great monarch ruling the world, has enslaved 
the entire human family. None can escape this bondage, 
except in one way. Under this bondage of Sin they get 
disease, sorrow, disappointment, death. Death is the 
great climax of the wages of this great Monarch. And 
so we read, "The wages of Sin is death." "The whole 
creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together." 
(Romans 6:23; 8:22.) They are all travailing in this 
slavery, which was pictured in the oppression of the 
Israelites in Egypt under Pharaoh. The whole world is 
in alienation from God, banished from His favor and from 
everlasting life. 

God's promise was that He would provide a Ransom 
for the purchasing back of the slaves. He did this, in 
due time, by providing the Redeemer. Father Adam 
went into slavery of his own volition. His children— all 
mankind— were born slaves, born in sin and slavery, under 
the penalty of death. Christ appeared that He 
might redeem the one who sinned— that He might give a 
Ransom-price, a corresponding price— His own life for 
the life of Father Adam. All these slaves may then be 
set free; may attain absolute freedom, if they will. All 
whom the Son shall set free will be free indeed. 

MAN'S RELEASE PICTURED IN TYPE 

This release of the slaves from Sin and Death was 
pictured in the Law by the release of the fiftieth year 
Jubilee. When the Jubilee arrived, the only ones who 



R5356 : page 355 

remained in slavery were those who preferred to remain 
thus. (Deut. 15:12-17; Lev. 25:39-41.) So the thousand 
years of Christ's Reign— the Millennium— is to be the 
great Jubilee time, in which all the slaves are to be freed 
from slavery to Sin and the power of Satan, and are to 
be lifted up to freedom, if they will. But the legal setting 
free of the slaves will be one thing, and the getting 
back of their privileges will be quite another thing. 
Mankind will be judicially free— they will then all have 
been bought with a price— taken from the taskmaster, 
Sin, and put under the new Master, Christ Jesus, the 
great King of Glory. 

Messiah's Reign will be one in which mankind will 
be uplifted. All things that were lost will be recovered 
during the thousand years. And all will be set free, except 
those who prefer the bondage— and these will ultimately 
go into the Second Death, extinction, never after 
to be awakened to have the privilege of attaining everlasting 
life, or being of the family of God. 

THE PRESENT MASTER OF MANKIND 

Sin became the possessor of our race, which came 
under his control— Sin being allegorically personified as 
a great monarch holding relentless sway over mankind. 
Satan is another name for Sin. As he was called by our 
Lord the father of lies, and "a murderer from the beginning" 
(John 8:44), he very properly stands as the representative 
of Sin, as the representative of all 
unrighteousness. 

Jesus Christ laid down the Ransom-price for all, that 
mankind might, in due time, be redeemed from slavery 
to Sin. The Divine sentence upon Adam was death, and 
Sin was the agent, or channel, on account of which this 
condemnation came. Christ was "made sin for us" 
(2 Cor. 5:21); that is to say, He was treated as the sinner, 
and received the punishment that properly belonged 
to the sinner. This He did that He might free us from 
this great slavery. The Apostle Paul declares that ultimately 
the whole creation shall be set free from the 
slavery of Sin and Death and shall become sons of God. 
-Rom. 8:20,21. -Diaglott. 

When Adam yielded to self-gratification he became 
subject to this death penalty. It was God who imposed 
the penalty— it was God's penalty that must be met. In 
order for Christ to meet this penalty upon Adam, it was 
necessary for Him to renounce all self-gratification and 
to become dead to self, that He might do the Father's 
will. And He gladly yielded Himself to God's will— all 
that is "written in the Book." 

We who have come into covenant relationship with 

R5356 : page 356 



God, have come through Christ. Having become voluntary 
servants of the Lord Jesus Christ we are still in 
slavery; but it is slavery to Christ instead of slavery to 
Sin. The world are slaves of Sin and not of Christ. Before 
Christ will make us free from Sin, the Father requires 
that we shall give up our wills entirely to Him. 
This constitutes us slaves in the most absolute sense. 
The most absolute slavery is slavery of the will to another. 
Ours is such a slavery, but it is one that is beneficial. 
Whether we eat or drink or sleep or work— whatever 
we do— it is all to be done in harmony with the 
Lord's will and for His glory. Yes, ours is a most blessed 
slavery, and we would not become free from it for any 
consideration. 

We see that unless we had this absolute submission 
of our wills to God, we could not be prepared for the 
glorious things to come, to be joint-heirs with our Redeemer 
in His glory, honor and immortality. We were, 
therefore, freed from the service of Sin that we might 
become the bond-servants of another, even Christ. And 
we recognize that in getting free from Sin, we are free 
indeed.— John 8:36. 

It is true that we are still under a measure of bondage 
to Sin— in our bodies— as long as we live. But the 
Apostle urges, "Let not Sin. ..reign in your mortal 
body"— do not allow it to dominate you; refuse to obey 
Sin. (Rom. 6:12.) So then we are to exert ourselves. 
Whoever will not exert himself will remain a bond slave 
of Sin. We are to resist determinedly and persistently 
the attempts of the old master, Sin, to bring us again 
into captivity. We are to strive to maintain the liberty 
wherewith Christ has made us free. (Gal. 5:1.) If we 
are half-hearted in this matter, we are only partially loyal, 
and shall fail to win the prize, unless we arouse ourselves. 
If we are fully loyal, His grace is sufficient, and 
He far more than compensates us for whatever of self-denial 
and sacrifice this loyalty may bring. 

"THE SIN OF THE WORLD" 

The sin of the world was Adam's sin. This original 
sin was disobedience, and this disobedience includes, not 
only the act by which Sin got possession of the world 
and has ever since held possession, but it includes everything 
incident to its penalty. So Jesus came into the 
world that He might take away "the sin of the world." 
(John 1 :29.) And He made possible the release from 
Sin by laying down His life, giving His life a corresponding 
price for Adam's. 

Sin obtained possession of Adam at the very moment 
that he sinned. He became the slave of Sin as soon as 
he obeyed Sin. Here are shown two great principles- 
righteousness and sin. Sin presented the temptation and 
said, Take this course; and as soon as Adam yielded to 
the suggestion he became Sin's slave; and God gave him 
over to the penalty. So the Scriptures represent that 



God merely took His hands off when Adam became the 
voluntary servant of Sin. 

PRINCIPLES OF GOOD AND EVIL ETERNAL 

The great principles of good and evil have always 
been in existence, whether they have been in operation 
or not. Righteousness has always existed. There has 
always been a principle of righteousness, and there has 
always been a principle of unrighteousness. Since the 
creation of beings in God's image began, the wrong 
course has always been open. Satan might have taken 
that wrong course long before he did. Mankind will 
always be open to the privilege of sinning, if they choose. 
But God will so thoroughly teach what is the wages of 
Sin, that mankind and all created intelligences will learn 
that lesson fully. They will not take the wrong course 
—nor love it— they will know that it would be suicide. 
They will not choose the wrong, just as God would not 
choose the wrong. All will have learned to "love righteousness 
and hate iniquity." 

But these two principles will continue to exist. As 
it is right to do one thing, it is wrong to do the opposite 
thing. God's just arrangement is that all who obey the 
principle of righteousness shall live everlastingly. Justice 
sees to it that any one who wanders from the right 
course pays the penalty. The sure consequence of sin 
will fall upon the sinner. This is a broad principle— 
"the wages of Sin is death," and the wages of righteousness 
is everlasting life. Strictly speaking, however, everlasting 
life is a gift, no one could earn it: "The gift of 
God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord." 

THE SELLING PRICE-THE PURCHASE PRICE 

When Adam sinned, it was his life that he sold, and, 
as the Apostle Paul tells us, Adam was not overtaken 
unawares by this sin. He knew that the penalty was 
death if he should sin; hence when he ate the forbidden 
fruit he knew that he was selling his life. In other words, 
he gave his life for an apple— or rather for the woman 
for whom he ate the apple. Therefore, the self-gratification 
cost his life. He came wilfully under the penalty 
of death, into slavery to Sin as the result of eating that 
apple— for he knew the penalty. The selling price was, we 
see, an apple. The purchase price, the corresponding 
price, was the giving of human life. 

The Divine Plan is like a great building which may 
be viewed from different angles. We could take various 
pictures other than those of purchase and sale. But to 
our mind this illustration fits and dovetails. 

The Ransom is the foundation of this Plan. There 
is no other phase of the Divine Plan that is more accurately 
set forth in the Scriptures, and no phase that 
is more fought against— either openly or with subtlety— 
than is the Ransom. The Ransom-price for Adam is to 



be paid to justice. Justice demanded that mankind be 
sentenced to death. Jesus Himself has met this demand. 
Justice says, Give me the price and mankind shall go 
free. Justice remains with its hands full all the time. 
It never lets go of its hold. The penalty stands until 
the price is paid. 

Sin is not a person. It is only the principle of evil 
personified and is sometimes used as a synonym of Satan, 
who is a person. Man sold himself to Sin— Justice did 
not sell him. But Justice has recognized the transaction, 
the sale— so that under the condemnation, Sin can have 
dominion over man. But Divine Love stepped in and 
provided the purchase price for the sinner. All those 
sold under Sin shall be redeemed, or purchased back 
from Sin and Death. This transfer can be made only 
through Christ. He is the Purchaser and Mediator who 
will, in due time, lift all those who will out of the condemnation 
of Sin and Death, and put them into the 
realm of righteousness and life. And Justice will stand 
by and agree that Jesus shall be privileged to restore 
mankind to life, through the merit of His sacrifice. 



"Hail to the Lord's Anointed, 

Jehovah's blessed Son! 
Hail, in the time appointed, 

His Reign on earth begun! 
He comes to break oppression, 

To set the captives free, 
To take away transgression, 

And rule in equity." 



R5357 : page 357 

LITTLE WAYS OF DOING GOOD TO OTHERS 

"As we have therefore opportunity, let us do good unto 
all men, especially unto them who are of the Household 
of Faith."-Gal. 6:10. 

THE Apostle's exhortation here is very comprehensive 

—to do good without limitation, 

whether it be in word or deed. Some can 

be more benefited by words than by any 

other service we could render them. One 

of the great needs of the world is more 

knowledge. And if any one can dispel the 

darkness of this ignorance and let in light, 

he will surely do great good. The implied 

thought of the Apostle, however, 

seems to be that the principles of right and wrong— good 

and evil— are to be discerned by the Lord's people. From 

our standpoint we should recognize what would be a good 



work and what would be an evil work. Many are not 
able to discern between what is good and what is evil. 
Those who do evil are, with very few exceptions, in more 
or less ignorance and blindness. 

Saul of Tarsus, for instance, was doing an evil work 
when he was persecuting the Church. But he did not 
realize this. Hence, the best service to Saul of Tarsus, 
or any one else under like conditions, would be to open 
the eyes of his understanding. 

SOME GOOD WORKS ENUMERATED 

Clothing the needy, feeding the hungry, taking care 
of the imbecile, are all good works— doing good to the 
world of mankind. As we look out into the world, we see 
many efforts being made to do good. Some of these 
efforts are wisely directed, and some unwisely. But we 
are not commissioned to set the world straight. We are 
not to interfere with anybody. Others have a right to 
their judgment, as we have a right to ours. But if any 
one were doing an evil work, thinking it to be a good 
work, we would be quite right to endeavor to stop him, 
using such means as might seem appropriate and wise— 
the law, or our own words, or the words of others. But 
even here we are to take heed lest we should be busybodying 
in other men's matters. 

If we were to further enumerate some of the good 
works which ought to be done, we would say, to care for 
the blind, to organize or put into operation a method by 
which they might be enabled to read, or to get happiness; 
to care for the deaf and dumb would also be a very good 
work. As for slum work, we would not have much sympathy 
with a good deal of this, as reported. We should, 
however, be very much in sympathy with everything that 
aims for good— physical good, mental good, social good, 
good of any kind. There are, besides the foregoing, good 
arrangements provided for the sick, the incurable; such 
as hospitals, sanitariums, etc. 

All who love their fellow men and have sympathy for 
those in distress should be in sympathy with efforts for 
the betterment of their condition, and neither manifest 
nor feel opposition to them. No child of God could feel 
in sympathy with anything evil. God is the Representative 
of everything that is good. Satan is the representative 
of everything that is evil and injurious. If we would 
be children of God we must be out of harmony with 
everything not in line with His original provision for 
man, and out of harmony with everything that is in support 
of Satan. 

Some of the efforts along the line of social uplift are 
not at all bad. Their promoters may be working in an 
illogical way, a way that we feel sure is not in harmony 
with the Bible way; but nevertheless we have sympathy 
with the Socialists. They are trying to do good. But we 
have no sympathy with those who are trying to do evil, 
injury. We have faith in God— that He purposes to 



bring about a great change shortly; but we believe that 
no efforts of humanity can bring about this change. Then 
there is a way of doing good along intellectual lines, the 
lines of instruction. It is a good thing to teach children 
how to sew, how to cook, how to learn the mechanical 
arts that will make them useful. Our public school 
teachers are doing a good work, as they give instruction to 
the youth, and especially if they give the right understanding 
in regard to that which they teach, that which 
is in harmony with God's Word— the proper instruction. 

SPECIAL WORK OF THE LORD'S PEOPLE 

But there is a higher work than all these. And we are 
to give our life and time to this, which we see is the 
most valuable of all. This is the instruction given for all 
who have the ear to hear, respecting the Almighty, His 
will, His purposes, His plan; for these are associated 
with every affair of life. This instruction, to those who 
receive it, becomes the best aid to proper thinking, proper 
living, proper acting, for this is God's way. And this 
way becomes the way of all who are consecrated to do 
His will, to walk in Jesus' footsteps. 

As, therefore, we come more and more in harmony 
with God's Plan, we perceive that no other work could 
be so grand as to make known to others God's character, 
God's Plan and God's will concerning us. As this has 
brought great blessing and sanctification to us, we should 
have the desire to take the Good Tidings to others, refreshing 
them as we have been refreshed, comforting 
them as we have been comforted. 

In doing this work we resort to every lawful means. 
And this is called in the Scriptures, preaching the Gospel 
—whether it is done by the printed page or orally or by 
pictorial representations, it is proclaiming the Gospel— 
that which will do the most good to all mankind. We 
labor under one difficulty in this respect; namely, that 
the world is not able to appreciate the Good Tidings, 
Satan having blinded their eyes, so that they cannot see 
the philosophy of God's Plan— it does not seem reasonable 
to them. Those in this condition are trying, as it 
were, to look around a corner, instead of coming to the 
corner and getting the right angle of vision. But whether 
people believe it or not, we believe preaching the Gospel 
to be the Lord's work and therefore the best. This does 
not hinder us, however, from having sympathy with 
others who are doing what they consider to be the best 
work, so long as the result is good. We should be in 
sympathy with everything that is in harmony with the 
Truth— in sympathy with everything the influence of 
which is beneficial to mankind. 

So then the Apostle is calling to our minds in a general 
way the opportunity of doing good to all men. But some 
may require assistance which we cannot give. For instance, 
we could not give up preaching the Gospel and go 
into the slum work, for the slum work is not preaching 



the Gospel. A godly physician might, however, in connection 
with his practise do good, not only along lines 
physical and mental, but also along spiritual lines. So we 
have opportunities every day with the butcher, the baker, 
the ice man, etc., all of whom are fellow creatures; for 
God made all mankind of one blood. As the Apostle enjoins, 
we should seek to do them good, seek to make them 
better, happier, more comfortable. 

KIND WORDS AND SMILES POTENT FOR GOOD 

It might be argued that in order to do good most 
widely, one's efforts should be associated with using money 
for the purpose. It is true that money represents an 
accumulation of time. It takes time to produce money; 

R5357 : page 358 

therefore whoever gives a dollar to any cause, gives what 
represents so much time; whoever donates one thousand 
dollars gives that which represents so much time, for the 
money will purchase time, comforts, etc. But not many 
of the Lord's people have much money to use. And if 
they had much money, they would feel that this is a talent, 
and that it should be used chiefly for the Household of 
Faith, for the Lord's brethren. 

Since, then, we cannot do much in a material way for 
men as we meet them in the walks of life, day by day, 
how can we do them good? One of the easiest ways is 
to look happy ourselves and thus inspire happiness in 
others. A person who goes about looking miserable is 
not likely to make others feel happy. But if we cannot 
always look very happy, let us look as happy as we can, 
and thus we will be doing good to a great many people 
whom we meet throughout the day. This we can do even 
if we have no money with which to help others. Look 
happy, and try thus to make them happy. And secondly, 
if we have no money, we can give a kind word, a smile, 
a pleasant tone, a little civility, wherever proper. 

All such little courtesies of life are means of doing 
good, and may bring a ray of sunshine into the lives of a 
great many people, the majority of whom are unfavorably 
situated. The light of the knowledge of the glory of 
God does not yet shine into their hearts. They are dark 
within, gloomy, foreboding, fearful. They know not 
God! and what they know of their fellow men is a knowledge 
of selfishness. They feel that they must be on their 
guard lest every one cheat them and get the better of 
them. Now, if our look, our manner, our tone, would be 
helpful, comforting, assuring, to these, then we would 
be doing them good— more good than if we should scatter 
dollar bills all along our pathway. "Kind words shall 
never die"; and the expressions that go with them are 
some of the ways of doing good unto all men as we have 
opportunity. 

We have a special work and therefore have not the 



opportunity to walk the streets and smile all the time. 
Our life-work is for the great King. But as we go about 
our work, we should drop a smile or a kind word— something 
along the line of doing "good unto all men." Our 
work is to be especially for the Household of Faith in 
the sense that while we may be doing missionary work, 
and going among those who are not of the Household of 
Faith, yet our motive in doing thus is the hope that there 
may be some of these who are already of the Faith 
Household, or some who will be amenable to the Message, 
and will wish to serve the Lord when they learn the way. 

R5358 : page 358 

And if we would desire to do good to them, how much 
more would we wish to encourage those who belong to the 
Lord, who have become members of His spiritual family! 

THE HOUSEHOLD OF FAITH 

These words— Household of Faith— are broad enough 
to include not only those who are fully in the way, but 
also those who have made more or less of an approach 
unto the Lord and the Truth. The very fact that any 
one is drawing near to the antitypical Tabernacle is a 
strong reason why we should wish to encourage him to 
press on. He has come a part of the way, even if he has 
not made a consecration. 

In a strict sense, the Household of Faith, of course, 
includes only those who are consecrated. But the words 
of the Apostle justify us in believing that those who are 
considering the matter, counting the cost, would in a 
broad sense be counted as of the Household of Faith. 
And we are to give these special assistance— all in whom 
we see any prospect of consecration. Our constant desire 
and effort should be to point men directly or indirectly 
to the Lord. Thus we shall be showing "forth the praises 
of Him who hath called us out of darkness into His marvelous 
light." 

We are to do these things as we have opportunity. 
This would include the thought of times and seasons and 
ways and means of doing good. So far as we are concerned 
we are to "be instant in season, out of season." 
We are not to consider our own inclinations, tastes, etc., 
but we would be obliged to consider the interests of others. 
A husband must specially regard the interests of his wife, 
and the wife the interests of her husband and children. 

SPIRIT OF A SOUND MIND NECESSARY 

We should be willing to serve anybody in any way as 
we have opportunity. And if there are many opportunities 
for service, we must choose between them, exercising the 
spirit of a sound mind, as to which would be the will of 
the Lord for us. The Lord's people should so order their 
lives as to get the best results— get the most good possible 



out of them. In choosing a means of livelihood, if there 

is a choice of five trades, one would study as to which 

would be the most lucrative, which would be the cleanest, 

which the most honorable, which require the most labor, 

etc. This would be from the natural standpoint. But 

from the Divine standpoint, the Christian's standpoint, 

the decisive question would be, In which of these avocations 

can I best serve the Lord? And this would mean, 

In which can I find the best opportunity for carrying out 

the good intentions of my heart as to the Lord's will respecting 

me? 

If we have made some mistake in this respect and the 
Lord opens wide the door for us to enter in elsewhere, or 
if He makes our present place so tight that we cannot stay 
there, then let us arrange our affairs accordingly, in such 
a manner that we may have the most opportunities for doing 
"good unto all, especially to the Household of Faith." 

There are some occupations which take us away from 
men, where we would have less opportunity of meeting 
people. No doubt it was the Lord's arrangement that 
Moses for a time should be away off in the land of Midian, 
keeping sheep for his father-in-law, Jethro. But as soon 
as the Lord was ready, He called Moses out and gave 
him a place of great opportunity and responsibility. No 
doubt that work in the wilderness was a place of great 
opportunity also; and doubtless before that, while in the 
schools of Egypt, he had great opportunity for learning 
lessons of experience. 

So the Lord's people are to watch for their opportunities. 
And day by day they are to seek, so far as possible, 
to be doing good to others, and especially to those of the 
Lord's Household— giving these always the preference. 

The Christian is to be ready to do good to all men at 
the expense of his own time and convenience, but he is to 
be ready to lay down his life for the brethren. He is 
to seek opportunities for laying down his life day after 
day, in the sense of giving his time to the communication 
of the Truth, or helping the Lord's brethren in any manner 
to put on the "whole armor of God," that they may 
stand in the evil day. 



"The world would be a desolate place, 

But for one here and there, 
Whose heart with self hath not been filled, 
Whose love for God hath not been killed, 
Whose thankful praise hath not been stilled- 

There's one such here and there. 

"But oh! the grandeur of the work, 

For this one here and there, 
To join in lifting up our race, 
To wipe away of sin each trace, 
To make of earth a perfect place, 

Put glory everywhere!" 



R5358 : page 359 

CHARACTER-LIKENESS TO THE LORD 

"I pray for them. ..that they may be one,. ..that they may 
be made perfect in one,. ..that the world may know that 
Thou hast... loved them as Thou 
hast loved Me."-John 17:9,20-23. 

THESE WORDS, we remember, were uttered 

by our Lord on the night of His betrayal, 

supposedly while on the way from the 

"upper room" where the Memorial was observed 

to the Garden of Gethsemane. The 

ones He evidently prayed for were the 

twelve Apostles, or rather the eleven, by 

this time; for in conjunction He says, "I 

have lost none of them, save the son of perdition." 

But the context shows that His 

prayer includes His faithful followers all the way down 

the Age. He says, "Neither pray I for these alone, but 

for all those who shall believe on Me through their 

word." He prayed that His followers might be one, 

even as He and His Father were one— the same kind of 

oneness, a oneness of mind. 

This text is one of the best proofs that the Lord Jesus 
and the Father are not one in person. He could not have 
prayed for all of the Church to be one in person. It is 
a oneness of will, a full harmony of will, a oneness of 
purpose. The Lord said, "Not My will, but Thine be 
done." He thus came into full oneness, harmony with 
the Father— with the Father's will, the Father's Plan. 
It is not a mutual concession, where each gives up some 
of his rights in order to become one. 

His first work for dealing with the world of mankind 
—before He would become the world's Savior and the 
Mediator of the New Covenant— was the election of the 
Church. This was the work which He had now begun, 
and He was committing to them the testimony. He desires 
that all the Church have a oneness of purpose, a 
oneness of will with His will. And we can see that this 
could be obtained only in the one way— by fully surrendering 
our will. And this, the Scriptures declare, is 
done by becoming dead. 

TWO CAUSES OF DISSENSION 

A man or woman is merely what his will is and what 
that will can make out of the body and its circumstances. 
And so at the very beginning of our discipleship, the first 
thing is to see that we are dead as respects our will, and 
alive toward the Lord Jesus Christ. All who do this He 
calls New Creatures. He grants them the Holy Spirit, 



that the new mind, the new will, may be theirs. In proportion 
as they obtain the new mind, the new will, in that 
same proportion will the oneness with one another exist. 

That which causes dissension amongst the Lord's 
people is either a lack of loyalty or a lack of knowledge. 
If it is a lack of loyalty, they will gradually drift away. 
The Lord does not choose to force any of His family. 
He is choosing such as worship Him in spirit and in 
truth, such as are in every respect loyal. He has set 
aside for the purpose of selecting this class the entire 
Gospel Age. This work of selecting has been in progress 
for nearly nineteen centuries. And this company will be 
a Little Flock. They will, evidently, be a very select 
class. They are required to walk by faith, not by sight. 

Not many have the loyalty to God and to righteousness 
to walk that way and to count the world as loss and 
dross— as nothing, with all its projects. As the disloyal 
ones leave the ranks, more and more the loyal ones will 
find themselves drawn together, and more and more of 
oneness will be found among those who are faithful. 
This would necessarily be true in every time and in every 
country. All who are thoroughly loyal would desire to 
do the Father's will, desire to lay down their lives in the 
Father's service. And this desire would make them one. 

FRICTION MINIMIZED WITH MATURITY 

The Lord speaks of their being perfected in one. As 
each individual member makes progress, he becomes more 
worthy to fill the place or use the opportunity provided 
for him. And thus the Body becomes more efficacious. 
But the thought that our Lord here expresses is rather 
that of completeness. He is referring to the end of the 
Age, when the work will be completed, perfected, when 
they will all be one. But the grand consummation will be 
effected by something which the Lord will Himself do. 

R5359 : page 359 

We find that, necessarily, because of the differences of 
our flesh, we cannot in everything see exactly alike. Now 
we can only see more or less obscurely. 

At present we cannot see fully and completely. Consequently 
there will always be more or less friction, even 
amongst those who are fully consecrated to do the 
Father's will. This friction should become minimized, 
as we become mature. But we cannot see eye to eye 
until the glorious consummation, when we shall have experienced 
the resurrection change, "in a moment, in the 
twinkling of an eye." "Flesh and blood cannot inherit 
the Kingdom of God." We are to have our trial in these 
imperfect bodies. And those who show their loyalty 
in fighting against the world, the flesh and the Adversary, 
to the end, will be joint-heirs with Christ, sharers in His 
Kingdom, executors of the Divine Program for the blessing 
of the world of mankind. 



AN ASTOUNDING STATEMENT 

At the Epiphania, or bright shining, of the Lord's 
manifestation, God will have completed His present work 
of directing the Church, and the world will be informed 
that they are under a different Dispensation. When the 
world shall have come to understand the matter fully, 
they will know the truth of our Lord's words, in His last 
prayer with His disciples, that the Father loves the 
Church as He loves the Lord Jesus Christ. This is a 
very astounding statement. It shows that there is nothing 
selfish in our Lord. He did not say, "They will always 
be inferior to Me. They will never have the glory that 
I shall have." 

On the contrary, the Lord Jesus knows that the 
Heavenly Father will exercise His Love along the lines 
of principle, character. And all who will be members of 
the same glorious company must have the same glorious 
character that our Lord had; that is to say, they must be 
loyal to the core. They must have demonstrated that they 
loved righteousness and hated iniquity. We read, "Thou 
hast loved righteousness and hated iniquity; therefore 
God, even Thy God, hath anointed Thee with the oil of 
gladness above Thy fellows." (Hebrews 1:9.) So He 
was anointed to be the Head of the Church class. But 
the Church class are declared in this Scripture to be His 
associates— not of inferiority, but of common fellowship, 
being on one plane. And the world will then know that 
the Father loved the Church as He loved Jesus. We 
understand that the Church will be on the same plane 
with her Lord Jesus. Nevertheless, we are to keep in 
mind that God "made Him to be Head over all— God 
blessed forever!" The Church will never be on an equality 
of position with Christ. 

This is very wonderful to us, that our Heavenly Father 
should love us as He loved Christ, that the Lord would 
love the jewel, in the mire or wherever it might be 
found! The Lord Jesus has been selecting these characters 
out of the mire of human sin. And those who 
prove to be of the "more than conqueror" class— loyal as 

R5359 : page 360 

the Lord Jesus was loyal— the Father will love as He 
loved the Lord Jesus, and will glorify them with His Son. 
'"When thou passest through the waters, 

I will be with thee!' 
Sure and sweet and all-sufficient 

Shall His presence be. 
All God's billows overflowed Him 

In th' great Atoning Day; 
Now He only leads thee through them— 
With thee all the way." 



R5359 : page 360 

THE HEIGHTS AND DEPTHS OF DIVINE LAW 

"Whosoever therefore shall break one of the least of these 
commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be called the 
least in the Kingdom of Heaven; but whosoever 
shall do and teach them, the same shall be called 
great in the Kingdom of Heaven. "--MATTHEW 5:19. 

THERE is prevalent amongst Christian people 
quite an erroneous view respecting the Divine 
Law. It is generally considered that, 
because the Apostle said that we are not 
under the Law, but under grace, he meant 
that the Law is done away with. We believe 
that this thought is incorrect. Our 
Lord said that till Heaven and earth pass 
away, not one jot or tittle of the Law should 
pass away till all be fulfilled. All written 
therein shall be accomplished. 

The Divine Law has always been in existence. It 
was plainly expressed in Adam; the various parts of his 
organism were expressions of the Divine law. The Law 
of God was written in his heart. He was in full harmony 
with the Divine Mind, and therefore in full harmony 
with the Divine Law. But when sin came in, the 
Divine Law in his being was measurably obliterated. 
There is still some of the Divine Law in all who are appreciative 
of right and wrong, but not sufficient to make 
right living possible. 

In God's dealing with the nation of Israel He gave 
them a Law. This Law, written in the Ten Commandments, 
is a brief summary of man's obligations— a text, 
as it were, from which many lessons might be drawn. In 
our knowledge of the Ten Commandments, we are still 
aware of what is God's Law. God never abrogated that 
Law. It is still in force upon the Jews, as also is the Law 
Covenant. But Gentiles never were under the Law 
Covenant. 

God offered the Jews everlasting life if they would 
keep the Law. They were bound by the Law; hence the 
Apostle points out that they would need first to die to 
the Law Covenant before they could come into Christ, 
the Life-Giver. (Rom. 7:4.) This did not mean that 
they must die to the Law of God, but merely to the Law 
Covenant. It would mean to give up all hope of attaining 
everlasting life through keeping the Law Covenant. 

The new hope into which Gentile Christians entered 
does not abrogate God's Law, nor does it release them 
from the obligations of His Law. But God has made a 
provision that notwithstanding our imperfection, our inability 
to keep the Law perfectly, He will accept us in 
Christ, our imperfections being covered by Christ's merit. 
Of these the Apostle said, "The righteousness of the Law 



is fulfilled in us, who walk, not after the flesh, but after 
the Spirit." We must needs be perfect beings to live up 
to the spirit of the Divine Law, it being the requirement 
for a perfect man. 

PERFECTION THE CHRISTIAN'S STANDARD 

This thought, then, is the key to our Lord's words in 
the text under consideration. He who would violate this 
Law of God, and teach others to do so, either by example 
or precept, should be considered as the least. And he 
that would keep the Law of God, and by example or precept 
help others to keep this Law, should be called greatest 
in the Church, the incipient Kingdom, the embryotic 
Kingdom. Those who would be of this Kingdom class 
must forsake father and mother and all things to take 
up their cross and follow Christ. In other words, Christ 
must be first. Amongst these followers of His there 
would be differences. Some through weaknesses of 
heredity, or what not, would be less faithful— others 
would be more faithful. Those who would keep the 
Divine Law most perfectly in heart and life would be 
most nearly copies of God's dear Son. 

And so it is with us today. We esteem highly those 
most diligent in service, those most zealous. Those who 
walk somewhat disorderly, who are vacillating, we esteem 
less. We take notice of ignorance and weaknesses in the 
Church. We must sympathize with these; nevertheless, 
one who would not overcome his weaknesses would not be 
so highly esteemed in the Kingdom class as one who 
could, and who would, walk more closely in the Master's 
footsteps. In other words, we understand the Master 
to be teaching that the Gospel is not out of sympathy with 
the Jewish Law. He said, "Be ye perfect, even as your 
Father which is in Heaven is perfect." There is no lower 
standard than that of perfection. It would not do for 
the Lord to say, Be ye slightly like the Father, or, Be ye 
nearly like Him. He must present the perfect standard. 

The Jew is striving for perfection, striving to get 
everlasting life. The Christian is striving for perfection, 
and expecting to get eternal life— not by perfectly 
keeping the Law, which he cannot do, but through the 
merit of Christ, which makes up for his deficiencies- 
covers his blemishes. 

THE OUTER SHELL OF DEEPER SENTIMENTS 

The Divine Law is briefly summed up, not only in the 
Old Testament, but also by our Lord Himself in the 
words, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy 
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and 
with all thy strength. And thou shalt love thy neighbor 
as thyself." (Deut. 6:5; Lev. 19:18; Matt. 22:37-39.) 
This is still more briefly summed up by the Apostle Paul: 
"Love is the fulfilling of the Law." (Rom. 13:10.) Love 
to God would lead us to do all those things which are 



inculcated in His Word; and love for our neighbor would 
lead us to fulfil all our obligations toward them, as 
inculcated. 

If we come to apply the commands of the Law to 
ourselves as Christians, we can easily amplify them all. 
For instance, our Lord's definition of adultery is much 
more searching than the statement as contained in the 
tables of the Law. The New Testament definition of 
murder is much deeper than that commonly accepted. 
The Apostle John declared that to hate a brother 
is murder. God could see that there was murder in the 
heart of the hater of a brother. The All-Seeing Eye perceives 
if there is disloyalty present in any degree— or anything 
contrary to the Divine will. From this standpoint, 
then, we see that the Ten Commandments are but 
the outer shell, as it were, of deeper sentiments. 

It was the custom of the Jews to do nothing whatsoever 

R5360 : page 361 

on the seventh day of the week. We presume that 
the significance of this commandment is, to the New 
Creature in Christ, that the rest of the seventh day typifies 
the perfect rest into which he has entered through 
Christ. 

All New Creatures in Christ are to keep Sabbath 
every day. And so the Apostle says, "We who have 
believed do enter into rest"— have entered into rest. It 
is not that our muscles or our brains are necessarily resting, 
but that we have the rest of heart, the rest of mind, 
the peace of God which passeth all understanding. It 
is important that we maintain this peace at all times, 
and do not let anything come in which would interfere 
with it and take us out of harmony with God. If it 
does, we should consider that we have broken the Sabbath 
command. 

The New Creature could not kill. It has no weapon 
except the Sword of the Spirit. Whoever hates his 
brother is a murderer. To cultivate a spirit of hatred 
would be a very serious matter. One who would do so 
should not be considered a true brother or sister in the 
Body of Christ, which is the Church. 



R5360 : page 361 

EDITOR AT THE INTERNATIONAL PURITY CONGRESS 

A FEW weeks ago, Governor Glynn, of New 
York, appointed the Editor of THE WATCH 
TOWER a delegate to represent New York 
State at the seventh International Purity 
Congress, to convene in Minneapolis, 
Minn., November 7th to 12th. 
We attended the Purity Congress and 



there met a number of noble men and 

women, who are fighting valiantly to stamp 

out the various forms of disease and vice 

which are vitiating mankind with alarming rapidity. 

On Sunday, November 9th, we were appointed by the 
Purity Congress Arrangements Committee to speak at the 
Schubert Theatre, Minneapolis, under the auspices of the 
local class of the INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION. 
The house was crowded. Our topic was, THE 
WAGES OF SIN AND THE REWARDS OF PURITY, from the 
text: "The wages of sin is death; but the gift of God is 
eternal life, through Jesus Christ, our Lord."— 
Romans 6:23. 

ONLY GOD CAN GRANT THE VICTORY 

We did not enter into statistics to prove that sin is in 
the world and manifesting itself in many forms— in political 
corruption, physical corruption, or disease, moral 
corruption, or impurity, and their various ramifications. 
We endeavored to probe deeper, to show why human 
beings are born into the world with sinful propensities 
or tendencies. After finding the cause, the source of 
sin, we discussed the remedy, and pointed out why all good 
people should be united in their opposition to sin and in 
their endeavor to stamp it out; although experience has 
proved that none of the world's panaceas really cure. 

Humanity must continually combat, only to find that 
sin, impurity, breaks out in other places or in other forms. 
It is like fighting fire or a plague. To cease fighting is to 
be overwhelmed. However, in the midst of the battle for 
purity, while convinced that eternal vigilance is necessary, 
and then only partially effectual, it is interesting to know 
that all on the side of purity are fighting on God's side, 
and that in His own time and way He will come to our 
rescue and grant a complete victory. So complete will be 
the victory that there will be no more sighing or crying 
or dying; no more sorrow or pain, because there will be 
no more sin, no more impurity. Heavenly conditions will 
have come to earth, which then will be a world-wide 
Paradise.— Isaiah 35. 

We admitted that this view of the situation is the very 
reverse of the popular theory of Evolution. Thinking 
people are more and more coming to realize that the wonderful 
blessings of our day, material and intellectual, do 
not uphold the theory of the Survival of the Fittest, and 
of general progress, physically and intellectually. The 
trend is downward. Imbecility, insanity and moral degeneracy 
are on the increase, and especially manifest in the 
families of the rich and the educated. The progress of 
our day must be accredited to God, and should be considered 
as marking the inauguration of the New Era, 
Messiah's Kingdom, so long promised. 

GOD IS NOT RESPONSIBLE 



The Bible alone explains the present situation. It 
alone tells us why so many go astray. Children are born 
with evil, immoral instincts, against which themselves 
and society must continually war. In Psalm 51:5 we 
read, "Behold, I was shapen in iniquity; and in sin did my 
mother conceive me." Here is the explanation. We inherit 
our tendency toward sin, and some inherit more of 
it than others. Few have realized the sacredness and 
responsibility of parentage. Few parents have realized 
how much they have to do with the moral and physical 
status of their children, not merely in the training of them 
after they are born, but in the qualities which are given 
to them at the time of their begetting and during the 
period of gestation. 

Let none get the thought from what we have said that 
any child can be born perfect, either physically, mentally 
or morally. The seeds of sin and degeneracy were implanted 
further back than our immediate parents. As 
physical likeness persists from grandparent to grandchild, 
so do moral traits and tendencies, impurities of blood and 
of ideals. The Bible takes us away back to the first man 
and the first woman, tells the story of their disobedience 
to God, and explains to us that when Adam and Eve became 
sinners, they thus cut themselves off from fellowship 
with God and came under the sentence, "Dying, thou 
shalt die." Then started the downward trend, which has 
been increasing in momentum ever since. 

God created man perfect, in His own image and likeness, 
the Bible assures us, and everywhere we see corroboration 
of this fact. In nearly every human being a 
certain amount of moral character still persists, notwithstanding 
the 6,000 years since the fall. In some more and 
in some less the Creator's character likeness is observable; 
but all are sinners, all come short of the glory of 
God— short of the Divine likeness originally granted to 
our race. God is not responsible; for as the Scriptures 
declare, all His work is perfect. (Deuteronomy 32:4.) 
He was fully justified in separating from Himself our 
disobedient first parents and sentencing them as unworthy 
of His favor and everlasting life, under the decree, 
"Dying, thou shalt die." 

Ever since, the race has been under the reign of Sin 
and Death. More and more has sin gained control. And 
the natural tendency of all sin is death-ward. It has not 
been improper that mankind should seek through medicine 
and surgery and in every manner imaginable to relieve 
himself of the burdens of Sin and Death. The effort has 
developed noble characters in the world. 

R5360 : page 362 

The fight against Sin and Death is still being prosecuted. 
Nevertheless, our physicians realize that the 
mental and physical ailments of the race are increasing, 
multiplying; and that their study, knowledge and skill 
are unable to keep pace. Our Purity Congress assures us 



of the same things along the lines of immorality. We 
must not relax our efforts for an instant. Every good 
man and every good woman should be alert to counteract 
as wisely and forcefully as possible, the influence of this 
reign of Sin and Death. As we contemplate the work 
which is being done in this direction, we rejoice to see so 
noble an army battling for the general good. We admire 
all sincere laborers for reform in any direction. 

IS NOT GOD INTERESTED? 

As we realize our own deep interest in the welfare of 
humanity, it would seem strange if our Almighty Creator 
were not Himself interested in the race which He 
made and which He justly condemned to death. The 
Bible points out that God still loves the world; and that 
He has a great plan for human recovery from sin, sorrow 
and death. The perplexity of Christians in the past has 
arisen from not taking a sufficiently broad view of the 
Divine character and Plan. Once we wondered why God 
did not more particularly bless reformers and use His 
power for the overthrow of the vicious and the corrupting 
elements of society. But now the light of the Millennial 
Morning is dawning. The Bible explains why God has 
permitted the reign of Sin and Death; and the understanding 
of this mystery is a blessing. 

The Bible teaching concerning the penalty of sin is 
not what was taught us in the creeds of the Dark Ages. 
The teachings of the Bible show that there is indeed a 
terrible penalty upon sin, but not the penalty of eternal 

R5361 : page 362 

torture, which we once supposed. The wages of sin is 

death; and everlasting life is a gift of God, to be bestowed 

only upon believers, through Christ. Hence the wicked 

cannot get everlasting life. "They shall perish;" "All the 

wicked will He destroy." But how many are really 

wicked? is the question. How many prefer sin to righteousness? 

How many would rather be right than wrong, 

were it not for the depraved tendency which prevails in 

themselves and the influence from others to which they 

are susceptible? 

SATAN, SIN AND DEATH TO BE OVERTHROWN 

With considerable elaboration of Scripture we pointed 
out that God loves His creatures deeply— not merely the 
Church, but the world. He loved mankind "while we 
were yet sinners." God is proceeding with a great Plan 
of Salvation, which will reach every member of the race 
and bring to each an opportunity of full recovery from 
sin and death— either in this life or in the next. To this 
end Christ died for all. Since Pentecost the work of God 
has been the calling, testing, proving of a select class, a 
very loyal and very faithful class, to be joint-heirs with 



Jesus in a glorious Kingdom of Righteousness. This 
Kingdom is to be established in the earth, and is not only 
to overthrow Satan, Sin and Death, but to restore to 
human perfection all who will prove willing and obedient, 
under the light and opportunity then to be granted. 

In the meantime, the reign of Sin and Death has not 
been valueless. It has given most instructive lessons, both 
to angels and to men, respecting God's holiness and the 
reasonableness of His requirements. It has demonstrated 
that all of God's creatures must be holy, pure, in order to 
enjoy His blessings, which He provides for no others. 
Those who have some knowledge and appreciation of 
righteousness should be on the alert to serve righteousness, 
purity, Truth, in proportion as they perceive these 
and see the terrible results of sin and impurity. The 
whole world should know that only the earnest followers 
of Christ will gain the great prize of joint-heirship with 
Him in His Kingdom. Nevertheless, of the whole world 
it is true that "Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he 
also reap." 

In other words, as any serve sin, and debauch themselves 
and others, they degrade themselves in proportion 
to their knowledge and wilfulness in the matter. And in 
proportion as any seek to live justly, purely, soberly, in 
that same degree do they benefit others, and prepare 
themselves for a more favorable condition in the Resurrection. 
Although all fall asleep in death, each will come 
forth in the great Day of Resurrection, which will last a 
thousand years. They will come forth in more or in less 
favorable conditions, with more or with less shame and 
contempt, to receive few or many stripes, or punishments, 
according as they knew or did not know the Master's 
will— the way of righteousness. 

URGES DILIGENCE IN BIBLE STUDY 

If the Bible story were more fully understood, its reasonableness 
would appeal to larger numbers, and its influence 
would be a blessing, physically, morally, in every 
way. Let us be diligent in Bible study, along unsectarian 
lines. Getting near to God means to come in touch with 
the power of God, which gives the victory over sin in the 
heart, and which will fit and prepare true Christians for 
the great work of the future when they will be heirs of 
God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, their Lord, in that 
Kingdom which is to bless all mankind, and for which we 
pray: "Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done on earth, 
even as it is done in Heaven." 

In the meantime, those in preparation for the work 
of the future, and co-laboring with God in the work of 
grace in their own hearts at the present time, should be 
glad to participate according to their opportunities in all 
moral reforms of the present time, or at least sympathetically 
to uphold the hands of those who are engaged in 
these reforms; as, for instance, the International Purity 
Federation. 



SEED-TIME AND HARVEST 

We are sowing, ever sowing, 

Something good or something ill 

In the lives of those around us— 
We are planting what we will. 

Not a word we say falls fruitless, 

Not a deed we do decays; 
Every thought and word and action 

Will be found in future days, 

When perhaps the hand that sowed them 
Shall itself have ceased to be; 

Still the record of their being 
Will live on eternally. 

Grant, then, Lord of all the harvest, 
That the seeds we daily sow 

May refresh the hearts of others, 
Spreading blessing as they grow. 

May each thought and word and action 
Be the growth of Christian love, 

To be found in coming ages 
In Thy garner-house above! 

Treasured there, in Thine own keeping, 
Just to prove our love was true; 

For the motive gives the value 
To the meanest thing we do. 

Charlotte Murray. 



R5361 : page 363 

JESUS AND THE CHILDREN 

-JANUARY 4.-MARK 9:30-41; 10:13-16.- 

"Gird yourselves with humility, to serve one another; 
for God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace 
to the humble. "-1 Peter 5:5. R.V. 

THE Master knew that the time of His death 

drew near. He wished to break the information 

gently to His loving disciples. 

Therefore He passed hastily through Galilee, 

en route for Capernaum, as stated in 

our lesson, rather seeking to avoid the curious. 

He desired this opportunity for 

breaking to His disciples the news of His 



soon-to-be-completed sacrifice. While He 

had previously declared that none could 

touch him because His hour had not yet come, now He 

declared that He would be delivered up into the hands 

of men, and that they would kill Him, and on the third 

day He would rise from the dead. 

But the disciples understood not and feared to ask 
explanation. They were only natural men; for none 
were begotten of the Holy Spirit until Pentecost. (John 7:39; 
Acts 1:8.) As Jews, they had the thought of the 
Messianic Kingdom uppermost in their minds. Jesus had 
authorized them to preach the Kingdom at hand, and had 
promised them a share in the Kingdom. Until now they 
were not ready for the further information that the 
Jewish nation would fail to accept Him, and that thus 
the Kingdom blessings would be put off for centuries. 

The Apostles had heard Jesus utter so many "dark sayings" 
and parables that they were bewildered, and wondered 
what interpretation to give to these words about 
His death and resurrection. But their minds naturally 
drifted to the great hopes that were before them— that 
Jesus would soon be the King, and they would then be 
in honored positions as His associates in the Kingdom. 
They even went beyond this, and disputed amongst themselves 
as respects the honorable positions they would occupy 
and as to which would be greatest— the Lord's 
prime minister. So little did they understand the great 
trials and disappointments which were only a few days 
in advance! 

Jesus gathered them about Him and inquired respecting 
their dispute; but they were ashamed to tell the 
topic. Then He gave them advice to the effect that the 
selfishly ambitious who would be seeking honor rather 
than service would be disappointed. In His Kingdom 
self-seekers would have the lowest place. As illustrating 
the matter He took a child and set him in their midst 
and said, "Whosoever shall receive one such little child 
in My name receiveth Me, and whosoever receiveth Me 
receiveth [not Me alone, but] Him that sent Me." 

By this the Master sought to show His disciples that 
it was not their own greatness that was to be considered, 
but God's favor. The humblest one amongst them, if 
favored by God, would have a high position. They were 
to have the spirit of sympathy and of appreciation of the 
Divine work of grace in each other. They were to receive 
each other as representatives of Jesus; and more, 
as representatives of the Father. If they entertained 
such views of one another, surely they would be kind 
and gentle toward all, and would seek to be helpful— "in 
honor preferring one another."— Romans 12:10. 

R5362 : page 363 

BLESSING THE CHILDREN 

The second part of our lesson recounts that the great 



Teacher was a lover of children even though, so far as 

the record shows, He did not generally give His time 

to them. When fond parents brought their children, 

desiring Him to bless them, the disciples, feeling that the 

Lord's time was too valuable to be thus used, rebuked 

them. But Jesus very earnestly directed that the children 

should be allowed to come. He took them up in 

His arms and put His hands upon them and blessed 

them, thus exhibiting His own sympathetic love and 

humility of heart. He could preach to one Samaritan 

woman by the well or take time to fondle children, notwithstanding 

the weight of the work that was upon Him 

and the fact that His course was nearly finished. 

But as the subject of the Kingdom was uppermost 
in His teachings and in the minds of His disciples, He 
took another opportunity of teaching them a lesson. 
They had, perhaps, been feeling too sure that they would 
be members of the Kingdom class. They had not yet 
learned what crucial tests would be applied to those who 
would be counted worthy to sit with the Redeemer in 
His Messianic Throne of glory and to participate with 
Him in blessing all the families of the earth. He therefore 
said: "Permit the little children to come unto Me, 
for of such is the Kingdom of God." 

We are not by these words to understand that the 
Master meant that His disciples, those whom He usually 
addressed in His discourses, would not be in the 
Kingdom, and that all in the Kingdom would be little 
children. Quite to the contrary. Little children will 
not be in the Kingdom at all. Only developed, tried, 
perfected characters will constitute the overcomers who 
will sit with the Master in His Throne. 

The thought that the Lord would impress here, as 
elsewhere expressed, is that even His twelve Apostles 
would not be in the Kingdom unless they became childlike, 
teachable, plastic, trustful. The proper child, unspoiled 
by its elders, is disposed to be very trustful; and, 
until deceived, it is disposed to believe every word of 
the parent and to trust implicitly to the parent's wisdom 
and power. All who become children of God must reach 
this condition of heart as respects the Heavenly Father. 
Whoever does not attain this condition will not be fit 
for the Kingdom. 

Impressing His subject still further, the Great 
Teacher said: "Whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom 
of God as a little child, shall not enter therein." 
This expression clarified the subject. The followers of 
Jesus are not to be little children, but must be childlike, 
because only the childlike followers will ever participate 
in the Kingdom. The receiving of the Kingdom mentioned 
evidently means the receiving of the Message of 
the Kingdom; for manifestly none can receive a kingdom 
until the kingdom has come or has been offered. 

Thus with the Jewish nation: The offer of the 
Kingdom came at the close of Jesus' ministry, when, 
after the manner of the kings of Israel, He rode into 



Jerusalem upon the ass, thus offering Himself as their 
King. The worldly scribes and Pharisees were too wise 
to receive Jesus, and plotted for His death. His disciples 
were as trustful as little children, and fully believed 
the Message of God's Word that there would be 
a Kingdom and the further Message that Jesus was the 
appointed King, who in due time would take His power 
and reign for the blessing of the world. 

This was illustrated when Jesus sat upon the ass. 
The multitude, crying "Hosanna to the Son of David! 
Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the Lord!" 
treated Him as the King. The disciples, fully acquiescing, 
as little children, doubted nothing. On the other 
hand, the "wise" scribes and Pharisees called out that the 

R5362 : page 364 

multitude must be stopped from thus shouting. They 

should be told that Jesus was not the Messiah, that they 

were deceived. But Jesus merely answered that what 

they witnessed had been foretold by the Prophet Zechariah (9:9) 

—that there must be a shout. And the Lord 

declared that if the people did not shout the stones would 

be obliged to cry out, in order that the prophecy might 

be fulfilled.-Luke 19:40. 

It seems remarkable that, after all the Bible has said 
respecting Messiah's Kingdom and the work which it is 
to accomplish in the blessing of Israel and all the families 
of the earth, so few seem to believe the Message, 
so few seem to be willing to receive it as little children. 
The majority today, like the scribes and Pharisees of old, 
are too "wise" to believe in the possibility of the establishment 
of Messiah's Kingdom. They realize the 
need of the Kingdom, but they have certain theories of 
their own which blind them to the Truth. 

Some mistakenly hold that the Kingdom of Christ 
was set up at Pentecost and that He has been reigning 
ever since, conquering the world. Alas, how unreasonable 
this seems, when we know that even under the most 
favorable conditions the heathen of the world double 
every century! How strange that some Christians have 
prayed so long that God's Kingdom would come and rule 
the world and put down the wicked and exalt the obedient, 
until finally the Divine will would be done on earth 
as completely as it is now done in Heaven— and yet 
all this without really, properly believing that the Kingdom 
which was offered to Israel, and which they refused, 
is evidently to be established— at the Second Coming of 
Jesus and the resurrection change of His Church! 

Another large body of Christian brethren, Roman 
Catholics, hold still a different theory; namely, that 
Messiah's Thousand- Year-Reign began in the days of 
Pope Leo III, A.D. 800; and that He has reigned in the 
world ever since. This view holds that it was most 
necessary for Jesus to come a second time to establish 
His Kingdom; but that in the year 800 A. D., Jesus established 



His followers in kingly power, and made the 
Pope at Rome His representative and vice-gerent. The 
word vice-gerent, as we all know, signifies one who reigns 
instead of another. The claim is that Christ has been 
reigning for now eleven hundred and thirteen years, 
fully and officially represented by the Pope. 

Neither of these views is satisfactory, and neither 
is Scriptural. Surely the conquest of the world has not 
been going on for the last eleven hundred years, as we 
might have hoped, if God's time had come for Messiah 
to take the long-promised Kingdom. Surely what St. 
Paul said of his day is true now also: "The god of this 
world hath blinded the minds of them that believe not" 
—"the children of disobedience"— to hinder the light 
of the glorious Gospel of Christ! 

The glorious Gospel of Christ is, "I will come again, 
and receive you unto Myself." His glorious Message 
further is that His Church shall sit with Him in His 
Throne, a Royal Priesthood; and that in His Day the 
righteous shall flourish and all the evil-doers shall be cut 
off in the Second Death. Well did the Apostle warn us 
not to depart from "the faith once delivered to the 
saints." Well were we told that many would depart from 
that faith, giving heed to spirits that would lead them 
astray and to doctrines of demons (1 Timothy 4:1), 
quite unlike the glorious, loving Gospel of God's Love, 
and His Mercy that endureth forever! 

Our Golden Text assures us that the Church, now 
being called to sit with Christ in His Throne in due time, 
must be girded with humility, as servants one of another; 
for God resisteth the proud and giveth grace to the 
humble. Therefore only the humble will receive the 
great gift of the Kingdom honors and opportunities. 



R5362 : page 364 

SEVENTY MINISTERS ORDAINED 

-JANUARY 11. -LUKE 10:1-24.- 

"It is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your 
Father that speaketh in you."— Matthew 10:20. 

MINISTERIAL ordination has for centuries 

been a bone of contention. Indirectly it 

has led to bloody persecutions in the past. 

Thank God! those days are gone, so far as 

the majority of Christians are concerned. 

And yet, because the masses do not clearly 

understand the subject of ordination, there 

is always danger of a recurrence of persecution 

along this line. Presbyterians, Baptists, 

Methodists, Lutherans, Episcopalians, 

all, have shared in these persecutions based upon misconceptions 



of ministerial ordination— in times past they 
persecuted each other along these lines. 

The claim was that none could be a preacher or 
teacher unless he had a special ordination; that for the 
unordained to preach or teach was a rebellion against 
Divine arrangement; and that all who followed his 
teaching or gave him support were heretics, and, as such, 
deserving of no sympathy, but rather of persecution. 

Ordination does not relate to a ceremony, or form, 
as many suppose. It signifies an authorization, a commission 
to preach. The Baptists commission those who 
agree with their creed to preach it. The Presbyterians so 
commission their disciples, as do the Lutherans, Methodists, 
etc. Roman Catholics and Episcopalians claim an 
ordination from God— that all their bishops are successors 
to the Apostles and armed with Apostolic authority; 
hence that any not commissioned, or ordained, by their 

R5363 : page 364 

bishops have no right to preach, but are heretics. From 
their standpoint, all other Protestants are heretics, 
preaching without authority. 

But the spirit of tolerance is growing; and within the 
last two years Episcopalians have lifted the embargo on 
other Protestants to the extent that an Episcopal minister 
may preach in the pulpit of another denomination, or a 
minister not ordained by the Episcopalians may be permitted 
to preach in their pulpits. But this is a very modern 
concession. 

The right thought of ordination is presented in the 
Study for today. Jesus had already appointed twelve to 
be His special Apostles; and now He ordained, or appointed, 
seventy more, not to be Apostles, but to be general 
ministers or missionaries. There was no ceremony 
connected with their appointment, or ordination, so far as 
the record shows. Jesus simply sent them out, telling 
them what to say. Our Golden Text explains the matter 
saying, "It is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your 
Father that speaketh in you." 

Strictly speaking, the Apostles had not yet received 
the Spirit of the Father directly. The Father's Spirit 
had been imparted to the Son, and it was the Son who 
shared that Spirit with those He sent out to preach in 
His name. The Father did not directly recognize, authorize 
or ordain any to preach the Gospel Message, until 

R5363 : page 365 

Pentecost. St. Peter there explains that the Holy 

Spirit shed forth upon the witnessing disciples was from 

the Father and by the Son. -Acts 2:32,33. 

Elsewhere it is explained that the Holy Spirit was 
not given previously because Jesus had not been glorified. 
It was necessary for Jesus to suffer, and to ascend on 
High and to present His merit on behalf of His disciples, 



before the Heavenly Father recognized them as sons 
of the new order and gave them the begetting of the Holy 
Spirit, the unction from the Holy One, the authorization, 
or ordination, to be His ambassadors and representatives 
in the world and, if faithful, by and by to be associates 
with Jesus in the Heavenly Kingdom, which for a thousand 
years is to bless the earth and roll away the curse. 

Only those whom God has ordained in the sense of 
giving them the Holy Spirit of sonship are in any wise 
commissioned, or authorized, to preach in the Lord's 
name. All the ceremonies on earth and all the hands of 
all the bishops cannot give authority to anybody to speak 
in the name of God. Our Lord Jesus did not begin His 
ministry until He had received God's ordination. At 
the time of His consecration and baptism the Holy Spirit 
came upon Him, anointing Him, consecrating Him, authorizing 
Him, to preach the good tidings to the meek, to 
bind up the broken-hearted, to proclaim liberty to the 
captives, to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, to 
comfort those that mourn.— Isaiah 61:1,2. 

The same Holy Spirit is authority for anybody who 
has received it to tell all that he understands respecting 
the Plan of God to all who have an ear to hear— especially 
to the meek, the broken-hearted, those who are 
feeling after God. While the Apostle Paul intimates that 
the female members of the Church are not to preach publicly, 
this does not interfere with the fact that all of 
them who have received the Holy Spirit have the anointing 
to preach and to teach according to the limitations 
and opportunities of their sex. And sometimes the private 
teaching is equally as effective as the more public. 

The forty years which closed the Jewish Age, beginning 
with John the Baptist and ending A.D. 70 with 
the destruction of Jerusalem, was the Harvest period for 
typical Israel. It witnessed the gathering into the Gospel 
garner of all the true wheat and the entire setting aside 
of the remainder, the chaff, in a great time of trouble, 
symbolically called fire. The Lord, in Matthew 13, intimates 
that in the end of this Gospel Age there will be a 
similar Harvest. Many believe that it began in 1874 
and will end in 1915. 

All of the Lord's faithful ones at the close of the Jewish 
Age were to recognize the great privilege of being 
engaged in the Harvest work, and the same must be true 
now. The Lord's followers are compared to gentle, inoffensive 
lambs and sheep, while the selfish, unregenerate 
world He pictures as wolves. In the Jewish Harvest He 
would not have them beg their way from house to house, 
but inquire for the most worthy people in every village, 
and, if received, remain there until they had given their 
witness in that village. They were to depend wholly upon 
the Lord, and to make no attempt to provide for their 
needs. This was to be to them a lesson for their future 
benefit. Later, Jesus sent forth His disciples, telling 
them to provide for their wants to the best of their ability 
—implying that the first experience had been a special 



one, to give them confidence and reliance in the Divine 
Power that they represented. 

The Master's Spirit was given to them in such measure 
that they were enabled to do as He did— to heal the 
sick, cast out devils, etc. We are not to understand that 
there is such an authorization of the Lord's people today. 
Conditions have changed. The healing of spiritual 
sickness, blindness and deafness, greater works than 
those, is the privilege of the Lord's people today. 

The one Message of the disciples was that the Kingdom 
of God had come nigh. Whoever could be influenced 
would be influenced by that Message. God's Kingdom 
had been waited for by the Israelites for many centuries. 
But alas, when it was presented, only a comparatively 
small number of the Jews were ready to receive it! 
Thereafter the Kingdom offer was taken away from 
them, and has since been given throughout the whole 
world, gathering the elect class from every nation to be 
Messiah's Bride and Joint-heir, through whom shortly 
the Kingdom will be established in the earth and its 
blessings be bestowed far and near upon all of the race. 

The Master referred to His preaching and mighty 
works in Capernaum, Bethsaida and Chorazin. These 
cities were figuratively said to have been exalted in point 
of privilege; and, as having rejected the Lord's favors, 
they would be cast down to the grave. Examples were 
given of Sodom and Tyre, both of which then were in 
ruins— brought down to Hades, down to the dust. 

Our Lord intimates, however, that the trial, or testing, 
or judgment, which His preaching had given was not 
a finality— there would be a future judgment or trial. 
According to St. Paul the entire Millennial Age is to be a 
thousand-year Judgment Day, in which the whole world 
is to be brought to a knowledge of the Truth, to a full 
opportunity of coming to a knowledge of God. (Acts 17:31.) 
Nevertheless, those who heard Jesus unmoved 
had hardened their hearts, and would be correspondingly 
disadvantaged in the Judgment Day. Jesus put the matter 
very strongly when He implied that it would be tolerable 
for those people, but more tolerable for Sodom, 
because its sin had been against less light and privilege. 
See also Ezekiel 16:48-63. 

Concluding, the Master assured His messengers that 
whoever heard them and despised them despised Him 
and the Father. This same thing is true undoubtedly of 
all whom the Lord has ordained and sent forth as ministers 
of the Gospel— the truly ordained. 



R5363 : page 365 

WILL THE EARTH BE BURNED? 

WE are obliged to antagonize, not only the Second 
Adventist views, but the teachings of 



all the orthodox creeds of Christendom 

when we declare that according to the Bible 

our world is never to be burned up— 

except in a figurative, symbolic sense. The 

Bible teaches that at the close of this Age 

a great trouble will be precipitated, which 

will destroy, consume or figuratively burn 

up, present institutions— ecclesiastical, religious 

and social. The raging fire will be anarchy; and 

its horrible result will be, according to the Bible, the 

ashes of present institutions. 

For six thousand years the world has had its ups 
and downs, individually and nationally. Christianity has 
influenced some, and Churchianity has influenced more. 
The true Christianity has produced the true saints, who 
have followed in the Master's footsteps and, like Him, 
have been treated as the filth and offscouring of the earth 
—while they live— after death to be honored as saints 
and heroes. Churchianity has a form of godliness without 
its power. The form has in many respects helped 

R5363 : page 366 

along to influence and power in the world, leading often 
to the perpetration of horrible crimes in the name of 
Christ and His Church. 

Now, as the Gospel Age is closing and the Messianic 
Age is dawning, the lifting of the curtain of the New 
Dispensation is producing wonderful results amongst men. 
Darkness, ignorance, superstition, are fleeing before the 
light of the New Day. The world is awakening because 
it is Morning. Human thought is quickened; and the 
wonderful inventions of our day— steam power and electricity 
—are carrying the thoughts of men to each other 
the world over. The printing press and the mail are potent 
factors in the awakening. Knowledge is filling the 
earth, as the Lord through His Prophets declared would 
be the case at this time.-Isa. 11:9; Hab. 2:14; Dan. 12:4. 

But this knowledge is coming to people who at heart 
are unprepared for it. The hands of the ignorant and 
unlearned are stretched forth to grasp the throttle of 
power— political, social, religious and financial. Wrongs 
are recognized; but those who seek to remedy them will 

R5364 : page 366 

only make a bad matter worse. All must yet learn that 
the world's only hope is in God's provision— Messiah's 
Kingdom. 

But before this lesson is learned, the spirit of 
discontent stirred up by knowledge will grasp the opportunities 
and gradually and ignorantly, unintentionally, will cause the 
great wreck of our present social, religious, political and 
financial institutions in "a Time of Trouble such as 
never was since there was a nation"— "no, nor ever shall 
be again. "-Daniel 12:1; Matthew 24:21. 



This great cataclysm of trouble, which all intelligent 
people perceive with more or less distinctness, is described 
in the Bible under various symbolic terms. Sometimes 
it is described as a whirlwind; at other times the 
description is that of a storm; again, of a great tidal 
wave— the sea (representing the masses) will swallow up 
the mountains (representing the kingdoms). (Psalm 46:2,3.) 
Again it is described as a fire, which will consume 
the whole earth. (Zephaniah 1:18; 3:8.) Yet in each case 
there is connected with the symbol something to show 
that it is merely a symbol, and that the utter destruction 
of humanity is not meant. As, for instance, after describing 
the storm, the Lord through the Prophet declares 
that He will command the nations to be still and to recognize 
Him as God, and that the result will be a great 
calm. (Psalm 46:8-10.) In the case of the fire, we read 
that after it has consumed the whole earth (the social 
fabric), then the Lord will turn to the people a pure 
language, a pure Message, that they may all call upon the 
name of the Lord to serve Him with one consent— 
Zephaniah 3:9. 

Evidently, the fire which will consume the earth must 
be a symbolic fire of trouble, consuming the symbolic 
earth, or social conditions, because the people still remain 
and are to receive the Lord's blessing. The pure Message 
that will then be given to the world will be in strong 
contrast with the confused messages of the contradictory 
creeds which for centuries have been given to the world, 
and which many of the world's thinking minds have been 
unable to appreciate or receive, and which have perplexed 
Christian minds. 

Let us, therefore, take the Word of the Lord and reject 
the messages of all the creeds of Christendom. Let 
us not for a moment think that the literal earth is to be 
burned up at the Second Coming of Jesus; but, quite to 
the contrary, let us believe St. Peter's statement that at 
that time will begin "the Times of Restitution of all things 
which God hath spoken by the mouth of all the holy 
Prophets since the world began." (Acts 3:19-21.) Let 
us remember the declaration of Scripture that "the earth 
abideth forever." (Ecclesiastes 1:4); that "God Himself 
formed the earth and made it; He hath established 
it, He created it not in vain, He formed it to be inhabited." 
-Isaiah 45:18. 

Let us remember that the world has never yet been 
inhabited. Vast territories have not yet been explored by 
man. Let us remember that God's promise respecting 
the earth is that, as Heaven is His Throne, so "the earth 
is His footstool," and He surely will make the place of 
His feet glorious. (Isaiah 66:1; 60:13.) Messiah's Kingdom 
will not only uplift humanity, but will also bring 
blessings of perfection to the earth. Eden eventually 
will be world-wide. "The desert shall rejoice and blossom 
as the rose." 



R5364 : page 366 

PROFITABLE BIBLE STUDY 

FROM A.D. 325, the date of the making of 

the first general Church creed, the Nicene 

Creed, down to the Reformation, a period 

of twelve hundred years, there was no 

Bible study except that which was done 

here and there in secret, for fear of persecution. 

The theory prevailed that the 

bishops were apostolic bishops, successors 

to the twelve Apostles of the Lamb; and 

that to ignore them and go back to the 

teachings of the New Testament was heretical, a crime. 

Following those twelve hundred years of no Bible 
study came two or three hundred years in which, under 
compulsion, the bishops allowed the people to have the 
Bible, but forbade them to read it for themselves without 
the interpretations and explanations of the supposed-to-be 
apostolic successors. Thus Bible study was handicapped; 
for the people were given to understand that 
misunderstanding of the Bible would mean heresy, and 
that heresy would mean everlasting torture. 

Only now are Bible students beginning to emerge from 
under the great cloud of false doctrine which for fifteen 
hundred years has misrepresented God and the Bible, 
putting darkness for light. Only now can Bible study 
be prosecuted in its true spirit, without the fear of man, 
which brings a snare. Only now is there general education, 
which permits of Bible study in this true sense. 
Only now have we the convenient Bible, cheap and in 
every home. Only now have we more leisure and opportunity 
for Bible study. Only now have we good light by 
which to study. 

But alas! now that we are ready and fully equipped 
for Bible study, we are handicapped, trammeled by 
wrong doctrines which have become lodged and fastened 
in memory. Some of these came from the creeds, some 
of them from hymn books, some of them from preaching 
and some from tracts. As a result, we are filled with 
misunderstandings and inconsistencies which cause the 
Bible to appear to be self-contradictory. So much is this 
the case that it is counted a fashionable thing in our 
day for intelligent people to laugh at the Bible and to 
deny its Divine inspiration. But the Bible is consistent 
with itself, and is thoroughly opposed to the doctrines of 
the creeds. These facts, however, need to be thoroughly 
learned before we can have full confidence in the Bible 
and fully appreciate it. These blessings are the portion 
of the Lord's people more and more, especially during 
the last thirty-five years. 

R5364 : page 367 



THREE EXCELLENT HELPS TO BIBLE STUDY 

Under all these circumstances the question of how 
to study the Bible so as to get its true meaning and avoid 
the errors of the past is a problem. Many Bible students 
believe that God has come to the rescue of His people 
in a time of need in providing helps for Bible students— 
the six volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. 

These volumes make no pretense of being Divinely 
inspired but, on the contrary, show from the Scriptures 
that no such Divine inspiration beyond the twelve Apostles 
was ever intended. They show, however, that it is 
in full harmony with the Bible to expect that, from time 
to time as necessity demanded, the Lord would raise 
up pastors and teachers for the assistance of the faithful 
in the study of the Scriptures— teachers who, without 
having plenary inspiration, would have, in a special 
manner, the guidance and blessing of the Holy Spirit, 
granted to all the Church. It is the belief of many that 
God has used the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES in the doing 
of such a teaching and pastoral work— guiding His 
people by pointing them to the Scriptures and suggesting 
interpretations which harmonize the Bible from Genesis 
to Revelation. 

The next question is, How can these helps for Bible 
study best be used by the Lord's people? That is a 
question which, in its last analysis, belongs to the individual 
Bible student or the classes of Bible students 
which desire to use them. There is no Divine command 
on the subject. Each individual and each class is at 
liberty to make use of whatever will be of assistance 
in the study of God's Word. In every case, however, it 
is to be remembered that no teacher, or book, takes the 
place of the Bible, but merely points to and expounds it 
as the Word of God. 

Many thousands of the Lord's people have testified to 
great blessings received from the use of these Bible keys 
in their own individual private reading and study. Hundreds 
of Bible students' classes in all parts of the world 
are using them, and, they claim, with great profit. We 
recommend them to all. The Watch Tower Bible and 
Tract Society has issued little booklets of questions on 
the different volumes of this series, and supplies them at 
very small cost. These are not generally necessary for 
individual study, but very helpful indeed in class study, 
because they pick the subject to pieces and stimulate 
the mind and memory in connection with the answers. 
The books are an assistance to the answers, supported 
by the Scriptures. These are styled Berean Bible Studies 
because it is the Bible that is being studied— not the 
question books nor the books that assist in giving the 
answers to the questions. 

We have also suggested another style of Berean 
Bible Studies, provided in the back of a specially prepared 
Bible of the Common Version. These are topical 
studies, and a variety of citations of Scriptures bearing 



upon such subjects is furnished. These are helpful 
studies, but in our judgment not nearly so well adapted 
to the majority of Bible study classes as the first named, 
which are supplemented by the question books. 

TWO METHODS CONTRASTED 

Sometimes opponents seem to make light of these 
methods of Bible study, and tell us that in their Bible 
classes they take up a certain chapter in the Bible and 
have a general discussion on it. Our reply is that if they 
have gotten knowledge, light and truth in this way, it 
proves it to be a good method. If they, on the contrary, 
obtain no satisfactory results, but merely a wrangle 
and a variety of expressions, none of which are very 
satisfactory, then this would appear not so very advantageous 
a course to pursue. 

R5365 : page 367 

To decide the matter we suggest that a Bible study 
class which has been following the usual style of studying 
a chapter be brought in contest with a class which 
has been using our first described method of Berean Bible 
study. Let the two classes take up any Bible topic 
that may be suggested; and it will soon be ascertained 
that those who have been following our Berean Bible 
study plan know ten or twenty times as much about the 
Bible on every subject. 

These STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES have not sought 
to follow any human creed or theory, but merely to 
bring together the various Scriptures on a subject and to 
find the harmonious view reflected from these various 
passages. The method has proved itself so satisfactory 
to those who have tried it, that they would not now think 
of using any other method of Bible study, considering 
that all other methods are of little value in comparison. 
Nevertheless, the matter is purely for the individual or 
the class to determine which is for its own best interests, 
which will serve its purpose best. 



page 367 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

OUR BELOVED PASTOR:- 

Having felt for some little time the especial and peculiar 
blessing which the Vow brings to those who make it their 

own, we, a few of the young members of the , Canada, 

Ecclesia, at this time take extreme pleasure in signing our 
names and forwarding the record to you. 

There is such entire satisfaction and rest of spirit to the 
New Creature in Christ Jesus who can make such an expression 
of complete immersion into His will as is expressed 



in the beautiful language and inner meaning of the Vow. 

Our hearts are continually full of love and gratitude to the 
dear Heavenly Father, who has sent us a servant to give such 
wonderful and delightful "meat in due season" to the Feet 
members of this Mystical Body, part of which we live daily 
in the Blessed Hope of becoming. 

Our hearts do verily burn within us as we talk over these 
"great and precious promises," and we are glad of the opportunity 
to add our names to the ever increasing list of those 
who are striving in every way to follow in His Steps, and 
who have taken the Vow. 

Your co-laborers in the Master's service, 
NINE SIGNATURES. 



MY DEAR PASTOR AND BROTHER:- 

Much Divine love and peace be thine throughout all eternity! 
I am writing to let you know that I have taken the 
Vow, and also to tell you of the many blessings which I have 
received and enjoyed as the results of your labors (as the 
dear Lord's honored Servant). 

I have been in touch with the Present Truth for three 
years, but have declined to give my all to the Lord and to 
consecrate my entire life to Him until recently. Finally I 
realized that I was receiving the grace of God in vain. Now 
I am continually thanking and praising my dear Heavenly 
Father for His goodness and kindness toward me for opening 
my eyes of understanding to see Him and His wonderful Plan 
of Salvation. 

Dear Brother, I am finding the morning Resolve a wonderful 
help to keep closer to the Lord. Praise His Holy 
Name! I sincerely ask your prayers that I may be more and 
more illuminated with this blessed Truth, and with the Holy 
Spirit, until I shall become one of the rays of the same great 
Fountain of light and Truth, with our dear Lord and all of 
the faithful in Him. 

Now praying God to ever bless and keep you to the end 
of the way, and to grant you an abundant entrance into the 
Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, I remain, 

Your Brother in the One Hope of our calling, 
B. C. PALMER. -Okla. 



page 369 

VOL. XXXIV DECEMBER 15 No. 24 
A. D. 1913-A. M. 6042 



CONTENTS 

1913-AnnualReport-1913 371 

Our Most Successful Year 371 



Class Extension Work 371 

Correspondence Department 372 

Colporteur Department 372 

Year's Pilgrim Service 372 

The Gospel in the Newspapers 373 

Financial Showing for 1913 373 

Knowledge and Faith Regarding Chronology 374 

The Good Samaritan 376 

"His Servants Shall Serve Him" 377 

"Let Me Bury My Father" 377 

Salvation— Universal and Limited 378 

God's Will is Best (Poem) 378 

Your "Good Hopes" for 1914 379 

"Blessed are the Meek" 381 

Loving Rules and Parliamentary Rules 381 

The Hope of The Gospel Age 382 

Public Ministries of the Truth 383 

Index to The Watch Tower-1913 384 

page 370 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



THE TEMPLE-NEW YORK CITY 

December 7th was "Dedication Day" at THE TEMPLE. It 
is conveniently located at Nos. 22-26 West 63d St., near Central 
Park, Columbus Circle Entrance. 

The 10.30 a. m. service, besides praise and prayer, consisted 



of a sermon from 1 Corinthians 3:17: "The Temple of God 
is holy, which temple ye are." At 2.30 p.m. there was a 
Symposium of twelve speakers who ably discussed the topic 
"Gratitude"— Thankfulness. At 4 p.m. about 850 participated 
in a grand Testimony Meeting. At the evening service 
Pastor Russell gave another discourse. All seemed to enjoy 
the day; and so far as heard all expressed pleasure with 
THE TEMPLE. 



1914-MOTTO TEXT CARDS-1914 

Our Motto Text for the New Year is "Be Strong and of 
Good Courage." (Joshua 1:9.) These are promised by 
December 15. Price, on neat cards, 6 cents each postpaid. 
In quantities for classes, postpaid, 40 cents per dozen, or $3.00 
per hundred. 



LARGE MOTTOES FOR MOUNTING 

We have secured some new large mottoes, size 15x20 
inches, for framing. They are of four designs of beautiful 
flowers, and still greater variety of texts. We have put these 
up in tubes for safety— four for $1; postage prepaid. 



DO YOU DESIRE THIS JOURNAL FURTHER? 

The postal laws are strict. Our subscription list must contain 
only bona fide subscriptions. Please advise at once if 
you wish THE WATCH TOWER for 1914 if your subscription 
has expired. Do this even if you cannot send the subscription 
price at the same time. Friends have provided a fund 
from which subscriptions may be paid for poor brethren, interested 
enough to request the journal on these terms. 
Hence, none need be without the regular visits of THE 
WATCH TOWER. 



R5365 : page 371 

19 13 -ANNUAL REPORT- 19 13 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

-DECEMBER 1, 1912-DECEMBER 1, 1913- 

TO PERMIT the balancing of our accounts 
and the rendering of them before the first 
of the year, it is our custom to start each 
financial year on December 1st. The sum 



total of the work reported a year ago was 

so large for us that we doubted if it would 

not be our banner year. Additionally, the 

threats of our enemies were heard on 

every hand. They boasted that before another 

year our Society's work would be 

stopped. The basis of this threat was their intended and 

already started campaign of slander, abuse, misrepresentation 

—anything to stop us. In closing our last year's Report 

we said: "Let us not be fearful of the great Adversary's 

roar, when like a roaring lion he would seek to 

intimidate us. 'Be of good courage, and the Lord shall 

strengthen thine heart.'" 

Without judging the majority of the ministers of 
Christ of various denominations we may surely say that 
the experiences of the past year have abundantly demonstrated 
that some very mean men are wearing the livery 
of Heaven, professing to be the mouthpieces of the 
Lord Jesus Christ. Our kindest thought respecting them 
is that the great Adversary is blinding them, much as 
he did the great Saul of Tarsus. And our hope for 
them is that, like Saul, they will ere long be smitten 
down by a great light from Heaven, and hear in their 
consciences a voice saying, "I am Jesus, whom thou 
persecutest"; and that then some of these rabid foes of 
the Truth may become its staunch servants. 

OUR MOST SUCCESSFUL YEAR 

We are sure that our readers are awaiting this Report 
with keen interest. Wonderful as it may seem, it is 
our privilege to report that the past year has been in 
every way our most successful one. The more the Lord 
permitted our enemies to assail us, the more did He 
strengthen and comfort our hearts with evidences of 
His favor. He demonstrated that He who is on our 
part is mightier than all that be against us. 

Indeed, we have had various evidences that the vicious 
attack of certain ministers has had an effect the 
very reverse of what they intended. The public have 
seen the Adversary's spirit manifested; and even worldly 
people know the difference between the Spirit of Christ 
—the spirit of meekness, the spirit of love— and the 
contrary spirit of Satan— the spirit of malice, hatred, 
envy, evil-speaking, strife. If God sees best to awaken 
some of His children to thought by the wolfish growling 
of some who pose as representatives of the Great Shepherd, 
it is not for us to question the Divine Wisdom, 
but to say with the Master, "The cup which My Father 
hath poured, shall I not drink it?" 

Nor is the Editor alone in these experiences. While 
he is the chief target, all identified with the work in a 
public way are also marks for those described by the 
Psalmist: "The wicked. ..shoot their arrows, even 
bitter words, that they may shoot in secret at the perfect." 
(Psalm 64:3,4.) Surely we may all rejoice in the 



privilege granted us of sharing in the sufferings of 
Christ. "For if we suffer with Him, we shall also reign 
with Him." And if our sufferings be the way by which 
the Lord would attract and bless others of His true 
sheep, we may surely, with the Apostle Paul, "glory in 
tribulations also."— Romans 5:3. 

CLASS EXTENSION WORK 

One of the most encouraging features of the work 
is the zeal manifested in various quarters in the CLASS 
EXTENSION WORK. Hundreds of dear brethren, backed 
by the Classes with which they are associated, have gone 
forth as evangelists. They have held meetings in cities, 
towns and villages in the vicinity of the Class home. 
They have broken a good deal of new ground in this way, 
have corrected misapprehension in respect to our Gospel 
Message, and have brought a considerable number to full 
consecration to the Lord and to great joy and blessing in 
the knowledge of the Truth. 

It is now two years since this work started; and this 
year, for your encouragement, we must give some figures. 
The friends in thirty States have joined in this work. The 
average number of speakers per month throughout the 
twelve months was 105; 3,050 meetings were reported, 
with an attendance of 91,881. The cost of these meetings 
as reported by the Classes was $8,546.61. This amount 
does not appear in our Report, except about 10 per cent. 
The Classes rejoiced in the privilege of financing their 
meetings, and only in a few instances was the Society's 
help needed. Of course, the Society furnished the literature 
used at these meetings, which with freight and expressage 
was no small item. 

We trust that this noble work will go on, and that the 

R5365 : page 372 

Lord's blessing will continue with it. We sometimes term 
it the "Layman's Home Missionary Movement." We observe 
that the Classes participating in this work most vigorously 
are usually the most blessed of the Lord spiritually, 
as well as numerically. And undoubtedly all who 
thus serve as evangelists receive a great blessing in their 
hearts from the Lord. In the interests of those Classes 
that feel that a repetition of the Class Extension Work 
would not be wise, or that feel that they have speakers 
or financial strength which they can furnish for Sunday 
work at greater distances from their homes, we have recently 
proposed an "Auxiliary Pilgrim Service." We trust 
that this may prove a means of blessing and furtherance 
of the work during the year just begun. 

OUR CORRESPONDENCE DEPARTMENT 

With literature in thirty different languages, distributed 
in large quantities, it is not surprising that we have 



a large correspondence. Our Brooklyn office keeps thirty 
typewriters busy, besides our Multigraph machines. 

Total letters received during the year 184,825 

Total number of letters dispatched during the 
year 481,521 

These figures do not represent the correspondence of 
the various branches. More and more the dear friends 
are learning to separate the business part of their letters, 

R5366 : page 372 

and so to write the letters that business items will be together, 
and separated from doctrinal questions, requests 
for Pilgrim service, etc. This aids us greatly in handling 
the mail satisfactorily, because our work is divided into 
different departments, for its greater efficiency. 

The Editor receives very many letters which he 
greatly enjoys, but does not answer. In the interest of 
the general work he seeks to confine his replies to matters 
and questions which seem really important. Please 
accept this excuse, and ordinarily address all correspondence 
to the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society. Where 
convenient, you may mark the envelope in care of whichever 
department your letter is especially concerned with; 
as, for instance, Pilgrim Department, Colporteur Department, 
etc. Ordinarily, mail respecting subscriptions and 
questions should be addressed to the Society merely. This 
applies to the various branch houses also. 

Nevertheless, wherever there are questions of deep 
importance you are still welcome to address the Editor 
personally. Rest assured that he will do his best to give 
you a prompt reply. 

THE COLPORTEUR DEPARTMENT 

We still regard the sale of the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
one of the best indications of the progress of the 
work. Our total sales of the six volumes for the year 
amounted to 692,598 copies. Only one year ever exceeded 
this number— 1908— when our total was 718,474. However, 
the difference is probably fully offset, or more, by 
the fact that last year numerous editions were published 
in foreign lands for cheapness or convenience, and these 
do not show in this year's Report. 

We still continue to regard the dear Colporteurs as 
amongst the most efficient servants in the Harvest work. 
They are a noble band. Additionally, they are learning 
better how to do effective service— they are becoming 
more courageous. With the ripening of their own characters, 
they are enabled to speak the Truth more forcefully 
than ever, and yet more gently, more lovingly. They 
are learning the meaning of the Apostle's words— "Speaking 
the Truth in love, grow up into Him." 

Some of the dear Colporteurs are so efficient that there 



is pretty sure to be a class of Bible students started, to 
meet regularly, in every town they canvass. They note, 
as they canvass, those who seem to indicate that they are 
true children of God, begotten of the Spirit, or hungry to 
know the Lord. These they nurse by repeatedly visiting 
them, encouraging them to read the STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES, helping them over misunderstandings and 
counteracting the evil influence of those who seek by slander 
to hinder them from reading and from true Bible 
Study. May the Lord's blessing be richly with the dear 
Colporteurs during the year beginning, encouraging, 
strengthening, blessing them! 

THE YEARS PILGRIM SERVICE 

No other year will at all compare with the one just 
closed in respect to the amount of Pilgrim work done 
and the apparent results. You know the dear Pilgrims— 
their devotion to the Lord and His Cause, and their willingness 
to endure hardness and to spend their strength 
to the glory of God and the blessing of His people. Their 
services are free; and as nearly as we are able the Society 
responds to requests for public and private services 
of these Pilgrims. Much, of course, must depend upon 
the size of the city from which the call comes, the convenience 
of reaching it, and the promises made in respect 
to a suitable auditorium. 

The Society has found that it is a waste of time and 
money to send Pilgrims to places where only second or 
third class auditoriums are promised. In our day, when 
churches, theatres and lodges are all bright, clean, attractive 
and comfortable, we must not expect the public 
to be attracted to very inferior places; for before hearing 
they do not know, they cannot realize, that we have 
for them a Message transcendently superior to anything 
else they have ever heard. 

Remember that the expenses of the Pilgrims are all 
borne by the Society, and that donations or collections are 
neither requested nor expected. We do, however, expect 
that these servants of the Lord will be esteemed by 
those whom they serve as worthy of food and clean, comfortable 
lodging. They expect no feasting nor special 
preparation, however. 

Incidentally, we advise all the brethren taking part in 
public meetings to give considerable attention to their apparel. 
Black clothing is always appropriate to the platform, 
and generally a skirted, or frock, coat. Only a 
white shirt and collar and a black or a white tie should 
be considered suitable. By this we do not mean that God 
is a respecter of persons and of clothing; but we believe 
that our Message carries more weight if delivered by 
those who are plainly, modestly, but appropriately dressed. 
Everything loud, crude and commonplace should be eliminated. 
The Truth should have a respectable presentation; 
for it attracts chiefly those of respectable mind. 



A WORD TO THE WISE 

Another thought: The introduction of the Pilgrim 
should be considered so important that unless well done, 
it should not be done at all. It should be very brief and 
in well-chosen, grammatical language. The introductory 
prayer should also be very brief— merely an invocation— 
a request for the Divine blessing upon the audience and 
the speaker, with thanks for the mercies of the occasion. 
All language implying a division of the audience should 
be avoided— "we" and "you." It should be taken for 
granted that all present are Bible students, and no suggestion 
to the contrary should be offered. The meeting 
to follow should be announced briefly before the speaker 
is introduced. Where announcement cards are used, they 
should be distributed with the hymn slips, while the audience 
is being seated. 

R5366 : page 373 

The following summary of this branch of the work 
speaks for itself and needs no comment: 

Total number of ministers serving 80 

Cities and towns visited 7,491 

Total number of public meetings 3,626 

Total number of attendance 808,851 

Semi-public meetings held 3,913 

Total number in attendance 230,218 

Parlor meetings held 9,373 

Total number in attendance 213,884 

Total number of miles traveled 882,713 



Grand total meetings held 16,912 

Grand total attendance 1,252,953 

THE GOSPEL IN THE NEWSPAPERS 

Divine providence is still favoring the presentation of 
the Gospel in the public press. The efforts of the enemies 
of the Gospel of the Kingdom to misrepresent our 
teachings and to prejudice editors and publishers against 
them have not prevailed. In this also we perceive that 
He that is for us is mightier than all they that be against 
us. The day may come when the Truth will be crushed 
to the earth by slander and misrepresentation, but that 
day has not come yet. Indeed, in quite a number of instances 
the editors, although worldly men, have appreciated 
the situation, despised the unjust principle manifested 
by some preachers in their opposition, and have 
given space and prominence to our Message. 

The latest figures given us by the Newspaper Syndicate 
which handles the Sermons and Bible Study Lessons 
in the United States and Canada show 1,424 papers publishing 



weekly. About 600 papers in Great Britain, South 
Africa and Australia publish weekly. This in round figures 
represents 2,000 newspapers. How many millions of 
readers are thus reached by these papers we know not, 
nor can we tell how many of those reached are reading 
and being influenced. We do know, however, that the 
whole world is waking up, and that the truths we are 
presenting are gaining adherents and exerting influence 
everywhere. We trust that the Lord's name is being glorified 
thus, and that many of His consecrated people are 
being ripened for the Kingdom. 

We still recommend that Bible Students support their 
home paper or the papers nearest them which publish the 
sermons, rather than those at a distance— even though the 
latter might be cheaper in price. 

GOD'S MESSAGE FOR THE PEOPLE 

Our papers for free circulation amongst the people 
are titled EVERYBODY'S PAPER, PEOPLE'S PULPIT, and the 
BIBLE STUDENTS' MONTHLY. These have a subscription 
price of twelve cents a year, but our list is comparatively 
small. The vast majority are circulated as sample copies 
—free. On the average they contain three attractive sermons 
each. The January 1st issue is generally used Volunteering 
—for a nation-wide free circulation. Other 
numbers through the year are used for the announcement 
of Pilgrim meetings, Class Extension meetings, etc. Many 
of them are used for circulation instead of tracts. They 
are more attractive than tracts. 

The wise distribution of these on street cars, trains, 
boats, etc., as the friends go from place to place, is recommended. 
This is a form of service in which all can 
engage. And these little newspapers have all the rights 
and privileges of the larger newspapers devoted to politics, 
sports and advertisements. Quite a good many people 
come into a knowledge of the Truth through this ministry. 
The friends everywhere are invited to send for 
these free, in such quantities as they can and will use 
faithfully in three months. There should be no dead 
stock wasted in cupboards or garrets. As a part of the 
Gospel Message each number should be considered too 
valuable to lie idle. 

Our total output of these various papers, issued free, 
and express or freight or postage prepaid, is represented 
by such large figures as to be beyond the comprehension 
of the majority of people; namely, 36,143,500 copies, representing 

R5367 : page 373 

approximately 100,000,000 of sermons or a thousand 
million tract pages. This does not represent the Society's 
work in foreign lands, but merely in America. 

Of course, the Higher Critics are disturbed. Having 
lost all vital faith in the Bible themselves, they have 
been injecting the poison gradually into the minds of 



their hearers, and collecting salary for destroying the 
faith that they have been professing to conserve. To 
them it seems too bad that the public should be awakened, 
and that they should appear in the uncomplimentary role 
of deceivers. They are angry, because not only their incomes, 
but their reputations are at stake. If slander and 
misrepresentation will do anything to hinder us from giving 
the people the Truth, many of these false shepherds 
are apparently ready to assist. 

Let us go forward with good courage, remembering 
that God is at the helm, and that no weapon formed 
against His Cause and the ministers of His Truth shall 
prosper— eventually— even though they might seem to 
prosper for a time— just as when Jesus was crucified, 
when St. Stephen was stoned, etc. 

THE WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTION LIST 

The one discouraging feature to us is that THE 
WATCH TOWER subscription list seems to grow very 
slowly. We are obliged by the postal regulations to keep 
pruning off the addresses of those who do not renew their 
subscriptions, either in money or by request, as of the 
Lord's poor. We print forty-five thousand copies per issue; 
but, for the amount of interest which prevails, we 
should be printing at least one hundred thousand. However, 
we content ourselves with the thought that we are 
doing our best to set forth the Message. The increase of 
the subscription list lies with our readers. 

THE FINANCIAL SHOWING FOR THE YEAR 

After reading the foregoing statement respecting the 
number of ministers engaged in the Pilgrim service and 
the miles they have traveled, respecting the ten hundred 
millions of tract pages distributed free and express prepaid, 
and concerning the large amount of correspondence 
attended to, all with business experience would be inclined 
to expect that the cost of this work would run up 
to a million dollars. The one thousand million tract pages 
alone at ten pages for one cent would be a million dollars. 
Our office force of one hundred and fifty people, 
at one hundred dollars a month each, would amount to 
$180,000.00. And some of our helpers, before coming to 
us, have earned more than this amount and could obtain 
more now. 

We have paid out for postage stamps, expressage and 
freightage $34,278.26. The Pilgrim service cost the total 
of $77,559.10, and the foreign branches a total of $53,832.52. 
This work, which ordinarily would have cost a 
million and a half of dollars, has been accomplished for 
very little more than a quarter of a million dollars. The 
figures below speak for themselves. They are possible 
only because all of the dear brethren everywhere live economically 
and labor faithfully, giving time, energy— their 
best— to the service of the Lord, the brethren and the 



Truth. 

R5367 : page 374 

Financial statement follows: 

Balance cash on hand from last year's 

report $663.72 

Good Hopes 169,462.51 

Tract Fund, etc., receipts 107,822.04 

$277,948.27 

Expended for the work above mentioned: 
In the United States and 

Canada $221,566.89 

In Great Britain 23,422.69 

In Germany 4,709.25 

In India 2,394.35 

In South Africa 1,193.42 

In Scandinavia 2,705.17 

For the Polish 2,130.31 

In West Indies and South 

America 5,351.75 

In China, Japan and Korea 10,636.73 

For Spanish, Arabic, Italian, 

French, etc., etc 2,503.76 

Cash balance on hand Dec. 1 1,333.95 

$277,948.27 

The above figures do not include moneys expended in 
preparation for the PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION, which 
has been advanced by dear friends deeply interested in 
that work— the amount may appear in our accounts for 
1914, should these friends turn over that work to our Association 
as a donation. Neither do the above figures include 
THE TEMPLE. Friends of the Cause are financing 
that work in our interest, on a second mortgage. 

Should it eventually be demonstrated, either that some 
mistake was made in the expiration of the Gentile Times 
(October, 1914), or that we had expected more to happen 
at that date than was due, or that the fulfilment of 
our expectations beginning there would be consummated 
more slowly than we expected— no matter which— we all 
surely shall be glad if the fiscal year begun shall show as 
grand results for the enlightenment of God's people and 
for the honoring of God's name as this Report witnesses 
for the year just closed. 

The Editor wishes all of his readers a very joyous and 
a very prosperous New Year. The grace of our Lord 
Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen! 



R5367 : page 374 



KNOWLEDGE AND FAITH REGARDING CHRONOLOGY 

[By request we here republish an article from our issue 
of October 1st, 1907.] 

A dear Brother inquires, Can we feel absolutely sure 
that the Chronology set forth in the DAWN-STUDIES is 
correct?— that the Harvest began in A.D. 1874 and will 
end in A.D. 1914 in a world-wide trouble which will 
overthrow all present institutions and be followed by the 
reign of righteousness of the King of Glory and his 
Bride, the Church? 

We answer, as we have frequently done before in the 
DAWNS and TOWERS and orally and by letter, that we have 
never claimed our calculations to be infallibly correct; we 
have never claimed that they were knowledge, nor based 
upon indisputable evidence, facts, knowledge; our claim 
has always been that they are based on faith. We have 
set forth the evidences as plainly as possible and stated 
the conclusions of faith we draw from them, and have 
invited others to accept as much or as little of them as 
their hearts and heads could endorse. 

Many have examined these evidences and have accepted 
them; others equally bright do not endorse them. 
Those who have been able to accept them by faith seem 
to have received special blessings, not merely along the 
line of prophetic harmonies, but along all other lines of 
grace and truth. We have not condemned those who 
could not see, but have rejoiced with those whose exercise 
of faith has brought them special blessings— "Blessed are 
your eyes for they see, and your ears for they hear." 

Possibly some who have read the DAWNS have presented 
our conclusions more strongly than we; but if so 
that is their own responsibility. We have urged and still 
urge that the dear children of God read studiously what 
we have presented— the Scriptures, the applications and 
interpretations— and then form their own judgments. We 
neither urge nor insist upon our views as infallible, nor 
do we smite or abuse those who disagree; but regard as 
"Brethren" all sanctified believers in the precious blood. 

On the contrary, it is those who differ who smite us 
and speak evil of us, because we do not welcome them 
as, with hammer and tongs, they seek to remove a mote 
which they think they see in our eye of understanding. 
They are our critics who always claim the infallibility. 
We go humbly onward, following the Apostle's example 
and words, "We believe and therefore speak," whether 
others hear or forbear to hear. Is not this in accord 
with the Spirit of Christ? Is it not in accord with our 
Lord's instructions also— "Forbid him not" (Mark 9:39); 
and again, "What is that to thee? Follow thou Me."— 
John 21:22. 

But some of those who come to a trifling point on 
which they disagree seem to imagine that the entire Harvest 
work must be overthrown, or at least stopped, until 
they get their little jot or tittle satisfactorily adjusted. 
Such evidently make mountains out of mole hills, and 



forget that, if the present movement among the Lord's 
people is the Harvest work or under the Lord's supervision 
at all, the Lord is responsible, and not they, and 
can be trusted to accomplish His own ends in His own 
best way without the violation of either the letter or spirit 
of His commands. 

Recurring again to the query on Chronology we quote 
from DAWN-STUDIES, Vol. II., page 38, last paragraph, as 
follows: 

"In starting with the question, How long is it since man's 
creation? we should and do feel confident that He who gave 
the prophecies, and said in the time of the end they 
should be understood, has provided in His Word the data 
necessary to enable us accurately to locate those prophecies. 
However, any who expect to find these matters so plainly 
stated as to be convincing to the mere surface reader, or the 

R5368 : page 374 

insincere skeptic, will be disappointed. God's times and seasons 

are given in such a way as to be convincing only to 

those who, by acquaintance with God, are able to recognize 

His characteristic methods. The evidence is given 'that the 

man of God may be thoroughly furnished.' (2 Tim. 3:17.) 

These well know that in all the paths by which the Father 

leads they must walk by faith and not by sight. To all 

who are prepared to walk thus, we expect to be able to point 

out at every step solid statements of God's Word— a sure 

foundation for reasonable faith." 

In the same chapter we proceed to point out that many 
of the links of chronology in sacred and profane history 
are "broken, lapped and tangled so much that we could 
arrive at no definite conclusion from them, and should 
be obliged to conclude, as others have done, that nothing 
positive could be known on the subject, were it not that 
the New Testament supplies the deficiency." (Page 49, 
first paragraph.) Thus we sought to prove that chronology 
cannot be built on facts, but can be received only on 
faith. But again we urge a fresh reading of Vol. II. entire. 
If with these suggestions some shall lose their faith 
in our chronology, others and many more, we believe, will 
have their faith in it strengthened greatly. 

R5368 : page 375 

We remind you again that the weak points of 
chronology are supplemented by the various prophecies 
which interlace with it in so remarkable a manner that 
faith in the chronology almost becomes knowledge that it 
is correct. The changing of a single year would throw 
the beautiful parallels out of accord; because some of the 
prophecies measure from B.C., some from A.D., and 
some depend upon both. We believe that God meant 
those prophecies to be understood "in due time"; we believe 
that we do understand them now— and they speak 
to us through this chronology. Do they not thereby seal 



the chronology? They do to faith, but not otherwise. 

Our Lord declared, "The wise shall understand"; and 
He told us to "Watch" that we might know; and it is this 
chronology which convinces us (who can and do receive 
it by faith) that the Parable of the Ten Virgins is now in 
process of fulfilment— that its first cry was heard in 1844 
and its second cry, "Behold the Bridegroom"— present- 
was in 1874. It is this chronology and none other which 
awakened us to trim our lamps, in harmony with the 
Lord's promise through the Apostle, "Ye brethren are not 
in darkness, that that day should overtake you as a thief." 

If our chronology is not reliable we have no idea 
where we are nor when the morning will come. Bishop 
Ussher's chronology, as we have pointed out (DAWN II., 
p. 51) puts the end of six thousand years nearly a century 
future and would destroy every prophetic application as 
we have seen and profited by it. And when we say "our" 
chronology we merely mean the one we use, the Bible 
chronology, which belongs to all of God's people who 
approve it. As a matter of fact it was used in practically 
the form we present it long before our day, just as various 
prophecies we use were used to a different purpose 
by Adventists, and just as various doctrines we hold and 
which seem so new and fresh and different were held in 
some form long ago: for instance— Election, Free Grace, 
Restitution, Justification, Sanctification, Glorification, 
Resurrection. 

The work in which the Lord has been pleased to use 
our humble talents has been less a work of origination 
than of reconstruction, adjustment, harmonization. God's 
Word, the great Harp from which now comes such wondrous 
music, was unstrung. One denomination had one 
string, another denomination had a different one— Election, 
Free Grace, Baptism, Second Coming of Christ, 
Time Prophecies, etc. They had twanged away, each on 
his own string, until all were disgusted at the discord and 
about ready to quit for relief— as they since have done, 
practically. Then came the Lord's time for putting the 
old Harp in order again, for the use of His most faithful 
followers. To whatever extent the great Master has used 
any of us either in restringing and tuning the Harp, or in 
calling to the attention of His "brethren" the harmony and 
the beauty of the melodious paeans therefrom in honor of 
the Almighty, let us praise Him for the great privilege 
enjoyed, and use it. 

The fact that we have reached this harmony just at 
the right time, according to our chronology— just at the 
time promised by our Lord when He declared that, to 
those who would be ready and open to His knock 
promptly, He should "come in and sup with them," that 
He would "gird Himself [become their servant] and come 
forth and serve them" (Luke 12:37)— is an evidence to 
us that the time features of the prophecies as we understand 
them are correct. To this great Chief Servant of 
His Church, then, we render thanks for the harmonious 
light of Present Truth— and are we not to consider that 



the chronology which has had so much to do with this 
light is also of Him? 

But let us suppose a case far from our expectations: 
Suppose that A.D. 1915 should pass with the world's affairs 
all serene and with evidence that the "very elect" 
had not all been "changed" and without the restoration 
of natural Israel to favor under the New Covenant. (Rom. 11:12,15.) 
What then? Would not that prove our 
chronology wrong? Yes, surely! And would not that 
prove a keen disappointment? Indeed it would! It 
would work irreparable wreck to the Parallel dispensations 
and Israel's Double, and to the Jubilee calculations, 
and to the prophecy of the 2300 days of Daniel, and to 
the epoch called "Gentile Times," and to the 1260, 1290 
and 1335 days, the latter of which marking the beginning 
of the Harvest so well fulfilled its prediction, "Oh, the 
blessedness of him that waiteth and cometh unto the 1335 
days!" None of these would be available longer. What 
a blow that would be! One of the strings of our "harp" 
would be quite broken! 

However, dear friends, our Harp would still have all 
the other strings in tune and that is what no other aggregation 
of God's people on earth could boast. We could 
still worship a God so great and grand that none other 
could compare with Him. We should still see the grandeur 
of His salvation in Christ Jesus— "a Ransom for all." 
We should still see the wonders of "the hidden mystery," 
our fellowship with our Redeemer in "His death" and 
also "in His resurrection" to "glory, honor and immortality" 
—"the Divine nature." 

If, therefore, dearly beloved, it should turn out that 
our chronology is all wrong, we may conclude that with 
it we have had much advantage everyway. If the attainment 
of our glorious hopes and present joys in the Lord 
should cost us such disappointment as our friends fear, 
we should rejoice and count it cheap! If the Lord sees it 
necessary for the arousing of the "Virgins" to permit a 
false note upon the time bugle, let us take it joyfully as 
one of the "all things" working together for good to those 
who love Him, to the called ones according to His purpose. 
But let us not forget that the parable shows that 
the second awakening of the Virgins was no mistake! 
The Bridegroom came! The "wise virgins" had the 
necessary faith to follow; the others, too worldly-wise, 
lacked the faith and missed the high honors accorded to 
the Bride class, though privileged later to be her companions 
at the "marriage supper of the Lamb." 

The best medicine, the best antidote, for a poisoned 
faith in Present Truth, is a careful review of the presentations 
of the DAWN-STUDIES. If that fails we know 
nothing to recommend. But let us not forget that there 
were conditions precedent to our admission into this 
light, and that those conditions must be maintained if we 
would stay in the light. If, therefore, all or any portion 
of the light becomes darkened, our first query should be, 
"Am I living up to my covenant conditions— self-denial, 



self-sacrifice?" If we discover a coolness there we may 
know that we have found the real secret of our trouble 
and should at once "take it to the Lord in prayer." 



"Mine eyes can see the glory of the presence of the Lord; 
He is trampling out the winepress where His grapes of wrath 

are stored; 
I see the flaming tempest of His swift descending sword: 

Our King is marching on. 

"The seventh trump is sounding, and our King knows no 

defeat. 
He will sift out the hearts of men before His Judgment Seat. 
O! be swift, my soul, to welcome Him, be jubilant, my feet; 

Our King is marching on." 



R5369 : page 376 

THE GOOD SAMARITAN 

--JANUARY 18. -LUKE 10:25-37.- 

"Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself."— Mark 12:31. 

OUR Studies since the first of the year relate 
to the last six months of our Lord's ministry. 
He knew that His death was approaching 
—that He must, as the antitypical 
Passover Lamb, be put to death the 
following Spring, on the fourteenth day of 
the first month. His ministry had only 
begun to awaken the people. 

The seventy, whose ordination or commission 
we considered a week ago, were 
sent across Jordan into the district known as Perea. 
And Jesus Himself went thither shortly afterward. The 
purpose of His ministry was to thoroughly awaken all 
the Jews to a knowledge of the fact that the time of their 
visitation had come. We are informed by the Apostle 
Paul that at the time of the Lord's death there were about 
five hundred that could be called brethren. But besides 
these, the witnesses above mentioned subsequently bore 
other fruit— after Pentecost. 

Later, the seventy returned expressing joy and confidence, 
and remarking that even the demons were subject 
to them in the Father's name. The Master took 
occasion to tell them that they were overlooking their 
chief cause of joy, saying, "Rejoice, rather, that your 
names are written in Heaven"— than that demons are 
subject to your command. So it is with all of us. Salvation 
is a personal matter with us, and works and 
preaching are merely incidentals connected with that 



work of personal salvation. The great time for works 

will be future. Then, if faithful, we shall be privileged 

to be associated with the Redeemer in His work of regenerating 

the world of mankind, breaking the shackles 

of Sin and Death, granting deliverance to the captives, 

even as the Prophets foretold. 

No matter how praiseworthy are the social uplifts of 
the present time, they are as nothing compared with the 
great social and moral uplift which God has planned and 
which Messiah will institute with His Kingdom. Hence 
the first work of all of God's consecrated people is a 
personal one— the preparation of their own hearts and 
characters for Divine approval, that they may have a 
share in the sufferings of the present time and in the 
glorious work of the future. 

At this point our Study for today opens. A lawyer 
thought to entrap the Master by asking the question: 
"Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal life?" In 
those days, when the only law of Israel was God's Law, 
a lawyer was one well versed in the teaching of the 
books of Moses. Jesus therefore said to this theological 
Doctor: How do you understand the matter? You know 
what is written in the Law. The lawyer replied: We 
shall love the Lord with all our heart, with all our soul, 
with all our strength, with all our mind; and our neighbor 
as ourselves. Jesus approved this, saying that it was 
true. Do this— keep the Law— and you shall live. You 
will never die. 

The lawyer was caught before he knew it. He knew 
that the people of Israel had been dying for centuries, 
notwithstanding the Law; yet himself and others were 
outwardly claiming that they were keeping the Law. 
Jesus showed him out of his own testimony that he was 
not keeping the Law, as he pretended to do and as the 
Pharisees in general pretended to do. The fact is that 
no imperfect, fallen human being can keep the perfect 
Law of God; for it is so comprehensive that only a perfect 
man could keep it thoroughly. 

The lawyer sought to make the best of a bad argument 
and, instead of acknowledging his defeat, turned the 
question to Jesus again: "Who is my neighbor" whom 
I am to love as myself? This was one of the points 
which Jesus had particularly made against the Pharisees 
—that outwardly they were pious, religious, they prayed, 
fasted, etc.; yet in their hearts they were unjust and 
would take unjust advantage of widows and orphans— 
not loving them as themselves. The lawyer sought to 
imply that God's Law did not include everybody as his 
neighbor, but only certain special ones. 

Jesus, however, again out-generaled him, saying, I will 
give you a parable. A certain man went down to Jericho; 
and on that lonely mountain road he was beset by thieves, 
who stripped him, wounded him and left him half dead. 
There happened that way a priest, one of the highest 
representatives of the Law; and when he saw the man, 
he passed by on the other side. Likewise there passed by 



a Levite, next in relationship to the service of the Law, 
the service of God. He went a little nearer and looked 
at the poor man, but did nothing. Then came along a 
Samaritan, an outsider, not a Jew at all; and he was 
filled with compassion. He bound up the wounds, put 
the man on his beast, brought him to an inn and took 
care of him, sacrificing his own time and strength in the 
wounded man's interest. He did more than this. He 
paid for the man's keep until he should return from 
Jerusalem. 

Now, said Jesus to the lawyer, I put the question to 
you, Which of these men acted the part of the neighbor 
to this man who fell among the thieves? Which one of 
these treatments of the case would fulfil the requirements 
of the Law, according to your judgment? The lawyer 
answered that the one who showed mercy on the man 
was the one who had surely done the neighborly act. 
Jesus replied that this should be an example to the 
lawyer, that he should do likewise— that he should be 
kind, thoughtful, generous, toward any human being who 
was in affliction— in need of help. 

LOVE FULFILS THE LAW 

We do well to remember God's real object in giving 
laws, commandments, etc. He is not taking pleasure 
especially in the number of times that we bow the knee 
or bow the head, nor in the number of times that we 
attend Divine worship, nor in anything that we can do 
along the lines of worship. The Lord especially delights 
to see us cultivate His own spirit of love and kindness 
and generosity. "God is Love; and he that dwelleth in 
love dwelleth in God." (1 John 4:16.) As the Apostle 
says, He that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, 
how can he claim to love God whom he hath not seen? 
How could he know that he would love God? (1 John 4:20.) 
Well does the Apostle Paul tell us that love is the 
fulfilling of the Law.— Romans 13:10. 

We are not to understand the Apostle to mean that 
simply to have love would fulfil God's Law and give 
us everlasting life. No ! It is only for those who have 
accepted Christ that love fulfils the Law. For all those 
who become disciples of Jesus, God has made a special 
arrangement, that the merit of Jesus' sacrifice shall 
cover their blemishes, so that if they cultivate and possess 
the heart quality of love (God-likeness) it will be 
acceptable— because Jesus' sacrifice makes good all deficiency. 
We are "accepted in the Beloved." "The 
righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us who are walking, 
not after the flesh, but after the Spirit." 

St. Paul remarks that love is the principal thing in 
our character in the Divine estimation. He tells us that if 

R5370 : page 377 

we should give all of our goods to feed the poor or even 



if we should give our bodies to be burned in some worthy 
cause, and yet not have love— not do these things from 
the spirit or prompting of love— it would all count for 
nothing in God's sight. (1 Corinthians 13.) Evidently 
the great lesson for Christian people to learn is to put 
away all these— anger, malice, envy, hatred, strife, and to 
put on all these— meekness, gentleness, long-suffering, 
brotherly kindness, love. St. Peter declares that if we 
do these things we shall never fall, but that an entrance 
into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior 
Jesus Christ will be granted to us.— 2 Peter 1:10,11. 



R5370 : page 377 

"HIS SERVANTS SHALL SERVE HIM" 

-JANUARY 25.-LUKE 8:1-3; 9:57-62; 10:38-42.- 

"Inasmuch as ye did it unto one of these My brethren, even 
these least, ye did it unto Me."-Matthew 25:40. R.V. 

THE opening verse of this Study furnishes us 

the key to all the preaching that Jesus did, 

so far as the record goes. His one Message 

was the Good Tidings of the Kingdom 

of God. This is still the Good Tidings, and 

any of the Lord's people who have not yet 

learned that the Kingdom of God is the 

very center and essence of the hope of the 

Church and the hope of the world, have 

not profitably read and believed the Bible. 

The Jews, not being ready for the Kingdom, were as a 

nation rejected from being Messiah's associates in that 

Kingdom. But not all were rejected; hence we read that 

to as many as received Jesus, to them gave He liberty to 

become sons of God— by the begetting and anointing of 

the Holy Spirit, which first came at Pentecost. 

SURELY THIS IS GOOD TIDINGS 

Those sons of God, if faithful, are to be with Jesus 
by and by— heirs of God and joint-heirs with Jesus 
Christ their Lord in this Heavenly Kingdom. Their 
honor and blessing shall be great; for they shall be like 
their Master and see Him as He is and share His glory. 
But this will not be all. If they develop this spirit of 
love, they will thereby be qualified for association with 
the Master in His great work of blessing mankind, rolling 
away the curse and uplifting humanity out of sin and 
death conditions. 

Surely this is Good Tidings, as stated in this 
lesson! And the same Good Tidings were heralded by 
those angels who proclaimed the Master's birth, saying, 
"Behold, we bring you good tidings of great joy, which 



shall be unto all people!" Thus far it has been Good 
Tidings only to God's servants and handmaidens, the 
Church. But it shall be Good Tidings to all when all the 
deaf ears shall be unstopped and when all the blind eyes 
shall be opened, and they shall see the glories of Messiah's 
Kingdom. 

While Jesus was thus declaring the Kingdom, He 
was not begging His way. We have no suggestion that 
He ever took up a collection or in any manner solicited 
money. Many think that this is a suggestion that the 
followers of Christ should likewise make no appeals for 
money, but merely use of their own substance and such 
other moneys as shall voluntarily be given unto them. 
However, this is for each to decide for himself. 

Amongst the healed ones was Mary of Magdala, out of 
whom the Lord had cast seven demons. In other words, 
the poor woman was in the condition in which many are 
who are in insane asylums. Her trouble was not organic, 
but caused by the harassing of the seven fallen angels 
who had taken possession of her. Whoever believes the 
Bible Message must believe that there are fallen angels 
—spirit beings who have a malevolent influence upon 
humanity to the extent that they can gain control, and 
who must be resisted by the will. Mary, apparently, 
was a woman of wealth. Released from the power of the 
demons, she was so grateful to Jesus that she did her 
best to serve Him on every occasion. Other honorable 
women are also mentioned as having contributed to the 
maintenance of the Lord. 

"LET ME BURY MY FATHER" 

Some were attracted to Jesus, evidently, with the 
thought that one so gifted and so well supplied with the 
necessities of life must be wealthy. One such said to 
the Lord, "I will follow Thee whithersoever Thou goest." 
But apparently his ardor was cooled when Jesus informed 
him that He had no property, no home of His own, although 
there were numerous homes to which he was 
welcome. Foxes have holes of their own and birds have 
nests of their own, but the Son of Man had no home 
that He could call His own. None but the very sincere 
would likely be attracted to follow a leader under such 
circumstances. Wealth attracts many, poverty few. 

Another said to Jesus, in substance, Lord, you may 
count me as one of your disciples; but I have a father, 
and I feel as though I must stay with him until his death. 

R5371 : page 377 

The reply of Jesus shows us the importance He attaches 
to every service we can render to the Heavenly Father's 
Cause. He said to him, "Let the dead bury their dead, 
but go thou and preach the Kingdom of God." 

IS IT NOT TIME TO AWAKE? 



The whole world is already dead from the Divine 
standpoint. The sentence of death that passed upon 
Adam involved all of his children. The only ones whom 
the Scriptures recognize as possessed of any life at the 
present time are those who become related to the Life-Giver, 
Jesus. The Master intimates that all such should 
take a different view of life from others. There are 
plenty in the world who can attend to the earthly things; 
few who can attend to the greater and more important 
work of proclaiming the Kingdom and gathering the 
Kingdom class. 

This is the most important work in the world, because 
it is God's work. And those who engage in it are co-laborers 
with God. Be it noticed again that it was the 
Kingdom of God that was worthy of this preaching and 
this sacrifice. Alas, how strange it is that so little of the 
preaching of later times is along this line! In other 
words, the Gospel Message that Jesus and His disciples 
delivered has been lost, forgotten, neglected. Is it not 
time for all Bible students to awaken to the great privilege 
of preaching the same Message that the Master and 
His appointed ones at the First Advent preached? 

LESSONS TO BE LEARNED 

Another came to Jesus, saying, I will follow You, but 
I wish first to go and bid farewell to those who are at 
home. I will spend a little time with them; and before 
long I will be with You in the work. It was not heartlessness 
on Jesus' part that suggested the answer: "No 
man, having put his hand to the plow, and looking back, 
is fit for the Kingdom of God." According to these 
searching words, who then, even amongst the Lord's 
consecrated people of today, is fit for the Kingdom? 

We are not to judge others, but each to judge himself. 

R5371 : page 378 

And yet, in a general way, are we not confident 
that many not only are looking back and making special 
provisions for the social amenities of life, but additionally 
are plunging into many of the luxuries, pleasures and 
frivolities of the world? The question is a searching 
one. How many of us will the Lord consider fit for the 
Kingdom— fit for a place with Himself in that glorious 
Messianic Empire, which we trust is nigh— at the door? 
There seems to be a principle involved. Those who are 
not absorbed with interest in the Kingdom, desiring its 
blessings and desiring a share in conferring blessings 
upon others, would probably not be qualified by the 
resurrection change to accomplish the work which He 
has designed shall be done for humanity. 

The story of Martha and Mary concludes the lesson. 
Both loved the Savior, but they manifested their love differently. 
Jesus did not disapprove of Martha and her 



carefulness as a cook in providing for His comfort; but 
He especially appreciated the spirit of Mary, which 
drew her to His feet to hear the wonderful words of life. 
Hers was the better part, Jesus said. So, then, in our 
service for the Master let us have this in mind, that He 
is especially pleased when we give earnest attention to 
His words and seek to be filled with and guided by His 
Holy Spirit. 

Today's Study represents special services which were 
rendered at different times during our Lord's ministry. 
Acceptable service, like acceptable praise, must come as 
a fruitage of love to the Lord. He who loves much will 
serve much. Salaries cannot purchase this kind of service, 
and persecutions cannot hinder it. 

Whoever was privileged to serve the Lord Jesus personally 
was certainly highly privileged. And yet we 
may be sure of the general principle laid down in our 
text, that whoever serves any whom the Lord classes as 
His brethren is really serving Him. He accepts the 
same as service to Himself. How precious this thought, 
and how valuable it is! What wonder that all who truly 
believe the Lord's Word should be zealous in their service 
of their brethren! As the Apostle suggests, we ought 
also to lay down our lives for the brethren, even as 
Christ died for all. 



R5372 : page 378 

SALVATION-UNIVERSAL AND LIMITED 

"Who will have all men to be saved, and to come 
unto the knowledge of the Truth."— 1 Timothy 2:4. 

WHILE this Scripture teaches a universal salvation, 

yet there are other Scriptures which 

speak of the ultimate destruction of a certain 

class. In seeking to harmonize these 

Scriptures we note that there are various 

salvations. For illustration: A man might 

be saved from a burning building in the 

morning, and in the afternoon from drowning 

in a pond of water. The next day he 

might be saved from financial disaster, from 

bankruptcy, and later from something else. 

There is one general trouble in the human family. The 
whole human race were sold under Sin. St. Paul, writing 
on this subject, says: "By one man's disobedience Sin 
entered into the world and Death by Sin; and so Death 
passed upon all men, because all are sinners." This, then, 
is the great disaster. The Scriptures tell us that God 
has provided Jesus to be a Life-giver to all mankind, 
and that He died, the Just for the unjust. "Since by 
man came death, by man came also the resurrection of 
the dead." "The hour is coming when the dead shall 



hear the voice of the Son of God; and they that hear 
shall live. ...The hour is coming when all that are in 
the graves shall hear His voice and shall come forth." 
(John 5:25,28,29.) This awakening from death is what 
the Apostle had in mind, evidently, when he said that God 
is "the Savior of all men." 

But if we should imagine the whole human family 
brought back to the same condition in which Adam was, 
it would not necessarily mean everlasting life. Adam 
was perfect, yet he fell into death; and his race, when 
fully recovered from the penalty, will be placed on trial 
as was he. And any one who will then be disobedient to 
God will not be granted everlasting life. The Scriptures 
show us that Christ, having redeemed the world, will at 
the beginning of the Millennial Age establish His Mediatorial 
Kingdom, which will be for the very purpose of 
liberating man from the bondage of Sin and Death. Then 
whoever chooses Sin will be choosing the wages of Sin- 
death. And whoever chooses righteousness will be choosing 
the reward that goes with it— everlasting life. Each 
will be granted the opportunity of everlasting life, because 
saved by Christ from the condemnation upon 
Adam. But first he must be set free before having 
either a punishment of everlasting death, or a reward of 
everlasting life. 

God "will have all men to be saved [recovered, out of 
the death state, the tomb], and to come to an accurate 
knowledge of the Truth; for there is one God, and one 
Mediator between God and men; namely, the Man 
Christ Jesus, who gave Himself a Ransom [corresponding 
price] for all, to be testified in due time." The due time 
for the world in general, here spoken of, will be during 
Messiah's Reign. The knowledge of the Lord will cover 
the whole earth as the waters cover the great deep. 
But there is in this Age a class being specially blessed— 
"Blessed are your eyes, for they see; and your ears, for 
they hear." Having this blessing now, we have the gracious 
opportunity of attaining joint-heirship with our 
Lord in glory, honor and immortality— the Divine nature. 



GOD'S WILL IS BEST 

"God's will is best; faith's vision may be darkened, 

And tangling influence our feet arrest; 
Yet to our cry for guidance One has hearkened; 

God's will is best. 

"We raise our tear-dimmed eyes with eager longing, 
To pierce the clouds that crown the mountain's crest; 

And watch the chill mists round the pathway thronging, 
With hearts distrest. 

"God's will is best— oh! tired heart and weary; 
Each footfall finds you nearer to your rest; 



And God prints on your pathway, lone and dreary, 
'God's will is best' 

"Why seek to know the secrets of the morrow; 

Or what new dangers may your way infest? 
Tis Providence apportions joy or sorrow 

To be your guest. 

"God's will is best— seek not to do God's planning; 

Nor of the future make untrusting quest; 
He only of your whole life has the scanning; 

God's will is best. 

"Enough, for mortal feet, the step before them; 

Enough, for mortal hands, life's next behest; 
Enough to know Immortal Love is o'er them; 

God's will is best. 

"God's will is best— your first dawn may be over; 

Life's noon be past, its sun low in the West, 
And night full nigh; but Heaven's morn will discover, 

God's will is best." 



page 379 

YOUR "GOOD HOPES" FOR 1914. 

[The plan here proposed we designate "GOOD HOPES," 
because nothing is actually promised— only your generous 
hopes expressed, based upon your future prospects as they 
now appear to you. The plan has proved not only so beneficial 
to the cause of Truth, but also so blessed to the hopers, for 
some years past, that we again commend it to all as Scriptural 
and good. Those who desire to make use of this plan 
can fill out both of these memoranda. One should be kept 
for the refreshment of your memory; the other mail to us.] 

-TO THE- 

"WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY." 

Dear Friends:— I have read with interest of the openings 
for the STUDIES and Tract work in foreign lands and here 
at home. I need not tell you that I am deeply interested in 
the spread of the Glad Tidings of the lengths and breadths, 
the heights and depths of redeeming love expressed for us 
in God's great Plan of the Ages. 

I am anxious to use myself— every power, every talent, 
voice, time, money, influence, all— to give to others this 
knowledge, which has so greatly blessed, cheered and comforted 
my own heart and placed my feet firmly upon the 
Rock of Ages. 

I have been considering carefully, and praying to be instructed, 
how to use my various talents more to my Redeemer's 



glory and for the service of His people— those 

blinded by human tradition who are, nevertheless, hungering 

for "the good Word of God," and those also who are 

naked, not having on the wedding garment of Christ's imputed 

righteousness, the unjustified, who stand at best in 

the filthy rags of their own righteousness. I have decided 

that so far as my "money talent" goes, I will follow the rule 

so clearly laid down for us by the great Apostle Paul (1 Cor. 16:2), 

and will lay aside on the first day of each week, according 

to my thankful appreciation of the Lord's blessings 

during the preceding week. Out of this fund I wish to contribute 

to the several parts of the Lord's work specified on 

the back of this letter. Of course, I cannot in advance judge 

or state particularly what the Lord's bounty may enable 

me to set apart weekly, and hence you will understand the 

sum indicated to be merely my conjecture or hope, based 

upon present prospects. I will endeavor to contribute more 

than I here specify, and should I not succeed in doing as 

well, the Lord will know my heart, and you, also, will know 

of my endeavors. 

My only object in specifying in advance what I hope to 
be able to do in this cause is to enable those in charge of 
the work of publishing and circulating the Tracts, etc., to 
form estimates, lay plans, make contracts, etc., with some 
idea of what I will at least try to do in the exercise of this, 
my highly appreciated privilege. 

My present judgment is that during the coming year, by 
self-denial and cross-bearing, I shall be able to lay aside on 
the first day of each week for Home and Foreign Mission 
Work (to assist in circulating SCRIPTURE STUDIES in foreign 
languages, and in publishing the BIBLE STUDENTS MONTHLY 
in various languages, and in supplying these gratuitously, to 
brethren who have the heart and opportunity to circulate 
them widely, and in meeting the expenses of brethren sent 
out as Lecturers to preach the Divine Plan of Salvation, and 
in general to be expended as the officers of the Society may 
deem best), the amount of per week. 

To comply with United States Postal Laws, all or any 
portion of my donation may be applied as subscription price 
for WATCH TOWER or BIBLE STUDENTS' MONTHLY sent to the 
Lord's poor or others, as the Society's officers may deem 
advisable. 

That the work be not hindered, I will endeavor to send 
you what I shall have laid aside for this cause at the close 
of each quarter. I will secure a Bank Draft, Express Order 
or Postal Money Order as I may find most convenient, and 
will address the letter to 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 

BROOKLYN TABERNACLE, 13-17 HICKS ST., BROOKLYN, N.Y. 
or, London Tabernacle, Lancaster Gate W., England; or, 
Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne, Australia. 

(Name) 



(Post Office) (State) 

page 380 

WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTIONS 

ON "GOOD HOPES" ACCOUNT. 

The friends who contribute to the "Good Hopes" (described 
on the reverse of this sheet) at times desire to send 
THE WATCH TOWER to friends who are not yet interested 
enough to subscribe for themselves, or to deeply interested 
friends who are too poor to subscribe and backward about 
accepting our Lord's Poor offer. They are invited to give us 
such addresses below— the expense to be deducted from their 
donations. Give full name and address, and write very plainly, 
please, mentioning the length of the subscriptions. 



WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTION RENEWALS 

Most of our subscriptions end with the year, so we take 
this opportunity to remark that we shall be glad to hear 
promptly from such as desire the visits of THE WATCH TOWER 
continued. The Lord's Poor friends have been requested to 
send their applications in May. When names are dropped and 
afterward renewed it makes us unnecessary trouble. When 
desiring to know date of expiration look on your TOWER 
wrapper. Date is given in lower left-hand corner. 

A PRIVILEGE AND A SERVICE 

We are convinced that THE WATCH TOWER lists do not 
contain the names of one-half of those deeply interested in its 
teachings. The total is small enough surely, and we are not 
content that the name of any should be missing. We believe 
that all such will be stimulated and encouraged on the "narrow 
way" by its semi-monthly appearance on their table, 
reminding them afresh of spiritual matters which the world, 
the flesh and the Devil continually tend to crowd out of mind 
and heart. 

We have at times required that all desiring THE WATCH 
TOWER on credit, or free, as "the Lord's Poor," should make 
personal application; now we request every subscriber to inquire 
among those whom he knows to be interested in Present 
Truth, and to obtain the consent of all such to send in their 
subscriptions either on credit or free, as their circumstances 
may necessitate. Any getting it on credit may at any future 
time request that the debt be canceled, and we will cheerfully 
comply. We desire that as nearly as possible THE WATCH 
TOWER lists shall represent all those deeply interested in its 
message. 

Our object is not the gain of "filthy lucre," but "the perfecting 
of the saints for the work of ministry"— present and 
to come. (Eph. 4:12.) We offer no premiums, desiring the 



co-operation of such only as appreciate the privilege of being 
co-workers with us in this ministry. Our list is now about 
40,500; but, we think, it should be at least 50,000. We have 
been confidently expecting the above program to bring it to 
that figure. Let as many as appreciate it as a privilege join 
in this service. 

CHOICE MOTTO CARDS-1913-1914 

We have, as usual, very choice sorts. These cards are 
made in Europe, hence subject to heavy expenses for freight 
and duty. Nevertheless, we can supply them in the United 
States and Canada at less than retail European prices, because 
we supply them at about cost price— that is to say, about one-half 
the usual American prices. Besides this, we prepay postage 
or express charges. Our object is to encourage the embellishment 
of the homes of the Lord's people with faith-stimulating 
and courage-inspiring texts tastefully prepared. 
To facilitate the handling of these motto cards we assort them 
in packets, carefully packed, at the following prepaid rates: 

No. Mz.— Fifteen small cards, different texts, 50c. pk. 

No. Mv.— Eight small and three larger-sized, 50c. pk. 

No. Ma.— Fifteen small and six larger, $1.00 pk. 

No. Mb.— Six small, six a little larger, and three medium-sized 
mottoes, $1.00 pk. 

No. Mc— Six small and six medium-sized mottoes, $1.00 pk. 

No. Md.— Six small, six a little larger, and three large 
mottoes, $1.00 pk. 

No. Me.— Four large mottoes, $1.00 pk. 

Where a Class or several individuals choose to order together 
to one address we can save a little in the expressage, 
justifying the offer of five of the One Dollar packets and one 
of the Fifty-cent packets for Five Dollars, or more, at the 
same rate, assorted, as you please. 

Make your selections carefully, write out your order plainly, 
stating exactly what is wanted, have money order or check 
accompany order and be sure to clearly indicate the address 
to which you desire shipment to be made. 

DAILY HEAVENLY MANNA 

Those who use this book as we recommend are surely 
being blessed. It should be on your breakfast table regularly. 
Its daily text should be read and commented on freely by 
all. Then the MANNA comment should be read. Introduce 
it to your friends as a help toward godly living. 

The following wholesale rates postpaid are granted to all 
WATCH TOWER subscribers: 

Purple cloth, silver embossed $0.35 

Dark blue cloth, silver embossed, German 35 

Leatherette, gold edges 50 

blue edges, Swedish 35 

" gold edges, " 65 

Genuine Morocco, gold edges 1.10 

MISCELLANEOUS 



Hymns of Dawn, with music (cloth) $0.35 

Hymns of Dawn, without music (flexible) 06 

Poems of Dawn (leather) 50c; cloth 25 

Memorizing Text-Cards (100 in pkg.— two assortments, 

Nos. 1 and 2), per pkg 25 

Scriptural Post Cards (assorted) per doz., 15c; per 100.. 1.00 
CHARTS (Blue Prints, soft cloth): 

Plan of the Ages, 5 ft. $1.00; 8 ft 1.50 

Chronology of the Bible, 8 ft 1.50 

Tabernacle of the Wilderness, 8 ft 1.50 

BINDERS for THE WATCH TOWER: 

Spring Back (holds 1 yr.) 50 

String Back (holds 2 yrs.) 50 

CROSS & CROWN PINS (Gold, with red enamel Cross): 

1/2" and 5/8" (ladies' or gents' style) each $1 and $1.15 

5/8" celluloid, per doz. 25c; each 03 

Missionary Envelopes, per hundred, 25c; per M 2.00 

Vow Bookmarks (paper) 25c per 100; (silk) each 05 

Booklets (on Hell, Spiritism, Evolution, Tabernacle 
Shadows, Our Lord's Return, Jewish Hopes); also 
Berean Question Booklets on each Vol. of SCRIPTURE 

STUDIES; each 5c; per doz 50 

Report on Foreign Missions, each 05 

THE BIBLE STUDENTS' MONTHLY, per year 12 

Tracts in all languages FREE 



R5370 : page 381 

"BLESSED ARE THE MEEK" 

"The meek will He guide in judgment; and the 
meek will He teach His way."— Psalm 25:9. 

EVEN a perfect man would need Divine guidance 
in respect to his judgment of matters, 
in respect to his decisions, in respect to his 
course, in respect to his ways. And if a 
perfect man would need Divine guidance 
and oversight, in order to make no mistake 
from his limited degree of knowledge, because 
of not knowing fully the Father's will 
respecting Him, much more would an imperfect 
man need this! The good and the 
bad, the wise and the foolish— all classes of mankind- 
need such instruction. But there is only one class now 
in the proper attitude of mind to receive it, and that 
class is Scripturally called the meek. 

We cannot say that the meek are those who feel 
themselves inferior and that there are superiors to be 
looked up to, necessarily. Adam in that event could 
not have been meek; Jesus could not have been meek; 
the Heavenly Father could not be meek. While it is 



not Scripturally stated that the Heavenly Father is meek, 
yet Jesus was meek, and He was the express image of 
the Father's person in the flesh. Hence we would assume 
that the Heavenly Father possesses meekness, in 
distinction from haughtiness. 

GOD RESISTS THE PROUD 

Our Lord said, "I am meek and lowly of heart." 
Our Lord was meek in that He was teachable. He realized 
that even in His perfection there were things to 
be learned; and He learned obedience through the things 
which He suffered. It was because He had this quality 
of meekness or teachableness that the offer was made 
to Him to be our Savior. Without this He never would 
have been our Redeemer, we may assume. Without this 
quality He would have been self-assertive and proud, 
not ready to do the Father's will. And as with the Master, 
so with the Church. 

Even small talents that are rightly directed are more 
valuable than larger talents that are misdirected. The 
pathway of life shows much large talent misdirected for 
lack of proper knowledge and guidance. And this lack 
of guidance, we may assume, has resulted from the lack 
of the spirit of teachableness— the lack of desire to know 
the best way, the Father's way. We can see that even 
a heathen man, if he were meek, would have much 
more opportunity to learn about the Lord's will than 
would one who thinks that he is above instruction. Whoever 
knows it all to begin with, is not apt to be in a condition 
to receive any instruction. 

The Lord declares that He resists the proud. Even 
if they become His children they would be kept at a 
distance. If the proud were permitted to come nearer 
to the Lord, it would make them more proud; whereas, 
if they are kept at a distance, they may become meek 
and teachable and humble. We see then that all need 
instruction. But the only ones who are in a position 
to receive it are those who recognize their need and who 
are in the attitude to avail themselves of the Lord's offer 
of guidance of their judgment, of their way, of their 
course in life. Such as avail themselves of the privilege 
get a proper estimate of everything— of the things of the 
life present, and also of the things of the life to come. 

These are the ones whom the Lord is pleased to instruct 
and guide in the knowledge of His Son, and 
into all His blessings. If they continue to be meek, He is 
able to make of them heirs of God and joint-heirs with 
Jesus Christ their Lord. We read in the Scriptures 
that the meek shall inherit the earth. They will inherit 
it under the terms of the primary and original Covenant. 
These will be the Seed of Abraham. From these the 
blessing will go to all mankind who will be obedient 
during the Millennial Reign. After the final test at the 
end of the Millennial Age, the whole world will be teachable. 
They will have learned the great lesson that God 



is the Fountain of all Wisdom; and they will have profited 
by this instruction. 



R5368 : page 381 

LOVING RULES AND PARLIAMENTARY RULES 

THE dear friends of the I.B.S.A. properly 

feel a responsibility in respect to their 

voting for Class Elders and Deacons and 

for everything that they do especially in the 

name of the Lord. We have already suggested 

that it would be unwise, perhaps unkind, 

to enforce parliamentary rules in respect 

to Church meetings, when perhaps 

only a few are really acquainted with such 

rules. The rules are, of course, good, wise 

and generally profitable. The spirit of parliamentary 

rules should apply everywhere; for they are built on the 

Golden Rule basis of protecting the interests of all and 

getting through with the business with the least friction 

and delay. 

With the Lord's people, however, love is always to 
have the first place. While love is always in accord with 
the Golden Rule, it is always at liberty to do more than 
even-handed justice. So all of the Lord's brethren should 
be quite willing to deny themselves a little preference in 
the interest of another where no principle would be involved. 

R5369 : page 381 

Love, joy, peace, should prevail in every Class. 
Everything tending toward these and in fullest harmony 
with loyalty toward God and His Word should be 
cherished. 

Several recent letters make further inquiry respecting 
Church elections, methods of nominating, etc., and inquire 
whether or not it would be improper to follow a 
little different method of nominating than that suggested 
in STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, Vol. VI. We answer 
that in all such matters the will of the Class is the law. 
The Lord left the matter in the hands of the Church; 
and each little section, or part, of the Church has fullest 
authority to follow the Divine arrangement, according to 
its judgment. 

In certain cases we believe it a very good plan to 
nominate Elders and Deacons by ballot, first deciding 
how many are desired for the term. Suppose that two 
Elders and five Deacons were considered a proper supply 
for the Class. Then, in balloting, each consecrated 
person should consider the Lord's will in respect to the 
nomination he would make. He may write the names of 
two nominees for Elder and five nominees for Deacon. 
Or, unless there were objection to it, he may give his two 



votes for one Elder and his five votes for one Deacon, 
or divide those votes in any way that he may choose. In 
this way, minorities in the Class would have an opportunity 
of being represented among the Elders. 

When the balloting is finished and the account made 
up, the two Elders who have received the largest number 
of nominating ballots should be considered the choice 
of the Class; and similarly the five Deacons. Then it 
would be in order to have a vote. It is usually both 
pleasant and appropriate to make elections of those receiving 

R5369 : page 382 

the highest number of ballots unanimous by a 
vote with the outstretched hand. 

Do not forget that the object always sought after is 
not how you can accomplish your will, but how you can 
give to every brother and sister the fullest opportunity for 
representation and have the same for yourself, especially 
with a view to doing the Lord's will. No matter how the 
results are reached, if they express satisfactorily the 
judgment of the majority, or all or nearly all of the Class, 
the matter is thoroughly legal, and in harmony with the 
principles laid down in the Bible. 

"Let brotherly love continue." Let us seek to lay 
down our lives for the brethren. We cannot serve the 
Lord directly, but can serve Him indirectly, by serving 
the brethren and by manifesting our patience and sympathy 
and love for them. 



R5371 : page 382 

THE HOPE OF THE GOSPEL AGE 

"To them who by patient continuance in well-doing seek for 
glory and honor and immortality, eternal life."— Romans 2:7. 

THE call of this Gospel Age is a call to glory, 
honor and immortality. As the Apostle 
Peter says, God has "given unto us [the 
Church] exceeding great and precious 
promises, that by these ye might become 
partakers of the Divine nature." (2 Peter 1:4.) 
St. Paul says that we were called 
in the "One Hope of our Calling"— this is 
the Hope that is set before us. Shall we all 
get this great reward? No. Some will 
draw back. "But we are not of them who draw back 
unto perdition; but of them that believe [and go on] 
to the saving of our souls [our lives]." (Heb. 10:39.) 
Those who draw back go into the Second Death. For 
them there is nothing reserved but everlasting destruction. 
They will perish as brute beasts.— 2 Peter 2:12. 
We have been redeemed from Sheol, the grave, the 



tomb. God will later deliver also all mankind, and give 

them an opportunity to come to a knowledge of the 

Truth. Only a comparatively small portion have as yet 

been made partakers of the Holy Spirit. Only the spirit-begotten 

ones are able to see these things now offered; 

therefore, "Blessed are your eyes, for they see; and your 

ears, for they hear." This is the only class with which 

God is dealing at the present time— those who have been 

begotten of the Holy Spirit. 

BOTH OVERCOMERS AND "MORE THAN CONQUERORS" 

But there is a difference between these that have been 
begotten of the Holy Spirit. Every man's work shall be 
tested "as by fire." The Apostle tells us that some will 
build with gold, silver and precious stones of the Divine 
promises. He declares that others will build with wood, 
hay and stubble, and that this latter class will suffer loss, 
but will themselves be saved, "yet so as by fire." (1 Cor. 3:12-15.) 
Eventually only those of the Wise Virgin 
class, who have copied the Lord's character, will be 
counted as "more than conquerors." The "more than 
conquerors" are those who go into this self-sacrifice 
voluntarily, as did our Savior. Others will not be counted 
as "more than conquerors." "To him that overcometh will 
I give power over the nations." These are more than 
merely overcomers— these that become the Royal Priesthood. 
These are the ones who will inherit immortality, 
who will receive the highest blessing. 

We see two classes brought to our attention in Revelation 7:4,9. 
In the first class are twelve thousand from 
each of the twelve tribes of Israel— one hundred and 
forty-four thousand in all. These are they "who follow 
the Lamb whithersoever He goeth." These are the ones 
who will stand with the Lamb on Mt. Zion, and who will 
sit with Him in His Throne. As many from the different 
tribes of Israel as were worthy at the First Advent 
were received and given the begetting of the Holy Spirit 
at Pentecost. But the full number were not found in 
Natural Israel. "Israel hath not obtained that which he 
seeketh for; but the Election hath obtained it, and the 
rest were blinded."— Rom. 11:7. 

During this Gospel Age God has been completing the 
Elect, filling up the number lacking to complete the one 
hundred and forty-four thousand, and apportioning, to 
each of those that come in, one of the places that were 
vacant. 

The Apostle says, "I would not have you to be ignorant, 
brethren, concerning this mystery, lest ye should be wise 
in your own conceits: that blindness in part is happened 
unto Israel, until the fulness of the Gentiles be come in." 
"The Deliverer shall come out of Zion, and shall turn 
away ungodliness from Jacob," my people. (Rom. 11:25,26.) 
The Deliverer is Christ the Head and the Church 
His Body. And this Deliverer will be the One who will 
bless all who become Israelites. 



The picture in Revelation 7:9 shows us the Great 
Company. And we read that John saw a great company, 
out of all nations and kindreds and peoples and 
tongues— not an elect number, not a fixed number, but one 
which no man could compute, being a number which no 
man knoweth. In the treatment that they must undergo, 
it is shown that these must wash their robes in the blood 
of the Lamb, and they will stand before the Throne, instead 
of sitting in the Throne. They will have everlasting 
life, but not immortality. Only the Little Flock, the 
Bride class, will have immortality. The Bride class will 
be counted worthy to escape the trouble coming on the 
world. They will keep their garments unspotted from 
the world. If there comes a spot or wrinkle, they go 
immediately to the Throne of Heavenly Grace, and find 
mercy and help and cleansing in time of need. 

TWO CLASSES IN THE CHURCH 

Thus we see that there will be two classes— the Little 
Flock and the Great Company. All of these were typified 
in the first-borns of Israel, who were spared, or 
passed over, in the night when Israel left Egypt. So 
all these will be of the Church of the First-borns. But 
a part of these will attain the Divine nature as the 
Bride of Christ, and a part will attain everlasting life, 
similar to the everlasting life that the angels possess. 

Only the Father originally had immortality. The 
First-begotten of the Father was the Logos. He was 
the Beginning of the Creation of God, the First-born of 
every creature, by whom all things were made that were 

R5372 : page 382 

made. St. John tells us that "In the beginning was the 
Logos, and the Logos was with the God, and the Logos 
was a God. All things were made by Him; and without 
Him was not anything made that was made." Hence we 
understand that angels, principalities and powers, cherubim 
and seraphim, as well as man, were all the direct creation 
of this Logos, though not by His own power. 

All things are of the Father, and all things are by the 
Son, and we by Him. First, Jehovah Himself is of the 
Divine nature; secondly, our Lord Jesus; and thirdly, the 
Church, the Lamb's Wife, will be of the Divine nature. 
The Great Company will be on the spirit plane, because 
begotten of the Spirit. 



