From Our Readers
Muscular Dystrophy  Thank you for publishing the encouraging experience “I Live With Muscular Dystrophy.” (January 8, 1990) I am a quadriplegic and dependent upon others in my daily life. But with support from my wife and others in the congregation, I am able to serve as an auxiliary pioneer minister. By using a phone directory that lists people according to street address (available at a public library), I am able to witness by telephone to people who live in security apartments.
B. W., United States
Modeling Career  I was fascinated by the article “Young People Ask . . . What About Modeling Careers and Beauty Contests?” (January 8, 1990) It was only in the strength of Jehovah that I was able to give up such a career. Until a few months before my baptism, I was a photo model. But although I kept bad association to a minimum, the pressure was enormous. A model is made fun of, ignored, and even forced to run around half naked due to a lack of changing facilities. Added to that is the loneliness when living for weeks on end in a hotel. The fashion world looks great, but it is full of greed, rivalry, immorality, materialism, and drugs.
J. Y. A. M., Federal Republic of Germany
Avoiding the Occult  Your article, “Young People Ask . . . Why Should I Avoid the Occult?” (March 8, 1990) made me more aware of the power Satan has over people and the subtle tactics he uses to arouse curiosity. I used to feel that there might be some good left in the demons, since they were once angels. The article clearly showed me that they are worthy only of their impending destruction. Thank you again.
R. S., United States
Prostate Problems  Your article on prostate problems (April 8, 1990) interested me, as my father needed prostate surgery. Although the article was very informative, the closing comments bothered me. You say that many men seek sexual arousal through pornographic literature. This insinuates that all men who have prostate problems are looking at films or literature of a pornographic nature.
N. R., Federal Republic of Germany
We did not mean to imply that prostate problems are necessarily the result of unchristian conduct. Prostate problems are common among older men​—including faithful Christians—​for a number of reasons. But since unfulfilled sexual arousal appears to be involved in causing or at least aggravating the problem in some men, it was deemed appropriate to caution our readers against the snare of pornography.​—ED.
Through a Child’s Eyes  Your article (January 22, 1990) was written with so much understanding that I felt moved to place as many copies as possible in schools and hospitals and with all the mothers I know. The headmaster of the school my sons attend very much appreciated the article, and one of my sons’ teachers had words of praise for the way the subject was handled. I too have four children and know how difficult it is being a parent. Articles like this aid us in helping our children.
M. P. R., Italy
The Ear  Since I like articles dealing with the human body, I was very pleased with your article about the ear. (January 22, 1990) I have been studying your magazines for a long time because they include everything that a person wants to know​—both the layman and those with a doctorate.
H. V., Brazil

