Human Rule Weighed in the Balances
Part 1c​—Human Rule Weighed in the Balances—​Why?
“Awake!” is pleased to announce a series of articles on “Human Rule Weighed in the Balances”
NO ONE can deny the influence that governments​—to confine our discussion to politics—​have had on world history and upon each of us individually. The language you speak, the standard of living you pursue, the type of work you do, the social system you enjoy, possibly even the religion you profess, have been at least partially dictated to you by the whims of political change.
Since government is necessary, who of us does not desire to live under a form of government that will satisfy our needs in the best possible way? But what kind of government is the best? And do we even have any choice in the matter of rulership?
Awake! is pleased to announce a series of articles on “Human Rule Weighed in the Balances.” These will continue in future issues of this magazine. During the remainder of 1990, it will deal with the historical background of monarchies, aristocracies, oligarchies, and plutocracies. It will delve into the broad spectrum of democracies, along with the many different kinds of republics. It will put the spotlight on autocracies, dictatorships, and totalitarian governments such as Fascism and Nazism of World War II vintage. Socialism and Communism will also be considered.
The intricacies of human rule are many and complex, so not all there is to know about government can be presented. The articles are not designed to be a comprehensive handbook on politics. They will not endorse or promote the interests of human governments in general or any one form in particular. Any comparisons between various forms will not be for the purpose of advocating one above the other. Awake! will closely adhere to its guidelines set out on page 5, where we read: “It probes beneath the surface and points to the real meaning behind current events, yet it always stays politically neutral.”
The articles “Human Rule Weighed in the Balances” are designed to be part of that process of probing “beneath the surface.” They will point to “the real meaning behind current events,” events that indicate that human rule is facing a crisis.
The book The Columbia History of the World describes the crisis this way: “The state in which we find government, religion, morality, social intercourse, language, the arts, and that ultimate basis of civilized life, public hope, permits us to form at least a tentative conclusion about the magnitude of the present epoch. Government is first in the list and first in importance. . . . [There] is contempt for law, for the State that enforces it, and for the governors that still believe in both. . . . The present outlook contrasts sharply with that of a century ago . . . In many parts of the world forces are ready at a word to storm city hall, break up a public hearing, ravage a university, or detonate an embassy. . . . The rage for absolute freedom is virulent. . . . In short, the one political and social ideal, the one motive power of the time is Separatism, no matter what other rags of older philosophy it masquerades under. If this is not yet Breakdown, it is undeniably Breakup.”
Will “Breakup” soon lead to “Breakdown,” and if so, with what consequences for the world in which we live? Of a truth, human rule is on judgment but not just by humans who have been weighing their governments for thousands of years and repeatedly finding them wanting. This time the Creator of the universe himself is calling for a reckoning. Does the record of human rule over the centuries justify its being permitted to continue? Or will its being weighed on divine judgment scales show it must go? And if so, with what can it be replaced?
The series of articles “Human Rule Weighed in the Balances” will enhance your knowledge of government. And it will fill you with hope because you have every reason to be optimistic. Better government is on the way. And best of all, you can live to enjoy it!
[Pictures on page 9]
When the record of human rule is weighed in the balances of divine justice, will God’s judgment be favorable?
[Credit Line]
WHO photo/​PAHO by J. Vizcarra

