From Our Readers
Lying All That Bad?
I want to thank you for the article “Young People Ask . . . Is Lying All That Bad?” (October 8, 1987) I have especially had the problem of lying, and many times when I was young, I lied to my parents. The article pointed out Jehovah’s view on lying​—that he will “cut off all smooth lips,” since he hates lies and “no lie originates with the truth.” (Psalm 12:2-4; 1 John 2:21; Proverbs 6:16, 17) For these reasons, I have set my goal not to lie anymore and not to speak half-truths. Thank you very much.
R. M. R., Brazil
Amalgam-Filling Issue
I was attracted to the article on “Unhealthy Fillings?” (October 22, 1987) Having been a practicing dentist for 37 years and having placed tens of thousands of amalgam (silver) fillings, I have been very much aware of the dangers of the mercury both to the patient and to the dentist and his coworkers. A properly placed amalgam filling has as much mercury removed from it as possible . . . By combining the mercury with an alloy composed mostly of silver, with lesser amounts of copper, tin, and zinc, the toxicity is much reduced and has been considered almost negligible. Further, until now the alternative material available is either much more costly or not nearly as durable.
A. R., D.D.S., United States
First, let us say that a brief item in “Watching the World” is not intended as an article to cover all aspects of a subject but merely to present some published information that might alert a person in need to look into the matter further. In addition, “Awake!” does not advocate one form of treatment above another. In all fairness, it should be said that neither the American Medical Association, the Federal Drug Administration, nor the American Dental Association support the assertion that silver amalgam fillings present any danger of toxicity to the nonallergic person. Less than 1 percent of the population is said to be allergic to mercury in the small quantity involved. In publishing the item, we were not recommending that all readers, without looking into the matter further, rush out to get their amalgam fillings replaced. Rather, this was published so that the rare person (perhaps not even one person out of a hundred) with a health problem, the source of which could not be established by any other means available, might be alerted to look into the possibility of amalgam fillings being a source of toxicity to which that individual was allergic.​—ED.
Saving Time
I was enthusiastic about the article “Time​—Are You Its Master or Its Slave?” (December 8, 1987) I immediately put the suggestions about making a schedule into operation, and with success! Also, your suggestions on how to save time are very helpful. I have resolved to say no sometimes to invitations so as to have more time for my preaching activity. What really hit home was the thought: Do not waste time fretting about unpleasant duties. Now, instead of postponing them, I try to do them first. It’s proving to be great fun!
A. W., Federal Republic of Germany

