Announcements
● Secretaries are reminded to submit orders for special talk handbills and Memorial invitations by January 10. Congregations that order after this date will be charged for additional postage.
● Literature offer for January and February: Live Forever book for $2.50. March: Any two of the older 192-page books for $1.00. The following books may be ordered from Brooklyn and used during the campaign: Choosing, Commentary on James, Happiness and Life Does Have a Purpose. April and May: Subscription for The Watchtower on contribution of $3.50 for a one-year semimonthly subscription. Six-month semimonthly subscriptions, $2.00 each.
● Presiding overseer should arrange to have new MEDICAL ALERT cards distributed at beginning of first Service Meeting in January. Brother handling announcements can give brief reminders concerning its use as expressed in letter dated July 20, 1980. Post letter on information board for a week or two and then return it to congregation file for future reference. Brothers are encouraged to fill out card promptly, having it properly signed, witnessed and dated.
● The district overseer’s new talk will be “Is This World Doomed to Ruin?” The circuit overseer’s new talk beginning February 1, 1983, will be “Paradise Restored by Christ’s Millennial Rule.”
● To make some of the material that appears in Awake! available in other languages, the Society has made arrangements to produce various language editions of Awake! on a quarterly basis (four issues per year). In the United States Awake! is now available on a quarterly basis in Arabic, Bicol, Croatian, Fijian, Hiri Motu, Icelandic, Shona, Sinhalese, Turkish and Urdu.
These quarterly editions of Awake! will be available as distributor orders through the congregation. They are not available by subscription. The cost of these magazines will be the same as for our regular editions.
● New Publications Available:
Aid to Bible Understanding (Volume 1, A-Bi)—Dutch
Choosing the Best Way of Life—Thai
Happiness—How to Find It—Afrikaans, Tagalog
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth—Greek, Italian
Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!—Efik, Igbo, Kikongo, Kikuyu, Lifou, Lingala, Mono-kutuba, Niuean, Samoan, Silozi, Yoruba
Are We Nearing Armageddon? (Kingdom News No. 31)—Chinese, English, French, Italian, Korean, Spanish
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
Psalms (set of five; congregation and public: $7.50; pioneers: $6.25)—English

