Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 2
Song 103
10 min: Local announcements and Announcements in Our Kingdom Ministry. Briefly review instructions in July 20, 1980, letter regarding use of Medical Alert card.
18 min: “Use New Book in Proclaiming Kingdom Truth.” Talk, along with questions and answers. (Invite publishers a week ahead of time to bring Live Forever book with them for this discussion.) As various features of the book are considered, chairman can refer to certain pages as examples. Thus, we all get better acquainted with the book. Chairman should be well prepared and enthusiastic so publishers appreciate value of Live Forever book and will want to share in presenting it in the territory. (Ask brothers to bring Live Forever book again next week.)
17 min: “‘Young People Ask’—A Series With Bible Answers.” Talk and discussion with audience based on January 8, 1983, Awake! article. Stress the need for parents to use this material in assisting their own children spiritually. It appears in every issue of Awake! Encourage participation in magazine work on second Saturday of month. May have opportunity to highlight this feature or other articles in the magazines. Announce field service arrangements.
Song 10 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 9
Song 25
10 min: Local announcements, including field service arrangements and accounts report.
25 min: “Presenting the Good News—With the Live Forever Book.” Discuss paragraphs 1 and 2 with audience. Then review new Topic for Conversation. Help the brothers appreciate the main idea we want to leave with the householder, namely: Man can live forever. Psalm 37:29 brings out three main points: (1) Life is promised only to the righteous; (2) life will be on earth; (3) life will be everlasting. Isaiah 55:11 establishes that the promise of everlasting life is not just a dream, for God holds true to his word. Encourage publishers to use appropriate questions in developing the Topic for Conversation at the doors: Was man created just to grow old and die? Is it not the natural desire of man to live? Would a loving God create humans with a desire to live forever and then not make it possible for them to fulfill that desire? Man does react to death as something unnatural. Why does man alone have a concept of eternity? Why is only man able to think about the future? Is it not logical that man, who can cultivate abilities and a sense of values, should continue living? Is it not strange that some animals and trees live longer than man? Following the above discussion, review with audience the suggested presentations in paragraphs 3-5. Comment on the value of being familiar with the references quoted in paragraph 3 and using them if the circumstances are appropriate. After considering paragraphs 3-5 present two well-rehearsed demonstrations based on paragraphs 3 and 5. Conclude with paragraph 6, encouraging all to keep in mind these points so as to be effective in using the new Live Forever book. Keep in mind two important objectives in this assignment, namely, helping the publishers to use the new Topic for Conversation effectively and helping them to present the new book effectively.
10 min: Question Box. Discuss material with audience.
Song 40 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 16
Song 48
 5 min: Local announcements, including field service arrangements.
15 min: “Come and See Kingdom Unity in Action!” Consider first half of insert through subheading entitled “Dormitories.” Handle by means of talk with questions and answers.
15 min: “Assisting Others Through the Congregation Book Study.” Questions and answers. Assign to elder who is a capable book study conductor. Encourage publishers to assist one another to share in magazine work this coming fourth Saturday of January.
10 min: Field Experiences With Live Forever Book. While we have had only the first part of January in which to place the book in the door-to-door work, a number of publishers may have had encouraging experiences with the book. Also, we have had the book since our “Kingdom Truth” District Convention last summer and some have had experiences placing the book and studying it with relatives, friends and interested persons. It will be upbuilding to hear these. Arrange for experiences in advance of meeting.
Song 72 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 23
Song 112
 5 min: Local announcements, including field service arrangements.
10 min: “Circuit Assemblies—A Spiritual Stimulus.” Discussion. Encourage all in congregation to make plans to attend local circuit assembly and help interested persons to attend as well.
15 min: Prepare locally according to needs or consider “Do You Have Affection for Jehovah?” from November 1, 1982, Watchtower. Highlight importance of zealously proclaiming Jehovah’s name and Kingdom locally.
15 min: “Come and See Kingdom Unity in Action!” Consider last half of material in insert beginning with subheading “Special Needs.” Handle by means of talk with questions and answers.
Song 8 and prayer.

