Presenting the Good News—With the Live Forever Book
1 Eternal life in perfection in a beautiful earthly paradise! What a sublime gift from Jehovah! His love should impel us to share this hope with people in our territory, using the new book You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth.
2 In order to be well equipped to discuss the subject of living forever in paradise on earth and to present this new book, all of us should first have read it ourselves. No doubt you have some interesting field service points that can be used with the new Topic for Conversation. Knowing the kind of people living in our territory will aid us in determining which chapters or specific points may be used to arouse their interest in Jehovah’s promise of everlasting life. Note illustrations that will capture the householder’s interest in the truth. Have these in mind when presenting the new book in your territory.
SUGGESTED PRESENTATIONS
3 The illustrations in chapter 19 are excellent for field service. After reading Psalm 37:29, you could say: “What do you think conditions on earth will be like when the righteous live here forever? [Allow householder an opportunity to reply.] Please note these illustrations and comments starting on page 156 of this new book.” Then, depending on the time available, point out some of the features of God’s New Order as illustrated on pages 156-158, 161 and 162. Help the householder to appreciate the Scriptural support for the statements made. Then you may conclude with Isaiah 55:11, showing that we can fully rely on these promises. Offer the book on a contribution of $2.50.
4 Chapter 1 harmonizes nicely with the new Topic for Conversation. After greeting the householder, you might say: “My purpose in calling is to share with you God’s promise to make this earth a paradise and give man unending life. Many people feel that the possibility of living forever on earth is just a dream. What do you think? [Allow for a response.] Scientists claim that man is made in such a way that he ought to live forever. These men say that the body’s ability to replace cells and thus renew itself should really continue indefinitely. [For more information see Truth book, page 28, paragraph 3; Awake!, April 22, 1977, pages 3-5.] The Bible agrees with that and speaks clearly and confidently about man living forever in a paradise earth. Notice what is stated here at Psalm 37:29. [If time permits, you may also read and comment on texts such as Isaiah 45:18; John 3:14-16, 36; Revelation 21:3, 4.] Some may be skeptical about this promise. However, since Jehovah God cannot lie, we have every reason to believe it. His words in Isaiah 55:11 assure it. [Read.] Is that not a wonderful prospect? [Allow for a comment.] I will be pleased to leave with you this new publication entitled You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth. Chapter 1 discusses further why living forever is not just a dream. The book is yours for a contribution of $2.50.”
5 If you are working in a territory where many do not believe in God, you could say: “My reason for visiting you today is to share information about the future. Have you ever wondered if it is possible for man to live forever? [Allow for comment.] Some are not inclined to believe this as they feel that God does not exist. So, living forever is considered just a dream. This book makes an interesting point that builds confidence in God’s existence and in the basis for believing his promises. [Point to page 35 and read paragraph 3.] Thus, when he created the earth and man, he had a purpose. [Read Psalm 37:29.] He has assured us that his purpose has not changed. [Read Isaiah 55:11.] It will be a pleasure to leave this new book with you on a contribution of $2.50.”
6 In view of what Jehovah has done in our behalf, we have much for which to be thankful. Show appreciation for his loving-kindness by aiding others with the help of the new Live Forever book. The good news of living forever is not just a dream.

