Use New Book in Proclaiming Kingdom Truth
1 How did we feel when we first started taking in an accurate knowledge of the truth? It was a delightful experience—an undeserved kindness from Jehovah. We felt as did the two disciples to whom Jesus miraculously appeared on the road to Emmaus. According to Luke 24:32 they said to each other: “Were not our hearts burning as he was speaking to us on the road, as he was fully opening up the Scriptures to us?” Yes, our hearts, too, were filled with appreciation as the meaning of the Scriptures was first opened up to us.
2 But we were not given the truth for just our own benefit. ‘How will they hear without someone to preach?’ asks the apostle Paul. (Rom. 10:14) The answer comes from more than 2 million of Jehovah’s people, who want to be like Isaiah and say: “Here I am! Send me.” (Isa. 6:8) Now is the time for Kingdom truth to be proclaimed far and wide. We should feel responsible for doing this in the territory assigned to our congregation.
3 Something that will help us proclaim Kingdom truth in our territory during January and February is the new book You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth. We have been waiting to offer it from door to door and now the opportunity is here. Likely by now you have read it and so know for yourself that it is an outstanding Bible study aid. With Jehovah’s blessing we trust that it will accomplish a tremendous work in the months ahead.
OFFERING IT IN THE HOUSE-TO-HOUSE MINISTRY
4 How might we effectively present the new Live Forever book in our house-to-house work during January and February? There are some fine suggestions given on page 8 under Presenting the Good News. Additionally, we can keep in mind that the book often places itself. People see it with its intriguing title and they want it. But if they are not sure, a brief look inside at the chapter headings and the beautiful illustrations quickly helps them to make up their mind.
5 Why not try to place it at every opportunity? There are those who have previously shown an interest in the Bible and may even have taken literature. Show it to them. Offer it to those you meet in your daily activity, such as tradesmen and neighbors. Keep a copy where it can be seen and offer it as opportunity affords. Do not forget your non-Witness relatives.
AN EXCELLENT STUDY BOOK
6 Why can we be confident that the Live Forever book is an outstanding Bible study aid that will have a great part in the future ingathering? Because what was learned in using the successful Bible study aids “Let God Be True” and The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life was drawn upon in developing this new book. Thus it contains basically the same Scriptural material along with the fine teaching techniques found in these older books.
7 Much consideration was given as to how the various Bible doctrines could be explained in a clearer, more pointed way. Time was taken to make illustrations, both visual and verbal, more effective and questions more searching. One constant goal was to reach the student’s heart. One publisher writes: “Even more than its lovely presentation and abundant illustrations, I just love the powerful use of scriptures and questions and the personal approach—to make the student see all things in connection with his relationship to Jehovah. The clear-cut contrasts made should help people see the need to make decisions, yes, changes in their beliefs, conduct, attitudes and religion.”
A WIDER RANGE OF SUBJECT MATERIAL
8 In addition to its improved, effective way of presenting Bible truths, the new book covers a wider range of subject matter than our previous study aids. Information vital for new ones has been incorporated to benefit the student. For example, in recent times the matter of moral conduct has been a big stumbling block that hinders many newer ones from progressing in the truth. So this matter is given thorough treatment. Not only is direct counsel provided regarding what wrongs to avoid and how to avoid them but also there is encouragement to do what is right.
9 In house-to-house ministry, in street witnessing, in making return visits—it is recommended that each publisher be equipped with one or more copies of the Live Forever book. Do not go in the field without it! Your positive attitude in presenting the book, describing its contents and placing it will prepare the way for starting many new home Bible studies.
10 Let us present the Live Forever book enthusiastically during January and February as we take advantage of the privilege Jehovah has given us in these final days to keep proclaiming Kingdom truth.

