A Special Kingdom News for Everyone
1 Starting April 24, we began general distribution of the special Kingdom News that has stirred the interest of concerned people everywhere! Its message is not only timely but also urgent. Publishers in every congregation have expressed wholehearted support, wanting to put this message into the hands of thousands of people. Are you reaching out for a full share?
2 A consignment of Kingdom News was sent to each congregation, supplying approximately 50 for each publisher and 250 for each pioneer. How many have you been able to distribute? If you have not been able to do as much as you had hoped, have you considered ways to do more before the distribution ends on May 14? What about enrolling as an auxiliary pioneer? Can you take advantage of extra meetings for service during the week, such as those for evening witnessing?
3 The elders will be carefully reviewing territory coverage. If it will not be possible for the assigned congregation to work some portions, the elders should contact neighboring congregations to enlist help. Our wholehearted efforts, along with good cooperation between congregations, should get the job done.
4 You have likely experienced extra joy in this work because so many have been able to participate, including new publishers and youngsters. Hopefully, this spirit of joy will be sustained, encouraging all to follow through by returning to visit those who have responded favorably. We were urged to keep good house-to-house records, taking note of those who manifested interest. The latter part of May would be a fine time to concentrate on making return visits with a view to starting new studies.
5 What can we say when we go back? You might find it effective to say: “You may recall the printed information I left with you recently; I hope you had an opportunity to read it and give the matter some thought. Its message has certainly stirred up a lot of discussion in our community, since it touches on vital issues that confront all mankind.” Refer to some of the thought-provoking statements on the second page, and then ask: “What do you think we need to do to make sure we are prepared for what the future will bring?” Allow for response. If interest is shown, discuss other points on pages 2-4 of the Kingdom News, and offer a Bible study or, if that is not possible, the latest magazines.
6 If you work in another congregation’s territory, be sure to turn over the names of any interested ones you locate so that return visits can be made by the publishers of that congregation. Likewise, if you are given some calls for follow-up, do not fail to return promptly.
7 The special distribution of this Kingdom News has created excitement and motivated all of us to intensify our efforts in the Kingdom-preaching work. We can be confident that it will be a resounding success, heightening the awareness of people everywhere of Jehovah’s great name and purpose. (Isa. 12:4, 5) The more we are able to do, the greater will be our joy.​—Ps. 126:3.

