Following Our Exemplar as Light Bearers
1 Jesus declared concerning himself: “I am the light of the world.” By following his example, Jesus’ disciples also were “the light of the world.” (Matt. 5:14) As “the light of the world,” Jesus could say that all who follow him will possess “the light of life.” (John 8:12) That makes us spiritual light bearers, who must never allow anything to hide or obscure that light.
2 Jehovah’s organization provides training to show us how to be effective light bearers. If we closely follow the counsel and direction we receive, we will be able to enlighten people of all sorts concerning Kingdom truth. (1 Tim. 4:6) Serving as light bearers involves not only talking the truth at every opportunity but also maintaining fine conduct as Christians. Our Exemplar’s conduct was above reproach. As his followers, we must demonstrate that Christianity is our everyday way of life. (Eph. 5:9; Titus 2:7, 8, 10) We must produce fine works that others can see, moving them to glorify God.​—Matt. 5:16.
3 One Witness encountered an unusual request while going from house to house. The man of the house and his wife were quite ill, but they needed to deposit some money in the bank. They asked if the Witness would do it. He agreed and was given $2,000 in cash to take to the bank! When he returned, he asked: “How could you trust me without even knowing me?” The answer: “We know, and everyone else knows, that Jehovah’s Witnesses are the only ones to trust.” How thankful we can be that our adhering closely to the moral principles of the Bible produces such a God-honoring reputation!
4 A first-grade teacher explained to her class why one six-year-old Witness student was not participating in coloring Halloween pictures. The teacher said she was very proud of her for having the courage to be different because of what she believes. If we firmly believe something, the teacher commented, we should have the courage to stand up for it. That night the teacher analyzed her own beliefs and had to admit that she had not shown the same courage to stand up for her convictions. The next day she announced that she was not going to involve her class in any future holiday celebrations, some of which she did not believe in herself!
5 Jehovah’s people are eager to let their light shine, no matter where they are. The exemplary conduct of youngsters at school has favorably impressed schoolmates and teachers. Adult Witnesses who display fine conduct in the neighborhood cause others to speak well of the Kingdom message. Informal witnessing under a multitude of circumstances attracts sincere people who want to learn more. Even our diligence and honesty in secular work give a witness. Yes, no matter where we are or what we are doing, we can arouse interest in the truth.
6 By keeping our eyes on the flawless life-pattern of our great Exemplar, we can continue to perfect our skills as his disciples. Copying his example will ensure that our light “shines upon all.”​—Matt. 5:15; 1 Pet. 2:21.

