Question Box
▪ What items should we take to meetings?
Each week we receive beneficial instruction and encouragement at congregation meetings. (Isa. 48:17; Heb. 10:24, 25) How much we benefit, however, depends largely on whether we come well prepared or not.
It would be good for each family member to have his own study material and other items needed for the meetings. This would include a Bible, a songbook, the publication(s) being studied, a notebook, and a pen or pencil.
For the Theocratic Ministry School, the Theocratic Ministry School Schedule and the Theocratic Ministry School Guidebook are needed. These items help us to keep in mind the theme of the student talks being given and to follow the school overseer when he gives counsel. We can make personal application of the counsel and suggestions in order to improve our own talks and field service presentations. Since January, most of the instruction talks are based on Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Proclaimers of God’s Kingdom. It may not be practical for every family member to take his own copy; perhaps one volume could be brought so that the family will have it available for reference.
For the Service Meeting, we need to have the current Our Kingdom Ministry and the Reasoning book. Take along any publications referred to during the meeting, such as literature items that will be used in presentations to be demonstrated. Elders should have a copy of Organized to Accomplish Our Ministry.
Parents should endeavor to have their children sit still and pay attention at congregation meetings. Providing them with personal copies of The Watchtower and other publications, even before they are able to read, encourages them to take an interest. When young ones are taught to respect theocratic publications and to use them, lifelong, wholesome spiritual habits are formed.
The joy and satisfaction we derive from congregation meetings are greatly enhanced when we come fully equipped. (2 Tim. 3:17) This is the best way to ensure that we are “filled with the accurate knowledge of [God’s] will in all wisdom and spiritual comprehension.”​—Col. 1:9.

