Why Keep a Record of Not-at-Homes?
1 A Witness couple were out in field service early in the day. Later that same day, they returned to cover their not-at-homes in that territory. One man invited them in and listened intently. He took a Live Forever book and asked if the Witnesses would return. He had never talked with Jehovah’s Witnesses before and had many questions he wanted answered; a Bible study was started. This couple were overjoyed to locate such a sheeplike individual. Would you like to have an experience such as that? Keeping a good record of not-at-homes and returning promptly may make it possible for you to do so.
2 We have repeatedly been urged to keep an accurate record of not-at-homes and to call again soon. As the above experience shows, another visit on the same day may bring excellent results. While we may be intent on covering the assigned territory, perhaps we are not as diligent in keeping a record of those who are not at home. Some say: ‘We work our territory every two or three weeks; there is no need to keep such a record because we will be back very soon anyway.’ But that gives us even more reason to keep a record. Where territory coverage is frequent, following up not-at-homes enables us to be more thorough in searching out deserving ones. How so?
3 In many areas, 50 percent or more of the residents are not at home during the day. So, in effect, we make more territory available by concentrating more on our not-at-homes. Even if the territory is seldom worked, we can improve the results when an effort is made to reach everyone before marking the territory as having been worked.
4 Calling on not-at-homes can usually be arranged for another day, preferably within a week. Many find it better to return on a day and at a time different from when the initial call was made. You may choose to use some time on Saturday or Sunday to follow up not-at-homes noted during the week. Then again, many congregations find that making such calls in the early evening hours has been fruitful. They may find more than half the residents at home.
5 You should list return visits in your personal records. If you are unable to get back to where no one was at home, your record of not-at-homes should be given to the brother handling the group, for use by the next group going into that territory.
6 Giving closer attention to this feature of our ministry can increase our productivity as well as our joy. It can give us the satisfaction that comes with knowing that we are thorough in searching out and caring for sheeplike ones.​—Ezek. 34:11-14.

