
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
The Right Way to Worship God




 1. Who should tell us the right way to worship God?
MOST religions claim that they teach the truth about God. But that is not possible, because religions teach very different things about who God is and how we should worship him. How can we know the right way to worship God? Jehovah is the only one who can tell us how we should worship him.
 2. How can you learn the right way to worship God?
2 Jehovah has given us the Bible so that we can learn the right way to worship him. So study the Bible, and Jehovah will help you to benefit from his teachings because he deeply cares for you.​—Isaiah 48:17.
 3. What does God want us to do?
3 Some people say that God accepts all religions, but that’s not what Jesus taught us. He said: “Not everyone saying to me, ‘Lord, Lord,’ will enter into the Kingdom of the heavens, but only the one doing the will of my Father.” So it is necessary for us to learn what the will of God is and then to do it. This is a serious matter because Jesus compared people who do not obey God to criminals, “workers of lawlessness.”​—Matthew 7:21-23.
 4. What did Jesus say about doing God’s will?
4 Jesus warned us that when we want to do the will of God, we will face challenges. He said: “Go in through the narrow gate, because broad is the gate and spacious is the road leading off into destruction, and many are going in through it; whereas narrow is the gate and cramped the road leading off into life, and few are finding it.” (Matthew 7:13, 14) The cramped road, or the right way to worship God, leads to everlasting life. The spacious road, or the wrong way to worship God, leads to death. But Jehovah does not want anyone to die. He gives everyone the opportunity to learn about him.​—2 Peter 3:9.



THE RIGHT WAY TO WORSHIP GOD

 5. How can you identify those who worship God in the right way?
5 Jesus said that we can identify those who worship God in the right way. We do this by examining what they believe and what they do. He said: “By their fruits you will recognize them.” And he added: “Every good tree produces fine fruit.” (Matthew 7:16, 17) This doesn’t mean that those who worship God are perfect. But God’s servants always try to do what is right. We will now see what will help us to identify those who worship God the right way.
6, 7. Why is true worship based on the Bible? What does Jesus’ example teach us?
6 Our worship should be based on the Bible. The Bible says: “All Scripture is inspired of God and beneficial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight, for disciplining in righteousness, so that the man of God may be fully competent, completely equipped for every good work.” (2 Timothy 3:16, 17) The apostle Paul wrote to Christians: “When you received God’s word, which you heard from us, you accepted it not as the word of men but, just as it truthfully is, as the word of God.” (1 Thessalonians 2:13) True worship is based only on God’s Word, the Bible. It is not based on human ideas, traditions, or anything else.
7 Everything Jesus taught was based on God’s Word. (Read John 17:17.) He often quoted the Scriptures. (Matthew 4:4, 7, 10) True servants of God follow Jesus’ example and base everything they teach on the Bible.
 8. What did Jesus teach us about worshipping Jehovah?
8 We should worship only Jehovah. Psalm 83:18 says: “You, whose name is Jehovah, you alone are the Most High over all the earth.” Jesus wanted people to know exactly who the true God is, and he taught people God’s name. (Read John 17:6.) Jesus said: “It is Jehovah your God you must worship, and it is to him alone you must render sacred service.” (Matthew 4:10) So, as God’s servants, we follow Jesus’ example. We worship only Jehovah, we use his name, and we teach others God’s name and what he will do for us.
9, 10. How do we show love for one another?
9 We need to have genuine love for people. Jesus taught his disciples to love one another. (Read John 13:35.) It doesn’t matter where we’re from, what our culture is, or whether we are rich or poor. Our love for one another should unite us as brothers and sisters. (Colossians 3:14) So we do not go to war and kill people. The Bible says: “The children of God and the children of the Devil are evident by this fact: Whoever does not practice righteousness does not originate with God, nor does the one who does not love his brother.” And it adds: “We should love one another; not like Cain, who originated with the wicked one and slaughtered his brother.”​—1 John 3:10-12; 4:20, 21.
10 We use our time, energy, and material things to help and encourage one another. (Hebrews 10:24, 25) We “work what is good toward all.”​—Galatians 6:10.
11. Why do we accept Jesus as the way to God?
11 We need to obey Jesus because he is the way to God. The Bible says: “There is no salvation in anyone else, for there is no other name under heaven that has been given among men by which we must get saved.” (Acts 4:12) In Chapter 5 of this book, we learned that Jehovah sent Jesus to give his life as a ransom for obedient humans. (Matthew 20:28) Jehovah has chosen Jesus to rule as King over the earth. That is why the Bible tells us that we must obey Jesus if we want to live forever.​—Read John 3:36.
12. Why do we not get involved in politics?
12 We should not get involved in politics. Jesus didn’t participate in politics. When he was on trial, he told the Roman ruler Pilate: “My Kingdom is no part of this world.” (Read John 18:36.) Like Jesus, we are loyal to God’s heavenly Kingdom, and for this reason, no matter where we live, we do not get involved in politics. However, the Bible commands us to obey “the superior authorities,” that is, the governments. (Romans 13:1) We obey the laws of the country where we live. Of course, when a law conflicts with God’s laws, we imitate the apostles, who said: “We must obey God as ruler rather than men.”​—Acts 5:29; Mark 12:17.
13. What do we preach about God’s Kingdom?
13 We believe that God’s Kingdom is the only solution for the world’s problems. Jesus said that the “good news of the Kingdom” would be preached all over the world. (Read Matthew 24:14.) No human government can do what God’s Kingdom will do for us. (Psalm 146:3) Jesus taught us to pray for God’s Kingdom when he said: “Let your Kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also on earth.” (Matthew 6:10) The Bible tells us that God’s Kingdom will destroy all human governments and that “it alone will stand forever.”​—Daniel 2:44.
14. Who do you believe worship God in the right way?
14 After studying these points, ask yourself: ‘Who base their teachings on the Bible? Who tell others about God’s name? Who show genuine love toward one another and believe that God sent Jesus to save us? Who do not get involved in politics? Who preach that only God’s Kingdom can solve our problems?’ It is only Jehovah’s Witnesses.​—Isaiah 43:10-12.



WHAT WILL YOU DO?

15. What must we do if we want God to accept our worship?
15 It’s not enough just to believe God exists. Even the demons believe God exists, but they don’t obey him. (James 2:19) If we want God to accept our worship, we must not only believe he exists but also do what he says.
16. Why should we reject false religion?
16 For God to accept our worship, we must reject false religion. The prophet Isaiah wrote: “Get out from the midst of her, keep yourselves clean.” (Isaiah 52:11; 2 Corinthians 6:17) That is why we need to reject anything that has to do with false worship.
17, 18. What is “Babylon the Great,” and why is it urgent to reject it?
17 What is false religion? It is any religion that teaches us to worship God in a way that is against his Word. The Bible calls all false religion “Babylon the Great.” (Revelation 17:5) Why? After the Flood of Noah’s day, many false religious teachings started in the city of Babylon. Those false teachings spread all over the earth. For example, the people living in Babylon worshipped groups of three gods. Today, too, many religions teach that God is a Trinity, but the Bible clearly teaches that there is only one true God, Jehovah, and that Jesus is his Son. (John 17:3) People living in Babylon also believed that part of a person continues living after the body dies and that that part can suffer in hell. That is not true.​—See Endnotes 14, 17, and 18.
18 God has foretold that soon all false religion will be destroyed. (Revelation 18:8) Do you understand why leaving false religion is so urgent? Jehovah God wants you to do that before it’s too late.​—Revelation 18:4.





By serving Jehovah with his people, you will become part of a worldwide family




19. When you decide to serve Jehovah, how will he care for you?
19 When you decide to leave false religion and serve Jehovah, some of your friends or family may not understand your decision and may even make life hard for you. But Jehovah will not abandon you. You will become part of a worldwide family of millions of people who truly love one another, and you will have the hope of living forever in God’s new world. (Mark 10:28-30) Perhaps some of the friends and family who oppose your decision to serve Jehovah will later decide to study the Bible.
20. Why is it important to worship God in the right way?
20 Very soon, God will destroy all wickedness and his Kingdom will rule over the earth. (2 Peter 3:9, 13) That will be a wonderful time! Everyone will worship Jehovah the way Jehovah wants us to. So it’s important for you to take action now and worship God in the right way.



THOSE WHO WORSHIP GOD





  base what they teach on the Bible

  worship only Jehovah and teach others his name

  love one another

  believe that God sent Jesus to save us

  do not get involved in politics

  preach that only God’s Kingdom can solve the world’s problems




SUMMARY
TRUTH 1: HOW TO RECOGNIZE TRUE WORSHIP
“Narrow is the gate and cramped the road leading off into life, and few are finding it.”​—Matthew 7:14
How do we know that God does not accept all kinds of worship?
Matthew 7:21-23
God does not accept all religions. Not all religions do God’s will.

Matthew 7:13, 14
True worship leads to eternal life. False religion leads to eternal destruction.

Matthew 7:16, 17
You can recognize true worship by its works. You do not have to study all religions; just study what the Bible says.


TRUTH 2: THE RIGHT WAY TO WORSHIP GOD
1 Thessalonians 2:13; 2 Timothy 3:16, 17
Believe and teach only what is in the Bible.

Matthew 4:10; John 17:6
Worship Jehovah and use his name.

John 13:35
Show true love for one another.

John 3:36; Acts 4:12
Obey Jesus. God uses Jesus to save us.

John 18:36; Acts 5:29
Do not get involved in politics.

Matthew 24:14; 6:10
Teach others that God’s Kingdom is the only solution to our problems.


TRUTH 3: YOU NEED TO ACT ON WHAT YOU BELIEVE
What must you do if you want God to accept your worship?
James 2:19
It is not enough just to believe in God. You need to do what he says in the Bible.

Isaiah 52:11; Revelation 17:5
False religion, or “Babylon the Great,” teaches people to worship God in a way that he does not accept. False religious teachings include the Trinity, the immortality of the soul, and hellfire.

Revelation 18:4, 8
Jehovah will soon destroy all false religion. You need to reject anything that has to do with false worship.

Mark 10:28-30
You might have opposition, but Jehovah will not abandon you.




