Do You Have a Spiritual Mentor?
AT THE tender age of 16, Uzziah became king of the southern kingdom of Judah. He reigned for over 50 years, from the late ninth to the early eighth century B.C.E. From a young age, Uzziah “kept doing what was right in Jehovah’s eyes.” What influenced him to take an upright course? The historical record states: “[Uzziah] continually tended to search for God in the days of Zechariah, the instructor in the fear of the true God; and, in the days of his searching for Jehovah, the true God made him prosperous.”​—2 Chronicles 26:1, 4, 5.
Not much is known about Zechariah, the adviser to the king, apart from this account in the Bible. Yet, as “the instructor in the fear of the true God,” Zechariah exercised a fine influence on the young ruler to do what was right. The Expositor’s Bible observes that Zechariah was obviously “a man versed in sacred learning, rich in spiritual experience, and able to communicate his knowledge.” One Bible scholar concluded about Zechariah: “He was well versed in prophecy and . . . was an intelligent, devout, good man; and, it seems, had great influence with Uzziah.”
Uzziah’s faithful course brought him many blessings, and he “displayed strength to an extraordinary degree” because “the true God continued to help him.” Yes, success in his secular efforts followed his spiritual success “in the days of Zechariah.” (2 Chronicles 26:6-8) After Uzziah became successful, he left the teachings of Zechariah, his mentor. Uzziah’s “heart became haughty even to the point of causing ruin, so that he acted unfaithfully against Jehovah.” As a result of a particularly irreverent act, he was struck with a loathsome skin disease, which incapacitated him, so that he could no longer serve as king in the fullest sense.​—2 Chronicles 26:16-21.
Do you have someone who might be called an instructor, a mentor, who influences you “to search for God”? This can be so whether you are young or past the days of your youth, whether you are male or female. Treasure such a mentor, for his or her admonition can help you to keep doing what is right in Jehovah’s eyes. Listen to this mature Christian, and seriously consider the advice he gives. May you never turn aside from the wise words of such an “instructor in the fear of the true God.”​—Proverbs 1:5; 12:15; 19:20.

