Be Patient and Thorough in the Ministry
1 The apostle Paul maintained a keen sense of responsibility before Jehovah to be patient and thorough as he preached the good news to all who would hear. He confidently told the assembled overseers from Ephesus: “I do not make my soul of any account as dear to me, if only I may finish my course and the ministry that I received of the Lord Jesus, to bear thorough witness to the good news of the undeserved kindness of God.” (Acts 20:24) Do we sense the necessity laid upon us to do likewise?​—1 Cor. 9:16.
IN OFTEN-WORKED TERRITORY
2 Patience is especially necessary when our territory is worked quite often. Despite limited territory, we should be moved to call again and again. Put forth effort to contact all the occupants in each home, and progressively help sincere persons to appreciate the Bible-based hope of God’s Kingdom.
3 When our territory is worked frequently, another benefit of being patient is that we can get personally acquainted with the householders. This may make them feel more comfortable in opening their door. There are excellent suggestions in the Reasoning book that we can use to vary our introductions in often-worked territory.​—See Reasoning, pages 9-15.
4 There may be occasions when we call on people who, while manifesting some interest, will not accept our literature. How should we react? Our endeavor to be thorough will move us to persevere in developing that interest. Cultivating what has been planted in their hearts may move them eventually to accept a Bible study. One brother made calls on an interested householder for five consecutive weeks without placing literature. On the sixth visit, the householder accepted literature, and eventually a Bible study was started.
OFFERING THE BROCHURES
5 During July and August, our Topic for Conversation will be “A New World​—By Whom?” This topic is sufficiently flexible to use when presenting any one of the following brochures: Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!, “Look! I Am Making All Things New,” Should You Believe in the Trinity?, The Divine Name That Will Endure Forever, and The Government That Will Bring Paradise. If we take time to become familiar with these brochures, we will find a number of appropriate talking points to use with the Topic for Conversation.
6 For example, we could introduce ourselves and then say: “What are your thoughts on man’s promise to bring about world peace? [Allow response.] Consider how the Bible comments on man’s abilities in this regard. [Read Jeremiah 10:23.] Throughout the centuries, man has proved that he is really not capable of ruling himself. However, note God’s reliable promise. [Read 2 Peter 3:13.] So God’s sure promise of a new earth will come true.” Then we could encourage the householder to read one of the brochures. If we are using the “Look!” brochure, we could direct the householder’s attention to what is stated on page 30, paragraph 58. When offering the Government brochure, we could highlight what is stated in the first paragraph on page 3. The picture on the front of the Life on Earth brochure is quite appealing and fits in with the Topic for Conversation. Also, the third paragraph on page 31 of the Divine Name brochure can be used.
7 Patiently and thoroughly covering our territory with the good news will result in salvation to those who listen to us. (1 Tim. 4:16) Time is running out! Therefore, may we exercise patience and bear thorough witness as we have a full share in preaching this message of salvation.

