Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING JULY 1
Song 173
10 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Highlight articles in current magazines that might be used in magazine work this Saturday.
15 min: “Visiting a Patient​—How to Help.” Talk on material in March 8, 1991, Awake! Outline congregation’s arrangements for assisting elderly, infirm, or shut-ins. Stress point on page 11, paragraph 4, on the benefit of being properly dressed.
20 min: “Be Patient and Thorough in the Ministry.” Question-and-answer coverage of article. Emphasize the need to be patient, especially in territory covered quite often. After discussing paragraph 6, have publisher demonstrate how to use the Topic for Conversation when offering the “Look!” brochure.
Song 156 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JULY 8
Song 162
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Theocratic News. Remind congregation of weekend arrangements for field service.
15 min: “Be Whole-Souled in the Field Ministry​—Part 1.” Question-and-answer discussion by service overseer. Assign in advance selected key scriptures to be read, and make practical local application. Create interest in five-part series.
20 min: Full-Time Service​—A Splendid Opportunity to Walk With God. (Mic. 6:8) Qualified elder or ministerial servant, preferably one in full-time service, gives warm, encouraging talk. (See May 15, 1989, Watchtower, pages 21-3.) Outline practical suggestions to help congregation publishers, according to their circumstances, to think seriously about taking up the full-time work. Interview two or three pioneers, and outline the many benefits of full-time service. New service year a fine time to begin. Those who start by September 1, 1991, may qualify to go to the Pioneer Service School in the summer of 1992.
Song 204 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JULY 15
Song 32
10 min: Local announcements. If congregation is to rotate meeting times on September 1, announce schedule that is to be followed. Review highlights from congregation’s June field service report. Commend publishers for accomplishments in the field.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—With Discernment.” Question-and-answer coverage. Demonstrate points in paragraph 5. Have skillful publisher show how to deal with householder who is initially argumentative by tactfully asking questions and showing what Bible says on subject. Demonstration should be well rehearsed.
15 min: How I Got the Truth. Experiences. Elder interviews two or three individuals. Focus on how God’s Word and organization moved them to point of dedication and baptism. Stress benefits they experience from being in the truth.
Song 67 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JULY 22
Song 210
15 min: Elder or qualified ministerial servant handles local announcements. Ask audience for talking points from available brochures. Pick points that fit in with the Topic for Conversation and that will build householder’s anticipation for reading the brochure. Have brief demonstration of transition into brochure and an appropriate talking point.
18 min: “Congregation Book Study Arrangement​—Part 1.” Discussion by experienced elder with one or two other elders or ministerial servants who are Congregation Book Study conductors. Put special emphasis on two or three matters that are especially needed in the local congregation, such as commenting in own words and making practical application of material considered.
12 min: Local needs. Consider points on which elders feel congregation needs assistance. May Scripturally consider some items that were brought to the congregation’s attention during the last visit of the circuit overseer.
Song 42 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JULY 29
Song 56
15 min: Local announcements and consideration of Question Box. Ask for experiences on placing brochures and starting Bible studies.
15 min: “Carrying Our Own Load of Responsibility.” Elder discusses article with family group. Recalls how congregation enjoyed and benefited from current circuit assembly program and builds anticipation for new circuit assembly program. Asks family heads in audience how the 1991 program helped their family. Encourages all to make definite arrangements to be present and benefit from the program outlined for the 1992 service year. If date of next assembly is known, this can be announced.
15 min: “Preventing the Return of Bad Habits.” Discussion of article appearing in the April 8, 1991, Awake!
Song 132 and concluding prayer.

