Congregation Book Study Arrangement
Part 1​—Responsibility of Study Conductor
1 The Congregation Book Study plays a vital role in the spiritual development of Jehovah’s people. In the months ahead, we will examine various aspects of the Congregation Book Study arrangement and consider how we can benefit. In this issue we want to focus on how the book study conductor can make the study encouraging and faith strengthening.
2 In order to be effective in his teaching, the conductor should prepare well. As a serious student of God’s Word, not only must he know the answer to each question but he should also understand why that answer is correct. His endeavor should be to assist all in the study to know the reasons for the answers. (1 Pet. 3:15) This will deepen their appreciation for the material.
GOALS IN CONDUCTING THE STUDY
3 One goal of the conductor is to use the material in the study to strengthen the faith of all in attendance and motivate them to want to do God’s will more fully. (Ps. 110:3; 2 Thess. 1:3-5) To accomplish this, the conductor must pause at appropriate places to ‘sound down’ points that build heartfelt confidence in Jehovah, his Word, and his organization. (Gal. 6:6, Ref. Bi. ftn.) Skillfully framed questions can be used to draw out these faith-building details as time allows.
4 Another goal is to help all see how they can use the material in a practical way. How can they use it in the field ministry? In encouraging the brothers as well as new ones? In strengthening their family and themselves? As Congregation Book Study conductors prepare each lesson, they should try to discern the practical use of specific points in the study.
5 Certain information may be used to help unbelieving relatives, schoolmates, or workmates. Other material may assist those in divided households or perhaps in one-parent families. The conductor may draw out those in attendance by helping them to reason and see how they may make practical application of the material being considered. The conductor should strive to keep the study interesting, making it more than simply a question-and-answer coverage of the material.​—Compare 1 Corinthians 14:9, 19.
SHOW PERSONAL INTEREST
6 By taking a personal interest in each one in the group, the conductor can encourage full participation. Timid ones may be assigned in advance to read scriptures, or they may be given a question in advance to prepare for answering. All should strive to comment in their own words. By listening carefully to the comments, the conductor can determine if some are in need of personal assistance. He can use other experienced ones in the group to assist in giving such individual attention.
7 The Congregation Book Study is a blessing to us. It gives us the opportunity to meet in small groups and receive more personal attention. Never should we view it as less important than other meetings. Your Congregation Book Study conductor takes seriously his responsibility to use each study to strengthen your faith in Jehovah and build your appreciation for God’s spiritual provisions.

