Be Whole-Souled in the Field Ministry
Part 1​—The Value of Appreciation for Jehovah
1 Being whole-souled in the ministry stems from a deep appreciation of Jehovah and all that he has done for us. (2 Sam. 22:2, 3) An empathetic view of the plight of all mankind alienated from God should move us to exert ourselves in service. (Matt. 9:36; 2 Cor. 5:14, 15) The more devoted we are to Jehovah and the more concerned we are for people, the more we will be motivated to share enthusiastically in the field service. (Matt. 22:37-39) Our ministry then becomes a treasure to be highly prized. (2 Cor. 4:7) But how can such appreciation for the ministry be cultivated?
KEYS TO BUILDING APPRECIATION
2 Personal and congregational Bible study along with prayerful meditation help us to develop a personal relationship with Jehovah. We come to discern the beauty of his qualities and personality. Do you follow a schedule for weekly Bible reading? Do you regularly set aside time to study the Society’s publications? Do you prepare for, attend, and participate in all congregation meetings? (Heb. 10:24, 25) During and after each personal study period, purposeful meditation will build heart appreciation for the pleasantness of our warmhearted God and his arrangements for true worship.​—Ps. 27:4.
3 Another way we can heighten our level of appreciation is to consider closely the example of other whole-souled ministers of God. The prophet Jeremiah was consumed with ardor for the work entrusted to him. (Jer. 20:9) Jesus left a pattern, displaying an appreciative spirit and zeal. (John 4:34) By his labors in the ministry, the apostle Paul demonstrated his gratitude for divine mercy shown him. (1 Tim. 1:12, 13, 17) As we reflect on such examples, as well as examples from modern times, we can build an appreciation that will make us whole-souled in the ministry.
4 When we learn about the glorious splendor of Jehovah’s dignity and concern ourselves with his wonderful works, we are moved to declare his greatness and cry out joyfully to his praise. (Ps. 145:5-7) We show that we treasure our opportunities to bear witness to the divine name by actively seeking ways to spread the Kingdom message.​—Luke 6:45.
5 But are there other things that will motivate our whole-souled participation in the ministry? If so, what are they? How can elders, ministerial servants, pioneers, and other experienced Kingdom proclaimers help? What part do goals play in cultivating enthusiasm? What benefits can be expected? These questions and others will be answered in this five-part series, which will be continued in succeeding issues of Our Kingdom Ministry.

