Presenting the Good News​—With Discernment
1 An inspired proverb says: “He that is guarding discernment is going to find good.” (Prov. 19:8) The wisdom of these words has often proved true in our preaching activity. For example, by using discernment and tact, many publishers have turned possible conversation stoppers into opportunities to give a further witness. Or they have at least laid a foundation for a witness to be given at a later time. How can this be done?
HANDLING CONVERSATION STOPPERS
2 Often we meet people who say, “I’m busy.” Is the householder truly busy, or is he merely saying this so as not to get involved in a lengthy discussion? Discernment is needed. If he does not seem really busy, we may try overcoming this conversation stopper. We could say, “Then I will be brief.” Thereafter, we can summarize what we intended to discuss, keeping in mind the agreement to limit our conversation. As a result of our consideration and interest-arousing comments, the person may even indicate a desire to continue the discussion right then.
3 Suppose the one you approach really is busy. Although we do not want to be turned aside easily, if we are insistent or pushy, we may leave an unfavorable impression. If a householder comes to the door with a cooking utensil in her hand and we smell food being prepared, very likely she is truly busy. So discernment and good judgment are needed. It would not be considerate to persist in the conversation at that time. How much better it would be to give the householder a tract and suggest calling back later. This will leave a more favorable impression, and a fine witness may be given the next time a Witness calls.
REACTING TO THE PERSON’S DISPOSITION
4 On occasion we meet individuals who are abrupt when we call on them in the house-to-house ministry. What should we do in this event? Proverbs 17:27 counsels: “A man of discernment is cool of spirit.” What fine advice! A mild voice expressing concern often serves to relax such a person. Moreover, if we can tactfully get him to express himself on an issue that concerns him, he may become less defensive. Even if he cuts short the conversation, possibly our mild response will leave him in a better frame of mind toward the work of Jehovah’s Witnesses. That would be a fine accomplishment. Of course, if a householder becomes upset and angry, it would be best to leave quietly and perhaps try witnessing to him at another time.
5 Then there are persons who, although argumentative, may be sincere. In these circumstances, it might be a real test of our patience to continue the conversation with them. But if we are discerning, we will not necessarily conclude that a householder is not interested just because he strongly expresses a differing view. We may wish to ask tactful questions in an effort to find out why he believes the way he does and then show him what the Bible says on the subject. (Prov. 20:5) Based on his reaction, we can decide if it would be advantageous to continue the conversation.
6 A discerning publisher realizes that time and circumstances often change a householder’s attitude toward the Kingdom message. His reaction may be quite different the next time we call. We must be careful not to assume we will get a negative response because of the way the householder reacted the last time we called at his door.
7 Deciding whether we should pursue a conversation is not easy. Yet, by developing the art of teaching, we will become more effective in presenting the good news with discernment, while we look to Jehovah to bless our efforts.​—1 Cor. 3:6; Titus 1:9.

