Meet the Alpine Marmot
A loud whistle pierced the air. It sounded like a boy whistling to a friend—but was much louder. The whistle echoed across the mountainside, giving little indication of its source. Then I noticed a small furry rodent dart into a nearby burrow. A quick look at my guidebook confirmed that I had just seen and heard an alpine marmot.
DURING the next few days, I became familiar with these furry rodents. I learned which rocks they preferred for sunning themselves, where their principal burrows were located, and how they survive in the harsh environment above the tree line.
Family Cooperation and Vigilance
Life on the alpine pastures is not easy for the marmot. Winters are cold, and its habitat may be snowbound for months. Also, predators on land and in the sky pose a threat. So the marmot’s survival depends on cooperation, planning, and vigilance.
Marmots are family-oriented, usually living in groups that consist of a breeding pair and their offspring. Each family has several burrows—one serves as the family home and the others provide shelter in times of danger. Sometimes marmots excavate their burrows in crevices underneath large boulders. These castlelike dwellings offer the marmots vantage points that serve both as turrets for observation and as sun terraces for relaxing.
The marmot takes hygiene seriously. A separate burrow is used as a toilet so that the home burrow is kept clean. At the end of their main burrow, marmots prepare an enlarged den, which they line with grass. This den provides a safe haven where the female gives birth. It also offers a warm sanctuary where the whole family can huddle during the long winter hibernation.
Perhaps the most important family responsibility is that of guard duty. An adult marmot acts as a sentinel while other family members forage nearby. To check for danger, the marmot sometimes stands on its hind feet to survey its surroundings better. Eagles, foxes, and humans are the main threats to the alpine marmot. Their presence or the sight of any large bird of prey will elicit an alarm call. Interestingly, the alarm call for eagles—the marmot’s principal winged predator—is noticeably distinct. At the sound of a warning call, the marmots scamper for safety. In an instant, it seems, no marmot can be seen above ground!
Obedience may well be a matter of life and death, especially in the case of young marmots, which are a favorite food of golden eagles. If the threat seems immediate, the guard retreats into a nearby burrow along with the others. Then, after a few minutes, he cautiously pokes his head out to see if the danger has passed.
Keeping Cool and Sleeping Well
In the high meadows where alpine marmots live, there is abundant grass to eat, and the summer climate is temperate. If the weather is cool, marmots will sunbathe on a suitable rock. High temperatures create more problems for them, since they cannot remove their furry coat. For this reason marmots are usually more active in the early morning and late afternoon.
Insomnia is certainly not a problem for alpine marmots; they hibernate for about six months. A related species, the hoary marmot, may hibernate for as long as nine months. During hibernation, the alpine marmot’s heart slows down to one or two beats per minute, and its body temperature drops to about 41 degrees Fahrenheit [5 degrees Celsius]. Understandably, fasting for such a long period requires preparation. During summer and early autumn, the marmots eat voraciously to acquire fat reserves that will last them through the long winter hibernation.
Young marmots are playful and often run around in circles chasing each other. I watched one group of three youngsters tumble down a grassy slope as all three of them engaged in a mock fight. Marmots of all ages greet each other by touching noses; family members also groom each other and snuggle during cold spells to keep warm.
Marmots prepare for the future and are alert to danger. (Job 12:7) Perhaps human families can learn from these rodents.
[Blurb on page 11]
The marmot adds charm to the alpine meadows, and its family cooperation testifies to the wisdom of the Creator.—Psalm 50:10
[Blurb on page 12]
An adult marmot will act as a sentinel while other family members forage nearby

