
April
Wednesday, April 1

[Jesus] said to Peter: “Get behind me, Satan! . . . You think, not God’s thoughts, but those of men.”​—Matt. 16:23.



What about us? Do we think God’s thoughts or those of this world? Granted, we have likely conformed our conduct to God’s requirements. But what about our thinking? Are we bringing our thoughts and viewpoints into alignment with Jehovah’s? Doing so requires a deliberate effort. On the other hand, little or no effort is needed to absorb the world’s thinking. That is because the spirit of the world is all around us. (Eph. 2:2) Furthermore, because it often appeals to self-interest, the world’s way of thinking can be enticing. Yes, it is challenging to think like Jehovah but all too easy to think like the world. However, if we allow the world to mold our thinking, we will be inclined toward selfishness and a desire for moral independence. (Mark 7:21, 22) It is therefore vital that we cultivate “God’s thoughts,” not “those of men.” w18.11 18 ¶1; 19 ¶3-4




Thursday, April 2

This is my Son, the beloved, whom I have approved.​—Matt. 3:17.



How encouraged Jesus must have been when Jehovah acknowledged him on three separate occasions by speaking directly from heaven. Just after Jesus’ baptism in the Jordan River, Jehovah said the above. Evidently, John the Baptist was the only other person who heard those words. Then, about a year before Jesus’ death, three of his apostles heard Jehovah say about Jesus: “This is my Son, the beloved, whom I have approved. Listen to him.” (Matt. 17:5) Finally, just a few days before Jesus’ death, Jehovah again spoke to his Son from heaven. (John 12:28) Even though Jesus knew that he would experience a shameful death, falsely branded as a blasphemer, he prayed that Jehovah’s will be done and not his. (Matt. 26:39, 42) “He endured a torture stake, despising shame,” not seeking recognition from the world, but only from his Father.​—Heb. 12:2. w18.07 10-11 ¶15-16



Memorial Bible reading: (Events after sunset: Nisan 9) Mark 14:3-9


Friday, April 3

Father, if you want to, remove this cup from me.​—Luke 22:42.



Just after Jesus introduced the Lord’s Evening Meal, he demonstrated tremendous courage. How so? Jesus accepted his Father’s will for him, even though he knew that doing so meant that he would be executed for the shameful crime of blasphemy. (Matt. 26:65, 66) Jesus maintained perfect integrity so as to honor Jehovah’s name, uphold God’s sovereignty, and open the way to endless life for repentant humans. At the same time, Jesus prepared his followers for what they would soon face. Jesus also showed courage by setting aside any anxiety he may have had and by focusing attention on the needs of his faithful apostles. The simple meal, which he introduced after dismissing Judas, would remind those who would become his anointed followers of the benefits of Jesus’ shed blood and of sharing in the new covenant.​—1 Cor. 10:16, 17. w19.01 22 ¶7-8



Memorial Bible reading: (Daytime events: Nisan 9) Mark 11:1-11


Saturday, April 4

Father, glorify your name.​—John 12:28.



In response, Jesus’ Father spoke from heaven: “I have glorified it and will glorify it again.” Jesus was troubled because of the great responsibility he had to remain faithful to Jehovah. Jesus was aware that he was going to suffer a brutal scourging and a cruel death. (Matt. 26:38) More than all else, Jesus wanted to glorify his Father’s name. Jesus was charged with blasphemy, and he was concerned that his death would bring reproach on God. Like Jesus, we too may be concerned about reproach brought on Jehovah’s name. Perhaps like Jesus, we are victims of unjust treatment. Or we may be disturbed by false stories that opposers spread about us. We may think about the reproach these reports bring on Jehovah’s name. At such times, Jehovah’s words are of great comfort to us. Jehovah will never fail to glorify his name.​—Ps. 94:22, 23; Isa. 65:17. w19.03 11-12 ¶14-16



Memorial Bible reading: (Daytime events: Nisan 10) Mark 11:12-19


Sunday, April 5

Jesus began explaining to his disciples that he must . . . suffer many things . . . and be killed.​—Matt. 16:21.



Jesus’ disciples could not believe what they were hearing. Jesus, the one they expected to restore Israel’s kingdom, said that he would soon suffer and die. It was the apostle Peter who spoke up. “Be kind to yourself, Lord,” he said. “You will not have this happen to you at all.” Jesus countered: “Get behind me, Satan! You are a stumbling block to me, because you think, not God’s thoughts, but those of men.” (Matt. 16:22, 23; Acts 1:6) With those words, Jesus made a distinction between thoughts that originate with God and thoughts that originate with this world under Satan’s control. (1 John 5:19) Peter echoed the self-sparing attitude of the world. But Jesus knew that his Father’s thinking was different. In his reply to Peter, Jesus clearly rejected the world’s thinking in favor of Jehovah’s. w18.11 18 ¶1-2



Memorial Bible reading: (Daytime events: Nisan 11) Mark 11:20–12:27, 41-44


Monday, April 6

Keep proclaiming the death of the Lord, until he comes.​—1 Cor. 11:26.



Imagine what Jehovah sees when millions around the world gather for the Lord’s Evening Meal. He looks at more than just the large number of people; he notices each individual who is present. For instance, he sees those who faithfully come every year. Among them may be individuals who come despite facing severe persecution. Others do not come regularly to other meetings, but they view attending the Memorial as a solemn duty. Jehovah also notices those who may be at the Memorial for the first time, perhaps out of curiosity. Certainly, Jehovah is pleased to see that so many attend the Memorial. (Luke 22:19) However, he is more interested in the reason for their coming; motive matters to Jehovah. Are we eager to be instructed by Jehovah and the organization that he is using?​—Isa. 30:20; John 6:45. w19.01 26 ¶1-3



Memorial Bible reading: (Daytime events: Nisan 12) Mark 14:1, 2, 10, 11; Matthew 26:1-5, 14-16


Memorial DateAfter SundownTuesday, April 7

Christ died for us.​—Rom. 5:8.



Jesus was willing not only to die for his disciples but also to live each day in a way that put their interests ahead of his own. For instance, he met with his followers even when he was physically tired or emotionally distressed. (Luke 22:39-46) And he focused on what he could give to others, not on what he could get from them. (Matt. 20:28) We belong to the only true Christian brotherhood, and we enjoy spending as much time as possible inviting new ones to join us. However, we are particularly interested in helping those who are “related to us in the faith” but who have become inactive. (Gal. 6:10) We prove our love for them by encouraging them to attend our meetings, especially the Memorial. Like Jehovah and Jesus, we are deeply moved when an inactive one returns to Jehovah.​—Matt. 18:14. w19.01 29 ¶12, 14; 30 ¶15



Memorial Bible reading: (Daytime events: Nisan 13) Mark 14:12-16; Matthew 26:17-19 (Events after sunset: Nisan 14) Mark 14:17-72


Wednesday, April 8

This means my body. . . . This means my “blood of the covenant.”​—Matt. 26:26-28.



In introducing the Memorial of his death, Jesus used only the Passover bread and the wine that were already on hand. Jesus told his apostles that those two basic items symbolized his perfect body and blood, which he would soon offer up in their behalf. The apostles may not have been surprised at the simplicity of this important new meal. Why not? Months earlier, at the home of his close friends​—Lazarus, Martha, and Mary—​Jesus began teaching. Martha was present, but she was distracted with preparing a large meal for her honored guest. Observing this, Jesus kindly corrected Martha, helping her to see that an elaborate meal was not always necessary. (Luke 10:40-42) Later, with just hours remaining before his sacrificial death, Jesus applied his own counsel. He kept the Memorial meal simple. w19.01 20-21 ¶3-4



Memorial Bible reading: (Daytime events: Nisan 14) Mark 15:1-47


Thursday, April 9

Father, glorify me at your side with the glory that I had.​—John 17:5.



Jehovah honored Jesus in an unexpected way by resurrecting him to “a superior position” and giving him what no one else had received up until that time​—immortal spirit life! (Phil. 2:9; 1 Tim. 6:16) What an outstanding acknowledgment of Jesus’ faithful course! What will help us to avoid seeking approval from this world? Keep close in mind that Jehovah always gives recognition to his faithful servants and that he often rewards them in unexpected ways. Who knows what unexpected blessings await us in the future? But for now, as we endure the hardships and trials of this wicked world, let us always remember that this world, is passing away. (1 John 2:17) Our loving Father, Jehovah, ‘is not unrighteous so as to forget our work and the love we show for his name.’​—Heb. 6:10. w18.07 11 ¶17-18



Memorial Bible reading: (Daytime events: Nisan 15) Matthew 27:62-66 (Events after sunset: Nisan 16) Mark 16:1


Friday, April 10

I make request . . . that they may all be one.​—John 17:20, 21.



Jesus was concerned about unity during his final supper with his apostles. When praying with them, he spoke of his desire that all his disciples be one, just as he and his Father are one. Their unity would give a powerful witness, offering clear evidence that Jehovah had sent Jesus to the earth to do God’s will. Love would be a mark of Jesus’ true disciples that would contribute to their unity. (John 13:34, 35) Jesus’ emphasis on unity is understandable. He had noticed a lack of unity or harmony among the apostles, such as during his final meal with them. As had happened before, a dispute arose over “which one of them was considered to be the greatest.” (Luke 22:24-27; Mark 9:33, 34) Another time, James and John requested that Jesus give them prominent places alongside him in his Kingdom.​—Mark 10:35-40. w18.06 8 ¶1-2



Memorial Bible reading: (Daytime events: Nisan 16) Mark 16:2-8


Saturday, April 11

A man will leave his father and his mother and he will stick to his wife, and they will become one flesh.​—Gen. 2:24.



Jehovah wants married couples to develop a love so strong that it lasts for life. (Matt. 19:3-6) Adultery is one of the most unloving crimes a person can commit. With good reason, the seventh of the Ten Commandments prohibited adultery. (Deut. 5:18) It is a sin “against God” and a cruel blow to a marriage mate. (Gen. 39:7-9) A victim of adultery might feel the pain of betrayal for decades. Jehovah also cares deeply about the welfare of children. Jehovah commanded parents to provide not only for their children’s physical needs but also for their spiritual needs. Parents were to take every opportunity to help their children appreciate Jehovah’s Law and learn to love him. (Deut. 6:6-9; 7:13) Parents were to view their children, not as mere property that they could neglect or mistreat, but as an inheritance, a gift from Jehovah to be cherished.​—Ps. 127:3. w19.02 21 ¶5, 7




Sunday, April 12

God . . . will recognize my integrity.​—Job 31:6.



Job kept his integrity by focusing on the hope that God would reward him. He believed that God did care about his integrity. Despite his trials, Job was confident that Jehovah would finally reward him. This confidence surely helped him cling to his integrity. Jehovah was so delighted with Job’s integrity that He rewarded him richly while he was still an imperfect man! (Job 42:12-17; Jas. 5:11) And even greater rewards lie ahead for Job. Our God has not changed. (Mal. 3:6) If we remember that he values our integrity, we can keep our hope for a bright future alive in our heart. (1 Thess. 5:8, 9) At times, you may feel lonely in such a course, but you will never be alone. You will be among millions of faithful integrity-keepers around the world. You will also join the ranks of men and women of faith who kept their integrity in the past, even under the threat of death.​—Heb. 11:36-38; 12:1. w19.02 7 ¶15-16




Monday, April 13

Have unity of mind, fellow feeling, brotherly affection, tender compassion, and humility.​—1 Pet. 3:8.



As the Memorial season passes, we do well to ask ourselves the following questions: ‘How can I imitate Jesus more closely in showing love? Do I think more about the needs of my fellow worshippers than about my own? Do I expect more from my brothers and sisters than they can give, or am I aware of their limitations?’ May we always imitate Jesus and show “fellow feeling.” The requirement to observe the Memorial of Christ’s death will not last much longer. When Jesus “comes” during the great tribulation, he will gather his remaining “chosen ones” to heaven, and the Memorial will cease to be commemorated. (1 Cor. 11:26; Matt. 24:31) Even after the Memorial meal is no longer observed, we can be sure that Jehovah’s people will fondly remember this simple meal as a symbol of the greatest humility, courage, and love ever shown by a human. w19.01 25 ¶17-19




Tuesday, April 14

You find pleasure in truth in the inner person; teach my innermost self true wisdom.​—Ps. 51:6.



Consider how our physical health illustrates the importance of who we are on the inside. First, to keep ourselves in good condition on the inside, we must choose a healthy diet, and we need to exercise regularly. Likewise, to keep ourselves in good spiritual condition, we must choose a healthy diet of spiritual food and regularly exercise our faith in Jehovah. That form of exercise involves applying what we learn and speaking about our faith. (Rom. 10:8-10; Jas. 2:26) Second, based on outward appearance, we might think that we are healthy even though we are actually diseased on the inside. In a similar way, based on our theocratic routine, we may think that our faith is strong, but wrong desires could be growing in us. (1 Cor. 10:12; Jas. 1:14, 15) We must remember that Satan would like to infect us with his thinking. w19.01 15 ¶4-5




Wednesday, April 15

Go and do the same yourself.​—Luke 10:37.



We might ask ourselves: ‘Am I doing the same? Am I doing what the compassionate Samaritan did?’ (Luke 10:30-35) ‘Could I more actively display mercy and engage in positive deeds of kindness toward those who are suffering? For instance, could I offer practical help to older fellow Christians, widows, and those who are spiritually fatherless children? Can I take the initiative to “speak consolingly to those who are depressed”?’ (1 Thess. 5:14; Jas. 1:27) When we display mercy toward others, we enjoy the happiness that results from giving. Moreover, we know that we are pleasing Jehovah. (Acts 20:35; Heb. 13:16) Regarding a person who shows consideration, King David said: “Jehovah will guard him and keep him alive. He will be pronounced happy in the earth.” (Ps. 41:1, 2) Giving expression to our feelings of compassion will also put us in line to receive Jehovah’s mercy, which in turn can result in our being eternally happy.​—Jas. 2:13. w18.09 19 ¶11-12




Thursday, April 16

Do not be afraid, for I am with you. Do not be anxious, for I am your God. I will fortify you, yes, I will help you.​—Isa. 41:10.



A faithful Christian sister named Yoshiko received bad news. Her doctor said that she had only a few months to live. How did she react? Yoshiko recalled a favorite Bible verse, today’s text. She then calmly told her doctor that she was not afraid, because Jehovah was grasping her hand. The comforting message found in that verse helped our dear sister to trust in Jehovah completely. That same verse can help us remain calm when dealing with severe trials. Initially, Jehovah had Isaiah record those words to comfort the Jews who would later be taken to Babylon as exiles. However, Jehovah had that message preserved for the benefit of not only the Jewish exiles but also all his people since that time. (Isa. 40:8; Rom. 15:4) Today, we live in “critical times hard to deal with,” and more than ever, we need the encouragement found in the book of Isaiah.​—2 Tim. 3:1. w19.01 2 ¶1-2




Friday, April 17

If the unbelieving one chooses to depart, let him depart.​—1 Cor. 7:15.



In such a separation, the two are still marriage mates and, even though living apart, would still face challenges. The apostle Paul gave this reason for staying united: “The unbelieving husband is sanctified in relation to his wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified in relation to the brother; otherwise, your children would be unclean, but now they are holy.” (1 Cor. 7:14) Many loyal Christians have remained with an unbelieving mate under very trying circumstances. They can testify that doing so was worthwhile in a special sense when their mate became a true worshipper. (1 Cor. 7:16; 1 Pet. 3:1, 2) Worldwide today, the Christian congregation abounds with successful marriages. You can likely find many happy couples in your local congregation. They are made up of loyal brothers who love their wife and devoted wives who prove to be loving mates, all showing that marriage can be honorable.​—Heb. 13:4. w18.12 14 ¶18-19




Saturday, April 18

Jehovah God planted a garden in Eden, . . . and there he put the man whom he had formed.​—Gen. 2:8.



Eden means “Pleasure,” and that garden was indeed pleasant. There was ample food, beautiful scenery, and delightful interaction with many animals. (Gen. 1:29-31) Pa·raʹdei·sos is the Greek term that translates the Hebrew word for “garden.” The Cyclopaedia by M’Clintock and Strong says about pa·raʹdei·sos: “A wide, open park, enclosed against injury, yet with its natural beauty unspoiled, with stately forest-trees, many of them bearing fruit, watered by clear streams, on whose banks roved large herds of antelopes or sheep​—this was the scenery which connected itself in the mind of the Greek traveller.” (Compare Genesis 2:15, 16.) God put Adam and Eve in such a paradise, but they disqualified themselves by disobeying God. Thus, Paradise was lost for them and their offspring. (Gen. 3:23, 24) Though without human occupants, that garden apparently remained until the Deluge of Noah’s day. w18.12 3-4 ¶3-5




Sunday, April 19

I, Jehovah, am . . . the One teaching you to benefit yourself.​—Isa. 48:17.



Parents endeavor to instill in their children good values. If the children choose to live within the values that they learned from their parents, they will be more likely to make decisions that they will not later regret. As a result, they will be free from many self-induced troubles and anxieties. Like a good parent, Jehovah wants his children to have the most fulfilling life possible. (Isa. 48:18) He therefore provides basic principles for moral conduct and for behavior toward others. In such matters he invites us to cultivate his very way of thinking and to share his values. Far from constraining us, this enhances, elevates, and expands our thinking ability. (Ps. 92:5; Prov. 2:1-5; Isa. 55:9) It helps us make choices that lead to happiness while still allowing us to blossom as individuals. (Ps. 1:2, 3) Yes, thinking like Jehovah is beneficial and desirable! w18.11 19-20 ¶7-8




Monday, April 20

They speak abusively of you.​—1 Pet. 4:4.



To continue walking in the truth, we must not give in to pressure from others. When we started to walk in the truth, our relationship with non-Witness associates and family members changed. Some were tolerant; others became outright opposers. Family members, workmates, and schoolmates may try to get us to join them in their celebrations. How can we resist the pressure to conform to customs and holidays that do not honor Jehovah? We can do so by keeping Jehovah’s view of such practices clearly in mind. Reviewing discussions printed in our publications that show the origin of popular holidays can be helpful. When we remind ourselves of the Scriptural reasons for not participating in such holidays, we are convinced that we are walking in the way that “is acceptable to the Lord.” (Eph. 5:10) Trusting in Jehovah and his Word of truth will protect us from “trembling at men.”​—Prov. 29:25. w18.11 11 ¶10, 12




Tuesday, April 21

Jehovah was with Joseph and Jehovah made whatever he did successful.​—Gen. 39:23.



When we are faced with sudden changes, we might easily let worries about the future paralyze our life. This could have happened to Joseph. Instead, he evidently decided to make the best of his situation, thus giving Jehovah something to bless. Although in prison, Joseph worked hard to fulfill any task given him by the chief officer, just as he had done when working for Potiphar. (Gen. 39:21, 22) Like Joseph, we may find ourselves in a situation over which we have little or no control. However, if we remain patient and work hard at making the best of our circumstances, we will give Jehovah something to bless. (Ps. 37:5) True, we may at times feel “perplexed,” but we will never, as the apostle Paul put it, be “left in despair.” (2 Cor. 4:8; ftn.) These words of Paul will come true in our case, especially if we stay focused on our ministry. w18.10 29 ¶11, 13




Wednesday, April 22

God is not unrighteous so as to forget your work and the love you showed for his name.​—Heb. 6:10.



How do you feel when someone you know and respect forgets your name or, worse still, does not even recognize you? Such an experience can be very discouraging. Why? It is because each one of us has a natural desire to be accepted. The type of recognition we desire goes beyond being identified by others; we also want some acknowledgment of who we are and what we have accomplished. (Num. 11:16; ftn.; Job 31:6) Like many other natural desires, though, our desire to be appreciated can become unbalanced, distorted by our imperfections. It can make us crave inappropriate expressions of recognition. Satan’s world fuels a desire for fame and acknowledgment that distracts attention from the one who truly deserves to be recognized and worshipped, our heavenly Father, Jehovah God.​—Rev. 4:11. w18.07 7 ¶1-2




Thursday, April 23

The whole world is lying in the power of the wicked one.​—1 John 5:19.



We are not surprised, then, that Satan and his demons would influence men in powerful positions to “speak lies.” (1 Tim. 4:1, 2) Religious leaders who lie are especially guilty because they endanger the future life prospects of those who believe their lies. If an individual accepts a false teaching and practices something that is actually condemned by God, it can cost that person his eternal life. (Hos. 4:9) Jesus knew that the religious leaders in his day were guilty of such deception. He told them to their face: “Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because you travel over sea and dry land to make one convert, and when he becomes one, you make him a subject for Gehenna [everlasting destruction] twice as much so as yourselves.” (Matt. 23:15; ftn.) Jesus condemned those false religious leaders in the strongest terms. They truly were ‘from their father the Devil, a murderer.’​—John 8:44. w18.10 7 ¶5-6




Friday, April 24

Happy are you when people reproach you and persecute you . . . for my sake.​—Matt. 5:11.



What did Jesus mean? He went on to say: “Rejoice and be overjoyed, since your reward is great in the heavens, for in that way they persecuted the prophets prior to you.” (Matt. 5:12) When the apostles were beaten and commanded to stop preaching, “they went out from before the Sanhedrin, rejoicing.” Of course, they did not relish the pain of being whipped. Yet, they rejoiced “because they had been counted worthy to be dishonored in behalf of [Jesus’] name.” (Acts 5:41) In our time, Jehovah’s people also endure with joy when they suffer in behalf of Jesus’ name or when they face difficult trials. (Jas. 1:2-4) Like the apostles, we do not take delight in any kind of suffering. But if we maintain our integrity to God during trials, Jehovah can help us to endure with fortitude. When we have the smile of approval of “the happy God,” we can be happy despite religious persecution or opposition at home.​—1 Tim. 1:11. w18.09 21 ¶18-20




Saturday, April 25

They are filled with trouble and sorrow.​—Ps. 90:10.



Because many in these “critical times” suffer from various degrees of emotional distress, countless individuals feel like just giving up. (2 Tim. 3:1-5) Estimates suggest that more than 800,000 people die every year from suicide​—about one death every 40 seconds. Sad to say, even some Christians have succumbed to such pressures and have taken their own life. Even if our brothers and sisters do not necessarily feel like giving up, many today deal with stressful situations and need to be built up in love. Some endure persecution and ridicule. Others are the victims of criticism or backbiting at their workplace. Or they are exhausted because of working overtime or having to meet relentless deadlines. Still others deal with strength-sapping domestic problems, perhaps being the target of criticism by an unbelieving mate. As a result of these and other pressures, many in the congregation feel physically and emotionally drained. w18.09 13 ¶3, 5




Sunday, April 26

No greater joy do I have than this: that I should hear that my children go on walking in the truth.​—3 John 4.



Christian parents cooperate with Jehovah when they set theocratic goals before their children. Many who have done so have later seen their sons and daughters take up full-time service assignments far from home. Some are missionaries; others pioneer where the need for publishers is greater; still others serve at Bethel. Distance might mean that families cannot get together as often as they would like to. Nevertheless, the self-sacrificing parents encourage their children to persevere in their assignments. Why? They find great joy and satisfaction in knowing that their children are putting Kingdom interests first. Perhaps many of these parents feel like Hannah, who said that she “lent” her son Samuel to Jehovah. These parents rightly view such cooperation as a precious privilege. They would not want things any other way.​—1 Sam. 1:28. w18.08 24 ¶4




Monday, April 27

It will be difficult for a rich man to enter the Kingdom of the heavens.​—Matt. 19:23.



Jesus did not say that it would be impossible. He also said: “Happy are you who are poor, for yours is the Kingdom of God.” (Luke 6:20) Yet, this did not mean that all poor people were specially blessed and responded to the teaching of Jesus. Many poor people did not respond. The point is, We simply cannot judge a person’s relationship with Jehovah by his material possessions. We are blessed to have many brothers and sisters, rich and poor, who love and serve Jehovah with a complete heart. The Scriptures instruct those who are rich “to place their hope, not on uncertain riches, but on God.” (1 Tim. 6:17-19) At the same time, God’s Word admonishes all of God’s people, rich and poor, to be careful not to love money. (1 Tim. 6:9, 10) Indeed, when we open our eyes and see our brothers as Jehovah sees them, we will not be tempted to judge them solely on what they have or do not have materially. w18.08 10-11 ¶11-12




Tuesday, April 28

Subject yourselves to God.​—Jas. 4:7.



Surely we are eager to show our appreciation to Jehovah for the honor of being his people. We see the wisdom in acknowledging his ownership of us by voluntarily dedicating ourselves to him. We take a firm stand against badness. And we love and respect our fellow worshippers, recognizing that they too belong to Jehovah. (Rom. 12:10) The Bible promises: “Jehovah will not forsake his people.” (Ps. 94:14) This ironclad guarantee is binding despite any calamity that might befall us. Even death cannot stand in the way of Jehovah’s love for us. (Rom. 8:38, 39) “Both if we live and if we die, we belong to Jehovah.” (Rom. 14:8) We eagerly look forward to the day when Jehovah will bring to life all his loyal friends who have died. (Matt. 22:32) Even now we enjoy many blessings. As the Bible says, “happy is the nation whose God is Jehovah, the people he has chosen as his own possession.”​—Ps. 33:12. w18.07 26 ¶18-19




Wednesday, April 29

All things are lawful, but not all things are advantageous. All things are lawful, but not all things build up.​—1 Cor. 10:23.



Some individuals may feel that since some choices in life, such as education, employment, or career, are personal, they should have the freedom to choose what they please as long as their conscience permits it. Perhaps they have in mind Paul’s words to the Corinthian Christians about food: “Why should my freedom be judged by another person’s conscience?” (1 Cor. 10:29) While it is true that we have the freedom to make these personal choices, we need to remember that our freedom is relative and that all decisions we make have consequences. For that reason, Paul prefaced his statement with the words of today’s text. That certainly helps us to see that there are far more important factors to consider than our own preferences when it comes to exercising personal freedom in all aspects of our life. w18.04 10 ¶10




Thursday, April 30

Return to me, and I will return to you.​—Mal. 3:7.



A Christian today could be following the wrong path even while professing to worship Jehovah. (Jude 11) For instance, one could nurture immoral fantasies, greedy thoughts, or hateful feelings toward a fellow Christian. (1 John 2:15-17; 3:15) This thinking can lead to sinful actions. All the while, one could be active in the ministry and regular at congregation meetings. Other humans may not be aware of our thoughts and conduct, but Jehovah sees all things and knows if we are not wholeheartedly on his side. (Jer. 17:9, 10) Even so, Jehovah is not quick to give up on us. When a person’s steps lead him away from God, Jehovah urges him: “Return to me.” Especially when we struggle with weaknesses, Jehovah wants us to take a stand against badness. (Isa. 55:7) If we do, he will in turn prove to be on our side by giving us the spiritual, emotional, and physical strength needed to “get the mastery over” our sinful inclinations.​—Gen. 4:7. w18.07 18 ¶5-6




