
August
Saturday, August 1

God recommends his own love to us in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.​—Rom. 5:8.



At meetings we are regularly reminded of what Jehovah and Jesus have done for us. Filled with gratitude, we try to imitate Jesus by how we live each day. (2 Cor. 5:14, 15) In addition, our heart stirs us to praise Jehovah for providing the ransom. One way we can praise him is by making heartfelt comments at our meetings. We can show the depth of our love for Jehovah and his Son by being willing to make sacrifices for them. Often, we must make sacrifices of various kinds to attend our meetings. Many congregations hold one meeting at the end of a workday when we are most likely tired. And another meeting is held on the weekend when other people are resting. Does Jehovah notice that we attend our meetings even though we are tired? Certainly he does! In fact, the greater our struggle, the more Jehovah appreciates the love we show for him.​—Mark 12:41-44. w19.01 29 ¶12-13




Sunday, August 2

When the Lord caught sight of her, he was moved with pity.​—Luke 7:13.



Jesus himself experienced some of the challenges people faced. For example, Jesus apparently grew up in a poor family. From working with his adoptive father, Joseph, Jesus learned how to do hard physical work. (Matt. 13:55; Mark 6:3) It seems that Joseph died sometime before the end of Jesus’ ministry. So Jesus likely felt the pain of losing a loved one in death. And Jesus knew what it was like to be in a family with differing religious views. (John 7:5) Those circumstances and others would have helped Jesus to understand the challenges and feelings of ordinary people. Jesus’ concern was especially evident when he performed miracles. Jesus did not perform miracles out of a mere sense of duty. He was “moved with pity” for those who were suffering. (Matt. 20:29-34; Mark 1:40-42) Jesus sympathized with people and wanted to help them.​—Mark 7:32-35; Luke 7:12-15. w19.03 16 ¶10-11




Monday, August 3

Continue putting up with one another.​—Col. 3:13.



It was the final night of Jesus’ earthly life. Imagine the stress Jesus felt. Would he remain perfectly faithful until death? The lives of billions of people hung in the balance. (Rom. 5:18, 19) Even more important, his Father’s reputation was involved. (Job 2:4) Then, during his last meal with his closest friends, the apostles, their conversation degenerated into “a heated dispute” over “which one of them was considered to be the greatest.” Remarkably, Jesus did not become irritated. Instead, he responded with mildness. Kindly, but firmly, Jesus explained​—again—​the attitude they should have. And he then commended his friends for loyally sticking with him. (Luke 22:24-28; John 13:1-5, 12-15) We can imitate Jesus and remain mild-tempered even when we are under stress if we remember that we all say and do things that irritate others. (Prov. 12:18; Jas. 3:2, 5) And try to mention the good that you see in others.​—Eph. 4:29. w19.02 11-12 ¶16-17




Tuesday, August 4

Jehovah . . . has firmly established his throne for justice.​—Ps. 9:7.



The Mosaic Law limited the possibility that a person would be falsely accused of a crime. A defendant had the right to know who was accusing him. (Deut. 19:16-19; 25:1) And before he could be convicted, at least two witnesses had to give evidence. (Deut. 17:6; 19:15) What about an Israelite who committed a crime that was seen by only one witness? He could not assume that he would get away with his wrongdoing. Jehovah saw what he did. Yes, Jehovah sets the perfect example; nothing he does is unfair. He rewards those who loyally uphold his standards, but he punishes those who abuse their power. (2 Sam. 22:21-23; Ezek. 9:9, 10) Some may act wickedly and seem to escape punishment, but when Jehovah determines that the time is right, he brings them to justice. (Prov. 28:13) And if they do not repent, they soon learn that “it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.”​—Heb. 10:30, 31. w19.02 23-24 ¶20-21




Wednesday, August 5

There has never again arisen a prophet in Israel like Moses, whom Jehovah knew face-to-face.​—Deut. 34:10.



Moses certainly looked to Jehovah for direction and guidance. Indeed, “he continued steadfast as seeing the One who is invisible.” (Heb. 11:24-27) Less than two months after the Israelites left Egypt, a serious problem arose​—even before they arrived at Mount Sinai. The people started to complain about a lack of water. They began to murmur against Moses, and the situation became so serious that Moses cried out to Jehovah: “What should I do with this people? A little longer and they will stone me!” (Ex. 17:4) Jehovah responded by giving Moses clear instructions. He was to take his rod and strike the rock in Horeb, and then water would come gushing out. We read: “Moses did so before the eyes of the elders of Israel.” The Israelites drank their fill, and the problem was solved.​—Ex. 17:5, 6. w18.07 13 ¶4-5




Thursday, August 6

Love builds up.​—1 Cor. 8:1.



One means by which Jehovah builds us up in love is the Christian congregation. Individually, we can reciprocate his love by loving and building up our spiritual brothers and sisters not only spiritually but also emotionally. (1 John 4:19-21) The apostle Paul urged Christians: “Keep encouraging one another and building one another up, just as you are in fact doing.” (1 Thess. 5:11) Yes, all in the congregation​—not just elders—​can imitate Jehovah and Jesus in comforting and building up the brothers and sisters. (Rom. 15:1, 2) Some in the congregation who have emotional disorders may need professional help and medication. (Luke 5:31) Elders and others in the congregation modestly recognize that they are not trained mental-health-care professionals. However, they and others in the congregation have a vital role to play​—to “speak consolingly to those who are depressed, support the weak, be patient toward all.”​—1 Thess. 5:14. w18.09 14 ¶10-11




Friday, August 7

Do not be anxious, for I am your God.​—Isa. 41:10.



We deepen our trust in Jehovah by getting to know him better. And the only way we can really know God well is by reading the Bible carefully and then meditating on what we read. The Bible contains a reliable record of how Jehovah protected his people in the past. That record gives us confidence that he will care for us now. Consider an example of the beautiful word picture Isaiah uses to illustrate how Jehovah protects us. He refers to Jehovah as a shepherd and to God’s servants as lambs. Isaiah says of Jehovah: “With his arm he will gather together the lambs, and in his bosom he will carry them.” (Isa. 40:11) When we sense Jehovah’s strong arms wrapped around us, we feel protected and calm. To help you remain calm despite the problems you may face, meditate on the reassuring words mentioned in today’s text. They will strengthen you as you face the challenges that lie ahead. w19.01 7 ¶17-18




Saturday, August 8

To do your will, O my God, is my delight.​—Ps. 40:8.



Do you have one or more spiritual goals that you are working toward? Perhaps you are trying to read portions of the Bible each day. Or you may be trying to improve your speaking and teaching abilities. Whatever the case, when you see positive results​—or others see them and commend you—​how do you feel? No doubt you feel a sense of achievement and joy. And so you should, in no small part because you are putting God’s will ahead of your own, in imitation of Jesus. (Prov. 27:11) By focusing on spiritual pursuits, you are also doing a work that is truly satisfying because it is not in the least futile. The apostle Paul wrote: “Be steadfast, immovable, always having plenty to do in the work of the Lord, knowing that your labor is not in vain in connection with the Lord.” (1 Cor. 15:58) By comparison, a life marked by secular ambitions and pursuits​—even if these seem very successful—​is ultimately a life of futility.​—Luke 9:25. w18.12 22 ¶12-13




Sunday, August 9

The righteous will possess the earth.​—Ps. 37:29.



David was referring to a time when people on earth would live according to God’s righteous ways. (2 Pet. 3:13) The prophecy at Isaiah 65:22 says: “The days of my people will be like the days of a tree.” This implies that people will live for thousands of years. According to Revelation 21:1-4, God will turn his attention to mankind, and one of the promised blessings is that “death will be no more” for people serving God in his righteous new world. Adam and Eve lost Paradise back in Eden, but it was not lost forever. As God promised, people on earth are yet to be blessed. Under inspiration, David said that the meek and righteous will inherit the earth and live on it forever. (Ps. 37:11) The prophecies in the book of Isaiah should whet our appetite for the delightful conditions that will prevail. (Isa. 11:6-9; 35:5-10; 65:21-23) When? When Jesus’ promise to the Jewish criminal comes to pass. (Luke 23:43) You can be in that Paradise. w18.12 7 ¶22-23




Monday, August 10

Above all the things that you guard, safeguard your heart.​—Prov. 4:23.



Can we avoid all contact with the world’s thinking? No, we cannot literally get out of the world. Some exposure to its ideas is inescapable. (1 Cor. 5:9, 10) The preaching work itself will bring us in contact with erroneous beliefs. However, where contact with ungodly views is unavoidable, we certainly need not entertain them or accept them. Like Jesus, we should be quick to reject thoughts that serve Satan’s purpose. Furthermore, we can protect ourselves from unnecessary exposure to the world’s thinking. For example, we should exercise caution when choosing our close friends. The Bible warns that if we keep close company with people who do not worship Jehovah, their thinking will rub off on us. (Prov. 13:20; 1 Cor. 15:12, 32, 33) Also, by rejecting entertainment that promotes the theory of evolution, violence, or immorality, we avoid poisoning our thinking with ideas that are “against the knowledge of God.”​—2 Cor. 10:5. w18.11 21 ¶16-17




Tuesday, August 11

I will walk in your truth.​—Ps. 86:11.



How can we strengthen our determination to go on walking in the truth? One way is to have as full a share as possible in teaching Bible truth to others. In this way you will keep a firm grip on our spiritual sword, which is “God’s word.” (Eph. 6:17) All of us can strive to improve our skills as teachers, “handling the word of the truth aright.” (2 Tim. 2:15) As we use the Bible to help others to buy truth and reject falsehoods, we embed God’s sayings in our own mind and heart. In this way, we strengthen our determination to go on walking in the truth. The truth is a precious gift from Jehovah. By means of this gift, we have our most prized possession, our intimate relationship with our heavenly Father. What he has taught us until now is only the beginning! God has promised us an eternity to add to the truth we have already bought. Therefore, cherish the truth like a fine pearl. Continue to “buy truth and never sell it.”​—Prov. 23:23. w18.11 8 ¶2; 12 ¶15-17




Wednesday, August 12

Noah [was] a preacher of righteousness.​—2 Pet. 2:5.



Noah’s preaching work prior to the Flood evidently included a warning of coming destruction. Note what Jesus stated: “For as they were in those days before the Flood, eating and drinking, men marrying and women being given in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the ark, and they took no note until the Flood came and swept them all away, so the presence of the Son of man will be.” (Matt. 24:38, 39) Despite the people’s indifference, Noah faithfully proclaimed the warning message that he had been given. Today, we preach the Kingdom message to give people an opportunity to learn about God’s will for mankind. Like Jehovah, we dearly wish that people would respond to the message and “keep living.” (Ezek. 18:23) At the same time, when we preach from house to house and in public areas, we warn as many people as possible that God’s Kingdom will come and bring an end to this ungodly world.​—Ezek. 3:18, 19; Dan. 2:44; Rev. 14:6, 7. w18.05 19 ¶8-9




Thursday, August 13

The one who testifies faithfully will tell the truth.​—Prov. 12:17.



What should you do if the authorities restrict the Kingdom activity in your land and you are called in for questioning about your brothers? Must you tell them everything you know? What did Jesus do when he was interrogated by the Roman governor? In line with the Scriptural principle that there is “a time to be silent and a time to speak,” Jesus at times said nothing at all! (Eccl. 3:1, 7; Matt. 27:11-14) In such a setting, discretion is the better course, so that we do not put our brothers at risk. (Prov. 10:19; 11:12) What will you do if a close friend or relative has committed a serious sin and you know about the matter? “Tell the truth.” You have a responsibility to tell the elders the whole truth, and you must not distort it. They have a right to know the facts so that they can determine the best way to help the wrongdoer restore his or her relationship with Jehovah.​—Jas. 5:14, 15. w18.10 10 ¶17-18




Friday, August 14

Keep encouraging one another and building one another up.​—1 Thess. 5:11.



How can we build up others in love? One way is to be a good listener. (Jas. 1:19) To listen with empathy is an act of love. You may ask tactful and sympathetic questions with the aim of understanding the feelings of a sufferer. You will then be able to show empathy and to build up your fellow servant. Let your facial expressions reflect your sincere, loving concern. If the other Christian feels the need to explain things in greater detail, be patient and resist any urge to interrupt. By listening patiently, you will more likely understand the feelings involved. That can help your suffering brother or sister to have confidence in you and thus be more inclined to listen to what you say as you strive to be upbuilding. When you show that you truly care, your loving concern can be very comforting. w18.09 14 ¶10; 15 ¶13




Saturday, August 15

Buy truth.​—Prov. 23:23.



Time is a price everyone who buys truth must pay. It takes time to listen to the Kingdom message, read the Bible and Bible literature, have a personal Bible study, and prepare for and attend congregation meetings. We must ‘buy out,’ or take, that time from some other less important activity. (Eph. 5:15, 16, ftn.) How much time will it take for us to gain an accurate knowledge of basic Bible teachings? That depends on our circumstances. There is no limit to what we can learn about Jehovah’s wisdom, ways, and works. (Rom. 11:33) The first issue of the Watch Tower likened the truth to “a modest little flower” and stated: “Be not content with one flower of truth. Had one been sufficient there would have been no more. Gather ever, seek for more.” Even with an eternity of time, we can always learn more about Jehovah. Today, the important thing is that we use our time wisely so as to buy as much truth as our circumstances allow. w18.11 4 ¶7




Sunday, August 16

Husbands, continue loving your wives.​—Eph. 5:25.



Husbands are exhorted to dwell with their wives “according to knowledge”​—an expression that could also be rendered “showing them consideration; understanding them.” (1 Pet. 3:7; ftn.) Understanding and consideration go hand in hand. For instance, an understanding husband knows that his wife, as his complement, is different from him in many respects, but she is by no means inferior. (Gen. 2:18) He thus shows thoughtful regard for her feelings, treating her with dignity and honor. A thoughtful husband also takes his wife’s feelings into account when he interacts with other women. Never does he flirt with them or show an improper interest in them; nor does he show such interest when using social media or the Internet. (Job 31:1) Yes, he remains loyal to his wife, not just because of his love for her but also because of his love for God and his hatred for what is bad.​—Ps. 19:14; 97:10. w18.09 29 ¶3-4




Monday, August 17

The one who conducts himself as a lesser one among all of you is the one who is great.​—Luke 9:48.



Why is it a challenge to apply what we learn from God’s Word? One reason is that it takes humility to do what is right, and our ability to remain humble is under assault. In these “last days,” we are surrounded by people who are “lovers of themselves, lovers of money, boastful, haughty,” and “without self-control.” (2 Tim. 3:1-3) When selfish behavior is reported and even celebrated, a servant of God might despise such conduct but envy the results. (Ps. 37:1; 73:3) One might even wonder: ‘Is there any point in my putting others’ interests ahead of my own? If I conduct myself “as a lesser one,” might people lose respect for me?’ Allowing the world’s selfish spirit to influence us could harm the loving relationships we enjoy in the congregation and our identity as Christians. But we are rewarded when we study the good examples set out in the Bible and imitate them. w18.09 3 ¶1




Tuesday, August 18

There is . . . happiness in giving.​—Acts 20:35.



Even though Jehovah was completely alone before he began to create, he was not thinking only of himself. On the contrary, he gave the gift of life to intelligent creatures, both spirit and human. “The happy God,” Jehovah, loves to give good things. (1 Tim. 1:11; Jas. 1:17) And since he also wants us to be happy, he teaches us to be generous. (Rom. 1:20) God made man in his image. (Gen. 1:27) That is, we were created to reflect his personality. In order to attain happiness and fulfillment, then, we need to follow Jehovah’s example by being interested in others and by being generous givers. (Phil. 2:3, 4; Jas. 1:5) Why? Quite simply because Jehovah lovingly designed humans that way. Despite our imperfection, we can succeed in imitating Jehovah’s generosity. Jehovah wants his human creation to imitate him, so it makes him happy when we are generous.​—Eph. 5:1. w18.08 18 ¶1-2; 19 ¶4




Wednesday, August 19

My sheep listen to my voice.​—John 10:27.



Christ’s followers show that they listen to Jesus by not only paying attention to his words but also acting on them. They are not distracted by the “anxieties of life.” (Luke 21:34) Rather, they make obeying Jesus’ commands a priority in life, even in the face of challenging circumstances. Through it all, our brothers remain faithful to Jehovah, cost what it may. Another way we can show that we are listening to Jesus is by cooperating with those whom he has appointed to take the lead among us. (Heb. 13:7, 17) God’s organization has made many adjustments in recent years, including the use of new tools and methods in our ministry, the format of our midweek meeting, and the way we build, renovate, and maintain our Kingdom Halls. How we appreciate the loving and carefully thought-out guidance! We can be sure that Jehovah will bless our efforts to follow the organization’s timely direction. w19.03 10-11 ¶11-12




Thursday, August 20

We should no longer be . . . carried here and there . . . by means of the trickery of men.​—Eph. 4:14.



A story that is only 10 percent true is 100 percent misleading. Consider what happened to the Israelites dwelling on the western side of the Jordan River in the days of Joshua. (Josh. 22:9-34) They received a report that the Israelites living on the eastern side had constructed a large, impressive altar. That portion of the report was true. Based on this incomplete information, those on the western side concluded that their brothers had rebelled against Jehovah. (Josh. 22:9-12) Thankfully, before attacking, they sent a delegation of trustworthy men to get all the facts. What did the men learn? The altar was built, not for sacrifices, but as a memorial, so that in the future all would know that they too were faithful servants of Jehovah. How thankful those Israelites must have been that they did not massacre their brothers based on incomplete information but took the time to get the facts! w18.08 5 ¶9-10




Friday, August 21

Let the one who thinks he is standing beware that he does not fall.​—1 Cor. 10:12.



As Paul pointed out, even true worshippers could become involved in wrong practices. Those who give in to temptation may think that they still have a good standing with Jehovah. But merely wanting to be Jehovah’s friend or claiming to be loyal to him does not always mean that one is actually approved by Jehovah. (1 Cor. 10:1-5) Just as the Israelites became anxious over Moses’ delay in coming down from Sinai, Christians today may feel anxious over the seeming delay of Jehovah’s day of judgment and the coming of the new world. The fulfillment of these promises may seem too far off in the future or too good to be true. Left unchecked, such thinking can lead us to put fleshly pursuits ahead of Jehovah’s will. In time, we could drift away from Jehovah and eventually engage in practices that we would never have considered being involved in when we were in good spiritual health. w18.07 21 ¶17-18




Saturday, August 22

I will also do this thing that you request, because you have found favor in my eyes and I know you by name.​—Ex. 33:17.



We can receive wonderful blessings when Jehovah comes to know us personally. But how can we put ourselves in a position to be known by Jehovah? We do that when we come to love him and dedicate our life to him. (1 Cor. 8:3) However, we need to maintain our treasured relationship with our heavenly Father. Like the Galatian Christians to whom Paul wrote, we too need to avoid slaving for “the weak and beggarly elementary things” of this world, including seeking its acclaim. (Gal. 4:9) Those first-century Christians had progressed to the point of being known by God. However, Paul said that the very same brothers were “turning back again” to empty things. Paul was, in effect, saying: “After you have come so far, why would you return to the foolish, valueless things you left behind?” w18.07 8 ¶5-6




Sunday, August 23

A wise person listens and takes in more instruction.​—Prov. 1:5.



Thankfully, we do not need to suffer the consequences of breaking God’s laws to learn valuable lessons. We can learn from the mistakes of others whose transgressions are recorded in God’s Word. Indeed, we receive the very best instruction from God, such as when we read and meditate on real-life Bible accounts. For example, think of the pain that King David experienced after he disobeyed Jehovah’s command and committed adultery with Bath-sheba. (2 Sam. 12:7-14) While reading and meditating on this account, we might ask ourselves: ‘How could King David have avoided the heartache he suffered because of his adulterous act with Bath-sheba? If I faced a similar temptation, would I have the strength to turn away? Would I flee like Joseph, or would I give in like David?’ (Gen. 39:11-15) By reflecting on the bad consequences of sin, we can strengthen our heart to “hate what is bad.”​—Amos 5:15. w18.06 17 ¶5, 7




Monday, August 24

Pay back . . . Caesar’s things to Caesar, but God’s things to God.​—Matt. 22:21.



Injustice often inflames political passions. Taxation was a hot political issue in Jesus’ time. Subjects of Rome, including those who listened to Jesus, were required to pay many taxes, such as on goods, land, and houses. And the corruption of the tax collectors increased the sense of being under a heavy burden. Tax collectors might purchase a position of authority at a public auction and then profit from what was collected. Zacchaeus, the chief tax collector in Jericho, had become rich by extorting money from the people. (Luke 19:2, 8) His course was probably typical of that of many. Jesus’ enemies tried to trap Jesus by getting him to take sides on a taxation issue. The tax in question was the “head tax,” a tax of one denarius levied on Roman subjects. (Matt. 22:16-18) The Jews especially resented this tax. It represented their subjection to Rome. w18.06 5-6 ¶8-10




Tuesday, August 25

Whatever a person is sowing, this he will also reap.​—Gal. 6:7.



The costs of siding with Satan always outweigh any seeming benefits that he may offer. (Job 21:7-17; Gal. 6:8) What advantage do we gain from knowing the extent of Satan’s influence? It helps us keep a balanced view of secular authorities and motivates us in our witnessing work. We understand that Jehovah wants us to respect governmental authorities. (1 Pet. 2:17) And he expects us to obey the laws of human governments as long as those laws do not conflict with his standards. (Rom. 13:1-4) But we realize that we must remain neutral, never favoring one political party or human leader over another. (John 17:15, 16; 18:36) Because we see what Satan is trying to do to Jehovah’s name and reputation, we feel more compelled to teach others the truth about our God. We proudly bear and use his name, knowing that loving him is far more rewarding than loving money or things.​—Isa. 43:10; 1 Tim. 6:6-10. w18.05 24 ¶8-9




Wednesday, August 26

A wife should not separate from her husband.​—1 Cor. 7:10.



In the event of marital problems, is separation a justifiable solution? The Scriptures do not outline various grounds for separation. Paul wrote: “If a woman has an unbelieving husband and he is agreeable to staying with her, let her not leave her husband.” (1 Cor. 7:12, 13) That applies in our day too. Admittedly, there have been instances where an “unbelieving husband” seems to prove that he is not “agreeable to staying with her.” He might be extremely physically abusive, even to the point that she feels that her health or life is in danger. He might refuse to support her and the family or severely endanger her spirituality. In such cases, some Christians have personally decided that, despite what he might say, the mate is not “agreeable to staying” together and that a separation is necessary. But other Christians in comparably difficult situations have not; they have endured and tried to work at improving matters. w18.12 13 ¶14, 16; 14 ¶17




Thursday, August 27

These are the ones who . . . bear fruit with endurance.​—Luke 8:15.



In the illustration of the sower found at Luke 8:5-8, 11-15, the seed is “the word of God,” or the Kingdom message. The soil represents man’s figurative heart. The seed that fell on the fine soil took root, sprouted, and “produced 100 times more fruit.” Just as the fine soil in Jesus’ illustration retained the seed, we accepted the message and held on to it. As a result, the seedlike Kingdom message took root and grew, as it were, into a wheat stalk that, in time, was ready to bear fruit. And just as a wheat stalk produces as fruit, not new stalks, but new seed, we are producing as fruit, not new disciples, but new Kingdom seed. How do we produce new Kingdom seed? Each time we in one way or another proclaim the Kingdom message, we duplicate and scatter, so to speak, the seed that was planted in our heart. (Luke 6:45; 8:1) Hence, this illustration teaches us that as long as we keep on proclaiming the Kingdom message, we “bear fruit with endurance.” w18.05 14 ¶10-11




Friday, August 28

All those for whom I have affection, I reprove and discipline.​—Rev. 3:19.



Paul was willing not only to encourage his brothers but also to “spend and be completely spent for” them. (2 Cor. 12:15) Similarly, elders should not only encourage and console their brothers with words but also build them up by showing sincere personal interest. (1 Cor. 14:3) Building one another up may involve giving counsel, but here again, elders should follow the example given in the Bible about how to give counsel in an encouraging way. An outstanding example in this respect was given by Jesus himself after his death and resurrection. He had some firm counsel to give to certain congregations in Asia Minor, but notice how he went about it. Before giving them counsel, he gave warm commendation to the congregations in Ephesus, Pergamum, and Thyatira. (Rev. 2:1-5, 12, 13, 18, 19) Elders would do well to imitate Christ’s example when they need to give counsel. w18.04 22 ¶8-9




Saturday, August 29

Fathers, . . . go on bringing [your children] up in the discipline and admonition of Jehovah.​—Eph. 6:4.



Parents, you no doubt do all you can to protect your children from literal diseases. You keep your home clean, and you throw out anything that might cause you or your children to get sick. In the same way, you need to protect your children from movies, TV shows, electronic games, and websites that are likely to infect them with Satan’s thinking. Jehovah has given you the authority to care for the spiritual health of your children. (Prov. 1:8) So do not be afraid to set household rules that are based on Bible standards. Tell your young children what they can and cannot watch, and help them to understand the reasons for your decisions. (Matt. 5:37) As your children get older, train them to discern for themselves what is right and what is wrong according to Jehovah’s standards. (Heb. 5:14) And remember, your children will learn even more from what you do.​—Deut. 6:6, 7; Rom. 2:21. w19.01 16 ¶8




Sunday, August 30

Old men and young together. Let them praise the name of Jehovah.​—Ps. 148:12, 13.



If you are a Christian youth, why not make it your aim to take an interest in older ones? You might respectfully ask them to relate an experience from their years of service. You will find this very upbuilding, and both you and they will be even more motivated to let the light of truth shine. And all of us can make it a point to welcome those who attend meetings at the Kingdom Hall. If you are assigned to handle a meeting for field service, you can do much to help older ones to have a share in the ministry. Do they have suitable territory? In some cases, you may choose to assign them to work with a younger companion who can provide physical support. You can also show understanding to those whose health and circumstances limit what they can do. Yes, your consideration and discernment can help young and old, experienced and less experienced, to preach the good news with zeal.​—Lev. 19:32. w18.06 23-24 ¶10-12




Monday, August 31

[Use] your freedom, not as a cover for doing wrong, but as slaves of God.​—1 Pet. 2:16.



We should never take for granted that Jehovah liberated us from the bondage of sin and of death. By means of the ransom, we can serve our God with a clean conscience and find real delight in doing so. (Ps. 40:8) In addition to expressing gratitude, however, we should be mindful of never misusing our precious freedom. The apostle Peter warned against using our freedom as an excuse for catering to our fleshly desires. Does that warning not remind you of what befell the Israelites in the wilderness? And the danger is still with us, perhaps even more so. Satan and his world offer ever more alluring choices in dress and grooming, food and drink, recreation and entertainment, and a host of other things. Clever advertisers often feature attractive people deceptively promoting as must-haves many things we really do not need. How easy it is to fall prey to these ploys and to misuse our freedom! w18.04 10 ¶7-8




