
December
Tuesday, December 1

He was moved with pity for them.​—Mark 6:34.



One of the most heartwarming aspects of Jesus’ personality is his ability to understand the challenges that we imperfect humans face. While on earth, Jesus was able to “rejoice with those who rejoice” and “weep with those who weep.” (Rom. 12:15) For example, when his 70 disciples returned with joy after completing a successful preaching assignment, Jesus “became overjoyed in the holy spirit.” (Luke 10:17-21) On the other hand, when he saw the effect that the death of Lazarus had on those who loved him, Jesus “groaned within himself and became troubled.” (John 11:33) What enabled this perfect man to be so merciful and compassionate in his dealings with sinful humans? First of all, Jesus loved people. He was “especially fond of the sons of men.” (Prov. 8:31) That love for people moved him to become thoroughly acquainted with the way humans think. The apostle John explains: “He knew what was in man.”​—John 2:25. w19.03 20 ¶1-2




Wednesday, December 2

Strike everything he has, and he will surely curse you to your very face.​—Job 1:11.



Satan attacked Job’s belongings, robbing him of his wealth, his servants, and his reputation in the community. He attacked Job’s family, robbing him of his ten beloved children. Then he attacked Job’s body, robbing him of his health by afflicting him with painful boils that covered him from head to foot. Job’s wife was distraught and overwhelmed with grief; she urged him to give up, to curse God and die. Job himself wished for death, but still he kept his integrity. Then Satan tried a different method of attack. He used three men who were companions of Job. The men visited Job for days, but they offered no comfort. Instead they heartlessly lectured and scolded him. They claimed that God was behind his troubles and cared nothing about his integrity. They even suggested that Job was a wicked man who deserved the terrible things that were happening to him!​—Job 1:13-22; 2:7-11; 15:4, 5; 22:3-6; 25:4-6. w19.02 4 ¶7-8




Thursday, December 3

The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of wisdom.​—Ps. 111:10.



Some kinds of fear are good for us. For example, we need to have a healthy fear of displeasing Jehovah. If Adam and Eve had developed that type of fear, they would not have rebelled against Jehovah. But they did rebel. After they did so, their eyes were opened in that they became fully aware that they were sinners. They could only pass sin and death on to their children. Because they could see, or understand, their condition, they became ashamed of their nakedness and covered themselves. (Gen. 3:7, 21) While we need to have a healthy fear of Jehovah, we do not need to have a morbid fear of death. Jehovah has made a way for us to gain everlasting life. If we commit a sin but are genuinely repentant, Jehovah will overlook our mistakes. He will forgive us in line with our faith in the ransom sacrifice of his Son. A primary way we show faith is by dedicating our life to God and getting baptized.​—1 Pet. 3:21. w19.03 5-6 ¶12-13




Friday, December 4

There was not a man left of them except Caleb the son of Jephunneh and Joshua the son of Nun.​—Num. 26:65.



The Israelites had many reasons for showing appreciation. They were freed from slavery after Jehovah brought the Ten Plagues on Egypt. Then God saved them from disaster by destroying the entire Egyptian army in the Red Sea. The Israelites were so grateful that they sang a victory song of praises to Jehovah. But did they remain grateful? When the Israelites encountered new challenges, they soon forgot about all the good things Jehovah had done for them. They then revealed their lack of appreciation. (Ps. 106:7) How? “The entire assembly of the Israelites began to murmur against Moses and Aaron”​—in reality, murmuring against Jehovah. (Ex. 16:2, 8) He was disappointed with the ungrateful attitude his people showed. He later foretold that this entire generation of Israelites would perish in the wilderness, with the exception of Joshua and Caleb.​—Num. 14:22-24. w19.02 17 ¶12-13




Saturday, December 5

I am mild-tempered and lowly in heart.​—Matt. 11:29.



Jesus did not draw undue attention to himself by requiring an elaborate observance of his death. Instead, he told his disciples that once a year they should remember him by means of a simple meal. (John 13:15; 1 Cor. 11:23-25) The simple but appropriate meal shows that Jesus was not a proud person. We can be happy that humility is one of the outstanding qualities of our heavenly King. (Phil. 2:5-8) How can we imitate Jesus’ humility? By putting the interests of others ahead of our own. (Phil. 2:3, 4) Think back to the final night of Jesus’ earthly life. Jesus knew that he would soon experience a painful death; yet, he was deeply concerned about his faithful apostles, who would soon be grieving for him. So he spent the last night instructing, encouraging, and reassuring them. (John 14:25-31) Jesus humbly showed more concern for the welfare of others than for himself. What an excellent example he set for us! w19.01 21 ¶5-6




Sunday, December 6

Please take pleasure in my voluntary offerings of praise, O Jehovah.​—Ps. 119:108.



Do you get a knot in your stomach each time you even think of raising your hand to comment? If so, you are not alone. The truth is that most of us feel some fear when we comment. Actually, those fears can be a good sign. They indicate that you are humble and view others as superior to you. Jehovah loves that quality. (Ps. 138:6; Phil. 2:3) But Jehovah also wants you to praise him and to encourage your brothers and sisters at the meetings. (1 Thess. 5:11) He loves you and will give you the courage you need. Consider some Scriptural reminders. The Bible says that all of us make mistakes in what we say and how we say it. (Jas. 3:2) Jehovah does not expect us to be perfect, and neither do our brothers and sisters. (Ps. 103:12-14) They are our spiritual family, and they love us. (Mark 10:29, 30; John 13:35) They understand that our comments at times do not come out exactly right. w19.01 8 ¶3; 10-11 ¶10-11




Monday, December 7

Remember . . . your Grand Creator in the days of your youth.​—Eccl. 12:1.



In today’s world, that is not always easy. However, it is by no means impossible. Jehovah wants you to enjoy a truly successful and satisfying life. With God’s help, you can succeed, not just in your youth but throughout your life. To illustrate, consider a lesson we can learn from the Israelites’ conquest of the Promised Land. When the Israelites neared the Promised Land, God did not command them to sharpen their fighting skills or train for war. (Deut. 28:1, 2) Rather, he told them that they needed to obey his commandments and trust in him. (Josh. 1:7-9) From a human viewpoint, that advice would make no sense! But it was the very best advice, for Jehovah gave his people victory after victory over the Canaanites. (Josh. 24:11-13) Yes, obedience to God calls for faith, but that faith always leads to success. This truth does not change with the passing of time. It is just as valid today. w18.12 25 ¶3-4




Tuesday, December 8

Lord, whom shall we go away to? You have sayings of everlasting life.​—John 6:68.



Some today have been stumbled by an adjusted understanding of a Bible passage. Others have taken sides with apostates and other opposers who misrepresent our beliefs. As a result, some have deliberately begun “drawing away” from Jehovah and the congregation. (Heb. 3:12-14) How much better it would have been if they had maintained their faith and kept their confidence in Jesus, as the apostle Peter did! Others have left the truth gradually, perhaps without even noticing what was happening. A person who gradually leaves the truth is like a boat that slowly slips away from the riverbank. The Bible describes such a slow change as ‘drifting away.’ (Heb. 2:1) Unlike one who intentionally draws away from the truth, one who drifts away does not do so deliberately. However, such a person strains his relationship with Jehovah and is in danger of losing it. w18.11 9 ¶5-6




Wednesday, December 9

Your people will offer themselves willingly.​—Ps. 110:3.



Do you desire to receive further training so as to be better equipped to carry out your sacred service? If so, you may qualify to attend the School for Kingdom Evangelizers. This school gives training to spiritually-minded men and women who are in full-time service, so that they can expand theocratic interests in the field. Those who apply to attend this school need to be willing to accept any assignment when they graduate. Would you be willing to take advantage of this opportunity to reach out for greater privileges of service? (1 Cor. 9:23) As Jehovah’s people, we are moved to be generous​—which is a manifestation of goodness, kindness, and love—​and to care about others each day. When we do that, we gain joy, peace, and happiness. (Gal. 5:22, 23) Whatever your circumstances in life, you can find joy by imitating Jehovah’s generous personality and by being one of his precious fellow workers!​—Prov. 3:9, 10. w18.08 27 ¶16-18




Thursday, December 10

What God has yoked together, let no man put apart.​—Matt. 19:6.



Someone might ask, ‘Is there ever a basis for a Christian to divorce and remarry?’ Well, Jesus stated his view on divorce: “Whoever divorces his wife and marries another commits adultery against her, and if ever a woman after divorcing her husband marries another, she commits adultery.” (Mark 10:11, 12; Luke 16:18) Clearly, Jesus thus honored marriage and wanted others to do so. A man divorcing his faithful wife (or a woman, her faithful husband) on some pretext and marrying another was committing adultery. This is true because merely divorcing one’s mate does not end the marriage. In God’s eyes, the two would still be “one flesh.” Moreover, Jesus said that a man’s divorcing his innocent wife would make her subject to adultery. How so? Back then, a divorced woman might feel compelled to remarry in order to gain financial support. Such a remarriage would amount to adultery. w18.12 11 ¶8-9




Friday, December 11

At my guardpost I will keep standing.​—Hab. 2:1.



Habakkuk’s conversation with Jehovah gave him a calm heart. So he resolved to keep waiting confidently on Jehovah to act. This was not just a spur-of-the-moment reaction, for he repeated his resolve when he later said that he would “quietly wait for the day of distress.” (Hab. 3:16) What does Habakkuk’s resolve teach us? First, we must never stop praying to Jehovah, no matter what trials befall us. Second, we need to listen to what Jehovah tells us through his Word and organization. Third, we should patiently wait on Jehovah, fully trusting that he will relieve our pains in his own time. If we continue to talk intimately with Jehovah and listen to him with a waiting attitude, as Habakkuk did, we too will gain a calm heart, which will help us to endure. Our hope will strengthen our patience, which in turn will help us to rejoice despite all the adversities we may face. Hope gives us confidence that our heavenly Father will act.​—Rom. 12:12. w18.11 15-16 ¶11-12




Saturday, December 12

Women should adorn themselves in appropriate dress, with modesty and soundness of mind.​—1 Tim. 2:9.



What is God’s view of stumbling others? Jesus said: “Whoever stumbles one of these little ones who have faith, it would be better for him if a millstone that is turned by a donkey were put around his neck and he were pitched into the sea.” (Mark 9:42) Those words express strong feelings! Since Jesus perfectly reflected his Father’s personality, we can be sure that Jehovah feels just as strongly about anyone whose callous actions stumble one of Jesus’ followers. (John 14:9) Do we share the view of Jehovah and Jesus? Have we made it our own? What do our actions reveal? For instance, suppose we are attracted to a certain style of dress or grooming that is likely to upset some in the congregation or that may well arouse passion in the minds of others. Will our loving concern for fellow believers override our personal preferences in style? w18.11 25 ¶9-10




Sunday, December 13

Satan answered Jehovah: “Is it for nothing that Job has feared God? . . . Stretch out your hand and strike everything he has, and he will surely curse you to your very face.”​—Job 1:9, 11.



What makes integrity so vital that each of us needs it? You need integrity because Satan has challenged Jehovah, and he has challenged you. That rebellious angel smeared Jehovah’s good name by implying that God is a bad, selfish, and dishonest Ruler. Sadly, Adam and Eve sided with Satan, rebelling against Jehovah. (Gen. 3:1-6) Life in Eden had given them countless opportunities to strengthen their love for Jehovah. But at the time of Satan’s challenge, their love was not complete, sound, or whole. Another question arose: Would any humans remain loyal to Jehovah God out of love for him? In other words, are humans capable of showing integrity? That question came to the fore in the case of Job. (Job 1:8-11) Like us, the man was imperfect. He made mistakes. However, Jehovah loved Job for his integrity. w19.02 3-4 ¶6-7




Monday, December 14

He . . . sold all the things he had and bought it.​—Matt. 13:46.



To show how precious the truth of God’s Kingdom is to those who find it, Jesus told about a traveling merchant who was searching for fine pearls. He found one of such high value that he “promptly sold” everything he had to buy it. (Matt. 13:45, 46) Similarly, the truth we found​—the truth of God’s Kingdom and all the other precious truths we learned from God’s Word—​is of such high value to us that we willingly and promptly made the sacrifices needed to obtain it. As long as we value the truth, we will “never sell it.” (Prov. 23:23) Sadly, though, some of God’s people have lost sight of the value of the truth they obtained​—and have even sold it. May that never happen to us! To show that we deeply treasure the truth and that we would never sell it, we must heed the Bible’s admonition to “go on walking in the truth.” (3 John 2-4) To walk in the truth involves living it​—giving it priority in our lives and conducting ourselves in harmony with it. w18.11 9 ¶3




Tuesday, December 15

By faith the walls of Jericho fell down after the people had marched around them for seven days.​—Heb. 11:30.



The Israelites were commanded not to attack Jericho but to march around the city once a day for six days and seven times on the seventh day. Some soldiers may have thought, ‘What a waste of time and energy!’ But Israel’s invisible Leader knew exactly what he was doing. Not only did his strategy strengthen the faith of the Israelites but it also spared them direct confrontation with Jericho’s mighty warriors. (Josh. 6:2-5) What can we learn from this account? We may not at times fully comprehend the reasons for new initiatives put forth by the organization. For example, we may at first have questioned the use of electronic devices for personal study, in the ministry, and at the meetings. Now we likely realize the benefits of using them if possible. When we see the positive results of such advancements despite any doubts we might have had, we grow in faith and unity. w18.10 23 ¶8-9




Wednesday, December 16

Lord, are you restoring the kingdom to Israel at this time?​—Acts 1:6.



Expectations about the Messiah, such as those held by Jesus’ disciples, doubtless led the people of Galilee to want Jesus to become their king. We can imagine that they were thinking that Jesus would be an ideal leader. He was an outstanding speaker; he could cure the sick; he could even supply food for the hungry. After Jesus fed about 5,000 men, he sensed the mood among the people. “Jesus, knowing that they were about to come and seize him to make him king, withdrew again to the mountain all alone.” (John 6:10-15) The following day on the other side of the Sea of Galilee, the enthusiasm may have died down some. Jesus then explained to the crowd the true nature of his work. He had come to bring spiritual, not material, benefits to the nation. “Work, not for the food that perishes, but for the food that remains for everlasting life,” he told them.​—John 6:25-27. w18.06 4 ¶4-5




Thursday, December 17

No crushed reed will he break, and no smoldering wick will he extinguish.​—Isa. 42:3.



Jesus understood the feelings of those who were figuratively like a bruised reed or the wick of an oil lamp about to go out. As a result, he was considerate, kind, and patient. (Mark 10:14) Of course, we do not have Jesus’ insight and teaching ability! But we can​—and should—​be considerate of the people in our territory. That includes how we speak to them, when we do so, and for how long. Today, countless millions have been “skinned and thrown about” by corrupt and heartless commercial, political, and religious leaders. (Matt. 9:36) As a result, many people are cynical and without hope. How important, then, that we be kind and compassionate in our choice of words and also in our tone of voice! Indeed, many are drawn to our message not only because of our Bible knowledge or sound reasoning but also because of our genuine interest in them and our thoughtful manner. w18.09 31-32 ¶13-14




Friday, December 18

Happy are those conscious of their spiritual need.​—Matt. 5:3.



How do we show that we are conscious of that need? We do so by taking in spiritual food, cherishing spiritual values, and giving priority to worshipping the happy God. If we take those steps, our happiness will grow. We will strengthen our faith in the coming fulfillment of God’s promises. (Titus 2:13) Building a strong relationship with Jehovah is a vital part of finding lasting happiness. The apostle Paul was inspired to write: “Always rejoice in the Lord [Jehovah]. Again I will say, Rejoice!” (Phil. 4:4) To enjoy such a precious relationship, we need to acquire divine wisdom. (Prov. 3:13, 18) However, to be lastingly happy, it is vital that we not only read God’s Word but apply it. Confirming the importance of putting into practice what we learn, Jesus said: “If you know these things, happy you are if you do them.” (John 13:17; Jas. 1:25) This is the key to satisfying your spiritual need and being lastingly happy. w18.09 18 ¶4-6




Saturday, December 19

[Epaphras] is always exerting himself in your behalf in his prayers.​—Col. 4:12.



Epaphras knew the brothers well, and he cared for them deeply. His situation as Paul’s “fellow captive” did not blind him to the spiritual needs of others. (Philem. 23) And he did something about it. Is that not a mark of unselfish concern? Praying for our fellow servants of Jehovah has real force, especially when we remember them individually, such as by name. (2 Cor. 1:11; Jas. 5:16) Think of those whom you can pray for by name. Like Epaphras, many of our brothers and sisters are praying for those in their congregation and for families who are carrying a heavy load of responsibility or who are facing serious decisions or temptations. In addition, we do well to remember those who have lost loved ones in death, those who have survived recent disasters and wars, and those who are enduring economic crises. Clearly, there are many brothers and sisters who need our prayers and who can benefit from them. w18.09 5-6 ¶12-13




Sunday, December 20

There is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving.​—Acts 20:35.



Paul was referring not only to sharing material things but also to giving encouragement, guidance, and assistance to those in need of these. (Acts 20:31-35) By word and example, the apostle taught us to give of ourselves​—our time, our energy, our attention, our love. Researchers in the field of social sciences have also observed that giving makes people happy. According to one article, “people report a significant happiness boost after doing kind deeds for others.” Helping others, researchers say, is important to developing “a greater sense of purpose and meaning” in life “because it fulfills basic human needs.” Hence, experts often recommend that people volunteer for public service to enhance their own health and happiness. This comes as no surprise to those who accept the Bible as the Word of mankind’s loving Designer, Jehovah.​—2 Tim. 3:16, 17. w18.08 22 ¶17-18




Monday, December 21

Stop judging by the outward appearance, but judge with righteous judgment.​—John 7:24.



Through his prophecy about our Lord Jesus Christ, Isaiah warms and reassures our hearts. Isaiah foretold that Jesus would “not judge by what appears to his eyes, nor reprove simply according to what his ears hear.” He would “judge the lowly with fairness.” (Isa. 11:3, 4) Why is this encouraging? Because we live in a world filled with bias and prejudice. We all long for the perfect Judge, who will never judge us by our outward appearance! Each day we make judgments about people. Yet, as imperfect humans, we are not able to judge matters perfectly as Jesus does. We tend to be influenced by what appears to our eyes. Nonetheless, when Jesus was on earth, he commanded us, not to judge by “the outward appearance,” but to judge “with righteous judgment.” Clearly, Jesus wants us to be like him and not judge others by their outward appearance. w18.08 8 ¶1-2




Tuesday, December 22

[You] will hear a word behind you saying, “This is the way. Walk in it.”​—Isa. 30:21.



True, we do not hear God speak to us from heaven. He has, however, provided his written Word, the Bible, in which he gives us instruction. Additionally, Jehovah’s spirit moves “the faithful steward” to keep giving His servants their food supply. (Luke 12:42) What an abundance of spiritual food we receive in the form of printed and online material, videos, and audio publications! May God’s own words, as recorded in the Bible, give us confidence that Jehovah has everything under control and that he will reverse any damage brought on us by Satan and his wicked world. And may we be determined to listen intently to Jehovah’s voice. If we do, we will successfully endure whatever problems we now face and any challenges that are yet to come. The Bible reminds us: “You need endurance, so that after you have done the will of God, you may receive the fulfillment of the promise.”​—Heb. 10:36. w19.03 13 ¶17-18




Wednesday, December 23

Jehovah said to Joshua . . . : “Moses my servant is dead. Now get up, cross the Jordan, you and all this people.”​—Josh. 1:1, 2.



Because Moses had been Israel’s leader for so long, Joshua may have wondered how God’s people would respond to his leadership. (Deut. 34:8, 10-12) One Bible reference work, referring to Joshua 1:1, 2, notes: “In both ancient and modern times a transition of leadership is one of the most precarious times in the security of a state.” Joshua must have had legitimate fears, but within a few days, he took decisive action. (Josh. 1:9-11) His trust in God was not misplaced. As the Bible record shows, Jehovah actually guided Joshua and His people, Israel, by means of an angelic representative. It is reasonable to think that this angel was the Word, God’s firstborn Son. (Ex. 23:20-23; John 1:1) With Jehovah’s help, Israel successfully navigated the transition from Moses’ leadership to that of Joshua. w18.10 22-23 ¶1-4




Thursday, December 24

A book of remembrance was written before him for those fearing Jehovah.​—Mal. 3:16.



Jehovah recognizes those who willingly serve him, and he writes their names in his “book of remembrance.” Having our name inscribed in Jehovah’s “book of remembrance” as his people comes with certain obligations. Malachi specifically stated that we must ‘fear Jehovah and meditate on his name.’ Giving our worshipful devotion to anyone or anything else would result in our name being removed from Jehovah’s figurative book of life. (Ex. 32:33; Ps. 69:28) Hence, our dedication to Jehovah involves much more than a solemn promise to do his will and to submit to water baptism. These actions are brief, and they quickly become part of the past. Our stand on Jehovah’s side as his people requires an ongoing demonstration of our obedience to him both in the present and in the future​—for as long as we live.​—1 Pet. 4:1, 2. w18.07 23-24 ¶7-9




Friday, December 25

Now that we have moved beyond the primary doctrine about the Christ, let us press on to maturity.​—Heb. 6:1.



This does not happen automatically. We need to “press on,” or keep working at it. Growing to maturity involves advancing to an increased level of knowledge and insight. That is why we have repeatedly been encouraged to read a portion of the Bible daily. (Ps. 1:1-3) Have you made that a personal goal? Doing such reading can give you greater insight into Jehovah’s laws and principles and a deeper understanding of God’s Word. The foremost law for Christians is the law of love. Jesus told his disciples: “By this all will know that you are my disciples​—if you have love among yourselves.” (John 13:35) Jesus’ half brother James called love “the royal law.” (Jas. 2:8) Paul said: “Love is the law’s fulfillment.” (Rom. 13:10) This emphasis on love is not surprising, since the Bible tells us that “God is love.”​—1 John 4:8. w18.06 19 ¶14-15




Saturday, December 26

They embittered his spirit, and he spoke rashly with his lips.​—Ps. 106:33.



Although the Israelites provoked Jehovah, it was Moses who became embittered. His lack of self-control led him to speak without considering the consequences. Moses allowed the actions of others to distract him from keeping his eyes fixed on Jehovah. Moses handled the first incident correctly. (Ex. 7:6) Yet, it is possible that after dealing for decades with the rebellious Israelites, he had become tired and frustrated. Was Moses thinking mainly of his own feelings instead of how he could glorify Jehovah? If such a faithful prophet as Moses could be distracted and stumbled, the same thing could easily happen to us. Like Moses, we are about to enter a symbolic land, the new world that Jehovah has promised us. (2 Pet. 3:13) None of us want to miss out on that special privilege. To fulfill our goal, though, we need to keep our eyes fixed on Jehovah, always seeking to do his will.​—1 John 2:17. w18.07 15 ¶14-16




Sunday, December 27

You have conquered the wicked one.​—1 John 2:14.



Satan cannot force people to act against their own will. (Jas. 1:14) Out of ignorance, many work in harmony with Satan’s purpose. But after they learn the truth, each one makes a choice as to whom he or she will serve. (Acts 3:17; 17:30) If we are resolved to do God’s will, there is nothing Satan can do to break our integrity. (Job 2:3; 27:5) Satan and the demons have other limitations. For example, nowhere do the Scriptures indicate that they can read the mind or heart of an individual. Only Jehovah and Jesus are spoken of as having that ability. (1 Sam. 16:7; Mark 2:8) If we do our best to speak and act in harmony with God’s will, we can be confident that Jehovah will not allow the Devil to do us any lasting harm. (Ps. 34:7) We need to know our enemy, but we do not need to be terrified by him. With Jehovah’s backing, even imperfect humans can conquer Satan. If we oppose him, he will flee from us.​—Jas. 4:7; 1 Pet. 5:9. w18.05 26 ¶15-17




Monday, December 28

Commit to Jehovah whatever you do, and your plans will succeed.​—Prov. 16:3.



Suppose you plan to travel to a distant town for an important event. Getting there requires a long journey by bus. At the bus station, there are many buses. You need to board the bus that is going to your chosen destination! Boarding a bus going anywhere else would mean that you would head in the wrong direction. Adolescents today face a similar situation: a long journey, not by bus, but in life. At times they may feel overwhelmed by the opportunities and decisions that confront them. Youths, you can make it easier for yourselves if you have a good idea where you want to go in life. Will you focus your life on your desire to please Jehovah? That means including him in all aspects of life​—education, employment, family responsibilities, and so on. And it means reaching out for spiritual goals. Young people who keep focused on serving Jehovah can be sure of his blessing in making a success of life. w18.04 25 ¶1-3




Tuesday, December 29

Oh no, my daughter! You have broken my heart, for you have become the one I have banished.​—Judg. 11:35.



Jephthah kept his vow and sent his virgin daughter to Shiloh to serve at the tabernacle for the rest of her life. (Judg. 11:30-35) However hard this was on Jephthah, it may have been harder still on his daughter, who willingly complied with her father’s decision. (Judg. 11:36, 37) She thus relinquished the right to marry, to have children, and to preserve the family name and inheritance. If anyone, then, needed comfort and encouragement, she did. The Bible account states: “It became a custom in Israel: From year to year, the young women of Israel would go to give commendation to the daughter of Jephthah the Gileadite four days in the year.” (Judg. 11:39, 40) Do not unmarried Christians who use their singleness to give greater attention to “the things of the Lord” also deserve commendation and encouragement?​—1 Cor. 7:32-35. w18.04 17 ¶10-11




Wednesday, December 30

Angels . . . did not keep their original position but forsook their own proper dwelling place.​—Jude 6.



A significant number of angels joined Satan’s rebellion. Prior to the Flood, Satan lured at least some of them into having immoral relations with the daughters of men. The Bible reveals this truth by symbolically portraying the dragon as dragging a third of the stars of heaven with him in his fall. (Gen. 6:1-4; Rev. 12:3, 4) When those angels abandoned God’s family, they put themselves under Satan’s control. These rebels, however, are not just a mob of troublemakers. Satan has set up an imitation of God’s Kingdom, with himself as king. In the invisible realm, Satan has organized the demons into governments, given them authority, and made them world rulers. (Eph. 6:12) By means of his spirit organization, Satan exerts authority over all human governments. w18.05 23 ¶5-6




Thursday, December 31

I will praise Jehovah, who has given me advice. Even during the night, my innermost thoughts correct me.​—Ps. 16:7.



God’s love for us is sometimes expressed through fatherly correction. David welcomed such kindly counsel. He meditated on God’s thoughts, making them his own and allowing them to mold him. When you in faith do the same, you too will grow in love for God and in your desire to obey him. You will also gain spiritual maturity and depth. A sister named Christin said, “When I do research and meditate on what I read, I get the feeling that Jehovah had this penned just for me!” It is no exaggeration to say that a spiritual outlook on life also gives you exceptional knowledge and insight by enabling you to see the world and its future through God’s eyes. Why does God give you such knowledge and insight? He wants you to set sound priorities in your life, to make wise decisions, and to look forward to the future with confidence!​—Isa. 26:3. w18.12 26 ¶9-10




