
January
Wednesday, January 1

Moses was by far the meekest of all the men on the face of the earth.​—Num. 12:3.



When Moses was a member of the Egyptian royal family, he was not meek. In fact, he had been so quick-tempered that he killed a man who he judged was acting unfairly. Moses assumed that Jehovah would agree with his actions. Jehovah spent 40 years helping Moses to understand that he needed more than courage to lead the Israelites; he needed to be meek. And to be meek, he also needed to be humble, submissive, and mild. He learned that lesson well and became an excellent overseer. (Ex. 2:11, 12; Acts 7:21-30, 36) Today, family heads and elders do well to imitate Moses. When treated disrespectfully, do not become easily offended. Humbly acknowledge any faults you have. (Eccl. 7:9, 20) Submissively follow Jehovah’s direction on how to handle problems. And always answer mildly. (Prov. 15:1) Family heads and overseers who respond that way please Jehovah, promote peace, and set an example of how to be meek. w19.02 8 ¶1; 10 ¶9-10




Thursday, January 2

He was moved with pity for them.​—Mark 6:34.



Note the reason why Jesus felt pity, which can reflect fellow feeling. He observed that the people “were as sheep without a shepherd.” Maybe Jesus saw that some of them were poor and were working long hours to provide for their families. Perhaps others were dealing with the loss of a loved one. If so, Jesus could likely relate to their situation. He may have faced some of these problems himself. Jesus was concerned about others, and he felt moved to bring them a message of comfort. (Isa. 61:1, 2) What do we learn from Jesus’ example? Like Jesus, we are surrounded by people who are “as sheep without a shepherd.” They struggle with many problems. We have what they need​—the Kingdom message. (Rev. 14:6) So in imitation of our Master, we preach the good news because we “have pity on the lowly and the poor.” (Ps. 72:13) We feel for people, and we want to do something to help them. w19.03 21-22 ¶6-7




Friday, January 3

May Jehovah be praised, who daily carries our load.​—Ps. 68:19.



We have many reasons to love Jehovah. Not only does he supply the good things we enjoy each day but he also teaches us the truth about himself and his purposes. (John 8:31, 32) He has given us the Christian congregation to guide and support us. He helps us carry our burdens now, and he offers us the hope of living forever in perfect conditions in the future. (Rev. 21:3, 4) When we meditate on how much Jehovah has already done to show that he loves us, we are drawn to love him. And when we love Jehovah, we gain a balanced view of fear. We fear hurting the One we have come to love so much. When you continue to recognize how much you benefit from Jehovah’s guidance, your love for him and his standards will grow. Then nothing Satan offers you will entice you away from serving Jehovah. Imagine yourself a thousand years from now. You will look back on your decision to get baptized as the best decision you ever made! w19.03 6 ¶14; 7 ¶19




Saturday, January 4

Who can find a capable wife? Her value is far more than that of corals.​—Prov. 31:10.



The entire family benefits when each member expresses appreciation. The more marriage mates show gratitude to each other, the closer they become. They also find it easier to forgive each other’s mistakes. A husband who appreciates his wife not only notices the good things she says and does but also “rises up and praises her.” (Prov. 31:28) And a wise wife lets her husband know specifically what she appreciates about him. Parents, how can you teach your children to show appreciation? Remember that your children will imitate what you say and do. So set a good example by saying thank you when your children do things for you. In addition, teach your children to say thank you when people do things for them. Help your children understand that expressing gratitude comes from the heart and that their words can do much good. w19.02 17 ¶14-15




Sunday, January 5

Until I die, I will not renounce my integrity!​—Job 27:5.



That is a statement of vital importance. Job refused to give in to Satan’s assault, and we can do the same. Satan makes the same charges about each of us. How are you involved? In effect, he says that you do not really love Jehovah God, that you will stop serving him to save yourself, and that any integrity you have is false! (Job 2:4, 5; Rev. 12:10) How does that make you feel? It is hurtful, is it not? However, think about this: Jehovah trusts you enough to offer you a marvelous opportunity. Jehovah is allowing Satan to test your integrity. Jehovah is confident that you can keep your integrity and help to prove Satan a liar. And He promises to help you do that. (Heb. 13:6) What a privilege to be trusted by the Sovereign of the universe! Do you see why integrity is so important? It enables us to refute Satan’s lies and to uphold our Father’s good name and support his way of ruling. w19.02 5 ¶9-10




Monday, January 6

The hour is coming when everyone who kills you will think he has offered a sacred service to God.​—John 16:2.



Jesus told the apostles of the trials that lay ahead of them. Then, pointing to his own example, he urged them to “take courage!” (John 16:1-4a, 33) Many years later, Jesus’ disciples were still following his self-sacrificing course and displaying courage. At great cost to themselves, they supported one another in their various trials. (Heb. 10:33, 34) Likewise today, we follow Jesus’ example of showing courage. For instance, it takes courage to assist our brothers who are persecuted because of their faith. At times, our brothers may be unjustly imprisoned. When that happens, we must do all that we can for them, including speaking up in their behalf. (Phil. 1:14; Heb. 13:19) Another way we show courage is by continuing to preach “with boldness.” (Acts 14:3) Like Jesus, we are determined to preach the Kingdom message, even though people may oppose and persecute us. w19.01 22-23 ¶8-9




Tuesday, January 7

Let us consider one another so as to incite to love and fine works, not forsaking our meeting together, as some have the custom, but encouraging one another.​—Heb. 10:24, 25.



What can help you to give encouraging comments at the meetings? Most important is that you prepare for each meeting. When you plan ahead and prepare well, you will feel more confident about commenting. (Prov. 21:5) What is involved in preparing well for the meeting? Begin each study session by asking Jehovah to give you holy spirit. (Luke 11:13; 1 John 5:14) Then take a few minutes to look over the lesson. Analyze the title, subheadings, illustrations, and teaching boxes. As you now study each paragraph, read as many of the cited scriptures as you can. Meditate on the information, giving special attention to points you wish to comment on. The better you prepare, the more you will benefit and the easier it may be for you to comment.​—2 Cor. 9:6. w19.01 9 ¶6; 11-12 ¶13-15




Wednesday, January 8

Write down the vision.​—Hab. 2:2.



By inspiring Habakkuk to write down his concerns, Jehovah provided us with an important object lesson: We must not be afraid to tell Him about our concerns or doubts. Indeed, he kindly invites us to pour out our heart to him in prayer. (Ps. 50:15; 62:8) Habakkuk took the initiative to draw close to Jehovah, his trusted Friend and Father. Habakkuk did not just fret over his situation, relying on his own understanding. Instead, he prayed about his feelings and worries, setting a good example for us. Moreover, Jehovah, the Hearer of prayer, invites us to show our trust by prayerfully sharing our concerns with him. (Ps. 65:2) Doing so will help us to experience Jehovah’s response​—his warm embrace by means of his kind guidance. (Ps. 73:23, 24) He will help us to know his thoughts no matter what afflicts us. Our heartfelt prayers are one of the deepest expressions of our trust in God. w18.11 13 ¶2; 14 ¶5-6




Thursday, January 9

The holy ones in the earth, the majestic ones, bring me great delight.​—Ps. 16:3.



The psalmist David did not limit his circle of friends to just his peers. Can you recall the name of a “majestic” one who became his dear friend? His name was Jonathan. In fact, their friendship was one of the most beautiful recorded in the Scriptures. Did you know, however, that Jonathan was about 30 years older than David? What, then, was the basis for their friendship? Faith in God, mutual respect, and seeing each other’s courage as they fought God’s enemies. (1 Sam. 13:3; 14:13; 17:48-50; 18:1) Like David and Jonathan, we too find “great delight” in loving those who love Jehovah and who show their faith in him. Kiera, who has served God for years, says, “I’ve made friends with people from around the world, people of many different backgrounds and cultures.” When you broaden out in this way, you will see clear evidence of the uniting power of God’s Word and spirit. w18.12 26 ¶11-13




Friday, January 10

Whoever divorces his wife, except on the grounds of sexual immorality, and marries another commits adultery.​—Matt. 19:9.



The expression “sexual immorality” covers a range of sexual sins outside of marriage: adultery, prostitution, sex relations between unmarried individuals, homosexuality, and bestiality. If, for example, a married man engages in sexual immorality, his wife can decide whether to divorce him or not. Significantly, Jesus did not say that a mate’s immorality (por·neiʹa) must absolutely lead to divorce. For example, a wife might choose to maintain the marriage despite her husband’s having been immoral. She might still love him; she might be willing to forgive him and work with him to improve their marriage. Realistically, if she got a divorce but did not remarry, she would face challenges. What of her material and sexual needs? What about loneliness? Are there children to consider? (1 Cor. 7:14) Clearly, the divorced innocent one would face serious issues. w18.12 12 ¶10-11




Saturday, January 11

O you who love Jehovah, hate what is bad.​—Ps. 97:10.



Jehovah hates unrighteousness. (Isa. 61:8) While he knows that we have some wrong inclinations because of inherited imperfection, he exhorts us to cultivate similar hatred for unrighteousness. Meditating on why Jehovah detests badness will help us make his view our own, giving us added strength to resist wrongdoing. Cultivating Jehovah’s view of unrighteousness will also help us identify certain practices as wrong, even though they are not specifically mentioned in God’s Word. For example, lap dancing is a form of lewd conduct that is becoming more common in the world. Some might excuse such conduct, reasoning that it is not the same as outright sexual relations. But do such actions reflect the thinking of God, who abhors every kind of badness? Let us stay far from wrongdoing by cultivating self-control as well as an abhorrence for what Jehovah hates.​—Rom. 12:9. w18.11 25 ¶11-12




Sunday, January 12

The righteous one will live by his faithfulness.​—Hab. 2:4.



The apostle Paul saw Jehovah’s assurance as so significant that he quoted this verse three times! (Rom. 1:17; Gal. 3:11; Heb. 10:38) Whatever difficulties the righteous one may suffer, he will by his faith and trust live to see the fulfillment of God’s purposes. Jehovah tells us to look beyond the present. The book of Habakkuk provides a powerful lesson for all of us living in these last days. Jehovah extends his promise of life to any righteous person who displays faith and trust in Him. Let us continue to strengthen our faith and trust in God, no matter what distress and anxiety we face. Through Habakkuk, Jehovah assures us that He will support and deliver us. He kindly asks us to trust in him and to wait patiently for his appointed time when, under God’s Kingdom, the whole earth will be filled with his happy and mild-tempered worshippers.​—Matt. 5:5; Heb. 10:36-39. w18.11 16-17 ¶15-17




Monday, January 13

Go on walking in the truth.​—3 John 4.



In the first century, some who initially responded favorably to the teachings of Jesus failed to continue walking in the truth. For example, after a large crowd had been fed in a miraculous way by Jesus, the crowd followed him to the other side of the Sea of Galilee. There, Jesus said something that startled them: “Unless you eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood, you have no life in yourselves.” Instead of asking Jesus to explain, they were stumbled by his words and said: “This speech is shocking; who can listen to it?” As a result, “many of his disciples went off to the things behind and would no longer walk with him.” (John 6:53-66) Sadly, some today have failed to hold on to the truth. Some were stumbled by what a prominent brother said or did. Others were offended by Scriptural counsel they received, or they let go of the truth because of a personality clash with a fellow Christian. w18.11 9 ¶3-5




Tuesday, January 14

Your Leader is one, the Christ.​—Matt. 23:10.



When we do not fully understand the reasons for some organizational changes, we do well to reflect on how Christ exercised his leadership in the past. Whether in Joshua’s day or in the first century, Christ has always provided wise direction to protect God’s people as a whole, to strengthen their faith, and to maintain unity among God’s servants. (Heb. 13:8) Jesus’ loving concern for our spiritual welfare is clearly reflected in the timely direction given by “the faithful and discreet slave.” (Matt. 24:45) When we discern Christ’s direction, we sense his keen interest in our spiritual advancement. In addition to caring for our spiritual needs, Christ helps us to keep our focus on the most important work being done on earth today​—our preaching activity.​—Mark 13:10. w18.10 25 ¶13-16




Wednesday, January 15

Walk worthily of the calling with which you were called, with all humility.​—Eph. 4:1, 2.



A remarkable example of showing self-control when we are provoked can be found at 2 Samuel 16:5-13. David and his servants endured reproach and physical assault by Shimei, a relative of King Saul’s. David did so despite having the power to put an end to it. How did David muster up the strength to control his spirit? The superscription of Psalm 3 indicates that it was composed when David “was fleeing from his son Absalom.” Verses 1 and 2 fit events described in chapter 16 of Second Samuel. Then Psalm 3:4 highlights David’s confidence: “I will call aloud to Jehovah, and he will answer me.” We too can pray when under attack. In response, Jehovah provides his holy spirit, which can help us to endure. Can you think of a situation in which you need to exercise self-restraint or freely forgive unwarranted animosity? Are you confident that Jehovah can see your affliction and bestow a blessing? w18.09 6-7 ¶16-17




Thursday, January 16

We are God’s fellow workers.​—1 Cor. 3:9.



When witnessing, we should always be considerate and respectful, which includes getting to know the local people well. Remember that when we go from door to door, we are uninvited guests. How important, then, that we call at a time when people might be more inclined to converse! (Matt. 7:12) For example, do people in your territory like to sleep longer on weekends? If so, you may be able to start your ministry by doing street work, public witnessing, or return visits on people you know will be up and about. Many people are very busy, so it may be appropriate to keep your visits brief, at least initially. (1 Cor. 9:20-23) When people see that we are aware of their circumstances or busy schedules, they may be more willing to have us call back. Clearly, the fruitage of God’s spirit should be reflected in our ministry. When it is, we truly become “God’s fellow workers”​—even a means by which Jehovah may draw someone to the truth.​—1 Cor. 3:6, 7. w18.09 32 ¶15-17




Friday, January 17

Happy are the mild-tempered, since they will inherit the earth.​—Matt. 5:5.



How can being mild-tempered contribute to happiness? After coming to an accurate knowledge of the truth, individuals change. At one time, they may have been harsh, quarrelsome, and aggressive. But now they have clothed themselves with “the new personality” and display “the tender affections of compassion, kindness, humility, mildness, and patience.” (Col. 3:9-12) As a result, they now enjoy a peaceful, loving, and happier life. Furthermore, God’s Word promises that such ones will “inherit the earth.” (Ps. 37:8-10, 29) In what sense do the mild-tempered “inherit the earth”? Jesus’ spirit-anointed disciples inherit the earth when they rule over it as kings and priests. (Rev. 20:6) Millions of others who do not have the heavenly calling, however, will inherit the earth in the sense that they will be allowed to live here forever in perfection, peace, and happiness. w18.09 19 ¶8-9




Saturday, January 18

Everyone must be quick to listen.​—Jas. 1:19.



Jehovah himself sets the superlative example in this regard. (Gen. 18:32; Josh. 10:14) Consider what we can learn from the interchange recorded at Exodus 32:11-14. Although not needing Moses’ input, Jehovah gave Moses an opportunity to reveal how he felt. What human would listen at length to the reasoning of someone who has displayed faulty thinking and then act on that person’s word? Yet, Jehovah listens patiently to humans who call on him in faith. Each of us does well to ask: ‘If Jehovah can stoop down to deal with people and listen to them as he did with Abraham, Rachel, Moses, Joshua, Manoah, Elijah, and Hezekiah, should I not be better at honoring all my brothers, dignifying them, listening to their ideas, and even acting on their good ideas? Does someone in my congregation or in my family deserve my attention right now? What should I do about that? What will I do about that?’​—Gen. 30:6; Judg. 13:9; 1 Ki. 17:22; 2 Chron. 30:20. w18.09 6 ¶14-15




Sunday, January 19

The generous person will prosper, and whoever refreshes others will himself be refreshed.​—Prov. 11:25.



It can be a challenge to maintain a generous spirit when we are surrounded by people who put their own interests ahead of those of others. However, Jesus stated that the two greatest commandments are to love Jehovah with our whole heart, soul, mind, and strength and to love our neighbor as ourselves. (Mark 12:28-31) Those who love Jehovah imitate him. Jehovah gives to others, and so does Jesus. And they recommend that we do the same, for it will make us truly happy. If we strive to manifest this generous spirit in our dealings with both God and neighbor, we will bring honor to Jehovah and benefit ourselves and others. No doubt you are already striving to give of yourself to help others, especially fellow believers. (Gal. 6:10) If you continue to do so, you will surely be loved and appreciated, and you will be happy as a result. w18.08 22 ¶19-20




Monday, January 20

Stop judging by the outward appearance.​—John 7:24.



Jehovah places no significance on racial, ethnic, national, tribal, or linguistic differences. Any man or woman who fears God and does what is right is acceptable to him. (Gal. 3:26-28; Rev. 7:9, 10) No doubt, you acknowledge that this is true. But what if you have grown up in a land or in a home filled with prejudice? While you might see yourself as being impartial, deep inside, prejudice may linger. Even Peter, who had the privilege of revealing Jehovah’s impartiality, later manifested prejudice. (Gal. 2:11-14) How can we stop judging by the outward appearance? We need to examine ourselves carefully in the light of God’s Word to see if we are holding on to any prejudiced thoughts or feelings. (Ps. 119:105) We might also need loving help from others who may see prejudiced attitudes in us, even if we cannot see them in ourselves. (Gal. 2:11, 14) It could be that these attitudes are so ingrained in us that we are not conscious of them. w18.08 9 ¶5-6




Tuesday, January 21

Let your light shine before men.​—Matt. 5:16.



Ask yourself: ‘Is my complete allegiance to Jehovah evident to others? Do I look for opportunities to identify myself as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses?’ Jehovah would be deeply saddened if after he has selected us as his people, we were to hesitate to let others know that we belong to him. (Ps. 119:46; Mark 8:38) Sad to say, some individuals have blurred the distinction between their serving God and their not serving him by imitating “the spirit of the world.” (1 Cor. 2:12) That is a spirit that caters to ‘the desires of one’s flesh.’ (Eph. 2:3) For example, despite all the counsel that has been given on the subject, some still prefer styles of dress and grooming that are immodest. They wear tight-fitting and revealing clothing, even to Christian gatherings. Or they have adopted extreme haircuts and hairdos. (1 Tim. 2:9, 10) As a result, when they are in a crowd, it may be difficult to tell who belongs to Jehovah and who is “a friend of the world.”​—Jas. 4:4. w18.07 24-25 ¶11-12




Wednesday, January 22

All of you are brothers.​—Matt. 23:8.



One sense in which we are “brothers” is that all of us have descended from Adam. (Acts 17:26) But there is more. Jesus explained that his disciples were brothers and sisters because they recognized Jehovah as their heavenly Father. (Matt. 12:50) In addition, they had become members of one large spiritual family, united by love and faith. Thus in their letters, the apostles often referred to fellow disciples as ‘brothers and sisters.’ (Rom. 1:13; 1 Pet. 2:17; 1 John 3:13) After making it clear that we should view one another as brothers and sisters, Jesus stressed the need for humility. (Matt. 23:11, 12) Undue pride among his apostles had led to some disunity. And pride of race could also have been a problem. Did the Jews have reason to be proud because they were descendants of Abraham? Many Jews had that deep-seated conviction. But John the Baptist told them: “God is able to raise up children for Abraham from these stones.”​—Luke 3:8. w18.06 9-10 ¶8-9




Thursday, January 23

A man of knowledge restrains his words.​—Prov. 17:27.



When faced with frustrating situations or recurring personality conflicts, do we control our lips and our temper? (Prov. 10:19; Matt. 5:22) When provoked by others, we need to learn to “yield place to the wrath.” Whose wrath? Jehovah’s wrath. (Rom. 12:17-21) If we keep looking to Jehovah, we will show him due respect by yielding to his wrath, patiently waiting for him to take action when he deems it necessary. To do otherwise and avenge ourselves in some way would be tantamount to disrespecting Jehovah. Do we faithfully follow the latest directions that Jehovah has given us? If so, we will not rely on always doing things the way we have done them in the past. Rather, we will be quick to follow any new direction that Jehovah provides through his organization. (Heb. 13:17) At the same time, we will be careful that we “do not go beyond the things that are written.” (1 Cor. 4:6) In so doing, we keep our eyes fixed on Jehovah. w18.07 15-16 ¶17-18




Friday, January 24

Press on to maturity.​—Heb. 6:1.



As you advance toward Christian maturity, you will find that principles become more important to you. That is because laws may apply to a specific situation, whereas principles are far broader in application. For example, a young child does not understand the dangers of bad associations, so a discerning parent will set rules to protect him. (1 Cor. 15:33) But as the child matures, his thinking ability develops, and he is able to reason on Bible-based principles. Thus, he can increasingly make wise decisions in choosing his associates. (1 Cor. 13:11; 14:20) When we reason on godly principles, our conscience increasingly becomes a more reliable guide, attuned to God’s thinking. Do we have everything we need to make wise decisions that please Jehovah? Yes. By making skilled use of the laws and principles found in God’s Word, we will be “fully competent, completely equipped for every good work.”​—2 Tim. 3:16, 17. w18.06 19 ¶14; 20 ¶16-17




Saturday, January 25

Who really is my neighbor?​—Luke 10:29.



Jesus’ story showed that a Samaritan could teach the Jews the meaning of true neighborly love. (Luke 10:25-37) To fulfill their commission, Jesus’ disciples needed to conquer the pride and prejudice they had. Before ascending to heaven, he assigned them to bear witness to “all Judea and Samaria, and to the most distant part of the earth.” (Acts 1:8) Jesus had earlier prepared them for such an extensive assignment by drawing their attention to good qualities in foreigners. He praised a foreign army officer for his outstanding faith. (Matt. 8:5-10) In his hometown of Nazareth, Jesus spoke of how Jehovah had favored foreigners, such as the Phoenician widow from Zarephath and the Syrian leper Naaman. (Luke 4:25-27) And Jesus not only preached to a Samaritan woman but he spent two days in a Samaritan town because of the people’s interest in his message.​—John 4:21-24, 40. w18.06 10 ¶10-11




Sunday, January 26

Put on the complete suit of armor from God so that you may be able to stand firm against the crafty acts of the Devil.​—Eph. 6:11.



The apostle Paul likened our life as Christians to that of soldiers engaged in hand-to-hand combat. Of course, the war we fight is spiritual, not literal. Even so, our enemies are real. Satan and the demons are skilled warriors with vast experience. At first glance, our prospects may seem bleak. Young Christians in particular may appear to be vulnerable. How can they hope to win against superhuman, wicked spirit forces? The fact is, young ones can win, and they are winning! Why? Because they “go on acquiring power in the Lord.” But they do more than draw on God’s power. They are dressed for battle. Like well-trained soldiers, they have “put on the complete suit of armor from God.” (Eph. 6:10-12) When developing his illustration, Paul perhaps had in mind the armor worn by Roman legionnaires.​—Acts 28:16. w18.05 27 ¶1-2




Monday, January 27

Our Father in the heavens, let your name be sanctified.​—Matt. 6:9.



The foremost reason why we share in the preaching work is to glorify Jehovah and sanctify his name before mankind. (John 15:1, 8) Yet, we cannot make God’s name more sacred. It is already sacred, or holy, in the absolute sense. But note what the prophet Isaiah stated: “Jehovah of armies​—he is the One you should regard as holy.” (Isa. 8:13) We sanctify God’s name, among other ways, by regarding it as separate from all other names and by helping others to regard it as holy. For instance, by proclaiming the truth about Jehovah’s wonderful qualities and his unchangeable purpose for mankind, we defend God’s name against Satan’s lies and slander. (Gen. 3:1-5) Also, when we strive to help people in our territory to see that Jehovah is worthy “to receive the glory and the honor and the power,” we sanctify God’s name.​—Rev. 4:11. w18.05 18 ¶3-4




Tuesday, January 28

It is good to give thanks to Jehovah . . . For you have made me rejoice, O Jehovah, because of your deeds; because of the works of your hands I shout joyfully.​—Ps. 92:1, 4.



The primary reason for setting spiritual goals is to show Jehovah how grateful we are for his love and for what he has done for us. As a young person, think of all you owe to Jehovah. Your life, your faith, the Bible, the congregation, and your wonderful hope for the future. Giving priority to spiritual matters is a way of showing gratitude to God for these blessings, and that brings you closer to him. Once you start working toward spiritual goals, you begin building a record of good works in Jehovah’s eyes. This brings you even closer to him. The apostle Paul promised: “God is not unrighteous so as to forget your work and the love you showed for his name.” (Heb. 6:10) You are never too young to set goals. Why not consider which goals are important to you and then start working toward them?​—Phil. 1:10, 11. w18.04 26 ¶5-6




Wednesday, January 29

Where the spirit of Jehovah is, there is freedom.​—2 Cor. 3:17.



People of the Roman world, among whom the early Christians lived, prided themselves on being champions of law, justice, and freedom. Yet, much of the power and glory of the Roman Empire was built on the backs of slaves. At one point, some 30 percent of the population were slaves. Undoubtedly, slavery and freedom were topics on the minds of the common people, including Christians. The letters of the apostle Paul have much to say about freedom. However, the objective of his ministry was not social or political reform, the very thing people of that day were seeking. Rather than looking to any human ruler or agency for freedom, Paul and his fellow Christians worked hard to help others learn the good news of God’s Kingdom and the incomparable value of the ransom sacrifice of Christ Jesus. Paul directed his fellow believers to the Source of true freedom. w18.04 8 ¶1-2




Thursday, January 30

Simon, Simon, look! Satan has demanded to have all of you to sift you as wheat. But I have made supplication for you that your faith may not give out; and you, once you have returned, strengthen your brothers.​—Luke 22:31, 32.



On the night before his death, Jesus told the apostle Peter the above. Peter proved to be a pillar in the early Christian congregation. (Gal. 2:9) He encouraged his brothers by his courageous example at Pentecost and thereafter. Toward the end of his long ministry, he wrote to fellow Christians. Explaining why, he stated: “I have written you in few words in order to encourage you and to give an earnest witness that this is the true undeserved kindness of God. Stand firm in it.” (1 Pet. 5:12) Peter’s inspired letters have continued to be a source of encouragement to Christians throughout the ages and up to this day. How we need this encouragement as we await the fulfillment of Jehovah’s promises!​—2 Pet. 3:13. w18.04 17 ¶12-13




Friday, January 31

The one who peers into the perfect law that belongs to freedom and continues in it . . . will be happy in what he does.​—Jas. 1:25.



To be able to do what one wants to do or to live the way one wants to live seems to be much desired by people everywhere. How to satisfy those desires, however, is quite another matter. On the social or political level, many resort to protests, demonstrations, revolts, even revolutions. But do such confrontations achieve the desired results? On the contrary, they often lead to tragedies and loss of life. All of this once again testifies to the truthfulness of King Solomon’s inspired observation: “Man has dominated man to his harm.” (Eccl. 8:9) In today’s text, James pointed out the key to finding true happiness and satisfaction. Jehovah, who gave that perfect law, knows best the things humans need in order to be completely happy and satisfied. He gave the first human couple everything that they needed to be happy​—including true freedom. w18.04 3 ¶1-3




