
July
Wednesday, July 1

Keep perceiving what the will of Jehovah is.​—Eph. 5:17.



We are living in “critical times” that are “hard to deal with,” and life is going to become even more difficult before a new day dawns and true peace is restored to this earth. (2 Tim. 3:1) So we do well to ask ourselves, ‘Where am I looking for help and direction?’ Centuries ago, a psalmist acknowledged the need for us to raise our eyes to Jehovah for help in times of need. (Ps. 123:1-4) He compared our looking to Jehovah with the way a servant looks to his master. What did the psalmist mean by that? Well, not only does a servant look to his master for food and protection but the servant needs constantly to watch his master to discern his wishes and then to carry them out. In a similar way, we daily need to search God’s Word to ascertain what Jehovah’s will is for us personally and then to follow that direction. Only then can we be sure that Jehovah will show us favor in our time of need. w18.07 12 ¶1-2




Thursday, July 2

If the Son sets you free, you will be truly free.​—John 8:36.



Jesus was talking about liberation from the greatest bondage and oppression that humankind has ever experienced​—being “a slave of sin.” (John 8:34) Not only can sin lead us to doing what is bad but it can also prevent us from doing what we know is right or from living up to what we know we are capable of. In that sense we are slaves of sin, and the outcome is frustration, pain, suffering, and finally death. (Rom. 6:23) It is only when the shackles of sin are thrown off that we can hope to have the true freedom that our first human parents once enjoyed. Jesus’ statement “if you remain in my word” implies that there are certain requirements or boundaries for being set free by him. (John 8:31) As dedicated Christians, we have disowned ourselves and have chosen to live within the bounds of Christ’s teachings as his disciples. (Matt. 16:24) Just as Jesus promised, we will be truly free when the benefits of his ransom sacrifice are fully applied to us. w18.04 7 ¶14-16




Friday, July 3

You alone truly know the human heart.​—2 Chron. 6:30.



Jehovah shows consideration for the feelings of his people​—even when their thinking is not always sound. Consider the case of Jonah. God sent this prophet to proclaim a message of judgment against the Ninevites. When they repented, God chose to spare them. However, Jonah was not happy about this outcome. He “became hot with anger” because his prophecy of doom did not come true. But Jehovah was patient with Jonah and helped him to adjust his thinking. (Jonah 3:10–4:11) In time, Jonah got the point, and he was even used by Jehovah to record this account for our benefit. (Rom. 15:4) Jehovah’s dealings with his people assure us that he has empathy for his servants. He is aware of the pain and suffering of each one of us. He understands our intimate thoughts, our deepest emotions, and our limitations. And “he will not let [us] be tempted beyond what [we] can bear.” (1 Cor. 10:13) How comforting that assurance is! w19.03 16 ¶6-7




Saturday, July 4

All things are naked and openly exposed to the eyes of the one to whom we must give an account.​—Heb. 4:13.



Under the Mosaic Law, appointed older men were responsible for handling not only spiritual matters but also civil and criminal cases. Consider a few examples. If an Israelite killed someone, he was not arbitrarily executed. The elders of his city would investigate the circumstances before deciding if the death penalty was appropriate. (Deut. 19:2-7, 11-13) The elders also judged numerous aspects of daily life​—from resolving public controversies over property to settling private marital disputes. (Ex. 21:35; Deut. 22:13-19) When the elders were fair and the Israelites obeyed the Law, everyone benefited, and the nation brought honor to Jehovah. (Lev. 20:7, 8; Isa. 48:17, 18) From this we see that every aspect of our life is important to Jehovah. He wants us to be just and loving when dealing with others. And he takes notice of what we say and do, even in the privacy of our home. w19.02 23 ¶16-18




Sunday, July 5

He let himself be afflicted, but he would not open his mouth.​—Isa. 53:7.



When we are under stress, it is difficult to be meek. Our words may become harsh and our tone cold. If you have ever felt stressed, consider the example of Jesus. During the final months of his life on earth, Jesus was under intense stress. He knew that he would be executed and that he would suffer terribly. (John 3:14, 15; Gal. 3:13) Some months before his death, he said that he was distressed. (Luke 12:50) And just days before his death, Jesus said: “I am troubled.” We can sense his humility and his submissiveness to God as he poured out his feelings in prayer. (John 12:27, 28) When the time came, Jesus courageously handed himself over to God’s enemies, who executed him in the most agonizing and humiliating way possible. Despite the stress, despite the suffering, Jesus meekly did God’s will. Without a doubt, we can say that Jesus is the most outstanding example of someone showing meekness under stress!​—Isa. 53:10. w19.02 11 ¶14-15




Monday, July 6

Let us consider one another so as to incite to love and fine works.​—Heb. 10:24.



To attend meetings regularly, we may need to demonstrate courage in the face of difficult circumstances. Some of our brothers and sisters attend meetings despite being burdened by grief, discouragement, or health problems. Others courageously attend meetings despite strong opposition from family members or governmental authorities. Think for a moment about how our example affects our brothers who are imprisoned for their faith. (Heb. 13:3) When they hear that we keep serving Jehovah in spite of our trials, they are strengthened to maintain their faith, courage, and integrity. When Paul was in prison in Rome, he rejoiced whenever he heard that his brothers were serving God faithfully. (Phil. 1:3-5, 12-14) Shortly before or just after his release, Paul wrote his letter to the Hebrews. In that letter he urged those faithful Christians to never forsake meeting together.​—Heb. 10:25. w19.01 28 ¶9




Tuesday, July 7

The whole world is lying in the power of the wicked one.​—1 John 5:19.



Satan wants us to become like him​—a rebel who ignores Jehovah’s standards and is motivated by selfishness. He surrounds us with people who are already corrupted by him and hopes that they will “spoil” or “corrupt” the way we think and act. (1 Cor. 15:33; ftn.) Satan also tries to infect our heart by getting us to trust human wisdom rather than Jehovah’s thinking. (Col. 2:8) Consider just one idea promoted by Satan​—that getting rich should be a primary goal in life. Those who think this way might become wealthy, or they might not. Either way, they are in danger. Why? Because they may become so focused on making money that they will sacrifice their health, their family relationships, and even their friendship with God just to reach their goal. (1 Tim. 6:10) We can be grateful that our wise heavenly Father helps us to have a balanced view of money.​—Eccl. 7:12; Luke 12:15. w19.01 15 ¶6; 17 ¶9




Wednesday, July 8

Well done, good and faithful slave! You were faithful over a few things. I will appoint you over many things. Enter into the joy of your master.​—Matt. 25:21.



Even before Jehovah’s Son came to earth and set a perfect example of how to impart encouragement, faithful servants of Jehovah were conscious of the need to be encouraging. When threatened by the Assyrians, Hezekiah assembled the military chiefs and the people of Judah to encourage them. “And the people were strengthened by [his] words.” (2 Chron. 32:6-8) Although in need of consolation himself, Job gave his three “troublesome comforters” a lesson in giving encouragement. He told them that if he had been in their place, he ‘would have strengthened them with the words of his mouth, and the consolation of his lips would have brought them relief.’ (Job 16:1-5) Finally, Job received encouragement from Elihu and from Jehovah himself.​—Job 33:24, 25; 36:1, 11; 42:7, 10. w18.04 16 ¶6; 17 ¶8-9




Thursday, July 9

I will fortify you, yes, I will help you.​—Isa. 41:10.



Isaiah had already described how Jehovah would fortify, or strengthen, his people, saying: “Jehovah will come with power, and his arm will rule for him.” (Isa. 40:10) The Bible often uses the word “arm” symbolically to signify power. So the statement that Jehovah’s “arm will rule” reminds us that Jehovah is a powerful King. He used his unbeatable strength to support and defend his servants in the past, and he continues to strengthen and protect those who trust in him today. (Deut. 1:30, 31; Isa. 43:10, ftn.) Especially when enemies persecute us, Jehovah keeps his promise: “I will fortify you.” In some parts of the world today, our enemies are trying hard to stop our preaching work or ban our organization. Even so, we are not overly anxious about such attacks. Jehovah has given us a guarantee that fills us with strength and confidence. He promises us: “No weapon formed against you will have any success.”​—Isa. 54:17. w19.01 5-6 ¶12-13




Friday, July 10

Happy are those conscious of their spiritual need.​—Matt. 5:3.



Unlike the animals, you have a spiritual need, which only your Creator can satisfy. (Matt. 4:4) When you listen appreciatively to him, you gain insight, wisdom, and happiness. God satisfies your spiritual need by means of his Word and the abundance of spiritual food that he provides through “the faithful and discreet slave.” (Matt. 24:45) And how varied and rich that food is! (Isa. 65:13, 14) The spiritual food that God provides will give you wisdom and thinking ability, which can protect you in many ways. (Prov. 2:10-14) For example, these qualities open your eyes to false teachings, such as the view that there is no Creator. They protect you against the lie that money and possessions are the key to happiness. And they help you to recognize and resist wrong desires and self-destructive behavior. So continue to search for godly wisdom and thinking ability, viewing them as treasures! w18.12 20 ¶6-7




Saturday, July 11

The days of my people will be like the days of a tree.​—Isa. 65:22.



Will the time come when our days “will be like the days of a tree”? Some trees live thousands of years. Humans would have to be healthy in order to have lifespans of such length. If they could live in the conditions that Isaiah foretold, it would be a dream come true, a paradise! And that prophecy will be fulfilled! Reflect on how the promises point to a future paradise: People of the whole earth will be blessed by God. No one will face danger from animals or beastlike humans. The blind, deaf, and lame will be cured. People will be able to build their own homes and enjoy growing wholesome food. They will live longer than trees. Yes, we find indications in the Bible that such a future is ahead. Still, some might claim that we are reading more into those prophecies than is justified. What solid reason do you have to look forward to a real paradise on earth? The greatest man who ever lived provided a solid reason.​—Luke 23:43. w18.12 5 ¶13-15




Sunday, July 12

Be transformed by making your mind over.​—Rom. 12:2.



The mind is flexible and can keep changing. To a large extent, any such changes will be determined by what we allow into our mind and what we choose to dwell on. By dwelling or meditating on Jehovah’s way of thinking, we can prove to ourselves that his viewpoints are right. It will then be our natural desire to bring our thoughts into alignment with his. Note, however, that in order to make our mind over to Jehovah’s way of thinking, we need to “stop being molded by this system.” We must stop taking into our minds ideas or viewpoints that are in opposition to God’s. The importance of this preliminary step can be illustrated with food. A person might seek to improve his health by eating food that is nutritious. But of what value would that be if he is also ingesting regular doses of contaminated food? Similarly, feeding on Jehovah’s thoughts will be of limited value if we are corrupting our mind with worldly ideas. w18.11 21 ¶14-15




Monday, July 13

Stand firm . . . with the belt of truth fastened around your waist.​—Eph. 6:14.



We must be firmly resolved to live in harmony with the truth day by day. Wear the belt of truth around your waist. In Bible times, the belt of a soldier supported and protected his waist and his internal organs. For his belt to provide protection, however, it had to be tight. A loose belt gave little support. How does our spiritual belt of truth protect us? If we keep it wrapped tightly around us like a belt, the truth will guard us from faulty reasoning and will help us to make sound decisions. When we are tempted or under trial, Bible truth will strengthen our resolve to do what is right. Just as a soldier would never have thought of going into battle without his belt, we must be determined never to loosen or remove our belt of truth. Rather, we do all we can to keep it tight around our body by living in harmony with the truth. w18.11 12 ¶15




Tuesday, July 14

Buy truth and never sell it.​—Prov. 23:23.



We do not find the truth in God’s Word without effort. We must be willing to make whatever sacrifices are needed to obtain it. As the wise writer of Proverbs notes, once we “buy,” or acquire, “truth,” we must be careful not to “sell,” or lose, it. Even something that is free may come at a cost. The Hebrew word translated “buy” at Proverbs 23:23 can also mean “acquire.” Both words imply making an effort or exchanging something for an item of value. We might illustrate the idea of buying truth this way. Let us say that a market advertises “Free Bananas.” Will those bananas miraculously appear on our table? No. We have to make the effort to go to the market to pick them up. Are the bananas free? Yes, but we must expend the effort and take the time to go to the market. Similarly, we do not need money to buy truth. However, we must make an effort to obtain it. w18.11 4 ¶4-5




Wednesday, July 15

His face shone as the sun, and his outer garments became brilliant.​—Matt. 17:2.



Jesus had invited Peter, James, and John to accompany him up into a high mountain. While there, they saw a remarkable vision. Jesus’ face shone brightly and his clothes glistened. Two figures, representing Moses and Elijah, began talking to Jesus about his coming death and resurrection. (Luke 9:29-32) Next, a bright cloud covered them, and they heard a voice from the cloud​—God’s voice! The vision gave a preview of Jesus’ future glory and power as King of God’s Kingdom. No doubt, Christ was encouraged and fortified for the sufferings and painful death he would endure. The vision also built up the disciples’ faith and strengthened them for the tests of integrity and years of hard work that lay ahead. Some 30 years later, the apostle Peter referred to the vision of the transfiguration, showing that the vision was still vivid in his mind.​—2 Pet. 1:16-18. w19.03 10 ¶7-8




Thursday, July 16

We recommend ourselves as God’s ministers, . . . by truthful speech.​—2 Cor. 6:4, 7.



What is one way that true Christians distinguish themselves from members of false religions? We “speak the truth.” (Zech. 8:16, 17) We will tell the truth in ways big and small​—to strangers, coworkers, friends, and loved ones. What if you are a young person who wants to fit in with your peers? Make sure that you never lead a double life, appearing to be chaste when around family and the congregation but acting entirely different when around worldly youths and on social media. That is living a lie, playing false to your parents, to fellow worshippers, and to God. (Ps. 26:4, 5) Jehovah knows when we are only ‘honoring him with our lips, but our heart is far removed from him.’ (Mark 7:6) How much better it is to do as the proverb says: “Let your heart not envy sinners, but be in the fear of Jehovah all day long.”​—Prov. 23:17. w18.10 9 ¶14-15




Friday, July 17

God is love, and the one who remains in love remains in union with God and God remains in union with him.​—1 John 4:16.



God’s people are a spiritual family​—one marked by love. (1 John 4:21) That love is usually reflected, not in rare heroic acts, but in countless smaller ways, such as by thoughtful words and kind deeds. When we treat others kindly and considerately, we “become imitators of God, as beloved children.” (Eph. 5:1) Jesus perfectly imitated his Father. “Come to me, all you who are toiling and loaded down,” said Jesus, “and I will refresh you . . . , for I am mild-tempered and lowly in heart.” (Matt. 11:28, 29) When we imitate Christ’s example by “[showing] consideration to the lowly one,” we receive our heavenly Father’s favor and find great happiness. (Ps. 41:1) So, let us manifest our love by continuing to show consideration for others in the family, in the congregation, and in the field ministry. w18.09 28 ¶1-2




Saturday, July 18

We are God’s fellow workers.​—1 Cor. 3:9.



When disasters strike, God’s people have opportunities to work with God by helping their brothers in practical ways. For example, they give financial support to those affected. (John 13:34, 35; Acts 11:27-30) Another practical way is by assisting with cleaning or reconstruction. Gabriela, a sister from Poland whose home was virtually destroyed by a flood, cheered up when brothers from nearby congregations came to her aid. “I don’t want to talk about what I lost​—those are just material things,” she relates. “Rather, I want to tell you how much I gained. This experience reassured me that being a part of the Christian congregation is a unique privilege as well as a source of joy and happiness.” Many who receive help after a disaster say that they feel richer from the experience. And those who work with Jehovah to provide such help enjoy great satisfaction themselves.​—Acts 20:35; 2 Cor. 9:6, 7. w18.08 26 ¶12




Sunday, July 19

Safeguard your heart.​—Prov. 4:23.



If we are to succeed in safeguarding our heart, we must be able to identify dangers and react quickly to protect ourselves. The word translated “safeguard” reminds us of the work done by a watchman. In King Solomon’s day, watchmen stood guard on the walls of a city and sounded an alarm if they saw danger approaching. That mental picture helps us understand what we must do to stop Satan from corrupting our thinking. In ancient times, watchmen worked closely with city gatekeepers. (2 Sam. 18:24-26) Together, they helped protect the city by making sure that the gates were closed whenever an enemy came near. (Neh. 7:1-3) Our Bible-trained conscience can act as our watchman and warn us when Satan tries to invade our heart​—in other words, when he tries to influence our thoughts, feelings, motives, or desires. Whenever our conscience sounds the alarm, we need to listen and shut the gate, so to speak. w19.01 17 ¶10-11




Monday, July 20

Let them serve as ministers, as they are free from accusation.​—1 Tim. 3:10.



Younger men must be evaluated, not by personal or cultural viewpoints, but by the measuring stick of God’s Word. (2 Tim. 3:16, 17) Unscriptural cultural views can hold back qualified brothers. In one country, a well-qualified ministerial servant was entrusted with weighty responsibilities. Although the elders in his congregation agreed that the young brother met the Scriptural qualifications of an elder to a reasonable degree, he was not recommended for appointment. A few older elders insisted that the brother looked too young to be viewed as an elder. Sadly, the brother was held back from appointment simply because of the way he looked. Reports indicate that this way of thinking affects many in various parts of the world. How important it is that we rely on the Scriptures rather than on our own viewpoints! That is the only way to obey Jesus and stop judging by the outward appearance.​—John 7:24. w18.08 12 ¶16-17




Tuesday, July 21

When anyone replies to a matter before he hears the facts, it is foolish and humiliating.​—Prov. 18:13.



There is danger in quickly forwarding e-mails and text messages. In some lands, our work is under restriction or outright ban. Our opposers in such lands may purposely circulate reports designed to instill fear or to cause us to distrust one another. Consider what happened in the former Soviet Union. The secret police, known as the KGB, spread rumors that various prominent brothers had betrayed Jehovah’s people. Many put confidence in such false reports, and as a result, they separated themselves from Jehovah’s organization. How sad! Thankfully, many later returned, but some never did. Their faith was shipwrecked. (1 Tim. 1:19) How can we avoid such a disastrous outcome? Refuse to circulate negative or unsubstantiated reports. Do not be naive, or gullible. Be sure you have the facts. w18.08 4 ¶8




Wednesday, July 22

Truly I tell you today, you will be with me in Paradise.​—Luke 23:43.



In the earliest available Greek manuscripts, punctuation was not consistently used. Thus, the question arises: Was Jesus saying, “I tell you, today you will be with me in Paradise”? Or was he saying, “I tell you today, you will be with me in Paradise”? Recall that Jesus had earlier told his followers: “The Son of man will be in the heart of the earth for three days and three nights.” (Matt. 12:40; 16:21; 17:22, 23; Mark 10:34; Acts 10:39, 40) So Jesus did not go to any Paradise on the day he and that criminal died. Jesus was “in the Grave [or “Hades”]” for days, until God resurrected him. (Acts 2:31, 32; ftn.) That dying criminal did not know that Jesus had made a covenant with his faithful apostles to be with him in the heavenly Kingdom. (Luke 22:29) Furthermore, that criminal had not even been baptized. (John 3:3-6, 12) Thus, what Jesus promised must be an earthly paradise that was to be fulfilled later. w18.12 6 ¶17-18, 20-21




Thursday, July 23

Make for us a god who will go ahead of us, because we do not know what has happened to this Moses.​—Ex. 32:1.



Soon the Israelites were worshipping a golden calf! Despite this obvious act of disobedience, the Israelites somehow fooled themselves into thinking that they were still on Jehovah’s side. Why, Aaron even called their calf worship “a festival to Jehovah”! How did Jehovah react? He felt betrayed. Jehovah told Moses that the people had “corrupted themselves” and had “deviated from the way [He] commanded them to go.” In his “burning anger,” Jehovah even considered wiping out the newly formed nation of Israel. (Ex. 32:5-10) However, Jehovah decided not to eliminate the Israelites. (Ex. 32:14) Although initially involved in setting up the idol, Aaron repented and joined the rest of the Levites who declared themselves to be on Jehovah’s side. While thousands lost their lives because of their idolatry, those who were on Jehovah’s side were promised a blessing.​—Ex. 32:26-29. w18.07 20 ¶13-16




Friday, July 24

Beware of the scribes . . . who love greetings in the marketplaces . . . and the most prominent places at evening meals.​—Luke 20:46.



What is the greatest form of recognition that we can strive for? It is not the kind of attention that people seek in the academic, business, and entertainment fields of this world. Rather, it is the kind that Paul described for us in these words: “Now that you have come to know God or, rather, have come to be known by God, how is it that you are turning back again to the weak and beggarly elementary things and want to slave for them over again?” (Gal. 4:9) What a wonderful privilege it is to “come to be known by God,” the Supreme Ruler of the universe! He is willing to have an intimate relationship with us. As one scholar stated, we “become objects of his favourable attention.” When Jehovah acknowledges us as his friends, we achieve the very reason for our existence.​—Eccl. 12:13, 14. w18.07 8 ¶3-4




Saturday, July 25

I ponder over your reminders.​—Ps. 119:99.



In order to benefit from God’s laws, we must grow to love and respect them. (Amos 5:15) But how do we actually do that? A key is to learn to view things the way Jehovah views them. To illustrate: Imagine that you are having difficulty sleeping well. Your doctor prescribes a program involving diet, exercise, and lifestyle changes. After trying the program, you find that it works! You probably would greatly appreciate your doctor for helping you to improve the quality of your life. In like manner, our Creator has given us laws that can protect us from the damaging effects of sin and thus improve our life. Think about how we benefit from following the Bible’s laws about lying, scheming, stealing, sexual immorality, violence, and spiritism. (Prov. 6:16-19; Rev. 21:8) When we experience the rich rewards that come from doing things Jehovah’s way, our heart naturally grows in love and appreciation for both Jehovah and his laws. w18.06 17 ¶5-6




Sunday, July 26

Are you the King of the Jews?​—John 18:33.



Perhaps the governor feared that Jesus could cause political unrest, a principal concern throughout Pilate’s rule. Jesus answered: “My Kingdom is no part of this world.” (John 18:36) He would not get involved in politics, for his Kingdom was to be a heavenly one. He told Pilate that his work on earth was to “bear witness to the truth.” (John 18:37) When we understand our assignment as clearly as Jesus understood his, we will avoid even lending tacit, or unspoken, support for political independence movements. This may not be easy. “People in our area are becoming more and more radical,” notes one traveling overseer. “A nationalistic spirit has taken over, and many take for granted that political independence will improve their lives. Thankfully, the brothers have safeguarded their Christian unity by concentrating on preaching the good news of the Kingdom. They look to God to solve injustice and the other problems we face.” w18.06 4-5 ¶6-7




Monday, July 27

Oppose the Devil, and he will flee from you.​—Jas. 4:7.



Only three books of the Hebrew Scriptures, 1 Chronicles, Job, and Zechariah, mention Satan, which means “Resister.” Why was little said about our enemy prior to the arrival of the Messiah? Apparently, Jehovah did not want to give Satan undue prominence by devoting large portions of the Hebrew Scriptures to discussing him and his activity. Jehovah’s primary purpose for inspiring that section of the Scriptures was to identify the Messiah and lead God’s people to him. (Luke 24:44; Gal. 3:24) When that was accomplished and the Messiah arrived, Jehovah used him and his disciples to reveal much of what we know about Satan and the angels who joined him. That is fitting, since it is Jesus and his anointed corulers whom Jehovah will use to crush Satan and his followers. (Rom. 16:20; Rev. 17:14; 20:10) Remember, the Devil’s power is limited. We are backed by Jehovah, Jesus, and the faithful angels. With their help, we can resist our enemy. w18.05 22-23 ¶2-4




Tuesday, July 28

He takes away every branch in me not bearing fruit.​—John 15:2.



Jehovah views us as his servants only if we bear fruit. (Matt. 13:23; 21:43) Hence, in the illustration found at John 15:1-5, the fruitage that each Christian must bear cannot refer to new disciples whom we may be privileged to make. (Matt. 28:19) Otherwise, faithful Witnesses who do not succeed in making disciples because of preaching in an unresponsive territory would be like the barren branches in Jesus’ illustration. However, such a conclusion is unthinkable! Why? Because we cannot force people to become disciples. It would go against Jehovah’s loving ways to disqualify his servants for failing to do something that is beyond their reach. Whatever Jehovah asks of us is always reachable. (Deut. 30:11-14) What, then, is the fruit we must bear? Clearly, the fruit must refer to an activity that each of us is able to carry out. What activity? The preaching of the good news of God’s Kingdom.​—Matt. 24:14. w18.05 14 ¶8-9




Wednesday, July 29

You are from your father the Devil, . . . a liar and the father of the lie.​—John 8:44.



Whether called pastors, priests, rabbis, swamis, or by some other title, religious leaders abound in the world today. Like their first-century counterparts, they are “suppressing the truth” from God’s Word and have “exchanged the truth of God for the lie.” (Rom. 1:18, 25) They promote such false teachings as “once saved, always saved,” the immortality of the human soul, reincarnation, and the foolish idea that God would condone homosexual lifestyles and same-sex marriages. Politicians have used lies to mislead mankind. One of the biggest lies is yet to be heard when men proclaim that they have achieved “peace and security!” But “then sudden destruction is to be instantly on them.” May we not be taken in by their attempt to minimize how precarious this system of things really is! In truth, we “know very well that Jehovah’s day is coming exactly as a thief in the night.”​—1 Thess. 5:1-4. w18.10 7-8 ¶6-8




Thursday, July 30

You must assist those who are weak and must keep in mind the words of the Lord Jesus, when he himself said: “There is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving.”​—Acts 20:35.



Jesus Christ, through his anointed brothers and supportive “princes” of the other sheep, provides encouragement and guidance to despondent and discouraged ones in this time of need. That is as it should be, for these elders are not “masters” over the faith of others but “are fellow workers” for the joy of their brothers. (Isa. 32:1, 2; 2 Cor. 1:24) The apostle Paul set an example to be imitated. He wrote to the persecuted Christians in Thessalonica: “Having tender affection for you, we were determined to impart to you, not only the good news of God but also our very selves, because you became so beloved to us.” (1 Thess. 2:8) Showing that just a word of encouragement does not always suffice, Paul told the elders from Ephesus the words of today’s text. w18.04 21-22 ¶6-8




Friday, July 31

Jehovah is the Spirit, and where the spirit of Jehovah is, there is freedom.​—2 Cor. 3:17.



To enjoy and benefit from that freedom, we must ‘turn to Jehovah,’ that is, come into a personal relationship with him. (2 Cor. 3:16) The Israelites in the wilderness did not view Jehovah’s dealings with them in a spiritual way. It was as if their hearts and minds were veiled and hardened, focused only on using their newfound freedom from Egypt in a physical, or fleshly, way. (Heb. 3:8-10) The freedom that is associated with the spirit of Jehovah, however, is more than liberation from physical slavery. Far beyond what human efforts can hope to achieve, the spirit of Jehovah brings liberation from enslavement to sin and death, as well as from slavery to false worship and its practices. (Rom. 6:23; 8:2) What a glorious freedom that is! A person can enjoy the benefits of such freedom even when imprisoned or enslaved.​—Gen. 39:20-23. w18.04 9 ¶3-5




