
March
Sunday, March 1

You rule over everything.​—1 Chron. 29:12.



When reading the first two chapters of Genesis, we can easily see that Adam and Eve enjoyed the kind of freedom that people today can only hope for​—freedom from want, from fear, and from oppression. The first couple’s life was completely free from worries about food, work, sickness, and death. (Gen. 1:27-29; 2:8, 9, 15) When it comes to freedom, though, a key point for us to bear in mind is that Jehovah God alone has what can be called absolute and unlimited freedom. Why? Because he is the Creator of all things and the almighty Sovereign of the universe. (1 Tim. 1:17; Rev. 4:11) Accordingly, all creatures in heaven and on earth have freedom in only a relative sense. They must recognize that Jehovah God has the ultimate authority to impose what he determines to be just, necessary, and reasonable limits. That, in fact, was what Jehovah God did with his human creation right from the beginning. w18.04 4 ¶4, 6




Monday, March 2

How beautiful . . . are the feet of the one bringing good news.​—Isa. 52:7.



In this present system, we endure only with Jehovah’s help. (2 Cor. 4:7, 8) But think of those who struggle to survive in this world without a close friendship with Jehovah. Like Jesus, we feel pity for them, and we are moved to bring them “good news of something better.” So be patient with those whom you teach. Remember, they may never have considered some of the Bible truths we know very well. And many have a strong emotional connection to their current beliefs. They may see their religious views as uniting them with their family, their culture, and their community. Before we ask people to give up their cherished “old” beliefs, we may first need to help them build a strong appreciation for “new” truths​—Bible teachings that at the outset are unfamiliar to them. Only then will they be ready to abandon their former viewpoint. It may take time to help people make such changes.​—Rom. 12:2. w19.03 23 ¶10, 12; 24 ¶13




Tuesday, March 3

I have approved you.​—Mark 1:11.



Jehovah’s example in expressing love and approval reminds us to look for opportunities to encourage others. (John 5:20) We blossom when someone we care about shows love to us and commends us for the good we do. Likewise, our brothers and sisters in the congregation and our family members need our love and encouragement. When we commend others, we strengthen their faith and help them to serve Jehovah loyally. Parents especially need to encourage their children. When parents commend their children sincerely and show them affection, they help their children to flourish. The words: “I have approved you” show that Jehovah was confident that Jesus would faithfully carry out his Father’s will. Jehovah has such confidence in his Son, so we can likewise be completely confident that Jesus will faithfully carry out all of Jehovah’s promises. (2 Cor. 1:20) When we consider Jesus’ example, we are even more determined to learn from him and to follow in his footsteps.​—1 Pet. 2:21. w19.03 8 ¶3; 9 ¶5-6




Wednesday, March 4

The law of the spirit that gives life in union with Christ Jesus has set you free from the law of sin and of death.​—Rom. 8:2.



When we realize the true value of a costly gift, we are moved to show our gratitude to the giver. The Israelites did not appreciate the freedom that Jehovah bestowed upon them when he delivered them from slavery in Egypt. Within a few months of their deliverance, they began to long for the food and drink they once had in Egypt and complained about Jehovah’s provisions, even wanting to return to Egypt. Just imagine, they put ‘fish, cucumbers, watermelons, leeks, onions, and garlic’ above their God-given freedom to worship the true God, Jehovah. Is it any wonder that Jehovah became very angry with his people? (Num. 11:5, 6, 10; 14:3, 4) What a lesson for us! The apostle Paul urged all Christians not to take for granted the freedom that Jehovah has kindly given us through his Son, Jesus Christ.​—2 Cor. 6:1. w18.04 9-10 ¶6-7




Thursday, March 5

He loves righteousness and justice. The earth is filled with Jehovah’s loyal love.​—Ps. 33:5.



All of us want to be loved. And all of us want to be treated fairly. If we are repeatedly denied love and justice, we may feel worthless and hopeless. Jehovah knows that we long for love and yearn for justice. (Ps. 33:5) We can be sure that our God loves us dearly and wants us to be treated fairly. This becomes evident when we look closely at the Law that Jehovah gave to the nation of Israel through Moses. As we study the Mosaic Law, we discover the warm feelings of our loving God, Jehovah. (Rom. 13:8-10) We can note that the Mosaic Law was built on love because love motivates all that Jehovah does. (1 John 4:8) Jehovah founded that entire code of laws on two basic commands​—love God, and love your neighbor. (Lev. 19:18; Deut. 6:5; Matt. 22:36-40) Each of the 600 and more commandments that make up the Law reveals a facet of Jehovah’s love. w19.02 20-21 ¶1-4




Friday, March 6

Where your treasure is, there your heart will be also.​—Matt. 6:21.



Job was careful about his behavior with those of the opposite sex. (Job 31:1) He knew that it was improper to pay romantic attention to any woman other than his wife. Today, we live in a world that bombards us with sexual temptation. Like Job, will we refuse to pay improper attention to anyone to whom we are not married? Will we also refuse to look at lewd or pornographic images in any form? (Matt. 5:28) If we exert such self-control daily, we will strengthen ourselves to keep our integrity. Job also obeyed Jehovah in the way he viewed material things. Job saw that if he put his trust in his possessions, he would commit a grave error deserving of punishment. (Job 31:24, 25, 28) Today, we live in a very materialistic world. If we develop a balanced view of money and possessions, as the Bible admonishes us to do, we will strengthen our determination to keep our integrity.​—Prov. 30:8, 9; Matt. 6:19, 20. w19.02 6 ¶13-14




Saturday, March 7

Just as the Father has loved me, so I have loved you.​—John 15:9.



Jesus perfectly reflected Jehovah’s intense love for us in everything that he did. (1 John 4:8-10) Above all, Jesus was moved from the heart to give his life in our behalf. Whether we are of the anointed or of the “other sheep,” we benefit from the love that Jehovah and his Son have shown to us by means of that sacrifice. (John 10:16; 1 John 2:2) Think, too, about the very nature of the Memorial meal; it reveals Jesus’ love and consideration for his disciples. How so? Jesus showed love for his spirit-begotten followers by instituting, not a complicated ritual, but a simple meal for them to observe. As time passed, those anointed disciples needed to observe the Memorial each year, doing so under various circumstances, including imprisonment. (Rev. 2:10) Were they able to obey Jesus? Yes, they were! Down to modern times, true Christians have sought to commemorate Jesus’ death. w19.01 24 ¶13-15




Sunday, March 8

You will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.​—John 8:32.



That freedom includes freedom from false religion, ignorance, and superstition. And it involves more. It will ultimately include “the glorious freedom of the children of God.” (Rom. 8:21) Taste that freedom even now by ‘remaining in Christ’s word,’ or teachings. (John 8:31) In this way, you will come to “know the truth” not just by learning about it but also by living it. In this old system, even a so-called good life is at best uncertain and short. We do not know what tomorrow will bring. (Jas. 4:13, 14) The wise course, then, is to stay on the path that leads to “the real life”​—everlasting life. (1 Tim. 6:19) Of course, God does not force us to walk that path. The choice is ours. Make Jehovah your “portion.” (Ps. 16:5) Cherish the many “good things” he has given you. (Ps. 103:5) And have faith that he can give you “abundant joy” and “happiness . . . forever.”​—Ps. 16:11. w18.12 28 ¶19, 21




Monday, March 9

A husband should not leave his wife.​—1 Cor. 7:11.



All Christians should strive to show regard for marriage, even as Jesus and Jehovah do. However, some may fail to do so, for humans are imperfect. (Rom. 7:18-23) Thus, it should not shock us that some Christians in the first century had troubled marriages. Paul wrote that “a wife should not separate from her husband”; yet, in some cases that did occur. (1 Cor. 7:10) Paul did not explain what led to such a separation. The problem was not, for example, that the husband had been immoral, giving the wife a basis for divorce and remarriage. Paul wrote that a wife who was separated from her husband should “remain unmarried or else be reconciled with her husband.” So the two were still united in God’s eyes. Paul advised that whatever the underlying problems, if sexual immorality is not involved, the goal should be reconciliation. The two could seek Bible-based help from congregation elders. w18.12 13 ¶14-15




Tuesday, March 10

Keep on . . . seeking first the Kingdom and his righteousness.​—Matt. 6:33.



Today, God’s will for his people is to develop a friendship with him and have as full a share as possible in his work. (Matt. 28:19, 20; Jas. 4:8) Well-meaning people might try to sway us from that course. For example, what if your employer offered you a promotion with a substantial increase in salary but the position would interfere with your spiritual activities? Or if you are in school, suppose you were offered an opportunity to move away from home to receive additional education. At that moment, would you need to do prayerful research, consult with others, and then make a decision? Why not learn Jehovah’s thinking on such matters now and endeavor to make his thoughts your own? Then, if you are ever presented with such an offer, you may find that it hardly amounts to a temptation. Your spiritual goals are set, your heart is resolved, and all that remains for you is to carry out a decision that you have already made. w18.11 27 ¶18




Wednesday, March 11

Above all the things that you guard, safeguard your heart.​—Prov. 4:23.



Solomon became king of Israel when he was just a young man. In the early part of his reign, Jehovah appeared to him in a dream and said: “Ask what you would like me to give you.” Solomon replied: “I am just a youth and I am inexperienced. . . . So grant your servant an obedient heart to judge your people.” (1 Ki. 3:5-10) “An obedient heart”​—what a modest request that was! No wonder Jehovah loved Solomon! (2 Sam. 12:24) Our God was so pleased with the young king’s answer that he gave Solomon “a wise and understanding heart.” (1 Ki. 3:12) As long as he was faithful, Solomon enjoyed many blessings. He had the honor of building a temple “for the name of Jehovah the God of Israel.” (1 Ki. 8:20) He became famous for his God-given wisdom. And the things he said when he was inspired by God are recorded in three books of the Bible. One of these is the book of Proverbs. w19.01 14 ¶1-2




Thursday, March 12

Stop being molded by this system of things.​—Rom. 12:2.



Some people resist the idea of having anyone mold or influence their thoughts. “I think for myself,” they say. They probably mean that they make their own decisions and that it is proper to do so. They do not wish to be controlled, nor do they want to surrender their individuality. We can be assured, however, that bringing our thinking into harmony with Jehovah’s does not mean giving up all individual thought or expression. As stated at 2 Corinthians 3:17, “where the spirit of Jehovah is, there is freedom.” We are free to develop our own distinct personalities. We can have our personal preferences and choose our fields of interest. Indeed, Jehovah designed us to do so. However, we cannot use our freedom without restraint. (1 Pet. 2:16) When it comes to issues of right and wrong, Jehovah wants us to be guided by his thinking as revealed in his Word. w18.11 19 ¶5-6




Friday, March 13

Demas has forsaken me because he loved the present system of things.​—2 Tim. 4:10.



When we learned the truth, our interest in material things became secondary to our spiritual pursuits. We were happy to make material sacrifices in order to walk in the truth. Over time, however, we may see others buying the latest electronic devices or enjoying other material advantages. We could begin to feel that we are losing out. No longer content with the necessities, we might put spiritual pursuits aside in favor of accumulating material possessions. Such a course reminds us of Demas. His love for “the present system of things” led him to abandon a life of service with the apostle Paul. Why did Demas leave Paul? Whether he loved material things more than spiritual activities or he was no longer willing to make personal sacrifices in order to serve with Paul, the Bible does not say. We surely do not want to rekindle a desire for material things and let those attractions crowd out our love for the truth. w18.11 10 ¶9




Saturday, March 14

You certainly will not die.​—Gen. 3:4.



Satan’s lie was malicious because he knew full well that if Eve believed him and ate the fruit, she would die. Eve and Adam both disobeyed Jehovah’s command and eventually died. (Gen. 3:6; 5:5) More than that, through such sin, “death spread to all men.” In fact, “death ruled as king . . . , even over those who had not sinned in the same way that Adam transgressed.” (Rom. 5:12, 14) Now, instead of being able to enjoy perfect, endless life as God had originally intended, humans are doing well if they live “70 years, or 80 if one is especially strong.” Even then, life is often “filled with trouble and sorrow.” (Ps. 90:10) How tragic​—all resulting from Satan’s lie! In explaining the Devil’s actions, Jesus stated: “He did not stand fast in the truth, because truth is not in him.” (John 8:44) Truth is still not in Satan, for he continues “misleading the entire inhabited earth” with his lies. (Rev. 12:9) We do not want to be misled by the Devil. w18.10 6-7 ¶1-4




Sunday, March 15

Happy are the peacemakers, since they will be called sons of God.​—Matt. 5:9.



Those who take the initiative to make peace have good reason to be happy. The disciple James wrote: “The fruit of righteousness is sown in peaceful conditions for those who are making peace.” (Jas. 3:18) When we have a strained relationship with someone either in the congregation or in the family, we can plead for God’s help to be peacemakers. Thus, Jehovah’s holy spirit, righteous conduct, and happiness can predominate. Jesus emphasized the importance of taking the initiative to make peace when he said: “If, then, you are bringing your gift to the altar and there you remember that your brother has something against you, leave your gift there in front of the altar, and go away. First make your peace with your brother, and then come back and offer your gift.”​—Matt. 5:23, 24. w18.09 21 ¶17




Monday, March 16

I am giving you a new commandment, that you love one another; just as I have loved you, you also love one another.​—John 13:34.



On his final night with his disciples, Jesus mentioned love nearly 30 times. He specifically indicated that his disciples should “love one another.” (John 15:12, 17) Their love for one another would be so outstanding that it would clearly distinguish them as his true followers. (John 13:35) This love is not mere sentimentality. Jesus was referring to a most noble quality​—self-sacrificing love. He said: “No one has love greater than this, that someone should surrender his life in behalf of his friends. You are my friends if you do what I am commanding you.” (John 15:13, 14) The genuine, self-sacrificing love and unbreakable unity of Jehovah’s servants today identify them as God’s people. (1 John 3:10, 11) How grateful we are that Christlike love prevails among Jehovah’s servants regardless of their nationality, tribe, language, or background! w18.09 12 ¶1-2




Tuesday, March 17

If anyone does not provide for those who are his own, and especially for those who are members of his household, he has disowned the faith.​—1 Tim. 5:8.



Jehovah expects his servants to care for their families. For example, you may have to work to provide financially for your loved ones. Many mothers stay at home to look after their infants. And some adult children may have to care for infirm parents. These are necessary activities. If you have such responsibilities, you likely cannot set aside as much time for theocratic activities as you would like to. But take heart! Jehovah is pleased when you provide for your family. (1 Cor. 10:31) If you do not have pressing family responsibilities, could you assist fellow worshippers who are caregivers and those who are infirm, elderly, or otherwise in need? Why not look around in your congregation and take note of who needs help? In doing so, you might be working with Jehovah to answer a prayer.​—1 Cor. 10:24. w18.08 24 ¶3, 5




Wednesday, March 18

God was with him, and he rescued him out of all his tribulations.​—Acts 7:9, 10.



Joseph was about 17 years old when his own brothers out of jealousy sold him as a slave. Prior to this, Joseph had been his father’s favorite. (Gen. 37:2-4, 23-28) For about 13 years, Joseph had to endure slavery and imprisonment in Egypt, far away from his beloved father, Jacob. What helped Joseph not to give in to despair and bitterness? While suffering in prison, Joseph must have focused his mind on evidence of Jehovah’s blessing. (Gen. 39:21; Ps. 105:17-19) The prophetic dreams that Joseph had when he was younger would also have given him confidence that he had Jehovah’s favor. (Gen. 37:5-11) He likely poured out his anguish to Jehovah on more than one occasion. (Ps. 145:18) In response to Joseph’s heartfelt prayers, Jehovah gave him the inner conviction that He would be “with him” in all his trials. w18.10 28 ¶3-4




Thursday, March 19

The poor man is hated even by his neighbors, but many are the friends of the rich person.​—Prov. 14:20.



Material wealth is a factor that can affect our view of others. But how could a person’s wealth or his poverty affect the way we view him? Holy spirit moved Solomon to record a sad truth about imperfect humans as shown in today’s text. What does this proverb teach us? If we are not careful, we could desire the friendship of brothers who are wealthy while shunning brothers who are poor. Why is it so dangerous to measure the value of others solely on the basis of their material wealth? Because doing so could create class distinctions in the congregation. The disciple James warned that this problem was dividing some congregations in the first century. (Jas. 2:1-4) We must be on guard not to allow this thinking to affect our congregation today and make sure that we fight against making judgments that are based on the outward appearance. w18.08 10 ¶8-10




Friday, March 20

Have intense love for one another.​—1 Pet. 4:8.



Our appreciation for Jehovah’s special friendship is shown in how we treat fellow worshippers. They too belong to Jehovah. If we never lose sight of that fact, we will always treat our brothers and sisters with kindness and love. (1 Thess. 5:15) Jesus said to his followers: “By this all will know that you are my disciples​—if you have love among yourselves.” (John 13:35) Interestingly, Malachi depicted Jehovah as “paying attention and listening” as His people interact with one another. (Mal. 3:16) Jehovah indeed “knows those who belong to him.” (2 Tim. 2:19) He is keenly aware of every single thing we do and say. (Heb. 4:13) When we are less than kind to our fellow worshippers, Jehovah is “paying attention and listening.” When we are hospitable, generous, forgiving, and kind to one another, we can be sure that Jehovah takes notice of that as well.​—Heb. 13:16. w18.07 26 ¶15, 17




Saturday, March 21

To [Jehovah] you should cling.​—Deut. 10:20.



It makes sense to cling to Jehovah. No one is more powerful, wise, or loving than our God! Who of us would not want to be on his side? (Ps. 96:4-6) Still, some of God’s worshippers have wavered when a situation called for them to take sides with Jehovah. Consider the case of Cain. He did not profess to worship any other god but Jehovah. Cain’s worship, however, was not acceptable to God. There were seeds of wickedness growing deep within his heart. (1 John 3:12) Jehovah reached out to Cain and told him: “If you turn to doing good, will you not be restored to favor? But if you do not turn to doing good, sin is crouching at the door, and its craving is to dominate you; but will you get the mastery over it?” (Gen. 4:6, 7) Jehovah was, in effect, telling Cain, “If you repent and take a firm stand on my side, I will, in turn, be on your side.” But Cain did not listen to the counsel. w18.07 17 ¶1, 3; 18 ¶4




Sunday, March 22

Let your light shine before men.​—Matt. 5:16.



One way we let our light shine is by preaching the good news and making disciples. (Matt. 28:19, 20) In addition, we can glorify Jehovah by our Christian conduct. Householders and passersby observe our behavior. Our friendly smile and warm greeting say much about who we are and what kind of God we worship. “When you enter the house,” Jesus told his disciples, “greet the household.” (Matt. 10:12) In the area where Jesus and the apostles often preached, it was not unusual for people to invite strangers into their homes. Today, this is not the custom in many places. Still, your positive, friendly manner as you explain why you are there can often allay a householder’s concern or ease his irritation. A pleasant smile is often the best introduction. That has also proved true when brothers and sisters engage in public witnessing using a literature cart. You may find that people often react favorably to a pleasant smile and greeting. w18.06 22 ¶4-5




Monday, March 23

God is not partial.​—Acts 10:34.



The apostle Peter had a custom of associating only with Jews. But after God made it clear that Christians should not be partial, Peter preached to Cornelius, a Roman soldier. (Acts 10:28, 35) Thereafter, Peter enjoyed food and association with Gentile believers. Years later, though, Peter stopped eating with non-Jewish Christians in the city of Antioch. (Gal. 2:11-14) In that case, Paul gave Peter a fitting reproof, which he evidently accepted. When Peter wrote his first letter to Jewish and Gentile Christians in Asia Minor, he spoke warmly about the whole association of brothers. (1 Pet. 1:1; 2:17) Clearly, the apostles did learn from Jesus’ example to love “all sorts of men.” (John 12:32; 1 Tim. 4:10) Although it took time, they adjusted their way of thinking. Putting on “the new personality,” the early Christians came to view all people as equal in the sight of God.​—Col. 3:10, 11. w18.06 11 ¶15-16




Tuesday, March 24

Stand firm . . . wearing the breastplate of righteousness.​—Eph. 6:14.



One type of breastplate worn by a Roman soldier in the first century consisted of overlapping horizontal strips of iron. This type of garment required that he regularly check that the plates were firmly fixed in place in order to protect his heart and other vital organs. What an appropriate symbol of how Jehovah’s righteous standards can protect our figurative heart! (Prov. 4:23) Just as a soldier would not swap a breastplate of iron for one made of an inferior metal, we would never want to exchange Jehovah’s standards of what is right for our own. Our judgment is just too flawed to offer us the protection that we need. (Prov. 3:5, 6) Instead, we regularly check that the ‘iron plates’ Jehovah has given us are firmly fixed over our heart. And the more we love divine truths, the easier it is to carry our “breastplate,” that is, to live by God’s righteous standards.​—Ps. 111:7, 8; 1 John 5:3. w18.05 28 ¶3-4, 6-7




Wednesday, March 25

The people were quarreling with Moses.​—Num. 20:3.



Despite Moses’ long record of unselfish leadership, the people complained not only about the lack of water but also about Moses, as if it were his fault that they were thirsty. (Num. 20:1-5, 9-11) In the heat of anger, Moses lost his mild disposition. Rather than speak in faith to the rock, as Jehovah had commanded, Moses spoke in bitterness to the people and gave credit to himself. Then, he struck the rock twice and much water gushed out. Pride and anger caused him to make a painful mistake. (Ps. 106:32, 33) For his temporary lack of meekness, Moses was not allowed to enter the Promised Land. (Num. 20:12) From this incident, we learn valuable lessons. First, we must constantly work at maintaining our meek attitude. If we neglect it for a moment, pride may reassert itself and cause us to speak and act foolishly. Second, stress can weaken us, so we must strive to be meek, even when we are under pressure. w19.02 12-13 ¶19-21




Thursday, March 26

This good news of the Kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth.​—Matt. 24:14.



Will obeying Jesus’ command to preach become burdensome? On the contrary. After relating his illustration of the vine, Jesus said that as Kingdom preachers, we will experience joy. (John 15:11) In fact, he assured us that his joy will become ours. How? Jesus compared himself to a vine and his disciples to branches. (John 15:5) A vine supports the branches. As long as the branches are attached to it, they receive water and nourishment that flows from the vine. Similarly, as long as we remain in union with Christ by closely following in his steps, we experience the same joy that he has in doing his Father’s will. (John 4:34; 17:13; 1 Pet. 2:21) Notes Hanne, a pioneer for over 40 years, “The joy I always feel after I have been in the ministry stimulates me to continue in Jehovah’s service.” Indeed, deep-seated joy gives us the strength to keep on preaching even in challenging territories.​—Matt. 5:10-12. w18.05 17 ¶2; 20 ¶14




Friday, March 27

I was appointed . . . a teacher of nations in the matter of faith and truth.​—1 Tim. 2:7.



In the first century, perhaps the apostle who did the most to encourage his brothers was the apostle Paul. He was sent by the holy spirit to preach to the people of the nations of the Greco-Roman world, who worshipped many gods. (Gal. 2:7-9) Paul traveled far and wide in what is now Turkey, as well as in Greece and Italy, establishing Christian congregations among non-Jews. These newly converted Christians “suffered at the hands of [their] own countrymen” and needed encouragement. (1 Thess. 2:14) About the year 50 C.E., Paul wrote to the young congregation in Thessalonica: “We always thank God when we mention all of you in our prayers, for we continually remember your faithful work, your loving labor, and your endurance.” (1 Thess. 1:2, 3) He also exhorted them to strengthen one another, saying: “Keep encouraging one another and building one another up.”​—1 Thess. 5:11. w18.04 18-19 ¶16-17




Saturday, March 28

The good news has to be preached first.​—Mark 13:10.



A young person who focuses his life on the desire to please Jehovah gives special attention to the ministry. Because the preaching work is so urgent, it should be high on our list of priorities. Could you set the goal of sharing in the ministry more often? Could you pioneer? But what if you find little joy in preaching? And how can you be more effective at giving a witness? Two basic steps will help: Prepare well, and do not give up sharing what you know with others. It might surprise you how much joy you will then find when preaching. You could start by working out an answer to a question commonly raised by schoolmates, such as “Why do you believe in God?” Our jw.org website contains articles designed to help young people work out for themselves how to answer that question. There you will find a worksheet entitled “Why Do I Believe in God?” The worksheet will guide you in preparing your own answer. w18.04 27 ¶10-11




Sunday, March 29

Be fruitful and become many.​—Gen. 1:28.



Even though Adam and Eve initially enjoyed freedom in many ways, there were limits imposed on them. Some of them were instinctive, but they were limits nonetheless. For example, our first parents knew that to keep on living, they had to breathe, eat, sleep, and so on. Would they feel a loss of freedom for having to do these things? No, for Jehovah saw to it that even in doing such routine things, they could find enjoyment and contentment. (Ps. 104:14, 15; Eccl. 3:12, 13) Jehovah specifically commanded Adam and Eve to populate the earth and to take care of it. Did this command in some way deprive them of their freedom? Of course not! It was given to enable humans to participate in their Creator’s purpose​—to make the earth into a global paradise home for a race of perfect humans forever. (Ps. 127:3; Isa. 45:18) Enjoying their marriage and family for all eternity could have been Adam and Eve’s happy lot in life. w18.04 4-5 ¶7-8




Monday, March 30

All those who were rightly disposed for everlasting life became believers.​—Acts 13:48.



If we are patient with people in the ministry, we will not expect them to understand or accept Bible truth the first time they hear it. As an example, consider how we might reason with someone about the hope of everlasting life on a paradise earth. Many believe that death is the end of it all or that all good people go to heaven. One brother relates an approach that he finds effective. First, he reads Genesis 1:28. Then, he asks the householder where and in what conditions God wanted the human family to live. Most people answer, “On earth, in good conditions.” Next, the brother reads Isaiah 55:11 and asks whether God’s purpose has changed. Often, the householder will answer no. Finally, the brother reads Psalm 37:10, 11 and asks what mankind’s future will be like. Using this Scriptural reasoning, he has helped a number of people to understand that God still wants good people to live forever in Paradise on earth. w19.03 24 ¶14-15; 25 ¶19




Tuesday, March 31

Listen to him.​—Matt. 17:5.



Jehovah made it clear that he wants us to listen to his Son’s words and obey them. Jesus lovingly taught his followers how to preach the good news, and he repeatedly reminded them to keep on the watch. (Matt. 24:42; 28:19, 20) He also urged them to exert themselves vigorously, and he encouraged them not to give up. (Luke 13:24) Jesus stressed the need for his followers to love one another, to remain united, and to observe his commandments. (John 15:10, 12, 13) That counsel is just as valid today as it was when Jesus gave it. Jesus said: “Everyone who is on the side of the truth listens to my voice.” (John 18:37) We show that we are listening to his voice when we “continue putting up with one another and forgiving one another freely.” (Col. 3:13; Luke 17:3, 4) We further show that we are listening to his voice by zealously preaching the good news “in favorable times and difficult times.”​—2 Tim. 4:2. w19.03 10 ¶9-10




