
November
Sunday, November 1

Whoever feeds on this bread will live forever.​—John 6:58.



When we serve Jehovah, we have the prospect of eventually gaining all that Adam and Eve lost, including the opportunity to live forever. Adam and Eve chose not to serve Jehovah because they failed to develop a strong love for him. Even so, Jehovah allowed them to live long enough to have children and to set their own standards for raising those children. The results of Adam and Eve’s decision to be independent of Jehovah soon made it clear how foolish they had been. Their oldest son murdered his innocent brother, and in time violence and selfishness dominated the human family. (Gen. 4:8; 6:11-13) All the while, Jehovah had a means to save all of Adam and Eve’s children who want to serve him. (John 6:38-40, 57) As you learn more about how patient and loving Jehovah is, your love for him will likely grow. You will want to reject the course that Adam and Eve chose and dedicate yourself to Jehovah. w19.03 2 ¶3; 4 ¶9




Monday, November 2

All of you have . . . fellow feeling.​—1 Pet. 3:8.



To develop fellow feeling, try to understand what family members and fellow believers are going through. Take an interest in the teenagers in the congregation as well as in the sick, the elderly, and those who have lost loved ones in death. Ask how they are doing. Really listen as they express themselves. Help them sense that you truly understand what they are dealing with. Offer to help in whatever way you can. When we do this, we show genuine love in action. (1 John 3:18) We need to be flexible when trying to help others. Why? Because people react to hardship in different ways. Some are eager to talk, while others are more reserved. So we want to offer help, but we should avoid asking questions that are too personal. (1 Thess. 4:11) Even when others do open up, we may find that we do not always share their point of view. Yet, we need to recognize that this is how they feel. We want to be quick to listen and slow to speak.​—Matt. 7:1; Jas. 1:19. w19.03 19 ¶18-19




Tuesday, November 3

I became very frightened.​—Neh. 2:2.



Do you have fears when speaking publicly about the truth? Remember Nehemiah. He served in the court of a powerful king. Nehemiah was gloomy because he had heard that the walls and gates of Jerusalem were in ruins. (Neh. 1:1-4) Imagine the knot he might have had in his stomach when the king asked him to explain why he was looking so unhappy! Nehemiah quickly prayed and then gave his answer. In response, the king did much to help God’s people. (Neh. 2:1-8) Think, too, of Jonah. When Jehovah asked him to speak to the inhabitants of Nineveh, Jonah was so scared that he ran in the opposite direction. (Jonah 1:1-3) But with Jehovah’s help, Jonah carried out his assignment. And the words he spoke did much good for those in Nineveh. (Jonah 3:5-10) From Nehemiah we learn the importance of praying before we answer. And from Jonah we learn that Jehovah can help us to serve him despite our greatest fears. w19.01 11 ¶12




Wednesday, November 4

No one has left house or [family] for my sake and for the sake of the good news who will not get 100 times more now . . . and in the coming system of things, everlasting life.​—Mark 10:29, 30.



When we choose to live according to Bible truth, our ties with friends and relatives may change. Why? Jesus prayed regarding his followers: “Sanctify them by means of the truth; your word is truth.” (John 17:17; ftn.) “Sanctify them” can also mean “set them apart.” When we accept the truth, we are set apart from the world because we no longer fit into its mold. People view us differently because our values have changed. We live by the standards of Bible truth. Though we do not want to cause division, some friends and close family members may distance themselves from us or even oppose our newfound faith. This does not surprise us. Jesus acknowledged: “Indeed, a man’s enemies will be those of his own household.” (Matt. 10:36) He also gave assurance that the rewards for buying truth far exceed any price we may pay. w18.11 6 ¶11




Thursday, November 5

All the congregations of the nations give thanks.​—Rom. 16:4.



The apostle Paul appreciated his brothers and sisters and showed it in the way he talked about them. He always thanked God for them in his private prayers. He also expressed his appreciation when writing to them. In the first 15 verses of Romans 16, Paul mentions 27 fellow Christians by name. Paul specifically recalled that Prisca and Aquila “risked their own necks” for him, and he described Phoebe as “a defender of many,” including Paul. He commended those beloved, hardworking brothers and sisters. (Rom. 16:1-15) Paul was aware that his brothers and sisters were imperfect, but he chose to focus on their good qualities. Imagine how encouraged those brothers and sisters must have been to hear Paul’s comments read aloud to the congregation! As a result, their bond of friendship with Paul no doubt grew stronger. Do you regularly express appreciation for the good things that members of your congregation say and do? w19.02 16 ¶8-9




Friday, November 6

I will not renounce my integrity!​—Job 27:5.



Must we be perfect in order to have integrity? After all, we may feel that we are less than sound, or even very flawed. We need not fear, for Jehovah does not focus on our flaws. His Word tells us: “If errors were what you watch, O Jah, then who, O Jehovah, could stand?” (Ps. 130:3) He knows that we are imperfect, sinful humans, and he forgives us generously. (Ps. 86:5) Also, Jehovah knows our limitations, and he does not expect more of us than we can do. (Ps. 103:12-14) For servants of Jehovah, the key to integrity is love. Our love for God, our loyal devotion to him as our heavenly Father, must remain complete, sound, or whole. If our love remains like that even when we are tested, then we have integrity. (1 Chron. 28:9; Matt. 22:37) We know that Jehovah has righteous standards, and our minds are focused on what pleases our heavenly Father. Our love for him moves us to put him first in the decisions we make and thus display our integrity. w19.02 3 ¶4-5




Saturday, November 7

Safeguard your heart.​—Prov. 4:23.



Each time we see the benefits of doing what is right, our faith grows stronger. (Jas. 1:2, 3) We feel good because we have made Jehovah proud to call us one of his children, and our desire to please him becomes stronger. (Prov. 27:11) Each test becomes an opportunity to show that we are not halfhearted about serving our caring Father. (Ps. 119:113) Instead, we prove that we love Jehovah with a complete heart, one that is fully resolved to obey his commandments and to do his will. (1 Ki. 8:61) Will we make mistakes? Yes; we are imperfect. If we do stumble, remember King Hezekiah’s example. He made mistakes. But he repented and kept on serving Jehovah “with a complete heart.” (Isa. 38:3-6; 2 Chron. 29:1, 2; 32:25, 26) Let us, then, reject Satan’s attempts to infect us with his thinking. Let us pray that we develop “an obedient heart” and remain faithful to Jehovah.​—1 Ki. 3:9; Ps. 139:23, 24. w19.01 18-19 ¶17-18




Sunday, November 8

Let us always offer to God a sacrifice of praise, that is, the fruit of our lips that make public declaration to his name.​—Heb. 13:15.



We benefit ourselves when we comment at meetings. (Isa. 48:17) How so? First, if we plan to give a comment, we are especially motivated to prepare well for the meeting. When we prepare well, we gain a deeper understanding of God’s Word. And the deeper our understanding, the better we can apply the things we learn. Second, we will likely enjoy the meeting more because we are involved in the discussion. Third, because it takes effort to comment, we often remember the points we spoke about long after the meeting ends. Also, we please Jehovah when we express our faith. We can be sure that Jehovah listens to us and deeply appreciates the effort we make to comment at meetings. (Mal. 3:16) He shows his appreciation by blessing us when we try hard to please him. (Mal. 3:10) Clearly, we have good reasons to comment at meetings. w19.01 8 ¶3; 9-10 ¶7-9




Monday, November 9

Abhor what is wicked; cling to what is good.​—Rom. 12:9.



Jehovah takes a very wise approach to his servants. Instead of giving us endless laws, he patiently teaches us to follow the law of love. He wants us to live by godly principles and to hate what is bad. Jesus’ Sermon on the Mount is a fine example of that teaching, for it addresses the root causes of wrongdoing. (Matt. 5:27, 28) As King of God’s Kingdom, Christ will continue to educate us in the new world so that our attitude toward righteousness and lawlessness will perfectly mirror his. (Heb. 1:9) He will also elevate us to physical and mental perfection. Imagine, you will no longer feel the tug of sin or experience the horrible effects of sin. Then, at last, you will enjoy “the glorious freedom” that Jehovah promised you. (Rom. 8:21) Of course, our freedom will never be absolute. Our freedom will have its fullest expression only when it is guided by godlike love.​—1 John 4:7, 8. w18.12 23 ¶19-20




Tuesday, November 10

He must write out a certificate of divorce for her . . . and dismiss her from his house.​—Deut. 24:1.



An Israelite man could divorce his wife if “he found something indecent about her.” The Law did not describe what was meant by “indecent.” It must have been something shameful or serious, not some petty offense. (Deut. 23:14) Sadly, by Jesus’ day many Jews divorced “on every sort of grounds.” (Matt. 19:3) We would surely not want to adopt their attitude. The prophet Malachi revealed God’s view of divorce. That was at a time when it was common for a man treacherously to divorce ‘the wife of his youth,’ maybe to marry a younger, pagan woman. Regarding God’s view, Malachi wrote: “I hate divorce.” (Mal. 2:14-16) That was in line with what God’s Word says about the first marriage: “[A man] will stick to his wife, and they will become one flesh.” (Gen. 2:24) Jesus upheld his Father’s view of marriage, saying: “What God has yoked together, let no man put apart.”​—Matt. 19:6. w18.12 11 ¶7-8




Wednesday, November 11

The harvest is great, but the workers are few.​—Matt. 9:37.



The circumstances of some brothers and sisters allow them to make themselves available farther afield. Their attitude is similar to that of the prophet Isaiah. In response to Jehovah’s question, “Whom shall I send, and who will go for us?” he replied: “Here I am! Send me!” (Isa. 6:8) Do you have the desire and circumstances to respond in a similar way to theocratic needs? Concerning the preaching and disciple-making work, Jesus said: “Therefore, beg the Master of the harvest to send out workers into his harvest.” (Matt. 9:38) Can you serve in a field where the need is greater, perhaps as a pioneer? Or can you help someone else to do so? Many brothers and sisters have felt that the best way to show love for God and neighbor is to pioneer in areas or in territories in which there is a greater need for harvest workers. Can you think of other ways to expand or increase your service? Great joy comes from doing so. w18.08 27 ¶14-15




Thursday, November 12

Let your way of life be free of the love of money, while you are content with the present things.​—Heb. 13:5.



The Gospels give us clear indications of Jehovah’s thinking with regard to material things. God handpicked the human parents who would raise his Son​—a couple who were of modest material means. (Lev. 12:8; Luke 2:24) When Jesus was born, Mary “laid him in a manger, because there was no room for them in the lodging place.” (Luke 2:7) Had Jehovah wanted to, he could in any number of ways have provided better accommodations for the birth of his Son. What mattered to Him, though, was the spiritual environment in which Jesus would be cared for and raised. From this Bible account, we can appreciate Jehovah’s view of material things. Some parents insist on the best for their children materially, even at the expense of their children’s spiritual health. Clearly, though, Jehovah considers spiritual matters to be of supreme importance. Have you adopted Jehovah’s view? What do your actions reveal? w18.11 24 ¶7-8




Friday, November 13

Happy is the people whose God is Jehovah!​—Ps. 144:15.



Being the Source of happiness, God wants us to be happy, and he gives us many reasons to rejoice. (Deut. 12:7; Eccl. 3:12, 13) In today’s world, though, being happy may be a challenge. Why? Stressful events​—such as when a loved one dies or is disfellowshipped or when faced with a divorce or the loss of a job—​can rob us of happiness. Domestic strife and a breakdown in peaceful communication can erode our sense of well-being. Ridicule by workmates or classmates, religious persecution, or imprisonment can undermine our happiness. So can deteriorating health, chronic illness, or depression. Nevertheless, Jesus Christ, “the happy and only Potentate,” delighted in bringing comfort and happiness to people. (1 Tim. 6:15; Matt. 11:28-30) In his Sermon on the Mount, Jesus identified a number of qualities that can contribute to our happiness despite distressing trials in Satan’s world. w18.09 17-18 ¶1-3




Saturday, November 14

Do not cut yourselves or shave your foreheads bald for a dead person.​—Deut. 14:1.



Giving up unscriptural customs and practices can be one of the most difficult prices to pay for truth. (Prov. 23:23) Although some may find it easy to accept the Scriptural basis for abandoning these practices, others may hesitate to pay the price because of pressure from family members, workmates, and close friends. The situation may become emotionally charged, especially if a custom involves rites in honor of dead relatives. The courageous example of others can help us to make the necessary changes. What did newly converted Christians in Ephesus who had been practicing magical arts do in order to put away those unscriptural practices and buy truth? The Bible explains: “[They] brought their books together and burned them up before everybody. And they calculated their value and found them worth 50,000 pieces of silver.” (Acts 19:19, 20) The faithful Christians made this costly sacrifice and gained priceless blessings. w18.11 7 ¶15-16




Sunday, November 15

When they finished circumcising the entire nation, they remained where they were in the camp until they recovered.​—Josh. 5:8.



Soon after Israel crossed the Jordan, Joshua met a man carrying a drawn sword. He was none other than the “chief of Jehovah’s army,” who was ready to defend God’s people. (Josh. 5:13-15; ftn.) Joshua received clear instructions from the angelic Leader on how to take the city of Jericho. At first, some of the instructions may not have appeared to be a good strategy. For instance, Jehovah commanded that all the men be circumcised, which would leave them indisposed for several days. (Gen. 34:24, 25; Josh. 5:2) Likely, those defenseless Israelite soldiers wondered how they would protect their family if enemy warriors raided their camp. But suddenly, the news broke that Jericho was “tightly shut up because of the Israelites.” (Josh. 6:1) Would their trust in God’s direction not have been strengthened by such an unexpected turn of events? w18.10 23 ¶5-7




Monday, November 16

Why are you doing these things? We too are humans having the same infirmities as you have.​—Acts 14:15.



How might we imitate Paul’s exemplary humility? First, we must resist any temptation to expect or accept adulation for what we accomplish in Jehovah’s strength. Each of us does well to ask himself: ‘How do I view the people to whom I preach? Might I unwittingly harbor toward certain people a bias that is common in my community?’ Commendably, Jehovah’s Witnesses around the world have been analyzing their territories to determine whether there are yet more who might respond to the good news. At times, this may require learning the languages and customs of those whom society in general has marginalized. In no way should Witnesses who reach out to such ones view themselves as superior. Rather, they seek to understand each individual in order to reach his heart with the Kingdom message. w18.09 5 ¶9, 11




Tuesday, November 17

Judas the Galilean rose up . . . , and he drew followers after himself.​—Acts 5:37.



The Romans had Judas executed. Apart from Judas and the other extremists, ordinary Jews were keenly awaiting the arrival of a political Messiah. That is, they expected that when the Messiah appeared, he would bring glory to their nation and freedom from the yoke of Rome. (Luke 2:38; 3:15) Many believed that the Messiah would establish a kingdom on earth in Israel. When that occurred, millions of Jews scattered abroad would return to their homeland. Recall that John the Baptist once asked Jesus: “Are you the Coming One, or are we to expect a different one?” (Matt. 11:2, 3) John may have wanted to know whether someone else would fulfill all the hopes of the Jews. The two disciples who met the resurrected Jesus on the road to Emmaus also had unfulfilled hopes about the Messiah. (Luke 24:21) Soon thereafter, Jesus’ apostles asked him: “Lord, are you restoring the kingdom to Israel at this time?”​—Acts 1:6. w18.06 4 ¶3-4




Wednesday, November 18

The naive person believes every word.​—Prov. 14:15.



We need to be especially cautious when we come across reports regarding Jehovah’s people. Never forget that Satan is the accuser of God’s faithful servants. (Rev. 12:10) Therefore, Jesus warned that opposers would “lyingly say every sort of wicked thing” against us. (Matt. 5:11) If we take that warning seriously, we will not be shocked when we hear outrageous statements about Jehovah’s people. Do you enjoy sending e-mails and text messages to your friends and acquaintances? If so, when you see a newly published story in the news media or hear an experience, you might feel like a news reporter who wants to be the first to break an exciting story. However, before you send that text message or e-mail, ask yourself: ‘Am I certain that the information I am about to spread is true? Do I really have the facts?’ If you are not certain, you could unwittingly circulate false information among our brotherhood. If in doubt, hit the delete key, not the send button. w18.08 3 ¶3; 4 ¶6-7




Thursday, November 19

Practice giving, and people will give to you.​—Luke 6:38.



Jesus wants us to find happiness by being generous. Many people react favorably to generosity. Of course, not all respond positively, but when they do, their gratitude can start a chain reaction. So practice giving whether people seem to appreciate it or not. You never know how much good you can do with just one act of generosity. Truly generous people do not give in order to get something in return. Jesus had this in mind when he taught: “When you spread a feast, invite the poor, the crippled, the lame, the blind; and you will be happy, because they have nothing with which to repay you.” (Luke 14:13, 14) “The generous person will be blessed,” said one inspired writer. Another said: “Happy is anyone who shows consideration to the lowly one.” (Prov. 22:9; Ps. 41:1) Indeed, we should give because we derive pleasure from helping others. w18.08 21-22 ¶15-16




Friday, November 20

Trust in Jehovah with all your heart, and do not rely on your own understanding. In all your ways take notice of him, and he will make your paths straight.​—Prov. 3:5, 6.



Obtaining the facts and evaluating them accurately present a challenge today because of the abundance of low-quality information, reports filled with half-truths, and our own imperfection. What will help us with this challenging task? We must know and apply Bible principles. One such principle is that it is foolish and humiliating to reply to a matter before hearing the facts. (Prov. 18:13) Another Bible principle reminds us not to accept every word without question. (Prov. 14:15) And finally, no matter how much experience we have in Christian living, we must be careful not to lean on our own understanding. Bible principles will safeguard us if we are certain to use facts from reliable sources to draw good conclusions and to make wise decisions. w18.08 7 ¶19




Saturday, November 21

Should we not . . . submit ourselves to the Father of our spiritual life?​—Heb. 12:9.



By water baptism, we formally and publicly acknowledge Jehovah’s ownership of us and our willingness to subject ourselves to him. Jesus did something similar when at his baptism he, in effect, said to Jehovah: “To do your will, O my God, is my desire.” (Ps. 40:7, 8, ftn.) How did Jehovah respond to Jesus’ baptism? The Bible account says: “After being baptized, Jesus immediately came up from the water; and look! the heavens were opened up, and he saw God’s spirit descending like a dove and coming upon him. Look! Also, a voice from the heavens said: ‘This is my Son, the beloved, whom I have approved.’” (Matt. 3:16, 17) Although Jesus already belonged to his heavenly Father, Jehovah was delighted to see his Son’s willingness to do His will exclusively. Jehovah is likewise pleased to accept our dedication, and he will honor us with his blessing.​—Ps. 149:4. w18.07 23 ¶4-5




Sunday, November 22

Must we bring out water for you from this crag?​—Num. 20:10.



By using the word “we,” Moses was likely referring to himself and Aaron. Those words indicated a gross lack of respect for Jehovah as the true Source of that miracle. This possibility seems to be confirmed by what we read at Psalm 106:32, 33: “They provoked Him at the waters of Meribah, and it went badly for Moses because of them. They embittered his spirit, and he spoke rashly with his lips.” (Num. 27:14) Whatever the case, Moses’ actions detracted from the honor due Jehovah. Speaking to Moses and Aaron, Jehovah said: “You both rebelled against my order.” (Num. 20:24) A serious sin indeed! Previously, Jehovah had denied a whole generation of Israelites entrance into the land of Canaan because of their rebelliousness. (Num. 14:26-30, 34) So it was both appropriate and consistent for Jehovah to make the same judgment with regard to Moses because of his rebellious act. He was not allowed to enter the Promised Land. w18.07 14 ¶9, 12; 15 ¶13




Monday, November 23

It is best not to eat meat or drink wine or do anything over which your brother stumbles.​—Rom. 14:21.



Would you be willing to forgo things that are within your right if you could thus avoid stumbling a brother whose conscience differs from yours? No doubt you would. Before they came to a knowledge of the truth, some of our brothers abused alcohol, but now they are determined to abstain from it. Surely, none of us would want to contribute to a brother’s falling back into a course that would cause him great harm! (1 Cor. 6:9, 10) Therefore, it would be unloving for a host to pressure a brother to drink alcohol if he has declined to do so. While likely in his late teens or early 20’s, the young man Timothy submitted to painful circumcision in order to avoid stumbling Jews to whom he was going to preach. His attitude was similar to that of the apostle Paul. (Acts 16:3; 1 Cor. 9:19-23) Like Timothy, are you willing to make personal sacrifices for the good of others? w18.06 18-19 ¶12-13




Tuesday, November 24

I will change the language of the peoples to a pure language.​—Zeph. 3:9.



Jehovah draws those whom he allows to become members of his spiritual family, gently attracting honesthearted ones to true worship. (John 6:44) When you first meet someone who is not in the truth, what do you know about that person? Other than his name and physical appearance, probably very little. That is not the case when you first meet someone who knows and loves Jehovah. Even if that person is from a different background, country, tribe, or culture, you already know much about him​—and he about you! For example, you quickly recognize each other’s “language”​—the “pure language” of truth. As a result, you each know what the other believes about God, moral standards, and the hope for the future, to name just a few. Moreover, those are the most important things to know about a person, the things that build confidence and trust. They also form the basis for wholesome and enduring friendships. w18.12 21 ¶9-10




Wednesday, November 25

Unless you get circumcised . . . , you cannot be saved.​—Acts 15:1.



Under Christ’s direction, the governing body made it clear that non-Jewish Christians did not need to be circumcised. (Acts 15:19, 20) But years after this decision, many Jewish believers continued to circumcise their children. We may wonder, though, ‘Why did Jesus allow this issue to remain unsettled for such a long time when his death had abolished the Mosaic Law?’ (Col. 2:13, 14) For some, it takes time to adjust to a clarification in understanding. Jewish Christians needed sufficient time to adjust their viewpoint. (John 16:12) Some found it hard to accept that circumcision was no longer a sign of a special relationship with God. (Gen. 17:9-12) Others, out of fear of persecution, were reluctant to stand out in Jewish communities. (Gal. 6:12) In time, though, Christ provided further guidance through inspired letters written by Paul.​—Rom. 2:28, 29; Gal. 3:23-25. w18.10 24-25 ¶10-12




Thursday, November 26

Caiaphas . . . had advised the Jews that it was to their benefit for one man to die in behalf of the people.​—John 18:14.



Caiaphas sent soldiers to arrest Jesus under the cover of night. Jesus was aware of this shameful strategy, so during his final meal with the apostles, he asked them to get some swords. Two would be sufficient to teach them a vital lesson. (Luke 22:36-38) Later that night, Peter used a sword to attack a member of the mob. No doubt, he was incensed at the injustice of Jesus’ nighttime arrest. (John 18:10) But Jesus told Peter: “Return your sword to its place, for all those who take up the sword will perish by the sword.” (Matt. 26:52, 53) This powerful lesson was in harmony with what Jesus prayed about earlier that night​—they must be no part of the world. (John 17:16) Fighting injustice was something to be left to God. Consequently, we maintain our peace and unity. And as Jehovah observes our divided world, it must warm his heart to see the unity that exists among his people.​—Zeph. 3:17. w18.06 7 ¶13-14, 16




Friday, November 27

The dragon became enraged at the woman and went off to wage war with the remaining ones of her offspring.​—Rev. 12:17.



In addition to offering bait, Satan tries to bully us into compromising our loyalty to Jehovah. For example, he can maneuver governments into banning our preaching work. Or he can prompt our associates at work or in school to mock us because of our desire to live by the Bible’s moral standards. (1 Pet. 4:4) He might also influence well-meaning family members to discourage us from attending meetings. (Matt. 10:36) How can we cope? First, we must expect this kind of direct assault​—Satan is at war with us. (Rev. 2:10) Then, we need to see the bigger issue behind such incidents​—Satan claims that we serve Jehovah only when it is convenient. He says that if we are pressured, we will turn our back on God. (Job 1:9-11; 2:4, 5) Finally, we have to rely on Jehovah for strength to face the issue. Remember, he will never abandon us.​—Heb. 13:5. w18.05 26 ¶14




Saturday, November 28

You do not know which will have success.​—Eccl. 11:6.



Even if it appears that the Kingdom message we preach is not reaching the hearts of people, we should not underestimate the impact of our sowing work. Granted, many people do not listen to us, but they do observe us. They notice our neat attire, polite behavior, and warm smile. In time, our conduct may help some to see that their negative views about us may not be correct after all. Sergio and Olinda, pioneers, relate: “Because of illness, we did not go to the square for a while. When we returned, passersby asked, ‘What happened? We missed you.’” Indeed, as long as we “do not let [our] hand rest” from sowing Kingdom seed, we have a valuable share in giving “a witness to all the nations.” (Matt. 24:14) Above all, we have the deep joy that comes from knowing that we have Jehovah’s approval, for he loves all those who “bear fruit with endurance”!​—Luke 8:15. w18.05 16 ¶16-18




Sunday, November 29

Praised be the God . . . who encourages us in all our trials.​—2 Cor. 1:3, 4, ftn.



Ever since humankind fell into sin and imperfection, Jehovah has proved that he is a God who gives encouragement. Immediately after the rebellion in Eden, he gave Adam’s future descendants reason to take courage. The prophetic promise written at Genesis 3:15 would give humankind hope that eventually “the original serpent,” Satan the Devil, and all his evil works would be destroyed. (Rev. 12:9; 1 John 3:8) Jehovah’s servant Noah lived in an ungodly world where the only people who worshipped Jehovah were members of his family. With violence and sexual perversion rampant all around him, Noah could have become discouraged. (Gen. 6:4, 5, 9, 11; Jude 6) But Jehovah told Noah that He was going to put an end to that wicked world and instructed him about what he must do to ensure his family’s safety. (Gen. 6:13-18) Jehovah proved to be for Noah a God of encouragement. w18.04 15 ¶1-2




Monday, November 30

Keep encouraging one another and building one another up, just as you are in fact doing.​—1 Thess. 5:11.



It would be an error on our part if we believed that we cannot be encouraging because we are not particularly communicative. It does not take much to be a source of encouragement​—perhaps no more than a warm smile when greeting someone. If there is no smile in return, it could mean that there is a problem, and just listening to the other person may bring comfort. (Jas. 1:19) We all can be encouraging to a brother or a sister who is in need of comfort. King Solomon wrote: “A word spoken at the right time​—how good it is! A cheerful glance makes the heart rejoice; a good report invigorates the bones.” (Prov. 15:23, 30, ftn.) Paul shows that even singing a Kingdom song together can be a source of encouragement. (Acts 16:25; Col. 3:16) Mutual encouragement will become more and more important as we see Jehovah’s day “drawing near.”​—Heb. 10:25. w18.04 23 ¶16; 24 ¶18-19




