
October
Thursday, October 1

Weep with those who weep.​—Rom. 12:15.



We cannot read hearts as Jehovah and Jesus do. Even so, we can try to understand the emotions and needs of others. (2 Cor. 11:29) Unlike the selfish world around us, we strive to “look out not only for [our] own interests, but also for the interests of others.” (Phil. 2:4) Congregation elders in particular need to show fellow feeling. They know that they are accountable for the sheep entrusted to their care. (Heb. 13:17) To help their fellow believers, elders need to be understanding. How can elders demonstrate fellow feeling? A sympathetic elder spends time with his Christian brothers and sisters. He asks questions and then listens attentively and patiently. That is especially important if one of these dear sheep wants to pour out his heart but struggles to find the right words. (Prov. 20:5) By willingly giving of his time, an elder forms strong bonds of trust, friendship, and love with his brothers.​—Acts 20:37. w19.03 17 ¶14-17




Friday, October 2

Like apples of gold in silver carvings is a word spoken at the right time.​—Prov. 25:11.



Appreciation is like a good meal​—it is more enjoyable when shared. When we feel appreciated, we are happy. When we express our appreciation, we make others happy. The person who receives our gratitude knows that his efforts to help us, or to give us something we need, were worthwhile. As a result, the bonds of friendship between us and that person are strengthened. Our expressions of gratitude are valuable, as mentioned in today’s text. Imagine how beautiful an apple made of gold and set in silver would look! And just think how valuable it would be! How would you feel if you received such a gift? Well, the words of gratitude you express to others can be just as valuable. And consider this fact: An apple made of gold could last indefinitely. Likewise, your expressions of appreciation may be remembered and treasured by the recipient for the rest of his life. w19.02 15 ¶5-6




Saturday, October 3

The man has become like one of us in knowing good and bad.​—Gen. 3:22.



When Adam and Eve ate the fruit from the tree of the knowledge of good and bad, they sent a clear message: They did not trust Jehovah and his standards. They chose to set their own standards of good and bad. But look at what they lost. They lost their friendship with Jehovah. They also lost the opportunity to live forever, and they passed sin and death on to their children. (Rom. 5:12) Compare the way Adam and Eve behaved with the way that the Ethiopian eunuch responded when Philip preached to him. The eunuch appreciated so much what Jehovah and Jesus had done for him that he immediately got baptized. (Acts 8:34-38) When we dedicate ourselves to God and, like that eunuch, get baptized, we send a clear message. We show that we appreciate what Jehovah and Jesus have done for us. We also show that we trust Jehovah and recognize that he is the one who should set the standard of good and bad. w19.03 2 ¶1-2




Sunday, October 4

I will not renounce my integrity!​—Job 27:5.



When applied to us as servants of God, integrity means wholehearted love for and unbreakable devotion to Jehovah as a Person, so that his will comes first in all our decisions. One basic meaning of the Bible word for “integrity” is this: complete, sound, or whole. For example, the animals sacrificed to Jehovah had to be sound. (Lev. 22:21, 22) God’s people were not allowed to offer up an animal that was missing a leg, an ear, or an eye; nor could they offer one full of disease. It was important to Jehovah that the animal be complete, sound, or whole. (Mal. 1:6-9) We can understand why Jehovah cares about soundness or completeness. When we purchase something, whether a piece of fruit, a book, or a tool, we do not want one that has gaping holes or parts missing. We want one that is complete, sound, or whole. Jehovah feels similarly when it comes to our love for him, our loyalty. It must be complete, sound, or whole. w19.02 3 ¶3




Monday, October 5

How I do love your law! I ponder over it all day long.​—Ps. 119:97.



To safeguard our heart, we must not only close it to wrong influences but also open it to positive influences. In ancient walled cities, a gatekeeper closed the gates of the city to stop an enemy invasion, but at other times he opened the gates to allow food and other supplies to be brought in. If the gates were never open, the inhabitants of the city would starve. Similarly, we need to open our heart regularly to the influence of God’s thinking. The Bible contains Jehovah’s thinking, so each time we read it, we allow Jehovah’s thoughts to affect the way we think, feel, and act. How can we get the most from our Bible reading? Prayer is vital to help us “see clearly the wonderful things” in his Word. (Ps. 119:18) We also need to meditate on what we read. When we pray, read, and meditate, God’s Word reaches “deep within [our] heart,” and we come to love Jehovah’s thinking.​—Prov. 4:20-22. w19.01 18 ¶14-15




Tuesday, October 6

Let us always offer to God a sacrifice of praise.​—Heb. 13:15.



Jehovah knows that we have different abilities and circumstances, and he deeply appreciates the sacrifices we are able to offer to him. Think of the type of sacrifices that he accepted from the Israelites. Some Israelites were able to offer a lamb or a goat. But a poor Israelite might offer “two turtledoves or two young pigeons.” And if an Israelite could not afford two birds, Jehovah accepted “a tenth of an ephah of fine flour.” (Lev. 5:7, 11) Flour was less expensive, but Jehovah still appreciated that sacrifice, as long as it was “fine flour.” Our kind God feels the same way today. When we give comments, he does not demand that all of us be as eloquent as Apollos or as persuasive as Paul. (Acts 18:24; 26:28) All Jehovah wants is that we give the best comments we can​—within our limits. Remember the widow who offered the two small coins. She was precious to Jehovah because she gave the best she could.​—Luke 21:1-4. w19.01 8-9 ¶3-5




Wednesday, October 7

You will be hated by all people on account of my name.​—Matt. 10:22.



As Christ’s followers, we expect to be hated. Jesus foretold that his disciples would be severely persecuted during the last days. (Matt. 24:9; John 15:20) Isaiah’s prophecy forewarns us that our enemies will do more than hate us; they will use various weapons against us. Those weapons have included subtle deception, blatant lies, and brutal persecution. (Matt. 5:11) Jehovah will not stop our enemies from using these weapons to wage war against us. (Eph. 6:12; Rev. 12:17) But we do not need to be afraid. Jehovah said that “no weapon” used against us would “have any success.” (Isa. 54:17) Just as a wall protects us from the force of a destructive rainstorm, so Jehovah protects us against “the blast of the tyrants.” (Isa. 25:4, 5) Our enemies will never succeed in causing us any lasting harm. (Isa. 65:17) All enemies of God’s people “will be brought to nothing and perish.”​—Isa. 41:11, 12. w19.01 6-7 ¶13-16




Thursday, October 8

Where the spirit of Jehovah is, there is freedom.​—2 Cor. 3:17.



Young ones, Jehovah loves freedom, and he put that love in your heart. At the same time, however, he wants you to use your freedom responsibly, which is a protection for you. Perhaps you know others who view pornography or who engage in sexual immorality, high-risk sports, or drug and alcohol abuse. To be sure, they may enjoy a few moments of excitement or pleasure. But often that comes at great cost, perhaps in the form of disease, addiction, or even death. (Gal. 6:7, 8) Yes, their “freedom” is a cruel self-deception. (Titus 3:3) By comparison, how many people do you know who became sick because they adhered to Bible standards? Clearly, obedience to Jehovah is both healthful and liberating. (Ps. 19:7-11) What is more, when you use your freedom wisely​—that is, within the bounds of God’s perfect laws and principles—​you show God, as well as your parents, that you can be trusted with more freedom.​—Rom. 8:21. w18.12 22-23 ¶16-17




Friday, October 9

A man will leave his father and his mother and he will stick to his wife, and they will become one flesh.​—Gen. 2:24.



Adam’s sin brought changes. One was death, which would affect marriage. We can see that from what the apostle Paul wrote when explaining that Christians are not under the Mosaic Law. He revealed that death ends a marriage and that the surviving mate can thereafter remarry. (Rom. 7:1-3) The Law that God gave to the nation of Israel provided details about marriage. It allowed for polygamy, a practice that existed even before God gave Israel the Law. However, polygamy was regulated, prohibiting abuses. For example, if an Israelite married a slave and later took a second wife, he could not diminish his first wife’s food, clothing, and marital due. God required that he protect and care for her. (Ex. 21:9, 10) We are not under the Law, but we can still see from it Jehovah’s interest in marriage. Does that not help you to esteem marriage? w18.12 10 ¶3; 11 ¶5-6




Saturday, October 10

You will not believe even if it is told to you.​—Hab. 1:5.



After leaving his worries and concerns in Jehovah’s hands, Habakkuk may have wondered how Jehovah would react. As an empathetic and understanding Father, Jehovah did not rebuke him for his sincere complaint. God knew that it was a desperate cry of pain and sorrow. In words really aimed at the wayward Jews, Jehovah informed Habakkuk of what would happen in the near future. It could well be that Habakkuk was the first to whom Jehovah revealed that the end of that violent era was very near. Jehovah showed Habakkuk that He was ready to act. The punishment of that violent and wicked generation was imminent. By the expression “in your days,” Jehovah indicated that this judgment would definitely occur during the lifetime of the prophet or that of his contemporaries. Jehovah’s reply was not at all what Habakkuk expected. Was this the answer to his impatient cry? What Jehovah told him surely meant that suffering would increase for all of Judah. w18.11 15 ¶7-8




Sunday, October 11

[God’s] will is that all sorts of people should be saved and come to an accurate knowledge of truth.​—1 Tim. 2:4.



What is your view of the many sorts of people who have yet to learn the truth? Although the apostle Paul searched in synagogues for those who already knew something about God, he certainly did not restrict his efforts to Jewish people. On Paul’s first missionary journey, for instance, the Lycaonian people mistook him and Barnabas for superheroes​—as incarnations of their false gods Zeus and Hermes. Were Paul and Barnabas tempted to ride the wave of popularity? Would that seem to be a refreshing break from all the persecution they had experienced in the last two cities they visited? Did they imagine that the publicity could help to advance the good news? Not at all! They immediately protested by ripping their garments and leaping into the crowd, crying out: “Why are you doing these things? We too are humans having the same infirmities as you have.”​—Acts 14:8-15. w18.09 4-5 ¶8-9




Monday, October 12

Do you not know that unrighteous people will not inherit God’s Kingdom? . . . And yet that is what some of you were. But you have been washed clean; . . . you have been declared righteous.​—1 Cor. 6:9, 11.



To accept the truth and live by the Bible’s moral standards, we must be willing to make changes in our thinking and conduct. Note what Peter wrote regarding these adjustments: “As obedient children, stop being molded by the desires you formerly had in your ignorance, but . . . become holy yourselves in all your conduct.” (1 Pet. 1:14, 15) For people in the morally corrupt city of Corinth, buying truth meant making major changes in their lifestyle. Likewise, to be able to buy truth, many today have turned their back on ungodly conduct. Peter further reminded Christians in his day: “The time that has passed by is sufficient for you to have done the will of the nations when you carried on in acts of brazen conduct, unbridled passions, overdrinking, wild parties, drinking bouts, and lawless idolatries.”​—1 Pet. 4:3. w18.11 6 ¶13




Tuesday, October 13

All those who were rightly disposed for everlasting life became believers.​—Acts 13:48.



How can we know who are “rightly disposed for everlasting life”? As in the first century, the only way to find those people is to give a witness. Thus, we need to do just as Jesus instructed: “Into whatever city or village you enter, search out who in it is deserving.” (Matt. 10:11) We do not expect insincere people, haughty individuals, or those with no spiritual inclination to respond favorably to the good news. We are looking for people who are honest, humble, and hungry for the truth. We can liken this search to what Jesus as a carpenter might have done in looking for just the right wood for making furniture, doors, yokes, or other things. Once he found suitable material, he could get his toolbox, use his skill, and make the item. We must do likewise as we endeavor to make disciples of honesthearted people.​—Matt. 28:19, 20. w18.10 12 ¶3-4




Wednesday, October 14

Philip went down to the city of Samaria and began to preach the Christ to them.​—Acts 8:5.



Philip the evangelizer provides a fine example of one who stayed focused on his ministry despite changing circumstances. In Jerusalem, a wave of persecution arose following the martyrdom of Stephen. At the time, Philip was enjoying a new privilege of service. (Acts 6:1-6) But when Christ’s followers were scattered, Philip could not just watch and do nothing. He went to preach in Samaria, a city that was largely untouched by the good news at that time. (Matt. 10:5; Acts 8:1) Philip was willing to go wherever God’s spirit would lead him, so Jehovah used him to open up new territories. His impartial approach was likely refreshing to the Samaritans, who were used to being treated with disdain by the Jews. Little wonder that crowds listened to him “with one accord”! (Acts 8:6-8) Philip stayed focused on his ministry, and as a result, he and his family were richly blessed by Jehovah.​—Acts 21:8, 9. w18.10 30 ¶14-16




Thursday, October 15

Let us consider one another so as to incite to love and fine works.​—Heb. 10:24.



One time when Jesus was in the Decapolis region, people “brought him a deaf man with a speech impediment.” (Mark 7:31-35) Instead of healing him in public, Jesus “took him aside” and healed him. Why? The man’s disabilities may have made him feel uncomfortable in a crowd. Perhaps sensing this, Jesus healed him in private. Of course, we cannot perform miraculous cures. But we can​—and should—​show thoughtful regard for the needs and feelings of our fellow worshippers. Jesus understood how the deaf man felt and treated him thoughtfully. Likewise, we should show consideration for the elderly and the infirm. The Christian congregation is marked, not by mere efficiency, but by love. (John 13:34, 35) That love moves us to go out of our way to help older ones and those with disabilities to attend Christian meetings and to preach the good news. That is so even if what they can do is limited.​—Matt. 13:23. w18.09 29-30 ¶7-8




Friday, October 16

Let each of us please his neighbor for his good, to build him up.​—Rom. 15:2.



Every one of Jehovah’s sheep is extremely precious to him and to Jesus, who provided the ransom sacrifice. (Gal. 2:20) We love our spiritual brothers and sisters dearly. And we want to care for them in a tender and loving way. In order to be a source of refreshment, “let us pursue the things making for peace and the things that build one another up.” (Rom. 14:19) How we all look forward to the time when, in the coming Paradise, we will never have reason to be discouraged! There will be no more sickness, wars, inherited death, persecution, domestic strife, and disappointments. When the Millennium is past, mankind will have reached perfection. Those who pass the final test will then be adopted as earthly sons of Jehovah God and have “the glorious freedom of the children of God.” (Rom. 8:21) May we all keep displaying the love that builds up and helping one another to attain that joyful and rewarding goal. w18.09 14 ¶10; 16 ¶18




Saturday, October 17

How I do love your law! I ponder over it all day long.​—Ps. 119:97.



Studying God’s Word involves more than superficial reading and merely highlighting the answers to study questions. When we study, we consider what the material tells us about Jehovah, his ways, and his thinking. We try to understand why God commands one thing and condemns another. We also give thought to what changes we need to make in our life and in our thinking. Although all these aspects might not be considered in every session of study, we profit by spending time​—perhaps half of each study period—​meditating appreciatively on what we read. (1 Tim. 4:15) As we meditate regularly on God’s Word, we ‘prove to ourselves’ that Jehovah’s reasoning on matters is perfect. We begin to see things from his point of view, and we come to agree with that viewpoint. Our minds are ‘made over,’ and we develop a new pattern of thinking. (Rom. 12:2) Progressively, we make Jehovah’s thoughts our own. w18.11 24 ¶5-6




Sunday, October 18

We are God’s fellow workers.​—1 Cor. 3:9.



In the first century C.E., Paul referred to himself and certain close associates as “God’s fellow workers” because of their role in planting and watering the seed of Kingdom truth. (1 Cor. 3:6) Today, we too can be “God’s fellow workers” by generously giving of our time, resources, and energy to the divinely commissioned preaching work. What a tremendous privilege this is! Being generous with our time and energy in the preaching and disciple-making work brings great joy. Many who have had the privilege of conducting progressive Bible studies will tell you that few things are more rewarding. Great happiness comes from seeing appreciative individuals light up when they grasp spiritual truths, grow in faith, make changes, and start sharing the truth with others. Jesus also experienced great happiness when the 70 preachers whom he had sent out to the field “returned with joy” because of the favorable results they had experienced.​—Luke 10:17-21. w18.08 20 ¶11-12




Monday, October 19

Whoever trusts in his own heart is stupid.​—Prov. 28:26.



Leaning too heavily on our own understanding can become a snare. We may begin to feel that we can look at a situation and understand it even though we do not have all the facts. Also, a challenge to evaluating matters accurately may be faced when we have a personality conflict with a brother in the congregation. If we constantly dwell on our differences, we may begin to look at our brother with a measure of suspicion. Thus, if we hear a negative report about this brother, we may be eager to believe it. What is the lesson? Harboring ill feelings toward our brothers can lead to distorted judgments that are not based on the facts. (1 Tim. 6:4, 5) We can prevent our judgment from becoming clouded by refusing to allow envy and jealousy to take root in our hearts. Instead of giving in to such bad feelings, may we recognize our obligation to love our brothers and freely forgive them from the heart.​—Col. 3:12-14. w18.08 6 ¶15; 7 ¶18




Tuesday, October 20

To Jehovah . . . belong the heavens . . . and the earth with all that is in it.​—Deut. 10:14.



By reason of their very existence, all humans belong to Jehovah. (Ps. 100:3; Rev. 4:11) Yet, throughout human history, God has designated specific groups of people as belonging to him in a special way. For example, Psalm 135 refers to faithful worshippers of Jehovah in ancient Israel as “his special property.” (Ps. 135:4) Also, the book of Hosea foretold that some non-Israelites would become Jehovah’s people. (Hos. 2:23) Hosea’s prophecy was fulfilled when Jehovah included non-Jews in his selection of prospective corulers with Christ. (Acts 10:45; Rom. 9:23-26) This “holy nation” is Jehovah’s “special possession” in an outstanding way, its members having been anointed with holy spirit and chosen for life in heaven. (1 Pet. 2:9, 10) What about the majority of faithful Christians today who have an earthly hope? Jehovah also calls them his “people” and his “chosen ones.”​—Isa. 65:22. w18.07 22 ¶1-2




Wednesday, October 21

Keep this mental attitude in you that was also in Christ Jesus . . . He emptied himself and took a slave’s form.​—Phil. 2:5, 7.



True Christians imitate the Christ, who provided us with the perfect example of how a human can be generous. (Matt. 20:28) Each of us would do well to ask, ‘Can I follow Jesus’ example even more closely than I am already doing?’ (1 Pet. 2:21) We can enjoy Jehovah’s favor by imitating his and Christ’s perfect examples, by being interested in the welfare of others, and by looking for ways to care for their needs. Indeed, in the parable of the neighborly Samaritan, Jesus made clear that he expected his followers to go out of their way to help others, even those of a different background. (Luke 10:29-37) Do you recall the question that moved Jesus to recount the parable of the neighborly Samaritan? A Jew asked him: “Who really is my neighbor?” Jesus’ answer shows that like the Samaritan we must be willing to give generously if we are to enjoy God’s favor. w18.08 19 ¶5-6




Thursday, October 22

The angel said to her: “Greetings, you highly favored one, Jehovah is with you.”​—Luke 1:28.



Did Jehovah continue to show Mary due recognition for faithfully caring for and raising his Son? Yes, he did. God had her actions and words recorded in the Bible. Apparently, Mary was not in a position to travel with Jesus during the three and a half years of his ministry. Perhaps as a widow, Mary had to stay in Nazareth. But even though she missed out on many privileges, she was able to be with Jesus at the time of his death. (John 19:26) Later, though, Mary was in Jerusalem along with the disciples during the days leading up to Pentecost when holy spirit was poured out. (Acts 1:13, 14) She was likely anointed along with the others present. If so, this would mean that she was given the opportunity to be in heaven with Jesus for all eternity. What a beautiful reward for her faithful service! w18.07 9 ¶11; 10 ¶14




Friday, October 23

Do all things for God’s glory.​—1 Cor. 10:31.



Throughout his ministry, Jesus taught basic truths to help his disciples recognize the consequences of certain attitudes or actions. For example, he taught that resentment can lead to violence and that lust can lead to adultery. (Matt. 5:21, 22, 27, 28) To help us have a conscience that is properly trained, we should let godly principles guide us and thus bring glory to God. On certain matters, two different Christians with Bible-trained consciences might come to opposite conclusions. Consider the use of alcoholic beverages. The Bible does not condemn the moderate use of alcohol. It does, however, warn against the excessive use of alcohol, as well as drunkenness. (Prov. 20:1; 1 Tim. 3:8) Does this mean that a Christian has no other factors to consider as long as his use of alcohol is moderate? Not at all. While he may be at peace with his own conscience, the Christian must also consider the conscience of others. w18.06 18 ¶10-11




Saturday, October 24

Look out for the leaven of the Pharisees and the leaven of Herod.​—Mark 8:15.



Jesus emphatically warned his disciples to stay clear of the teachings, or leaven, that the Pharisees, Sadducees, and party followers of Herod advocated. (Matt. 16:6, 12) Interestingly, this conversation took place not long after the occasion when the people wanted to make Jesus king. When religion is mixed with politics, violence can easily erupt. Jesus taught his disciples that they must maintain neutrality in these circumstances. That is related to the reason why the chief priests and the Pharisees planned to kill Jesus. They saw him as a political and religious rival who threatened their position. “If we let him go on this way, they will all put faith in him, and the Romans will come and take away both our place and our nation,” they said. (John 11:48) Thus, High Priest Caiaphas took the lead in plotting Jesus’ death.​—John 11:49-53; 18:14. w18.06 6-7 ¶12-13




Sunday, October 25

Let your love be without hypocrisy.​—Rom. 12:9.



An effective bait that Satan uses is curiosity about the occult. Today, he promotes interest in the demons not only through false religion but also through the entertainment industry. Movies, electronic games, and other media make spiritism seem exciting. How can we avoid being caught in this trap? We should not expect God’s organization to supply a list of acceptable and unacceptable entertainment. Each of us needs to train his own conscience to be in harmony with God’s standards. (Heb. 5:14) However, we will make wise choices if we apply the apostle Paul’s inspired counsel above. We could ask ourselves: ‘Will my choice of entertainment make me seem hypocritical? If my Bible students or return visits saw the entertainment I choose, would they think that I practice what I preach?’ The more our speech and actions harmonize, the less likely we are to be caught in Satan’s snares.​—1 John 3:18. w18.05 25 ¶13




Monday, October 26

The goodwill of my heart and my supplication to God for them are indeed for their salvation.​—Rom. 10:1.



How can we imitate Paul? First, we strive to maintain a heartfelt desire to find any who might be “rightly disposed for everlasting life.” Second, we supplicate Jehovah in prayer to open the heart of sincere ones. (Acts 13:48; 16:14) Silvana, a pioneer for nearly 30 years, says, “Before I go to a house in my territory, I pray to Jehovah, asking him to give me a positive attitude.” We also pray to God that angels may direct us to find honesthearted ones. (Matt. 10:11-13; Rev. 14:6) Notes Robert, a pioneer for over 30 years, “To work along with angels who know what is going on in the householders’ lives is exciting.” Third, we try to see a potential for good in people. Says Carl, an elder, “I look for any small sign that may reveal a person’s sincerity, perhaps a smile, a kind look, or an honest question.” Yes, like Paul, we can endure in bearing fruit. w18.05 15 ¶13; 16 ¶15




Tuesday, October 27

Let us consider one another . . . , encouraging one another, and all the more so as you see the day drawing near.​—Heb. 10:24, 25.



News of faithfulness on the part of those we have helped in the past can be a real source of encouragement, as it was for the apostle John, who wrote: “No greater joy do I have than this: that I should hear that my children go on walking in the truth.” (3 John 4) Many pioneers can attest to how encouraging it is for them to learn that some of those they helped into the truth years ago are staying faithful and perhaps are even serving as pioneers. Simply reminding a discouraged pioneer of past joys can be a real source of comfort. Many circuit overseers have stated how encouraged they and their wives felt after receiving even a short note of gratitude for their visit to a congregation. The same can be true of elders, missionaries, pioneers, and Bethel family members who receive a word of appreciation for their faithful service. w18.04 23 ¶14-15




Wednesday, October 28

[The king] should [not] take many wives for himself, so that his heart [might] not go astray.​—Deut. 17:17.



Solomon disobeyed, eventually marrying 700 women. He brought into his household an additional 300 concubines. (1 Ki. 11:3) Many of his wives were non-Israelites, who worshipped false gods. Hence, Solomon also disobeyed God’s law against marrying foreign women. (Deut. 7:3, 4) Solomon’s gradual departure from Jehovah’s requirements led him in time to extreme wrongdoing. Solomon built an altar to the idol goddess Ashtoreth and at least one other altar to the false god Chemosh. There he joined his wives in pagan worship. He built those altars on, of all places, a mountain located directly in front of Jerusalem, where he had built Jehovah’s temple! (1 Ki. 11:5-8; 2 Ki. 23:13) Perhaps Solomon fooled himself into thinking that Jehovah would overlook his disobedience as long as he also continued to offer sacrifices at the temple. But Jehovah never overlooks wrongdoing. w18.07 18-19 ¶7-9




Thursday, October 29

Take up the large shield of faith, with which you will be able to extinguish all the wicked one’s burning arrows.​—Eph. 6:16.



Some of the “burning arrows” that Satan might fire at you are lies about Jehovah​—that He does not care about you and that you are unlovable. Nineteen-year-old Ida struggles with feelings of unworthiness. She says, “I have often felt that Jehovah isn’t close to me and that he doesn’t want to be my Friend.” How does she deal with this attack? “The meetings are a giant boost to my faith,” says Ida. “I used to sit there and never comment, thinking that nobody would want to hear what I had to say. Now, though, I prepare for the meetings and try to answer two or three times.” Ida’s experience highlights an important truth: The literal shield given to a soldier had fixed dimensions, but the size of our shield of faith can either shrink or grow. It is up to us. (Matt. 14:31; 2 Thess. 1:3) How important it is that we build up our faith! w18.05 29-30 ¶12-14




Friday, October 30

What must I do to get saved?​—Acts 16:30.



The jailer had a change of heart and asked for help only after the earthquake struck. (Acts 16:25-34) Similarly, some individuals today who have not responded to the Bible’s message before may have a change of heart and look for help when their world is suddenly shaken by a seismic event. Perhaps they may have lost their longtime job unexpectedly and are left in shock. Others may be at a loss after being diagnosed with a serious illness, or they may be heartbroken after losing a loved one in death. They may ask questions about the meaning of life that at one time they ignored. Perhaps they even wonder, ‘What must I do to get saved?’ When we meet them, they may want to listen to our message of hope for the first time in their life. Therefore, by faithfully continuing in our preaching work, we make sure that we will be available to give comfort to people at a time when they may be ready to accept it.​—Isa. 61:1. w18.05 19-20 ¶10-12




Saturday, October 31

Jehovah’s spirit is upon me, because he anointed me to declare good news.​—Luke 4:18.



Today, the vast majority of people are still blinded by the god of this system of things and are in bondage​—religious, economic, and social. (2 Cor. 4:4) It is our privilege to follow Jesus’ example of helping people to come to know and worship Jehovah, the God of freedom. (Matt. 28:19, 20) That is not an easy work, and there are many challenges. In some lands, people are becoming more indifferent, some even hostile. The question that each of us should consider is, ‘Can I use my freedom to give greater support to the Kingdom work?’ It is most encouraging to see that many have sensed the urgency of our times and have simplified their lives so as to share in the full-time ministry. (1 Cor. 9:19, 23) Some of them serve within their local territories; others move to where the need is greater. What a splendid result of making wise use of the freedom to serve Jehovah!​—Ps. 110:3. w18.04 11-12 ¶13-14




