
September
Tuesday, September 1

Though you never saw him, you love him.​—1 Pet. 1:8.



Jesus showed fellow feeling for Martha and Mary. When he saw their grief over the death of their brother, Lazarus, “Jesus gave way to tears.” (John 11:32-35) He did not weep just because he had lost the company of a close friend. After all, he knew that he was going to resurrect Lazarus. Rather, Jesus wept because he understood and was touched by the heartache of his dear friends. We benefit greatly from learning about Jesus’ fellow feeling. Of course, we are not perfect as he was. Yet, we love him for the way he treated others. We are encouraged to know that he is now ruling as King of God’s Kingdom. He will soon eliminate all suffering. He is in the best position to help humanity recover from the wounds inflicted by Satan’s rulership, for Jesus too was once human. Indeed, we are blessed to have a Ruler who can “sympathize with our weaknesses.”​—Heb. 2:17, 18; 4:15, 16. w19.03 17 ¶12-13




Wednesday, September 2

No man can come to me unless the Father, who sent me, draws him.​—John 6:44.



We can play a part in helping others learn about God, but we do not play the most important part. (1 Cor. 3:6, 7) Jehovah is the one who draws people. In the end, each individual will respond to the good news based on his or her heart condition. (Matt. 13:4-8) Remember that most people did not accept Jesus’ message​—and he was the greatest Teacher who ever lived! Really, then, we should not become discouraged if many of the people we try to help do not respond favorably. We will see benefits when we show fellow feeling in our ministry. We will enjoy our preaching work more. We will experience the greater happiness that comes from giving. And we make it easier for those who are “rightly disposed for everlasting life” to accept the good news. (Acts 13:48) So “as long as we have the opportunity, let us work what is good toward all.” (Gal. 6:10) Then we will have the joy of bringing glory to our heavenly Father.​—Matt. 5:16. w19.03 25 ¶18-19




Thursday, September 3

In the midst of the congregation I will praise you.​—Ps. 22:22.



King David wrote: “Jehovah is great and most worthy of praise.” (Ps. 145:3) He loved Jehovah, and that love moved him to praise God “in the midst of the congregation.” (1 Chron. 29:10-13; Ps. 40:5) Today, one way we praise Jehovah is by commenting during Christian meetings. All of us appreciate hearing a variety of comments at our meetings. We enjoy the simple, sincere words of a young child. We are inspired by the excitement in the voice of someone who is commenting about a truth that he or she has just discovered. And we admire those who “mustered up courage” to give a comment, even though they are shy or are only beginning to learn our language. (1 Thess. 2:2; ftn.) How can we show appreciation for their effort? We can thank them for their encouraging comment after the meeting. Another way is by giving a comment ourselves. Then not only do we receive encouragement at our meetings but we also give it.​—Rom. 1:11, 12. w19.01 8 ¶1-2; 9 ¶6




Friday, September 4

Show yourselves thankful.​—Col. 3:15.



The ten men were desperate. They had leprosy, and the future looked bleak. But one day, they saw Jesus, the Great Teacher, from a distance. They had heard that Jesus healed all sorts of sicknesses. So they cried out: “Jesus, Instructor, have mercy on us!” The ten men were completely cured. No doubt all of them were grateful for Jesus’ kindness. One of them, however, did more than feel gratitude​—he expressed his appreciation to Jesus. That healed man, a Samaritan, felt compelled to glorify God “with a loud voice.” (Luke 17:12-19) Like the Samaritan, we want to express our gratitude to those who are kind. Jehovah sets the example for us in expressing appreciation. One way he does this is by rewarding those who please him. (2 Sam. 22:21; Ps. 13:6; Matt. 10:40, 41) And the Scriptures encourage us to “become imitators of God, as beloved children.” (Eph. 5:1) So a key reason why we should express appreciation is that we want to follow Jehovah’s example. w19.02 14 ¶1-2; 15 ¶4




Saturday, September 5

I will not renounce my integrity!​—Job 27:5.



A young girl at school respectfully refuses to join in a holiday celebration that does not please God. A shy young man preaching from door to door knocks on the door of a fellow student who has made fun of Jehovah’s Witnesses before. A man working hard to provide for his family is asked by his boss to do something dishonest or illegal. Though he could lose his job, the man explains that he must be honest and obey the law because God requires that of his servants. (Rom. 13:1-4; Heb. 13:18) What quality do you see in those three individuals? You may notice several, such as courage and honesty. But one quality stands out as especially precious​—integrity. Each of the three shows loyalty to Jehovah. Each one refuses to compromise on God’s standards. Integrity moves those individuals to act as they do. Jehovah would surely feel proud of each one of them for showing that quality. We likewise want to make our Father in heaven proud. w19.02 2 ¶1-2




Sunday, September 6

The Law has a shadow of the good things to come.​—Heb. 10:1.



The Law specifically protected those who could not protect themselves, such as orphans, widows, and foreign residents. The judges in Israel were told: “You must not pervert the judgment of the foreign resident or of the fatherless child, and you must not seize the garment of a widow as security for a loan.” (Deut. 24:17) Jehovah showed tender personal interest in the most vulnerable in the community. And he held those who mistreated them to account. (Ex. 22:22-24) Jehovah wants those he places in positions of responsibility to take a loving interest in all whom they oversee. He hates sex crimes and wants to ensure that all, especially the most vulnerable, receive protection and justice. (Lev. 18:6-30) When we are convinced that Jehovah is treating us justly, our love for him grows. And when we love God and love his righteous standards, we feel impelled to love others and treat them justly. w19.02 24-25 ¶22-26




Monday, September 7

Reject ungodliness and worldly desires.​—Titus 2:12.



Consider an example of how we can protect ourselves from being influenced by Satan’s thinking. Jehovah has taught us that “sexual immorality and every sort of uncleanness [should] not even be mentioned among [us].” (Eph. 5:3) But what will we do if peers at work or at school start talking about sexually immoral topics? The watchman, our conscience, might sound an alarm. (Rom. 2:15) But will we listen to it? We might be tempted, instead, to listen to our peers or to look at pictures they might be sharing. But this is the time to close the city gates, so to speak, by changing the conversation or by walking away. It takes courage to resist pressure from our peers to think about or to do wrong things. We can be sure that Jehovah sees the effort we make, and he will give us the strength and wisdom we need to resist satanic thinking.​—2 Chron. 16:9; Isa. 40:29; Jas. 1:5. w19.01 17-18 ¶12-13




Tuesday, September 8

When I reflected on all the works that my own hands had done . . . , I saw that everything was futile . . . There was nothing of real value.​—Eccl. 2:11.



Fabulously rich and powerful, Solomon embarked on an experiment to “try out pleasure and see what good [would come].” (Eccl. 2:1-10) He built houses, designed gardens and parks, and pursued whatever he desired. How did he feel afterward? Contented? Fulfilled? Satisfied? We need not guess. Solomon himself told us in today’s text. What a powerful lesson! Will you wisely take it to heart? Jehovah wants to spare you the pain of learning life’s lessons the hard way. Granted, you need faith in order to obey God and put his will first in your life. That faith is invaluable, and it never disappoints. Yes, Jehovah will never forget “the love you showed for his name.” (Heb. 6:10) So work hard to build a strong faith, and thus see for yourself that your heavenly Father has your best interests at heart.​—Ps. 32:8. w18.12 22 ¶14-15




Wednesday, September 9

God recommends his own love to us in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.​—Rom. 5:8.



A spiritual person has faith in God and has God’s mind on matters. He looks to God for guidance and is determined to obey him. (1 Cor. 2:12, 13) David is a good example. He sang: “Jehovah is my portion, my allotted share, and my cup.” (Ps. 16:5) That “portion” included David’s approved relationship with God, in whom he took refuge. (Ps. 16:1) The result? “My whole being is joyful,” he wrote. Yes, nothing gave David more joy than intimacy with God. (Ps. 16:9, 11) The joy that David experienced does not come to those who center their lives on pleasures and riches. (1 Tim. 6:9, 10) Developing faith in Jehovah and serving him will give your life meaning and provide you with satisfaction. How can you grow in faith? You must spend time with him, as it were, by reading his Word, observing his creation, and thinking about his qualities, including his love for you.​—Rom. 1:20. w18.12 25 ¶7-8




Thursday, September 10

Let marriage be honorable among all.​—Heb. 13:4.



Paul was not making a mere casual observation. Rather, that text was directing, yes urging, Christians personally to esteem marriage, to view it as precious. Is that your view of marriage in general and particularly of your own marriage if you have a mate? In honoring marriage, you are in the best of company. Jesus honored marriage. When the Pharisees asked Jesus about divorce, he referred to what God had said regarding the first marriage: “For this reason a man will leave his father and his mother, and the two will be one flesh.” Jesus added: “What God has yoked together, let no man put apart.” (Mark 10:2-12; Gen. 2:24) Jesus thus agreed that marriage is of divine origin and stressed its permanence. God did not tell Adam and Eve that marriage could be ended by divorce. The standard set in that Edenic marriage was monogamy, “the two” being joined together in a lasting union. w18.12 10-11 ¶2-4




Friday, September 11

Be transformed by making your mind over.​—Rom. 12:2.



When we first came to a knowledge of the truth, we learned the importance of obedience to Jehovah’s basic requirements. But as we continue to grow spiritually, we learn more about Jehovah’s thinking​—his likes, his dislikes, and his way of viewing various matters—​and this influences our actions and personal choices. While learning to think like Jehovah is a delight, it can also be a challenge. At times, our imperfect reasoning might get in the way. For example, we might have difficulty understanding Jehovah’s view of moral cleanness, materialism, the preaching work, the misuse of blood, or something else. What can we do? How can we continue to make progress in making God’s thoughts our own? The answer lies in making our mind over by studying God’s Word with a view to grasping his thoughts, meditating on them, and bringing our thinking into alignment with God’s thinking. w18.11 23-24 ¶2-4




Saturday, September 12

How long must I ask for help from violence, but you do not intervene?​—Hab. 1:2.



Habakkuk lived during a very difficult and challenging time. He was deeply saddened because he was surrounded by wicked, violent people. When would their wickedness end? Why did Jehovah take so long before acting? All Habakkuk saw was injustice and oppression practiced by his own countrymen. He felt helpless. So in the midst of this dark period, he called on Jehovah to intervene. Habakkuk may have started to imagine that Jehovah was not concerned. It seemed that God would not act soon enough. Can you identify with the feelings of this dear servant of God? Had Habakkuk lost trust in Jehovah? Did he fail to maintain his faith in God’s promises? By no means! The mere fact that he entrusted his problems and concerns to Jehovah and not to humans shows that he had not given up in despair. He was obviously troubled because he could not understand God’s timing or the reason why Jehovah allowed him to be in such a painful situation. w18.11 14 ¶4-5




Sunday, September 13

Stop storing up for yourselves treasures on the earth.​—Matt. 6:19.



When the fishermen Peter and Andrew were invited by Jesus to become “fishers of men,” they “abandoned their nets.” (Matt. 4:18-20) Of course, most of those who learn the truth today cannot simply walk away from their jobs. They have Scriptural obligations. (1 Tim. 5:8) However, individuals who learn the truth must often change their attitude toward material things and adjust their priorities. Consider the example of Maria. Golf was her life, and her goal was to enjoy a lucrative career as a professional golfer. Then Maria started to study the Bible, and she was pleased with the changes that the truth helped her make in her life. Maria realized that it would be difficult for her to pursue both spiritual and material riches. (Matt. 6:24) She gave up her lifelong goal of becoming a professional golfer. She now serves as a pioneer and enjoys what she describes as “the happiest, most meaningful life possible.” w18.11 5 ¶9-10




Monday, September 14

This is the carpenter, the son of Mary.​—Mark 6:3.



At 30 years of age, Jesus laid aside his carpenter’s tools because he knew that being a minister was the more important occupation. He said that the work of declaring the good news of the Kingdom of God was one reason why God sent him to the earth. (Matt. 20:28; Luke 3:23; 4:43) Jesus made the ministry the primary focus of his life, and he wanted others to join him in that work. (Matt. 9:35-38) We may not be carpenters, but we certainly are ministers of the good news. That occupation is so important that God is involved; we are called “God’s fellow workers.” (1 Cor. 3:9; 2 Cor. 6:4) We acknowledge that “the very essence of [Jehovah’s] word is truth.” (Ps. 119:159, 160) That is why we want to be sure that we are “handling the word of the truth aright” in our ministry. (2 Tim. 2:15) To that end, we keep honing our skills in using the Bible, the principal tool that we use to teach the truth about Jehovah, Jesus, and the Kingdom. w18.10 11 ¶1-2




Tuesday, September 15

Assist those who are weak and . . . keep in mind the words of the Lord Jesus.​—Acts 20:35.



When a husband looks to his head, Jesus Christ, as a role model, he helps his wife to cultivate “deep respect” for him. (Eph. 5:22-25, 33) Her respect, in turn, will move her to be considerate of her husband. When parents show consideration for each other, they set a fine example for their children. Parents, of course, have the primary responsibility to teach their children how to be considerate of others. For example, parents can teach them not to run around in the Kingdom Hall. At a social gathering, parents might tell their children to let older ones go ahead of them when lining up for food. When a child performs a thoughtful deed for us​—perhaps opening a door—​we should commend the child. Doing so can have a good effect on the young one, impressing on his heart that “there is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving.” w18.09 29 ¶5-6




Wednesday, September 16

Your Leader is one, the Christ.​—Matt. 23:10.



As shown by his active direction, our enthroned King, Jesus Christ, is definitely looking to the future. Therefore, let us rejoice over the benefits we derive from adjusting to recent changes. You might find it encouraging during your family worship to discuss how you have benefited from changes in the weekly meetings or in the ministry. If we perceive the spirit behind the instructions we receive from Jehovah’s organization and their beneficial effect on us, we will likely follow that guidance with joy. We certainly appreciate that reducing the amount of literature being printed saves money; using new technologies allows us to further the Kingdom work throughout the earth. So use electronic publications and media more extensively if possible. In this way, we will reflect Christ’s concern to use the organization’s resources wisely. When we earnestly uphold Christ’s direction, we strengthen the faith of others and contribute to unity. w18.10 25-26 ¶17-19




Thursday, September 17

Having tender affection for you, we were determined to impart to you, not only the good news of God but also our very selves.​—1 Thess. 2:8.



When we display godlike tenderness, we can be the answer to a distressed person’s prayers. (2 Cor. 1:3-6) However, do not expect perfection from your spiritual brothers and sisters. Keep a balanced view of them. To expect faultless behavior is unrealistic and will bring disappointment. (Eccl. 7:21, 22) Remember, Jehovah is realistic in what he requires of his servants. If we imitate his example, we will be prepared to put up with the imperfections of others. (Eph. 4:2, 32) Instead of giving them the impression that they are not doing enough, make it a point to commend them for what they are doing. That can encourage them. Sincere commendation can build others up in love and help them to find “cause for rejoicing” in their own sacred service. How much better when we do so rather than express frustrating comparisons with others.​—Gal. 6:4. w18.09 16 ¶16-17




Friday, September 18

My food is to do the will of him who sent me and to finish his work.​—John 4:34.



To Jesus, spiritual food included acting on God’s direction. In what sense is this like food? Just as our bodies are contented and nourished when we eat a good meal, our hearts are strengthened and our faith is nourished for everlasting life when we participate in doing God’s will. Putting divine instruction into practice is essentially what wisdom means. (Ps. 107:43) The reward for wisdom is worth the effort. “Nothing you desire can compare to it. . . . It is a tree of life to those who take hold of it, and those who keep firm hold of it will be called happy.” (Prov. 3:13-18) Jesus said: “If you know these things, happy you are if you do them.” (John 13:17) The disciples’ happiness would last if they kept doing what Jesus instructed them to do. They did not embrace his teachings and example simply as an immediate response on that one occasion. It became their way of life. w18.09 4 ¶4-5




Saturday, September 19

God went on to create the man in his image.​—Gen. 1:27.



God gave the first human couple instructions that should have made them think about the welfare of others, even though they were alone in the garden of Eden. Jehovah blessed Adam and Eve and encouraged them to multiply, fill the earth, and subdue it. (Gen. 1:28) Just as the Creator was keenly interested in the welfare of his creation, the first human parents should have been interested in the happiness of their unborn children. Paradise was to be extended earth wide for the benefit of Adam’s offspring. That huge project would require the cooperation of his ever-growing family. For perfect men and women, working to extend Paradise would have meant cooperating to the full with Jehovah to achieve his purposes, thereby entering into his rest. (Heb. 4:11) Imagine how fulfilling and rewarding that project would have been! Giving of themselves for the welfare of others would have brought them great blessings and immense satisfaction. w18.08 18 ¶2; 19-20 ¶8-9




Sunday, September 20

He slandered your servant to my lord the king.​—2 Sam. 19:27.



What if you are a victim of a slanderous accusation? Jesus and John the Baptizer experienced such a challenge. (Matt. 11:18, 19) How did Jesus deal with false information? He did not spend all his time and energy defending himself. Instead he encouraged people to look at the facts​—what he did and what he taught. As Jesus said, “wisdom is vindicated by its works.” (Matt. 11:19; ftn.) There is a valuable lesson here that we do well to learn. At times, people may say unfair or critical things about us. We may long for justice and wish that we could do something to undo the damage to our reputation. Yet, there is something we can do. If someone spreads a lie about us, we can live in such a way that no one will believe that lie. Indeed, as Jesus’ example shows, our personal record of upright Christian conduct can wipe out half-truths and false accusations. w18.08 6 ¶11-13




Monday, September 21

Jehovah your God you should fear, him you should serve, to him you should cling.​—Deut. 10:20.



The Bible accounts about the disobedience of Cain, Solomon, and the Israelites at Mount Sinai have a noteworthy element in common. These individuals had opportunity to “repent . . . and turn around.” (Acts 3:19) Clearly, Jehovah is not quick to give up on those who take a false step. In Aaron’s case, Jehovah extended forgiveness. Today, warnings from Jehovah may come in the form of a Bible account, Bible-based publications, or kind advice from a fellow Christian. When we heed the warnings, we are assured of Jehovah’s mercy. Jehovah’s undeserved kindness has a purpose. (2 Cor. 6:1) It gives us an opportunity “to reject ungodliness and worldly desires.” (Titus 2:11-14) As long as we live “amid this present system of things,” we will face situations that will put our exclusive devotion to Jehovah to the test. May we always be ready to take a firm stand on his side! w18.07 21 ¶20-21




Tuesday, September 22

Jehovah knows those who belong to him.​—2 Tim. 2:19.



How can we strengthen our resolve to seek Jehovah’s recognition and not that of the world? To do so, we need to remember two important facts. First, Jehovah always gives recognition to those who serve him faithfully. (Heb. 6:10; 11:6) He deeply appreciates every one of his servants, and he views it as “unrighteous” to ignore those who are faithful to him. He is “aware of the way of the righteous” and knows how to rescue them out of trial. (Ps. 1:6; 2 Pet. 2:9) Second, Jehovah may give us recognition in ways we may never expect. Those who do good deeds purely to be seen by men are told that they will have no reward at all from Jehovah. Why? Their reward has already been paid in full. (Matt. 6:1-5) However, Jesus said that his Father “looks on in secret” at those who do not receive due credit for the good they do to others. He notices those acts and repays each person accordingly. w18.07 9 ¶8, 10




Wednesday, September 23

Stop calling defiled the things God has cleansed.​—Acts 10:15.



Peter was perplexed as to what the voice was trying to tell him. Just then, the messengers from Cornelius arrived. After receiving direction from the holy spirit, Peter pressed forward and accompanied the messengers to the home of Cornelius. If Peter had judged matters solely on outward appearance, he would never have entered the home of Cornelius. Jews simply did not enter the homes of Gentiles. Why did Peter move forward despite deep-seated prejudices? Peter was profoundly affected by the vision he had seen and by the reassurance he received from the holy spirit. After he listened to what Cornelius related, Peter, no doubt moved by the account, declared under inspiration: “Now I truly understand that God is not partial, but in every nation the man who fears him and does what is right is acceptable to him.” (Acts 10:34, 35) What a thrilling new understanding for Peter​—one with far-reaching implications! w18.08 9 ¶3-4




Thursday, September 24

Hate what is bad.​—Amos 5:15.



We may well stay far away from practices that God hates. Yet, there are other activities or aspects of life about which the Scriptures provide no specific command. In such areas, how can we determine what is acceptable and pleasing to God? That is where our Bible-trained conscience comes into play. Jehovah has lovingly given us principles that work in conjunction with our Bible-trained conscience. He himself says: “I, Jehovah, am your God, the One teaching you to benefit yourself, the One guiding you in the way you should walk.” (Isa. 48:17, 18) By using our mind and heart to reason on Bible principles, we correct, direct, and mold our conscience. That, in turn, helps us to make wise decisions. A principle is a fundamental truth or doctrine that is used as a basis of reasoning or action. To understand a principle includes understanding the thinking of the Lawgiver and the reasons why he gave certain laws. w18.06 17 ¶5; 18 ¶8-10




Friday, September 25

Is it lawful to pay head tax to Caesar or not?​—Matt. 22:17.



The party followers of Herod who raised this issue hoped that if Jesus denounced the tax, he might be accused of sedition. If Jesus said that taxation was a necessary burden, he could lose the support of his followers. Jesus was careful to remain neutral on the taxation issue. Of course, Jesus knew that corruption was common among tax collectors. But Jesus did not want to get sidetracked, diverted from the much more important issue. That was God’s Kingdom, which would be the real solution. He thereby set the example for all his followers. They should avoid becoming involved in political issues, no matter how right or just a certain cause might seem. Christians seek the Kingdom of God and his righteousness. They do that instead of forming strong opinions about, or speaking out against, certain unjust practices. (Matt. 6:33) Many of Jehovah’s Witnesses have succeeded in moving away from strong political views that they once held. w18.06 6 ¶9-11




Saturday, September 26

The sons of the true God began to notice that the daughters of men were beautiful.​—Gen. 6:2.



Perhaps Satan tempted the disloyal angels not only with the opportunity for immoral sex but also with the promise of seizing power over mankind. His purpose may have been to disrupt the arrival of the promised ‘offspring of the woman.’ (Gen. 3:15) In any case, Jehovah ended all such plots by bringing the Flood​—a move that thwarted the efforts of Satan and the rebellious angels at that time. So, never underestimate the lure of immorality or the danger of egotism. For aeons, the angels who joined Satan served in the very presence of God. Yet, many allowed bad desires to take root and grow. Similarly, we may have served for decades in the earthly part of God’s organization. Yet, even in this spiritually clean environment, unclean desires can take root. (1 Cor. 10:12) How important it is that we constantly search our heart, reject immoral thoughts, and suppress unhealthy pride!​—Gal. 5:26; Col. 3:5. w18.05 25 ¶11-12




Sunday, September 27

I have great grief and unceasing pain in my heart.​—Rom. 9:2.



Paul felt discouraged by the Jews’ negative reaction to the Kingdom message. Even so, he did not give up on them. Note what he further said in his letter to the Christians in Rome about his feelings toward those Jews: “The goodwill of my heart and my supplication to God for them are indeed for their salvation. For I bear them witness that they have a zeal for God, but not according to accurate knowledge.” (Rom. 10:1, 2) Paul stated why he kept on preaching to the Jews. He was moved by “the goodwill of [his] heart.” It was his heart’s desire that some Jews would find salvation. (Rom. 11:13, 14) He implored God in prayer to help individual Jews to accept the Kingdom message. Paul added: “They have a zeal for God.” He saw a potential for good in people. Zeal, if properly directed, can transform sincere individuals into zealous disciples of Christ, as Paul well knew. w18.05 13 ¶4; 15-16 ¶13-14




Monday, September 28

[Speak] what is good for building up as the need may be, to impart what is beneficial to the hearers.​—Eph. 4:29.



Each of us should be alert to observe “the need” that others have. Paul counseled Hebrew Christians: “Strengthen the hands that hang down and the feeble knees, and keep making straight paths for your feet, so that what is lame may not be put out of joint but, rather, may be healed.” (Heb. 12:12, 13) All of us, including young ones, can build one another up by words of encouragement. Paul gave this advice: “If, then, there is any encouragement in Christ, if any consolation of love, if any spiritual fellowship, if any tender affection and compassion, make my joy full by being of the same mind and having the same love, being completely united, having the one thought in mind. Do nothing out of contentiousness or out of egotism, but with humility consider others superior to you, as you look out not only for your own interests, but also for the interests of others.”​—Phil. 2:1-4. w18.04 22 ¶10; 23 ¶12




Tuesday, September 29

Be as free people, using your freedom . . . as slaves of God.​—1 Pet. 2:16.



The real purpose for which Jehovah, through Jesus, has freed us from the law of sin and of death is for us to live a life of dedication “as slaves of God.” The best way to protect ourselves from misusing our freedom and thus becoming enslaved again by worldly ambitions and desires is to be fully absorbed in spiritual pursuits. (Gal. 5:16) Consider, for example, the patriarch Noah and his family. They lived in a violent and immoral world. Yet, they kept free from being entangled in the desires and pursuits of the people around them. How did they manage to do that? They chose to keep busy in all that Jehovah had assigned them to do​—build the ark, store up food for themselves and the animals, and sound the warning to others. “Noah did according to all that God had commanded him. He did just so.” (Gen. 6:22) The result? Noah and his family survived the end of that world.​—Heb. 11:7. w18.04 10 ¶8; 11 ¶11-12




Wednesday, September 30

I will give you all this authority and their glory, because it has been handed over to me, and I give it to whomever I wish.​—Luke 4:6.



Satan and the demons use not only governments but also false religion and the commercial system to mislead “the entire inhabited earth.” (Rev. 12:9) Through false religion, Satan promotes lies about Jehovah. In addition, the Devil seems determined to make as many people as possible forget God’s name. (Jer. 23:26, 27) As a result, sincere individuals who think that they are worshipping God are deceived into worshipping demons. (1 Cor. 10:20; 2 Cor. 11:13-15) Satan also promotes lies through the commercial system. For example, this system often teaches people that the best way to be happy is to pursue money and gather many possessions. (Prov. 18:11) Those who believe this lie spend their lives serving “Riches” rather than God. (Matt. 6:24) Eventually, their love of material things can choke any love they had for God.​—Matt. 13:22; 1 John 2:15, 16. w18.05 23 ¶6-7




