From Our Readers
DEPRESSION
Thank you, thank you! Thank you for the articles on depression. I am certain that this issue will literally save lives. How wonderful it was to read about others suffering the same destructive pattern of thinking and yet to have a sympathetic treatment of the subject; not just being told we have lost our faith or should just be able easily to change our thinking habits! I am truly looking forward to the coming issue that will discuss various methods of treatment.
S. F., Missouri
Thank you so much for publishing this excellent series of articles on depression. Having suffered from severe depression in past years, I could especially appreciate the informative, positive and understanding way the subject was handled. The many fine suggestions given to the victims of depression as well as to their friends and families are certain to help those facing this problem. I also very much appreciated the practical suggestions on how to prevent depression.
S. B., Ohio
I am 24 years old and over the last 10 years I have had many periods of depression. I thought of suicide many times. I really appreciate the part about how others can help because, as was mentioned, when a person is depressed he often speaks and behaves in ways that others can’t understand. And then to have someone tell the person that he is just looking for attention or pity really makes him feel worthless. I’ve gone through most of my life with low esteem and negative thoughts but now I feel as if my life is taking on new shape and that I have a chance really to feel happy.
D. M., Illinois
TREATMENT OF ANIMALS
Why do you not enlighten your readers as to the wretched death that animals are subjected to by so-called experiments? Why do the religious organizations show so little interest in what man is doing to the animals? Is this allowed in your religion, tolerated? Can man do whatever he wants to with the animals entrusted to his care? Where is man’s responsibility toward animals? Would this not be a subject for your magazine?
I. S., Germany
We agree that man has a serious responsibility to give proper care to the animals. Proverbs 12:10 states: “The righteous one is caring for the soul of his domestic animal, but the mercies of the wicked ones are cruel.” We have treated aspects of this subject from time to time and will do so in the future. See “Awake!” of March 22, 1980; June 22, 1980, and November 22, 1981.​—ED.
CARPET YIELD
I read some time ago in “Watching the World” that a London jeweler had his workroom carpet refined and got a rather high yield. So we got to talking about this and decided to try it also. Sure enough! That month of July our business was in the hole $7,000. And guess what we got out of the carpet? $7,600. I never would have done it if I hadn’t read about it in “Awake!”
G. C., Georgia

