Should You Vary Your Initial Approach?
1 Our first objective in going from house to house is to gain an attentive ear. In frequently worked territory, many publishers find it helpful to vary their initial approach when covering the same area. Of course, there is no reason to change something that works well for you. However, if you seldom get past your opening words, you may find the need to vary what you say initially.
2 How might this be done? You might say: “I would like to leave this printed message on the subject [read subject on back of handbill and offer to householder].” Then use the topic you feature from the handbill as a basis for your Scriptural presentation. The reverse side of the handbill may highlight such scriptures as Revelation 21:4; Matthew 24:3 and Micah 4:3, 4. An interesting conversation could be built around any of these texts. Especially in territories where the handbill has not been commonly used to introduce the message, it may capture the householder’s interest.
3 Questions, too, can arouse interest. You might ask: “What do you think might be done to upgrade the quality of life today?” Or, “What do you feel is mankind’s greatest need at present?” Another question could be: “If you could remedy just one problem facing mankind, what would you change?” Then use a scripture that fits the householder’s thinking, ultimately drawing attention to the Kingdom.
4 A question, along with an illustration in a publication, might attract immediate interest. For example, you could point to the picture on page four of the Truth book and ask: “Would you like to live in a place like the one pictured here?”
5 In varying our approach, we might also consider when we call. By varying the time of the day and the day of the week, we may be able to meet members of a household who seldom hear the good news. We may find that certain times and days are more convenient for such people and they may be more willing to listen. Have you considered working from house to house or following up not-at-homes on Saturday afternoons? Or, what about doing such service in the early evening hours when many are at home and in a relaxed frame of mind? If we can make some adjustment in our schedules, possibly more sheeplike ones could be located.
6 From time to time, it is good to analyze our approach to see if adjustments would be beneficial in aiding us to start more conversations, and would enable us to have more opportunities to declare the good news.

