Kingdom News No. 28
Hope for Ending Inflation, Sickness, Crime, War?
WHY HOPE?
Many people have predicted a better future.
Politicians are elected for promising to overcome inflation, crime, war.
But how reliable have they been? You know the answer.
Scientists and doctors promise a better world, cures for disease.
Yet sickness and death still plague all mankind.
Astrologers and fortune-tellers make many predictions.
But have these been any more accurate than blind chance?
On the other hand, the Bible has a record of 100-percent accuracy.
Why not put hope in a source with a proved record?
The Bible long ago predicted the world’s present problems. Check this for yourself at Matthew 24:3-14; 2 Timothy 3:1-5; Revelation 6:1-8.
But it also shows that the very existence of these problems is the basis for hope. It says:
‘When all this starts to happen, hold your heads high, because your deliverance is near.’—Luke 21:28.
THIS IS WHAT YOU MAY LIVE TO SEE
The Bible foretells . . .
An End to Inflation; Prosperity Instead: “There will come to be plenty of grain on the earth; . . . there will be an overflow.”—Psalm 72:16.
An End to Sickness: “Neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore.”—Revelation 21:4.
An End to Crime: “Just a little while longer, and the wicked one will be no more.”—Psalm 37:10.
An End to War: “[God] is making wars to cease to the extremity of the earth.”—Psalm 46:9.
Where will this take place? Right here on earth.
When will it come? In our generation.
How will it be done? Through God’s kingdom.
THE BIBLE’S SURE HOPE CAN HELP YOU EVEN NOW
It gives the confidence that comes with knowing what lies ahead:
‘Whenever you lie down you will feel no dread. You will not need to be afraid of the storm upon the wicked ones, because it is coming.’—Proverbs 3:24-26.
Even now, making the Bible’s hope your own can help you cope with economic difficulties, severe illness, death of a loved one.
HOW CAN YOU ACQUIRE THIS KIND OF HOPE?
By learning what the Bible really teaches.
Millions have found real help in the book “The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life.”
Send the coupon below for your copy.
Please send me, postpaid, the 192-page book “The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life.”
I enclose 60 cents (U.S.) as full payment.
[Picture on page 4]
The Bible’s Hope Gives Confidence

