From Our Readers
Losing Weight  I am 37 years of age and an invalid. For several years now, I have been fighting overweight. The doctor prescribed fasting and protein diets, and at first I lost weight rapidly. But then I began to gain weight once more. That resulted in discouragement and, in the end, indifference. Armed with the explanation in the article (May 22, 1989) as to how the body reacts to diets, I now feel encouraged enough to renew the attack on the pounds.
G. E., Federal Republic of Germany
The information was superb, and I learned more in those few pages than I have learned from the countless “slimming” magazines that I have been buying and reading for over ten years. (What a fortune I could have saved myself!) I realize now what is the practical and correct way to shed surplus weight, leading to a happier and healthier person.
C. L., Great Britain
Courtship  The discussion of dating and courtship in the April 22, 1989, Awake! was the best you have ever published. Members of our congregation of all ages are talking about it, expressing appreciation for the realistic direction given. It acknowledged that those who are courting need to spend time together, and it gave direction on what to say and do while courting. My wife died two years ago, and I know the article will be of help to me when I attempt courtship again. Thank you so much for this practical information.
M. T., United States
I have taught my children that it is wise always to have a chaperon. My upset comes with the fact that this was not mentioned in this recent article. I feel it will encourage unchaperoned dating.
S. W., United States
The moral dangers of courtship were discussed in the June 8 and June 22, 1982, issues. And the advisability of having a chaperon was considered in detail in the April 22, 1986, issue. The current article simply added to the previous counsel by focusing on the need for the man and the woman to get to know each other.​—ED.
Musician’s Life Story  I enjoyed the article about Larry Graham to the point that I read it several times. I was just growing up during the ’60’s, and his former band was one of my favorite groups. I felt very encouraged that he has reached many in the music business with the Bible’s message. I am also pleased that he is now a full-time evangelizer.
M. P., United States
Religious History Series  I wish to express my very deep respect for your study of world religions. It is common for religions to hold themselves in high esteem while disparaging others. I was very much impressed by the attitude adopted by your noble religion, which rises above that.
Y. T., Japan
Verbal Abuse  I was abused from infancy until I left home. Though he never struck me, my father would smash dishes, destroy furniture​—he even put his fist through a wall once. He blamed his abuse on me. The message I received from your article (June 8, 1989) was that my father was correct, that the victim inspires the abuse.
A. N., United States
We are sorry if the article caused emotional pain to any victims of parental abuse. The article focused on how a youth can cope with, and perhaps avoid provoking, common parental outbursts. By no means did we intend to imply that a child is responsible for behavior such as that described above. Regarding these serious forms of parental abuse, the article said: “A youth is wise to seek outside help, perhaps approaching a Christian elder in his local congregation.”​—ED.

