Can a Blind Man “See”?
As told by Bernardo de Santana
“IT IS just too bad, Bernardo,” Germiro said. “You used to work right along with us; you were able to see then, but now . . . that’s the way it goes. God willed it that way, didn’t he?”
“That’s right, Germiro,” I answered. “It’s God’s will, so there’s nothing we can do about it.”
I really felt that it was God’s will that I had lost my sight, but in my heart there were unanswered questions. Here I was​—32 years old, single, a devout Catholic, and in a shaky financial condition. I asked myself: ‘Why did God “will” that I lose my sight? How will I ever care for my parents?’ When I had first noticed my sight failing, I prayed fervently for help to Santa Luzia, the “saint” for sight, kneeling before her image in the hospital that bears her name. ‘Why did she fail me?’ I wondered.
At one time I made my living selling vegetables in the Market of the Seven Doors in Salvador, Brazil. It was not lucrative, but it was steady work. Ever since I was ten years old I had worked on a farm in Sergipe State. So when we moved to Salvador it was natural for me to take up selling vegetables.
One day I noticed that my vision was failing. A specialist confirmed that I had cataracts, but he was hopeful that surgery would restore my sight. An operation on my right eye in 1960 did improve my vision some, but a second operation on the left eye, four years later, proved unsuccessful. From then on it was just a matter of time until I was completely blind. Although I had known for years that I was losing my sight, it is hard to express my feelings once the darkness became complete.
I continued to work in the market but with certain adjustments. Before I left for work, my family divided the money, putting bills of different denominations in separate pockets. This enabled me to make change. But I had to be constantly alert so as not to make mistakes. My fellow workers were sympathetic, and their kind words prevented me from getting discouraged. But some of their expressions, such as those of Germiro mentioned at the outset, only served to raise questions in my mind.
Beginning to “See”
It was at this point in my life that one of my acquaintances, a Jehovah’s Witness named Clovis, spoke to me about the promises in the Bible. He told me that God would make a New Order where the blind would see and the deaf would hear again. (Isaiah 35:5) His words struck a responsive chord in my heart. Eager to learn more, I sought him out constantly to ask questions. Observing my interest, he asked me: “Bernardo, how about my coming to your home one afternoon so we can talk more about the Bible?” I accepted eagerly. This was the beginning of our weekly Bible discussions.
Although handicapped, I was anxious to learn. With Clovis’ patient help, not only did I discover God’s name​—Jehovah—​but I also learned of His wonderful acts in the past. They were a guarantee that His promises for a righteous Paradise earth would be fulfilled. Then even physical disabilities, such as mine, would be no more. It was not long before I was talking to others about my new hope, even preaching from house to house. Finally, on November 18, 1973, I was baptized. Especially from then on my life began to take on a real purpose, making it easier to cope with my handicap.
From my study of the Bible I knew that God had not willed that I become blind. Rather it was just as the Bible states at Ecclesiastes 9:11: “Time and unforeseen occurrence befall them all.” Like all of mankind, I was born of imperfect parents who had inherited sin and imperfection from our first human parents, Adam and Eve. (Romans 5:12) Rather than being God’s will that I lose my sight, I learned that his will is that I see again. Under the Kingdom rule of God’s Son and on the basis of his ransom sacrifice, all imperfections and defects will be removed from believing mankind, and this in the near future. I began to “see” so many things that I could not see before when I had my good eyesight.
My prayers now were directed to Jehovah rather than to Santa Luzia and other “saints.” Rather than praying for a miraculous healing to occur now, I prayed sincerely that ‘His will take place, as in heaven, also upon earth.’ Included in my prayers was a petition that I might someday find a “helper” and “complement,” a wife with whom I could share my joys and troubles.
One day while offering Bible literature to people in the business section of Salvador, I heard a female voice say, “I’m one of Jehovah’s Witnesses too.” I stopped to talk with her. She was the owner of a small street stand. I asked: “Is your husband one of Jehovah’s Witnesses too?” She answered: “I have no husband. I’m single.” That chance encounter began a friendship that blossomed into courtship, and on June 14, 1975, Ambrosina and I were married. To this day she continues to be my fine helper and complement.​—Genesis 2:18.
Working With the Handicap
Ever since my baptism, my desire has been to tell others of what I had learned from the Bible. I was happy that my handicap did not prevent me from doing this. How amazing it was to find that my faculties of hearing and touch tended to make up for my loss of sight. What a sense of accomplishment I felt the first time I went preaching from door to door alone! I wondered if I could not devote more time to this work. A talk by a traveling overseer of Jehovah’s Witnesses helped to answer my question. He quoted a number of examples of persons with handicaps, some worse than mine, who actually served as full-time preachers of the good news, called pioneers. Encouraged, I filled out my application to serve as an auxiliary pioneer.
Due to my blindness, I had some problems pioneering, but with the help of loving brothers in the congregation, these were all solved. For example, on rainy days I needed three hands. In one hand I carried my briefcase and in the other my cane. But the umbrella? How much I appreciated the “third hand” offered by my Christian brothers who accompanied me in the ministry! Difficulties arose, too, in working territories where the streets were unknown to me, but again understanding brothers helped me.
How did I find my way around the preaching territory? Usually, I had no problem, since I had taken a special course to help the blind get around. I learned how best to use my cane, to train my hearing and sense of touch, to get on and off buses, and to climb up and down stairs. The course helped me to learn many little things that I had taken for granted before. I would memorize names of streets and then keep count of them as we crossed them. I learned also to keep a mental record of each house on the street, and in this way I was able to make return visits on persons interested in Bible study. Also, although we live about two and a half kilometers (1.5 mi) from the Kingdom Hall, I have no problem in going there by myself.
In this regard a visiting traveling overseer was heard commenting: “When I visited the congregation I was really impressed when I worked with Bernardo. He knows the streets and even the houses, can climb stairs and go up and down hills. I was amazed to see how he locates the homes of the persons with whom he conducts Bible studies. We went to one study on the fourth floor of an apartment building, and he took us there without difficulty.”
Preparation and Efforts Rewarded
My door-to-door ministry requires special preparation. I memorize ahead of time the Bible texts I will use, as well as the page in the Bible where they are found. At the doors I ask the householder to read the texts, citing the page number, but if the householder prefers not to read, then I will quote the texts from memory.
When I conduct Bible studies, I encourage the student to prepare well. Next, I have him read the question first for my benefit, then the paragraph, and finally the question again. This helps me to determine if he answers the question correctly. Using this method I aided two persons to dedication and baptism. Also, I conduct studies with three other families.
For years I have shared in the Theocratic Ministry School of our congregation. In preparation for my talks I have someone read the material aloud to me, recording it on tape at the same time. Then I listen to the recording and form a mental outline of my talk, memorizing also the Bible texts to be included. I am then ready to give my talk. At least I am never counseled about depending too much on written notes! Following the same procedure enables me to comment regularly at the study of The Watchtower in the congregation.
The year 1977 was a milepost in my life as a dedicated Christian. I was appointed as a regular pioneer, a ministerial servant, and Congregation Book Study conductor, which privileges I continue to enjoy. I follow the same procedure in the Congregation Book Study as with my Bible students.
In conclusion: Can a blind man “see”? I can see the fulfillment of so many Bible prophecies in our day and hence I realize the need to help others to learn the truth that leads to eternal life. (John 17:3) In a spiritual way I have experienced the fulfillment of Isaiah 35:5: “At that time the eyes of the blind ones will be opened.” I have full confidence that in Jehovah’s due time this prophecy will also have a literal fulfillment on thousands of persons who, like me, have lost their sight. In the meantime, my desire is to continue doing his will to the best of my ability so as to be found worthy to live in his New Order of righteousness.
[Blurb on page 27]
“He told me that God would make a New Order where the blind would see and the deaf would hear again”
[Picture on page 28]
For my door-to-door ministry I memorize the Bible texts I will use, as well as the page in the Bible where they are found

