VOL. XXXVI MAY 15 No. 10 
A. D. 1915-A.M. 6043 



CONTENTS 

The New Creature's Conquest of His Flesh 147 

Conflict Between Mind and Body 148 

Two Classes in the World 149 



The Special Battles of the Church 149 

"The Crown of Life"-Who Will Receive It? 150 

Development as New Creatures in Christ 151 

Systematic Study Necessary 151 

Necessary Food Always in "Due Season" 151 

First Lessons in School 152 

Forgiveness Is Blessed 152 

Conditions for Forgiveness 153 

"Let Them Pray Over Him" 154 

Prayers That Are Heard 154 

Who May Pray 155 

What We Should Pray For 155 

"Prophesy Against the Shepherds" 156 

The Second Flock and Its Fold 157 

Interesting Letters 158 

Re Charges of the Preachers' Union 158 

Baptist Preacher Gets Light 159 

page 146 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



LITTLE CONVENTIONAL GATHERINGS 

(Continued from April 15 issue.) 

In harmony with our suggestion the friends at various places where 
Brother Russell will be addressing the public are arranging for little, 
quiet, local Conventions. Incidentally, we remark, that these are often 
amongst the most profitable. We advise that they be not made public— 
that the public be not invited to them, unless, indeed, it would be the particular 
friends of those who might be in attendance, especially if they 
were consecrated people. Additional places intending such gatherings 
have sent us the particulars noted below. 

Information respecting board and lodging at economical rates, etc., 
etc., should be obtained from the Class Secretaries: 
RIVERSIDE, CAL., May 26-One day. 

C. H. Meadors, Sec'y, 156 E. Prospect Ave. 
PORTLAND, ORE., June 10 (3 days) other days unknown. 

C. W. Field, Sec'y, 778 Sherrett Ave. 
TACOMA, WASH., June 13 

A. H. Heath, Sec'y, 3716 N. Proctor St. 
BUTTE, MONT., June 17-One day. 

J. A. Blomquist, Sec'y, 1011-1/2 Nevada Ave. 
CHEYENNE, WYO., June 19, 20. 

Mrs. W. E. Haller, Sec'y, 312 E. 16th St. 
DENVER, COLO., June 20 (3 days), other days unknown. 

Albert L. Fanders, Sec'y, 3956 Kalamath St. 
OMAHA, NEB., June 22, 23, 24. 

A. W. Riemer, Sec'y, 1503 Prospect St., Florence, Neb. 
SOUTH BEND, IND., June 25, 26, 27. 

Bertha L. Vincent, Sec'y, 419 Cushing St. 
INDIANAPOLIS, IND., June 25, 26, 27. 

C. A. Wise, Sec'y, 1 120 W. 30th St. 



CONSPIRACY ARTICLE IN SWEDISH 

Swedish friends will please note that we now have in stock Swedish 
B.S.M. No. 68 for use wherever Swedish ministers slander the Truth. 
Mention quantity you can use without waste— free. 

R5691 :page 146 

BETTER HEALTH-LONGER LIFE 

While it is true that the Lord's consecrated people should look forward 
with joy to their "change" at death, nevertheless it is quite proper 
that as long as they do live, they should keep their bodies in reasonably 
good condition, so that their service for the Lord, for the Brethren, for 
their families and all men may be as efficient as possible. These are 
sufficient reasons for our publishing the advice below. Additionally, 
however, the Lord's people are interested in the welfare of the world 
and in everything that will assist mankind. Especially are we expecting 
simple, helpful knowledge of how to live, because we believe that we are 



already forty years into the great Millennial period, and that light on 
every subject is being granted accordingly. 



It has long been noted by physicians that many of the ailments of 
life are due to diseased condition of the bowels. To offset this many 
are using enemas, sometimes styled internal bath. These help some, but 
are inconvenient, only palliative, and evidently are not in line with the 
laws of nature. Proper food should keep the system in proper order. 

Only recently has it been learned that there are healthful and also 
injurious bacteria. For instance, the fine butter flavor of first-class 
butter is found to result from the presence of a certain kind of bacteria, 
which now is cultivated and obtainable commercially. On the other hand, 
that which makes other butter rancid is an undesirable species of bacteria, 
not only unpleasant to the taste, but injurious to the system. Similarly, 
in the secretions of the mouth, the throat and the alimentary canal, 
bacteria live— some good, healthful, others injurious. 

It has been found that there is a species of bacteria associated with 
putridity which is highly injurious. Hence the impropriety of eating 
putrid food, which is apt to foster disease, especially in persons of low 
vitality. It has been discovered that such bacteria infest the bowels, 
producing gas or flatulence and hindering the food eaten from giving 
back the proper nourishment and strength. This bacteria producing 
putridity is associated sometimes with constipation and sometimes with 
diarrhoea. In any event, it is undesirable. A relief from this difficulty 
has been found— good bacteria which, driving out and taking the place 
of the bacteria of putridity, tends to make the bowels clean and healthy, 
and to favor digestion and general health. 

This new bacteria came to the attention of the world in recent years 
through noting that the people of Bulgaria are extremely healthy and 
long-lived. The cause for their good health was sought and found. Not 
only do they eat plain food, but the Bulgarians use a great deal of sour 
milk, which contains the healthful bacteria. Not everybody is aware of 
the fact that, while ordinary ferments are injurious, the proper ferment 
of milk is very healthful. 

Sour milk is being prepared under various names; for instance, 
Bulgarzoon, Lactobacilline, Fermilac and other preparations. These 
cultures are sold in tablet and liquid forms. Put into sweet milk according 
to directions, they germinate and produce what much resembles 
buttermilk, but is much better than the average buttermilk. The only 
difficulty about these tablets is the expense. Below we give directions 
whereby each reader may start his own culture of this helpful bacteria, 
Bacillus Lactine, by using only one of the tablets purchased. 

The drinking of this milk needs to be continued with some regularity, 
at least once each day or, preferably, three times, until the bowels are 
thoroughly cleansed and the culture, Bacillus Lactine, gets well established 
in the system. It is a peculiarity of this Bacillus Lactine that it 
passes through the stomach into the bowels without being digested. In 
very chronic cases it is recommended that the sour milk be used as an 
enema or internal bath, following a regular water enema, or injection. 

(Continued on 2d column, page 159) 

R5689 : page 159 



(Continued from page 146) 
Directions for Starting Bacillus Lactine Culture 

Crush one tablet of whatever preparation is used and stir into one 
quart of good, sweet milk which has been brought to blood heat. Cover, 
and put in a warm place until it becomes a firm clabber. This will require 
about twenty-four hours in winter, less time in summer unless 
kept in a cool place. Then shake, beat or churn for a few minutes, and 
put the jar in a cool place. It is ready for use as soon as it is shaken, 
but improves by standing awhile. Shake or churn as often as served, 
that it may be perfectly smooth. 

After you are satisfied that the buttermilk is as good as can be made 
with the tablets, discontinue their use, and substitute a good half 
teaspoonful of the buttermilk for each quart of milk, and treat in the same 
manner. Should your buttermilk— from overheating the milk, or from 
any other cause— be injured or become unpalatable, it will be necessary 
to go through the same process as at first, with a fresh tablet. If regularly, 
properly made, there will never be reason for renewal of tablet. 

"Directions for Use" usually— perhaps always— state that pasteurized 
milk cannot be used to prepare the buttermilk. Six months' daily experience 
has demonstrated that this is a mistaken idea. 

LA GRIPPE AND TYPHOID FEVER REMEDIES 

One of the simplest remedies we know of for La Grippe and Typhoid 
Fever, especially in their earlier stages, is to put the bulk of a pea of 
cayenne pepper into a little milk, stir it thoroughly and swallow it. Do 
this twice a day for about three days. 

R5691 :page 159 

A NEW CURE FOR PNEUMONIA 

Doctor Park, in the Medical Record Journal, tells that he has discovered 
a new treatment for pneumonia, which seems to effect a cure 
every time. His published statement, intended for physicians, is briefly 
stated as follows: 

"In 2 ounces of chemically pure distilled water I dissolved 15 grains 
each of sodium salicylate and the soluble phosphate of iron. This solution 
is sterilized by heat, and on cooling there is added 15 minims of 
saturated calcium-creosote mixture, the whole then being passed through 
a small laboratory porcelain filter. The injections are made through the 
skin, with an all-glass syringe, using a 27-gauge needle, into one of 
the large veins of the forearm. Great care, of course, is taken with the 
asepsis and also to be sure that the needle is within the vein. If it is 
properly inserted there will be absolutely no pain. If pain is felt, it 
means that the needle has gone into the muscle instead, and the injection 
must instantly be stopped and a new trial made. There may be a 
momentary flushing of the face and occasionally a temporary nausea. 
The dose varies from 2 to 5 c.c, according to circumstances. The injection 
must be made very slowly." 



R5685 : page 147 



THE NEW CREATURE'S CONQUEST OF HIS FLESH 

"Ye have put off the old man with his deeds, and have put on the 
new man, which is renewed in knowledge after the image of 
Him that created him."— Colossians 3:9,10. 

DEVELOPMENT is necessary to the life of 

the New Creation. In our text the term 

"old man" stands for the human will, which 

once dominated the being. All who become 

Christians in the Bible sense of the term 

not only accept Christ and trust in Him as 

their Savior, but devote their old will, their 

old nature, to death. Thenceforth that old 

nature is repudiated, and is no longer to 

control the life of the individual. But the 

body of the "old man"— the fleshly tabernacle— is still retained 

after the old will has been discharged and the new 

will has come in. The New Creature, with new impulses, 

a new purpose, uses the mortal body as its servant. The 

new will is now master. 

This new will is the will of God, or in other words, it 
is a will to do God's will. Our consecration is a consecration 

R5686 : page 147 

to do the will of God, to be dead to any other 
will, whether our own natural will or the will of another. 
This includes the dedication of everything we have or 
had hoped to have as human beings. It means the laying 
on the altar our every power, our every ability, our 
strength, our time, our pocketbook, our influence. Those 
who make a Covenant of Sacrifice are accepted up to the 
full number of the Elect. They will, if faithful unto 
death, receive new bodies in the resurrection. 

KNOWLEDGE THE BASIS OF DEVELOPMENT 

In our context the Apostle explains how this putting 
off and putting on is done. This "new man"— this spirit-begotten 
New Creature— is to develop by acting upon the 
knowledge that it gains. We had some knowledge before 
consecration, or we would not have thought of taking such 
a step. First, the Lord permitted a measure of knowledge 
to come to us. Then when we had accepted the terms and 
presented ourselves for sacrifice, the Savior's merit was 
imputed to us, and we were received of God and begotten 
as New Creatures by His Spirit, His power; and the good 
work has been going on in all those who have met the 
necessary conditions of development. 

We must grow in love. The Apostle tells us that we 
might have all knowledge and yet be as nothing. Knowledge 
alone will not suffice. However, knowledge is the 
basis of faith and obedience. Without knowledge we 
could accomplish nothing. Knowledge shows us the will 



of God on the one hand and the selfishness that appertains 
to the fallen human nature on the other. It shows us the 
love and generosity that belong to the new nature. It 
shows us the Lord's character— the character that we are 
to imitate. We are to be "renewed in knowledge after 
the image of Him that created us"— created us as New 
Creatures. 

As St. Paul expresses it elsewhere, we are to be transformed 
—formed over. We have a new will from the 
beginning, but it requires some time to transform our 
minds. Our minds being accustomed to reasoning along 
the lines of the flesh, the old nature, it takes some length 
of time before they are so entirely renewed as to view 
things from the Divine standpoint. But only as we thus 
progress can we form a Christlike character. 

RENEWING OF CHURCH AND WORLD DIFFERENT 

Not only are we to have our minds renewed, but our 
bodies are to be brought into subjection to the new mind, 
our new will. Because our bodies are earthly and imperfect 
through the fall, we can never hope to bring them 
into complete subserviency to the new mind. There will 
always be more or less of conflict. But we are to deaden, 
to treat as though they were nothing, these desires and 
impulses of the depraved flesh. Thus we make progress, 
being transformed day by day into the image and likeness 
of our God and of His dear Son. Those who attain this 
character-likeness to the Master will in due time be 
granted the Divine nature. 

This change of mind comes only to those who are 
spirit-begotten; it does not come to the world. The Lord 
will deal with the world during the incoming Age. Mankind 
also will need to be renewed; but theirs will not be a 
renewal such as is granted to the Church. The world will 
need a new mind, and must learn to overcome all their 
fallen tendencies, but they will be required to give up only 
that which is sinful. Their renewal will be along the lines 
of Restitution, a restoration, to the former condition of 
the perfect man. They will not have a new mind that is 
in conflict with human nature, as has the Church. The 
world will not renounce their human nature; they are to 
renounce only sin and to bring their human nature, by 
Divine assistance then granted, up to perfection. 

ALL MUST ATTAIN THE LIKENESS OF GOD 

In the end, we see, every being who will have everlasting 
life on any plane will be in the likeness of God— the 
image of God. Father Adam in his perfection had this 

R5686 : page 148 

image; the holy angels have this image; Jesus had this 
image of the Father; and the Church must have this 
image. The world, also, by and by, must have this image 



of God. All must love and serve righteousness. Wrong 
must always be repulsive. All who attain life everlasting 
will see Divine Wisdom, Justice, Love and Power, and 
will thoroughly conform themselves to that standard in all 
their thoughts, words and deeds. All who do not attain 
this image of God by the close of the next Age— the 
thousand years of Christ's reign— will be cut off from 
life, without remedy. 

The Lord Jesus said, "This is life eternal, that they 
might know Thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, 
whom Thou hast sent." (John 17:3.) To know God 
means to have intimate acquaintance with Him, to be like 
Him in character, to be able to view matters as He views 
them. Only those who have the mind of God will be 
granted eternal life— whether of the Church now or of 
the world in the next Age. 

THE CONFLICT BETWEEN MIND AND BODY 

St. Paul brings to the attention of the Church the fact 
that all true Christians are New Creatures in Christ (2 Corinthians 5:17), 
and therefore may be spoken of as 
separate and distinct from their mortal bodies. (See 
verses 1 to 4 of same chapter.) This will never be true 
of the world in general; it is true only of those who are 
begotten of the Holy Spirit. The Lord does not judge 
these New Creatures according to the imperfections of 
their flesh, because these are covered. They will prove 
the measure of their love and loyalty by the way in 
which they fight against sin and the desires of the flesh, 
and especially against a rebellious spirit in their own flesh. 

Each child of God has an enemy in his own body, and 
the more so because our bodies through the fall have become 
more or less surcharged with sin. The New 
Creature wills to do the Lord's will. Hence from the time 
that the New Creature has an existence there is a conflict 
between this New Creature and the old body. The 
Apostle Paul declared that he browbeat his body, kept his 
body under the control of the new mind; and he intimates 
that this is the only way to be a follower of the Lord 
Jesus.— 1 Corinthians 9:27. 

THE FLESH TO BE THOROUGHLY SUBJUGATED 

This matter of keeping the body under had a beginning. 
All our former lives we had been asking our body, 
What is your will? What is your desire? What will 
please you? Therefore it is a somewhat difficult matter 
now to bring the body under the control of the new will 
and to be able to say, "Thy will, O Lord, not mine, be 
done." Just as a colt needs to be broken, to be brought 
into subjection, so it is with our flesh. If it is 
thoroughly broken, it will remain in subjection. From 
time to time it will, of course, attempt to assert itself, 
but it must be conquered; for if it is not thoroughly 
broken and subjugated, if it is allowed to have more or 



less of its own way, there will always be danger of a 
runaway or of some other difficulty, and of final 
catastrophe. 

We are not to take the Apostle too literally when he 
says that he browbeats his body. His thought is, not that 
we are literally to handle our body in a rough way, to 
maltreat it, as some have thought, but that we are to 
subjugate it, to teach it a thorough lesson. The object of 
this is that the body may learn to be a good servant of 
the New Creature. The Spirit of the Lord cannot quicken 
our mortal body until we have first brought it into subjection. 
Even if the triumph of the New Creature means 
the quick death of the body, it must be made submissive; 
for after we have decided that as human beings our own 
will is not to be any longer in control, but the Lord's will 
is to govern, the only thing to do is to set to work to use 
our body in His service. This will be done more or less 
thoroughly as we grow as New Creatures. As this battle 
goes on, if it is faithfully waged, our flesh becomes 
weaker, and the new mind is renewed day by day. We 
learn more fully to put our bodies under and bring them 
into the service of the new will. It should be manifest to 
all that we are seeking to do the will of the Lord; and 
that the will of the flesh is dead, and not to be entertained 
for a moment. 

THE TESTING OF THE BELIEVER 

The Apostle tells one reason why he kept his body 
under— lest, having instructed others how they should 
do, he himself should make a failure and become a castaway. 
Likewise with every true Christian this is a matter 
of supreme importance, and should be particularly noted 
by every one who is a teacher in the Church. 

In choosing a Bride for His Son, the Father is making 
a selection from those who accept the Gospel Message and 
desire to draw near to Him. The first test is as to 
whether or not they will make a full consecration to God. 
The second test is as to whether, after they have made 
their consecration, they will conquer the flesh and bring 
it into subjection. The third test is as to whether they 
will strive always to keep the flesh in subjection, even 
unto the end of the way. 

The Lord is watching our course continually. His eye 
is ever upon us to see to what extent we are zealous in 
crucifying our flesh. Those who are in dead earnest in 
this matter are the ones whom He is seeking. He seeks a 
godly seed— those who have the disposition of the Master; 
and the Master's disposition has ever been in direct 
antagonism to everything sinful. "Thou hast loved righteousness 
and hated iniquity; therefore God, even Thy God, 
hath anointed Thee with the oil of gladness above Thy 
fellows," was spoken by the Father of our Lord Jesus. 
Moreover, the Master gladly laid down His life in sacrifice 
to do the Father's will and to save the world. 



R5687 : page 148 

And so the Father has, during the Gospel Age, been 
seeking for the Bride of His Son those who preeminently 
love righteousness, who hate iniquity, and are glad to be 
living sacrifices, to be used up in God's service. In proportion 
as we manifest the spirit which actuated our Lord 
—a love for that which is right, a promptness to fight 
against all sin in ourselves, and a spirit of loving sacrifice 
—we shall be copies of God's dear Son. If we fail to have 
a proper zeal and energy in this respect, we shall be unfit 
to be granted the reward promised— "the prize of the 
High Calling"— and shall be rejected, be cast away. 

One who had committed the sin unto death would be a 
castaway in the most absolute sense. Even the Great 
Company class must prove loyal of heart and mind and 
must hate sin, though cast away as regards the "prize." 
The degree of love and zeal we manifest in fighting 
against the weaknesses of the flesh has much to do with 
the attainment of the prize, in determining whether or not 
we shall be inheritors of the highest nature with our Master 
—the Divine nature. 

We find that in our flesh there is a tendency to revive 
from its condition of reckoned deadness, and to struggle 
for supremacy. Hence, as we have said, the new nature 
must be continually on the alert to maintain its ascendency, 
to fight the good fight of faith, that we may gain the 
"crown of life," may be overcomers in the highest sense— 

R5687 : page 149 

"more than conquerors." We are in a position of great 
responsibility. 

TWO CLASSES IN THE WORLD 

There are at the present time two classes in the world 
—the fleshly and the spiritual. The fleshly live according 
to their natural tendencies; the spiritual live by faith, 
contrary to the flesh. Those who become footstep followers 
of Jesus are begotten of the Holy Spirit; hence 
they have been lifted to a higher plane than others of 
mankind. To them the old things of their past lives have 
passed away, have been renounced, and all things have 
become new. 

The Apostle declares that if these live after the flesh- 
according to their natural inclinations and the desires and 
ambitions of the world— it means that they have descended 
again to the plane of the world; and they will die. It is 
only if we faithfully endure, if we suffer with Christ, 
that we shall reign with Him. Our sufferings with Christ 
are not in the upholding of some foolishness— of wearing 
a certain cut of hair, or a certain style of dress, etc.— but 
in active opposition to error, in living apart from the 
spirit of the world, and in energy and faithfulness, according 
to opportunity, in the spread of the Truth. The 



Lord's side is to be our side in everything. This brings 
us into conflict with the world and with the tendencies 
and proclivities of our own flesh; for we naturally love 
the things that the world loves. 

OUR RESPONSIBILITY AND OUR DANGER 

We are not to blame the world for living according to 
the flesh; for this course is the natural bent of the fallen 
nature. But it is different with us, by reason of the fact 
that we have sacrificed the earthly in order to obtain the 
spiritual. It would be a disastrous matter with us if we 
should live after the flesh, should sow to the flesh, instead 
of to the Spirit. It is not possible for us to live fully up 
to the Spirit, but it is possible for us to make a strenuous 
endeavor to do so. We can live after the Spirit, though 
we cannot measure up to the perfect standard. We can 
do our best; we can make our plans and arrangements in 
harmony with what God's Holy Spirit would dictate and 
approve, as God gives us wisdom to discern. This is the 
only course by which we can reach the eternal life and 
glory which the Lord has promised to the faithful Church. 

We recognize, indeed, that there are two classes which 
will attain spiritual life; but only one will be granted an 
abundant entrance into the Kingdom. Those who sow liberally 
to the Spirit will reap the larger reward. Those 
who sow sparingly will reap the smaller reward. Those 
who are striving to live in full harmony with God, and 
contrary to everything that is in opposition to God, seeking 
by prayer and the study of the Word to ascertain His 
will, shall win the promised prize.— Philippians 3:14. 

But those who have been spirit-begotten, and who then 
live according to the flesh, are not to expect any reward 
—not even Restitution. There can be nothing for them 
but the Second Death. They have had their chance for 
life and have abused it. Christ came to give one full, individual 
opportunity to each and all— and only one. God 
gave Adam an opportunity for everlasting life, but he was 
then inexperienced with sin and its consequences; hence, 
he is to be granted in his awakening an opportunity equal 
to that given the remainder of the world. Christ died to 
redeem all, and thus to give to all mankind, in due time, a 
full, fair opportunity for life eternal, after experience with 
the nature and the results of sin. 

The Church are having their trial now. This class, 
which is now receiving its opportunity, is limited. None 
can come to the full degree of responsibility, except those 
who have the clear enlightenment and special opportunities 
now granted to only a comparatively few. These, 
after having once been begotten of the Holy Spirit, must 
gain spiritual life, or else fail altogether and go into the 
Second Death. 

In the next Age the world will be brought forth from 
the tomb— the death state— in an imperfect, blemished 
condition. The great Mediator will be in charge of the 
world's interests, having then made satisfaction to Justice 



on their behalf. It will be His mission to help mankind up 
to perfection— all who will. But any who continue to 
live, or to attempt to live, after the sinful cravings of their 
fallen flesh will eventually be destroyed; for those who 
prefer sin, after coming to a clear knowledge of the difference 
between good and evil, and having access to all 
needed assistance to rise out of their fallen estate, will be 
cut off as cumberers of the ground and corrupters of the 
earth. Those who during the incoming Age would attain 
eternal life on the human plane must seek to live in harmony 
with God's Law, with righteousness; and thus they 
will reach full perfection and restitution, under the 
guidance and assistance of The Messiah. 

THE SPECIAL BATTLES OF THE CHURCH 

But much more glorious than even this is the prospect 
before those who are now faithfully running the race for 
the prize of the High Calling, held out to the Church! 
There are, however, enemies yet to be vanquished, and 
victories to be gained, if we would receive the crown. Until 
the final battle is fought, we must not relax our vigilance 
for a moment nor lay aside one piece of our armor. 

Considering particularly what are some of the battles 
of the New Creature, we realize that many of them pertain 
to the weaknesses of the flesh through heredity— sin 
working in our mortal bodies, seeking to bring us into 
captivity. After we have become New Creatures, the 
gross sins of the flesh gradually become distasteful even 
to those once in bondage to them. When these are conquered, 
a great victory has been won. But there are 
subtle sins that lurk in the flesh of all those who have 
become the Lord's; and these dispositions hide themselves 
in such a manner that they frequently deceive the new 
will, which needs to be educated up to a clear appreciation 
of the principles of righteousness. 

It is an advance lesson in the School of Christ that 
hatred of a brother is murder, that we are not only to 
hate the act of murder, but also the murder spirit, and are 
so fully to cast out this spirit as to have nothing but love 
and kindly wishes in the heart toward others, even our 
enemies. Only the more advanced and better drilled pupils 
in the School of Christ see clearly and distinctly the meaning 
of the Apostle's words when he denominates anger 
(fleshly wrath), malice, hatred, strife, envyings, and evil 
speakings, as the works of the Devil. These must be 
fought to the finish. 

"WE BESEECH YOU, THEREFORE," BELOVED 

All the children of God must come to see that "love 
worketh no ill to his neighbor," nor does it wish ill. We 
must see that such evil dispositions originate in the mind, 
in the heart; and as soon as the true soldier of the cross 
perceives any of these sins manifesting themselves outwardly 
or lurking in his heart, he will begin a vigorous 



campaign against them, and will go to the Throne of 
Grace for the promised grace to help in time of need. 
Only thus can the child of God keep his record clear and 
retain the Lord's favor and blessing. 

Let each of us then, dearly beloved, apply earnestly to 
ourselves these lessons. Let us diligently follow the example 

R5687 : page 150 

of the beloved Apostle Paul, and "keep under" our 
bodies, lest we become castaways. Let us keep ever before 
our minds the thought that we have "put off the old man 
with his deeds"; and that we have "put on the new man," 
and are now on trial for life or death eternal; that we 
are being tested, are being given the opportunity to prove 
the sincerity and depth of our consecration to the Lord. 
Surely this will spur us on and energize us to faithfulness. 
Let us remember that the keeping under of our body 
appertains to food and drink, to the clothing we wear, to 
the way we spend our consecrated time, to our every 
thought, word and deed. 

These battlings of the new mind against the flesh are 
a "good fight"— good in the sense that they are fightings 
against the intrenched weaknesses and besetments of the 
fallen nature, against temptations from within and without, 
that appeal to us as human beings. They are a "fight 
of faith" because the entire course of the New Creature 
is one of faith; for "we walk by faith, not by sight." We 
could never succeed in this fight unaided. Hence we must 
keep very close to the Lord. We must "watch and pray," 
putting on and keeping securely fastened to us the whole 
armor of God. The time is short in which to complete 
this work in ourselves. Then let us be diligent! 



R5688 : page 150 

THE "CROWN OF LIFE"-WHO WILL RECEIVE IT? 

"Blessed is the man that endureth temptation; for when he is tried, 
he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord hath 
promised to them that love Him."— James 1:12. 

THE above words of the Apostle James are a 

part of an earnest exhortation to all the 

Church of God scattered abroad. "Blessed 

is the man who endureth [with fortitude] 

temptation." Those who do not love the 

Lord with all their hearts, in whom self or 

some other idol has first place, will be seduced 

by the world, the flesh or the Devil 

into some form of rebellion against the 

Divine Word or Divine providences. They 

will have schemes, theories or desires which they will 

prefer to the Lord's Plan and way; and their own 



theories, plans and ways will be found, when analyzed, to 
be based upon selfishness and ambition or an evil spirit 
of envy, hatred, jealousy, pride, etc. It is only such as 
endure such temptations and besetments with fortitude, 
by the grace of God conquering and subduing the fleshly 
mind, that will receive the promised crown. 

The Apostle here speaks of the final reward as being 
"the crown of life." It might be possible to view this 
matter of the crown of life from different standpoints; 
for instance, to think of life as being a crowning blessing, 
on whatever plane of being. Those who will be 
brought into the Lord's favor during the Millennial Age 
will, after the close of that Age, if proven worthy, gain 
everlasting life. In other words, they will be crowned 
with a life which will be endless. The Ancient Worthies 
will have this life everlasting. They will be crowned 
with life. Life, perfect, unending, is the greatest blessing 
God could bestow. Then the Little Flock will be 
especially crowned with life; for they will have life on 
the superior plane, the life of the Divine nature— the 
nature of Jehovah; life in the very highest form will be 
their crown. So we think of all these things as being 
crowns of life when all have been tested and proven to 
the end of their course. 

THE CROWN ABOVE ALL OTHERS 

But we have reason to suppose that St. James is here 
referring to the Church, the Bride of Christ, the most 
blessed of all humanity. The Church is now especially 
on trial. This trial of our love, endurance, faith, patience, 
is for the purpose of demonstrating which of us 
will be found worthy of the chiefest of all blessings— the 
Divine nature, which God has promised to those who love 
Him— love Him more than they love houses or lands or 
bonds, more than they love wife or husband or parents 
or children or self, or any other thing. God will have a 
reward for others, also; but it will not be this highest 
crown, which He offers to the Bride of His Son alone. 

What constitutes the temptation spoken of in our text? 
The answer of the Scriptures is that the Lord has said 
there will come trials and temptations— disciplinings— to 
those who are His, to develop their character, to prove 
their steadfastness and loyalty. Without trials and 
temptations our allegiance to God would never be shown. 
Self-love might be reigning in our hearts, and we would 
not recognize it unless it were demonstrated. It is very 
easy to think how much we love the Lord and how much 
we would like to do for Him. Then comes the temptation 
to sloth, and to do something for ourselves instead 
of for the Lord. It is easy for us to think we love His 
will, and to sing: 

"I love Thy will, O God." 

Then we are severely tried on that line, and we sometimes 



find out that our love for His will needs yet farther 
development and greater fixity. 

Our covenant with the Lord is to love Him with all 
our heart, mind, soul and strength and to love our neighbor 
as ourselves. We are to live up to this standard in 
the spirit of our minds so far as we are able by Divine 
assistance, trusting to the merit of the precious blood to 
cover our unavoidable deficiencies. Yea, we are to "lay 
down our lives for the brethren." The temptation comes 
to love other things more, to love self more than we love 
God and the brethren. The Lord permits these trials and 
temptations and difficulties to come to us. The way we 
meet these, we think, will have much to do in deciding 
whether we shall be worthy of the highest crown of life. 

THE CROWN OF LIFE AFTER THE TRIAL 

"When he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life." 
The expression, "when he is tried," does not mean one 
trial merely; but our entire experience is spoken of as a 
trial, a test of loyalty. Our whole life is a matter of 
trial or testing to see how sincere we are, how fully we 
love the Lord, what we are willing to sacrifice, in harmony 
with our covenant. "When he is tried," then, means, 
when his trial is over. Then he will receive the "crown 
of life." He will not get it before. That would not 
necessarily mean, however, that he would get the crown 
the minute the trial was over— as soon as his sacrifice 
was completed in death. Jesus slept until the third day 
before He received His crown. The Apostles and others 
slept for many centuries before they received theirs. 

It does not mean, either, that the very minute or the 
very day on which the Christian had fully demonstrated 
his faithfulness to the Lord he would immediately fall 
asleep or would be instantly ushered into honor and immortality 
by the glorious change of the First Resurrection. 
The Lord might have further purposes of usefulness, 
etc., in regard to His children before their sacrifice 
would be completed. 

R5688 :page 151 

So with every phase of our trial and testing there 
should be a demonstration of our loyalty. Let the trials 
come, then, and let them continue to come. No matter 
what our natural infirmities may be, we shall be granted 
grace sufficient; and we are expected to be loyal under 
all conditions, at all times, until the end. 



R5688 :page 151 

DEVELOPMENT AS NEW CREATURES IN CHRIST 
"Strong meat belongeth to them who are of full age, even those 



who by reason of use have their senses exercised to discern 
both good and evil."— Hebrews 5:14. 

THE Apostle here seems to have in mind some 

who are babes in Christ, some who have 

immature conceptions of God and His Plan, 

who lack spiritual development, contrasting 

them with others who are more developed, 

who have become men in Christ Jesus— who 

are "of full age," as St. Paul expresses it, 

mature in Christian attainment. "Strong 

meat" belongs to these. The Apostle has 

given a reproof to some who, considering 

the length of time they have been in Christ, should have 

been strong in the faith, in doctrine, in spiritual life, and 

should be qualified to teach others. Yet still they were 

children, needing others to teach them again the first 

principles of the doctrine of Christ, needing still to be fed 

on milk, even yet not able to assimilate "strong meat." 

Beginners who have not long known Christ, who are 
new in respect to the truths of God's Plan, are not to be 
choked with strong meat. These may be fed upon the 
simpler truths, which they can assimilate. They need "the 
sincere milk of the Word, that they may grow thereby." 
Some of the Lord's people, who have been longer in the 
way, in talking with the newly consecrated unwisely begin 
to tell them the truths regarding immortality, trinity, etc., 
before they are able to digest them. These are giving 
strong meat to babes, and are liable to drive them away 
from the table of the Lord, giving them spiritual 
dyspepsia, so that they are unable longer to eat even of 
the simpler food furnished by the Lord. 

For those who are only beginners in the good way, 
there is plenty of food in God's Word of the more 
easily digestible sort; food which should be helpful to 
New Creatures in Christ who are just beginning to walk 
in the narrow path. We are not to understand, however, 
that they are to continue for quite a period of time 
to live exclusively on milk. As they begin to grow and 
develop on a milk diet, they may be given somewhat 
stronger food, until after a time they will be able to 
digest the strongest features of the Truth, and to draw 
nourishment from them. Some develop and are able to 
digest the strong meat much more rapidly than others. Those 
who have not been falsely taught regarding Scriptural 
doctrines, who have not been steeped for many years in 
the errors brought into the Church during the Dark 
Ages, are often much more ready and able to grasp the 
truth on these subjects than are those who have been long 
under the blinding influence of error along these lines. 

SYSTEMATIC STUDY NECESSARY 

Those who are of humble, teachable mind, seeking a 
"thus saith the Lord" for all they accept, not trying to 
uphold any theories of their own, but to follow only the 



Lord, can generally, by taking the STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES and their Bible, and taking up the Plan step 
by step, in a systematic, orderly manner, as it is presented, 
proving every statement by the sure Word of 
God, see the truth regarding these fundamental doctrines 
with little difficulty. In this way they gain a comprehensive 
view of the whole Plan of God, and can see how 
its various features fit and dovetail into one another; 
this would be impossible if they heard first only a portion 
of the Plan, disassociated from the rest. 

R5689 :page 151 

For this reason it is well to urge the newly interested 
one to read and prove for himself, and not endeavor to 
explain too much through conversation. Much harm is 
often done thus by well-meaning friends, in their zeal to 
have the beginner grasp it all at once, which is impossible; 
and often their efforts result in confusing the mind 
of the one seeking the Truth. 

SPIRITUAL EYESIGHT A MATTER OF GROWTH 

As we look at a little babe, we see that it can crow, 
can kick a little, can cry somewhat, and to a certain 
extent can see objects. It has a certain amount of appreciation 
of things beautiful, of things terrorizing, of 
things happifying. But it does not see things very 
clearly nor comprehend them. If we pass our hand 
before its eyes, it apparently has not a focus. As with 
young kittens, which cannot tell what is near and what 
is far off, so with beginners, babes, in spiritual matters. 
The younger ones in their attempt to study God's Word, 
are apt to go tripping along through it, and think they 
see this or that. They cannot be entrusted with important 
truths at first; for they would be pretty certain to 
be stumbled. 

But as these grow older, they can "rightly divide" the 
Truth, they can distinguish Truth from error, they can 
tell what would be hurtful and what would be helpful. 
Even a child that burns itself at the fire learns to look 
out for that which will burn, and learns to approach the 
fire very carefully, very judiciously. As all this is true 
as relates to temporal matters, and as the sense of appreciation 
and comprehension develops in the babe, so in 
babes in Christ, there is a development of the sense of 
appreciation and ability to comprehend the heights and 
depths and lengths and breadths of God's Wisdom and 
Love, and the fulness and grandeur of His great Plan 
with all its varied features. 

NECESSARY FOOD ALWAYS IN "DUE SEASON" 

To gain this appreciation, it is necessary, not only to 
read the Truth, but to think upon it, to make it our own, 
to strive earnestly to conform our lives to it. It is better, of 



course, for one to merely read so many pages or chapters 

of the Bible than to read some worthless thing; but to 

simply read a certain amount in the Bible without understanding 

accomplishes little. The Bible needs to be 

studied; and the Lord has never left His people without 

teachers of His own choosing, who were able to lead the 

dear sheep of the great Shepherd's Fold into the green 

pastures where they could obtain whatever food was 

needed at that time. As the gradual unfolding of Truth 

in its times and seasons has added to the quantity and 

variety of food required by the flock of God for their 

proper nourishment, it has been supplied by Him through 

instrumentalities which he has raised up for the purpose 

in due season. 

The real saints of God have never been left without 
all needed supplies in every age. In our own day more 
Truth has unfolded than at any previous period of the 
Church's history. More and richer food is now necessary, 

R5689 : page 152 

to strengthen the Church for the peculiar conditions 
and testings of this day; and more has been supplied. 
But as we have stated, and as the Apostle in our text 
shows, there are various degrees of development in the 
Church of Christ; and some have been accepted from the 
world in these latter days to take the places of some who 
have through unfaithfulness lost their crowns. Hence 
the wisdom that cometh from above is required to feed 
and nourish these weaker ones properly. 

FIRST LESSONS IN SCHOOL 

In a school there are lessons arranged according to 
the ability and comprehension of the pupils. When the 
primary lessons in spelling are given, the teacher begins 
with small, simple words, instead of long words. Such 
words as c-o-w, cow; c-a-t, cat, are given first. A 
teacher who is wise and understands her business would 
not think of starting little children out with such a word 
as "prognostication," or "hippopotamus." The pupil 
would first be given more simple and easily comprehensible 
words. Object lessons, by pictures, etc., are also 
used at first to attract the eye, and thus to assist the 
child mind. 

And so with religious matters. Those who would 
give proper instructions to others must be qualified to 
teach. The Lord has placed the various members in the 
Body of Christ "as it hath pleased Him." To some He 
has given Apostles and workers of miracles; to others 
evangelists and teachers and pastors. In the early history 
of the Church, in its infantile condition, miracles- 
object lessons and proofs to the eye, to the ear, the outward 
physical senses— were necessary, and hence were 
supplied. As the Church became established, these outward 
evidences in connection with the Truth passed away. 



The Apostle Paul says, "When I was a child, I spake 
as a child, I thought as a child, I understood as a child; 
but when I became a man I put away childish things." 
(1 Corinthians 13:11). And so with every true follower 
of Christ. As he grows and develops, step by step, as 
his senses become exercised to discern good and evil— 
what is true, what is right, what is profitable, what is 
comprehended in the glorious High Calling of the Church, 
what is included in full consecration to Christ— he more 
and more puts away his childish views, his immature conceptions, 
and becomes educated and advanced in the 
things of God— the deep things. A beginner, who had 
not learned to study the Word of God, could take it and 
get out of it things that would be really harmful to him. 
One must learn to take Bible truths in their setting— to 
see what they mean, how they apply, to whom they apply, 
etc.— or all will be confusion and contradiction. One 
can bring sweet music from an instrument only when he 
learns how to manipulate the keys, how to combine the 
various chords; otherwise only discord is the result. 

RESPONSIBILITY OF THOSE LONG IN THE WAY 

There are certain principles laid down in the Bible. 
We need to get a grasp on these principles and apply 
them in our daily lives. There is the principle of Justice 
—a foundation principle. This principle must be recognized 
and practised before we are in a proper condition 
to build upon this foundation the principles of Love, 
Mercy, Gentleness, etc., all of which must be incorporated 
into our lives, our characters, as children of God. We 
need to learn what justice means, what true love means. 
The standards of the world along these lines have become 
much perverted, and we need to be properly taught from 
the only authoritative source— the Word of God. We 
must learn how to apply these principles. 

Those who have been for some time drinking from 
the Fountain of Truth, and feeding at the table of the 
Lord, where the food is pure, unadulterated, nourishing, 
should be fully established in the first principles of 
the doctrine of Christ. Much of the superstructure of 
"gold, silver and precious stones" should be already 
erected, and the good work of character-building should 
be progressing steadily day by day. We should be firmly 
rooted and grounded in Christ, so that nothing can move 
us. We should be able to discern clearly between truth 
and error on every important point. We should be so 
loyal to the Lord and His Word that we shall rejoice in 
the glorious privilege of proclaiming it at every suitable 
opportunity. We should know what we believe and why 
we believe it, and be courageous and uncompromising in 
declaring the Truth which has so blessed our own hearts 
and lives. 



R5690 : page 152 

FORGIVENESS IS BLESSED 

-JUNE 13.-PSALM 32.- 

SINS FORGIVEN, COVERED, BLOTTED OUT-INIQUITY NOT IMPUTED 
-THE GUILELESS SPIRIT -WHO MAY PRAY FOR FORGIVENESS 
-UNDER THE LAW COVENANT-UNDER THE COVENANT 
OF GRACE-UNDER THE NEW COVENANT-SOME SINS 
NOT FORGIVABLE BUT EXPIABLE-"LET THEM PRAY OVER 
HIM "-MORTAL SIN OR SIN UNTO DEATH. 

"Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, 
whose sin is covered."— Verse 1. 

THE Scriptures bring to our attention the 

thought that sins may be forgiven in the 

sense that God will not continue to treat 

us as sinners, the sins, however, remaining 

to be dealt with— merely covered. They 

also show that the time for actually blotting 

out sins is in the future, not in the present 

life. To illustrate: The Christian who has 

transgressed Divine Law quite unintentionally 

and entirely through inherited weaknesses 

may promptly go to God for forgiveness through 

the Redeemer, and is assured that his sin is covered, that 

God will not remember it against him nor treat him as a 

sinner, because Jesus Christ the righteous made full 

atonement for such sin. 

There is another class of sin, partly of weakness and 
heredity, and partly assented to by the mind. This we 
might term a mixed sin. The Lord, in forgiving this sin, 
will restore the joys of His countenance to His child and 
entirely cover or overlook the transgression in proportion 
as it was unwilful, unintentional, through ignorance; but 
He will punish that portion which was of knowledge and 
connivance or assent of the mind. 

There is still another kind of sin, which the Bible 
describes as a wilful sin— against light, against knowledge. 
This is sometimes spoken of as a sin against the 
Holy Spirit, because the light of knowledge and Truth is 
the light of God's Spirit of Truth; and whoever wilfully 
transgresses it transgresses the Spirit of Truth. Such 
sin Jesus declared has never forgiveness, neither in 
this Age nor in the Age to come. (Matthew 12:32.) 
But this does not mean that the individual will be punished 
for it forever. It simply means what it says— that such a 
sin cannot be forgiven and could only be expiated. If, 
however, it were a sin against full light, the expiation 
would mean the Second Death. We have reason to believe 

R5690 : page 153 

that on account of our inherited weaknesses and unholy 



environment, nearly all sins committed by God's people 
may be classed as mixed sins— only partly wilful. 

In any event, a man who realizes his transgression forgiven 
and his sin covered must have great peace and joy 
toward the Lord, and blessing that is beyond description. 
He may, however, at the same time, carry the marks of 
those forgiven sins in his body to his dying day; and he 
may perhaps be troubled with aches and pains and with 
various diseases as a result of sins that are forgiven— to 
his dying moment. The sins, therefore, are not blotted out 
all that while, although they are forgiven. The marks of 
them are seen in his flesh or his mind or in whatever way 
they have blemished him. 

St. Peter tells us that our sins are to be blotted out fully 
at the Second Coming of Christ. We can readily see how 
this will be; for the promise to the Church is that in the 
resurrection they will be given perfect bodies; that which 
is in part and imperfect will be done away, and that which 
is perfect will be theirs forever in the body of the resurrection 
—"sown in dishonor, raised in glory; sown in weakness, 
raised in power; sown an animal body, raised a 
spiritual body."— 1 Corinthians 15:43,44. 

CONDITIONS FOR FORGIVENESS 

Much confusion of thought prevails respecting the conditions 
upon which forgiveness of sins may be expected. 
This is not the fault of the Bible, which makes the matter 
very clear and very plain. It is the fault of our confused 
theologies, which have mixed up everything for us. To 
understand the matter we must remember that the whole 
world, as the children of Adam, rest under Divine sentence 
of death, with no offer of hope directly made to them. 
The Lord's people have a Revelation from Him, informing 
them that God purposes great things for the world by 
and by through Messiah's Kingdom, but that these are not 
applicable to them at the present time. The mercies and 
favors of God, including forgiveness of sins, are all confined 
for the present to those who come into covenant relationship 
with God. 

What is meant by covenant relationship? some may 
ask. We reply that God entered into a Covenant with 
the Jewish nation, through Moses as the mediator of their 
Law Covenant. A part of that arrangement was that on 
the basis of certain sacrifices for sins— sacrifices of bulls 
and goats— God entered into a Covenant, or bargain, with 
that nation. These sacrifices of bulls and goats every year 
on the Day of Atonement imputed to the nation forgiveness 
of sins for that year; that all the people might be in 
relationship with God. Thus they had the right to come 
to God in prayer in respect to any matter of God's promise 
or in respect to the forgiveness of their sins, as in the case 
of David. 

But this privilege did not extend to the Gentiles— it 
was merely an arrangement made with the Jews. And 
even with the Jews it was only a typical arrangement. 



It foreshadowed the permanent arrangement of this 

Gospel Age, based upon the "better sacrifices" of the antitypical 

Moses— Jesus. 

Since the time of Jesus another Covenant has been 
opened, while the Law Covenant may be said to be inoperative 
for the present. The Covenant now applicable 
to Christians is called Scripturally a Covenant of Sacrifice 
(Psalm 50:5), or a Covenant of Grace. It is a 
Covenant of Sacrifice because all who enter into this 
Covenant with God sacrifice their earthly rights and 
interests, accepting instead the spiritual blessings, which 
God has promised and which they can see with the eye 
of faith. 

Jesus was the first One who made the Covenant 
of Sacrifice. Holy, harmless, undefiled and separate 
from sinners, He presented His body a living sacrifice 
to God, saying, "Lo! I come, as in the volume of 
the Book it is written of Me, to do Thy will, O My 
God." (Psalm 40:7,8; Hebrews 10:7.) Thus He surrendered 
His will, and with it everything and every power 
He possessed. During the three and a half years of His 
ministry, He zealously carried out this Covenant unto 
death, even the death of the Cross. For this cause God 
highly exalted Him, giving Him the perfection of the 
spirit nature, to which he attained at His resurrection- 
glory, honor and immortality forever.— Phil. 2:8-1 1. 

The work of this Gospel Age is to call out from 
amongst the sinner race such as may have a similar 
spirit, or disposition, to that which Jesus had. None, 
like Him, are holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from 
sinners; but what they lack in this respect is made up to 
them by the imputation of the merit of Jesus, so that, as 
the Apostle declares, they are accepted of God in the Beloved 
One. And being thus accepted, they are privileged 
to enter into the same Covenant of Sacrifice which Jesus 
entered into. With Him, they say to the Father, Lo! we 
present ourselves in harmony with everything written in 
Your Book, to do Your will even unto death. It is the same 
Covenant! and in describing this, the Apostle declares 
that we walk in Jesus' steps and fill up that which is behind 
of the afflictions of Christ.-l Pet. 2:21; Col. 1:24. 

Many seem not aware that only such as are in covenant 
relationship with God have any right to go to God in 
prayer, to ask either forgiveness of sins or anything else. 
Nevertheless, this must be clear to every one who will 
think on the subject. God declares that He heareth not 
sinners, and that He has made only one provision whereby 
any may come to Him. Jesus is the Way, the Truth and 
the Life. "No man cometh unto the Father but by Me," 
He declares. (John 14:6.) He is the Advocate for those 
who become His disciples and who engage to walk in 
His steps; but He is not the Advocate for the world— 
merely for the special class, His followers. In due time, 
at the close of this Age and the opening of the Millennium, 
He will become the Mediator for the whole world, 
will make satisfaction for all their sins, and will take 



over every member of the race under His Divine supervision. 
His Mediatorial Kingdom is arranged with this 
in view. Even then, the world will not go to the Father 
with their sins nor with their prayers, but merely go to 
the great Mediator between God and men— between God 
and the world. They will have blessings and favors then 
abundantly, under the arrangement provided; but they 
can have nothing now. The only ones who can get God's 
favors at the present time are those who come by the appointed 
Way— through the Covenant of Sacrifice. 

THE ADVOCATE'S ONLY TERMS 

With false ideas in our minds respecting the penalty 
for sin— with the idea that it is to be eternal torment- 
many imagine the Lord Jesus sitting tearfully and dejectedly, 
waiting for sinners to show the slightest sign of 
repentance, when He would fly to their relief and accept 
them without any particular terms or conditions. Nothing 
could be further from the truth— nothing could be further 
from the teaching of the Bible. On the contrary, if 
the sinner thinks of turning from sin to God and comes 
to Jesus to inquire if He will be His Advocate with the 
Father and make him satisfactory and acceptable, he is 
promptly told that he can have this privilege only on 
certain fixed conditions. 

The conditions are stipulated— he must become a disciple 

R5691 :page 154 

of Christ. And this means all that the Master declared 
saying, "If any man will come after Me [be My 
disciple], let him deny himself [sacrifice his own will], 
and take up his cross and follow Me." (Matthew 16:24.) 
There is no short cut. There are no other terms, and 
Jesus does not urge any one to accept these terms. 

Misinformed evangelists may, in the name of the Lord, 
urge and make different terms; but they are that far 
away from the authorized Message of God's Word. On 
the contrary, Jesus said to some in His time, "Sit down 
and count the cost"— be not hasty; know well what you 
are doing, and fully determine the matter before you 
undertake the responsibilities of discipleship. It is better 
not to vow than, after having vowed, to break the vow. 
It is better not to put your hand to the plow to become a 
servant of the Lord than, after taking these vows and 
entering the service, either to turn back or even to look 
back, as implying a half-hearted service.— Luke 9:62. 

THE NARROW WAY-THE FEW 

Some one may perhaps suggest that if these views 
were generally accepted, there would be far fewer professed 
Christians in the world. We agree to this; but 
we insist that the Christians would be of a better standard, 
more acceptable to the Lord. The Lord declares, 



"Strait is the gate and narrow is the way that leadeth 
unto life [in the present time], and few there be that find 
it." These few are to constitute the Kingdom Class, the 
Bride Class, and with Christ are to be the Divine agency 
for blessing all the families of the earth during the thousand 
years of Christ's Reign. 

Another point that might be worthy of notice is that 
when we first come to the Lord, it is not necessary to 
pray for forgiveness of original sin. He informs us that 
all the arrangements are made, completed, for those who 
desire to accept His terms and become his disciples. All, 
therefore, we have to do is to go to the Lord intelligently, 
thoughtfully, and tell Him how glad we are that He has 
made these arrangements; and that we gladly accept the 
terms of discipleship, with the promise that His grace 
shall be sufficient for us, and with His assurance that all 
things shall work together for good to the called ones 
according to His purpose. 

It is after these have come into covenant relationship 
with God that they have need to pray for the forgiveness 
of their trespasses— their sins of omission or commission 
conflicting with their covenant of consecration and 
the Divine requirements. Thus this class is privileged to 
offer the Lord's Prayer, "Forgive us our trespasses, as we 
forgive those who trespass against us." These trespasses 
thus to be forgiven do not include the original sin. That 
was forgiven freely for all those who accepted Christ and 
came under this new covenant-arrangement. The trespasses 
are our failures to come up to the standard required 
of the Lord after His grace has freed us from 
the transgressions that are past. 

"LET THEM PRAY OVER HIM" 

St. James calls our attention to some of the Lord's 
people who might become sin-sick to such an extent that 
they would not have access to the Throne of Grace themselves. 
Because of carelessness of living, neglect of 
duties and privileges, disregard of their covenant obligations, 
a cloud between them and the Father comes thick 
and dark. They are unable to penetrate this cloud. Their 
prayers seem not to reach the Father. He is hiding His 
face from them. Theirs is an extreme case. Through 
the Apostle the Lord says that if any one shall turn such 
a transgressor— a Christian who has gotten into such a 
wrong condition— from the error of his way, he will save 
a soul from death and hide a multitude of sins. 

The Apostle tells the procedure. The sin-sick one 
should realize his need, so that he would call upon the 
elders of the Church— the senior Christian brethren. He 
should confess to them his fault or whatever he believes 
has had to do with separating him from the Lord's 
favor. They in turn, as members of the Body of Christ, 
may intercede for him to the Lord and may anoint him 
with oil in the name of the Lord; and if he have committed 
sins, they shall be forgiven him, and the Lord 



shall raise him up to spiritual health and strength again. 
-James 5:14-16,19,20. 



R5692 : page 154 

PRAYERS THAT ARE HEARD 
-JUNE 20.-PSALM 141.— 



MANY MAY WORSHIP, FEW MAY PRAY-ONLY THE SANCTIFIED 
IN CHRIST JESUS-THEIR FREQUENT NEEDS-"GOD'S EAR 
OPEN'-THEIR PRAYERS ARISE AS INCENSE TO HIM- 
LEARNING TO PRAY-WHAT TO PRAY FOR-WATCHING FOR 
ANSWERS-THE BREATH OF LIFE SPIRITUAL. 

"Keep me from the snares which 
they have laid for me."— V. 9. 

WHEN we think of the greatness of the Creator, 

Maker of Heaven and earth and all 

therein, and when we think of our own 

littleness, our weaknesses and imperfections, 

we are amazed that our God has 

made any provision whereby even the best 

of His creatures might hold communion 

with Him in prayer. We should not fail 

to note the difference between worship and 

praise, which anybody may render to the 

Lord, and prayers and supplications, which are acceptable 

only from the Lord's consecrated people and their 

children while still minors. 

To illustrate: It is one thing that the populace may 
cheer a governor or a king, may remove their hats or 
bow their heads, but it is quite another thing for that 
same conglomeration of people to be received by the king 
or the governor into association as his friends or to have 
communion with him, to tell him about their matters, to 
have his counsel and guidance. So, while God has an 
interest in the whole world of mankind, a deep interest, 
it is not the same interest that He has in His Church. 
And by His Church we mean, not any sect or party or 
denomination, but those individuals who, regardless of 
sectarian lines, have entered into a heart covenant with 
the Lord, renouncing their own wills and accepting, instead, 
the will of God in Christ. These are the Bible 
Church, whose names are written in Heaven. (Hebrews 12:23.) 
These are the ones addressed in the Bible as 
the saints of God, and respecting whom it is declared, 
"All things are yours;. ..and ye are Christ's; 
and Christ is God's."— 1 Corinthians 3:21-23. 

This Church of God, in all the world, is not numerically 
strong. As the Bible says, it contains not many 
rich, not many wise, not many learned, but chiefly the 
poor of this world, rich in faith, heirs of the Kingdom. 



(1 Corinthians 1:26; James 2:5.) Their reigning, their 
power and their control in the world's affairs will not 

R5692 : page 155 

come until they shall have experienced the resurrection 
change, and Messiah's Kingdom shall be fully inaugurated. 
Then these shall live and reign with Christ a 
thousand years.— Revelation 20:4. 

WHO MAY PRAY 

Strangely enough, many seem to have gotten the 
thought that anybody, at any time, may rush into the 
presence of the Almighty God with his requests. The 
intimation even seems to be that God is unhappy because 
people do not come to Him thus. Such views of prayer 
indicate a lack of Bible study, Bible information. The 
Bible teaches that prayer is a great privilege. 

Jesus declared, "No man cometh unto the Father but 
by Me." Furthermore, He indicated the restrictions upon 
those who would approach the Father through Him— 
they must be His disciples; and to become His disciples, 
they must take upon themselves certain obligations or 
vows. They must renounce their own wills, and accept 
the will of Jesus. They must lay all upon the altar; otherwise 
they cannot be accepted, cannot be presented to the 
Father, cannot be begotten of the Holy Spirit, cannot be 
styled or treated as sons of God, cannot be joint-heirs 
with Jesus Christ in His coming Kingdom— cannot have 
the privilege of sons of God in the present life either— 
the privilege of prayer and of Divine fellowship, communion, 
instruction. 

All these special blessings the Bible reserves for those 
who become especially, peculiarly, the sons of God. Even 
in respect to these who have become sons of God, Jesus 
intimates a danger of their losing the privilege of prayer. 
He says, "If ye abide in Me, and My words abide in you, 
ye may ask what ye will"— not otherwise.— John 15:7. 

We believe that misinformation on this subject of 
prayer has worked disadvantageously to many. The majority, 
holding intercourse with evil, only occasionally 
flee to the Lord in some trouble, and that without entering 
into any covenant with Him or receiving any recognition 
as sons, and without desiring this. If they were 
rightly informed, the effect upon their minds at first would 
be to stun them. They would awake suddenly to the 
realization that they are without God in the world; that 
their affairs are not subject to His supervision; but that 
as part of the world, they are under the general curse, or 
sentence of death. 

The highest qualities of the human mind, which lie 
at the very top of our craniums, are the organs of worship, 
reverence, veneration, spirituality. Even the wicked, 
at times, feel that they will please God by praying to 
Him and asking Him for some favors. They have not 



learned that God has addressed them, saying, "Unto the 
wicked God saith, What hast thou to do, to take My 
Covenant into thy mouth, seeing thou hatest instruction 
and castestMy words behind thee?"— Psalm 50:16,17. 

It is high time that the difference between the Church 
and the world shall be more distinctly discerned, and that 
the privileges of the Church shall be appreciated. The 
effect would be to awaken in others a sense of their need 
for God. Then, in their hours of distress, realizing that 
they have no God, would they not be the more likely to seek 
Him earnestly in His appointed way, through the Lord 
Jesus Christ, and through a full consecration— the only 
terms upon which Jesus would accept them and be their 
Advocate with the Father, and secure for them the title 
and privilege of sons of God, valuable both for the present 
life and for that which is to come? 

INCENSE, PRAYER, BEFORE GOD 

The Prophet David, in this lesson, pictures the Christian 
in his distress coming to God in His appointed way: 
"O Lord, I cry unto Thee: make haste unto me; give 
ear unto my voice, when I cry unto Thee. Let my prayer 
be set forth before Thee as incense." This is the same 
thought elsewhere expressed in the Bible— that the prayers 
of God's people rise up before Him as a sweet perfume. 
(Revelation 5:8.) And, by the way, we remember that 
the incense of old, which typified the prayers of the 
saints, was composed of a rare mixture of spices, giving 
forth a peculiarly sweet odor; and that nobody was allowed 
to make that incense except the priests who were 
to offer it. (Exo. 30:34-38; 37:29.) Thus again the 
Lord shows us that the privilege of prayer, of approaching 
Him in an acceptable manner, is confined to the antitypical 
priests, called by St. Peter the Royal Priesthood.— 
1 Peter 2:9. 

Only those of the Lord's people who have consecrated 
their lives to Him, even unto death, are thus represented 
as members of the sacrificing Priesthood, to whom the 
Apostle wrote, saying, "I beseech you, brethren, by the 
mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, 
holy and acceptable to God, and your reasonable 
service." (Romans 12:1.) The Lord has pledged to 
this particular class that He will hear them, yea, that He 
will answer them— not necessarily according to their natural 
preferences, but He will heed the spirit of their cry 
and give to them, according to His Wisdom, the experiences 
and blessings most helpful. 

WHAT WE SHOULD PRAY FOR 

Our prayers should be in harmony with our endeavors. 
Thus in our lesson the Church of Christ are represented 
as praying the Lord to set a guard over their lips. The 
thought is that they are striving to keep their lips, their 
mouths, from utterances that would be injurious to 



others; and that, on the contrary, they may be helpful to 
humanity and honoring to God. Also, because they are 
striving for heart purity and to avoid practising wicked 
works with evil doers, therefore they pray in harmony, 
"Incline not my heart to any evil thing, to practise wicked 
works with men that work iniquity; and let me not 
eat of their dainties"— assist me in my determination of 
opposition to all these things. 

How appropriate that the Lord's consecrated people 
should scrutinize their lives when they come to their 
Father in prayer! How appropriate for them to note to 
what extent their blessings, luxuries and dainties have 
come to them contrary to the principles of justice and 
love— contrary to the Golden Rule! Whoever intelligently 
thus prays will surely be examining his life to rectify 
his business relations, so that he may not eat of the 
dainties which would come from injustice or oppression, 
but, on the contrary, rejoice in the commonest things of 
life if they be the best procurable in harmony with the 
principles of righteousness, the principles of love. 

"LET THE RIGHTEOUS SMITE" 

The class that are thus in fellowship with God, 
through prayer and through seeking to be obedient to 
His arrangements and laws, are so fully engaged that they 
are able to say, as in this Psalm, that they will take no 
offense if reproved by the righteous— rather the reproofs 
of such will be to them like an excellent oil, such as a 
guest received from his host in ancient times. The true 
Christians, the class who have the fellowship with God 
through prayer, have the qualities of heart which the 
Apostle describes as the fruits of the Holy Spirit; namely, 
meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering, brotherly-kindness, 
love. (Galatians 5:22,23; 2 Peter 1:5-8.) 

R5693 : page 156 

And because possessing these, they are not easily offended, 
but indeed are glad to have such experiences and lessons 
as the Lord's providences may direct to them— especially 
if these come through the brethren, and particularly if 
the brethren who use these administer their rebukes in 
a Christian manner— in meekness, remembering themselves, 
lest they also be tempted.— Galatians 6:1. 

In such cases, the reproof will be a blessing from the 
Lord— if given in that spirit and received in that spirit. 
Neither their heads nor their hearts are broken by such 
Scriptural reproofs; and they themselves learn to administer 
admonitions to others in similar manner, so as not 
to injure, but to help. Their prayers are for each other 
in what seem to be calamities; and in harmony with the 
Lord's promise, these seeming calamities and all the affairs 
of life shall operate together for good to those who 
love Him, to the called ones according to His purpose. 

The American Revision gives the wording here differently: 



"As oil upon the head; let not my head refuse 

it: for even in their wickedness shall my prayer continue." 

In hyperbole the Prophet declares the distress of the 
Church as affecting them even to death. "Our bones are 
scattered at the mouth of Sheol (the grave), as when one 
cutteth and cleaveth wood upon the earth"— like the fragments 
made by the wood-cutter, who considers the chips 
not worthy to be gathered. But while this may be the 
estimation of God's saints from the worldly viewpoint, not 
so is it with God, as the following verse implies: "But 
mine eyes are unto Thee, O God the Lord: for in Thee is 
my trust; leave not my soul destitute." 

But whatever affliction God's consecrated people may 
have in the present life, whatever rejection may be their 
experience at the hands of the great or the wise of this 
world, they have God's promise of glory, honor, immortality, 
in the future. In Him they trust, and He will not 
leave them desolate. He has declared, "The gates of 
Hell (Sheol, Hades) shall not prevail against them"; that 
is to say, the power of the grave shall not prevail against 
the Lord's Anointed, Christ and the Church— they shall 
come forth from the power of the tomb glorious in the 
First Resurrection majesty to reign a thousand years.— 
Revelation 20:6. 

"KEEP ME FROM THE SNARES" 

Satan is represented as a fowler, a hunter, who is seeking 
after the Lord's people even as earthly hunters are 
prone to hunt after speckled birds. Before the invention 
of powder, the hunters more particularly entrapped their 
prey with snares and pitfalls. While Satan is represented 
as being the great Arch-enemy, he also is accredited with 
using agents. Chief amongst his agents, according to the 
Bible, are those fallen angels of whom he is the prince— 
"the prince of devils." But he has amongst men many 
workers of iniquity. These are his servants whether 
they realize it or not. 

As Jesus declared, "His servants ye are to whom ye 
render service." In consequence of this rule, we understand 
that many are professedly servants of God who are 
deceiving themselves, who are really the servants of the 
Wicked One; for his works they do, as Jesus said. They 
colabor for the upbuilding of unrighteousness, iniquity, 
injustice, and in holding down the Truth and in misleading 
the people. 

The Lord will help His people, He will deliver them 
from the various snares of the Adversary; and eventually 
Satan and all his cohorts will fall into their own snares. 
Thus, in ancient times, when the Egyptians thought to 
capture the Israelites at the Red Sea, the Lord opened the 
way for the Israelites and they escaped; while their 
enemies pursued after them, and were themselves entrapped 
and overwhelmed. 

Similarly, in the great Time of Trouble that is approaching, 
apparently Satan and his servants will be 



overwhelmed in that trouble in a manner not expected by 
them. The Church will escape those things coming upon 
the world and will stand before the Son of Man, changed 
in the power of the First Resurrection and called to be 
with Him as His Kingdom class. But the world will be 
ensnared in that great Time of Trouble. Yet, thank God, 
it will be for their advantage as they learn the ways of 
the Lord more fully, and great will be the blessings of 
the Almighty coming to them ! 



R5693 : page 156 

"PROPHESY AGAINST THE SHEPHERDS" 

-JUNE 27.-EZEKIEL 34.- 

SELF-SEEKING SHEPHERDS-FEED THEMSELVES, BUT NOT THE 
FLOCK-THE TRUE SHEPHERD COMES-SEEKING THE SCATTERED 

SHEEP -FEEDING THE FLOCK-CARING FOR THE 
SICK AND LEAN-REPROVING THE SELFISH OF THE FLOCK 
-DAVID TO BE THE NEW SHEPHERD-ONE FLOCK, ONE 
SHEPHERD-"THE LORD IS MY SHEPHERD." 

"I Myself will be the Shepherd of My sheep. "-V. 15. 

TODAY'S Study is a parable, applicable, we 
believe, at the present time. It begins with 
an arraignment of the shepherds, the pastors 
of the Lord's flock. It accuses them 
of neglecting the sheep in favor of themselves. 
It declares that they appropriate 
the wool of the sheep and devour the best 
of the flock, but neglect to feed the flock- 
neglect to lead them to the "green pastures" 
of God's Word and to the "still waters" 
of Divine Truth. The parable pictures the Lord's flock, 
scattered here and there, some wounded, some torn, some 
lean and hungry, all neglected so far as the false 
shepherds are concerned. 

We cannot understand this as signifying nominal 
Christians, but the true saints of God. Nominal Christianity 
fares well enough, but the Lord does not recognize 
merely nominal Christians as His flock. They are 
the tares, not the wheat; they are the goats, not the 
sheep. The shepherds who neglect to care for the sheep, 
to provide them with the spiritual food and to assist 
them to find it, to appropriate it, are often quite busy 
with the goats— the worldly elements of their congregations. 
Their church arrangements are often especially 
for the goat, or tare class. These do not care for spiritual 
food; they must be provided with entertainments, 
suppers, sociables, discourses on politics, or harmless 
dissertations well filled with jokes. Do not they furnish 
most of the money? Would they not withdraw from 



the church if spiritual food were dispensed? For these 
some are providing "smokers," parish houses, well supplied 
with games, etc. 

But the shepherds were not appointed by the Lord 
to look after the goats and the tare class, but to look 
after the wheat, the Lord's sheep. They are unfaithful 
pastors, or shepherds; and this prophecy is a reproof to 

R5693 : page 157 

them. The true flock of God is scattered, some here, 
some there, in many denominations and outside of all. 
They become the prey of the beastly of the world, and 
are ensnared into various false doctrines, but "neither 
did My shepherds search for My flock, but the shepherds 
fed themselves, and fed not My flock. Therefore, O 
ye shepherds, hear the word of the Lord! Thus saith 
the Lord God, Behold I am against the shepherds; and 
I will require My flock at their hand, and cause them to 
cease from feeding the flock; neither shall the shepherds 
feed themselves any more: for I will deliver My flock 
from their mouth." 

THE SHEPHERD GATHERING HIS FLOCK 

Many Bible students believe that this Scripture is 
in process of fulfilment— that we are living in the Parousia 
of Christ, and that He has been present in the world 
for some years past, searching out the truly consecrated 
of His people, and gathering them out of all sectarian 
systems and from the world, to Himself. Surely it is 
true that the shepherds are ceasing to feed the flock; 
for very few of the flock of the Lord's consecrated people 
any longer seek spiritual food at their hands. They 
are wandering in a famishing condition, and much in 
danger of falling into the various snares of the Adversary. 

However, the Great Shepherd Himself is with His 
flock, and is causing His voice to be heard; and the 
sheep will be gathered to Him out of every nation and 
out of every denomination. Truly, Jesus said, "My 
sheep hear My voice, and they follow Me"; and "a 
stranger will they not follow; for they know not the 
voice of strangers." (John 10:27,5.) The voice of the 
Lord, of the Great Shepherd, amongst His sheep is to 
be heard now because it is the time of His Second Presence. 
He is about to complete His flock of this Gospel 
Age and to glorify them with Himself in the First 
Resurrection. Surely, goodness and mercy shall follow 
them; they shall dwell in the House of the Lord forever. 

"Thus saith the Lord God, Behold I, even I, will both 
search My sheep, and seek them out. As a shepherd 
seeketh out his flock in the day that he is among his 
sheep that are scattered, so will I seek out My sheep, 
and I will deliver them out of all places where they 
have been scattered in the cloudy and dark day. And I 
will bring them out from the people, and gather them 



from the countries, and will bring them to their own 
land." Verses 11-13. 

R5694 : page 157 

The Home-land of the Lord's sheep of this Gospel 
Age is Heaven itself, and His bringing them to it will 
mean their resurrection change. Then they shall be in 
the Kingdom with Jesus Himself— still His sheep, still 
His flock, still His Bride, still His members. But He 
declares also, "Other sheep I have that are not of this 
fold: them also I must bring; and there shall be one fold, 
and one Shepherd."— John 10:16. 

THE SECOND FLOCK AND ITS FOLD 

These other sheep of the Lord, we believe, will include 
all of mankind who, during the Millennial Kingdom, 
will be glad to avail themselves of the great provision 
the Lord has made for them in His Plan. They 
are other sheep in the sense that they will be of a different 
nature from the flock which the Lord is selecting 
during this Gospel Age. The flock now being called 
and gathered are being begotten to the Divine nature, a 
spirit nature, and they will attain to this spirit nature by 
a resurrection change; as it is written, "Flesh and blood 
cannot inherit the Kingdom of God."— 1 Cor. 15:50. 

The other sheep will be the great flock of the Lord, 
the great family of Adam, purchased by Jesus. For a 
thousand years the work of calling and gathering mankind 
and separating between sheep and goats will progress, 
as outlined in Matthew 25:31-46. The whole world 
will be granted the opportunity of taking their choice as 
to whether they will be sheep or goats. And nothing in 
the Scriptures informs us whether the sheep or the goats 
will be the more numerous. We are merely informed 
that all will have the invitation to become the Lord's 
sheep, to come under His shepherding care; and by so 
doing and proving their loyalty to Him and developing 
His spirit, His character-likeness, they will be granted 
everlasting life on the human plane, the earthly plane. 

There the Lord will bring the Restitution which St. 
Peter mentions (Acts 3:19-21), and which will be offered 
to Adam and all his race, who will not receive the 
call of this Gospel Age. Theirs will not be so high a 
call, but will evidently be a glorious one. The whole 
earth— a Paradise, an earthly heaven— will be their 
everlasting portion, but it will not be the Heavenly 
Home to which the Church has been invited. The 
world's blessing of Restitution to human perfection, to 
the image and likeness of God in the flesh, will not be 
the equivalent of the spiritual nature granted to the 
Church of this Age, but it will be wonderfully grand. 

As for the goats of that time, thank God! they are 
not to be tormented, as many of us once supposed. Rather, 
they are to be cut off from life, as is implied in the 



Greek word kolasin. "These [the goats] shall go away 
into everlasting cutting off; but the righteous [the 
sheep] into life everlasting." (Matthew 25:46.) The 
Great Shepherd, who is now gathering His flock of this 
Gospel Age, will remain therefore for a thousand years 
to gather out fully all His flock of the Millennial Age, 
to separate them fully from all having the contrary spirit, 
and to destroy completely all except His sheep. All 
who really love righteousness and hate iniquity, when 
given a clear opportunity to discern and to take their 
stand, will choose the right and become the Lord's sheep. 
All others, who will to be wicked, will die; as it is 
written, "All the wicked will He destroy."— Psalm 145:20. 

"I will feed My flock, and I will cause them to lie 
down, saith the Lord God. I will seek that which was 
lost, and bring again that which was driven away, and 
I will bind up that which was broken, and will strengthen 
that which was sick; but I will destroy the fat and the 
strong; I will feed them with judgment"— with a 
righteous recompense.— Verses 15,16. 

THE FLOCK CRITICIZED ALSO 

Not merely the shepherds, the pastors, the preachers, 
the ministers, are reproved by the Lord, but also some of 
His flock not in official positions. In the Day of the 
Lord's presence, these also will be dealt with, as we read: 

"And as for you, O My flock, thus saith the Lord God, 
Behold, I judge between cattle and cattle, between the 
rams and the he goats. Seemeth it a small thing unto 
you to have eaten up the good pasture, but ye must tread 
down with your feet the residue of your pastures? and 
to have drunk of the deep waters, but ye must foul the 
residue with your feet? And as for My flock, they have 
eaten that which ye have trodden with your feet; and 
they have drunk that which ye have fouled with your feet. 
Therefore, thus saith the Lord God unto them, Behold, I, 
even I, will judge between the fat cattle and between the 
lean cattle. Because ye have thrust with side and with 
shoulder, and pushed all the diseased with your horns, 
till ye have scattered them abroad, therefore will I save 
My flock, and they shall be no more a prey; and I will 
judge between cattle and cattle."— Verses 17-22. 

R5694 : page 158 

The New Order of things incidental to Messiah's 
Kingdom is here brought to our attention. This already 
has begun in respect to the Gospel Church. Some who 
have been considered quite prominent in Christendom, 
pushing and managing its affairs, and discounting the 
Lord's true sheep as peculiar people, will be reproved by 
the Lord in this Day. The poor, the outcasts, the peculiar, 
are the ones that He styled His flock, and that He 
was to especially gather and especially feed and especially 
heal in this time. And is it not so? Is the Lord not 



feeding His sheep and blessing them irrespective of all 
sectarianism, and wherever they may be, in every land? 
Verily, He is searching them out and feeding them; and 
soon, the Harvest time closed, these will be gathered to 
the Heavenly fold. Meantime, the good work begun with 
the Gospel sheep will be extended amongst mankind. 

Never again will the Lord leave His sheep without 
shepherding. We are not from this to understand that 
He made a mistake when He said, "If I go away, I will 
come again"; but rather that the leaving of His flock 
for a time was incidental to their testing, their proving, 
and development, that those loyal to the Lord, the principles 
of righteousness and the instructions of His Word 
might be manifested, even though they were scattered, 
and that others also might be manifested as unfaithful. 
It is, however, refreshing to know that throughout the 
entire Millennial Age, until all the work of perfecting 
the sheep shall have been accomplished, the Shepherd 
will be with them. Thus we read: 

"And I will set up one Shepherd over them, and He 
shall feed them, even My servant David; He shall feed 
them, and He shall be their Shepherd. And I, Jehovah, 
will be their God, and My servant David a prince among 
them; I the Lord have spoken it. And I will make with 
them a Covenant of Peace, and will cause the evil 
beasts to cease out of the land; and they shall dwell 
safely in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods."— 
Verses 23-25. 

We are not from this to understand that the Prophet 
David of old is to be made Jehovah's representative and 
given the care of the sheep in the future. The word 
David signifies beloved; and the thought, we believe, is 
that the antitype of David is meant. Jesus is preeminently 
beloved of the Father; and the Bride class, the 
Church, are to be the members of Christ, their Head- 
members of the Beloved. Thus the Lord Jesus said of 
His people, "The Father Himself loveth you." 

We see then that The Christ, Head and Body- 
Jesus and the Church— are to be the antitypical David, 
or Beloved of God, into whose care all who are His 
sheep or who desire to become His sheep during the 
Millennial Age will be committed. The wild beasts, representing 
the evil-doers, those who will devour, destroy 
and do harm, will be caused to cease; and the whole 
world will become "the fold." No longer will there be 
need of making a special fold, building the fences against 
the enemies; for the sheep will be in a quiet and restful 
condition— "in the woods." 

In other words, the close of the Millennium will witness 
what the Lord has declared, that nothing shall hurt 
nor destroy in all His holy Kingdom. (Isaiah 11:9.) 
It will witness also what Jesus has declared; namely, 
that from that time onward, there shall be no more sighing, 
no more crying, no more dying, no more curse, because 
all the former things shall have passed away. 
"And He that sat upon the Throne said, Behold, I make 



all things new." (Revelation 21:3-5.) Even Satan shall 
be bound, to deceive the world no more until Messiah 
shall have fully accomplished the work of perfecting 
the flock. 



R5694 : page 158 

INTERESTING LETTERS 
RE CHARGES OF THE PREACHERS' UNION 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

We appreciated very much the article in the March 15 
WATCH TOWER entitled, "Preachers Back of Malicious Attack. 
Of course, all of us were certain that the charges 
were false, but until the article appeared we had nothing 
with which to refute the falsity of them. Now we are fully 
armed. 

One would hardly believe that reports could spread so 
rapidly. 

We find here in Texas that the opposition to the Truth 
is so thoroughly organized throughout the country that every 
preacher, even in the smallest towns and in the rural districts, 
has in his possession copies, not only of all the books 
written in opposition to the Truth, but also of the charges 

R5695 : page 158 

made against Brother Russell and of our alleged teachings 
of a second chance, no punishment for sin, etc. In our 
Volunteer work we are making it a point to refute these 
charges whenever opportunity presents. 

We are not inclining toward weariness in well doing. We 
are confident that we shall reap unspeakably glorious results 
in due time, and we believe the due time is not far off. 

It is our delight to bear before the Throne of Heavenly 
Grace our dear Pastor and all others who suffer for righteousness' 
sake. And we daily search our own hearts lest 
possibly we may shrink from joyfully sharing with these 
whatever the Lord may allow to come upon us. With continued 
love and prayers for all, we are, 

Faithfully yours in His fellowship and service, 
SETH T. MOORE.-Texas. 



OPPOSITION PROVED TO BE BOOMERANG 

DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

A short time ago, having heard your teachings roundly 
denounced by one or two brother clergymen, I obtained the 
six volumes of your STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES and began 
to study and investigate for myself. The final upshot of 
this inquiry has been that the whole of your views and 



position as set forth in the above volumes has convinced me 
beyond all question that modern Christendom is upon a false 
foundation, and that somehow the "Churches" have lost 
vital integral portions of that Truth which was delivered 
once for all to the saints. I have therefore recently felt it 
to be my duty to resign my position as an Anglican minister, 
as I am now certain that the "Churches" as at present organized 
do not, and cannot, truly and adequately represent 
our Lord to humanity as Redeemer. Why this is so you 
make abundantly and transparently clear in your STUDIES. 

I have been engaged in the work of the ministry for the 
last thirteen years, and during this time have tenaciously 
held on to my position in the Church, although for some 
years I have had the instinctive feeling that in some way 
things were far from right within the borders of "Orthodoxy." 
The difficulty was I did not know how to set about to try 
and remedy matters. Your third volume of the STUDIES, 
"Thy Kingdom Come," shows clearly that there could be no 
remedy in these latter days, for the time of Harvest is 
come, and that the evident decay and disintegration of Christendom 
is the Lord's method of gathering together His 
own Spiritual Elect Church. The whole thing has come to 
me with the force of a Divine Revelation— for such it assuredly 
is. I can only add that it has been the deep desire 
within to try and do my Lord's will that has kept me within 
the "Orthodox" Church until the present. Now, however, 
that I see, as in a mirror, that He is calling me to come out 
of Babylon as with a stentorian voice— in view of her 
wickedness, worldliness, cruelty, hypocrisy and errors— I feel 
that I must obey Him at all costs. I have done this, and 
already I feel a sense of inner peace and tranquility coming 
over me. May God bless and keep you, Brother Russell, 
and all the brethren with you who are now busy making 
ready for the Coming of the King ! 

For myself I just want to do the Lord's will in all things, 
and will be glad to serve and co-operate with you and the 
Association generally as may most effectively tend to assist in 

R5695 : page 159 

the establishment of our Lord's Kingdom. Kindly use me 
as you may judge will be best to this great end. I am a 
married man with three children, but whatever difficulties 
may arise I have already proved that His grace is sufficient 
for me. He has shown me the road to take to do His will 
and He will enable me so to do. 

I have made myself known to the brethren in Toronto 
and they have welcomed me in a most kind and brotherly 
way. If it should be the Lord's will for me to remain in 
this city, it will be a joy and privilege to cooperate with 
them in seeking to further the great end we have in view. 
At the same time I have the feeling that if arrangements 
could be made for me to undertake a short, special course of 
study and training under your direction at Brooklyn it 
would do me much good and enable me to render more 
efficient service later on. I will, however, leave myself 



wholly in your hands and endeavor to begin to serve the 
Association as you may judge best. 

With earnest prayers that your hands may be upheld in 
every possible way, and that God in His infinite mercy may 
shower upon you and the brethren generally still greater 
blessings for the Great Day yet to come, I am 

Yours in the Lord, R. A. ROBINSON.-Canada. 



MOST WONDERFUL MONTHS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I desire to testify to you that the last twelve months— 
for I am now nearly twelve months in the Truth— have been 
the most wonderful in my life. Looking back I can clearly 
see how our dear Lord has led me step by step, and given me 
strength sufficient to walk that narrow path that leads upward 
to Him. What joy and peace He has given me since I 
learned to look to Him, and what marvelous patience He has 
had with me! 

The local Methodist minister (I used to be a member 
of his congregation) has desired me to return to his flock. 
He has used many arguments and has given me booklets to 
read; but he cannot answer me when I point out to him 
that neither he nor any of the denominational ministers 
were able to show me the path my Savior trod, and it was 
not until I came in touch with you, through your writings, 
that my eyes were opened and my ears unstopped to hear 
the call to consecrate my all to Him. How can I turn my 
back on one who has done so much for me! 

Dear Brother, daily I ask God's richest blessings for you. 
Will you pray for me— just once— that through His grace 
and strength I may be able to join you and others of His 
saints beyond the veil? 

With love, your brother, J. C. EDWARDS. -Canada. 



MORNING RESOLVE, VOW, HYMN, MANNA, PRAYER 

MOST DEARLY BELOVED BROTHER IN THE ANOINTED: 

This year, when reading the MANNA for January 1st, I 
made a table of the appointments the Lord has furnished us 
for our building up in the faith, and fitting us to run in the 
narrow way. I was surprised at the number. 

The daily appointments of Morning Resolve, Vow, hymn, 
MANNA and prayer that we have in common with all the 
Household of Faith, have been a blessing to me this year 
as never before. I believe that one reason for this is that I 
am learning more the value of prayer, and I try always to 
ask the Lord beforehand to bless the morning service to me. 
If I forget this, I notice a difference in my response to it. 
The fact that these appointments, though used daily, never 
wear out is a proof to me of their Divine origin. I am 
referring more especially now to the Vow and Resolve. I 



think there has never been a question that the hymns and the 
MANNA came from God. 

In a Second Volume Berean lesson not long ago reference 
was made to the Lord's gathering His people together in 
mental association and spiritual communion. In our home 
here we are realizing the special spiritual communion with 
the whole Israel of God that comes from using the same 
morning service; and I thanked God for the way He had 
arranged, that through the question books the consecrated 
were given the opportunity to come into mental association 
and have their attention drawn to the same thought in each 
paragraph to be especially emphasized. Thus one could 
leave a class in Halifax and go to a class in Los Angeles, 
and be at home in the STUDIES immediately; that is if these 
classes were up to date. There is nothing else like it on 
earth; and the value of this arrangement cannot be emphasized 
too much, as we believe such a wonderful arrangement 
for the building up in knowledge that we may grow in 
grace has been under the direct supervision of our beloved 
Bridegroom and Head, the Chief Reaper in the Harvest. 

I send you a large bundle of that most precious commodity, 
the love that comes because of being a member of 
the Anointed One. May the God of all consolation comfort 
and refresh you continually is my prayer. 

Your Sister by His kind favor, LILLA S. WARD 



BAPTIST PREACHER GETS LIGHT 

DEAR PASTOR:- 

I am constrained to acquaint you with the news that in 
God's hands you have been a means of blessing to us who 
were for some time spiritually cast down. I was aforetime 
a Baptist pastor and evangelist in England, earnest in my 
endeavors for the Gospel's sake, and had to suffer because 
I could not bend to those who thought they had the right 
to lay down the law. I felt that there was something lacking 
in their teachings and was in such perplexity that I 
drifted into indifference and unhappiness. 

Heartily disgusted with the worldliness and "isms" of 
the churches, and worst of all their denial of God's Word, 
I involuntarily cried, "Send out Thy light and Thy Truth; 
let them lead me!" "Restore unto me the joy of Thy 
salvation!" 

About this time my father mailed me a WATCH TOWER 
copy of THE DIVINE PLAN OF THE AGES, but I was so 
prejudiced— regarding you as one of the modern upstarts— 
that I relegated it to the bottom of my box, unread. Again 
I was presented with, this time, a bound copy of the same 
book! In curiosity I began to read, and my curiosity soon 
became deep interest and diligent Bible study and my prayer 
has been answered! 

In God's power I have been able to interest others; my 
brother-in-law has joined in our studies and desires to add 
his testimony to mine in gratitude to God for your ministrations. 



May God continue to abundantly bless you in your 
noble and fearless proclamation of THE Truth! 

As opportunity offers we do our little for the spread of 
present-day truths and have been blessed accordingly. True, 
we have had to endure misjudgment and misunderstanding, 
but we rejoice to be accounted worthy to suffer these things 
for Him who endured so much for us. 

Feeling sure that such testimony will gladden your heart, 
and rejoicingly awaiting the establishment of the Kingdom, 

Gratefully yours in Christ, JOHN A. PERRY. --Australia. 



page 160 

International Bible Students Association Classes 

STUDIES AND LECTURES UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



I. B. S. A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 
FOR THE MONTH OF JUNE 
Questions from Manual on Series Second of 
"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 
STUDY VIII. 



WeekofJune6 Q. 1 to 4 WeekofJune20 Q. 11 to 15 

WeekofJunel3 Q. 5 to 10 WeekofJune27 Q. 16 to 23 

Question Manuals on Vol. II., STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 5c. each; 
or 50 c. per dozen, postpaid. 



page 161 
