A Global Solution—Is It Possible?
EXPERTS agree that tuberculosis (TB) is a global problem that requires a global solution. No country can control TB in isolation, since millions of people cross international borders each week.
International cooperation, many believe, requires that wealthy nations help poor nations, which are hardest hit by TB. As Dr. Arata Kochi states, “it is in the interest of wealthy countries to help less-developed countries fight tuberculosis, before their own countries become the battleground.”
But rich nations, beset with what they see as more pressing priorities and problems, have not rushed to the rescue. Some poor countries themselves often neglect health care, pouring money into their armaments instead. By mid-1996, only 10 percent of the world’s TB patients were being treated with the DOTS strategy, too few to prevent the epidemic from worsening.
WHO observes: “The knowledge and inexpensive drugs to cure TB have existed for decades. What the world needs now is a breakthrough by people of power, influence and compassion who will see that these medicines are put to use effectively throughout the world.”
The Conquest to Come
Can we look with confidence to humans of power and influence to solve the problem? The inspired Bible psalmist wrote: “Do not put your trust in nobles, nor in the son of earthling man, to whom no salvation belongs.” In whom, then, can we trust? The scripture further states: “Happy is the one who has the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in Jehovah his God, the Maker of heaven and earth, of the sea, and of all that is in them.”—Psalm 146:3, 5, 6.
As the Designer and Creator of the earth, Jehovah God has both the power and the wisdom to bring an end to disease. Does he have compassion? Through his inspired prophet, Jehovah promises: “I will show compassion upon [my people], just as a man shows compassion upon his son who is serving him.”—Malachi 3:17.
The closing chapter of the Bible describes a vision that was given to the apostle John. He saw “trees of life producing twelve crops of fruit, yielding their fruits each month.” These symbolic trees and the fruit they yield picture divine provisions that will enable obedient humans to live forever on earth.—Revelation 22:2.
Continuing, John wrote: “The leaves of the trees were for the curing of the nations.” The symbolic leaves picture blessings from God that will result in the healing of humankind, both spiritually and physically. Thus, we can be certain that in the righteous new world under God’s rule, TB will be conquered completely and eternally.—Revelation 21:3, 4.
[Picture on page 8, 9]
God promises permanent healing for mankind

