Young People Ask . . .
Are Raves Harmless Fun?
“When I’m dancing with my hands in the air and the music surging through my body, I feel energized by the others on the dance floor. It’s like a rapture.”—Gena.
GENA thus describes the thrill of attending a rave. These dance parties, usually lasting all night, first became popular in Britain during the 1980’s. Now they are popping up in all parts of the globe, including Belgium, Canada, Germany, India, New Zealand, South Africa, and the United States.
Raves are held in clubs, abandoned warehouses, vacant fields—anywhere people can gather for a night of frenzied, nonstop dancing. “Raves are gradually replacing nightclubbing as youth’s recreation of choice,” wrote Adam Levin, in the Sunday Times Magazine of Johannesburg, South Africa. “If your teenagers haven’t mentioned them yet,” he added, “then you have a communication problem.”
A Look at the Rave Scene
Raves are sometimes shrouded in secrecy, their location not being announced until the day of the event. Nevertheless, when the elaborate light show and pulsating techno music begin, anywhere from several dozen to thousands of youths in bizarre attire may be present. “It’s like one big unified mass of people dancing around and letting out their aggressions to the beat,” says Katy, a college sophomore.
A rave is more than just a dance, however. It is also a culture, or a “scene,” as ravers like to call it. The basic tenets of the rave scene are reputedly peace, love, unity, and respect—regardless of race, nationality, or sexual orientation. “We’ve been trying to mix cultures at these parties,” says the owner of a store that specializes in dance music. “The idea is togetherness,” he adds, “and dancing together is a great way to achieve that.”
In view of such seemingly noble ideals, you may ask, ‘What could be wrong with raves?’ But there is another side to the rave scene that you should consider.
The Seamy Side of Raves
Some claim that alcohol is rarely present at raves. Drugs, however, are a different matter. “One wonders whether the rave scene would have been more easily accepted by the public had the presence of drugs not been so high,” admits a raver named Brian. “Of course,” he adds, “many others wonder how raves could have ever come about without them.”
Although marijuana and LSD have made their way into some raves, the drug of choice among ravers seems to be MDMA, commonly known as Ecstasy. Users claim that Ecstasy is relatively safe. They insist that it simply energizes them to dance the night away and that it enhances their feelings of euphoria. Yet, under the headline “Popular Drug May Damage Brain,” The New York Times notes that Ecstasy “may have long-term, harmful effects on appetite, sleep, mood, impulsiveness and other mental functions.” And that is not all. “There have been some deaths from Ecstasy,” claims Dr. Howard McKinney, “and several other cases where people who took normal doses experienced heart failure, liver failure or coma.” With good reason Dr. Sylvain de Miranda says: “Rave-goers taking Ecstasy are dancing with death.”
Even organic drugs—such as Herbal Acid, Acceleration, herbal Ecstasy, or Rush—can be harmful. For example, it is claimed that under certain conditions, the organic drug Acceleration can cause a heart attack and even death.
For those who still insist that the drugs used at raves are harmless, there is another factor to consider. Canadian police detective Ian Briggs claims that 90 percent of the drugs sold as Ecstasy are not really Ecstasy at all. “A lot of it is PCP or other dangerous drugs,” he says. “People selling these drugs are unscrupulous. They’re not around when the drugs start taking effect.”a
Admittedly, some raves may be drug free. However, even ravers will admit that it is often impossible to predict whether any, many, or most of those who are present at a rave will be under the influence of an illegal substance.
Are Raves Really for You?
There is nothing inherently wrong with music and dancing, nor is it improper to want to have a good time. After all, the Bible says that there is a “time for joy” and a “time for dancing.” (Ecclesiastes 3:4, Today’s English Version) It also admonishes: “Rejoice . . . in your youth.” (Ecclesiastes 11:9) So the Creator wants you to be happy! Nevertheless, you must remember that “the whole world is lying in the power of the wicked one,” Satan the Devil. (1 John 5:19) Thus, it should hardly be a surprise that forms of recreation that are glorified by this world are often tainted with unwholesome elements.
For example, think about those who attend raves. Are they following the Bible’s admonition to ‘cleanse themselves of every defilement of flesh and spirit’? (2 Corinthians 7:1) True, ravers may espouse peace, love, and unity. But “the wisdom from above” is more than “peaceable”; it is also “chaste.” (James 3:15, 17) Ask yourself, ‘Do the morals of those who frequent raves harmonize with the standards found in God’s Word, the Bible? Do I want to spend all night with those who are “lovers of pleasures rather than lovers of God”?’—2 Timothy 3:4; 1 Corinthians 6:9, 10; compare Isaiah 5:11, 12.
These are important questions to consider, for Paul wrote that “bad associations spoil useful habits.” (1 Corinthians 15:33) To keep company with those who show disregard for God’s laws will ultimately spell disaster, for the Bible states: “He that is walking with wise persons will become wise, but he that is having dealings with the stupid ones will fare badly.”—Proverbs 13:20.
The fact is that many raves are little more than drug parties and those who attend can reap bitter consequences. Some raves, for example, are raided and shut down by police, either because they are being held illegally or because drugs are present. Would you want to be counted among those who are not law-abiding? (Romans 13:1, 2) Even if breaking the law did not come into the picture, could you attend such a party and remain “without spot from the world”? (James 1:27) Since revelries, or “wild parties” (Byington), are condemned in the Bible, would your presence at a rave enable you to maintain a clear conscience before God and men?—Galatians 5:21; 2 Corinthians 4:1, 2; 1 Timothy 1:18, 19.
Clearly, Christians should beware of the danger of raves. But do not despair. There is still much recreation that you can enjoy. For example, many families among Jehovah’s Witnesses have arranged for wholesome gatherings.b With careful planning and supervision, these leave all in attendance feeling spiritually and physically refreshed. More important, association that is upbuilding pleases Jehovah, “the happy God,” who wants his people to rejoice.—1 Timothy 1:11; Ecclesiastes 8:15.
[Footnotes]
PCP (phencyclidine) is an anesthetic that is sometimes used illicitly to induce vivid mental imagery.
For more information, see The Watchtower, August 15, 1992, pages 15-20, and Awake!, May 22, 1997, pages 8-10.
[Box on page 26]
What Is Techno?
  Put simply, techno refers to electronic dance music. It includes many styles. Most people would describe techno as rhythmic, for it usually ranges between 115 and 160 beats per minute.
  “To the uninitiated,” says The European, “techno sounds like the noises you hear when you sit in the dentist’s chair, coupled with the noises you imagine there were the night Sodom and Gomorrah got hit.” Some listeners, however, are captivated by techno’s steady beat. “For me,” says 18-year-old Christine, “this music gives the feeling of unlimited freedom and independence.” Sonja feels similarly. “At first,” she admits, “I didn’t like techno music at all. But the more you listen to it, the more acceptable it becomes. If you turn it up real loud, you can hardly escape the pounding beat. You move automatically. If you are not careful, the beat controls your whole body.” Shirley, aged 19, sees something deeper in techno. “It’s more than just music,” she says. “It’s a whole way of life, expressed in clothing and language.”
  Christians desire to “keep on making sure of what is acceptable to the Lord.” (Ephesians 5:10) Therefore, they should use caution with techno just as they would with any other style of music. If you find yourself drawn to techno, ask yourself: ‘How does this style of music affect me? Does it make me feel happy, calm, and peaceful? Or does it rile me up, perhaps even inciting angry or immoral thoughts? Will my attraction to this music style draw me closer to its life-style? Would I be tempted to attend a rave to hear this style of music or dance to it?’
  Really, the bottom line is this: Whatever your taste in music, never allow it to come between you and your heavenly Father.

