From Our Readers
Adoptee’s Search  I want to thank you for the experience “A Thrilling Surprise.” (February 22, 1997) It was truly moving to read of how this son found his real mother and learned that she was also his spiritual sister!
M. G. D., Italy
I read the story of the life of Dana Folz with tears. I have an adopted brother who got to meet his mother when he was grown up. It was not a happy reunion. Even today, he must deal with negative feelings toward our family. The article helped me to see the importance of showing him patience and love.
M. D. L., Argentina
I found your magazine in the bathroom of a local business. It contained one of the most stirring accounts I have ever read! I have often been asked: “What if a baby was conceived during a rape? Do you not favor abortion under these circumstances?” No more eloquent plea for the life of the unborn could possibly be given than Dana Folz’s thrilling, real-life drama.
M. P., United States
Organized Crime  I am a security consultant and a member of the Police-Community Relations Committee. I found your suggestions on how to protect one’s family from crime very practical and beneficial. (“Organized Crime—How It Affects You,” in the issue of March 8, 1997) I have already circulated the magazine to other committee members. It is refreshing to know that one day a world without crime will be here.
C. E. J. A., Nigeria
The articles were particularly helpful because I have been studying the Bible with a man who has been affiliated with organized crime for the past 11 years. The difficulties of cutting off ties with organized crime were accurately explained. With Jehovah’s help, he too can break away if he makes up his mind to do so.
A. M., United States
Flowers  I am ten years old, and I want to thank you for the article “Flowers Show That Somebody Cares.” (March 8, 1997) It taught me how to take care of flowers so that they will last longer.
L. C., Italy
For years I have wanted to know how to preserve flowers, as I am very fond of them. However, they would always wither too rapidly. The suggestions in Awake! have really helped me. I am very grateful for the work that you are doing.
J. P., Mexico
Birth of a Star  The article “Star Birth in an Eagle’s ‘Nest’” (March 8, 1997) made me stop and think for a moment about Jehovah God’s beautiful, unspoiled creation. I was deeply moved.
J. A., Australia
Adoption  I can truly relate to the article “A Cry From the Heart.” (March 8, 1997) I was an unwed mother at age 19. My mother was very angry and bitter, and she let me know that the baby was not welcome. I felt that it would be in my baby’s best interests to let others care for him. After becoming a Christian, I prayed for 15 years that I would meet him. My prayer was finally answered some time ago, and I got to meet him and share the good news with him. He was very understanding of the circumstances that compelled me to give him up. My advice to women in this situation is to keep praying to Jehovah. Perhaps it will work out that you can be reunited with your child. If not, God can grant you peace of mind and heart if you fully trust in him.
G. S., United States

