From Our Readers
Saving Children  Thank you for the article “Millions of Children Are Dying.” (September 22, 1988) I had opportunity to use the information on Oral Rehydration Therapy when my two-month-old developed diarrhea. In no time at all, I could see a change. He settled down and went right to sleep.
S. S., United States
Holocaust  In response to your articles, I am sending to you a pamphlet entitled Did Six Million Really Die? (April 8, 1989) A number of revisionist historians have concluded that the Holocaust never happened, that the six-million figure has been exaggerated at least a thousandfold, that there never were any gas chambers built for the annihilation of Jews by the Nazis.
R. B., Canada
We are well-acquainted with the views of revisionist historians. However, there is the testimony of thousands of survivors​—hundreds of whom were Jehovah’s Witnesses—​who in many cases were eyewitnesses to concentration-camp slaughter. While the exact number of those killed in the Holocaust may never be known, that a holocaust took place is an undeniable historic fact.​—ED.
I feel unable to place this issue with others because of the photograph on pages 2 and 3. Such scenes have been shown in recent TV documentaries; at least one can turn these off. The impact of the printed page is much greater, and it would have been tactful to issue a warning to people who have not got used to horror in daily doses.
V. S., England
At times the truth is unpleasant, shocking. Even the Bible uses graphic​—at times frightening—​language when the subject demands it. And the subject of the Holocaust certainly demands realistic treatment. The photograph thus served to impress upon our readers the reality and horror of the Holocaust in a way that words simply fail to do. It also impresses upon us that human rule has failed and that God is fully justified in soon bringing this wicked system of things to an end and replacing it with the rule of his Kingdom.​—Daniel 2:44; Matthew 6:9, 10; 2 Peter 3:13.​—ED.
Your recent article on the Holocaust bordered on perfection. However, it was too centered on the large Jewish group and the minority group of Jehovah’s Witnesses. This was to the detriment of other groups who suffered, such as the Gypsies.
A. G., France
A number of other groups suffered under the Nazi regime. Jehovah’s Witnesses, though, were unique in that they could have been released had they renounced their faith. Their refusal to do so thus shows them to have been martyrs, not merely victims.​—ED.
Homosexuality  Before your article I felt so very alone. (April 8, 1989) When I was a preteen, I began having homosexual encounters with some of my friends. I continued this on into adolescence until I started studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses. But sometimes I still had wrong feelings lingering inside me. I even felt that I would never be a real man, much less a congregation elder. But when I read the quote from Jason in the article, I began to cry because now he is a congregation elder, and he had similar problems in the past! I feel that I am a part of Jehovah’s organization now.
M. M., United States

