Insight on the News
“Punk Rock” Music
● A new type of music​—“punk rock”—​is becoming popular among youths in England. According to “Parade” magazine, “it symbolizes the grievances of a new generation of undisciplined, teenaged rebels who have been reared in poverty.” It is said that this music’s theme is: “Don‘t let people step on you​—and if they do, fight back.” The journal also says: “Peace and love have been replaced by war and hate.”
Reportedly, “punk rock” performers and fans wear old clothing with such items as bus tickets and labels attached to it. The youths consider this to be fitting attire.
While such music and dancing may gain popularity in some places, Christian parents and youths need to consider more than the tempo and emotion-arousing nature of such music as “punk rock.” Music and dancing that emphasize “war and hate” are not suitable for those professing to follow Jesus Christ. The Christian apostle Paul wrote: “A slave of the Lord does not need to fight, but needs to be gentle toward all.” (2 Tim. 2:24) He also wrote: “Pursue peace with all people.”​—Heb. 12:14.
While shunning a spirit that does not harmonize with the Scriptures, Christians also exercise care in their personal appearance. Accordingly, Paul wrote: “I desire the women to adorn themselves in well-arranged dress, with modesty and soundness of mind.” (1 Tim. 2:9) And, of course, the Christian’s standard is as high for youths, whether boys or girls.
Value of Early Home Education
● “Science News” reports that long-range studies have confirmed the great value of home education for children. Intelligence levels and abilities of the young were raised significantly when parents began educating their children even before they went to school, and then continued that education afterward. Even brief home programs made a difference.
Only one percent of the children whose parents had helped them in a home-based education program needed special attention by the fifth grade. But about 30 percent of the children who did not have such home training needed special help by that time.
The Bible places special emphasis on the educating of children by parents. To God’s people of ancient times the command was given: “Congregate the people, the men and the women and the little ones . . . in order that they may listen and in order that they may learn.” (Deut. 31:12) This “community” type of education was backed up at home, for regarding God’s laws and principles, parents were told: “You must inculcate them in your son and speak of them when you sit in your house and when you walk on the road and when you lie down and when you get up.” (Deut. 6:7) Thus, “from infancy” Timothy knew the Holy Scriptures.​—2 Tim. 3:15.
This is why Jehovah’s Witnesses include their children of all ages in their educational activities centered around the Bible. Such education also involves helping them to read, often before their entering school.
Moral Breakdown Deepens
● God’s Word foretold that in these “last days” people would be ‘lovers of themselves, having no natural affection, without self-control, without love of goodness.’ (2 Tim. 3:1-5) Part of the foretold breakdown includes the matter of sexual morals. Fornication, adultery, homosexuality and lesbianism are rampant. So are the results​—an epidemic of venereal diseases and unwanted pregnancies.
Another aspect of the sexual degradation now in evidence has to do with incest, sexual immorality committed among family members. Researchers say that “incest has reached epidemic proportions, mostly unreported, with its victims ranging across the socio-economic spectrum.”
A common and damaging form of this immorality is father-daughter incest. A girl who has been sexually abused by her father may suffer emotional instability the rest of her life. Her outlook on men, and on the honorable sexual relationship God created for marriage, is often seriously damaged. With good reason does God’s Word say that “those who are disgusting in their filth . . . and fornicators” will be destroyed in “the second death.”​—Rev. 21:8.

