Announcements
SERVING FIRST THE DIVINE INTERESTS—1 Chron. 26:30, Mo.
It is altogether right that one give first and foremost attention to the things that concern Jehovah God and his purposes. These interests, being divine, are of superlative worth and importance. Outstanding among these interests today is Jehovah’s purpose to cleanse the earth of all wickedness, permitting lovers of righteousness to survive and live forever under his kingdom. And what are we to do? Advanced information is now being published world wide. It is the privilege of all who have received this knowledge to share in the campaign of proclaiming “this good news of the kingdom . . . in all the inhabited earth” before “the accomplished end [of the old system of things] will come.” Throughout the month you are encouraged to share in this divine activity by taking subscriptions to the Watchtower magazine at $1 for the year. With each new subscription a copy of the 96-page booklet What Do the Scriptures Say About “Survival After Death”? will be given free.
1957 MEMORIAL ANNOUNCEMENT
The time draws near when Jehovah’s people, remnant and other sheep, will assemble as congregations for the observance of the most significant of all memorials, the one that annually commemorates the victorious death of the Lord Jesus Christ. The date this year is April 14. The meeting, which will start after 6 p.m., will be opened with song and prayer, after which the discourse will be given by a qualified speaker, one of the remnant if available and capable. Then the emblems will be served separately after Jehovah’s blessing has been prayed for upon first the bread and then the red wine. The meeting will be closed with prayer and song, after all present have been invited to have part in special field service arrangements. Each congregation should commence making Memorial arrangements.
DISCOVERING HIDDEN TREASURES
A veritable storehouse of treasure, its priceless contents far more valuable than any material riches—that is God’s Word, the Bible. In it are found treasures that are not to be kept under guard or in a safety vault away from the eyes of truth seekers. But how can you discover the treasures of the Bible? First, it is necessary to go to the storehouse itself. But that is not enough. There you must dig and search for it. Modern tools will make your search much easier, that is, reading and digging into the Bible that is in the living language of today. That is why the New World Translation is a real treasure in itself. Three volumes are now completed, the entire “New Testament,” called the “New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures,” Volume 1 of the “Hebrew Scriptures,” containing the books from Genesis to Ruth, and Volume 2, containing the books from First Samuel to Esther. Each volume is $1.50, and a de luxe edition in genuine morocco leather is available for $5 each. Order yours today.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
April 7: ‘Stay Awake, Stand Firm, Grow Mighty.’ Page 145.
April 14: ‘Keep Watching the Ministry That You Fulfill It.” Page 151.

