“You Would Make a Good Pioneer!”
 1. How did one sister feel about her pioneer ministry?
1 “I could not have found any other work that could have brought me as much contentment or could have been so spiritually rewarding.” So said Kathe B. Palm. She spent decades as a selfless pioneer minister witnessing from one end of Chile, South America, to the other. Thinking of the rewarding life of those in full-time service, perhaps someone has said to you: “You would make a good pioneer!”
 2. Explain why deep satisfaction is gained from spiritual activities.
2 A Satisfying Way of Life: Our Model, Jesus, found genuine refreshment in doing his Father’s will. (John 4:34) Therefore, it was with sincerity that Jesus taught his followers that real satisfaction results from engaging in activities related to the worship of Jehovah. We are content when our lives are filled with works that bring Jehovah’s approval. Additionally, as we give more time, energy, and resources to help others, we increase our happiness.—Acts 20:31, 35.
 3. What joy may we experience from spending increased time in the ministry?
3 The more time we spend in the ministry, the more opportunities we have to experience the joy of starting and conducting Bible studies. Even where many householders seem apathetic, we may find that our territory is more productive than we first thought as we gain experience and skill in the ministry. Pioneers can utilize the wealth of education they receive at the Pioneer Service School after pioneering for about one year. (2 Tim. 2:15) As we persevere, we may very well be planting seeds of truth that will produce fruitage at a later time.—Eccl. 11:6.
 4. What should youths nearing graduation consider?
4 Youths: While you are finishing your basic education, have you given careful thought to your future? Until now, your schoolwork largely determined your schedule. How will you fill that vacuum after graduation? Instead of pursuing a secular career, why not prayerfully consider the goal of regular pioneering? The skills you will learn—witnessing to people of different backgrounds, overcoming personal obstacles, cultivating self-discipline, and developing teaching ability—will benefit you throughout life.
 5. How can parents and the congregation encourage pioneering?
5 Parents, are you doing your part in pointing your children toward full-time service? Your words and positive example can do much to help them put Kingdom interests first. (Matt. 6:33) Ray, who started pioneering when finishing high school, recalls: “My mom always felt that pioneering results in a most satisfying way of life.” All in the congregation can encourage pioneer service by their words and support. Jose, from Spain, states: “My congregation viewed the pioneer work as the best career for young ones. Their comments and appreciation for the pioneer service along with their practical help made it easier for me to start pioneering.”
 6. What may we do if we do not currently have the desire to pioneer?
6 Overcoming Obstacles: But what if you say, ‘I do not have the desire to pioneer.’ If that is the way you feel at first, pray to Jehovah about the way you feel and tell him, ‘I do not know if pioneering is for me, but I want to do what is pleasing to you.’ (Ps. 62:8; Prov. 23:26) Then look for his direction through his Word and organization. Many regular pioneers first “tasted” pioneering as auxiliary pioneers, and the joy they experienced moved them to pursue a career in full-time service.—Ps. 34:8.
 7. How may we overcome doubts that we can reach the monthly requirement of 70 hours?
7 What if you are not sure that you can meet the monthly requirement of 70 hours? Why not speak to pioneers having circumstances similar to yours? (Prov. 15:22) Then write out several possible schedules. You may find that buying out time for the ministry from nonessential activities is easier than you first thought.—Eph. 5:15, 16.
 8. Why should we periodically reevaluate our circumstances?
8 Take a Fresh Look: Personal circumstances often change. It is good to reevaluate your situation from time to time. For example, are you nearing retirement from secular employment? Randy, who retired early, says: “This decision has enabled me to start regular pioneering along with my wife, and it has given us the opportunity to move and serve where the need is greater. I have received innumerable blessings for my decision, but the greatest blessing of all is a good conscience.”
 9. What should married couples consider?
9 Some couples have found after a careful examination that both do not have to work full-time. True, this may require the family to simplify their lifestyle, but it is worth the sacrifice. John, whose wife recently quit her full-time job in order to expand her ministry, relates: “There is no better feeling than to know that my wife is involved in spiritual things during the day.”
10. What motivates Christians to consider pioneering?
10 A Demonstration of Love and Faith: Jehovah has made preaching the most important work any of us could do. This old system is soon to be destroyed, and only those calling on Jehovah’s name will be saved. (Rom. 10:13) A heart full of love for him and gratitude for what he has done for us will motivate us to obey the commission from his Son to preach zealously. (Matt. 28:19, 20; 1 John 5:3) In addition, having faith that we are indeed living in the last days will move us to do all we can in the ministry while there is yet time, rather than using the world to the full.—1 Cor. 7:29-31.
11. How should we view it if someone tells us that we would make a good pioneer?
11 Regular pioneering is more than a response to an organizational arrangement; it is an expression of our devotion to God. So if someone tells you that you would make a good pioneer, view it as a compliment. And give prayerful consideration to joining those who are engaged in this satisfying avenue of service.
[Blurb on page 4]
Parents, are you doing your part in pointing your children toward full-time service?
[Blurb on page 5]
Jehovah has made preaching the most important work any of us could do.

