Rich Blessings at the “Light Bearers” District Conventions
SOME 2,700 years ago, the prophet Isaiah wrote: “Look! darkness itself will cover the earth, and thick gloom the national groups.” (Isaiah 60:2) How true those words have proved to be! However, there is hope, for Jehovah has caused light to shine forth. Last year, those who love God’s light were warmly invited to attend the “Light Bearers” District Convention.
The convention program was first presented in June in North America. During the months that followed, it has been presented in Eastern and Western Europe, Central and South America, Africa, Asia, and the isles of the seas. Those who have attended number into the millions. And what a rich spiritual feast they have enjoyed!
“Welcome, All You Light Bearers!”
In most places the convention started on Friday and concluded on Sunday afternoon. As the conventioners settled into their seats on Friday morning, they were treated to a brief overview of the way Jehovah’s light has shone ever brighter during these last days. Then the convention chairman took the rostrum. He emphasized that true Christians should be bearers of light and warmly said: “Welcome, all you light bearers!” The convention program would help delegates to continue to reflect Jehovah’s light.
The keynote address set the tone for the whole convention. This speaker reminded conventioners that the lights went out for mankind way back in the garden of Eden. Since then, Satan has blinded humans to the light of truth. (2 Corinthians 4:4) Nevertheless, Jesus came as “a light of the nations.” (Isaiah 42:1-6) He exposed religious falsehoods, identified wrong works belonging to darkness, upheld Jehovah’s sovereignty, and preached the good news of the Kingdom. Jesus’ followers did the same​—and they still do! (Matthew 28:19, 20) The speaker stirringly said: ‘We, like Jesus, can be light bearers. There is no work that is more important in our day. And there is no greater privilege.’
Just as the first convention session was drawing to a close, there was a surprise. The convention chairman returned to the platform and announced the release of the first of a series of four new tracts. Enthusiastic applause greeted this development, and one copy of this tract was made available to every delegate present.
On Friday afternoon, the convention program got down to basic counsel for light-bearing Christians. The first two talks provided fine advice on how to avoid being contaminated by the world’s darkness. Since Satan can appear to be an angel of light, it is vital to maintain a spiritual outlook so that the unclean things of the world do not seduce us. (2 Corinthians 11:14) Paul counseled: “Quit being fashioned after this system of things, but be transformed by making your mind over, that you may prove to yourselves the good and acceptable and perfect will of God.” (Romans 12:2) Convention delegates heard that the transforming of a Christian is a continuing process. Our minds are constantly purified and molded as we study God’s Word and apply what we learn. Thus, we become more and more like Jesus, who was “full of undeserved kindness and truth.”​—John 1:14.
Young Light Bearers
The second half of Friday afternoon was directed to youths. The first talk (“Youths​—What Are You Pursuing?”) commended young Christians who are such a good example of faithfulness. But it reminded them that they are a particular target of Satan. Even a well-trained athlete needs a coach. In the same way, young people need the help of their parents and of the congregation in order to keep walking in the light.
This was emphasized by the excellent drama Doing What Is Right in Jehovah’s Eyes, which concluded the Friday program. Highlighted was the example of King Josiah. Even as a young boy, he was determined to serve Jehovah. There were bad influences around him, but with the guidance of high priest Hilkiah and because of his own love for God’s Law, Josiah did what was right in Jehovah’s eyes. May young Christians today act in a similar way.
Let the Light Shine
After a night’s rest, the delegates came to the convention on Saturday morning ready for further upbuilding Scriptural counsel. They were not disappointed. Following a discussion of the day’s text, the program continued with a symposium outlining different ways that a Christian can let his light shine. (Matthew 5:14-16) Preaching is one vital way, and good conduct also plays an important part. As the speaker said, “preaching tells others what we believe, but practicing love demonstrates it.”
A vital preaching aid was then drawn to the conventioners’ attention​—tracts. With the announcement of the previous day still fresh in mind, delegates heard experiences proving how powerful these little instruments are. The delegates were encouraged to have a supply of tracts with them at all times, ready for every occasion.
Attention was next drawn to the pioneers, those full-time Kingdom proclaimers who work hard in bearing light. How we appreciate our hardworking pioneers! And their number is increasing. Even in lands where freedom of worship has just recently been granted, the pioneer ranks are swelling. Pioneers were encouraged to treasure their privilege. Those not yet pioneering were urged to consider their situation. Perhaps they too could arrange their affairs to let their light shine in the full-time service.
Being a light bearer often involves sacrifices, and this was highlighted in the following talk, “Serving Jehovah With a Self-Sacrificing Spirit.” Paul entreated: “Present your bodies a sacrifice living, holy, acceptable to God.” (Romans 12:1) A self-sacrificing spirit is displayed by those who endure persecution. Pioneers make sacrifices every day in order to stay in the full-time service. Indeed, all true Christians make sacrifices, occupying themselves in Jehovah’s service rather than in the selfish, materialistic pursuits of this world. Such a course results in rich blessings from Jehovah.
That discourse served as a fitting introduction to what followed​—the baptism talk. Those who were baptized at the “Light Bearers” District Convention surely will not forget this talk. Their baptism will always be a highlight of their life. They were reminded that they were following the example of Jesus Christ, who was baptized at 30 years of age. Moreover, the baptism candidates were happy to recall that they had “put off the works belonging to darkness” and had made the decision to “slave for Jehovah.” (Romans 12:11; 13:12) Joyfully they stood before the convention crowd and made an audible public declaration before going off to the baptism. (Romans 10:10) We pray Jehovah’s blessing on all of those who symbolized their dedication to him by undergoing water baptism during the “Light Bearers” District Conventions.
Saturday afternoon was time for some frank warnings. These came in the form of talks entitled “Avoid the Snares of Greed,” “Is Someone Spoiling Your Useful Habits?” and “Guard Against Idolatry of Every Sort.” These three talks identified some of the tactics used by Satan to weaken a Christian. Judas Iscariot was an apostle, but he betrayed Jesus for money. Young Samuel grew up right at the national center of Jehovah’s worship, but he was inescapably exposed to some very bad association. (1 Samuel 2:12, 18-20) Idolatry can include things like sexual immorality and covetousness. (Ephesians 5:5; Colossians 3:5) Yes, greed, bad associations, and idolatry are dangerous and must be avoided.
The convention program then changed gears, as it were. The next talk raised a number of interesting Bible questions and answered them. For example, can you explain whether people who do not accept the truth and die before the great tribulation will be resurrected? What can a Christian do when he or she is unable to find a suitable marriage partner? To deepen their Bible knowledge, delegates were encouraged to make full use of the Watch Tower Publications Index, particularly under the heading “Questions From Readers.”
Christ’s Presence and Revelation
The concluding portion of Saturday’s program turned to prophecy with the symposium entitled “Shedding Light on Christ’s Presence and Revelation.” Features of “the sign” proving the presence of Jesus Christ were reviewed. (Matthew 24:3) In the second part, the modern-day activities of “the faithful and discreet slave” were discussed. (Matthew 24:45-47) It was pointed out that since 1919 the slave class has faithfully spearheaded the work of preaching the good news of the Kingdom. Then a great crowd was gathered out of all nations to share with anointed Christians in reflecting Jehovah’s light. The speaker concluded: “Let all zealously continue to support the faithful and discreet slave. It is only by doing this that someday very soon all sheeplike ones will be able to hear the happy words: ‘Come, you who have been blessed by my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the founding of the world.’”​—Matthew 25:34.
The final speaker discussed the meaning and the implications of the revelation of Jesus Christ. (1 Corinthians 1:7) What an experience that revelation will be! Babylon the Great will be destroyed. The great battle between Satan’s world and Jesus and his angels will end in the destruction of this system. Finally, Satan himself will be abyssed and put out of action. But there will be relief for God’s people, with the marriage of the Lamb in heaven and the bringing forth of a new earth. The speaker delighted his audience by releasing the new brochure Does God Really Care About Us? What a fine help that will be for humble individuals who need to know about our caring Creator and his purposes for us!
Christian Households
Sunday, the final day of the convention, had now arrived. However, much was yet to be presented. After the discussion of the day’s text, attention was given to the Christian family with the symposium “Caring for One Another in the Christian Household.” The first part helped conventioners to realize the secret of having a successful Christian family: putting spiritual things first. The second part encouraged families to do things together, whether that involves meeting attendance, field service, family study, or recreation. And the third part of the symposium reminded delegates of their privilege and responsibility to care for the elderly. “Our older brothers and sisters are an asset to the congregation,” said the speaker. Let us treasure their experience and imitate their integrity.
The meaning of the expression “sound in mind” was examined next. (1 Peter 4:7) One who is sound in mind is balanced, sensible, reasonable, humble, and rational. He can distinguish between right and wrong, true and false. Moreover, he strives to maintain good spiritual health.
The final talk on the Sunday morning program discussed our subjection to God and Christ. “The importance of being in loyal subjection to Jehovah God and to his Son, Jesus Christ, cannot be overemphasized,” said the speaker. He went on to show how this affects every aspect of our lives. What will help us to remain in subjection? Four qualities: love, godly fear, faith, and humility.
Sunday Afternoon
All of a sudden, it was Sunday afternoon and time for the final session of the convention. To many, it seemed that the convention had just started, and already it was approaching its conclusion.
The public talk was entitled “Follow the Light of the World.” Those present were treated to a fascinating explanation of the role of physical light in maintaining life. Then the speaker showed the greater importance of spiritual light. Physical light keeps us alive for a few decades, but spiritual light can keep us living for all eternity. A highlight of the talk was a verse-by-verse discussion of John 1:1-16, where Jesus is identified as the light of the world. Today, in the final years of this evil system, it is more urgent than ever to follow Jesus in this role.
After a summary of the Watchtower Study material assigned for that week, it was time for the concluding talk. Happily, the speaker showed that there were many things to look forward to in the days ahead. For example, he announced a new audiocassette, the drama Doing God’s Will With Zeal. And that was not all. There was to be a new series of videocassettes entitled The Bible​—A Book of Fact and Prophecy, the first on the subject The Bible—​Accurate History, Reliable Prophecy.
Finally, the speaker announced that in 1993 there would be four-day district conventions, including special international gatherings in Africa, Asia, Europe, and South America. Even though the “Light Bearers” District Convention was ending, delegates could start to make plans for the following year.
Then it was time for convention delegates to go home. Surely, they were more determined than ever to keep on reflecting light in this bedarkened world. After three days packed with spiritual good things, the words of the last scripture quoted in the final talk had taken on great significance: “Jehovah is the Divine One, and he gives us light. . . . Give thanks to Jehovah, you people, for he is good; for his loving-kindness is to time indefinite.”​—Psalm 118:27, 29.
[Picture on page 15]
Convention program in Russian
[Pictures on page 16, 17]
Members of the Governing Body spoke at many conventions
Japanese delegates were among those assembled in St. Petersburg, Russia
A stirring Bible drama emphasized the need to do what is right in Jehovah’s eyes
New light bearers symbolized their dedication to Jehovah by being baptized
Conventioners engrossed in the program in St. Petersburg
[Picture on page 18]
Delegates were thrilled to receive the new brochure “Does God Really Care About Us?”

