
COVER SUBJECT | ANGELS​—ARE THEY REAL? WHY IT MATTERS
How Angels Can Help You

Faithful angels are keenly interested in human affairs and are actively involved in carrying out Jehovah’s will. When God created the earth, the angels “joyfully cried out together, and all the sons of God began shouting in applause.” (Job 38:4, 7) Throughout the course of history, angels have desired “to peer” into prophetic utterances regarding future events on earth.​—1 Peter 1:11, 12.




The Bible shows that in order to accomplish God’s will, angels have at times provided a measure of protection for true worshippers. (Psalm 34:7) For example:
  When Jehovah brought destruction on the wicked cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, angels helped righteous Lot and his family to flee.​—Genesis 19:1, 15-26.

  In ancient Babylon when three young Hebrews were condemned to die in a fiery furnace, God “sent his angel and rescued his servants.”​—Daniel 3:19-28.

  After the righteous man Daniel spent the night in a den of ravenous lions, he explained that he had survived because “God sent his angel and shut the mouth of the lions.”​—Daniel 6:16, 22.







Angels have a long history of helping faithful people







THE ANGELS SUPPORTED THE EARLY CHRISTIAN CONGREGATION

At times, God’s angelic messengers intervened in the activities of the early Christian congregation when that was necessary to fulfill Jehovah’s purpose. For example:
  An angel opened the doors of a prison and directed the apostles imprisoned there to continue preaching in the temple.​—Acts 5:17-21.

  An angel instructed the evangelizer Philip to go to the desert road that ran from Jerusalem to Gaza and preach to an Ethiopian who had gone to Jerusalem to worship.​—Acts 8:26-33.

  When it was God’s time for non-Jews to become Christians, an angel appeared to the Roman army officer Cornelius in a vision and instructed him to summon the apostle Peter to his home.​—Acts 10:3-5.

  When the apostle Peter was imprisoned, an angel appeared to him and led him out of the prison.​—Acts 12:1-11.





HOW ANGELS CAN HELP YOU

There is no evidence that God is now using angels to help people miraculously in the ways described in the Bible. However, regarding our time, Jesus said: “This good news of the Kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations, and then the end will come.” (Matthew 24:14) Did you know that Christ’s disciples are doing this work under the supervision of the angels?





Angels help declare the good news throughout the earth




The book of Revelation indicates that angels would be diligently helping people earth wide to learn about Jehovah God and his purpose for mankind. The apostle John wrote: “I saw another angel flying in midheaven, and he had everlasting good news to declare to those who dwell on the earth, to every nation and tribe and tongue and people. He was saying in a loud voice: ‘Fear God and give him glory, because the hour of judgment by him has arrived, so worship the One who made the heaven and the earth and the sea and the springs of water.’” (Revelation 14:6, 7) Many modern-day experiences give evidence that angels are supporting the worldwide Kingdom-preaching work. Indeed, when even one sinner repents and turns to Jehovah, “joy arises among the angels of God.”​—Luke 15:10.
What will happen when the preaching work is completed? Then angelic “armies in heaven” will support Jesus Christ, the King of kings, in fighting “the war of the great day of God the Almighty” at Armageddon. (Revelation 16:14-16; 19:14-16) Powerful angels will serve as executioners of divine judgment as the Lord Jesus “brings vengeance on those who . . . do not obey the good news about our Lord Jesus.”​—2 Thessalonians 1:7, 8.
Be assured, therefore, that the angels are personally interested in you. They have deep concern for the welfare of those who desire to serve God, and Jehovah has repeatedly used them to strengthen and protect his faithful servants on earth.​—Hebrews 1:14.
Each one of us, then, has a crucial choice to make. Will we listen to and obey the good news that is being proclaimed earth wide? Jehovah’s Witnesses in your community will be happy to assist you to benefit from the loving help of God’s mighty angels.



For more information on what the Bible says about loyal and disloyal angels, see chapter 10 of the book What Does the Bible Really Teach? published by Jehovah’s Witnesses, available on jw.org.

