Announcements
◆ Literature offer, January through April: Watchtower subscription, with three booklets, for $1.50, or subscriptions for both Watchtower and Awake!, with six booklets, for $3.00. If the subscription is not accepted we can offer two magazines and the three new booklets for 25c, and, finally, one booklet.
◆ The Memorial for 1976 will be held on April 14 after 6 p.m., Standard Time. Memorial invitations may be ordered in lots of 250 for 25c. 500 for 50c, or 1,000 for $1. Please remit with order. Please use a separate order blank for these.
◆ The booklet Defending and Legally Establishing the Good News, published by the Society in 1950, shows that complete decisions that have been rendered by the courts in favor of Jehovah’s witnesses on such subjects as door-to-door work, disorderly-conduct laws, flag saluting, divorce and child custody, and zoning laws affecting use of property for Kingdom Halls, are available by written request to the Society. The Defending booklet itself is also available for use and may be ordered along with other literature; see its listing under “Booklets” in the Cost List.
◆ Starting in February, circuit overseers will give a public talk that includes eighty colored slides on the theme “God Prospers the Subjects of His Kingdom.” At circuit assemblies, starting late in January, district overseers will give the public talk “Are You Doing What God Requires of You?”
◆ A special public talk will be held on March 28 in all congregations. The subject: “Who Is Jesus Christ so that We All Need Him?” In due time, a manuscript for the talk will be sent to each congregation. We suggest that you order handbills soon.
◆ New Publication Available:
Is This Life All There Is?—Danish
Listening to the Great Teacher—Bicol, Bohemian, Gun, Hiligaynon, Icelandic, Kiluba, Slovak
◆ Available Again in U.S.A.:
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures (Pocket ed.)—English
“All Scripture Is Inspired of God and Beneficial”—French, Spanish
The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life—Efik, Russian
◆ Out of Stock in U.S.A.:
Divine Rulership—The Only Hope of All Mankind—English, Spanish
◆ The 1975 Yearbook, which contains the most up-to-date comprehensive account on the work of Jehovah’s witnesses in modern times, is still available in English and Spanish.
◆ Change of address information regarding magazines may now be sent to: Watchtower, R.D. 1, Box 300, Wallkill, N.Y. 12589, as listed on page 2 of The Watchtower and Awake! If a phone call is required, you may call 914-944-2041. All subscriptions, however, both new and renewal, should continue to be sent to Brooklyn.

