Helping Those Near You
1 While the vast majority of Bible studies are started as we engage in house-to-house and return visit activity, other contacts may also yield good results. In one community a check showed that, of 328 newly dedicated persons who had been baptized, 40 percent were introduced to the truth through informal witnessing. Yes, 131 of the 328 who got baptized were helped on the way to life through informal witnessing, generally by persons with whom they were already acquainted.
2 It is generally recognized that a person’s relatives, friends and acquaintances often will listen to him more readily than to a complete stranger. At first such ones may listen just to be polite because they know you. However, when the truth touches their hearts, they respond and act because it is the truth and not because of friendship with you.
3 Being aware of this advantage, what can we do? We can show genuine interest in their welfare, not hastily concluding that they are not interested and therefore ought to be avoided. Possibly your good conduct and kindness will open the way to discuss the truth, to place some literature, even to conduct a Bible study, with them. Do not be discouraged if they do not respond at first, but be happy if some progress, however small, is seen.
4 Can we also beneficially apply in our house-to-house work this knowledge of how people respond to those with whom they are personally acquainted? Yes. It can be beneficial to us to get well acquainted with the people in the territory, and especially those in our own neighborhood. In addition to your regular witnessing with the congregation, you may find it helpful to have a personal territory near home that you can work thoroughly a number of times so that people get to know you. As they develop greater confidence and trust in you they may eventually begin to listen.
5 In our preaching work we find people who are glad to have us deliver the magazines to them regularly, though they may show no other interest at first. However, a good relationship develops on these magazine routes after a time, and in some cases studies can be started. One special pioneer tells us that in a recent assignment this was the source of his best studies.
6 It is apparent that people listen more readily to those they know and trust. Being aware of this can help us in witnessing both to those we are now acquainted with and to those we get to know through the house-to-house work.

