Keep Awake to the Privilege to Preach!
1 What a grand privilege it is to be witnesses of the Sovereign Ruler of the universe, to bear his name, to share in a work that he has commissioned! This precious privilege is ours as the Christian witnesses of Jehovah. Do we appreciate it?
2 Jesus showed us how to demonstrate that we are truly awake to this privilege. He said: “We must work the works of him that sent me while it is day; the night is coming when no man can work.” The work that God has entrusted to us is not something to be carelessly put off; now is the time to do it, while there is yet the opportunity. What does that work include? Jesus explained: “For this I have been born, and for this I have come into the world, that I should bear witness to the truth.” (John 9:4; 18:37) His doing that included his seizing every opportunity to preach the good news, making that a prominent part of his life. (Luke 4:43) He set the example for us. Are you following his lead? Are you keeping awake to the privilege to preach?
3 That it is possible to lose one’s appreciation for that privilege is evidently indicated by a recent survey showing that about 30 percent of the publishers in this country are irregular in their field service. That means that occasionally—and in some cases, often—an entire month goes by without their sharing the truth with others. Additionally, how many others are there who participate only to the extent of a few hours each month—not because of limitations of health or other restrictions, but because they do not truly cherish the privilege to preach? They may reason, “Well, I did do something in the field service this month.” But is that whole-souled service?—Luke 10:25-28.
DOES IT MAKE A DIFFERENCE
4 Is there reason for a person who has become irregular in his field service to be concerned? Indeed there is, if it is not due to an unavoidable situation but is a reflection of indifference. To those in the Laodicean congregation who had become lukewarm about their service to God, “the faithful and true witness” Jesus Christ said: “Because you are lukewarm . . . I am going to vomit you out of my mouth.” (Rev. 3:14-16) And the apostle Paul warned against indifference when he wrote: “We desire each one of you to show the same industriousness so as to have the full assurance of the hope down to the end, in order that you may not become sluggish, but be imitators of those who through faith and patience inherit the promises.” (Heb. 6:11, 12) So, it does make a difference. One’s becoming indifferent, neglectful of the privilege to preach, can lead to loss of the blessings for which one has worked. Surely none of us want that to happen to us.
5 But does it make a difference to the welfare of others if we preach to them or not? Romans 10:14 answers: “How will they call on him in whom they have not put faith? How, in turn, will they put faith in him of whom they have not heard? How, in turn, will they hear without someone to preach?” Love for Jehovah and for our fellowman should make us want to be numbered among those who are having a full share in that work of preaching. Lives are involved. After urging Timothy to persist in his service to God, Paul reminded him: “By doing this you will save both yourself and those who listen to you.”—1 Tim. 4:16.
WHAT YOU CAN DO
6 Regularity in field service depends to a great extent on a good schedule. It is a fine thing for each one of us to have a schedule that is reasonable, flexible and in harmony with our personal circumstances. If you do not yet have your own service schedule, why not make one up now? You may want to talk to one of the elders and let him know what you have in mind, and undoubtedly he will have encouraging suggestions to offer. Perhaps you can arrange to work occasionally with another publisher; this can be mutually upbuilding. After applying your schedule for a time, you may see ways to improve it, and it is good to make adjustments in line with what proves to be best for you, your family and the territory.
7 The desire to help people in the territory should definitely be a major consideration when we work out our schedule. When are we most likely to find them at home and most receptive? If no one is at home during the day, could we call in the late afternoon or early evening? Doing this, we may find that we are reaching people who have seldom, if ever, heard the good news. By our thus showing genuine concern for individuals we give evidence that we appreciate that more than our spending time is involved if we truly are awake to the privilege to preach.
WHAT THE CONGREGATION CAN DO
8 All of us in the congregation can help one another to prove to be faithful witnesses of Jehovah. When planning to share in the field service, why not invite someone else to join you? Share with other publishers any methods of approach, also ideas for starting Bible studies, that you find to be successful. Appreciate, too, that when you set a zealous example in Jehovah’s service, this beneficially affects others, both within your household and outside.
9 A good example on the part of the elders is especially important. At 1 Peter 5:2, 3, they are admonished: “Shepherd the flock of God in your care, not under compulsion, but willingly . . . becoming examples to the flock.” Where the elders are exemplary in the preaching work, the congregation usually shows like appreciation for the privilege to preach. Many elders find that, by making advance plans to work with publishers and pioneers in the field service, they can often provide needed personal attention to members of the congregation as they walk together from one house to the next. The field overseer in particular, because of handling field service records, can easily observe who might benefit from personal help, and if loving concern moves him to pass this information on to the book study conductors, they can arrange for practical assistance to be given by experienced publishers. In this way we are aided to be alert, progressive in outlook in our preaching of the Kingdom message.
10 Jehovah’s provisions for our upbuilding are regular, consistent, dependable. (Rev. 22:2) Appreciating the grand privilege that it is to serve him, let us all earnestly endeavor to reflect those qualities in our own lives. Make the preaching of the good news a prominent part of your life, and then faithfully report it. Your doing so will give indication that you are awake to the privilege to preach “while it is day.”

