Presenting the Good News—With the Watchtower Subscription
1 We appreciate what The Watchtower has meant to us and has accomplished in our lives. Now it is our wish that it do the same for others. So it is important that we describe The Watchtower and present the subscription offer with enthusiasm and conviction. Surely there is no need to hold back in heartily recommending it to anyone.
2 During the campaign we encourage you to be acquainted with especially the first article in each issue. It is designed particularly for the Watchtower campaign. The title and the scripture that is prominently displayed provide a fine basis for discussion with householders. Having the magazine in your hand as you discuss the subject will make presenting the subscription offer easier.
3 You might rehearse in your mind a few brief introductions that will generally fit almost any of the articles, such as, “Did you know that the Bible says this?” Then read the scripture that is prominently displayed in the article. Or, you might say, “In view of recent developments [identify which ones], you can see why people would be interested in a subject like this.” Then refer to the article.
4 But does this mean preparing a new presentation twice a month? Actually, it will be simple and refreshing. After a brief introduction, simply refer to the title of the article and read the scripture prominently featured. If there is opportunity, read a choice point from the article, then offer the subscription. Listen carefully to the presentations on the service meeting and you will soon appreciate the simplicity of the idea and enjoy the stimulating variety of a new subject with each issue of the magazine. You yourself will be learning as you impress on your mind another basic Bible thought.
5 When engaged in magazine work on Saturday or at other times, would it be good to offer the subscription where special interest seems to be shown? By all means! We often meet people who say, “You know, I really enjoy reading those magazines.” Let them know that they can receive them regularly through the mail on a subscription basis. In fact, why not give some thought to this ahead of time and thus be prepared to offer the subscription when engaged in the magazine work or on other similar occasions?
6 In previous years it has proved beneficial for us to concentrate, during certain months, on bringing the subscription to the attention of certain groups with whom we are acquainted. Why not do the same during this Watchtower campaign, giving special attention in January to our relatives and friends? Possibly we will want to present them with a gift subscription. If so, be sure to write “Gift” at the top of the subscription slip, and print your name as the giver at the bottom.
7 At all times keep in mind the three new booklets, too, and look for opportunities to get them into people’s hands. These may easily open the way for home Bible studies.
8 There are things for all of us to be alert to during January. Presenting The Watchtower with enthusiasm and conviction is one, and using the booklets well is another. There are sound reasons to believe that Jehovah, by his holy spirit, will richly bless our use of these fine instruments.

