Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 4
10 min: Song 8. Enthusiastic talk on points selected from pages 16-32 of the 1976 Yearbook.
20 min: “A Secure Future—How You Can Find It.” Discussion and demonstration on use of new booklet. (At previous Watchtower study remind publishers to bring Secure Future booklet to service meeting.) Want to become well acquainted with new booklets. They are designed to help us start studies. Not difficult to conduct study after it is started—problem is to get it started. How can this be done? Why not try to get the householder to look into the booklet quickly and in the simplest way possible? Could simply say to householder: “Notice this subject, ‘A Secure Future—How You Can Find It.’ This is something all of us are interested in, isn’t it?” Then, if you have the householder’s attention, you can say: “Notice what it says here.” Open to page 3 and begin reading, doing so with appropriate feeling. Read entire paragraph and then ask the question at the bottom of the page, doing so in a conversational way. No need to say, “Now I am going to read the question at the bottom of the page.” Avoid formality. Chairman asks audience for comments. Does anyone have a suggestion to make it even more simple?
Prepared publisher demonstrates how to get into booklet to start a study, following the above presentation as closely as possible so audience will learn by repetition.
Then can have the publisher demonstrate how we might proceed with next three paragraphs (if it appears householder is receptive), reading the paragraph first, then asking the question in a conversational and animated way, but not putting householder on the spot. Publisher brings discussion to a close and makes definite arrangements to return for further discussion.
Encourage publishers to give thought to these suggestions and to try to use them this week to start studies, where possible, on the first call.
17 min: “Presenting the Good News—With the Watchtower Subscription.” Questions and answers. At appropriate points have prepared publisher demonstrate presentation using opening article in current Watchtower. Have publisher obtain subscription and give householder magazine and three booklets and then walk away. Chairman asks, “Did he [she] forget something?” Have publisher return, using simple transition to direct attention to new booklet, read first paragraph, ask question and start friendly discussion.
13 min: Concluding Comments. Highlights of Branch Letter. Ask brothers to bring booklets to next service meeting. Song 12.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 11
25 min: Song 15. Question-and-answer discussion of paragraphs 1-10 of insert on “Speaking with the ‘Same Line of Thought’ About Our Service to God.”
18 min: Which Booklet to Use? As you discuss this subject, occasionally draw audience into discussion through questions. Our three new booklets were especially designed for home Bible study work. Each booklet was prepared so as to appeal to a certain group of persons. Draw on material in paragraphs 3-5 of the front-page article of the December 1975 Kingdom Ministry to show how this is so. In order to be able to use these booklets most effectively in the field, we must listen closely to what the householder says. When we know his thinking we will be in a position to decide which booklet would be especially helpful to him.
Demonstrations: Have four different publishers present subscription offer to four different householders. Omit introductions, show only the conclusion of the Scriptural discussions, and give brief subscription offer. First householder takes offer and three booklets; second accepts only two magazines and three booklets; third accepts only booklet; fourth takes no literature, but, in view of conversation, publisher decides to make return visit with booklet in mind. Each publisher, though conversation with householder is brief, draws out different information, revealing the thinking of the householder. After each conversation, chairman questions audience on what the key statements of the householder were, what these revealed about his thinking and which booklet, if studied, would best answer his questions.
Chairman concludes with encouragement to be alert at the doors, listening to what people say, seeking to determine just what they need in order to be helped. Also, encourage all to make some return visits this week to try to start studies.
17 min: Concluding Comments. Accounts report. Also discuss how to fill out subscription slips. Distribute subscription slips to all in audience so they can follow along. One handling this should study thoroughly the S-11 form, “How to Handle Subscriptions Properly,” and consider points with audience. Emphasize how vital it is to fill out slips very carefully and neatly, otherwise subscription might never reach subscriber, or could be delayed and cause problems. The correct remittances to be sent in for subscriptions are itemized in paragraph 38 in the Watchtower Cost List. About two out of every ten people move or in some way change addresses during the year. Whatever you can do to provide the Society with these address changes in advance will save the Society expense and help to get the magazines to subscribers. Encourage all to bring booklet for next week’s meeting. Song 16.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 18
25 min: Song 17. Question-and-answer discussion of insert, from subheading “Its Use in Dealing with Officials” to the end.
15 min: “There Is Much More to Life!” Discussion and demonstration based on new booklet.
Review the principles of simplicity mentioned two weeks ago for starting studies. Ask publishers for experiences enjoyed since then in field in using the suggestions to try to start studies. (Check for these in advance.)
Turn attention to booklet There Is Much More to Life! and make a few comments on type of persons it is intended for. Publisher, using simple introduction, demonstrates use of this booklet to start a study. Speaking with householder, he reads title of booklet and says: “Both of us are interested in enjoying life, aren’t we?” If you have his attention, say “Notice what it says here,” and start reading with the first paragraph. In conversational way read first question and allow householder to respond.
Chairman and audience analyze what was done, commenting on points they can copy. Chairman comments on new arrangement in these booklets regarding scriptures. Have publishers noticed that scriptures in paragraphs are all quoted and that additional texts are not cited there? Thus when one just reads the booklet it is less complicated and more fast-moving. When conducting a Bible study with the booklet the scriptures to be looked up are the ones cited at the bottom of the page with the questions, not the ones quoted in the paragraphs. Have all in audience turn to their booklets to see this feature.
Chairman encourages publishers to rehearse simple introduction leading into the booklet. Urge all to spend some time this week making return visits to start Bible studies.
20 min: Concluding Comments. “Helping Those Near You.” Cover main points in form of talk, although can involve audience as time permits. Remind audience to bring booklets again next week. Song 19.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 25
25 min: Song 21. “Keep Awake to the Privilege to Preach!” Question-and-answer discussion. In introduction give brief report on number of publishers in congregation, number sharing every month, number irregular, and number reporting 1-5 hours a month. This should be done in a kindly, helpful way with goal of assisting congregation to see where strengthening needs to take place. Point out that we all need encouragement and that this analysis will show how and where all in congregation can share in this. Explain how any in congregation wanting assistance should proceed.
20 min: “Is There a God Who Cares?” Discussion and demonstration based on new booklet. Review the principles of simplicity mentioned previously. Ask publishers for experiences enjoyed in field since then, using these suggestions. Then turn attention to booklet Is There a God Who Cares? Make a few comments on type of persons it is intended for. Chairman illustrates simple introduction by reading the three questions on the cover of the booklet and saying, “Don’t you agree that there are quite a few people who really want the answer to these questions?” Then he explains that a publisher could continue by saying, “Notice what it says here,” and proceeding to read first two paragraphs and ask question in conversational, interested way.
After this brief discussion by chairman, have prepared publisher actually demonstrate introduction and cover first few paragraphs in booklet. Chairman and audience can comment on effect points that we can copy.
Chairman comments on value of illustrations in new booklets and how they can be used to put main points across to students. Illustrations are not simply to make booklet more attractive but also to teach. Have all in audience turn to their booklets and discuss some of the illustrations with them.
Chairman encourages publishers to get well in mind simple introduction to booklet and to be alert at all times to opportunities to start studies. Ask: How many have actually tried to start a study this month?
15 min: Concluding Comments. Consider applicable items from Announcements. Mention main thoughts from Question Box. Report on how subscription campaign is progressing. Song 40.

