VOL. XVIII. APRIL 1, 1897. No. 7. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 94 

God's "Peculiar People" 95 

Relative Values of the Heavenly 

and Earthly Treasures 98 

"To be Testified in Due Time" 100 

Interesting Questions Answered 102 

Is There No Hope for Poor Judas? 102 

Truths Seen More Clearly 103 

Friday, The Close of Our Lord's 

3-1/2 Years' Ministry 105 

God's Acceptance of Cornelius 105 

The "Christians" of Antioch 107 

page 94 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



THE GERMAN EDITION OF ZION'S WATCH TOWER. 

Our first issue, now ready, is a double number (8 pages) for April 
and May. We have received a considerable number of subscriptions, 
but have published a large quantity for gratuitous sample copies. You 
are invited to send in as many addresses as you may please of German 
Christians likely to have an ear to hear the harvest message. Free 
samples will be sent to them promptly. 

We again mention subscription terms as follows:— 

America. Germany. Switzerland. 
Two copies each month, a year 25c Mk. 1.30 Fr. 1.50 
Five " " " " 50c " 2.50 " 3.00 

Twelve " " " $1.00 " 5.00 " 6.00 



Postage included. 

R2134:page94 

"MY SOUL, BE ON THY GUARD!" 

Do not forget that our ever active Adversary seems to be granted 
additional liberty and power of temptation at the Passover season. Let 
each soldier of the cross be specially on his guard to resist him— steadfast 
in faith and good works and love. Let each also be on guard to 
help and not to stumble the "brethren" at this time. Pray for one-another 
and for us; as we also remember all of you at the throne of 
the heavenly grace. 



R2127 : page 95 

GOD'S "PECULIAR PEOPLE." 



"Ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a 
peculiar people; that ye should shew forth the praises of him 
who hath called you out of darkness into his marvelous 
light: which in time past were not a people, but are 
now the people of God."— 1 Pet. 2:9,10. 

WE LOOK in vain for this "holy nation" 

amongst the various nations of the world today. 

The pathway of even the best of those denominating 

themselves Christian nations is marked with blood 

and violence and various evidences of selfish rapine. 

The very best of them would fall far short of any reasonable 

standard of holiness. They are all, as the Scriptures 

declare, parts of the kingdom of darkness under 

the prince of darkness, "the prince of this world," who 

still rules the "kingdoms of this world." 

This "holy nation" was founded by our Lord 
Jesus, and had no existence before his advent. The 
basis upon which it was founded was the "ransom for 
all" which he gave at Calvary, and the beginning of 
the construction of his kingdom was at Pentecost. 
Since then it has progressed after a manner which is 

R2128 : page 95 

adapted to his purposes, tho very contrary to the manner 
of the world and the nations of earth. It is unknown 
to the worldly, as it is written, "The world 
knoweth us not, even as it knew him not." 

This Kingdom is an ecclesiastical Kingdom— a 
Church-Kingdom; but even if we look amongst the 
numerous church-kingdoms which have sprung up in 
the world (each of which claims to be the kingdom of 
God's dear Son), we find that this "holy nation" or 



Kingdom is none of these. It is not the Roman Catholic 

church or ecclesiastical kingdom, nor the Greek 

church, nor the Armenian, nor the church of England, 

nor the Methodist church, nor the Lutheran, nor the 

Presbyterian, nor the Baptist, nor the Congregationalist. 

These all may have amongst their millions some members 

of this "little flock," this "holy nation," this true 

Kingdom class which the Lord is selecting; but none 

of these institutions is the Lord's Kingdom; none of 

them contains all who are his. There is only one record 

in the universe that enrolls all the members of this 

"holy nation" or Kingdom: it is called, "The Lamb's 

Book of Life." Hence, if we examine church history, 

we shall no more find this "holy nation," this holy ecclesiastical 

Kingdom, than amongst the temporal kingdoms. 

The historians knew not of the true "holy nation:" 

they saw and knew and recounted the incidents 

of the human organizations, called "Christ's kingdoms," 

but they knew nothing of the true one. Altho 

it has existed from the day of Pentecost to the present 

time, it has always been the kingdom of heaven suffering 

violence— despised and rejected of men, insignificant 

and ignored in the sight of the world.— Matt. 11:12. 

The reason for this is that it is a "peculiar people"— 
not peculiar in dress, nor in manners, nor in language, 
nor in foolish, senseless forms and idiosyncrasies; but 
peculiar in that it is separate from the world and the 
spirit of the world. It has the spirit of Christ— a spirit 
of full consecration to the Lord, and separateness from 
the world and its selfish aims. It is peculiar in its adherence 
to the Word of the Lord as its only law. It is 
peculiar in that it rejects worldly wisdom when it conflicts 
with the divine revelation. It is peculiar in that 
it is in the world, but not of the world. It is peculiar in 
that it has a decided faith and acts in harmony with its 
faith, and with zeal. It is peculiar in that it is self-sacrificing 
and knows no will but the will of its King. 

R2128 : page 96 

It is peculiar in that it knows the truth and is able to 
give a reason for the hope within, while others merely 
speculate and wonder and doubt. 

The King, when establishing this Kingdom, forewarned 
all who would be of it that, in proportion as 
they possessed his character and his truth, and were 
thus "children of the light," and likenesses of himself, 
who was "the Light of the world,"— in that proportion 
they would have the enmity of the world and the 
opposition of the flesh and the devil to withstand and 
overcome. In view of his forewarnings, "Marvel not if 
the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before it 
hated you;" "If ye were of the world, the world 
would love its own, but now ye are not of the world; 
because I have chosen you out of the world, therefore 
the world hateth you;" "Whosoever will live godly 



in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution;" in view of 

these admonitions it should not surprise us that the nations 

of the world (political and ecclesiastical kingdoms) 

have always hated and persecuted the individuals composing 

this "holy nation." They seem to realize an 

antagonism, however little it may be expressed. This 

"holy nation" looks to a higher King and higher laws 

than any by which others are governed, and as Herod 

sought to destroy "him who was born king of the 

Jews," so the various worldly nations have sought (under 

the influence of the prince of this world) to hinder 

the development of this holy nation as antagonistic to 

their systems. 

Nevertheless, we note the care with which the 
apostles pointed out that all who compose this holy 
nation shall, so far as possible, "live peaceably with all 
men"— avoiding strife and contentions, except where 
principles are involved; and even when contending 
"earnestly for the faith once delivered to the saints," 
to manifest the spirit of meekness and patient forbearance, 
that "whereas they speak against you as evildoers, 
they may by your good works which they shall 
behold, glorify God in the day of visitation." He urges, 
therefore, all of the holy nation, saying, "Submit 
yourselves to every ordinance of man for the Lord's 
sake:... For so is the will of God, that with well-doing 
ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men: 
As free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, 
but as servants of God.... For this is 

thankworthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure 
grief, suffering wrongfully. ...For even hereunto 
were ye called: because Christ also suffered for us, 
leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps; 
who did no sin, neither was guile found in his 
mouth; who, when he was reviled, reviled not again; 
when he suffered, he threatened not; but committed 
himself to him that judgeth righteously."— 
1 Pet. 2:13-23. 

Thus the King of this "holy nation" set for every 
member of it an example that they should walk in his 
footsteps. He declared that his Kingdom was not of 
this world; consequently neither does the Kingdom 
power of this "holy nation" belong to this present 
age. It awaits the return of the King himself, who 
said, "If I go away, I will come again, and receive you 
unto myself." He has promised, moreover, that when 
he comes again it will not be in a body of humiliation 
for sacrifice on behalf of the sins of the world— for this 
sacrifice he has already accomplished to the full: He 
comes to reign, and has promised that his "holy nation" 
shall be associated with him in the reign of righteousness, 
wherewith he will "bless all the families of 
the earth." 

But we notice further the Apostle's statement that 
this "holy nation" or Kingdom is also a "royal 
priesthood." We look amongst the priesthoods of 



earth, but we find that the priestly office is distinctly 
kept separate from the kingly office, everywhere. 
Indeed, they are generally antagonistic. The 
kings and royal families usually represent the highest 
developments of ambition and self-gratification: the 
priests of earth, theoretically at least, present sacrifices, 
and thus seek to make atonement for sins. Priests 
do not exercise kingly authority, nor kings condescend 
to priestly services. But in this "peculiar people" the 
priesthood and kingship are united. 

It was so with the King himself,— as a priest he 
offered up his own life, unselfishly, for the redemption 
and blessing of others. As a King he still has the same 
unselfish character and will use his kingly office to 
carry forward to all mankind, and make available to 
all, the blessings, liberties and privileges purchased 
with his own precious blood. His reign will be for this 
very purpose;— and for the establishment of righteousness 
and the extirpation of evil and those who adhere 
to it. The King himself is the great High priest of 
this "peculiar people," this "holy nation," this "royal 
priesthood;" and it is required of each individual member 
of this "holy nation" that he shall be a priest; that 
he shall be a sacrificer; that he shall partake so much 
of the loving and generous disposition of the King that 
he will desire to do good unto all men, as he may have 
opportunity, especially to "the household of faith;" 
and that he shall lay down his life for the brethren— 
in the service of the truth, in their interest. In these 
and all respects they must all be conformed to the 
image of God's dear Son.— Rom. 8:29. 

This experience as sacrificers in this present time 
as sufferers for righteousness' sake, as tempted and tried 
and able to sympathize with the weak and the erring, 
is a necessary part of the educational discipline which 
must be undergone by this priesthood before they are 

R2128 : page 97 

accounted ready to enter the honors and powers of 
their divine kingdom, as representatives and associates 
of the King of kings and Lord of lords. 

Nor does their priesthood end when their kingly 
powers begin, for it is written concerning their future 
reign,— "Thou hast made us unto our God kings and 
priests, and we shall reign on the earth." (Rev. 5:10,11.) 
This "peculiar people," this "holy kingdom" or nation 
all of whom are "royal" priests, has a great work to 
do when established in the kingdom power; for it is 
none other than the promised "Seed of Abraham," 
which, according to the divine promise, is to have entrusted 
to it the great work of blessing all the families 
of the earth, by bringing them to the knowledge of the 
Lord, and into harmony, if they will, with the New 
Covenant sealed by the precious blood of the King. As 
explained by the Apostle Paul (Gal. 3:16,29), the 



King himself is the head of this "seed," this "peculiar 
people," this "royal priesthood;" and they are reckonedly 
members of his body, and with him they complete 
this holy seed to which is committed the work of 
blessing.— Rom. 11:31. 

Israel after the flesh, the natural seed of Abraham, 
supposed that they would have inherited this great 
privilege and honor, of being the divine representatives 
in blessing and enlightening the world; but when the 
King came unto them as "his own," they received him 
not, as a nation, but to as many as received him, the 
faithful remnant, to them gave he "liberty to become 
the sons of God" and members of this "peculiar people," 
this "royal priesthood;" and he then visited the 
Gentiles to take out of them suitable ones of sufficient 
number to complete this foreordained priesthood. This 
"royal priesthood" then, be it noticed, is not the priesthood 
of Levi, even as this "holy nation" is not the 
nation of Israel. It is a new priesthood, a new people 
and a new nation, which never before had any existence, 
"which in times past was not a nation," and was 
not a priesthood, but now is become the people of God, 

R2129 : page 97 

the "royal priesthood," the "holy nation." 

The Apostle notes still another distinctive feature 
pertaining to this "peculiar people," saying that it is 
a "chosen generation" or race. How strange it would 
at first seem that the Apostle should speak of this 
peculiar people, gathered out from amongst various 
races, Jews and Gentiles, as being a special, particularly 
chosen race: as though they were a different 
family entirely from the remainder of mankind. If 
tribal relationship be understood, is not this "peculiar 
people" a mixture of all the races? And if all humanity 
be considered, are not these "peculiar people" of 
the same race as the remainder of mankind? 

Ah, no! they are a new race, a race separate and 
distinct from all others. True, they once were of the 
same race, and some belonged to one branch or family 
and some to another; but their King, in calling them to 
be this "holy nation," set aside entirely their previous 
genealogy and started them as a new race. As members 
of the Adamic race they were already slaves of 
sin and under condemnation of death; but their Master 
and King, who redeemed them from sin and death, 
opened the way for a full completion of the great divine 
purpose, and they were begotten again, not of 
blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of 
man, but of God. (John 1:13; 1 Pet. 1:3.) They 
are therefore "new creatures" in Christ Jesus. (Gal. 6:15.) 
To them old things have passed away, and all 
things have become new.— 2 Cor. 5:17. 

The apostle therefore was right in his declaration 
that these are a different generation or race from others 



of mankind. He was right also in speaking of them as 
a "chosen generation"— the race which God himself is 
selecting for the accomplishment of his great and wonderful 
plan, first declared to Abraham, but not understood, 
and expected to be fulfilled in Abraham's literal 
posterity. In reality this salvation "began to be preached 
by our Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that 
heard him." (Heb. 2:3.) True, God has certain provisions 
and blessings in reservation for the natural seed 
of Abraham, and let us remember that to them also 
came the first opportunity, and the first place, in this 
new, select, spiritual race or "chosen generation." The 
Head or Chief of this chosen race, the twelve subordinate 
chiefs, the apostles, and many of the other members 
of this "holy nation" came from the literal seed 
of Abraham; but as a whole the natural seed was not 
worthy to become the "chosen race" or generation; 
but only to as many of them as received him (Christ), to 
them gave he liberty to become the "sons of God,"— 
by regeneration.— John 1:11,12. 

Grasping the full statement of the Apostle with 
reference to this peculiar people, this holy nation, this 
new or regenerated race, this royal priesthood, we can 
see readily that none of the human systems or organizations 
of earth, past or present, fit these demands. But 
we can see also that the conditions are well fulfilled in a 
"little flock" of which we may find scattered members 
here and there to-day, and all the way back to Pentecost. 
They are all self-sacrificing priests, who serve 
the living God through Christ Jesus acceptably, by 
serving one another, and all men as they have opportunity, 
and in general serving the gospel. Fully consecrated 
to God, and their imperfections (unintentional) 
all covered by the merit of the Redeemer, they are indeed 
a "holy nation," with higher and different aims 
from those of the world, and with a different spirit, 
they are indeed a peculiar people. And the royalty of 
their priesthood, altho unknown to the world at present, 

R2129 : page 98 

shall be revealed in due time; for it is declared by the 
inspired Word, that "the whole creation groaneth and 
travaileth in pain together until now," "waiting for 
the manifestation of the sons of God."— 
Rom. 8:19,22. 

When the glory of these sons of God, this chosen 
race, this royal priesthood, shall be revealed in the establishment 
of the Messianic Kingdom, during the 
Millennium, the entire groaning creation— the whole 
race of Adam, condemned in Eden, but ransomed at 
Calvary— shall be blessed by this great "Seed of Abraham." 
Instead of their groanings they may have joy 
and peace, through accepting the blessed arrangements 
of the New Covenant; and as a result, by the close of 
the Millennial age, all who will may have experienced 



the blessings of the divine promise, "God shall wipe 
away tears from off all faces and turn away the reproach 
for being his people." Then shall be brought 
to pass the saying which is written, He that sat upon 
the throne said, "Behold, I make all things new; and 
God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and 
there shall be no more death, neither sorrow nor crying, 
neither shall there be any more pain: for the former 
things are passed away."— Rev. 21:4,5. 

Is it any wonder that the Apostle declares that 
each and all of these "peculiar people" should make it 
the first, the chief, practically the only business of life, 
"to show forth the praises [the virtues of character 
and plan] of him who hath called you out of darkness 
into his marvelous light?" And the showing or the 
telling of these is the preaching of the gospel, whether 
it be done in public or in private, by word of mouth or 
by printed page. And this, the chief business of the 
peculiar people, begun now, will continue to be their 
business throughout the future, tho under more favorable 
circumstances, in the majesty of the Kingdom, 
with power to enforce the wise and just and wholesome 
laws, and with love and mercy to help and to succor 
the weak and the erring, and gradually to restore them, 
if they will, to all that was lost in Adam. 

What a wonderful gospel! What a wonderful 
privilege to be permitted to engage in its proclamation 
in any manner! Truly, all of the peculiar people can 
appreciate the testimony of the great Apostle Paul, 
"Woe is me if I preach not the gospel of the Lord 
Jesus Christ." 



R2129 : page 98 

RELATIVE VALUES OF THE HEAVENLY AND EARTHLY TREASURES. 



"A man's life consisteth not in the abundance of 
the things which he possesseth."— Luke 12:15. 

THIS statement of our Lord reminds us also of the 
exhortation of the Apostle Paul, "Let us lay 
aside every weight, and run with patience the race set 
before us, looking unto Jesus." All that the Lord's 
people have and are should be consecrated to their most 
efficient use in the divine service, according to their 
understanding of the teaching of God's Word. As we 
reflect upon it, how manifest it becomes that all earthly 
riches which are not consecrated to God are only 
weights and hindrances to the Christian. And not 
only so: it is not enough that our all be consecrated to 
God as an acceptable sacrifice; for if all be consecrated 
to sacrifice, and yet never subjected to the flames of the 



altar, of what avail is it, except as a broken vow to 
rise up against us in judgment? 

Many, indeed, are foolish enough to think that 
abundance of possessions is the only thing worth living 
for; and when they are obtained they put their 
trust in these uncertain riches and forget God. Their 
time and attention are all engrossed and their interest 
absorbed in the accumulation and care of the earthly 
treasures, which shut out all nobler aspirations toward 
spiritual things. It is for this reason that the Lord 
cautions his people not to be overcharged with the 
cares of this life. It is right to be charged to the extent 
of our necessities, and also to the extent of the 
responsibilities of our stewardship in the Lord's service, 
to be provident and thoughtful, not only for ourselves, 
but also for others whom it may be in our power to 
assist; but to be charged is one thing, to be overcharged 
is quite another. To be overcharged is to permit 
corroding care and anxious solicitude to absorb our 
thought, our time, our interest, and so crowd out 
spiritual interests and spiritual aspirations. 

In the discourse from which the above text is selected, 
our Lord was endeavoring to give to his disciples 
that amount of confidence in God which would 
enable them to cast all their care upon him, knowing 
that he careth for his children as a wise and loving 
parent, and that his tender mercies are over all his 
works. He drew illustrations from the sparrows, the 
ravens, the lilies of the field and the grass, showing 
that God had not forgotten nor failed in his care of 
even these comparatively insignificant things, then adding, 
How much more will he clothe and feed you, 
who are of more value than many sparrows. The very 
hairs of your head are all numbered, so minute is his 
knowledge of you. Do not be anxious about what 
you shall eat, or what you shall drink, or wherewithal 
you shall be clothed; for your Father knoweth that you 
have need of these things. Seek the Kingdom of God 
and his righteousness, and all these things shall be added 

R2129 : page 99 

[supplied as needed] unto you. Sell that you have, and 
do good with it, as wise and faithful stewards of your 
consecrated talents, and fear no want of any good thing 
in consequence; for "no good thing will the Lord withhold 
from them that walk uprightly." 

What a blessed promise that is! Not only will 
he make all, even the adverse things, work together 
for good to them that love God, to the called according 
to his purpose, but he will not withhold any really 
good thing from us. Can we fully appreciate this tender, 
loving solicitude and watchful care for us personally? 
Can we understand how it takes cognizance of 
every interest, temporal and spiritual, and how, with 
wise and loving forethought, it maps out our present 



course and guides our steps in view of those eternal 
interests which at present we cannot fully comprehend? 
Perhaps we cannot fully do so all at once; but let us 
take it into consideration, praying for a clearer vision of 

R2130 : page 99 

the love of God, and by and by the blessedness of these 
promises will dawn upon us more and more; and we 
will begin to realize more fully than ever before that, 
having placed our all upon the altar of sacrifice, subject 
to the consuming flames of the altar, we thenceforth 
belong to that blessed "little flock" to whom our 
Lord addresses these comforting teachings, and whom he 
exhorts to loving, patient faith, saying, "Fear not, 
little flock; for it is your Father's good pleasure to give 
you the Kingdom." 

Truly, those who follow the Lord's leading in this 
narrow way of sacrifice and of faith are only a little 
flock; for only a few thus apply their hearts unto instruction 
and wholly follow the divine direction. Consequently, 
only a few know the blessedness of the realization 
of the Lord's tender care. But to those who 
follow this leading there is a growing sense of his love 
which the daily walk with him deepens, confirms and 
sweetens as the years go by, and as experience makes 
plain the guidance of his loving hand. As one after 
another of the trials of life come, and we mark his 
overruling power, which caused even the adverse elements 
to work together for our good, faith takes 
deeper root and the character becomes more stable, 
sturdy and pleasing to God. 

It is for this very purpose that the Lord permits 
us to be subject to the various vicissitudes of the 
present life, and that those who belong to the Kingdom 
of heaven suffer violence at the hands of an unfriendly 
world. There are lessons of immense value to 
be learned in this hard school of experience— lessons 
of faith, of fortitude, of heroism, of courage, of endurance, 
of meekness, of patience, of sympathy for the 
suffering, and of loving helpfulness to others. There 
are works of grace to be wrought out in us which only 
the hard experiences of life can accomplish. For instance, 
we would be inclined to lean too much to our 
own understanding, if we were not at times brought 
face to face with problems that baffle our skill. It is 
when we are "afraid to touch things that involve so 
much," that in our perplexity we come to him who 
has kindly said, "Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and 
he will sustain thee," and ask him to undertake for us. 
Or we might be inclined to trust too much in the 
arm of flesh, if the arm of flesh had never failed us, and 
the disappointment driven us to the Lord to seek the 
shelter of his wing. Or we might learn to trust in 
uncertain riches, if moth and rust had never corrupted 
nor thieves stolen the little or much of our earthly 



possessions. Or we might have been satisfied with earthly 
friendships and earthly loves, had not their loss sometimes 
left us alone with God to prove the sweetness of 
his consolation. Or we might be weak and imbecile, 
had not the storms of life swept over us and the very 
emergencies of our case nerved us to courage, endurance 
and Christian fortitude. In view of all these 
necessities to the development of character, the Christian 
can truly feel that whatever the Lord permits to 
come upon him will be made to work together for his 
good; and in this confidence he can peacefully sing,— 

"If on a quiet sea toward home I calmly sail, 

With grateful heart, O God, to thee, I'll own the favoring gale. 

"But should the surges rise, and rest delay to come, 

Blest be the tempest, kind the storm, which drives me nearer home. 

It would be a mistake, however, to suppose in 
view of the Lord's promised care over all our interests, 
that he would in every case make things work together 
for our temporal advantage. There was at least one in 
the company to whom our Lord was speaking who 
seemed to interpret him thus, and who therefore requested 
his interposition on his behalf in the matter of 
an inheritance, saying, "Master, speak to my brother 
that he divide the inheritance with me." 

In reply to this request Jesus said, "Man, who 
made me a judge or a divider over you?" and then 
followed the instructions concerning the superior value 
of the heavenly treasure, showing that the earthly 
things are not worth the strife to obtain them. Jesus 
had not yet come to judge the world, but referring to 
that time when he would be the divinely appointed 
Judge of all the earth, he showed that the searching 
scrutiny of that judgment would extend to all the 
minutiae of human affairs. Every selfish act, every injustice, 
every unkindness, every wrong thing, will 
then,— but not now, except in very few instances,— 
receive its just recompense of reward. "For there is 
nothing covered that shall not be revealed, neither hid 
that shall not be known.... Whatsoever ye have 
spoken in darkness shall be heard in the light; and 

R2130 :page 100 

that which ye have spoken in the ear in closets shall be 
proclaimed upon the housetops." 

Men and women in their present selfish condition 
of mind and heart, and intoxicated with the spirit of 
the world, although thus forewarned, do not consider 
with what shame and confusion of face they will one 
day have to meet the record of the past, when the little 
mean acts which they supposed none they cared for 
knew of, and the unkind words to the defenseless 
which they thought no one else would ever know all rise 



up to bear testimony against them. Such often overlook 
their own folly, and consider that the penalties 
will fall only upon the criminal class. But the Lord's 
judgment will be discriminating and exact; "God 
shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret 
thing; whether it be good or whether it be evil;" and 
"The eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding 
the evil and the good." 

In view of this judgment to come, when the Lord, 
the righteous Judge, shall be established in his Kingdom, 
Paul says to all of the Lord's people who realize 
oppression or injustice or unkindness of any kind,— 
"Dearly beloved, avenge not yourselves, but rather 
give place unto wrath: for it is written, Vengeance is 
mine, I will repay, saith the Lord. ...Be not overcome 
of evil, but overcome evil with good." 

No, Jesus is not the Judge or divider of the earthly 
things now: that will be the work of the Millennium; 
and so far as the earthly things are concerned now, 
his people may suffer many injustices and difficulties 
of various kinds; but the Lord's counsel is to dismiss 
all anxious care concerning them, and, having food and 
raiment, to be contented, and wait for the great reward 
of patient endurance. 

Meanwhile, let Christians see to it that they are 
rightly exercised by all the disciplinary experiences of 
the present time; let them learn the lessons of trust in 
God and all the other valuable lessons so necessary to 
fit them for the exalted position to which they are 
called; let them rejoice in the present favor and communion 
with God which is the privilege of all the 
saints, and, with steadfast faith, look forward to the 
rest that remaineth for his tried and disciplined people. 

Lay up for yourselves treasure in heaven, and let 
your heart be there. Then disappointments, ingratitude 
and all the vexing trials of the present life which 
go to make up the daily cross can be borne with a comparatively 
easy grace. Your life consisteth not in the 
abundance of the things you possess: you, beloved, are 
not dependent upon these earthly things; the Lord is 
the portion of your inheritance; yea, you have a 
goodly heritage. (Psa. 16:5,6.) "Fear not, little 
flock"— fear not to carry out your consecration to the 
full, keeping your little all upon the altar of sacrifice, 
and subject to the consuming fire, trusting all of your 
future, both for the present life and that which is to 
come, to the loving care of your covenant-keeping 
God; and, by and by, in the glory of the Kingdom, 
you shall prove the superior value of the heavenly 
treasures when the victory of faith shall be fully realized. 
Praise the Lord for his abundant grace and 
his precious promises! M. F. RUSSELL. 



R2126 : page 100 



"TO BE TESTIFIED IN DUE TIME." 



A correspondent sends us a published answer to 

the question,— "Since Christ gave himself 

a ransom for all, to be testified in due time (1 Tim. 2:6), 

and since the great majority of mankind has not had 

the privilege of this testimony, how and when will it 

be given?" as follows:— 

"Christ has already been 'testified' as a ransom 
for all, by his incarnation, in which he lived in our nature 
in this world; by the voice of God acknowledging 
him as his only begotten Son; and by the manifestation 
of his power in his behalf in raising him from the dead. 

"The point involved in the question, as we understand 
it, is, How far is God under obligation (if we 
may so speak) to bring these facts before every individual 

R2127 : page 100 

of mankind? In answer to this let us ask 
further, Has not God done all that is necessary on his 
part, to give the world sufficient knowledge of the 
gospel in every age? It is his plan to work through 
men; and thus every one who receives light and truth 
becomes a debtor to his fellow men, to make known 
that light and truth to them. If he does not do this, 
and those within his reach live and die in darkness, 
who is responsible? Is not God's throne so far 
clear?... 

"Again: it will doubtless be admitted that God has 
in mind just the requisite number to people this earth, 
and when this number have embraced the gospel, the 
call will cease, and the eternal state begin. But if all 
who have not heard the gospel are to have another 
chance, and have the gospel pressed upon them till they 
do receive it, there would be in the end a sufficient 
number to people several such worlds as this. Thus 
the whole course of events shows the plan of God's 
providence to be this: to gather out from each generation 
those whom the gospel reaches, till the requisite 
number of people are gathered out for his name, then 
establish the promised kingdom. And that the time 
has been so far prolonged is owing to the dilatoriness 
of men, not to any limitations of the provisions of the 
grace of God. URIAH SMITH." 

Our correspondent wishes to know what we think 
of this interpretation of the text in question. 

We think it very illogical and unsatisfactory. 

R2127 :page 101 

Really three answers are given, or three parts to the 
one answer, and we will review these in order, 



separately. 

(1) It is manifestly untrue and unreasonable to 
claim that Christ was or could be "testified as a ransom" 
BEFORE HE HAD PAID THE RANSOM PRICE, as 
this writer claims. Our Lord's own testimony is that he 
came into the world to give his life a ransom. The ransom 
was not given before Calvary, and could not be 
testified to truthfully until after that event. Indeed, 
while the laying down of our Lord's life, finished at 
Calvary, was the ransom-price, it was not presented to 
the Father or formally paid over "for us," until after 

our Lord's ascension. He ascended up on high, there 
to appear in the presence of God on our behalf. In the 
typical sin-offering for Israel, this presentation of his 
sacrifice as man's ransom-price to God was typified by 
the sprinkling of the blood upon the Mercyseat and 
before the Mercyseat.— See Tabernacle Shadows of 
Better Sacrifices. 

Besides, this wrong view excludes from testimony 
of any kind all except the Israelites; for the remainder 
of mankind were without God and had no hope. 
(Eph. 2:12.) Furthermore, the Apostle does not say 
that the ransom had been testified, but on the contrary 
he puts it future— to be testified in due time. 

The testimony referred to in verse 6 is the explanation 
of the knowledge of the truth of verse 4, just as 
Christ a ransom for all is the explanation of the statement 
that God will have all to be saved (verse 4). The 
testimony must extend to all, in order that all may 
have the promised knowledge. Verse 7 agrees, also, 
declaring that the Apostle himself was even then engaged 
in giving this testimony. How unreasonable the 
claim, therefore, that Christ gave this testimony in full. 
The Apostle declares that this testimony "began to be 
preached by our Lord"— but it has continued by the 
apostles and all the faithful Church since and must 
continue until it has reached all and brought all to a 
knowledge of the truth. 

(2) Respecting God's "obligation" to save few 

or many, or to testify the terms of salvation to few or 
many: He had no obligation originally; nor has he 
any obligations now except such as he has voluntarily 
assumed. But he has voluntarily, of his "grace," assumed 
some obligations;— toward Israel, toward the 
Church of Christ, and toward "all the families of the 
earth." As shown in our last issue, all of these obligations 
are set forth in the great Abrahamic Covenant. 
As shown, that Covenant is unconditional. It is therefore 
a first-class obligation. Moreover, it was sworn to 
by the Almighty. God wished us to know positively 
that he obligated himself; so that when the Law Covenant 
was added and still later the New Covenant was 
added (both added, as we have seen, for necessary and 
useful purposes) we might still know that neither of 
these could render void or "of none effect" the original, 
wide promise. (Gal. 3:17.) Hence God assured us 



of the blessing of all through the Seed, by two immutable 
(unchangeable) things— his word and his oath. 
-Heb. 6:18. 

All men are to be "blessed" by being brought to 
a knowledge of God's gracious arrangements in Christ. 
All must be blessed with sufficient "light" to see 
Christ as the "way," the "truth," the "life" and the 
"door" to divine favor everlasting. The testifying of 
this to all "in due time" will be the blessing of all as 
provided for in God's oath-bound Covenant. 

(3) The third answer is no less unreasonable 
than the others. In MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., page 
170, we give figures to prove that several times the 
entire population of the world for the past six thousand 
years could be comfortably provided for on this planet. 
Anyone can figure it out for himself; there is no need 
for anyone to be deluded by the oft repeated nonsense 
that the earth is one vast cemetery, and that if the 
dead from Adam until now were all restored to being 
they would be unable to find even standing room. 

Mr. Smith is the foremost teacher amongst "Seventh-Day 
Adventists," who hold that no one but 
Seventh-Day keepers will be saved; explaining that 
they are God's "little flock." Now put this claim 
(and the total known numbers of Seventh-day keepers, 
of the past and the present) alongside the claim above 
that— "God has in mind just the requisite number to 
people this earth; and when this number have embraced 
the gospel the call will cease and the eternal state begin." 

How do those propositions harmonize? The present 
population of the world is estimated at above fifteen 
hundred millions, and yet these do not begin to populate 
this planet— there are millions of acres without an 
inhabitant. Mr. Smith teaches that the end of all hope 
is nigh, even at the doors, yet, according to his reasoning 
above, it will require Seventh-Day Adventists 
nearly a million years to convert enough people to their 
view of matters in order to properly let the gospel call 
"cease and the eternal state begin." Nor does he leave 
himself a loophole by claiming that God will exercise 
miraculous power to increase the number of Seventh-Day 
keepers, for he says again, "God has done all that 
is necessary on his part;" "it is his plan to work 
through men." 

O! if Brother Smith and his zealous colaborers could 
only see clearly the full meaning of this one Scripture, 
—"The man Christ Jesus— gave himself a ransom for 
all— to be testified in due time,"— it would straighten 
out all their difficulties and introduce them to the antitypical 
Sabbath. 

R2127 : page 102 

How else could the oath-bound Covenant be fulfilled, 
—than by the Millennial reign of Christ and his 
"little flock," the "royal priesthood?" How else could 



the benefits of the ransom be made applicable to "all" to 
"every man" and "for the sins of the whole world?" 
How else could our Lord ever be "the true Light which 
lighteth every man that cometh into the world? (John 1:9.) 
How else will he ever "draw all men unto [or toward] 
himself" than by the presentation to all of the same 
truths which now constrain or draw us? How many 
will so make use of the blessing— the light, the drawing 
and the knowledge— as to conform to the requirements 
of the New Covenant is another question entirely. But 
there is no question that the work of the glorified Church 
in the Millennial Kingdom will be the fulfilment of 
God's oath-bound Covenant. (Gal. 3:29.) But first the 
"little flock," the Christ (head and body), must suffer 
many things and enter into glory. All the "members 
of his body" must be "lifted up" to shame, and share 
their Lord's ignominy and all must also be "lifted up" 
to glory, to share his honor. Then, the Seed complete, 
its work will be glorious. 



R2130 : page 102 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS ANSWERED. 



IS THERE NO HOPE FOR POOR JUDAS? 

Question.— I have read the TOWER article (Apr. 
15, '96) in which you give reasons for believing that 
Judas had many opportunities above others of his time 
and nation; and that hence, while the nation crucified 
our Lord "ignorantly" and may be forgiven, Judas 
sinned against light and has therefore no hope, and has 
died the Second Death— the penalty of wilful sin. 
But I find it hard to give poor Judas up. Am I wrong 
in this; or is it an evidence that I have more love than 
others? 

Answer.— By reason of the fall our entire race has 
suffered depravity both of mental and physical tastes 
—likes and dislikes; and many are by heredity disposed 
to call the good evil, and the evil good. Christianity 
does not select the least blemished amongst men, 
but oftener the more blemished; the less blemished 
often feel a self-complacency and satisfaction which 
hinders them from coming to God as repentant sinners 
and realizing that they can be justified only through 
the imputed merit of Christ. But those who do come 
to Christ, and hear him, soon learn how imperfect are 
their own depraved conceptions, and seek and obtain 
his mind to thenceforth be instead of their own judgments. 
"We have the mind of Christ," says the 
Apostle— it is our "new mind," we are "transformed 



R2131 :page 102 

by the renewing of our minds" so as to be able to 
"prove [know] what is the good, acceptable and perfect 
will of God."— Rom. 12:2. 

Your question indicates that however much you 
have submitted your judgment to God's will on some 
questions, you have not submitted on this point. The 
reason seems to be that you are deceiving yourself into 
thinking that your sympathy with Judas is the true 
love which the Scriptures everywhere enjoin as the 
essence of Christian character. But you are deceiving 
yourself. To love an evil thing is on a par with 
hating a good thing. Both are wrong; both are sinful; 
both are evidences that the depraved mind is not 
renewed, remodeled, transformed into the mind of 
Christ. As well might the drunkard or the libertine 
claim that his love of evil things indicates more true 
love. 

The mind of the Lord, inculcated by his Word, 
teaches that we are to love the beautiful, pure, true, 
noble; we are to love (in the sense of sympathizing 
with) the weak, penitent and oppressed who are seeking 
for the paths of truth and righteousness; but we 
are to "hate iniquity" and "every false way" and 
all the meanness and sin which is wilful, against light 
and of the devil. 

Cease to pride yourself upon your love for one of 
the most detestable characters known to the pages of 
history, of whom our Lord who so loved (sympathized 
with) the world that he laid down his life for it (—and 
greater love hath no man than this) said, "It had been 
better for that man if he had never been born." 
Adopt God's standpoint, as the Apostle says, "Be not 
deceived, God is not mocked, he that doeth righteousness 
is righteous [and approved of God], but he that 
practices sin [knowingly, willfully] is of the devil." 

For our part we have no thought of ever becoming 
more loving than the Lord: we accept his definitions, 
and seek to be conformed mentally thereto— the 
image of God's Son. We want to love just as he loves 
and just what he loves, and we want to hate what he 
hates. Of him it is written, "Because thou hast loved 
righteousness and hated iniquity; therefore the Lord, 
even thy God, hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness 
above thy fellows." (Heb. 1:9.) "Do not I 
hate them, O Lord, that hate thee?. ..I hate them 
with a perfect hatred."— Psa. 139:21,22. 

We are glad that neither Satan nor Judas nor any 
other creature will ever be tormented to all eternity. 
We are glad that a full, fair opportunity for coming to 
a knowledge of the Lord and of the way of righteousness 
will be granted to every member of Adam's race; 
but we are glad that, on the contrary, all who rejoice 
not in the truth but rejoice in iniquity will be utterly 



R2131 :page 103 

and everlastingly destroyed in the Second Death. We 
abominate Satan, who for over six thousand years has 
wrought unrighteousness and gloated over the evil and 
pain and sorrow which he has wrought, and who with 
clear knowledge of the redemptive work has for eighteen 
centuries opposed the Kingdom and the great 
salvation. The person who could believe in Satan's 
conversion after all this battling against the light and 
the truth has a perverse mind, very sadly blinded by 
the god of this world. 

SEEN MORE CLEARLY. 



Question (1).— In a recent number of the WATCH 
TOWER you show quite to my satisfaction that mother 
Eve was not reckoned as a separate individual, but as 
part of the body of Adam as much as before she was 
taken from his side, and that thus the one sacrifice, once 
for all, covered her in him. But now I want to ask 
two questions: Is not this presentation a little different 
from the presentation on the same subject in 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., page 123? 

Answer.— Yes; this statement is a little different 
from that in DAWN, and the next edition, now 
on the press, will show a few words of change on the 
page referred to. While the point is comparatively 
unimportant, and does not vitally affect any part of 
the plan of the ages, yet we spare no pains to present 
the truth as clearly and as fast as we see it. The trunkline 
of truth, the plan of the ages, is not only the best 
and safest route for the consecrated mind to travel in 
coming to a knowledge of the things which were, the 
things which are and the things which shall be, but, 
more than this, it is the only through route. Along this 
route, here and there, are side-tracks and switches which 
may require and must have straightening and alignment 
with the main track; but these are all "betterments," not 
impairments, of the road. But, anyway, we have never 
claimed for the DAWN verbal accuracy or infallibility. 
It is our enemies who cannot refute the general teaching 
of the divine plan, that seek to divert attention and 
arouse prejudice by crying, "Infallible!" The divine 
plan of the ages is so grand, that all the consecrated 
who see it realize that God is its author, whoever may 
be its promulgators, connected with the various steps 
of its presentation. Such rejoice with the clarifying of 
its every detail. 

Changes in the language used in expressing the 
same thoughts have been made in several instances. 
(Notably VOL. I., pages 106, 107, 140, 157, 240, 279, 
321 and foot notes of pages 124 and 288— the latter 
formerly an appendix. Also note addition of foot note 



on page 150.) These alterations of language are all, 
we trust, beneficial to the readers. They were made 
necessary by reason of two things:— 

(1) Enemies have tried to put a false light upon 
our words, and to pick out sentences or portions of a 
sentence to use against the truth and to misrepresent 
the general teachings of DAWN;— thus we have been 
misrepresented by some as being "Universalists," by 
others as teaching a second individual chance or trial for 
all of Adam's race, by others as being in agreement 
with their blasphemous doctrine that God is the author 
of all sin and wickedness. 

(2) Friends have honestly misunderstood our 
teachings. Unused to reasoning on religious subjects, 
many failed to see the two distinct parts of the one salvation; 
(a) the part between Justice and the ransom 

given by our Lord Jesus for all mankind by which he 
"bought" the whole world, and became Lord and 
Judge of all, with the right or power to grant lasting 
life to whomsoever he will; and (b) the part of salvation 
which relates to the purchased race, and the terms 
upon which they may individually avail themselves of 
the grace of their Redeemer, and obtain from him the 
life-everlasting which he (by virtue of his ransom sacrifice) 
has the right to give to all who comply with the 
terms of the New Covenant. 

Our constant aim is to have the teachings of the 
WATCH TOWER and MILLENNIAL DAWN so expressed, 
that, like legal documents, they cannot be misunderstood. 
That we have not always succeeded does not 
discourage us; for we find that the inspired words of 
Scripture are frequently wrested by false teachers, and 
misunderstood by God's honest children. The difficulty 
encountered by the legal profession in stating 
matters so that they cannot be misunderstood is witnessed 
by the frequent contest of Wills. A case in point is the 
broken Will of the noted lawyer-millionaire, Hon. S. J. 
Tilden. Yet, presumably, his Will was the most painstaking 
paper he ever prepared. 

We cannot hope that the plan is yet so stated that a 
"wayfaring man" cannot misunderstand our meaning 
and enemies cannot misrepresent us. We trust that no 
false pride, nor false ideas of infallibility, will ever 
hinder us from declaring the truth, the whole truth, 
relating to God's plan, as he shall give us to see 
the truth. 

Question (2).— Would the fact that, as pointed 
out in Tabernacle Shadows of Better Sacrifices, the 
Church, the Bride of the Second Adam, joins in his 
sacrifice, have any bearing on this question? 

Answer.— No; for it is only after we have been 
"justified" by the ransom price that we are called to be 
his bride, joint-sacrificers and joint-heirs with Christ. 

THE DATE OF JESUS' BIRTH. 



Question.— It appears that a considerable number 
of Seventh-Day-Adventists are reading MILLENNIAL 

R2131 :page 104 

DAWN [The Lord be praised!] and are finding that 
their dates and theories are faulty. They are writing 
to the editor of the Sabbath Herald for help and further 
proofs. The editor sees what many of his readers do 
not see probably; viz., that the date of Jesus' birth, as 
clearly and forcibly set forth and proved in DAWN, 
VOL. II., utterly destroys the back-bone theory of 
Seventh-Day-Adventism in re the "Cleansing of the 
Sanctuary"— by showing as VOL. III. does, that they 
have not only misunderstood the nature of the "cleansing," 
but also the time of it, which they fix in 1844 
instead of 1846 A.D. 

The article referred to throws a lot of dust for the 
eyes of its readers, but really makes only two points, 
which I will thank you to answer. 

(1) He claims that the date of Dionysius as given 

in foot note on page 54, DAWN, VOL. II., is incorrect. 

(2) He claims that "two years before Augustus' 
death" Tiberius "was allowed the celebration of a 
triumph in Rome, and was then clothed by Augustus 

with PROCONSULAR POWER, which was understood by 
all the people as CO-SOVEREIGNTY with himself." 

I see that the first point is of no consequence, as 
it no more bears on the subject than does the date of 
my birth. But the second point is of consequence; if 
it proves Tiberius to have begun his reign two years 
before the death of Augustus. 

Answer.— (1) The foot note referred to is in error, 
evidently a slip of the editorial pencil or by the compositor. 
It should read, and will be found in later 
editions, as follows:— 

R2132:page 104 

The year A.D. was fixed upon as early as the sixth 
century by Dionysius Exiguus and other scholars of 
that period, though it did not come into general use 
until two centuries later. 

However, as you suggest, this has no bearing 
whatever on the subject, and might just as well have 
been the twelfth or any other century. 

(2) The editor of Sabbath Herald finds his dates 
and reckonings all out of harmony with the testimony 
of Luke 3:1-3;— the only positive date given in connection 
with our Lord's birth and ministry, by which 
it can be connected with reliable Roman history. 
Like many others this editor has been misled by 
Josephus' unreliable dates, and having adopted them 
and fixed his theory thereon, as do many others, he 



must needs cast some discredit upon Luke's statement. 
There is not a shadow of doubt as to when Tiberius began 
his reign (A.D. 14); but this editor (and many others), 
having a false theory and date to uphold, claims that 
Tiberius began to reign and that his reign dated two 
years before he was recognized as Emperor, two years 
before the great Augustus had vacated the office by 
death. 

The so-called proofs of this, which you quote, are 
absurd, and find their only strength in the ignorance 
of his readers: the editor evidently thinks that the 
words "proconsular powers" will be misunderstood by 
his readers to mean imperial power— a totally different 
thing. That the fallacy and weakness of the argument 
may be seen we quote from the Standard Dictionary, 
the highest authority, the meaning of proconsular and 
proconsul, as follows:— 

"Proconsular.— The dignity, office, or term of office 
of a proconsul." 

"Proconsul.— A Roman official who exercised 
consular authority in one of the provinces, or as commander 
of an army— though not a Consul." 

Illustration.— "Judea was henceforth to be incorporated 
into the province of Syria, with the Proconsul 
...as supreme head under the Emperor." 

So far from "proconsular powers" signifying that 
Tiberius was made the Emperor, or that he shared imperial 
honors with the Emperor, these words signify 
an officer under the Emperor. And, indeed, there 
were several Consuls and Proconsuls in the great 
Roman empire. Nor would the vain and ambitious 
Augustus Caesar, who changed the order of the calendar 
so as to perpetuate his name in one of the months 
with the most days and at the high noon of the year, 
be the kind of man likely to grant one mite of his 
honor or office to another, until death. 

The fact is that students of chronology are quite 
at a loss for anything that will fix the date of our 
Lord's birth with positiveness, except it be this statement 
of Luke 3:1; and we accept it implicitly, as God-given, 
for our instruction. Besides, Luke was an educated 
man and shows himself to have been well acquainted 
with the general affairs of his time. He connected 
the beginning of John's preaching of the Kingdom 
of heaven at hand with the reign of Tiberius 
Caesar for the very purpose of locating or fixing the 
event chronologically; and it would be passing strange 
if he would purposely misstate the matter. There is 
no question, in secular histories, as to when "the reign 
of Tiberius Caesar" began; the only people to raise a 
question about it are those who, following the inaccurate 
records of Josephus, want to twist Luke's plain statement 
into harmony with a date two years earlier. 

The beginning of the "Seventy Weeks" (490 
years) of Israel's favor (Dan. 9:24) was so obscure and 
indefinite that the Jews could not and did not know 



positively when to expect Messiah. No doubt this was 
of divine intention. Had the fulfilment of the time of 
this prophecy been apparent to the Jews, doubtless they 
would not have crucified the Lord of glory. Only a 
few dates as far back as the beginning of those Seventy 
Weeks can be accurately fixed, and they by reason 
of notable eclipses recorded in connection with them. 

R2132:page 105 

Recognizing the fulfilment of the events of the seventieth 
week, and getting the date thereof from Luke 3:1-3, 
we are enabled to reckon back and know exactly 
when they began, regardless of the inaccuracies of records 
and the multiplied disputations of chronologists. 

The best answer to such criticism is the re-reading 
of the plain statements of MILLENNIAL DAWN. On this 
topic see VOL. II., pp. 54-72; VOL. III., Chap. 4. 

FRIDAY, THE CLOSE OF OUR LORD'S 3-1/2 YRS.' MINISTRY. 



Question. Mr. Totten writes as follows:— 

"A brother writes us under date of Nov. 18, '96, 
—'By the way, have just ended a long correspondence 
with Russell; he has had to throw up the sponge on 
both the 3-1/2 year ministry and Friday crucifixion!" 

Mr. Totten gives a few lines of comment on the 
above. Now as a personal favor I ask if your opinion 
on these matters has changed in the least from that 
presented in DAWN? 

Answer. There is not a word of truth in the 
statement. It is "out of whole cloth" like Mr. Totten's 
Astronomical and prophetical misstatements exposed 
in our issue of May 15, '96. 

We have not changed our opinion in the least from 
the presentation of these subjects in DAWN; we see not 
the slightest shadow of reason for any change on either 
subject. 



R2132:page 105 

GOD'S ACCEPTANCE OF CORNELIUS. 

-APRIL 11. -ACTS 10:30-34.- 

"Whosoever believeth in him shall receive 
remission of sins."— Acts 10:43. 

CORNELIUS, noted as the first adopted son of 
God from amongst the Gentiles, was a Roman 
soldier, the captain of a company quartered in 
Caesarea for the better preservation of order and the 



enforcement of the will of the Roman government, 
which, at that time, controlled Palestine. It may be 
that he was the very same Centurion mentioned in 
Luke (7:2-10) as a worthy, noble and generous man, 
of whom Jesus said, "I have not found so great faith, 
no, not in Israel;" and whose servant was healed as a 
reward of this faith. True, that Centurion was stationed 
at Capernaum, while Cornelius we find in Caesarea; 
it is possible, however, that these bands of Roman 
soldiers were moved about from place to place as a better 
means of awing the people with a small number of 
soldiers. It would certainly be very remarkable to find 
two such Centurions of so remarkable a character residing 
so near together. And we are to remember that 
a period of about six years must have elapsed between 
the time of our Lord's healing the servant at Capernaum 
and the events we now consider. 

The date of Cornelius' conversion cannot be positively 
determined from history, but from prophecy we 
may locate it with great positiveness in the year 36, 
A.D., because there the "seventy weeks" of Daniel's 
prophecy terminated. Our Lord was baptised at the 
beginning of the seventieth week (Oct., A.D. 29), was 
crucified "in the midst of the week" (April, A.D. 33). 
The seventy weeks ended the special favors of the Jewish 
nation (Oct., A.D. 36). That date, therefore, was 
the earliest at which it was possible for the gospel to 
be sent to the Gentiles. 

It would appear that Cornelius had been in an 
acceptable attitude of heart before the Lord for some 
time. We may reasonably infer, therefore, that God delayed 
the sending of the gospel message to him for 
some particular reason. That particular reason, we see, 
was, that the full period of the "seventy weeks" (of 
years) must be confined to Israel, as it is written, "He 
shall confirm the covenant with many for one week," 
altho he was to "cut short the work in righteousness" 
(so far as the nation was concerned) "in the midst of 
the week." The "many," to whom the covenant was confirmed 
for the remainder (3-1/2 years) of the seventieth 
week, consisted of those worthy Jews who, beginning 
at Pentecost, were specially taught, and thousands of 
them converted, during this remaining period of individual 
favor to the Jew. We may, therefore, presume 
that Cornelius, having been for some time in an acceptable 
condition of heart, the gospel went to him at 
the earliest possible moment— about Oct., A.D. 36. 

We cannot properly speak of these experiences of 
Cornelius as a conversion or turning of his heart; for 
his heart was already in the right attitude, as was that 
of Saul of Tarsus. As the latter needed to have his 
knowledge corrected, so the former needed to have his 
knowledge increased; and then both needed to be accepted 
in the Beloved,— and to receive the spirit of 
adoption as "sons of God." 

The testimony is that, at the time of receiving this 



great blessing of the truth, Cornelius was in the right 
attitude of heart to receive it: he was hungering and 
thirsting after righteousness, and was fasting and praying 
for it. What a suggestion is here! If all people 
could be gotten into a condition similar to this described 
of Cornelius, we might expect the conversion of the 
whole world speedily. The great difficulty in the presentation 
of the gospel is the unreadiness of the hearts 

R2132:page 106 

of those who need it. This is true, whether of the 
savages of Africa or the philosophers of India and China, 
or the self-satisfied ones of so-called Christian lands. 

R2133 : page 106 

They do not know the truth, and they cannot receive 
it, because their hearts are not prepared for it. And if 
the truth be received into any other than into a good 
and honest heart, it not only is not likely to bring forth 
a good harvest, but indeed may introduce a liberty 
(freedom from superstition, etc.) which may actually 
be unfavorable in its results. The constant effort of 
all, therefore, should be, not only to be in a proper attitude 
of heart themselves, but to see to it that those 
whom they approach with the truth are brought in contact 
not only with the knowledge and liberty which the 
truth carries, but also with its influence as a sanctifying 
and cleansing power. 
In the vision granted to Cornelius the Lord commends 

(1) his prayerful attitude, which implied faith 

in God and a desire for harmony with him in righteousness; 

(2) his works of righteousness— his alms-giving, 

his endeavor to overcome selfishness and to copy divine 
benevolence. So we believe it is with all; whoever is 
in the right attitude of heart will be more and more 
moved to good works. 

We have here also an illustration of divine methods; 
and we have every reason to believe that they are 
the same to-day. God did not miraculously fill the 
mind of Cornelius with a knowledge of the gospel and 
the details of the divine plan of salvation;— nor does he 
do this to-day, altho some of his children evidently so 
misunderstand his arrangement. On the contrary, the 
Lord made use of his servant Peter in communicating 
the truth, in teaching those who were ignorant of it. 
Men accordingly were sent a considerable journey to 
find Peter, and Peter journeyed with them the same 
distance in order to preach the gospel, rather than have 
any miraculous presentation of it. 

The language of Cornelius, when Peter was come 
to his house, indicates an appreciation of the fact that 
the message was from God, and that Peter was merely 
the honored instrument. Cornelius, presenting himself 
and his household in the presence of Peter for instruction, 



said, "We are all here present before God, to 
hear all things that are commanded thee of God." 
Here was a proper respect for the servant of God as a 
servant of God and his Word; but also a full recognition 
that "every good and perfect gift cometh down from 
[our Father] above," and that the gospel itself is 
"neither of man nor by man." 

It is safe to say that Peter, as well as Cornelius, 
received a great lesson from the Lord in connection 
with this visit. He was learning that, altho the divine 
favor and privilege of the gospel had been granted "to 
the Jew first," according to divine promise, nevertheless 
only true Jews could be acceptable with God, while 
"in every nation he that feareth him, and worketh 
righteousness, is [now] accepted with him"— through 
the merit of the sacrifice given "once for all" by him 
who has since been highly exalted and made "Lord 
of all." 

Peter presupposes on the part of Cornelius just 
such knowledge as we would expect of an educated 
and influential man at that time, particularly if he were 
the Centurion of Capernaum who had personal contact 
with our Lord. He says, You have heard about this 
preaching of Jesus all through your country here, the 
matter is public, no one could live in this vicinity without 
coming to a knowledge of these general facts. 
They may have heard the facts misstated to some extent 
and misrepresented, but in a general way all know 
that our preaching is concerning Jesus of Nazareth: 
that he was anointed of God, the Messiah; that he received 
the holy spirit and with it power; and that he 
used this power in doing good and healing all oppressed 
of the devil (through sickness, etc.),— all of which, 
either directly or indirectly, are traceable to sin and 
thus to the author of sin, Satan. 

Having briefly rehearsed the matters which Cornelius 
already knew, the Apostle rehearsed some matters 
which were not so generally known, but denied as 
incredible; namely, that the death of Jesus was not 
like the death of others, but was a sacrifice; that 
this sacrifice was acceptable with God as the ransom-price 
for sinners; and that God had "given assurance 
unto all men" (that the sacrifice was satisfactory and 
had been accepted on behalf of all men) by raising 
Jesus from the dead on the third day.— Acts 17:31. 

We have heretofore seen that our Lord Jesus was 
not raised from the dead a fleshly being, a human being, 
but a spirit being, and that "flesh and blood cannot 
inherit the Kingdom of God." We have seen that, 
accordingly, no one could see him as the resurrected 
spirit being, except a miracle were performed, either 
by granting special powers to see a spirit being, 
or by our Lord's appearing in a body of flesh on certain 
occasions (just as angels had done previously) for 
the purpose of the better impressing upon the disciples 
the two facts; (1) his resurrection, (2) his change of 



nature which prevented his being seen, except as he 
would specially "appear" or "manifest" himself. 
Thus, Peter here declares that the people in general 
did not see the Lord Jesus after his resurrection, but 
that God "showed him," unto "witnesses chosen before 
of God, even unto us." 

Thus by these proofs of our Lord's resurrection God 
granted us the evidences of coming divine favor— proofs 
that Christ is empowered of the Father to be the Judge 
of all who are to be judged, the living (the angels who 

R2133 : page 107 

kept not their first estate and who are "reserved unto 
the judgment of the great day," and upon whom the 
death sentence has never yet been pronounced) and 
the dead (the world of mankind, "dead in trespasses 
and sins," and dead, in the sense that all are under the 
sentence of death). 

The Apostle's discourse was orderly, and he next 
proceeded to show that all this was in harmony with 
what had been foretold respecting this long-promised 
Savior, Messiah. Then, completing his argument and 
bringing it down and making a personal application of 
it to his hearers, he showed that, the penalty of sin 
having been paid for all by the Lord Jesus, and all 
judgment of the sinners having been transferred to the 
hands of him who "bought us with his own precious 
blood," it followed that he had full power and authority 
to extend the terms and conditions of the New Covenant; 
namely, the remission of sins to all who believed 
in him as their Priest (Redeemer), their Prophet 
(Teacher) and their King (Ruler). 

We are not surprised to find from the narrative 
that this man, whose heart was so ready for the truth, 
who was hungering and thirsting for it, fasting and 
praying to be in a condition for receiving it, was so 
ready that he appropriated the words of the Apostle as 
the bread from heaven and the water of life for which 
he had been hungering and thirsting. It does not surprise 
us, therefore, that God immediately, in view of 
his full consecration, accounted him worthy of "the 
spirit of adoption;" and not only so, but also gave him 
some of the outward manifestations or miraculous 
"gifts," similar to those granted to the believers on the 
day of Pentecost. 

The Apostle Peter, as he subsequently testified to 
his fellow-disciples at Jerusalem, was astonished to see 
that God in every respect treated the converts from 
the Gentiles the same as the converts from the Jews; 
and dropping all prejudice Peter at once grasped the 
situation and did not hesitate to offer to Cornelius symbolic 
baptism as the evidence or pledge of his consecration 
to the Lord; assuredly gathering that whomsoever 
the Lord counted worthy of the holy spirit was worthy 
also of every other feature of the divine arrangement 



for the household of faith. With us also should it be 
the same: whoever we may find truly believing the 
gospel of redemption and forgiveness of sins through 
Christ, and consecrated to God's service in Him,— such, 
wherever found, are to be esteemed as brethren and 
fellowshiped to the full, whether or not they have seen 
every item of the truth now due. Further knowledge 
will come to the consecrated, and, as a fruit of it, obedience 
in every particular may reasonably be expected. 



R2133 : page 107 

THE "CHRISTIANS" OF ANTIOCH. 

-APRIL 18.-ACTS 11:19-26.- 

"Then hath God also unto the Gentiles 
granted repentance unto life."— Acts 11:18. 

ANTIOCH was one of the chief cities of the 

world at this time: it ranked with Rome 

and Corinth. It was the capital of the province of 

Syria. The gospel reached it as the result of the persecution 

which arose about the time of Stephen's martyrdom, 

in which Saul of Tarsus was one of the leaders. 

Some of those who had received the gospel at Jerusalem 

when "scattered everywhere," got as far away as 

Antioch, about 300 miles from Jerusalem. They did 

not put their lights under a bushel, but endeavored to 

"show forth the praises [virtues, glories] of him who 

had called them out of darkness into his marvelous 

light." They met with hearing ears and believing 

hearts, under the divine leading and blessing. They 

no doubt thus eventually realized that their persecutions 

were part of the "all things working together for 

good to them who love God;" and those of right mind 

surely rejoiced that by any means they were permitted 

to be co-workers together with God, and to be used of 

him in his glorious work. These laborers were not 

apostles, nor even notable ones amongst the Lord's 

disciples, so that it was not considered necessary by 

the writer even to mention their names; nevertheless 

R2134:page 107 

we can be sure that however obscure amongst men, they 
were reckoned by the Lord as his jewels whom he will 
shortly gather, and who, numbered amongst those who 
turn many to righteousness, will shine as the stars for 
ever and ever. The testimony to their efficient work is, 
—"A great number believed and turned unto the Lord." 

It is worthy of notice that believing is one thing 
and turning to the Lord is another thing. We fear 
that this distinction is too often forgotten, and that too 



many are satisfied merely to get their friends to believe 
some of the good things of the gospel of our Lord 
Jesus, and do not press the matter on to the only legitimate 
and proper conclusion— a complete turning away 
from sin and the world; a thorough turning of every 
sentiment, hope, ambition and desire "unto the Lord," 
and into harmony with his divine plan. Let us remember 
the statement, "devils also believe;" and let us not 
rest satisfied with efforts merely to convince the head 
without convicting and regenerating the heart. 
Many speak of the Church at Antioch as "the 
first Gentile Church" and of "Gentile Christians" and 
"Jewish Christians." All this is a mistake: there is 
not and never was a "Gentile Church," nor a "Gentile 
Christian." We might just as well speak of a 
"heathen Church" or a "heathen Christian," for such 
is the meaning of these expressions. There was a Jewish 
Church under Moses, but there was never a Jewish 
Christian Church, and there never will be. The way 
may have been smoother for a Jew to pass out of 
the partial light of the Law Covenant into the new light 
of the Gospel Covenant, than for the Gentile to pass 
from the outer darkness of heathenism into the full 
light of the gospel; but, nevertheless, there was a 
positive transfer in both cases. Christianity is not a 
blending of the gospel with Judaism, nor is it a blending 
of the gospel with heathenism. Our Lord declared 
that he would not put a patch upon the Jewish system and 
call it Christianity, nor put the new wine of the gospel 
into the old wine skins of Judaism; but that, on the 

R2134 : page 108 

contrary, he established a totally new thing; and that 
those who would enter his Kingdom must first be begotten 
again, and ultimately be born again before they 
could share it.— John 3:3-8. 

While we would contend earnestly for the truths 
and facts of the gospel, we do not wish to be hypercritical 
as to words and names. If, therefore, any have 
used the terms "Jewish Christians" and "Gentile Christians" 
merely through mistake of language, and have 
had the apostolic thought in mind, namely, that there 
is "neither Jew nor Gentile, bond nor free, male nor 
female, but ye are all one [a new one— a new Church] 
in Christ Jesus," we have no desire to quarrel with 
such, nor to be captious; and yet we do respectfully 
urge upon all such the unwisdom of using terms which 
of themselves, and without particular private explanation, 
are misleading. 

The gospel was preached at Antioch at first, properly, 
to the Jews only; yet, when the due time for it 
to go to the Gentiles arrived, the Lord's providence 
opened up the way and showed his servants that 
Cornelius was not an exceptional case, but that the 
gospel was to be preached in all the world for a witness, 



for the purpose of gathering his little flock 

from all kindreds, nations and tongues who should 

have an ear to hear it and to whom he would send it. 

The progress of the interested at Antioch was a refreshment 
to the central company of believers at Jerusalem, 
and forthwith appreciating the fact that they 
would need instruction in the truth, and that the Lord 
would be pleased to continue to use human instrumentalities 
to this end, they at once dispatched Barnabas on 
a missionary tour. Barnabas, as a good, faithful servant 
of the Lord, was greatly rejoiced when he found 
the condition of matters at Antioch, yet, apparently, 
he found a condition of things to meet which he himself 
lacked certain qualifications. Of a loving and kind 
disposition, his visit no doubt was very helpful to them, 
but he apparently discerned that they needed instruction 
as well as exhortation, and immediately he thought 
of Paul, the wonderful Christian logician, and of how 
ably he could present the gospel in its various features 
to those Grecians of a philosophical turn of mind. Accordingly 
he sought him and found him and brought 
him with him to Antioch. The results showed the wisdom 
of the course, and no doubt it was entirely ordered 
by the Lord. A year's stay in Antioch under 
the able teachings of Paul and under the loving ministries 
and exhortations of Barnabas resulted most 
favorably: not only was the church of believers well 
developed, but the multitudes who assembled received 
considerable instruction also, and thus the knowledge of 
the gospel was greatly spread abroad. 

Some have surmised that the name "Christian," 
first attached to the Lord's people at Antioch, was applied 
in ridicule. But it seems to us that the evidences 
all point to the contrary, and indicate that this was 
the name which the believers adopted for themselves, 
by which they would be known to outsiders. Had the 
name been a disreputable one we might have supposed 
it to be applied in ridicule; but since the basis of the 
name Christian is the word Christ, and since the word 
Christ signifies Messiah or the Anointed (of God), it 
must have been accepted as a most honorable name, 
or who would think that a divine anointing could signify 
anything dishonorable in the eyes of any man, Jew 
or Gentile. 

This adopted name "Christian" indicates the 
healthy condition of the Church, and testifies to the 
sound instruction which they had received from Paul 
and Barnabas. When later another company of Christians 
began to split up into factions, some calling themselves 
followers of Peter, some followers of Paul, some 
followers of Apollos, the Apostle reproved them for 
this, assuring them that it was an evidence that their 
views in general on the subject were fleshly, carnal, 
worldly and not spiritual. He told them that it was 
an evidence that as yet they were "babes" in spiritual 
things, and pointed out to them that neither Peter, 



nor Paul, nor Apollos, had died for them, and that 
at very most they were only servants of the Lord Jesus, 
who had redeemed them and who had sent them the 
blessing of the truth, using such instrumentalities as 
seemed to him good. (1 Cor. 3:3-23.) What evidences 
we have all around us that the carnal or worldly 
mind prevails very largely to-day,— that very many 
who have named the name of Christ are merely "babes" 
in spiritual comprehension. The evidences of these 
conditions may be found in the fact that one says, "I 
am of Wesley," another, "I am of Calvin," another, 
"I am of Peter," and that in general the believers of 
the Lord Jesus are split up into parties and factions- 
Lutherans, Presbyterians, Congregationalists, Episcopalians, 
Baptists, etc. 

Moreover, it is not true, as some claim, that these 
names are merely forms and that they signify nothing. 
They do signify much: they imply that those who 
brand themselves with these names acknowledge various 
the rules of various parties and factions, and that 
they are all more or less in bondage to human systems 
and traditions of men, and have failed to a large extent to 
realize the individual "liberty wherewith Christ makes 
free" all those who have come to him, and who are 
united to him only. Nor do we with many advocate 
the removal of these dividing fences of human creeds 
merely to construct of them a "union" fence, doubly 
strong, around the whole company of believers in 
Christ. On the contrary, we deny the propriety of 
any human fences, and hold that each individual 
Christian is to be united and bounden only to 
the Lord and to his instructions, and not to others, few 
or many. All the truly consecrated and truly united 
to the Lord will find themselves in fellowship with all 
others similarly united to him, and the bondage between 
these various members (the bonds of love and of 
common submission to the one Head and to all of his 
arrangements) will be the only bondage necessary to 
the complete operation of this body of Christ, according 
to the directions of his Word. 

Let us each make it our highest ambition and aim 
to be Christians in the fullest sense of that word. To 
truly be a Christian implies a union with Christ; it 
implies a submission to him as our Head, it implies a 
share with him in the anointing of the priesthood for 
the work of sacrifice and of self-denial in this present 
time; it implies also an association with him in the 
anointing of kings and joint-heirs in the coming Kingdom. 
Let us take and let us keep this holy name, and 
it alone; and let us make sure that we do not take this 
holy name in vain. 



page 109 


