VOL. XXXIII MAY 15 No. 10 
A.D. 1912-A.M. 6040 



CONTENTS 

Jesus No Longer Flesh— Now "That Spirit" 159 

What Went to Heaven? 159 

The Sabbath Day 161 

The Seventh Day Still a Sabbath 162 

A Faith Foundation Necessary 164 

Humility a Character Foundation 165 

Grapes Off a Bramble Bush 165 

"Least In the Kingdom" 166 

Not the Bride, But the Friend 166 

Curiosity Is Not Religion 166 

And She Was a Sinner 167 

Two Debtors and Their Love 168 



General Convention— June 1-9 168 

Interesting Questions 169 

Messiah's Kingdom Will Be Spiritual 169 

Perfection Will Insure Against Accidents 169 

Some Interesting Letters 170 

"Are Ye Able?" (Poem) 171 

page 158 

INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION MEETINGS 
AT WHICH BROTHER RUSSELL WILL BE PRINCIPAL SPEAKER 



FRIENDS FROM NEARBY PLACES ARE CORDIALLY INVITED. 



WASHINGTON, D.C., MAY 12 

Morning Rally for Praise, Prayer and Testimony at 10:30 o'clock, 
and Discourse for the interested at 7:30 p.m. in the Old Masonic 
Temple, 9th and F Streets. Discourse for the Public in the New National 
Theatre at 3 p.m. 

BOSTON, MASS., MAY 19 

Morning Rally for Praise, Prayer and Testimony at 10:30 o'clock, 
and Discourse for the Interested at 7:30 p.m. in Ford Hall, Ashburton 
Place. Discourse for the Public in the Boston Theatre, Washington 
Street, at 3 p.m. 

The Boston Class has arranged for a Supplementary Convention, 
to be held May 20, 21, in Marie Hall, Pratt Building, 142 Pleasant St., 
Maiden, near Boston. Visiting friends will be welcomed. For lodgings, 
etc., address A. Ogston, secretary, 44 Wyllis Avenue, Everett, Mass. 

ELKHART, IND., MAY 25 

At 7:30 p.m. Brother Russell will address a Public meeting in Bucklen 
Theatre, cor. Main and Harrison Sts. 

(Continued on last page.) 



1912-VOLUNTEER MATTER PLENTIFUL- 19 12 

Our financial deficiency noted in our Society's Report for 
191 1 has been much more than made up! We are prepared 
to supply I.B.S.A. Classes everywhere with this year's 
free literature in unlimited quantities. There is no need for 
any to be idle. The harvest is plenteous, the laborers are 
comparatively few. Let us extend our efforts and increase 
our own joy and usefulness. We desire earnestly our Master's 
"Well done, good and faithful servant." We have this 
year's special issue of PEOPLES PULPIT ready now for 



shipment, and its message, "The Handwriting on the Wall," 
is timely. Everybody can have a hand in this branch of harvest 
work. "He that reapeth receiveth wages." 



LOANING MONEY TO PROFESSED BRETHREN 

Caution along this line is rarely needed by the majority 
of people; but our readers are very sympathetic whenever 
Christian brethren make an appeal. We are glad 
that this sympathetic feeling exists and would not destroy 
it for a great deal. Frequently, however, we receive letters 
from brethren telling how they were deceived and 
asking us to warn others to be on guard against deceivers. 

This is a matter in which we can do nothing. Each 
individual must use his common sense and strive to do the 
Lord's will with whatever money talent he possesses. 
One good thought to have in mind is the Bible instruction 
that nothing be loaned which we could not afford to lose. 



WHEN WILL SATAN BE DESTROYED? 

The above words are found on the first line of the second 
column, page 45, of our issue of February 1. They are 
wrong and give an entirely erroneous coloring to the statements 
following. About two thousand copies of THE WATCH 
TOWER were printed with this mistake. All the remainder, 
however, had the sentence properly, as written by the Editor, 
namely, "When and how will this be done?" Please look 
up your copy of that issue and make it correct, as it might 
be misleading to a stranger, although the error is so glaring 
that anyone familiar with the Truth should recognize it at 
once. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR JUNE 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
June follow: (1) 112; (2) 30; (3) 130; (4) 203; (5) 36; (6) 
229; (7) 109; (8) 222; (9) 114; (10) 46; (11) 127; (12) 12; 
(13) 299; (14) 73; (15) 259; (16) 27; (17) 209; (18) 58; (19) 
333; (20) 313; (21) 307; (22) 91; (23) 145; (24) 60; (25) 165; 
(26) 4; (27) 107; (28) 238; (29) vow; (30) 260. 



R5025 : page 159 
JESUS NO LONGER FLESH--NOW "THAT SPIRIT" 



"With what body do they come?"— 1 Cor. 15:35. 

IN THE MAY 1 issue of THE WATCH TOWER 

we discussed the fact of the resurrection and 

showed from St. Paul's words that without 

God's purpose of a resurrection those who 

have fallen asleep in death would have 

perished as brutes. We followed with the 

Apostle the assurances that Christ did rise 

from the dead and did become the First-fruits 

of all those who have gone into the 

sleep of death. Others, indeed, were 

awakened temporarily— as, for instance, Jairus' daughter, 

Lazarus the friend of Jesus, and the son of the widow 

of Nain. 

Yet none of those instances is counted as a resurrection, 
for it is said that Christ is the First-fruits of those 
who slept. Their awakening was merely of a temporary 
nature, and they soon relapsed into the sleep of death. 
They did not have a full resurrection— anastasis— a raising 
up to perfection of life, such as the redemptive work 
of Jesus guarantees to Adam and to all his race willing 
to accept the same under the terms of the New Covenant. 

You will recall that in our last issue we demonstrated 
from the Scriptures that it is not the body, but the soul, 
that is promised a resurrection— that it was our Lord's 
soul that went to sheol, to hades, to the death state, and 
that God raised Him up from death on the third day. We 
noted a difficulty into which all Christendom was plunged 
by the unscriptural theory that it is the body that is to be 
resurrected. We now continue to search and note well 
further difficulties into which this error plunged us as 
believers in the words of Christ, particularly in connection 
with our Redeemer's resurrection. 

WHAT WENT TO HEAVEN? 

The ordinary thought in Christian minds in respect 
to Jesus' death and resurrection is that when He seemed 
to die He did not die; that He, the being, the soul, could 
not die; that, instead, He went to Heaven, and then, on 
the third day, came back to get the body which had been 
crucified; and that He took it to heaven forty days later; 
that He has had that body ever since; and that He will 
have it to all eternity, marred with the print of the nails 
in His hands and feet, the thorns upon His brow, and 
the spear mark in His side. What a ghastly thought! 
How strange that we should ever have been misled into 
so unscriptural and unreasonable a theory! Some endeavor 
to gloss the matter by suggesting that our Lord's 
flesh is glorified— that it shines— the shining presumably 
making the wounds all the more conspicuous. 

ABSURDITY OF THEORIES RECEIVED FROM DARK AGES 

Our Methodist friends have not yet changed their 



statement of the matter, namely, "He ascended up on 
high, taking His fleshly body with Him, and all that appertained 
thereto, and sat down on the right hand of God." 
This medieval statement correctly admits that the fleshly 
body was not the Lord's, but that He, the soul, took it 
with Him as luggage. The statement, "and all that appertained 
thereto," presumably would refer to our Lord's 
sandals, walking stick and such clothing as the soldiers 
did not divide amongst them at the time of His crucifixion 
—if indeed He had any others! But our dear Methodist 
friends want to be sure that nothing was left behind. 
All this is of a piece with the theory that the saints 
when they die go to heaven, and then, later, come back 
and get their bodies, "and all things appertaining thereto" 
—the inconveniences that they have been rid of for centuries ! 
How many trunkloads of "things appertaining 
thereto" may be taken by some, and how mixed an assortment 
by others is not stated. Neither are particulars given 
respecting those whose clothing, etc., have meantime worn 
out. But we have had enough of this, if it has helped 
us to see the absurdity of our theories received from the 
"Dark Ages"— if it has awakened us to thought and to 
Bible investigation on this important and interesting 
subject. 

WHAT SAY THE SCRIPTURES? 

The Bible presentation of this subject is every way 
reasonable, consistent and harmonious. St. Paul points 
out that "there is a natural body and there is a spirit 
body." He does not mean and he does not say that the 
spirit body is a human body glorified. Quite to the contrary. 
He declares that "Flesh and blood cannot inherit 
the Kingdom of God"— no matter how glorified it might 
be. A human being is so totally different from a 
spirit being that, as St. Paul says, "It doth not yet appear 
what we shall be," in our resurrection change; and the 
Scriptures do not even attempt to give us an explanation. 

The Bible merely declares that as we now bear the 
image of the earthy, Adam, we shall, by the glorious 
resurrection change, be given a share in the nature and 
likeness of the Second Adam, our glorious Lord. We 
shall be like Him and see Him as He is; and, be it noted, 
we must change from flesh and blood conditions to spirit 

R5025 : page 160 

conditions by resurrection power, in order that we may 
see Him as He is. Surely this proves that our Lord Jesus 
is no longer flesh, as He once was— "in the days of His 
flesh."— Hebrews 5:7. 

DIFFERENCE BETWEEN HEAVENLY AND EARTHLY 
BODIES 

Our text calls attention to the difference between 



celestial bodies and terrestrial, or earthly bodies, and declares 
that they have different glories. It tells us that the 
first Adam was made a living soul, a human being, but 
that our Redeemer, who humbled Himself and took the 
earthly nature, "for the suffering of death," thereby became 
the Second Adam— the Heavenly Lord. The wide 
distinction between the Second Adam and the first Adam 
is clearly set forth. One was earthy and the other 
heavenly. As we now bear the image of the earthy, we 
shall, if faithful, bear the heavenly image of our Lord, 
the Second Adam, after our resurrection change. 

St. Paul illustrates by saying that we know of many 
kinds of organisms on the earthy or fleshly plane— one 
flesh of man, another of beasts, another of birds and another 
of fish. But however different the organisms they 
are all earthy. So, on the heavenly plane, the spirit plane, 
there are varieties of organisms, but all are spirit. 

Our heavenly Father is the Head or Chief— "God is 
a Spirit." Cherubim, seraphim, and the still lower order 
of angels are all spirit beings; and Christ Jesus, our Redeemer, 
after finishing the work of sacrificing appointed 
to Him, was resurrected to the spirit plane— far above 
angels, principalities and powers— next to the Father; 
and thus we read, "Now the Lord is that Spirit." And 
again that "He was put to death in the flesh, but quickened 
(or made alive) in the spirit."— I Pet. 3:18. 

The more we examine the subject the more foolish and 
unscriptural the views handed to us from the Dark Ages 
appear. For instance, the Scriptures clearly set forth that 
our Redeemer, prior to becoming a Man, was a spirit being 
—"the Only Begotten of the Father, full of grace and 
truth." His leaving the spirit plane to become a Man is 
Scripturally described as a great stoop or humiliation. Is 
it reasonable to suppose that the heavenly Father would 
perpetuate to all eternity that humiliation, after it had 
served its intended purpose? Surely He would do nothing 
of the kind! 

The Bible tells us why Jesus humbled Himself to the 
human nature— "a little lower than the angels." It was 
because a man had sinned, and the Redeemer must, under 
the Law, be on the same plane of being as the one whom 
He would redeem. Thus Jehovah particularly specified, 
"An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, a life for a life." 
Hence the death of an angel, or of our Lord in His pre-human 
condition, could not have effected the payment of 
man's penalty and the consequent release of the condemned 
race. Thus again we read, "A body hast Thou 
prepared Me," "for the suffering of death."— 
Heb. 10:5; 2:9. 

GOD HIGHLY EXALTED HIM 

No one questions that this applies exclusively to our 
Lord's experiences during the years in which "He who 
was rich for our sakes became poor, that we through His 
poverty might be made rich." Surely it is unsupposable 



that the Father would arrange a Plan by which our Redeemer's 

faithfulness in accomplishing man's redemption 

would cost Him an eternity of poverty, humiliation, degradation 

to a plane "a little lower than the angels," while 

the Church would be made rich, and would attain a spirit 

state "far above angels"— be made "partakers of the divine 

nature."— 2 Peter 1:4. 

On the contrary, the very same Apostle who tells us 
of our Lord's humiliation carries the matter to the climax, 
telling us of His faithfulness, as the Man Christ Jesus, 
unto death, even the death of the cross; and then he adds 
an assurance of the heavenly Father's faithfulness in not 
leaving His Son on a lower plane: "Wherefore," says 
the Apostle, "God also highly exalted Him, and hath given 
Him a name above every name." This, too, is in harmony 
with our Lord's words in His prayer to the Father. A 
joy had been set before Him by the Father— a joy of 
pleasing the Father, of bringing a blessing to mankind, 
and the joy also of exaltation, as a special reward for 
obedience. 

But the Redeemer, ignoring all the promises of a 
higher glory as a reward for His faithfulness, merely 
prayed to the Father in these words, "Father, glorify 
Thou Me with the glory which I had with Thee before 
the world was." In humility He asked no reward. He 
did not pray, Remember that you promised a still greater 

R5026 : page 160 

exaltation in glory! No, He would be quite content to 
have served the Father's purpose and plans and then to 
return to the glorious state in which He was before He 
left the glory, and for our sakes became poor and took 
upon Himself the human nature. And what said the 
heavenly Father in response to that prayer? Oh, we remember 
the words of Jehovah were, "I have glorified 
Thee, and I will glorify Thee again," or further— the 
implication is that of a still higher glory than the one 
which He enjoyed before He was made flesh. 

HE APPEARED AND DISAPPEARED 

Two lines of difficulties present themselves, one of 
which can be answered and the other cannot. The unanswerable 
difficulty is where a natural-minded man undertakes 
to reason the subject out. He finds it impossible 
of comprehension as he finds other items of Divine revelation. 
St. Paul explains this, saying, "The natural man 
receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God, neither can 
he know them, because they are spiritually discerned." 
The Apostle proceeds to tell us that all men are natural 
men, except such as have been begotten by the Holy 
Spirit. All natural men will, in their resurrection, receive 
earthly, or human bodies, while all spiritual ones, 
New Creatures in Christ, will receive spirit bodies, as 
St. Paul explains in our context, verses 36-50. 



Those of our readers, therefore, who have never accepted 
Christ, and made a full consecration of their all 
to be His disciples, following in His footsteps, may know 
that they have not been begotten of the Holy Spirit (because 
only upon these terms are any begotten of the 
spirit). These, therefore, we will ask to consider what we 
say, and hold it, if they please, tentatively, until such 
time as, in God's providence, they may be begotten of the 
Holy Spirit, and thus be enabled to understand spiritual 
matters such as this. 

Another class who have difficulty on this subject are 
the spirit-begotten ones who have been entangled in their 
reasoning by the declaration of the creeds respecting the 
resurrection of the body. It is difficult to unlearn error. 
When visiting various lands and learning of the hold of 
superstition upon the heathens, we said to ourself, we 
believe that we Christians experience just as much difficulty 
in unlearning our errors as these heathens do in 
getting free from theirs. 

THE UNCONSECRATED CANNOT UNDERSTAND SPIRITUAL 
PROBLEMS 

Coming to the point of what is to be resurrected, we 
note the fact that our Lord appeared in a body of flesh, 

R5026 :page 161 

and showed the disciples the print of the nails and the 
hole made by the spear. But we, perhaps, failed to note 
that only twice did He thus appear, and but for a few 
moments each time. His other six or seven appearances 
during that forty days were also very brief, and in various 
bodies— once as a gardener, another time as a traveler— 
His third time as a stranger on the shore, and to Saul of 
Tarsus, as a spirit being of more than angelic brightness, 
"shining above the brightness of the sun at noonday." 
We overlooked the fact that these appearances, if all put 
together, would probably not have exceeded four hours 
out of the entire forty days in which our Lord tarried 
with His disciples after His resurrection and before His 
ascension. We were not critical students when we overlooked 
these things, and forgot to ask ourselves why these 
things were so. 

Now we see more distinctly why our Lord did as He 
did. His disciples were natural men and therefore could 
not appreciate spiritual things. Furthermore, they could 
not receive the guiding of the Holy Spirit until the Lord's 
ascension and appearance in the presence of the Father 
on behalf of His Church, to make satisfaction for their 
sins, and to make them acceptable joint-sacrificers with 
Him. Meantime, had Jesus not tarried those forty days 
—had He ascended immediately after His resurrection— 
the disciples, stunned and bewildered, would have had no 
assurance of His resurrection. They would have found 
it impossible to go out and tell the people that He had 



risen from the dead when they had no proof to this effect. 

And even if Jesus had appeared to them as He did to 
Saul of Tarsus, above the bright shining of the sun, this 
would not have been convincing and satisfactory. They 
might have said, Here is a phenomenon, but how can we 
positively associate it with the life and death of Jesus? 
Matters were different with Saul of Tarsus. He needed 
something to thoroughly arouse him and to teach him for 
all time, and others through him, that the Lord is not a 
Man, but "that Spirit." Besides, some of the disciples 
who already believed were able to give Saul of Tarsus 
assurances of what they knew respecting the resurrection 
of Jesus and His ascension. 

NO FOOLISH SUGGESTIONS IN BIBLE ABOUT THE RESURRECTION 

The Lord adopted the only reasonable way of helping 
His disciples to understand that He was no longer dead— 
that He had risen from the dead— and that He was no 
longer human, but had been glorified, and had become a 
spirit being. The two things were necessary and they 
were done at the same time. 

Even on the occasions when our Lord appeared in a 
body like to the one crucified, He took care that the manifestation 
should be under such conditions as would positively 
prove that He had become a spirit being. He came 
into the room where they were while the door was shut, 
and after a few words with them He vanished from their 
sight, as no human being could have done and as He never 
did during His earthly career. That the Apostles caught 
the thought is well evidenced by St. Paul's argument on 
the subject in the context. There is no foolish suggestion 
in the Bible about Jesus having a fleshly body in heaven— 
that is all in our creeds and hymn books, prepared for us 
by our well-meaning but mistaken forefathers, who used 
to burn one another at the stake if they failed to promptly 
agree together on such propositions. 

We mourn the dead, but they shall wake; 

The lost, but they shall be restored! 
O! well our human hearts might break 

Without that sacred word! 
Dim eyes, look up! sad hearts, rejoice! 

Seeing God's bow of promise through, 
At sound of that prophetic voice: 

"I will make all things new." 



R5026 :page 161 

THE SABBATH DAY 

SEVEN IS a very prominent number in the 
Bible— in everything relating to the Divine 
Program. In the first chapter of Genesis 



the Sabbath Day is referred to in a figurative 

way in speaking of the Seventh Epoch 

of God's creation on our earth— bringing 

order out of chaos. Not until Mt. Sinai, 

however, when the Law was given to Israel 

on two tables of stone, was the Day Sabbath 

made obligatory on anybody. And since that 

Law Covenant was made with the one nation (Israel) and 

none other, the Sabbath requirements of that Law apply 

to that nation only. This does not signify that the setting 

apart of a certain time for rest would be of advantage 

only to the Jew, nor that a special Seventh Day devoted 

to God would be disadvantageous to all people. It merely 

means that God entered into Covenant relationship with 

the one nation only, and hence to them only He told His 

Will, His Law— obedience to which He made the foundation 

of the blessing He promised to that people. There 

is no room to question the import of the Fourth Commandment 

of the Jewish Law. It distinctly commanded that 

the Seventh Day of the week should be to the Jews a rest 

day, in which no work of any kind should be done, either 

by parent or child, employer or servant, male or female, 

ox or ass or any creature owned by a Jew. It was a rest 

day pure and simple. Divine worship was not commanded 

to be done on that day— not because God would be displeased 

to have Divine worship upon that day or upon 

any day, but because there is a reason connected with the 

matter which related, not to worship, but to rest, as we 

shall see. The strictness of this Law upon the Jews is 

fully attested by the fact that upon one occasion, by Divine 

command, a man was stoned to death for merely picking 

up sticks on the Sabbath Day. It is plain, therefore, to be 

seen that the Law given to Israel on this subject meant 

what it said to the very letter. 

In the New Testament Jesus is supposed by some to 
have taught a laxity in the matter of Sabbath observance, 
but this is quite a misunderstanding. Jesus, born a Jew, 
"born under the Law," was as much obligated to keep that 
Law in its very letter as was any other Jew. And He did 
not, of course, violate the obligation in the slightest 
degree. The Scribes and Pharisees had strayed away 
from the real spirit of the Law in many particulars. Their 
tradition, represented at the present time by their Talmud, 
attempted to explain the Law, but really, as Jesus said 
frequently, made it void, meaningless, absurd. For instance, 
according to the traditions of their Elders, it was 
breaking the Sabbath, if one were hungry, to rub the 
kernels of wheat in their hands and blow away the chaff 
and eat the grain, as the disciples did one Sabbath Day 
in passing through the wheat field. The Pharisees called 
attention to this and wanted Jesus to reprove the disciples, 
because, according to their thought, this simple process 
was labor— work— reaping and thrashing and winnowing. 
Jesus resisted this absurd misinterpretation of the Law 
and by His arguments proved to anyone willing to be 



R5027 : page 162 

taught that they had mistaken the Divine intention— had 
mistranslated the Law of the Sabbath. On several occasions 
He healed the sick on the Sabbath Day. Indeed, 
the majority of His healings were done on that day, 
greatly to the disgust of the Pharisees, who claimed that 
He was a law-breaker in so doing. We cannot suppose 
that Jesus performed these miracles to aggravate the 
Pharisees; rather we are to understand that their Sabbath 
Day typified the great Sabbath of blessing and healing 
—the antitypical Sabbath which is in the future— the 
period of the Messianic reign and the healing of all 
earth's sorrows. 

Jesus clearly pointed out to the Scribes and Pharisees 
that they were misinterpreting the meaning of the 
Divine arrangement, that God did not make man merely 
to keep a Sabbath, but that He had made the Sabbath 
for, in the interest of, mankind. Hence everything 
necessary for man's assistance would be lawful on the 
Sabbath Day, however laborious it might be. Indeed, 
Jesus carried the thought still farther and pointed out to 
His hearers the absurdity of their position— for, he said, 
if any of you should have an ox or an ass fall into the pit 
on a Sabbath Day, would you leave him to die and thus 
suffer loss, as well as allow the animal to be in pain? 
Assuredly they would not, and assuredly they would be 
justified in helping any creature out of trouble on that 
day. Then said Jesus, If so much might be done for a 
dumb creature, might not a good work of mercy and help 
for mankind be properly enough done on the Sabbath 
Day? 

THE SEVENTH DAY STILL A SABBATH 

A mistake made by many Christians is the supposition 
that the Law Covenant which God made with Israel 
ceased, passed away. On the contrary, as the Apostle 
declares, "The Law hath dominion over a man so long 
as he liveth." The Jewish Law is as obligatory upon the 
Jew today as it was upon his fathers in the days of Moses. 
Only death could set the Jew free from that Law Covenant 
until, in God's due time, it shall be enlarged and 
made what God, through the Prophet, styles a New Covenant 
—a New Law Covenant. That will take place just 
as soon as the Mediator of the New Covenant shall have 
been raised up from amongst the people. That Prophet 
will be like unto Moses, but greater— the antitype. That 
Prophet will be the glorified Christ— Jesus the Head and 
the completed Church, who are frequently spoken of as 
members of His Body, and sometimes styled the Bride, 
the Lamb's Wife. This antitypical Mediator (Acts 3:22,23), 
under the New Law Covenant which He will 
then establish, will assist the Jews (and all who come 
into harmony with God through Him) back to that human 
perfection in which they will be able to keep the Divine 



Law perfectly in every particular. This great Mediator, 
Messiah, will for a thousand years carry on this great 
work. 

This Mediator is not yet completed. The Head has 
passed into glory centuries ago, but the Body, the Church, 
awaits a completeness of membership and resurrection 
change— to be made "like Him and see Him as He is" 
and share His glory and His work. 

Meantime the Law Covenant is still in force upon 
every Jew; but it is not in force upon any but Jews, as 
it never has been in force upon any other people. During 
these eighteen centuries, between the death of Christ and 
the inauguration of the New Covenant, Jesus, as the great 
High Priest, is offering the "better sacrifices" mentioned 
by St. Paul (Hebrews 9:23) and described in type in 
Leviticus 16. The first part of the great High Priest's 
sacrifice was the offering of the human body which He 
took for the purpose when He was made flesh— "a body 
hast thou prepared Me" "for the suffering of death." 
(Heb. 9:5; 2:9.) The second part of His "better sacrifices" 
is the offering of His Mystical Body— the Church. 
This work has been in progress since Pentecost. To the 
consecrated ones who approach the Father through Him 
He becomes the Advocate. He accepts them as His members 
on the earth; and their sufferings thenceforth are His 
sufferings so fully that He could say of them to Saul of 
Tarsus, "Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou Me?" "I am 
Jesus whom thou persecutest." These, accepted as His 
representatives in the flesh, their blemishes covered by 
their Advocate's merit, are begotten, by the Heavenly 
Father, of the Holy Spirit to be members of the New 
Creation— the spiritual Body of Christ, of which He is 
the Head. 

We remarked that the Sabbath Day, still in full force 
and its observance obligatory upon the Jew, is not upon 
other nationalities. We should modify this statement by 
the remark that there are some who mistakenly endeavor 
to be Jews and try to get under the Law Covenant provisions 
as Sabbath-keepers, etc. St. Paul recognized this 
tendency in his day. Note his words to the Christians of 
Galatia, who were not by nature Jews but Gentiles. He 
says, "Ye that desire to be under the Law, do ye not hear 
the Law?" "Oh, foolish Galatians, who hath bewitched 
you?" He proceeds to show them that the Jews are in 
bondage to their Law and can never get eternal life under 
it until the Mosaic Law Covenant shall ultimately be 
merged into the Messianic New Law Covenant. His 
argument then is that if the Jew cannot get life in keeping 
the Law, it would be foolish for Gentiles to think that 
they could secure Divine favor and everlasting life by 
keeping that Law. He declares, "By the deeds of the 
Law shall no flesh be justified in God's sight." The only 
way to obtain justification in God's sight is by the acceptance 
of Christ and by a full consecration to be His disciples 
and to join with Him in His Covenant of sacrifice 
—as it is written, "Gather together My saints unto Me, 



saith the Lord, those who have made a Covenant with 
Me by sacrifice" (Psa. 50:5); and again, "I beseech you, 
brethren, present your bodies living sacrifices, holy and 
acceptable to God, your reasonable service."— 
Romans 12:1. 

CHRISTIANS AND THE LAW SABBATH 

St. Paul did not mean that Christians should not strive 
to keep the Divine Law, but that they should not put 
themselves under it as a Covenant, nor think that by 
striving to oppose the Law Covenant they would get or 
maintain harmony with God and gain the reward of everlasting 
life. On the contrary, he declares in so many 
words, "The righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us 
who are walking, not after (or according to) the flesh, 
but after (or according to) the spirit." (Romans 8:4.) 
His meaning is clear. The Decalogue was never given to 
Christians, but it is quite appropriate that Christians 
should look back to that Decalogue and note the spirit of 
its teachings and strive to conform their lives thereto 
in every particular. 

But what is the spirit of the Decalogue? Our Lord 
Jesus clearly set it forth to be— "Thou shalt love the Lord 
thy God with all thy heart, with all thy mind, with all 
thy being, with all thy strength, and thou shalt love thy 
neighbor as thyself." St. Paul says that our Lord not 
only kept that Law, but that He magnified it, or showed 
it to have greater proportions than the Jews ever supposed 
it had— length and breadth, height and depth beyond the 
ability of fallen humanity to perform; moreover, the 
Apostle declares that our Lord Jesus made that Law 

R5027 : page 163 

honorable. The Jews having tried to keep the Divine 
Law for more than sixteen centuries had reason to 
doubt if anyone could keep it in a way satisfactory to 
God. But the fact that Jesus did keep the Law perfectly, 
and that God was satisfied with His keeping of it, made 
the Law honorable— proved that it was not an unreasonable 
requirement— not beyond the ability of a perfect man. 

Jesus showed the spirit or deeper meaning of several 
of the commandments; for instance, the command, Thou 
shalt do no murder, He indicated would be violated by anyone's 
becoming angry and manifesting in any degree 
an injurious or murderous spirit. (See also I John 3:15.) 
The commandment respecting adultery our Lord declares 
could be violated by the mind without any overt act— the 
simple desire to commit adultery if an opportunity offered 
would be a violation of the spirit of that command. It is 
this magnified conception of the Ten Commandments that 
the Apostle says Christians are better able to appreciate 
than were the Jews, because of having received the begetting 
of the Holy Spirit. And it is this highest conception 
of the Divine Law which is fulfilled in us (Christians 



—footstep followers of Jesus) who are walking through 
life, not according to the flesh and its desires and promptings, 
but according to the spirit— the spirit of the Divine 
Law, the spirit which the Father hath sent forth into our 
hearts— the desire to be like Him who is the Fountain of 
Love and Purity. 

THE SPIRIT OF THE SABBATH 

And there is another or deeper meaning to the other 
commandments than was understood by the Jews; so it is 
also with the Fourth, which enjoins the keeping of the 
Seventh Day as a day of rest or Sabbath. The word Sabbath 
signifies rest, and its deeper or antitypical meaning 
to the Christian is the rest of faith. The Jew, unable to 
keep the Mosaic Law and unable, therefore, to get everlasting 
life under the Law Covenant, was exhorted to flee 
to Christ; and, by becoming dead to the Law Covenant, 
by utterly renouncing it, he was privileged to come into 
membership in Christ— become sharer in the Covenant of 
sacrifice. So doing, he was promised rest from the Law 
and its condemnation, because "to them that are in Christ 
there is no condemnation"— the merit of Christ covers the 
shortcomings of all those who are striving to walk in His 
steps, and the Divine Spirit and Word give them the assurances 
of Divine favor, which ushers them into peace 
with God through our Lord Jesus Christ— ushers them 
into rest. Thus the Apostle declares, "We which believe 
do enter into (Sabbath) rest."— Hebrews 4:3. 

Moreover, the Apostle indicates that although we enter 
into a rest of faith now, through faith and obedience to 

R5028 : page 163 

Christ, Christians have a still greater rest awaiting them 
beyond their resurrection, when they shall enter into the 
rest which is in reservation for those that love the Lord- 
trie rest, the perfection, on the spirit plane, attained, as 
the Apostle describes, by resurrection— "sown in weakness, 
raised in power; sown in dishonor, raised in glory; 
sown an animal body, raised a spirit body." 

FIFTIETH DAY AND FIFTIETH YEAR 

Here we are reminded that Israel had two systems of 
Sabbaths— one of Sabbath Days and the other of Sabbath 
Years. The Sabbath Days began to count in the Spring. 
It was a multiple of seven. Seven times seven days 
(forty-nine days) brought them to the Jubilee day, the 
fiftieth day, which was styled Pentecost. It is scarcely 
necessary to call attention to the fulfilment of the antitype 
of this. Pentecost never had its true meaning until the 
Lord, as "the First-fruits of them that slept," arose from 
the dead. Then immediately the seven times seven, plus 
one, began to count, and on the fiftieth day the Holy 
Spirit was shed abroad upon all those "Israelites indeed" 



who, already consecrated, were waiting in the upper room 

for the antitypical High Priest to make satisfaction for 

their sins and to shed forth upon them the Holy Spirit, 

as the evidence of their restoration to Divine favor. Immediately 

they had peace with God. Immediately they 

entered into rest. Immediately they realized that they 

were children of God, begotten of the Holy Spirit, that 

they might in due time become joint-heirs with Jesus 

Christ their Lord. And is it not true that all down 

throughout this Gospel Age all who follow in the footsteps 

of Jesus and the disciples, all who renounce sin, 

trust in Jesus and fully consecrate their lives to Him, become 

recipients of the Holy Spirit and similarly enter into 

His rest? Only those who have entered into this rest and 

joy of the Holy Spirit can fully appreciate the matter. 

Now let us glance at the year Sabbath. Every seventh 
year the land had its rest. And seven times seven (forty-nine) 
brought them up to the fiftieth year or the Year of 
Jubilee, in which year all debts were cancelled and each 
Israelite returned to his own inheritance. It was a Year 
of rest, peace, joy. That Jubilee pictures the glorious 
Restitution Times of Messiah's Kingdom, which, we 
believe, are nigh, even at the door. When these times 
shall be ushered in, all the faithful followers of Jesus will 
have reached the heavenly condition, to be forever with 
the Lord. Their rest (Sabbath keeping) will have reached 
its completion, its perfection, and throughout that antitypical 
Jubilee the blessings of Divine favor will be gradually 
extended to the whole world, that every creature 
desirous of coming into harmony with God may enter into 
the rest which God has provided for the poor, groaning 
creation through the great Redeemer. 

THE CHRISTIAN'S SUNDAY SABBATH 

From what we have already seen it is manifest that 
God has put no Sabbath obligations upon the Christian— 
neither for the seventh day nor for any other day of the 
week. He has, however, provided for him a rest in the 
Lord, which is typified by the Jewish Sabbath Day. Do 
we ask upon which day we should celebrate this rest? 
We answer that we should be in this heart attitude of joy, 
rest, peace in the Lord and in His finished work, every 
day. So, then, the Christian, instead of having a Sabbath 
rest day, as the Jew, has rest perpetual— every day. And 
instead of its being merely a rest for his body, it is better 
—a rest for his soul, a rest for his entire being. It can be 
enjoyed wherever he may be, "at home or abroad, on the 
land or the sea," for "as his days may demand, shall his 
rest ever be." This is the spiritual antitype to the spiritual 
Israelite, of the Law Sabbath given to the natural 
Israelites. Whoever quibbles for the day Sabbath of the 
Jew shows clearly that he has not understood nor appreciated 
as yet, to the full at least, the antitypical Sabbath 
which God has provided for the spiritual Israel through 
Christ. 



But is there not a compulsion to the Christian to observe 
one day in the week sacred to the Lord? Yes, we 
answer; there is an obligation upon him such as there is 
upon no one else in the world. He is obligated by his 
Covenant to the Lord to keep every day sacred to the 
Lord. Every day he is to love the Lord his God with all 
his heart, with all his mind, with all his being, with all 
his strength; every day he is to love his neighbor as himself. 
And while striving to the best of his ability to conform 
to this spirit of the Divine Law, and while realizing 
that the blood of Jesus Christ our Redeemer cleanses us 

R5028 : page 164 

from all the imperfections contrary to our intentions— 
these may rest in the peace and joy of the Lord continually. 
"We which believe do enter into rest." 

There is no day of the week commanded to the spiritual 
Israelite as respects physical or mental rest— the latter 
they may have always, and the former may be ordered by 
human regulations for one day or for another. The 
Christian is commanded to be subject to the laws that be, 
in all such matters as are non-essential, not matters of 
conscience. 

THE RIGHT USE OF LIBERTY 

Let us remember, however, that our liberty in Christ 
is the liberty from the weight and condemnation of sin 
and death. Let us not think specially of a liberty from the 
Jewish restraints of the Seventh Day nor think especially 
of the fact that no day above another has been commanded 
upon Christians in the Bible. Let us rather consider this 
liberty as of minor consequence and importance as compared 
with our liberation from the power of sin and death. 

If one day or another be set apart by human lawgivers, 
let us observe their commands. Let us be subject 
to every ordinance of men. In Christian lands generally 
the first day of the week is set apart by law. Shall we 
ignore this law and claim that God has put no such law 
upon us and that we should have our liberty to do business, 
etc.? Nay, verily; rather, on the other hand, let us 
rejoice that there is a law which sets apart one day in 
seven for rest from business, etc. Let us use that day 
as wisely and as well as we are able for our spiritual upbuilding 
and for assistance to others. What a blessing we 
have in this provision! How convenient it makes it for 
us to assemble ourselves together for worship, praise, the 
study of the Divine Word! And if earthly laws provided 
more than one Sabbath (rest) day in the week we might 
well rejoice in that also, for it would afford us that much 
more opportunity for spiritual refreshment and 
fellowship. 

Nor should our knowledge of the liberty we enjoy in 
Christ ever be used in such a manner that it might stumble 
others. Our observance of the Sabbath enjoined by the 



law of the land should be most complete— to the very 
letter— that our good be not evil spoken of— that our 
liberty in Christ and freedom from the Mosaic Law be 
not misunderstood to be a business or pleasure license, but 
a privilege and opportunity for the worship and service 
of the Lord, and the building up of the brethren in the 
most holy faith, "once delivered to the saints." 

WHO CHANGED THE SABBATH DAY? 

Often the question is asked, Who changed the Sabbath 
Day to Sunday? The proper answer is that nobody 
changed it. The seventh day (Saturday) is still as obligatory 
upon the Jew as it ever was. 

The early Christians observed the seventh day for a 
long time because it was the law of the land, which gave 
them a favorable opportunity for meeting for praise, 
prayer and the study of God's word. In addition, the 
fact that Jesus arose from the dead on the first day of 
the week, and that He met with them on that day, led 
them to meet again and again on the first day, in hope 
that He would again appear; thus gradually it became 
a custom for them to meet on that day for Christian fellowship. 
In this way, so far as we know, both the first 
day and the seventh day of the week were observed by 
Christians for quite a time, but neither was understood 
to be obligatory— a bondage. Both days were privileges. 
And as many other days of the week as circumstances 
would permit were used in praising God and building one 
another up in the most holy faith, just as God's people 
are doing, or should be doing, in this, our day. 

Are we told that a pope once designated that the first 
day of the week should be observed by Christians as the 
Christian Sabbath? We answer that this may be so, but 
that neither popes nor any beings, not even the Apostles, 
could have right to add to or to take from the Word of 
God. St. Paul particularly warned the Church against 
coming into bondage to the Jewish customs of observing 
new moons and Sabbaths as though these were obligations 
upon Christians. The Son of God has made us free- 
free indeed. But our freedom from the Law Covenant 
of Israel enables us the more and the better to observe the 
very spirit of the Divine Law daily, hourly, and to present 
our bodies living sacrifices, holy and acceptable to God 
through the merit of our Redeemer. 



R5029 : page 164 

A FAITH FOUNDATION NECESSARY 

-JUNE 9. -LUKE 6:39-49.- 

"Be ye doers of the Word and not hearers 
only, deceiving your own selves."— Jas. 1:22. 



THE GREAT TEACHER in today's lesson 

emphasizes the necessity of knowledge and 

of a faith built thereupon. The blind 

leading the blind represent the ignorant 

leading the ignorant into difficulties, into 

the ditch. In the mental blindness of the 

past many Christians assumed that the 

Master here taught that the blind leaders 

and the blind followers of our day would 

all fall into the pit of eternal torment, but 

not so. The thought is that they will stumble and experience 

injury instead of reaching the desired destination. 

The destination sought by the Jews was fellowship 
with and relationship to God— His highest favor, mentioned 
to Abraham, saying, "In thy Seed shall all the 
families of the earth be blessed." St. Paul says of that 
promise, "Israel hath not obtained that which he seeketh, 
but the election hath obtained it and the rest were 
blinded." (Rom. 1 1:7.) The entire Jewish race was 
blinded and turned aside and fell into the pit— into confusion, 
darkness, separation from God. This was the 
very matter against which Jesus forewarned them. They 
were following the lead of the Scribes and Pharisees and 
Doctors of the Law, all of whom were blind leaders who 
misled their too trusting followers. The disciple or follower 
will not fare better than his master or leader or 
teacher; he cannot hope for better results than his 
leader. 

How important, then, that God's people recognize the 
true Leader, Jesus, that they hear His voice, and heed 
not the voice of others. In the present, in the ending of 
this Gospel Age, we have a condition of things very similar 
to that which obtained in the end of the Jewish Age. 
We have many great, learned and wise men in all the 
denominations of Christendom, as the Jews had in Jesus' 
day in all their different sects. It is equally important 
that we take heed that we do not follow blind leaders 
today— in fact, it is much more important. Why should 
we follow any of the creeds when now we have the Word 
of God in such convenient form and when all are able to 

R5029 : page 165 

read it? Who cannot rejoice that recently the 
Pope issued instructions that the Roman Catholic bishops 
should encourage Catholics to study the Bible? How it 
would rejoice us to find the Protestant leaders similarly 
urging the Word of God upon their peoples! 

Alas! on the contrary, we find that many of the great 
and wise of the principal pulpits of the world are undermining 
the faith of the people by telling them that the 
Bible is not Divinely inspired, that Moses and the 
Prophets did not write the books ascribed to them, and 
hence indirectly saying that Jesus and the Apostles were 
deceived when they made quotations from the Old Testament 



and ascribed them to Isaiah, Jeremiah, Moses, 

Habakkuk, etc. These great men style themselves 

Higher Critics and endorse the theory of Evolution, that 

humanity is undergoing a process of evolution from 

monkey-likeness up to God-likeness. They are thus indirectly 

telling their people that there was no fall from 

God's image and likeness, that there was no sin committed, 

no sentence for sin, no Redeemer from sin and its 

sentence and that restitution is not to be hoped for nor 

to be desired.-Acts 3:19-21. 

Surely the Great Teacher's advice not to follow blind 
leaders was never more needed than in our day. Blessed 
will they be who heed the warning, and by it will be 
guided back to a more thorough study of the words of 
the Great Teacher, His Apostles and the Prophets. 

HUMILITY A CHARACTER FOUNDATION 

The parable of a man with a beam in his own eye 
trying to pick a mote out of his brother's eye was a 
forceful method whereby the Master inculcated the necessity 
of humility on the part of those who would be 
taught of God. Humility is here as elsewhere put as a 
foundation virtue. The Latin word for humility is 
humus, ground. This implies that it is the soil out of 
which other virtues are produced. Those who think 
they know everything can learn nothing. As Chalmers 
has said: "The more a man does examine, the more does 
he discover the infirmities of his own character." As 
Wheatley remarked, "Ten thousand of the greatest faults 
in our neighbors are of less consequence to us than one 
of the smallest in ourselves." A knowledge of our sins 
and imperfections should make and keep all humanity 
humble; but how beautiful it is to realize that the perfect 
Jesus was humble and that all the holy angels are so! 

GRAPES OFF A BRAMBLE BUSH 

While the Scriptures forbid God's people to judge one 
another, they do commend to us another kind of judging. 
We are not to judge in the sense of condemning, 
sentencing, etc., those who claim to be honest, sincere, 
reverential, merely because they differ from what we 
would expect; God knows their hearts and to his own 
Master each servant must stand or fall eventually. 

But while not condemning the heart we are to judge 
of the outward conduct. The parable which our Lord in 
this lesson gives respecting the gathering of grapes from 
bramble bushes illustrates this point. God's people are 
likened to the grape-vine, which produces no thorns but 
luscious clusters of fruit. Mankind in general are likened 
to bramble bushes, ready to scratch, tear, injure, on the 
slightest provocation, and are merely self-sustaining, not 
bringing forth fruitage that would be a blessing to others. 
We are to distinguish between such characters and God's 
people: "By their fruits shall ye know them." 



It is said that at times a bramble bush will be entirely 
covered by a vine, so that the grapes would appear 
to be coming from the bush. We are not to be mistaken. 
A good tree cannot bring forth an evil fruitage, neither 
can an injurious tree bring forth a good fruitage. The 
lesson, applied to humanity, is that those who are really 
God's people cannot live injurious lives or fruitless lives; 
they must be fruit-bearing else they are none of His. 
And should we find some of the fruits of the spirit commingling 
with a thorniness of life, an evil, injurious disposition, 
we are to assume that in some sense of the word 
the fruitage is merely put on and does not belong to the 
bramble-bush character. 

It is therefore useless for any man to tell us that he 
has given his heart to the Lord in fulness of consecration 
and that he has received the sanctifying influences 
of the Holy Spirit and yet find him rejoicing in sin, taking 
pleasure in iniquity, injustice, selfishness and a 
course of life injurious to his neighbors. If his heart be 
changed the results will be manifest in his daily life, because 
"out of the abundance of the heart the mouth 
speaketh." 

THE HOUSE ON THE ROCK 

The closing parable of this lesson is in full tune with 
its opening verse. In the first parable the blind who 
trust to the leadership of the blind fall into the ditch. 
In the parable now before us the picture is that of a 
householder. If he be wise he will not build upon the 
shifting sands, which either a wind storm or a rain storm 
may undermine, and cause a wreck, but he will seek a 
solid, rock foundation which will endure the storm. 

This parable illustrates two classes of believers. Both 
hear the Great Teacher's instructions and both believe 
and both rear faith structures and entertain heavenly 
hopes. But the one is more prudent, more careful than 
the other. One seeks for the doctrines and principles of 
the Divine Word, and builds his faith structure upon 
that true foundation which the Divine Revelation affords. 
His faith cannot fail whatever storms may assail; 
it is surely founded on the Divine promises. 

The unwise believer takes too much for granted and 
builds upon the traditions of the elders, the creeds of the 
Dark Ages, etc. He fails to appreciate the necessity for 
having a proper foundation for his faith and his works. 
In the time of stress and storm with which this Age will 
end all such will find the foundation swept from under 
their faith structure. There will be a general fall of 
Babylon, as the Scriptures declare— everything not well 
founded upon the sure Word of God will give way; "That 
day shall declare it." St. Paul mentions the same class 
and applies the lesson specially to our day in his letter 
to the Corinthians. Those whose faith structure will fail 
will thereby suffer great loss, though they themselves may 
be saved as by fire— through great tribulation.— 



I Cor. 3:13-15. 
R5028 : page 165 

DEEDS, NOT WORDS 

"They do the least 
Who talk the most, 

Whose good designs, 
Are all their boast; 
Let words be few. 

"They do the most 
Whose lives possess 

The sterling stamp 
Of righteousness; 
For deeds are true." 



R5030 : page 166 

"LEAST IN THE KINGDOM" 

--MATTHEW 11:2-19.-JUNE 16.- 

"Amongst them that are born of women there is none greater 
than John; yet the least in the Kingdom of God is 
greater than he."— Luke 7:28. 

IT WOULD BE difficult to express in words 

a higher tribute to John the Baptist than 

Jesus paid him in our text. Again He said, 

"There hath not risen a greater Prophet 

than John the Baptist." If then John was 

so holy a man, so great a man from the 

Divine standpoint, why did our Lord in this 

text declare that the least in the Kingdom 

of Heaven would be greater than John? 

This text has puzzled Bible exponents for 

many a day. It has seemed to many to be contradictory. 

But just as soon as we turn on the light contained in 
that word "Kingdom," the entire subject becomes clear. 
God had promised a Messianic Kingdom, and Jesus had 
come that He might be the Head of that Kingdom. The 
steps leading to the Kingdom honors and glories were 
steps of obedience to God, even unto death, and these 
steps Jesus had begun to take. On the cross He declared, 
"It is finished." He had finished the work of proving 
Himself loyal to God and to the Truth even unto death 
on the cross. 

Jesus thus became the Great Conqueror, the great High 
Priest, the great King of Glory, being exalted to the 
Heavenly state in His resurrection. But, as the Great 
King, He was to have associated with Him in His Throne, 
His Bride class. As the Great Priest, He was to have an 



under-priesthood, a "Royal Priesthood." As the Great 
Judge of the world, He was to have associates; as St. Paul 
declares, "Know ye not that the saints shall judge the 
world?"-I Cor. 6:2. 

In the Divine Plan this company of associates with 
Jesus in His glorious Kingdom were as much foreknown 
and foreordained as was He and His share in the Kingdom. 
As it was necessary for Him to undergo trials and 
testings of loyalty unto death, so it must be with the class 
called to be His associates— "He was tempted in all points 
like as we are." Thus His Message is, "To him that overcometh 
will I grant to sit with Me in My Throne, even as 
I overcame and am set down with My Father in His 
Throne." These would be followers in His footsteps, 
none could precede Him. His work was necessary first, 
to open up for His followers a new and living way, 
through the veil— that is to say, through His flesh- 
through His sacrifice. 

"SOME BETTER THING FOR US" 

While about five hundred brethren became Jesus' 
consecrated followers during His earthly ministry, they 
were not then accepted of the Father as sons, and not 
begotten of the Holy Spirit until Pentecost. God would 
not recognize any as sons until Jesus had finished His 
sacrifice, and, as the great Advocate, "Appeared in the 
presence of God for us"— as our Advocate with the 
Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous. John did not belong 
to this class, just as Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and all the 
Prophets did not belong to it. In God's providence their 
reward will be different from that of the Church— theirs 
will be an earthly reward. They will be resurrected to 
human perfection. They will have to do with the human 
phase of the Kingdom, which amongst men will represent 
Messiah and the Church, who will be spirit beings, but 
invisible to men, and whose dealings with mankind will 
be through those noble characters, the Ancient Worthies. 

We are not to infer that those glorious characters mentioned 
in the Scriptures who lived before Christ's time 
were ignoble or less faithful than the Gospel Church, but 
merely that God promised them the earthly perfection, 
while He has promised the Bride of Christ the heavenly 
perfection. They will not, like the remainder of mankind, 
come forth to imperfection, to attain perfection gradually 
during the thousand years of Messiah's reign; the record 
is that they will come forth as perfect human beings. 
That will be the reward of their faithfulness. St. Paul 
explains the entire matter in Hebrews, the 1 1th chapter. 
He tells of the faith and heroism of those Ancient 
Worthies and that "they had this testimony, that they 
pleased God." There will be no necessity for testing them 
in the future. Their acceptance with God is already 
proven and declared. 

Nevertheless, in God's order the earthly Kingdom and 
restitution blessings for the world cannot begin until the 



Kingdom class, Christ and the Church, shall first be completed. 

Thus the Apostle declares, "All these died in faith, 

not having received the (earthly) things promised to 

them, God having provided some better thing for us (the 

Church), that they, without us, should not be made perfect." 

The glorification of the Church, her resurrection 

to perfection, must first be accomplished before the blessings 

through them can proceed to the natural seed of 

Abraham, and then through Israel to all nations.— 

Heb. 11:38-40. 

NOT THE BRIDE BUT THE FRIEND 

John the Baptist seemed to either comprehend the 
situation, or else he spoke the truth by prophecy when he 
declared, "He that hath the Bride is the Bridegroom, but 
the friend of the Bridegroom, hearing His voice, rejoiceth 
greatly. This my joy therefore is fulfilled." He perceived 
that in God's providence he had a very honorable 
and blessed station and work to accomplish, but he was 
to be neither the Bridegroom nor a member of the Bride 
class. 

This does not imply that John was disappointed at the 
time, nor that he and the other Ancient Worthies will be 
disappointed when they come forth in the resurrection 
to find a Bride class selected to a higher place than theirs. 
On the contrary, their cup of blessing being full, and 
never having been begotten of the Holy Spirit to a spirit 
nature, they will not be able to comprehend or appreciate 
any blessings higher than their own. Just, for instance, 
as a fish in the water, seeing a bird flying in the air, would 
not be jealous of the bird and its greater freedom, but, 
on the contrary, would be better satisfied in the water, 
its natural element, so all natural men, not begotten of 
the Holy Spirit, will appreciate more the earthly blessings 
which Divine providence has provided for them. 

In this very lesson Jesus intimates all the above, saying, 
"The Law and the Prophets were until John." He 
was the last of the Prophets. He introduced Jesus, the 
Head of the Kingdom class. Jesus further declared, "If 
ye are willing to receive it, this is Elias which was to 
come." That is to say, Those of you who are able to 
appreciate the matter may understand that John the 
Baptist did a work which was in full accord with the 
prophecy which declared that Elijah must first come and 
do a reformatory work before Messiah would come. 

CURIOSITY IS NOT RELIGION 

Addressing the multitudes the Great Teacher inquired, 
Why did you go out to the wilderness to see John? Was 

R5031 :page 167 

it to hear his message? Was it because God spoke 
through him as a Prophet as the wind makes music 



through the reeds? Or did you go out to see a man in 
fine clothing and of kingly state? 

What really drew to the wilderness to John's teaching 
was that he was God's Prophet; as it is written, "Behold, 
I send My messenger before Thy face, who shall 
prepare the way before Thee." This preparation for 
Jesus John made with the Jewish nation. His message 
was that the Kingdom of Heaven was about to be offered 
to them, and that only the holy would be ready to receive 
it. 

But neither John nor his hearers fully realized in what 
way the Kingdom would be offered to the people, namely, 
that it would be an offer, first, of a place or share in the 
Kingdom, and that the terms would be full consecration 
to the Lord, to walk "the narrow way." Jesus again 
testified, "If ye had received John ye would have received 
Me." 

In other words, all who received John's message were 
such as were in heart condition to receive Jesus; and 
the same spirit of indifference which permitted Herod to 
imprison John and to finally behead him marked the Jewish 
leaders and their unbelief. John as a Prophet was 
abstemious to the extreme, and they said, "He hath a 
devil." Jesus presented Himself less peculiarly, eating 
and drinking and being clothed as other people, and of 
Him they said, "Behold a gluttonous man and a winebibber, 
a friend of publicans and sinners." Thus was it 
demonstrated that the fault was not in the manifestation 
of God's providence, but in the hearts of the majority 
of the Jews. 



R5032 : page 167 

AND SHE WAS A SINNER 

--LUKE 7:36-50. -JUNE 23.- 

"Faithful is the saying, and worthy of all acceptation, 
that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners." 
-1 Timothy 1:15. 

THE GOSPEL OF CHRIST is the Message 

of Divine compassion toward sinners. All 

religions recognize sin and propose reconciliation 

with God— by works of charity, by 

voluntary self-torture, or by future torments. 

None of the heathen gods have 

any touch of sympathy for humanity; they 

are cold, cruel, vindictive. The Bible, of 

all the religious books we know of, alone 

tells of a God touched with the feeling of 

human infirmities and with sympathy toward sinners. 

"God commendeth His love toward us in that while we 

were yet sinners Christ died for the ungodly."— Rom. 5:8 



Note the expressions of the Scriptures indicating 
Divine compassion: "God looked down from His Holy 
Habitation to behold and to hear the groaning of the 
prisoners"— the suffering of humanity under the death 
penalty, and the incidental aches and pains of our fallen 
condition. He did more than look, He did more than pity; 
His right Arm of divine power in due time began to bring 
deliverance for the captives of sin and death. Already 
He has sent His Son and thus provided a Ransom price 
for the sins of the whole world. Already His Son has 
been glorified, and merely awaits the time for the establishment 
of His Kingdom. 

Meantime Divine grace has been still further manifested 
in the invitation granted to a "little flock," to be 
justified by faith and to be sanctified by the High Priest's 
offering of them, and thus to become New Creatures, 
joint-heirs in His Kingdom. Still the Scriptures tell us 
of God's pursuing Love and Mercy. He is unwilling that 
any should perish, but wills, on the contrary, that all shall 
have an opportunity to turn to Him that they may have 
everlasting life. It is for this very purpose that Messiah's 
Kingdom will be established in great glory and with full 
power. God's right Arm is not shortened. In due time 
it will bring the salvation for which the poor groaning 
creation has so long waited. It will come with the manifestation 
of the Sons of God in Kingdom power.— 
Rom. 8:19. 

Eventually the Redeemer "shall see of the travail of 
His soul and be satisfied." Eventually the Heavenly 
Father's Plan will be so outworked that every creature in 
heaven and earth and under the earth shall be heard 
saying, "Praise and glory and honor, dominion and might 
be unto Him that sitteth upon the Throne, and unto the 
Lamb, forever." Eventually God, through the Messianic 
Kingdom, "shall wipe away all tears from off all faces," 
and cause the reproach of being His people to disappear 
from the earth. (Rev. 21:4; Isa. 25:8.) So superior is 
this God of the Bible and of Christianity to all the misconceptions 
of heathendom and Christendom that, when 
the glorious Day of Messiah's Kingdom shall have been 
fully ushered in, the glory of our God will be revealed, and 
all flesh shall see it together.— Isa. 40:5. 

A WOMAN WHO WAS A SINNER 

Our Redeemer possessed and exemplified the Heavenly 
Father's love and mercy. He declared that He was 
merely the exponent of the Father's will, and hence of the 
Father's love and sympathy. Our Lord's sympathy is presented 
not only in this lesson but also in many others, and 
all of His followers do well to cultivate the same spirit. 
Jesus was not sympathetic with the sins of the people, but 
with the people themselves. He realized as few do the 
real difficulty with the majority of sinners. "Behold, I 
was shapen in iniquity, in sin did my mother conceive me!" 
exclaimed the Prophet. We are sinners by heredity. We 



have inherited partially depraved minds, partially unbalanced 
brains and morals. 

St. Paul, speaking of the very noblest class, declares, 
"We cannot do the things which we would"— any of us; 
hence all humanity are sinners. "There is none righteous, 
no, not one." Therefore it is merely a question of the 
degree of sinfulness, and the degree is often measured by 
the degree of inherited weakness, or the degree of surrounding 
temptations. The really reprehensible and 
blameworthy sinners are those who sin wilfully, deliberately, 
knowingly, intentionally, without either will or effort 
to resist sin. But it is not ours to judge which these are. 
Indeed, we are incompetent to judge, we cannot read the 
heart, we cannot fully appreciate the degree of the temptation 
and the weakness of the tempted. Hence the Master 
said, "Judge nothing before the time." In due time the 
saints will judge the world, but not now. 

Now we must follow the Master's example; and we 
may well do this because, although He knew what was in 
man, as we could not know, He was very charitable, which 
leads us to suppose that if we were perfect we would be 
all the more charitable towards sinners, though not at all 
sympathetic with sin. 

Who can read the New Testament Gospel narratives 

R5032 : page 168 

without realizing that Jesus was indeed a "Friend of 
sinners," as was charged against Him by the Pharisees? 
And is not this the feature of the Bible which specially 
commends it to humanity? With the exception of the 
wilful sinners, whom we must hope are few, there comes 
a time when sin is seen in its true color and is detested. 
Then is the time when the gospel Message from the 
Friend of sinners specially appeals to such. All seem to 
know instinctively that Jesus stands ready to be the 
Friend and Helper of all who come to the Father through 
Him. 

Jesus had accepted an invitation to dine at a Pharisee's 
house. The dinner had begun. Resting upon one arm 
they used the other for handling the food. After the 
custom of the times, they reclined upon low tables or 
couches, their heads toward the center where the food 
was placed. A curtain separated the dining room from 
the outer court. 

While the dinner was progressing, a woman "who 
was a sinner," a harlot, deeply penitent, entered. She 
had in her hand some precious perfume, with which she 
intended to anoint the Savior's feet, as was sometimes 
done with dignitaries of that time. Her heart was full, 
and tears gushed from her eyes while she sought to open 
the bottle; they fell like rain upon Jesus' feet, evidently 
quite contrary to the woman's intention. She was dishonoring 
the very feet she intended to honor. Loosening 
her hair, she used it as a towel, entirely regardless of the 
fact that for a woman at that time it was considered dishonorable 



to let down her hair in public; but intent upon 
her errand she dried the feet and poured the precious 
perfume upon them, presumably as an honor to the One 
from whom she had heard "wonderful words of life"— 
words of Divine compassion and pity for sinners, words 
of hope for herself. 

TWO DEBTORS AND THEIR LOVE 

The host of the occasion watched Jesus to see how He 
would receive this manifestation of loving devotion, saying 
in his heart, If this Man were a prophet, He would 
know that the woman offering Him this honor is disreputable. 
He would denounce her and bid her, "Begone," and 
not to touch Him. Jesus knew his thoughts and answered 
him in parabolic form, saying, "A certain creditor 
had two debtors, one owed five hundred pence and the 
other fifty. Neither could pay and he forgave them both. 
Which of them will love him most?" The Pharisee replied, 
"I suppose he to whom most was forgiven." Jesus 
agreed with him. 

Then Jesus made application of the matter; turning to 
the woman, He said to His host, Seest thou this woman, 
who washed My feet with her tears and wiped them with 
her hair? You are the host of the occasion, yet you did 
not offer Me water for the washing of My feet, as is 
customary in our land to do to those whom we desire to 
honor. You gave Me no kiss, as is customary amongst 
friends, but this woman has repeatedly kissed My feet. 
"You did not anoint My head with oil, but she hath 
anointed My feet with ointment. Therefore, her sins, 
which are many, are forgiven, for she loved much; but to 
whom little is forgiven, the same loveth little." And He 
said to the woman, "Thy sins are forgiven." 

Is not this to some extent an illustration and an explanation 
of the fact that the majority of those who 
love the Lord most are such as realize their own sinful 
and fallen condition most and who appreciate most the 
forgiving love of God manifested in Jesus? Is it not true 
today also that those who are most moral, and therefore 
might be said to have less to be forgiven, have correspondingly 
less love? 

This should not be the case, however. The less 
degraded ought naturally to be the more able to love and 
to appreciate Divine goodness and love and the more willing 
to present their little all in Divine service. 

R5033 : page 168 

Those present not improperly began to inquire, Who 
is this that even forgives sins? The only satisfactory 
answer is that He is the one He professes to be, the Son 
of God, the Redeemer of the world. He was then in 
process of rendering up His sacrifice according to His 
covenant, and on the strength of that covenant and 
sacrifice He had authority to tell the woman that her sins 



were forgiven, because He was making the Atonement 
which would be applicable to her. 



R5029 : page 168 

GENERAL CONVENTION JUNE 1-9 
PERTLE SPRINGS, MO. (CHAUTAUQUA GROUNDS). 

THIS CONVENTION has been specially arranged 
for the convenience of Bible students 
within a radius of a thousand miles from 
Kansas City. We have no doubt, however, 
that many will be in attendance from still 
greater distances. The place itself is ideal 
and strictly first-class in every particular. 
It borders a beautiful lake and has free 
access to the health-giving Spring from 
which it takes its name. 

Many will be able to attend this Convention who could 
not conveniently come to one in the East by reason of the 
cost in money and time. Our expectation is that this will 
be one of our most enjoyable Conventions. We never had 

R5030 : page 168 

a better situation as respects conditions surrounding, 
quiet, etc. 

The proprietors of the Chautauqua are also the owners 
of a large hotel there and of rooming flats in Warrensburg. 
They guarantee comfortable accommodations for a 
thousand persons at $1.50 per day. Aside from this we 
are arranging with private householders in Warrensburg 
for as many more at $1.00 each, two in a room. The 
round-trip fare to Pertle Springs daily will make the 
amount $1.10. However, none would best reckon on less 
than $1.25 per day. 

Excursion rates are already in operation, but these are 
being extended so that a fare of not more than four cents 
per mile for the round-trip may be expected to be in operation 
by the time you receive this notice. 

The speakers for the Convention will include some of 
the very best. Brother Rutherford will be Chairman, and 
Brother Russell will be in attendance also. The sessions 
will begin Sunday, June 2, at the Springs, continue there 
throughout the week and adjourn to conclude at Kansas 
City June 9. 

Decide as quickly as possible whether or not you will 
attend this Convention. If you decide to attend, write 
immediately to the Society's representative, N. Engle, 
Warrensburg, Mo., stating what priced accommodations 
you desire and, if you will not be staying the entire time, 
which days you will be in attendance. 

We hope for a grand reunion at Pertle Springs and for 



a season of spiritual refreshment. To this end we exhort 
all who attend to come praying that the Lord will bless 
them, not only in receiving a blessing, but also in dispensing 
one to others. We are sure, as on other occasions, 

R5030 : page 169 

not to go away empty, but to carry with us spiritual blessings 
for the refreshment of those at home not permitted 
to attend. 

HARVESTERS' DAY AT THE CONVENTION 

The program for the Convention includes a "Harvest 
Workers' Day." Noting this, one dear friend who has 
received great spiritual profit through the Colporteur 
service has proffered assistance to all the Colporteurs of 
the Society in attendance to the extent of $5— to all who 
shall have been in the regular Colporteur work for at least 
three months prior to the Convention. We have no doubt 
that this proposal will be helpful to some who might not 
otherwise be able to bear the expense. The money is 
deposited with the Colporteur Department and will be 
credited on the accounts or handed over in money, as may 
best suit the convenience of the receivers. 



R5031 :page 169 

SOME INTERESTING QUESTIONS 
MESSIAH'S KINGDOM WILL BE SPIRITUAL. 

Question.— What is meant by Messiah's Kingdom? 

Answer.— Our understanding is that Messiah's Kingdom 
will be a spiritual one, invisible to mortals, yet all-powerful 
for the accomplishment of the great things promised 
in the Law and the Prophets. The Empire which 
He will establish, invisible to men, will take the place 
of the Empire of Satan, likewise invisible. The King 
of Glory will replace the Prince of Darkness. Principal 
amongst Messiah's earthly agents and representatives will 
be Abraham, Isaac and all the Prophets, raised to full, 
human perfection. Instead of their being, as heretofore, 
the fathers, they shall be the children of Messiah, whom 
He will make "Princes in all the earth." (Psa. 45:16.) 
To this Kingdom the nation of Israel will speedily unite. 
Eventually every nation will come into harmony with 
Messiah, and all people will be privileged to come in under 
Israel's New Covenant, then established by the great 
"Messenger of the Covenant, whom ye delight in."— Jer. 31:31-34; 
Mai. 3:1-3. 

The glorious Messiah, whom the Jews identify with 
"Michael, the great Prince, which standeth for thy people" 
(Dan. 12:1), the Mohammedans also expect, and 



identify Him with Mohammed of the past. The Free 
Masons also expect the same glorious personage and, in 
their traditions, identify Him with Hiram Abiff, the great 
Master Mason. This same great Messiah, Michael, the 
Archangel, the antitypical Melchizedek, Priest as well as 
King, we identify as "the Man Jesus Christ, who gave 
Himself a Ransom-Price for all, to be testified in due 
time."— I Tim. 2:6. 

But when the Great King shall appear in His Glory 
and establish His Kingdom with Israel, He will be, as 
promised by the Prophets, "The desire of all nations." 
(Hag. 2:7.) Then all the blinded eyes shall be opened 
and all the deaf ears shall be unstopped. (Isa. 35:5.) 
Then, who He is, and how He should be identified with 
Abraham's Seed and David's line, will be clearly known 
to all in Heaven and all on earth. Not now, but when 
the King shall reign in righteousness, all shall fully understand 
the significance of Zechariah's prophecy (12:7-10) 
and of Psa. 22: 16. Content that Messiah shall show 
the Truth in His Day of revealment, we are glad to point 
Jews, Mohammedans, Christians, all, to the glorious 
Messiah, and the great work of blessing for all the 
nations, which God will accomplish, through the Seed of 
Abraham, according to His Covenant and His Oath. 



PERFECTION WILL INSURE PROTECTION AGAINST ACCIDENTS. 

Question.— Will there be accidents and death during 
the Millennium aside from those of sinners going into 
the Second Death? 

Answer.— While the reign of Christ will be a reign of 
righteousness unto life, we are not to understand that 
Adamic death will be at an end as soon as Messiah has 
begun His reign, for it is stated that He must reign until 
He has put down all enemies. (I Cor. 15:25,26.) It is 
understood that people will be more or less in the Adamic 
death during the thousand years and will rise gradually 
out of Adamic imperfection and death to the perfection 
of the human nature. We should remember that the Kingdom 
as it will be established in the beginning of the 
Millennial Age will consist of the New Jerusalem— that 
is, the glorified Church, of which Christ is the Head. 
(Rev. 21:1-8.) During the thousand years the world will 
be coming into accord with this arrangement. For all 
such as will come into harmony there will be a blessed 
arrangement by which they will be protected from any 
penalty for imperfections. We may reasonably suppose 
that after perfection is reached there will be no more 
accidents, just as we have reason to suppose that in heaven 
there is no necessity for surgeons, doctors, ambulances, 
etc. "Nothing shall hurt or destroy in all God's holy 
mountain [Kingdom]." (Isa. 11:9.) God's will shall 
be done on earth as it is done in heaven. We read that 
there shall be no more sighing and no more crying and no 



more dying. 



THE FINAL TESTING WILL DETERMINE IT. 

Question.— Will restitution include the right to everlasting 
life, or will the right to everlasting life be determined 
by the final testing that will come at the end of 
the Millennial Age? 

Answer.— Perfection was given to Adam originally; 
and by virtue of his perfection he had a right to continue 
to live, if he were obedient. But as God saw fit to test 
Father Adam, so He will test the human family. And the 
final test, after the Kingdom shall have been turned over 
to the Father, will be by way of testing their worthiness 
to attain these life-rights and to keep them everlastingly. 
The thousand years of Christ's reign will be for bringing 
mankind to perfection. At the end of that reign those who 
have reached perfection will be delivered over to the 
Father. The New Covenant will have accomplished for 
them all that it was intended to accomplish. But before 
God determines them worthy of the fulness of His everlasting 
life, He will see that all are tried individually and 
without any Mediator between. We may be sure that the 
test will be a crucial and a just one. 



APPLICABLE TO TWO CLASSES. 

Question.— To whom is the Apostle speaking when he 
says, "I beseech you, brethren, by the mercies of God, to 
present your bodies living sacrifices"?— Rom. 12:1. 

Answer.— These words are properly applicable to two 
classes. First, they apply to a class termed "brethren," in 
the sense that they are no longer opponents, but sympathetically 
in harmony with the consecrated. The Apostle was 
urging these to complete the work of grace which they 
had already begun. Secondly, the text applies to those 
who have made the consecration, and urges them to complete 
the work. I urge you, brethren, that day by day you 
attend to this matter of presenting your bodies living sacrifices 

R5031 :page 170 

until the work be accomplished. This, he says, is a 
reasonable service, acceptable to God. 

Although St. Paul does not say how the great Advocate 
will make the sacrifice acceptable, yet this is to be 
understood by Christians, who know that they are accepted 
in the Beloved. After that class have given up their lives, 
after they have put all in the Lord's hands, they understand 
that they, themselves, as members of the Body of 
Christ, are to die daily. Hence it is that daily an opportunity 
comes to us to lay down life in the Lord's service. 



While this is a daily dying, yet, in another sense of the 
word, it is a sacrifice to the end of life. Our Lord Jesus 
said, "I have a baptism to be baptized with, and how am I 
straitened until it be accomplished!" (Luke 12:50.) In 
one sense, His sacrifice was accepted at Jordan. In another 
sense it was day by day until that baptism was completed 
on the cross and He cried, "It is finished!" 



MAY HAVE TWO APPLICATIONS. 

Question.— "For, behold, the Lord, the Lord of hosts, 
doth take away from Jerusalem and from Judah the 
stay and the staff, the whole stay of bread, and the whole 
stay of water." (Isaiah 3:1.) What does this mean? 

Answer.— There was a famine which came upon Judea. 
The people did not have enough to eat or to drink. They 
are still in very much the condition of Ishmael at the 
time when Hagar laid him down to die. During the 
Gospel Age the poor Jews have been famishing. They 
have been without any communication whatever with God. 

The same Prophet, from whose inspired writings the 
above text is taken, tells us of another class whose "bread 
shall be given them, whose water shall be sure." (Isa. 33:16.) 
They will be well cared for, well protected, and 
will have both bread and water. This text may have 
applied to the Jews at the time of the destruction of 
Jerusalem and may apply to any Jews and others who, 
since that time, have put their trust in the Lord and to 

R5032 : page 170 

whom He has supplied what was needed for the 
strengthening of their lives. As we look about us today 
we find many of nominal Israel hungry, thirsty. They 
endeavor to make themselves think that they are well fed; 
and the majority of them do not realize that they are poor 
and naked and unfed and blind. In the meantime the 
Church of Christ is in the protected place. Everything is 
working together for good to them. Their bread and 
water is sure. "No good thing will He withhold from 
them that walk uprightly"; "the meek will He guide in 
judgment; the meek will He teach His way." 



page 170 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEAR FRIENDS :- 

Your recent favor came duly to hand and I lack words 
to express my appreciation. I can only say that I sincerely 
thank you and think the bookmark both beautiful and helpful. 

A sense of my own unworthiness, my semi-invalid, 



"shut-in" condition and other adverse circumstances have 
caused my hesitation in taking the Vow; but I have finally 
decided to take it, trusting the grace of Christ to enable me 
to keep it faithfully. 

As I read these wonderful STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
my heart is filled with praise to our Heavenly Father and 
our Lord Jesus that such loving-kindness has been shown 
me in the gift of these marvelous treasures of the Divine 
Revelation, so enlightening my mind by the Spirit of Truth 
that I am able to understand and appreciate the Scriptures. 

To believe the wonderful truths unfolded to us through 
STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES separates one from kindred, 
friends and even "Christian" companions; they think one 
more dangerous than an infidel. To believe MILLENNIAL 
DAWN teachings is to be ostracized by the nominal church. 
But Christ welcomes those who are cast out for His Truth's 
sake! 

I have been prayerfully re-reading the STUDIES and have 
just taken up Vol. V., in which I find so much to study out. 
I find, now and then, little ways in which I can give my 
testimony to those being ensnared by Evolution, etc.; it is my 
greatest joy and comfort to be able to offer this small service. 

Earnestly praying for all the brethren and sisters who are 
laboring for the Master. 

Yours in The Faith, 

(MRS.) MARY CHAFFEE.-R.I. 



DEAR FRIENDS :- 

For the benefit of any whom you might know to be afflicted 
with cancer, I have much pleasure in informing you that recently 
a dear friend of mine was cured of cancer. The agency 
in this case was radium; and the process was painless. I also 
know of another instance of a very much worse case being 
entirely cured. 

Is not this another instance of the bringing to us of restitution 
blessings by the Lord? 

Your sister in Christ, 

MRS. J. P. ALLGOOD (M.D.).-Ala. 



DEAR BRETHREN:- 

I recently received Vols. IV. and VI., STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES, and am reading them with great joy. I now 
have five volumes, and am highly pleased with all. 

For some time I have been looking for God's people on 
earth, according to the Scriptures, but until now have failed 
to find them. Though a member of the Methodist Church, I 
could not find them there, as I understand their description in 
the Bible, and my own desire for their companionship. 

I extend my hand to you in joyous welcome, and greet 
you with love. I shall offer as much support, financially and 
otherwise, as lieth in me, and desire to secure further literature 
from you as soon as money matters permit. 



There is great joy in the prayer of our Lord: "Thy 
Kingdom come; Thy will be done on earth as in heaven!" 

I ask your prayers for me and my household, assuring you 
of mine. 

I remain your friend and brother, CHRIS. ACHERSOLD.-Ark. 



BELOVED PASTOR AND BROTHER:- 

When the Vow came, I was new in the Truth, and it was 
not received by me as "meat in due season." 

In asking advice of the brethren older in the Truth, I 
was cautioned to wait, and to weigh all these things, which 
I foolishly did, instead of taking the matter seriously to the 
Lord and asking guidance of Him. 

But I did tell the Father that I would not let it interfere 
with my study of His wonderful Plan, nor with my fellowship 
with His earnest workers, and that I would wait upon 
Him till He should show me the way. 

He surely took me at my word, for it was nearly two 
years later that the eyes of my understanding were opened 
so that I realized how much I had lost in not taking this 
precious Vow sooner! 

Then it was that I and my two dear younger brothers, who 
with me symbolized their consecration, and have grown up 
with me in the Truth, and whose letters accompany this, took 
the matter up seriously and called upon our dear Brother 
Sherman. He so clearly showed us the way that at that time 
we made the Vow our own before the Lord, and have since 
been wonderfully blessed. 

We did not, until now, realize that we had not done our 
part by you in acknowledging its acceptance; but we do so 
at this time, hoping that sending our names may bring the 
greater encouragement to you. 

Our earnest prayer is that you may be kept most precious 
in the Father's sight! May God bless you, dear brother! 

Yours in the one Hope, W. D. CHAPIN-Calif. 



BELOVED BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

I have been negligent of my duty and privilege of sending 
in my name as one who has taken the Vow. 

Since taking it I have received so many rich blessings that 
my appreciation and love of it are greatly increased. It helps 
me each day in the Christian warfare, reminding me of my 

page 171 

consecration and of my weakness and dependence upon the 
Lord for the promised grace to help in every time of need. 
It has brought very near to me the remembrance that all 
the Lord's dear Harvest laborers are praying for me because 
of our common membership in the Body of Christ! It forcibly 
brings to mind the need to watch and pray lest I "become 
a castaway," and thus helped I have been enabled to overcome, 



but know that I fall far short of my high aim. 

Being quite young and in contact with the world, this 
precious Vow has helped me to keep myself pure— "unspotted 
from the world." Sometimes heart-sick and discouraged, 
then come the sweet words: 

"As thy days so shall thy strength be"; "I will never forsake 
thee"— the promised grace to help! "Praise ye the Lord 
for all His benefits ! " 

Praying for your highest spiritual welfare, I remain 

Your brother and fellow-servant in the Lord, 
K. E. THOMPSON.-Calif. 



OUR DEAR BROTHER:- 

Your kind letter of Christmas and New Year greeting 
with enclosures, just received and much appreciated. We join 
in most hearty reciprocation of these good wishes. May the 
dear Lord abundantly bless and continue to use you in His 
glorious work. We will prize very highly the book-mark with 
your picture and the beautiful poem and Vow-cards. We 
also thank you for the book of poems. 

Indeed, our hearts fill to overflowing with gratitude to our 
dear Heavenly Father as we learn more and more of His 
wonderful "Truth" and each day realize more fully what 
blessed privileges we are enjoying at the present time. We 
greatly appreciate, too, your kind assurances that you have 
our interest at heart. However, we already felt this to be 
the case. 

We note your remarks in your letter that 1912 will doubtless 
be the most momentous year of the harvest in many respects. 
This awakens in us fresh zeal and more earnest prayer 
that we may all be able to stand in the evil hour and prove 
faithful unto the end. 

Praying the Lord's richest blessings upon you in your 
tour, and that He may "keep you under the shadow of His 
wings," we are, with Christian love, 

Your sisters in His name, M. B. CLEVELAND, 

P. B. CLEVELAND. 



R5033 :page 171 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have just finished reading your sermon in the Manila 
Times, and it has given me much peace and happiness. I want 
to learn more of the Bible, but find it obscure so much of 
the time. In the past I can truthfully say it has been a sealed 
book to me. But from now on I am going to diligently search 
the Scriptures for Truth and spiritual guidance. 

Any reading matter you can send me to help me toward 
enlightenment will be most gratefully received. If you will 
tell me where to secure all of your writings on the Bible I 
shall gladly send the required amount to get them. 

We will leave here in June for San Francisco, Cal., where 



we expect to remain nine or ten months. While there I desire 
greatly to take up the systematic study of the Bible. Could 
you recommend to me some school (or person) there under 
which I could place myself as a Bible student? 

May God bless abundantly your great work is my prayer. 

Faithfully yours, MRS. J. DUCKWORTH-FORD. --Philippines. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

You will be interested to know a little circumstance which 
illustrates how the HEAVENLY MANNA can be used of the 
Lord to draw attention to the Truth. 

A brother and sister staying at a strange house left their 
MANNA on the dresser during the day, so that it might be 
seen. The help looked at it and liked it very much. This 
led to the sale of several first volumes and the arousing of 
considerable interest in the Truth. 

Lovingly your brother, WALTER H. BUNDY. 



DEAR BROTHER:- 

If you will pardon me for taking a little of your valuable 
time I would be pleased if you will answer the following 
question:— 

In DAWN, Vol. 1, page 232, par. 1, we read as follows: "Our 
sins He consented to have imputed to Him, that He might bear 
our penalty for us, and He died on our behalf, as though He 
were the sinner." In Vol. 5, page 109, line 23, we also read: 
"Not imputed to them, but imputed to Him, who bore our 
sins in His body on the tree." In Vol. 5, page 444, par. 2, we also 
read: "That God was in Christ reconciling the world unto 
Himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them, but imputing 
them unto Him." 

Please be kind enough to inform me at your earliest convenience 
if you have changed your mind as to these teachings, 
or do you still hold the same views? With earnest prayers 
that God will be with you and keep you unto the end, I am, 

Yours in His dear name, P. L. DERRING.— Va. 

IN REPLY 

Your favor of March 25 is before me. I am pleased to 
answer its question as follows: 

The work of Christ is presented from a variety of standpoints, 
some showing modifications of one kind and some of 
another; some stating the matter from the human standpoint 
and some from the Divine. What we need in all Scriptural 
matters is to get at the real import. 

From God's standpoint human sin is imputed to Jesus; 
that is to say, He was provided to be the sinner's Representative 
—to pay the price for the release of man from the death 
sentence; thus God pictures Christ as the serpent raised upon 
the pole. Thus the Apostle says He was made sin for us, 
although He knew no sin— He was a sin-offering. 



Viewing the matter from the other standpoint, from the 
human standpoint, we see our own weaknesses and shortcomings, 
realizing the necessity of our Master's imputing to 
us the merit of His sacrifice to make up for our deficiency. 
Thus the facts agree, whether we state them from one standpoint 
or another. Our sins were reckoned against Jesus when 
He died for sin. The righteousness of Christ is imputed to 
us when we offer ourselves to God and our Great Redeemer 
and High Priest makes good our deficiency. 

With much Christian love, 

YOUR BROTHER AND SERVANT IN THE LORD. 



"ARE YE ABLE?" 

Are ye able to walk in the narrow, strait way, 
With no friend by your side, and no arm for your stay? 
Can ye bravely go on through the darkening night? 
Can ye patiently wait till the Lord sends the Light? 

Are ye able to crush your soul's longing for Love, 
Will ye seek for no friendship save that from above? 
Can ye pass through this world, lone, unnoticed, unknown, 
While your faith faintly whispers, "He knoweth His own?" 

Where the feet of the Blessed One stood, can ye stand? 
Can ye follow His steps to a wilderness land? 
Are ye able to cast aside pleasure and fame? 
Can ye live but to glorify His precious name? 

Can ye smile as His dear voice says tenderly, "No," 
When "the field is so white," and your heart yearns to go? 
Can ye rest then in silence, contented and still, 
Till your Lord, the Chief Reaper, revealeth His will? 

Are ye able to lay on the Altar's pure flame 

That most treasured possession, your priceless good name? 

Can ye ask of your Father a blessing for those, 

Who see naught in your life but to scorn and oppose? 

When the conflict twixt Error and Truth fiercer grows, 
Can ye wield the strong "Sword" against unnumbered foes? 
Can ye lift up the "Standard" e'en higher and higher, 
While His praises ye sing in the midst of the fire? 

When ye see the Lord's cause going down to defeat, 

Will your courage endure in the seven-fold heat? 

Will your faith keep you steadfast, though heart and flesh fail, 

As the New Creature passes beneath the last "Veil"? 

Ah, if thus ye can drink of the Cup He shall pour, 
And if never the Banner of Truth ye would lower, 
His Beloved ye are, and His crown ye shall wear, 
In His throne ye shall sit, and His glory shall share! 
GERTRUDE W. SEIBERT. 



page 173 


