





“Keep Holding Men of That Sort Dear”




SINCE 1992, the Governing Body has appointed experienced, mature Christian elders to help its committees carry out their work.a These helpers, from among the “other sheep,” provide valuable support to the Governing Body. (John 10:16) They attend the weekly meeting of the committee to which they are assigned, providing background information and offering suggestions. The Governing Body members make the final decisions, but the helpers implement the committee’s direction and carry out whatever assignments they are given. The helpers accompany Governing Body members to special and international conventions. They may also be assigned to visit branch offices as headquarters representatives.
One of the helpers who has served since the arrangement was instituted says: “When I take care of my assigned tasks, the Governing Body can concentrate more fully on spiritual matters.” Looking back over his two decades of serving as a helper, another brother observes: “It has been a privilege beyond anything I could ever have anticipated.”
The Governing Body entrusts much to its helpers and appreciates the fine service performed by these loyal, hardworking brothers. May we all “keep holding men of that sort dear.”—Phil. 2:29.



See the box “How the Governing Body Cares for Kingdom Interests” in chapter 12 of the book God’s Kingdom Rules! for a summary of the responsibilities that are cared for by the six committees of the Governing Body.

Helpers to Governing Body Committees

Coordinators’ Committee

John Ekrann

Robert Wallen


 

Personnel Committee

Gerald Grizzle

Patrick LaFranca

Daniel Molchan

Ralph Walls


 

Publishing Committee

Don Adams

Robert Butler

Harold Corkern

Donald Gordon

Robert Luccioni

Alex Reinmueller

David Sinclair


 

Service Committee

Gary Breaux

Joel Dellinger

Seth Hyatt

Christopher Mavor

Baltasar Perla, Jr.

William Turner, Jr.

Robert Wallen

Leon Weaver, Jr.


 

Teaching Committee

Ronald Curzan

Kenneth Flodin

William Malenfant

Mark Noumair

David Schafer


 

Writing Committee

Robert Ciranko

James Mantz

Izak Marais

Gene Smalley

John Wischuk


 



