R879 : page 1 

VOL. VIII. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., SEPTEMBER, 1886. 

NO. 1. 



page 1 

Zion's Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 
BUSINESS OFFICE: No. 40 Federal Street, Allegheny, Pa. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does 
not cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing 
every expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from 
other periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS: --Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send by 
Draft, P.O. Money Order, or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. 
RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Three shillings per year. Remit by Foreign Postal Money Order. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and 
freely we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, 
come ye to the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy 
and eat~yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and 
without price." And you that have it-- "Wherefore do ye spend 
money for that which is not bread? and your labor for that which 



satisfieth not? Hearken diligently~and eat ye that which is good, 
and let your soul delight itself in fatness."-- ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



R879 : page 1 

MILLENNIAL DAWN.-The First Thousand is exhausted and 
we are now mailing from the Second Thousand. For terms see 
last page. Any who have paid for the book at any time and have 
not yet received it, should advise us at once. We have filled all 
back orders for which we have the full addresses. 



R879 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

Earthquakes of a physical character in Europe and America 
during the past two weeks have excited almost as much interest 
as the social earthquakes [the shakings by Anarchists, etc.] did a 
few months ago. 

Since the subject of earthquakes was of sufficient importance for 
our great Teacher to specially mention, they are worthy of our 
notice also. Our Master, in referring to them, did not attempt by 
so doing, to arouse the fears of his holy followers, but on the 
contrary said, "Take care that ye be not alarmed, for these things 
must occur." "Nation will rise against nation and kingdom 
against kingdom, and there will be in various places famines and 
earthquakes. Yet these are only a beginning of sorrows. "--Matt. 
24:6-8. Diaglott. 

Famines and earthquakes have in all ages given evidence that not 
only man but his home—the earth—is under the curse. And not 
only does mankind groan and travail in pain together until now, 
waiting for the new dispensation, but the earth also groans and 
quakes and travails to be delivered into the full and perfect 
Edenic condition, in which it will be a fit home for the restored, 
perfected race. 

Our Lord well knew that these quakings of the earth, both 
physical and social, had been before his first advent, and that 
they would be frequent during the entire period between the first 
and second advents, and yet he mentions them among the 
notable things to be experienced in the transition period from the 
Gospel to the Millennial age: and so too with famines and 
pestilences. It seems evident, then, that our Lord's reference is 
not to the common run of such calamities, but to some special 
and wonderful events. This is clearly marked by the account of 
this same discourse given by Luke; he gives some items not 
mentioned by Matthew and Mark. Luke (21:10-12) records it 
thus: "Nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against 
kingdom, and great earthquakes shall be in different places, and 



famines, and pestilences, and frightful sights, and great signs 
shall there be from heaven. But before all these they shall lay 
their hands on you and persecute you." 

It certainly was not before a great earthquake that the Church 
began to suffer persecution, for a few days after Jesus uttered 
these words there was an earthquake (the day he died) and there 
was another when he arose. (Matt. 27:51-54 and 28:2.) We think 
the proper inference then is, that in connection with the quakings 
of society, the overturning of kingdoms (mountains in symbol) in 
this great "Day of Jehovah," into which we have already entered, 
we may expect wars, pestilences, earthquakes, and famines, not 
as usual, not as heretofore, but to an extent never before known 
in earth's history. All these things together combine to make "a 
time of trouble such as never was since there was a nation even 
to that same time," "no, nor [thank God] ever shall be." (Dan. 
12:1; Matt. 24:21.) And as for the earthquakes and famines, 
severe and wonderful as they will evidently be, the Master tells 
us, "These are [only] the beginning of sorrows," the start of 
troubles much more intense. 

We can readily imagine the effect of these "beginnings of 
sorrows" upon the people. Should famines no worse than have 
been known in the past, occur now, the people, used to bountiful 
harvests and great extravagance, would feel it terribly to die by 
the tens of thousands for the lack of the simplest food. And with 
the present mixture of intelligence with ignorance, among the 
masses, is it not surmisable that the famines would be charged in 
some way to Capital~to speculation, etc., by those whose store 
of learning is "a dangerous thing"? The tendency would be 
toward bread riots, class legislation, anarchy, and other falsely- 
supposed remedies and preventives, thus producing the social 
earthquakes and tidal waves. 

Were earthquakes to occur in our day no more terrible than in the 
past, sixty thousand people might perish in six minutes as in the 
Lisbon earthquake, and the result would be to make Infidels and 
Atheists by the thousand among men. More free to think for 
themselves than in the past, more conversant with facts and less 
superstitious, and lacking information as to why evil was 
permitted, or misinformed regarding it, by the creeds and 
teachers of the nominal Church of to-day, and unable to see that 
these things are part of the one grand, stupendous plan for human 
restitution and everlasting happiness, of which the cross of Christ 
is the centre, many, very many, would doubtless conclude that 
there is no God and no hereafter, that nature is the only God, and 
evolution the only process of creation, etc. And being thus freed 
from the moral restraints and fears which now hold in check so 
many evil doers, the world will be ripe indeed for a time of 
worldwide trouble, of anarchy and crime, to which past ages 
furnish no parallel-- slightly illustrated during the "Reign of 
Terror" in France. 



And seeing that God hath appointed this "day of vengeance" in 
which to permit human effort to work itself out and prove its 
own inefficiency, and to demonstrate to them the necessity and 
wisdom of his laws and plans, what wonder if God has reserved 
many of the great changes of nature, with their attendant 
sorrows, for that same day of trouble, in which the increasing 
light of truth, instead of leading men to repentance and a 
recognition of the Lord, are because of hardness of heart leading 
to vain philosophies and self-conceit, which only a full course of 
discipline and an utter failure of those philosophies will make 
tractable preparing the way for the Kingdom of God. 

We may be sure that great changes must take place in the 
climates and soils of the earth, before it will be "prepared," as 
was the garden of Eden to be a fit home for perfect man. 
Cyclones, earthquakes, thunderbolts, and alternations of drouth 
and deluge, and of blizzards of cold and simoons of heat, are 
indications of the imperfection of earth; for the causes are 
doubtless natural, and very rarely indeed can we see them to be 
special dispensations of Providence. That God has the entire 
scope of his plan in all its details measured exactly, we cannot 
doubt, after learning the plan of the ages; hence we may know 
that earth must reach its perfection as the garden home of man by 
the close of the Millennial Age— when man's trial being ended, it 
will be due time for all the willing and obedient to enjoy God's 
favor to the utmost, when "there shall be no more curse" either 
upon man or upon the earth for his sake. And if this be true, how 
appropriate that great physical, as well as moral changes, should 
occur in this harvest or transition period, "the day of 
preparation," that evil (catastrophy) may be ended, and that by 
streams breaking forth in the desert (Isa. 35:1,2,6), etc., the earth, 
like mankind her lord, may from a new plane go on gradually, 
progressively, to the fullest perfection in all respects, under the 
glorious reign of Messiah. 

But amid all the troubles of this day, the saints should give ear to 
the Master's words, "See that ye be not troubled, for all these 
things must come to pass." The physical convulsions are as 
needful and as proper as the moral and social upheavals, and in 
order that our faith might be well founded and unshaken, God 
has provided us the strong meat of truth in due season. From the 
advanced standpoint now attainable, we can see the grand 
outlines of God's plan, in which the "Day of Wrath" and its 
shaking are needful parts. 

Thus advised, and leaning upon the strong arm of her Beloved 
the King, the little flock, the saints, the espoused Bride of the 
Lamb, may well be without the alarm and fear which will 
gradually become more and more general. Speaking for these 
members of the body of Christ, and concerning this very trouble, 
the Psalmist says:-- 



God is our refuge and strength, 

A very present help in trouble; 

Therefore will not we fear 

Though the earth be removed, 

Though the mountains be carried 

Into the midst of the sea, 

Though the waters thereof roar and be troubled, 

Though the mountains shake with the swellings thereof. 

-Psa. 46:1-3. 

This applies equally, whether the literal or symbolic or both, be 
understood as meant. We need not fear the revolutions and 
overturnings of governments at hand, for we are waiting for and 
expecting thus to see Messiah's heavenly rule introduced. We 
need not fear or be troubled at literal earthquakes, or death in any 
form, since we are only waiting to finish our course, and realize 
that "Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord from henceforth." 

Thus armed and prepared, we may be without fear or carefulness 
as regards these things, and give the more earnest heed to our 
mission as laborers in the harvesting of the church, and to our 
part in the battle of this great day~the defence of the truth, the 
defence of the cross. 


