From Our Readers
No Natural Affection
Thank you for your articles on “Do You Recognize the Meaning of What You See?” I especially enjoyed the article on “No Natural Affection.” Even as a Christian mother I find myself falling victim to this worldly attitude. It sure reminded me of the need for family closeness in these last days. Thank you again.
D. L., Washington
New Drug Addicts
Thank you very much for the interesting articles appearing in “Awake!” They are excellent in imparting general knowledge. I just finished reading the series on “The New Drug Addicts.” It mentions Valium as being addictive and it is said that withdrawal symptoms can be more intense than those from heroin. From personal experience I can confirm that this is true.
R. R., Germany
Cardiac Pacemaker
Recently I had a cardiac pacemaker inserted. I remembered an article you published some years ago on this subject. I found my copy and took it with me when I went to the hospital. I read and reread it and it gave me a very great deal of encouragement and help. Thank you for your constant efforts to supply such useful and encouraging information so regularly.
G. K., England
Useful Advice
Thank you for the magazine. I look forward to each issue. Your research is the best, and I find the advice useful to cope with life. For example, your story on poverty helps one to see where material things are really lacking and makes me more satisfied with my lot in life.
K. R., Canada
Friend of the Unborn
I want to thank you out of the innermost part of my heart for the very informative article “Are You a Friend of the Unborn?” I was very surprised to learn that even things like coffee, tea or chocolate​—I am fond of all three—​could result in so much damage. About two months ago I suffered a miscarriage after eight months of pregnancy. Maybe it’s a matter of coincidence, but during that period I drank many liters of coffee and ate a great deal of chocolate. I avoided everything I knew to be damaging; maybe if I had known all of this at the time things may have gone well. We still want a baby very much and this time I am going to avoid all the things mentioned. I am going to give my family doctor as well as the gynecologist a copy of that “Awake!” Again, my thanks. I am going to take real good care of my future “guest.”
T. S. d. G., Netherlands
Violent Temper
Thank you for printing the article “Bringing My Violent Temper Under Control.” I, too, like many, have a problem in this regard, although certainly not to the extent of the person mentioned. I feel deeply encouraged by his experience and wholeheartedly agree with his comments about Jehovah’s power​—a violent temper just can’t be overcome in our own strength.
S. H., England

