Are You Prepared for a Medical Emergency?
A medical emergency can occur suddenly and without warning. (Jas. 4:14) Therefore, one who is shrewd will prepare as much as possible. (Prov. 22:3) Have you decided what medical treatments and procedures you will accept, and have you put your decision in writing? To help you, the video Transfusion-Alternative Health Care—Meeting Patient Needs and Rights, the second presentation on the DVD entitled Transfusion-Alternatives—Documentary Series, has been produced. As you watch it, see if you can answer the following questions. Because the video includes brief surgical scenes, parents should use discretion in viewing it with young children.
(1) Why are some in the medical community reevaluating the use of blood transfusions? (2) Give three examples of complex surgeries that have been performed without blood transfusions. (3) Why are thousands of physicians and surgeons worldwide willing to treat patients without blood transfusions? (4) What have recent hospital studies revealed about blood use? (5) What are the medical risks associated with blood transfusions? (6) What have many experts concluded regarding the benefits of transfusion alternatives? (7) What causes anemia, and what can be done to compensate for it? (8) How can red-cell production be stimulated in a patient’s body? (9) What techniques are being used to minimize blood loss during surgery? (10) Can transfusion alternatives work for young children or for people involved in life-threatening emergencies? (11) What is one of the primary ethical principles of good medical care?
Since acceptance of some of the treatments featured in the video is a matter of conscience, do not wait until you are faced with an emergency to consider what you will or will not accept. Chapter 7 of the “God’s Love” book and the cited references as well as the insert in the November 2006 issue of Our Kingdom Ministry will help you make informed decisions. Then, if you are baptized, indicate your choices on the DPA card, and carry the card with you at all times.
[Blurb on page 3]
Have you decided what medical treatments and procedures you will accept and put this in writing?

