What Is Happening to Evolution?
THE theory of evolution is again making news. But it is doing so in a way that many people did not expect.
What is happening? This: the theory of evolution is being challenged on a scale that seemed very unlikely a few years ago. From the scientific quarter the strength and quality of the assault have surprised many who thought that science had long ago settled the question of man’s origin.
But what difference could it make to you how man got here? Well, are you a student? Then likely evolution is taught in your school, as it is nearly everywhere. This evolution teaching has profoundly affected literature, medicine, history, philosophy, even religion​—and most other subjects. If evolution is in error, then much of what you are taught will be based on a wrong premise, a lie.
If you are a teacher you no doubt feel a responsibility toward your students. You want them to learn the truth. But what if evolution is not true? In that event, would not your teaching it actually contribute to the moral breakdown of today?
As a parent, you are interested in your family’s having a happy future. What does evolution offer? If a few years in a violent world is all that your children have to live for, why, they may reason, should we not lie, steal, fornicate and cheat? Is it not in this way that ‘the fit survive’ and the ‘weak are weeded out’? Wisely, you too should know the facts about the evolution teaching.
If you are a religious person, you cannot believe both evolution and the Bible. The Bible says that God created man separately; evolution says he did not. One is wrong.
If you cling to evolution, what future does it offer to you as an individual? Only death. But the Bible promises that God will destroy the entire wicked system of things in our time and bring about a peaceful new order. (Ps. 37:11, 29) In that new order, the Bible says, there will be no more sorrow, sickness, pain or death. (Rev. 21:4) Is it reasonable to reject such a prospect by insisting on evolution without making a thorough investigation?
So, the challenge before evolution is not just scientific, but also moral. And if God exists, and will take action soon, evolution and its believers will clash, head on, with him.
Hence, just what is being said about evolution these days? What does the latest scientific evidence reveal about it?

