Which Do You Believe: Evolution or the Bible?
THE question “Which do you believe: evolution or the Bible?” is by no means merely an academic one. The answer has far-reaching implications.
If evolution is right, then the Bible is wrong. If the Bible, which teaches ‘You must not lie,’ is itself guilty of lying in regard to man’s origin, why should what it says about other matters be respected? Why believe that ‘you must not steal’ and that ‘you must not commit adultery’? Why believe its promises for life in a new order of righteousness? Why believe its explanation about man’s present condition?
On the other hand, if the Bible is right about man’s origin, then evolution is wrong. There is then basis for considering the Bible’s statements trustworthy.
Could Both Be Right?
Could not both evolution and the Bible be correct? Could not the Bible simply be telling us that God made man, but evolution was the means he used?
That is sometimes taught by clergymen. An Associated Press dispatch from Mobile, Alabama, in April 1969, said: “The 109th General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in the United States has concluded that the Bible and the theory of evolution are not contradictory.” The Catholic Encyclopedia (1967) notes: “The reconciliation of scientific origins and the religious teachings of Genesis [are] possible.”
But is it really possible that both evolution and the Bible’s account of creation can be freely interchanged; that one explains the other? No! Why do we say so?
We have seen in previous articles that the Bible teaches that man is a separate creation of God. Like the animal and plant creations, man reproduces only ‘after his kind.’ Evolution says that man proceeds from a lower “kind,” from animal kind. Both views cannot be right.​—Gen. 1:11, 12, 21, 24, 25.
We have also found that the Bible teaches that Adam, the first man, was created by God about 6,000 years ago. The genealogy from Adam to Jesus Christ is clearly noted in the Scriptural record. (Gen. 5:1-32; 1 Chron. 1:1-27; Matt. 1:1-17; Luke 3:23-38) But evolution says that man appeared over one million years ago, and this after several million more years of evolving. One teaching must be wrong.
Further, the Bible, which Christendom’s clergymen claim to uphold, clearly teaches that the perfect man Jesus Christ came to each as a “corresponding ransom” for what the perfect man Adam lost by his sin. (Rom. 5:12; 1 Tim. 2:5, 6) If man does not inherit sin from Adam, as the Bible teaches, the sacrifice of Jesus is nullified and Christians “are of all men most to be pitied.” (1 Cor. 15:19) No, a person cannot accept both. Only one, evolution or the Bible, is correct. The other is wrong.
Accept the Challenge Before You
A challenge therefore faces all truth-loving people. They must examine the evidence and decide for themselves to accept evolution or the Bible. No person should be allowed to make this decision for another.
Some persons, for instance, accept evolution because many churches now officially or unofficially believe it. But why, it might be asked, would churchmen, like those quoted earlier, accept evolution?
Because it is popularly taught. This is but one more example of the churches’ trying to be on friendly terms with the world. Notes the Victoria (British Columbia) Daily News: “The church is part of its world . . . Too frequently and too long it has appeared as a man-made, man-driven institution.”
Understandably, a “man-made, man-driven institution” would latch onto that which is popular with influential men of the world, would it not? But why should you follow the example of those who compromise the teachings of the very book they claim to represent, the Bible?
Others are persuaded to believe in evolution because ‘scientists say it is true.’ But there are many highly regarded scientific people who do not accept the teaching of evolution. Scientists, like other people, are divided in their opinion on this subject. So, if you are to let scientists make your decision for you, which scientist should you ask?
Actually, letting anyone make such a choice for you is childish. The New English Bible states an eternal verity when it says: “Grown men . . . discriminate between good and evil.” (Heb. 5:14) Yes, a mature person will face up to this decision and act. But how can you make such a decision?
Carefully weigh the evidence that has been presented in this magazine. As you do so, draw on your own experience. Compare the statements by believers in the Bible and by believers in evolution with what you have actually experienced in life. You must not be asked to believe the unbelievable.
As an illustration, if a famous cathedral was built several centuries ago, you were not around personally to witness its construction. But suppose someone told you it came into existence by itself​—would you believe that? Obviously not. Such a statement would run counter to everything you have personally observed in life.
So, too, with the ‘construction’ of man. We were not around when man first appeared. If evolutionists ask you to believe that man came into existence without a Maker, does that seem consistent to you? We know that everything made has a maker; experience has taught all of us that.
Further, we know that challenging problems face mankind today. Which will best assist persons to meet these problems​—belief in evolution or belief in the Bible? Knowing that can aid us to know which one we should believe.

