Who Will Face Up to the Challenge?
EVER since Darwin published The Origin of Species in 1859 the clergy have supported the evolution theory.
In crisp contrast with the clergy of Christendom, however, Jehovah’s witnesses have consistently put their trust, not in evolution, but in the Bible. Volume One of Studies in the Scriptures (1886), by the first president of the Watch Tower Society, said the theory of evolution is “as contrary to human reason as to the Bible.” Since that time numerous Watch Tower Society publications have supported the Bible in the evolution issue. The unequivocal stand that Jehovah’s witnesses have taken in this respect is well known.
Thus, Norman Macbeth, in his Darwin Retried, also points to the Witnesses as defending the Bible in the evolution challenge: “Jehovah’s Witnesses have learned a good deal of biology. The issue of Awake! for 22 April 1967 was pressed upon me one day and I was amazed to find that it contained some shrewd criticism of Darwinism . . . Thus it is no longer correct for Simpson to say: ‘ . . . those who do not believe in it [evolution] are, almost to a man, obviously ignorant of the scientific evidence.’”
Jehovah’s witnesses have faced up to the challenge evolution has tried to present and made it clear to the world that they believe the Bible. They know that to accept even part of the evolution theory is to reject what the Bible says. As discerning Christians they will not be seduced into believing any evolutionary philosophy. The words of Paul are appropriate: “Look out: perhaps there may be someone who will carry you off as his prey through the philosophy and empty deception according to the tradition of men, according to the elementary things of the world and not according to Christ.”​—Col. 2:8.
But what about you? Will you be led along with the common evolution teaching of the day? We live in serious times. In the past God has not endlessly tolerated those who hypocritically claimed to worship him. He took action to clear his Word. (See, for instance, Ezekiel 8:10-12; 9:1.) Today the clergy of Christendom have tried to shove God’s Word out of the picture and endorse such teachings as evolution in its place. But God will again stand behind his Word; he does not change. What will he do?
Soon he will bring what the Bible calls a “great tribulation such as has not occurred since the world’s beginning until now, no, nor will occur again.” (Matt. 24:21) All persons and organizations that support falsehood, including teachings such as evolution, will be eradicated. In fact, this entire corrupt system as well as the Devil himself will be put out of operation.​—Dan. 2:44; Rev. 19:19–20:3.
With the removal of this wicked system of things the way will be cleared for a new system of things. God’s original purpose stated in the garden of Eden will be carried out. He will show that what he originally stated in his Word regarding the earth’s being like a paradise will be accomplished. The Bible says that God will “wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.” Even the dead will arise, just as Jesus Christ assured us.​—Rev. 21:4; John 5:28, 29.
Does that prospect not appeal to you? Consider how it compares with what evolution offers. Evolution falls before scientific fact. It gives no reliable explanation of man’s past and no hope whatsoever for the future. For this reason, it has actually contributed to man’s moral problems, not aided him to overcome them. Evolution has not aided men to meet the challenge before the whole race.
On the other hand, the Bible has. Science cannot disprove what the Bible says about man’s past. The Bible gives men a sure hope for the future and encourages them to become godlike in personality, manifesting qualities such as love, goodness and self-control.
Which has the genuine ring of truth​—evolution or the Bible? Only the truth will survive the coming world destruction.
Of course, we do not expect you to accept all that we have said herein without further examination. But what we do encourage is that you accept the challenge before you personally in this respect. Make an examination now; time is running out.
Learn what the Bible really says about man and his Maker. Jehovah’s witnesses, who alone truly advocate the Bible, will be happy to assist you at your convenience and at no charge. We urge you to accept their offer to be of help.
[Picture on page 29]
Evolution cannot explain man’s past. It offers no hope for the future. Only the Bible explains man’s past and offers a genuine hope for the future​—everlasting life on a paradise earth

