Announcements
ASSEMBLIES IN PROGRESS!
By July 1 three of the 1954 district assemblies will be history. Are you one of the thousands who have received strength, encouragement and instruction from them, or is your assembly one of the eighteen yet to come throughout the United States and Canada? It is evident that Jehovah is directing his devoted people and that he is leading them to the assembly cities. Attend whichever assembly you wish, but by all means do not fail to benefit from the program that has been provided for all. Growing in knowledge and receiving rich spiritual instruction are earnest desires of members of the New World society. Assembling together strengthens and encourages all to live up to Jehovah’s righteous requirements. There is still time to mail your room request to the convention committee at any of the remaining assembly cities. The rewards are great. Be sure to attend!
July assemblies: 15-18: San Antonio, Tex.; San Diego, Calif. 21-25: Toronto, Ont., Can. 22-25: New Orleans La. July 29-August 1: Billings, Mont.; Charleston S. C.; El Paso, Tex.; Milwaukee, Wis., Oakland, Calif. Oklahoma City, Okla.; Pueblo, Colo.; Salt Lake City Utah; Sioux City, Iowa; Tampa, Fla.
WALKING IN JEHOVAH’S NAME FOREVER—Mic. 4:6.
Can one walk in the name of Jehovah, following his right ways, and at the same time ignore that name or push it into a corner? Surely not. Since God in his Word reveals his name as Jehovah, who has the right to ignore it or to expunge it from the sacred Record? (Ps. 83:18) During this month of July all walking in Jehovah’s name will engage in house-to-house work offering three books on absorbing Bible themes, together with three booklets, on a contribution of only $1.50. Will you please God and be a blessing in the community this month by preaching to others?
A SUPERLATIVE VALUE: THREE FINE BOOKS
The three Bible study aid books “The Kingdom Is at Hand”, What Has Religion Done for Mankind? and “New Heavens and a New Earth” are not just three more books. No, for these three fine hard-bound books, each containing between 352 and 384 pages, present a variety of superlative reading that will enable a truth-seeker to be Scripturally well informed of what is taking place today. They clearly show that this old world is in its last days, while a new world of righteousness is at hand. Obtain these books on a contribution of $1.50. Send in your order now.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of July 25: Requirements for the Ministry, ¶1-14.
Week of August 1: Requirements for the Ministry, ¶15-25, and Today’s Right Kind of Ministers, ¶1-6.
Week of August 8: Today’s Right Kind of Ministers, ¶7-21.

