Walking in Jehovah’s Name Forever
FULFILLMENT of Bible prophecy indicates that we are living in a time of judgment, in the “latter days” when all men must make an important decision.a The choice involves their destiny, and whether they choose life or not depends upon their choosing the right god. Concerning this time we read: “For all the peoples walk every one in the name of his god; and we will walk in the name of Jehovah our God for ever and ever.”—Mic. 4:5, AS.
Who in these latter days is walking in the name of Jehovah? Not the nation of Israel, for its religious leaders for more than 2,000 years have hid Jehovah’s name because of a superstitious reverence. Nor the popular religious organizations of Christendom. They not only slight it, but some of them seem to be so ashamed of it that they removed it entirely from their new translation, the Revised Standard Version. Such men would put the God of the Bible on the same level as the gods of the pagans, and make him just another “Lord.”
Then who are walking in Jehovah’s name? The record made in the courts of the land, in the newspapers, magazines and books, both religious and secular, and an enormous amount of literature distributed and hundreds of thousands of public lectures given furnish the answer. Yes, it is the witnesses of Jehovah, whose work has not been done in a corner, by any means.—Acts 26:26.
And why do they attach so much importance to that name? Because there are many that are called “gods” and “lords” and so the true God must have a distinguishing name. That is why he said through Moses: “You must not bow down to another god, because Jehovah is exclusively devoted to his name. He is a God exacting exclusive devotion.”—Ex. 34:14, NW; 1 Cor. 8:5, 6.
And did not Jesus teach us to pray: “Our Father in the heavens, let your name be sanctified”? And did he not himself pray: “Father, glorify your name”? And note also his words on the night of his betrayal: “Father . . . I have made your name manifest to the men you gave me out of the world. . . . Holy Father, watch over them out of respect for your own name which you have given me, . . . I have made your name known and will make it known.” The disciple James likewise showed the importance of Jehovah’s name, for which God was calling out a people from among the nations.—Matt. 6:9; John 12:28; 17:5, 6, 11, 26; Acts 15:14, NW.
How do we individually walk in Jehovah’s name? Not only by taking Jehovah’s name upon us but by keeping his commandments, by walking in his righteous ways and by preaching the good news of his kingdom. As a result of our thus walking in the name of Jehovah those of the nations who are hungering and thirsting for righteousness will learn to know Jehovah God and will associate with the New World society and also make it their decision to walk in the name of Jehovah our God.
Are you having a share in helping others to walk in the name of Jehovah? If you are it will mean salvation for both yourself and those that hear you during the destructive fury of Armageddon and an entrance into Jehovah’s new world of righteousness, where you will enjoy everlasting life so that you can walk in the name of Jehovah forever, daily blessing him and praising his name.—Ps. 29:2.
[Footnotes]
See The Watchtower, September 1, 1953, for details.

