From Our Readers
Communication  Today I received the January 22, 1994, issue containing the series “Communication in Marriage.” This is, quite possibly, the best series of articles I have ever read. My husband and I have been married for a year and a half. We have a very good relationship and are quite happy, though at times miscommunication occurs. Awake! provided some fine insights into why this happens. As I begin to read the articles for the third time, let me say thank you to Jehovah and to you for publishing such timely information.
C. M., United States
My husband is doing well as a Christian elder and full-​time evangelizer. However, we have had a communication gap ever since we were married and have experienced awkward moments. These articles frankly showed us the causes of the problem. We are sure they will help us improve our relationship.
C. A., Japan
Reading “Pam’s” reactions, I realized I could not have described my feelings any better. The same can be said about my husband and “Jerry.” This article helps treat the cause, rather than simply the effects. I was also struck by the appealing way in which the articles presented this important subject.
E. F., Italy
Even though I’m only 17 right now and don’t want to get married for quite a few years, I still greatly appreciated this inside look at why people act the way they do. I’m planning on saving this article to read periodically throughout the next few years. I’ll especially need it when I am ready to get married!
N. B., United States
My father is much like “Jerry.” But now I understand that when he retreats into silence and doesn’t talk to me, that is his right. Even though the article was enlightening, I’m afraid he’ll use the article to confirm that what he does is OK.
A. B., United States
The articles endeavored to help readers understand why men and women tend to feel or act in certain ways. However, we did not mean to imply that either men or women somehow have a right to noncommunicative or inappropriate behavior. The Scriptures urge fathers to avoid ‘exasperating their children.’ (Colossians 3:21) This would rule out indulging in unreasonably long periods of silence when children want and need parental direction.​—ED.
I am certain that letters must be pouring in with positive comments about these articles. Please add my comments. In the article about “Jerry” and “Pam,” you could have substituted the names of my wife and me. How I wish I could have understood my wife’s feelings! I was just like “Jerry,” trying to meet her needs but doing so as I would have wanted my own needs met. Now my wife of 20 years has divorced me. Perhaps my wife’s heart will be touched by these articles, and we can attempt to rebuild our marriage.
J. K., United States
Bible Quiz  How I enjoyed the page “Have You Ever Wondered?” in the January 8, 1994, issue. I made copies of that page and sent it to friends, family members, and other interested persons. I encouraged them to check every Scripture and jot down any questions they might have. It is a very good vehicle for having a Bible discussion with such ones. Please keep that page coming!
M. S., United States

