
Lasting Peace and Happiness Just Ahead!









1, 2. What is God’s Kingdom?
JESUS taught his disciples to pray: “Our Father in the heavens, let your name be sanctified. Let your kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also upon earth.” (Matthew 6:9, 10) We are to pray for God’s Kingdom to come. But what is God’s Kingdom? It is a heavenly government. Jehovah has appointed his beloved Son, Jesus Christ, to be its King. What will this Kingdom do for us?
2 More than 2,500 years ago, God inspired his prophet Daniel to say: “In the days of those kings [the nations on earth] the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be brought to ruin. And the kingdom itself will not be passed on to any other people. It will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms, and it itself will stand to times indefinite.” (Daniel 2:44) This prophecy clearly points out that God’s Kingdom must first remove human rulership, which is causing all the divisions and sufferings on earth today, and then it will bring in a lasting, peaceful rule over all mankind. When will all of this take place? Will we see it?
3-5. Why do we firmly believe that God’s Kingdom will soon solve all the problems of the world?
3 When Jesus was on earth, his disciples asked him: “Tell us, When will these things be, and what will be the sign of your presence and of the conclusion of the system of things?” Jesus’ reply indicated that there would be global wars, food shortages, great earthquakes, and increasing lawlessness. Besides, false religious teachers would arise to mislead many, his true disciples would become objects of persecution and hatred, the love of the greater number would cool off, and the good news of God’s Kingdom would be preached in all the earth. (Matthew 24:3-14) Have you seen such things occurring? Many observers have admitted that since the first world war broke out in 1914, mankind has entered a time of unprecedented turmoil. Philosopher Bertrand Russell wrote: “Ever since 1914, everybody conscious of trends in the world has been deeply troubled by what has seemed like a fated and predetermined march toward ever greater disaster.” Danish historian Peter Munch is reported as writing: “The outbreak of the war in 1914 is the great turning point of the history of humanity. . . . We entered an age of disaster, horror, and hatred, with insecurity everywhere.”
4 Besides wars, from 1914 onward, famine, pestilence, earthquakes, and violence have escalated to an unprecedented degree worldwide. Sadly, in spite of advanced science and technology, mankind is totally helpless when it comes to solving these difficult problems. All of this proves beyond any doubt that since 1914, the sign Jesus gave regarding the time of the end is right before our eyes. Jesus Christ has begun ruling in the invisible heavens. The world has entered its time of the end!
All of us are faced with a life-and-death choice

5 As all these events are taking place in our very time, all of us are faced with a life-and-death choice. What is that choice? In talking about the end of this system of things, Jesus indicated that he will divide the people of all the nations, as a shepherd divides the sheep from the goats. Only sheeplike ones​—people who love righteousness and actively support God’s Kingdom—​will survive the end of this wicked system of things and enjoy God’s blessings under his Kingdom forever.​—Matthew 25:31, 33.
Only sheeplike ones will survive the end of this wicked system of things

6, 7. (a) What blessings will God’s Kingdom bring? (b) What are you now being sincerely invited to do?
6 What blessings will God’s Kingdom bring for mankind? The things that the Kingdom will soon accomplish include:
               Wars, crime, and violence will be eliminated forever.​—Psalm 46:8, 9; Isaiah 2:4.

               Equality and impartiality will exist for all; there will be no more racial, social, or other forms of discrimination.​—Acts 10:35; Revelation 7:9, 10.

               There will be abundant food, adequate housing, and enjoyable work for everyone.​—Psalm 72:16; Isaiah 25:6; 65:21, 22.

                Sickness, disability, old age, and death will be no more.​—Isaiah 25:8; 35:5, 6; Revelation 21:4.

                The dead will be raised.​—John 5:28, 29; Revelation 20:12.

                The earth will become a global paradise.​—Luke 23:43; Psalm 98:7-9.


7 “This means everlasting life, their taking in knowledge of you, the only true God, and of the one whom you sent forth, Jesus Christ,” said Jesus. (John 17:3) We therefore sincerely invite you to make the time to study the Bible and find out what you need to do in order to qualify for the hope of enjoying life forever in Paradise on earth under God’s Kingdom. We encourage you to associate regularly with Jehovah’s Witnesses. Earth wide, there are millions with living faith who are worshipping the Eternal Sovereign, Jehovah, in one accord. Now is the time for you to join their ranks. Now is the time to take action without delay. Do not hesitate. Join them in accepting the invitation: “Come! . . . Let anyone that wishes take life’s water free.”​—Revelation 22:17.








Will you make the effort to find lasting peace and happiness?




