From Our Readers
Loss of a Child
Thank you for your issue on “Facing the Loss of a Child.” (August 8, 1987) Even though I cried several times as I read the articles, it was helpful to know that others have felt exactly as I have. It was March 1978 that our 24-year-old Karen was killed when a truck hit her car at an intersection just a few blocks from her home. I appreciated it so much that your article stated that it is not wrong to grieve, and it doesn’t show a lack of faith in God’s promises of a resurrection; rather, it indicates a deep love for the dead person. That was so comforting to me. Diane Krych’s writing to David about having a party for him when Jehovah wakes him from his sleep touched my heart. I too have thought about Karen’s party when she is resurrected. I just can’t wait to see her beautiful smile!
D. L., United States
I have just read your issue “Facing the Loss of a Child.” I can testify to the trueness of every word therein. The grief never goes away. For 13 years I have felt guilty because of grieving over my son’s death. I do not feel guilty anymore. Now I feel relieved to know that grieving doesn’t in any way betray a lack of faith in our great God, Jehovah.
A. M., United States
I want to express my deep appreciation for the article “Facing the Loss of a Child.” Our dear son John died about seven years ago. I went through many of the feelings described in your article​—disbelief, denial, guilt feelings. I didn’t write letters to him but had a suitcase packed with his things. In my mind he was on vacation and couldn’t communicate with me. For two years I was depressed, withdrawn, and despondent. I couldn’t understand my feelings. Now I am much better, though the loss is still great. Thanks so much for helping others understand our feelings and what positive things they can say or do to help.
V. W., United States
I have just finished reading the articles on “Facing the Loss of a Child.” It’s been six years and eight months since we lost our only daughter in a car accident. Your articles helped me to see that what I’ve gone through was normal. I couldn’t accept her being dead. I thought of her as a missionary in another land, even though I knew she was gone. I too felt the need to write letters. It has only been in the last year that I have come to accept her death; I realized that no matter how long I grieved I couldn’t bring her back. So it was time to come out of my excessive grief. Thank you so much for this article.
V. B., United States
As stated on page 14 of the above-named issue, “Awake!” was not recommending writing letters to the deceased as a help in getting through the grieving process. Diane Krych’s letter was published not only to illustrate how the resurrection hope sustained her but also to illustrate how some people react when stricken with extreme grief, so that others will be able to respond with understanding and compassion.​—ED.

