VOL. XIX. JANUARY 15, 1898. No. 2. 



CONTENTS. 



Views from the Watch Tower 19 

"Agnostics in Heaven" 19 

"Admits He Lived a Lie" 20 

"An Invisible Hand is Shaking" 20 

Poem: What the Prince of Peace 

Might Say 21 

Secret Faults and Presumptuous Sins 22 

The Blessed Ones Portrayed 24 

"After this Manner Pray Ye" 27 

Interesting Letters 31 

page 18 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age or accident, or other 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their cases and requesting the paper. 



R2247 : page 19 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



"AGNOSTICS IN HEAVEN. 



DR. Lyman Abbott, like other thinkers, finds it 
difficult to believe that the divine plan is as 
narrow as Calvin's creed would make it appear. But 
Dr. Abbott is more fearless than many preachers and 
hence keeps well to the forefront as an expounder of 
the advanced thought which is invading all denominations. 
He is reported in the public press as having recently 
expressed the belief that there would be agnostics 
in heaven. It would appear that he received a 
considerable number of letters criticising his position, 
and urging that, tho hope might be entertained for the 
heathen, none should be extended to unbelievers in 
Christian lands. In response he preached a discourse 
from the words, "He that believeth in me, believeth 
in him that sent me." 

Discoursing on the text, he is reported to have 
declared, "There is more faith in Christ in many an 
agnostic who spends his life in the service of humanity, 
than there was in Torquemada. There are many 
people who are trying to believe in Christ but cannot, 
and so call themselves agnostics." 

The Doctor is sure that many unbelievers are far 
too good to be everlastingly tormented, and who in 
justice should not be punished in any manner for not 
believing creeds and theories contradictory to each 
other, and to reason, and much of which their own 
adherents repudiate unqualifiedly. Mr. Abbott feels 
that these moral people should not be consigned to 
torment for not acting the hypocrite and professing to 
believe what they do not believe, as so many professors 
in the churches do. 

Quite right thus far, Dr. Abbott. But are you not 
wresting the Scriptures, and perverting the Lord's 
word of your text, in trying to convince these unbelievers 
that they are saved by morals and good works, 
and that these constitute faith? Are not these unbelievers 
better men for confessing their lack of faith, 
than many in the churches who profess faith and have 
it not? Are you not in danger of making these honest 
unbelievers two-fold more the children of Gehenna, 
than they are at present, by getting them to profess 
a lie; as the Master said to some of the Doctors of the 
Law at his first advent? 

But if God were to let Dr. Abbott have his way, 
and take to heaven all the unbelievers and all the 
heathen who cannot believe for similar reasons, we 
fancy that heaven would be so barbarous and uncouth, 
and its denizens so characterless, that Dr. A. and others 
who advocate the same unscriptural theory, that faith 
in the precious blood of Christ is unnecessary to salvation, 
would like to get away from such a heaven to 
some more civilized place. 

How strange that, seeing the difficulties and unreasonableness 
of their unscriptural position, Dr. A. 
and the growingly large class who think along the 



same lines do not see and accept heartily the Scripture 
position,— (1) That faith in Christ is essential, and a 
development of character also, to any who would receive 
the gift of God, everlasting life; (2) That the 
present Gospel age is intended merely for the selection 
of a "little flock" along a "narrow way" which "few" 
find and still fewer care to walk in; (3) That another 
age of a thousand years is to follow this and be the 
Kingdom age, in which Christ and the "little flock," 
developed in the Gospel age, will be the world's instructors 
and judges— "kings and priests unto God" 
(Rev. 1:6; 5:10; 20:6) whose reign shall bless the 

R2247 : page 20 

world with full, clear knowledge and opportunity for 
the development of character and its reward of eternal 
life. 

How strange that men, learned and thinking men 
too, will oppose this divine scheme of "restitution" 
which St. Peter tells us God has declared through all 
the holy prophets since the world began! (Acts 3:19-22.) 
Doctor Abbott and all thinking people see the 
necessity for just such an opportunity of salvation, for 
the ignorant heathen and others, whom the "god of 
this world has blinded" so that they cannot now see and 
accept the divine provision (2 Cor. 4:4); yet these 
thinkers prefer to wrest and twist the divine Word, 
and teach the salvation of unbelievers in heaven in 
preference to the better as well as Scriptural plan of 
restitution and education and trial for eternal life on 
the earth during the coming Millennium. 

This is passing strange indeed. Surely, they are 
"blind guides," as the Scriptures declare, and are 
leading their followers into the ditch of doubt and 
skepticism. Surely, they are not wilfully choosing the 
error! Surely, they do not see the beautiful, reasonable, 
Scriptural plan of God! The matter reminds us 
of an incident that is related respecting the great river 
Amazon. A sailing vessel at sea had encountered adverse 
winds and had lost its way, and had exhausted 
its supply of fresh water and the crew was famishing 
for water. Sighting another vessel, they signaled, 
"Famishing for water. Can you supply us?" The 
other vessel signaled back, "Throw your buckets overboard 
and dip all the fresh water you want." They 
were in the mouth of the Amazon River while still out 
of sight of land. The water they craved was all about 
them, but they knew it not. So it is with our friends 
who want to find some way of salvation for the heathen 
and honest skeptics: if they would only taste and see, 
they would find in the Bible on their pulpits and in all 
their homes the very water of life for all the willing 
and obedient, which their reasons crave and their hearts 
seek: they would find a plan of salvation there which 
fully meets every reasonable requirement. 



Thanks be unto God for his grace which has 
brought some of us "out of darkness into his marvelous 
light." 

"ADMITS HE LIVED A LIE." 



Under the above and similar captions the daily 
press of our land is calling attention to Mr. Henry 
Morehouse Taber, deceased, President of the Board of 
Trustees of the First Presbyterian Church, New York 
City, and long highly honored as a Christian millionaire, 
and prominent in Presbyterian circles. But tho 
Mr. Taber did not have the courage of his convictions 
while he lived, he at least wished to be honest in his 
death; and hence he left a Will, recently probated, 
which has caused quite a stir by its candor respecting 
his total unbelief. It denounces all religions as frauds 
and shams based on superstition. In it he desires that 
no funeral services be held over his corpse, and that 
the same be cremated, instead of buried. 

Was not this man positively injured by reason of 
being cajoled into a dishonest profession of faith in the 
Westminster Confession, by membership in the Presbyterian 
Church? Who will deny that this man would 
have been in a much better condition to meet his Redeemer 
and Judge in the General Judgment of the 
Millennial Day, if he had not lived a lie respecting 
his faith? There are thousands, we doubt not, in the 
pulpits as well as in the pews of all denominations, 
who are similarly living a lie; and the majority are not 
honest enough to make even a post-mortem confession, 
as Mr. Taber did. 

These dishonest people do not wish to be dishonest, 
but act a lie for fear the truth would do injury to 
the Church. How much better to be honest and let 
God take care of all consequences. "Come out of her, 
my people, that ye be not partakers of her [Babylon's] 
sins and that ye receive not of her plagues," is the 
Lord's command to all who are his people, as soon as 
they get the light of present truth and thus get out of 
harmony with the falsities of Babylon's professions and 
confessions. 

"AN INVISIBLE HAND IS SHAKING." 



Rev. R. Heber Newton, one of the prominent 
New York preachers, on January 9, among other things 
said (as reported in the New York Herald):— 

"All religions are moving in the same direction- 
reaching forth toward something new. The end of 
this century has been looked to by prophetic students 
as the end of a dispensation— the opening of a new 



order. Our fathers believed that Jesus Christ was to 
come again somewhere about this time. 

"An invisible hand is shaking the intellectual 
kaleidoscope, and the figures familiar to generations 
are changing before our eyes. The traditional systems 

R2248 : page 20 

of divinity seem to hosts of men to-day of as much help 
as the charts of New York harbor drawn up by the 
primitive Knickerbockers would be to our steamers. 
Men are slowly and painfully realizing that there is no 
answer in the Thirty nine articles and Westminster 
Confession for us in the year 1898. Their whole 
thought is as antique and obsolete as the language of 
Chaucer and Spenser. Men ask now for a gospel in 
the vernacular of the nineteenth century: not necessarily 
a new gospel, but at least a translation of the 
old gospel of the mediaevals and ancients into a 'tongue 
understanded of the people.' 

"Sublimely unconscious of the day that is breaking 
outside the church walls, our priests go on droning 
the old refrain about an impossible Bible and an unnatural 

R2248 : page 21 

Christ, and anathematizing those who don't 
care to come in and listen to their music of the past. 
Pulpits are timorous and silent on questions of the age. 
Conventions reauthorize, at every triennial session, as 
text books for theological seminaries, treatises which 
are as accurate maps of our present knowledge as the 
celestial charts of the Ptolemaic astronomers.... 

"What is needed is not denunciation, but the 
quickening of a new idea and the kindling of a new 
ideal which shall once more guide and inspire man to 
a life higher than that of pleasure. 

"The close of this century has witnessed the growth 
of monster nationalities. Are they under the inspiration 
of the Christian law? It does not look much like 
it, as we see the great Christian powers standing around 
China, waiting to dismember it. Have our Christian 
States become pirates, flaunting above their ensigns 
the black flag? The bishop of Breslau may invoke a 
benediction upon the fleet which goes forth for the 
protection of the cross, but the average man smiles 
cynically at such conception of Christianity. 

"Every new advance of humanity is won against 
obstructiveness of the churches. Every social and political 
injustice that, one after another, is swept violently 
away— slavery, land monopoly, the tyranny of 
capital, war— is defended, up to the last, by the sign 
of Him who came to break every yoke and to let the 
oppressed go free; over whose cradle the angels sang, 
'Peace on earth, good will among men.' 

"Humanity is growing conscious of its magnificent 



possibilities of glorious life, which are still postponed 
from generation to generation because the 
churches, which should be consecrated to this task of 
social regeneration, have not the mind nor the heart 
to grapple with it. They are busied, as their prototypes 
of old, with their pretty, petty play of charities, 
while neglecting the weightier matters of the law, the 
stern and solemn sentences of justice. 

"A GREAT REVOLUTION POSSIBLE." 

"The era of competition is ended. The era of 
combination has opened. All business is concentrating. 
In this massing of capital there is coming to be 
an absolute domination over the wage worker, over 
the interest of the people at large, over the life of the 
State itself. Yet this movement is natural and necessary. 
It is in the line of economic progress. The real 
question concerning it is, Can this new order grow a 
soul within it, a spirit capable of mastering these monster 
powers and using them, not for self-aggrandizement, 
but for human service? If it cannot, there is a revolution 
ahead worse than any the world has hitherto 
known. If it can, there opens an era of boundless, 
beneficent progress. This is a question of religion. It 
is the old need of an ever fresh faith and hope and love. 

"Plainly a real religion of some sort is needed, 
more needed than ever," said the speaker in conclusion. 
"It is the one thing which alone is really needed. 
All else will flow from it. Without it all else 
will disappear— political institutions, wealth, civilization, 
everything. Our duty as we find ourselves in 
this epoch of transition is to keep our minds open for 
the new light that God is preparing to send forth into 
the world, and our hearts eager for the new life into 
which he is preparing to lead us." 



How many more see the same thing? and fear the 
same thing? What is lacking that these people do not 
receive the "present truth," the "meat in due season" 
for the household of faith? The trouble is that they 
have too much faith in each other, and not sufficient 
faith in the Lord and his Word. The blind people are 
looking to and following the blind leaders; and the 
latter are looking in the wrong direction to see "the 
Sun of Righteousness arise with healing in his beams." 
If the Lord's message of "present truth" and Scripture 
harmonization presented in the four volumes of 
MILLENNIAL DAWN were promulgated from some 
source more "highly esteemed among men," who can 
doubt that it would— 

"Satisfy men's longings, as nothing else can do?" 

So also, if our Lord Jesus had been a Pharisee and 
from a notable family and city, his message would 



have been received, and he would not have been crucified. 
God still hides his truth from the great and 
wise and prudent, and reveals it unto babes— the humble 
minded, the teachable. Nevertheless, the congregation 
of "All Soul's Church" which heard the above 
sermon should be an excellent field of labor for some 
earnest friends of the truth to labor in,— seeking to 
present the "harvest" message contained in MILLENNIAL 
DAWN volumes. And while a discourse like the 
above may not convert any one to Christ, it undoubtedly 
may shake loose some of the true "wheat" from 
Babylon's bundles and thus prepare this class for the 
food for which they are starving spiritually. 



R1716 : page 21 

WHAT THE PRINCE OF PEACE MIGHT SAY, 
IF HE WOULD SPEAK TO-DAY. 



"I have come, and the world shall be shaken 

Like a reed at the touch of my rod, 
And the kingdoms of men shall awaken 

To the voice and summons of God. 
No more through the din of the ages, 

Shall warnings and chidings divine 
From the lips of my prophets and sages 

Be trampled like pearls before swine. 

"Have ye 'seized' all my lands and my cattle? 

Would ye keep back from labor her meed? 
Would ye challenge the outcasts to battle, 

When they plead at your feet in their need? 
And when clamor of hunger grows louder, 

And the multitude prays to be fed, 
Will ye answer with prison and powder 

The cries of your brothers for bread? 

"I'd turn from your altars and arches 

And the mockings of steeples and domes, 
To join in the long, weary marches 

Of the poor ones bereft of their homes; 
I'd share in the sorrows and crosses 

Of the poor, the hungry and cold, 
For dearer to me are their losses 

Than your mines and your altars of gold. 

R1716 : page 22 

"I will wither the might of the Spoiler, 

I will end the reign of his hate; 
The servants of Sin shall no longer 



Be prospered in Church and in State. 
Aye, the prayers of the poor are ascending 

To be written with lightnings on high! 
And the wails of all captives be blending 

With bolts that shall leap from the sky. 

"Then the thrones of your kings shall be shattered, 

And the captives and surfs shall go free; 
Then I'll harvest from seed that I scattered 

On the borders of blue Galilee. 
Yea, I come not now as a stranger— 

Lo, my reapers shall sing through the night, 
Till the star that stood over the manger 

Shall cover the world with its light." —Selected. 



R2248 : page 22 

SECRET FAULTS AND PRESUMPTUOUS SINS. 



"Cleanse thou me from secret faults. Keep back thy servant also 

from presumptuous sins; let them not have dominion over me: 

then shall I be upright, and I shall be innocent from the 

great transgression. Let the words of my mouth, and the 

meditation of my heart be acceptable in thy sight, 

O Lord, my strength and my Redeemer.— Psa. 19:12-14. 

THIS prophetic prayer represents well the heart 

attitude of the fully consecrated and earnest 

Christian. While realizing a forgiveness of the "sins 

that are past through the forbearance of God," through 

the grace of God which was in Christ Jesus, which imputed 

our sins to him and his righteousness to us who 

believe in him, nevertheless the well-instructed soul 

realizes its faults, its short-comings. These secret faults 

may be of two kinds: (1) They may be faults which 

were secret to ourselves at the time committed— slips, 

unintentional errors. Of course the earnest heart, desiring 

full fellowship with the Lord, will regret even 

his unintentional short-comings and will strive and 

pray for divine grace to get the victory over these: 

but besides these there are other secret faults, which 

are secret in the sense of being unknown to any one 

but ourselves and the Lord: imperfections or faults of 

the mind before they take the outward form of actual 

and presumptuous sins. 

All Christians of experience in the good way and 
in the battle against sin and self have learned that there 
can be no outward or presumptuous sins that have not 
first had their beginning in secret faults of the mind. 
The sinful thought may be one of pride suggesting 
self-exaltation; it may be one of avarice suggesting unlawful 
acquisition of wealth; or it may be some other 



fleshly desire: the mere suggestion of the thought before 
our minds is not sin; it is merely the operation of 
our faculties, and of the influences which surround us, 
inquiring of our wills whether or not we will consent 
to such thoughts. Many consent to thoughts of evil 
who at the time would utterly repudiate any suggestion 
to commit evil deeds; but if the thought be entertained 
it is a secret fault, and the growing tendency 
would surely be toward the more outward and presumptuous 
sinful conduct, the tendency of which is always 
from bad to worse. For instance, to illustrate, 
suppose the suggestion should come to our minds of a 
method by which we could advance our own interests 
of fame or honor or reputation by the undermining of 
the influence and reputation of another, how quickly 
the evil, selfish thought, if entertained, would lead to 
envy and possibly hatred and strife. Almost surely it 
would lead to back-biting and slander and other works 
of the flesh and the devil. The beginnings are always 
small, and correspondingly much easier to deal with 
than in their developed form. Hence, the prophetic 
prayer, "Cleanse thou me from secret faults" and thus 
restrain or keep me back from presumptuous sins. 

In the Epistle of James (1:14,15) we read, "Every 
man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own desire 
and enticed. Then when desire hath conceived it 
bringeth forth sin: and sin, when it is finished, bringeth 
forth death." Here we have the same thought 
differently expressed. The temptation consists at first 
in the presentation to the mind of suggestions which 
are impure or unkind or unfaithful to obligations; but 
there is no sin, no fault, as yet. The fault begins, 
when we harbor the evil suggestions, begin to turn them 
over in our minds and to consider the attractions which 
they may have to offer. This is where desire (taking 
hold of the evil thing instead of resisting it) causes a 
beginning of the secret fault; and it is only a process 

R2249 : page 22 

of development which in many instances under favorable 
circumstances may be very rapid, that sin, the 
presumptuous or outward acts of sin, results;— for instance, 
bearing false witness against a neighbor, or 
slander, or other evil deeds. And the evil course having 
begun in the fostering of the evil suggestion, and 
having progressed to presumptuous sin, there is a great 
danger that their entire course of life will be ultimately 
affected thereby and bring the transgressor into that 
condition where he will commit the great transgression 
—wilful, deliberate, intentional sin— the wages of 
which is death, second death. 

It would appear then that every intelligent Christian 
would continually pray this inspired prayer, for 
cleansing from secret faults that he might thus be restrained 
from presumptuous sins; and thus praying 



heartily, he would also watch against these beginnings 
of sin and keep his heart in a cleansed and pure condition, 
by going continually to the fountain of grace for 

R2249 : page 23 

help in every time of need. He who seeks to live a 

life of holiness and nearness to the Lord by merely 

guarding and striving against outward or presumptuous 

sins, and who neglects the beginning of sin in the 

secrets of his own mind, is attempting a right thing in 

a very foolish and unreasonable way. As well might 

we seek to avert the smallpox by outward cleanliness, 

while permitting the germs of the disease to enter our 

systems. The bacteria or germs of presumptuous sins 

enter through the mind, and their antiseptics and bactericides 

of the truth and its spirit must meet them 

there and promptly kill the bacteria of sin before it 

germinates and leads us to such a condition of evil as 

will manifest itself in our outward conduct. 

For instance, whenever the bacteria of pride and 
self-importance present themselves, let the antidote be 
promptly administered from the Lord's great medical 
laboratory for the healing of the soul: the proper dose 
to offset this species of bacteria is found in the words, 
"He that exalteth himself shall be abased, and he that 
humbleth himself shall be exalted;" and "Pride goeth 
before destruction, a haughty spirit before a fall." 

If the thought presented to our minds be the bacteria 
of envy, then let us promptly apply the antidote 
which declares that envy is one of the works of the 
flesh and of the devil, and contrary to the spirit of 
Christ, which by our covenant we have adopted as ours. 
And let us remember that envy is closely related to 
and apt to be followed by malice, hatred and strife, which 
under some circumstances mean murder, according to the 
New Covenant and our Lord's interpretation.— 1 John 3:15; 
Matt. 5:21,22. 

If the bacteria which presents itself to our minds 
is avarice, with the suggestion of unjust methods for 
its gratification, let us promptly apply to it the medicine 
furnished in the Lord's Word, namely, "What 
shall it profit a man if he gain the whole world and lose 
his own soul?" "For the love of money is a root of all evil, 
which some, coveting after, have erred from the truth 
and pierced themselves through with many sorrows." 

The more attention we give to this subject, the 
more we will be convinced, from our own personal experiences, 
of the truth of the Scriptural declarations 
respecting the beginnings of sin as secret faults in the 
mind; and the more we will appreciate the statement 
of the Word, "Keep thy heart [mind, affections] with 
all diligence; for out of it are the issues of life." — 
Prov. 4:23. 

But we are not to wonder that God has so constituted 
us as to permit temptations to come to our minds, 



nor are we to pray that we may have no temptations; 

for if there were no such presentations, no such temptations, 

then there could be no victories on our part, 

no overcoming of sin and of the wicked One. But we 

know that for this very reason we are now in the school 

of Christ; not that we shall there be shielded from all 

temptation, but that we may learn of the great Teacher 

how to meet the Tempter, and by our Master's grace 

and help to come off conquerors, victors in the strife 

against sin. The degree of our success in this conflict 

will depend largely upon the keenness of our faith and 

trust in the great Teacher. If we feel confident in his 

wisdom, we will follow closely his instructions and 

keep our hearts [minds] with all diligence. Faith in 

the Lord's wisdom and in his help in every time of 

need is necessary to us in order that we may be thoroughly 

obedient to him; and hence it is written, "This 

is the victory that overcometh the world, even your 

faith;" i.e., it will be by the exercise of faith and the 

obedience which flows therefrom that we will be enabled 

to "come off conquerors and more than conquerors 

through him that loved us and gave himself for us." 

Nor are we to seek divine aid far in advance, as, for 
instance, to be kept throughout the year to come, or 
month to come, or week to come: rather we are to know 
that if we have made a covenant with the Lord and are 
his, that he is near us at all times in every trial, in 
every temptation; and that his assistance is ready to 
our use, if we will but accept it and act accordingly. 
Hence, our prayers should be for help in the time 
of need, as well as general prayers for the Lord's blessing 
and care for each day. In the moment of temptation 
the heart should lift itself to the great Master, in 
full assurance of faith, recognizing his love, his wisdom 
and his ability to help us, and his willingness to make 
all things work together for good to those who love 
him. Asking for assistance in such a time of need 
would surely draw to us the Lord's counsel and help 
and strength for righteousness, truth, purity and love; 
and thus we should be hourly victorious, daily victorious, 
and finally victorious. 

The difficulty with many is that they are looking 
for some great battles, instead of averting the great 
battles by availing themselves of the Lord's provision, 
and keeping their minds cleansed from secret faults. 
The little battles, and much more numerous, are the 
ones in which we gain the victories with their ultimate 
rewards. "Greater is he that ruleth his own spirit 
[mind, will] than he that taketh a city." 

Finally, the grand results of obedience to this counsel 
of the Lord, the grand attainment of those who 
have faithfully kept their hearts with diligence, is expressed 
in our text, and may well be the repeated earnest 
prayer of all the sanctified in Christ Jesus,— "Let 
the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my 
heart, be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, my strength 



and my Redeemer." 

A year from now we hope to hear from very many 
of great blessings received through this counsel of the 
Lord's Word, as suggested in our last issue. 



R2249 : page 24 

THE BLESSED ONES PORTRAYED. 

--JAN. 23. -MATT. 5:1-12.- 

"Ye are the Light of the World. "-Matt. 5:14. 

THE beatitudes— or the blesseds— designate the 

particular graces necessary to our Lord's followers, 

if they would receive the blessings which the 

Father designed they should enjoy through Christ. 

These constitute the text as it were of our Master's 

great "Sermon on the Mount." It is supposed to have 

been delivered from a site known as the Mount of Beatitudes, 

sloping gradually, about sixty feet in height 

and situated about seven miles South-west from Capernaum 

where, as we saw in our last lesson, Jesus had 

taken up his residence. Strange to say, it was on this 

very site on July 5th, 1 187, that the last remnant of 

the Crusaders was destroyed, after their army had been 

defeated by Saladin in the valley below. Those Crusaders 

claimed to wage their warfare in the interest of 

the Lord's cause, but had they remembered and properly 

applied to themselves even remotely the lesson 

which we are about to consider, spoken by our Lord 

on this very Mount, they would not have been defeated 

and exterminated, for they would not have been 

Crusaders at all. Alas, how many cry, Lord, Lord, 

and attempt in the Lord's name to do many wonderful 

works who, neglecting his Word, are not his people 

and fail to get the blessings now offered. 

At this time our Lord's ministry was fully inaugurated: 
he had collected his first disciples, had performed 
some miracles, and the multitudes began to 
follow him, saying truly, "Never man spake like this 
man." With his disciples nearest to him and the multitudes 
surrounding, he began his celebrated discourse 
the text of which we have under consideration. 

(1) "Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is 
the Kingdom of Heaven." This first beatitude or 
blessed state really in some respects comprehends all 
the others. Through it the other graces and blessings 
are accessible. It is the gateway and the main roadway 
from which all the other avenues of blessing 
branch off. Some one has said, it is the hallway of 
the house of blessing, from which all the various rooms 
or apartments are accessible. 

The word blessed signifies much more than happy; 



happiness proceeds usually from outward causes, while 
one might be blessed while in misery, in pain, not joyous 
but grievous. The root of the word blessed here 
carries with it the thought of great or honorable: our 
Lord is describing the characters which from his standpoint 
and that of the Father are truly great, honorable 

R2250 : page 24 

characters, which God is pleased to bless and ultimately 
to reward. 

The Greek word here translated poor has the significance 
of utter destitution, extreme poverty. Hence, 
the thought is that a full appreciation of our own spiritual 
destitution is essential before we will be ready to 
receive the measures of divine grace provided for us 
by the Father in Christ Jesus, our Lord. And not only 
must this destitution be realized at the beginning of 
our approach to God, but it is necessary that the same 
dependence upon divine grace and realization of our 
own insufficiency shall continue with us all our journey 
through, if we would finally be acceptable and be 
granted a share in the Kingdom which God has promised 
to them that love him. There is nothing in this 
text to signify earthly poverty and destitution: nevertheless 
we know from experience, as well as from the 
Lord's Word, that not many rich or great, but chiefly 
the poor of this world, rich in faith, shall be heirs of 
the Kingdom. Very evidently moderate poverty is the 
most favorable condition for us in our present weak 
and fallen condition: earthly prosperity and riches very 
frequently tend to choke the new nature and hinder it 
from bringing forth the peaceable fruits of righteousness 
—tending rather to a spirit of self-sufficiency, pride, 
etc. As our Lord Jesus expressed it, "The cares of 
this life and the deceitfulness of riches choke the Word, 
and it becometh unfruitful." Let us all then in seeking 
the character which will be approved of God and 
accepted to the Kingdom of God's dear Son, seek more 
and more continually this humility of mind which so 
far from being boastful and self-sufficient, humbly accepts 
with gratitude every good and every perfect gift 
as coming from the Father of Lights. 

(2) "Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall 
be comforted." We apply this in connection with the 
first blessing; for it is not every one who mourns who 
will be comforted, but merely the poor in spirit: their 
mourning will be from the right standpoint and will 
bring a blessing of heavenly comfort— a realization of 
sins forgiven, iniquities covered and divine reconciliation 
and favor. We sometimes sing, 

"Why should the children of a King 
Go mourning all their days?" 

There is a proper thought in the poet's expression: 
for we need not continue to grieve over our "sins that 
are past through the forbearance of God," which are 



"covered" by the merit of the precious blood: nor 
should our lives be destitute of the "joys of the Lord" 
and the "songs in the night" which he gives, according 
as it is written, "He hath put a new song into my 
mouth, even the loving kindness of our God." But 
hilarity and boisterous "gayety" are certainly inappropriate 
to the children of the Great King. Why? 
Because all such should realize that life is a stern reality, 

R2250 : page 25 

not only to the Christian but to the whole world, 
"the groaning creation." A sympathy with the sorrows, 
difficulties and privations of the masses, at home 
and in heathen lands, no less than a realization of the 
grandeur of the high calling of the Church in this Gospel 
age and of the exceeding great and precious things 
which hinge upon our faithfulness to him who hath 
called us out of darkness into his marvelous light, — 
these all should be saying to us continually, in the 
language of the Apostle, Be vigilant! Be sober! Watch! 
Quit you like men! 

Besides, all who are earnestly striving for the victory 
over self, and the world, and sin, are sure to make 
a sufficient number of failures along the way to insure 
them considerable experience in mourning for these 
deflections,— if their hearts are in the right attitude 
toward the Lord. Gracious indeed is the promise to 
such, "They shall be comforted." Our Lord does 
comfort such with the assurance that he notes their 
tears as well as their efforts in opposition to sin, and 
that he is thus preparing them through present experiences 
and the development of character for the 
Kingdom. 

(3) "Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit 
the earth." Nothing can be more evident than the 
fact that this promise also waits for the establishment 
of the Kingdom, for its full fruition. Certainly the 
meek are not in this age favored with the ownership 
or control of any considerable proportion of the earth's 
surface. Rather it is the arrogant, the proud, the domineering 
the selfish and pushing who chiefly inherit 
the earth at the present time— under the rule of "The 
Prince of the power of the air, who now worketh in 
the hearts of the children of disobedience." Very evidently 
this blessing also belongs to those who inherit 
the first blessing— those poor in spirit who shall be 
heirs of the Kingdom. The Kingdom class— Christ 
Jesus and his Church, his body, will inherit the earth 
—purchased, as well as man, by the great sacrifice finished 
at Calvary. And when this Kingdom class shall 
inherit the earth, it will not be to oppress mankind, 
but on the contrary for their elevation, restitution and 
blessing. This is in harmony with the Heavenly 
Father's promise,— "I will give thee the heathen for 
thy inheritance; and the uttermost parts of the earth 



for a possession." 

But the time for this inheritance has not yet come. 
It will be introduced as soon as the last member of the 
elect Church has been fitted and prepared for the inheritance 
by the development of the graces of character 
here portrayed by our Lord. Yes, blessed are the 
meek— all who shall be accounted worthy of a share in 
the Kingdom and in its inheritance must be meek, 
teachable, humble, for "Jehovah resisteth the proud 
but showeth his favor to the humble."— James 4:6. 

(4) "Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst 
after righteousness: for they shall be filled." To whom 
is this blessed promise applicable? Surely to none 
other than "the elect," the Church, referred to preceding 
as "the poor in spirit," "the meek." These, 

and these alone at the present time, are hungering and 
thirsting for truth and righteousness, in respect to the 
divine revelation on every subject and affair of life. 
Others may have a little hunger for truth, but they 
are soon satisfied;— especially when they find the truth 
unpopular and that, however sweet to the taste, it afterward 
brings bitter gripings of persecution and ostracism 
under present unfavorable world-conditions. To 
a considerable number honesty and righteousness are 
the best policy, to a limited degree,— so far as public 
opinion sustains them; but a righteousness and honesty 
and love of the truth at the cost of persecution, at the 
cost of having men "separate you from their company," 
is only hungered and thirsted after by the "little flock" 
— the overcomers. "They shall be filled." They will 
be filled to the full by and by, very shortly, in the 
"change" of the "first resurrection," when this mortal 
condition shall be exchanged for immortality; when 
this animal body shall give place to a perfect spirit-body. 
Then partial knowledge and partial attainment 
of righteousness shall be superseded by a full, complete 
knowledge, then "we shall know, even as we are 
known." But even now this class enjoys much larger 
measures of knowledge of the truth and experiences 
in the blessings of righteousness than are possible to 
any other class. 

(5) "Blessed are the merciful; for they shall obtain 
mercy." Human mercy, sympathy, pity, compassion, 
are but reflections of the divine character: 

these qualities may be found in the natural man, but 
not infrequently when so found they are traceable to 
some extent to pride, selfishness, ostentation, show. 
The mercy, pity and sympathy which would exercise 
themselves irrespective of human knowledge and approval, 
and irrespective of divine reward, are not frequently 
met with except in the "poor in spirit, heirs 
of the Kingdom." And all who are of this class must 
be merciful, pitiful, loving: their own relationship with 
the Lord and all their hopes respecting the Kingdom 
to come depend upon their being merciful; for only the 
merciful shall obtain mercy, and those who pray, "Thy 



Kingdom come, thy will be done on earth," are instructed 
to pray at the same time for the forgiveness 
of their trespasses (only) as they also forgive the trespasses 
of others, their fellow-creatures. 

(6) "Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall 
see God." We are to distinguish sharply between 
purity of heart, will, intention and absolute purity of 

R2250 : page 26 

every word and act of life; for the one is possible while 
the other is impossible, so long as we have our present 
mortal bodies and are surrounded by present unfavorable 
conditions. The standard set before us in this 
very sermon however is a standard not only for the 
heart but for all the conduct of life, "Be ye perfect 
even as your Father in heaven is perfect." By this 
standard we are to measure ourselves, and that continually, 
and not with one another; and to this standard 
we are to seek to bring the conduct of our lives 
and the meditation of our hearts. But only our wills 
(hearts) have yet been transformed and renewed and 
purified: our present imperfect earthen vessels in which 
we have this treasure will not be "changed" or renewed 
until the resurrection. Then, and not until 
then, will we be perfect in the divine likeness, but now 
nothing short of purity of heart, will, intention, can 
be acceptable to God and bring the blessing here 
promised. 

In whom do we find the new hearts, renewed hearts, 
cleansed hearts, pure hearts? Surely, in none except 
those who are called, chosen and faithful,— the poor in 
spirit class, the meek, the "little flock," heirs of the 
Kingdom. 

(7) "Blessed are the peace-makers: for they shall 

be called the children of God." None will be accounted 
worthy to be called children of God who shall not 
have developed peace-loving dispositions. The anger, 
malice, hatred, envy, strife and generally quarrelsome 
disposition, which to some extent is inherited through 
the fall by every member of the race, must be recognized 
as belonging to "the works of the flesh and of 

R225 1 : page 26 

the devil, and must be resisted in heart fully, and in 
outward conduct as fully as possible. Peaceableness 
must supplant quarrelsomeness in all those who would 
hope to share the Kingdom and be recognized as children 
of God. "So far as lieth in you live peaceably 
with all men." This of course does not mean peace 
at any price, otherwise our Lord, the apostles and the 
faithful body of Christ throughout this age might not 
have suffered, or at least might have endured very 
much less suffering for righteousness' sake. Hence, 
the significance of our Lord's statement, "In the world 



ye shall have tribulation; in me ye shall have peace." 

But surely, as we should be at peace with the 
Lord, so we should desire and strive and expect to be 
at peace with all who love the Lord, who have his 
spirit, and who are seeking to walk in the same way 
toward the Heavenly Kingdom. "Live in peace [among 
yourselves]" (2 Cor. 13:11), is the injunction of the 
Apostle to the Church. There is a great lesson in 
these words for all who are seeking to be heirs of the 
Kingdom and to inherit these blessings which our Lord 
enumerates. With perverse natural dispositions it may 
require considerable time and practice to learn to know 
and choose and love the path which leads to peace 
among God's people. This path is love;— love which 
thinketh no evil, vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up, 
seeketh not her own, but beareth all things, endureth 
all things, hopeth all things. And to be a peace-maker 
one must first be a peace-lover himself: to attempt to 
make peace without first having the spirit of love ourselves 
is to blunder, and will surely result in failure. 
Those who, wherever they go, make for peace, righteousness, 
love and mercy, in meekness, thereby prove 
themselves to be children of God. 

(8) "Blessed are they which are persecuted for 
righteousness' sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of 
Heaven." This blessing also applies only to "the 
faithful in Christ Jesus." The elements of character 
which constitute righteousness, and imply harmony 
with God and heirship to the Kingdom which he has 
promised, have already been stated in the seven propositions 
preceding; and now our Lord calls attention to 
the fact that with all these graces and elements of 
righteousness, far above the standard of the world, 
this class would nevertheless be persecuted and suffer; 
because of these very elements of character which he 
approves. This is because the world in general throughout 
this age will be so blinded to the truth, and so in 
harmony with sin, that righteousness will be hated in 
proportion as sin is loved. But in order to be heirs of 
the Kingdom we must not only love righteousness, 
meekness, purity of heart, humility of spirit, etc., but 
must be ready and willing to endure persecution in 
support of these heavenly principles. 

The great Apostle, Paul, declared, "All that 
will [in this present time] live godly in Christ Jesus 
shall suffer persecution." (2 Tim. 3:12.) Hence, the 
implication is that we must have all of the foregoing 
seven characteristics so deeply imbedded in our characters 
that we will endure the persecutions which they 
will bring, unflinchingly. Such the Lord elsewhere terms 
overcomers, saying, "To him that overcometh will I 
grant to sit with me in my throne." So then, to have 
a share in the Kingdom implies a share in the persecutions 
which the Kingdom class will endure faithfully. 
The same thought is amplified in the two succeeding 
verses, which inform us that we should not only be 



ready to endure persecution, but, rightly informed, 
will realize that the more we endure along proper lines 
the more cause we will have for rejoicing in heart, 
however sorrowful our outward conditions and circumstances 
may at times be. 

Nor does the Lord leave us to suppose that the 
only persecutions to be endured are those of physical 
culture; he specifies that some of these persecutions, 
the endurance of which will be acceptable with him as 

R225 1 : page 27 

proofs of our love for him, his kingdom and its rules 
of righteousness, are "revilings," "false-witnesses" 
and "all manner of evil" misstatements, because we 
are his, loyal to his Word and cause. Let us remember 
also that as the persecutions, misstatements, slanders, 
revilings, misrepresentations, against the early 
Church came not so much from the world as from 
those who professed to be God's people, Israel according 
to the flesh, so now we must expect that persecutions 
will come from professing Christians, who are not 
in heart-harmony with the Lord, and his Word, and 
the rules of righteousness which our Master laid down. 

These same rules of course apply in a modified degree 
to the whole world, in proportion as they have 
these traits of character: even in uncircumcised hearts, 
and even tho they be only outwardly practiced and for 
effect, nevertheless to that degree do blessings attend. 
And we may reasonably suppose that when the Kingdom 
class, the Church, shall be exalted with their Lord 
and head, to share his Millennial Kingdom, and to 
bless the world of mankind with a righteous government, 
and to bring all to a knowledge of the Lord and 
of the truth,— then practically these same rules will 
apply to all who then will be on probation for divine 
approval and eternal life. Now however, during this 
Gospel age, these lessons are fully applicable to the 
elect Church, the "little flock," to whom only it is the 
Father's good pleasure to give the Kingdom. 



R225 1 : page 27 

"AFTER THIS MANNER PRAY YE." 

-JAN. 30. -MATT. 6:5-15.- 

"Pray to thy Father which is in secret." 

"PRAYER is the soul's sincere desire, uttered 
or unexpressed," says the poet: and 
he says truly, for the Scriptures inform us that God 
is a "discerner of the thoughts and intents of the 
heart;" and again, that in the case of the saints the 



spirit or intention is accepted by the Lord when we approach 

him in seasons of distress, when we can find 

no language in which to clothe our feelings and desires, 

—when we come to him with spirit-groanings which 

we cannot utter in words. (Rom. 8:26.) Nevertheless 

both by words and example our Lord instructed 

us that our prayers should be uttered, formulated, and, 

if possible, not be left merely to incoherent feelings and 

groanings. It was to this end that he gave the instructions 

of the present lesson, in answer to the request 

of the apostles, "Lord, teach us to pray."— Luke 11:1. 

While certain rules should govern all prayers, all 
approaches to God for communion, namely, that we 
should approach with humility and simplicity and 
reverence and in the name of Jesus, yet circumstances 
may govern in certain particulars:— 

(1) The prayer of the sinner, the alien and stranger 
from God, should differ from that of the child of 
God who has received pardon and reconciliation along 
the divinely appointed lines. For instance, the prayer 
of the publican, approved by our Lord, did not address 
Jehovah as "Father" but as God— "God be merciful 

to me a sinner." On the contrary, those who come 
into relationship with God under the terms of his covenant 
in Christ have the privilege not only of recognizing 
God as the Creator and Ruler, but also as their 
"Heavenly Father," and of addressing him as such. 

(2) Amongst those who approach God in prayer 

as his children, different circumstances and conditions 
may have a bearing as respects the manner of worship: 
at times they may properly go aside and hold communion 
with the Father in secret,— where no earthly 
eye will see and no earthly ear will hear. Our Lord's 
own example should be an illustration of this privilege: 
we remember how it is written of him frequently that 
he went apart from his disciples and prayed alone, and 
how sometimes he spent the entire night in solitary 
prayer. 

(3) Prayer at other times may properly and profitably 
be offered in the presence of fellow-believers and 
audibly, as the prayer of all and in which all are interested 
and join. An illustration of this may also be 

drawn from our Lord's example: for instance, his 
prayers recorded in John 11:41,42; 17; Matt. 11:25,26; 
Luke 10:21; 11:1. These prayers could not have been 
recorded if they had not been heard by the apostles: 
and the very object of their utterances in their presence 
was evidently for their benefit and blessing, as well 
as for the benefit and blessing of all the household of 
faith since then. The prayers of Moses and Solomon, 
David and Jeremiah, Ezekiel and Daniel are also recorded, 
and hence were made publicly, at least before the 
Lord's people. The record respecting the early Church 
seems to imply that they met together as one family 
and that their prayers as well as their hymns and song-prayers 
were general, in common, for the benefit of 



the whole company present. This is implied in the 
account given in Acts 1:14 where it is declared, "These 
all continued with one accord in prayer and supplication, 
with the women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and 
with his brethren." Again, the words of one of their 
prayers are quoted in Acts 1:24; evidently this prayer 
was uttered audibly and in common. Again in 1 Cor. 14:16 

R2251 : page 28 

the Apostle shows the thanksgiving of the congregation 

was and should be presented before the Lord 

not only audibly but in a language heard and understood 

by the worshipers, so that all might be able to 

say "Amen" to the thanksgiving and petition. 

(4) At times it may not be improper to give thanks 
to God in the presence of a mixed company— believers 
and unbelievers. Illustration of this course is found 

R2252 : page 28 

in our Lord's own conduct. His prayer at his baptism 
in Jordan was witnessed evidently by the multitudes. 
(Luke 3:21.) Again our Lord prayed in public, in 
the hearing of the mixed gathering, at the grave of 
Lazarus. Again at the close of our Lord's ministry, 
when he prayed, "Father, save me from this hour," 
"Father, glorify thy name," the multitudes surrounding 
evidently heard or in some manner knew of the 
prayer, as is shown by the statement of John 12:29. 
Again our Lord's last prayer, on the cross, was audibly 
heard even by his enemies.— Matt. 27:46,50. 

We have gone into details of proof respecting this 
subject because some of God's dear people have fallen 
into the error of supposing from this very lesson which 
we are about to consider, that it is wrong, sinful, to 
pray with or in the presence of others, either the Church 
or the world; they evidently put more stress upon our 
Lord's words, "Enter into thy closet, etc.," than our 
Lord intended, as we have shown from his own course 
of conduct, which certainly is the best illustration of 
the spirit of his teachings,— for "In him was no sin, 
neither was guile found in his mouth." We remark 
incidentally, however, that we have no sympathy whatever 
with a practice which seems to be very common 
with the majority of Christians, namely, that of preaching 
at transgressors and scoring them, in prayers ostensibly 
offered to God. That this general disposition 
is recognized by others, is well illustrated by the following 
statement which appeared in a Boston secular 
journal, in a favorable comment upon the discourse of 
a very popular minister in that city. It said: "His 
prayer was generally acknowledged to be one of the 
finest ever offered to a Boston audience." There are 
indeed strong reasons for believing that many of the 
prayers offered are offered more to the congregations 



who hear than to the Almighty. This is a gross perversion 
of the wonderful privilege of prayer granted to 
God's children, and is of a piece with the hypocrisies 
of our Lord's day against which he warned his disciples, 
saying that those who thus pray are hypocrites and 
have their reward in being heard of men; for that is 
the reward they seek. 

To this day the traveler in the far East will see 
and hear prayers in every direction. Some of them 
may be results of misdirected energy and conscience, 
but many of them no doubt, as intimated by our Lord, 
are the results of spiritual pride and desire to be 
thought pious. A traveler in the East writes: "I was 
awakened in the early morning by a sound of prayer 
that was evidently intended to be heard of men whether 
God should hear it or not; it was a prolonged and 
energetic intoning, with an occasional rise in the voice 
that would be sure to start the soundest sleeper— it 
was the dragoman [guide], who after the morning 
greeting, added, 'Did you hear me pray this morning, 
my master?' Indeed I did, was my reply. And then 
he told me of his zeal and earnestness in prayer." The 
customs of Christendom differ; and yet in every direction 
we may find evidence of the same spirit,— ambition 
to be thought pious, effort to make an impression upon 
men and women, rather than to hold communion 
with the Heavenly Father. Such hypocrisies cannot 
be too strongly guarded against in all those who seek 
and enjoy communion with the Father and with our 
Lord Jesus Christ. 

TO WHOM SHALL WE PRAY? 



Our Lord's instruction is, "Pray to thy Father," 
"Pray, our Father which art in heaven." But this 
instruction is to be coupled with the further instruction, 
"Whatsoever ye shall ask of the Father in my 
name he will give it you." (John 15:16; 16:23.) "No 
man cometh unto the Father but by me." (John 14:6.) 
This excludes Jews, excludes Mohammedans, excludes 
the heathen, excludes all who have not a knowledge 
of Christ and a faith in him as the Redeemer. Only 
believers who have accepted Christ may approach God 
in prayer and call him "Father;" others may formulate 
petitions, but need expect no answers. It is only 
after we have accepted Christ and had our sins forgiven 
through faith in his blood that we may have 
the "boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of 
Jesus by a new and living way which he has consecrated 
for us." (Heb. 10:19,20.) These privileges 
which we enjoy under the New Covenant sealed and 
ratified by the blood of Jesus, had their correspondence 
and type in fleshly Israel and the Law Covenant 
sealed with the blood of bulls and goats; hence it was 



that the Jews as a people under their covenant were 
permitted to have access to God in prayer— tho not so 
directly and closely and intimately as we of the New 
Covenant. 

"Use not vain repetitions as the heathen do." 
The natural tendency of the human mind in approaching 
the Creator seems to be to feel its own poverty of 
expression, and to attempt to make up for this by repetitions. 
Thus the Chinese have the "praying 
wheels" in which long prayers that the worshiper 
cannot remember to repeat are turned round and round 
by him as representing his will, his wish, his prayers. 

R2252 : page 29 

The same principle is used amongst Roman Catholics, 

who repeat the same prayers scores and hundreds of 

times, and are promised by their priests certain special 

rewards for "saying" these prayers, a certain number 

of times,— the omission of so many days or years of 

future purgatorial sufferings. The same influences 

seem to operate upon Protestants tho less grossly, and 

often leads to long prayers and improper details of instruction 

to the Almighty. The Lord wished his followers 

to pray intelligently and realize that they were 

approaching an intelligent and reasonable God who 

knows already, far better than we, what things we 

have need of; and who is more willing to give them to 

us than earthly parents are to give good gifts to their 

children. Hence to repeat our petitions over and over 

is not only vain, in the sense that it will profit us 

nothing, but it indicates a low degree of spiritual development, 

very imperfect ideas respecting God, and a 

very imperfect relationship with him. The Christian 

neither needs to repeat certain prayers indefinitely, nor 

does he need to take up in prayer all the affairs of the 

world and the affairs of the Church, to tell God all 

about them and how they ought to be regulated. We 

have heard public prayers which implied that the worshiper 

had as much or more wisdom than the Almighty; 

because in them he undertook to tell the Almighty 

how, when, where and what should be done the world 

over, at home and abroad;— how many should be converted 

at the meeting in which he was praying, and 

how the heathen everywhere, the world over, should 

be dealt with. 

All this is monstrously wrong. No man is in a 
fit condition of heart to approach God in prayer who 
has not first learned of his own ignorance and lack of 
wisdom, and learned also of the Lord's infinitely superior 
knowledge and wisdom and power and love. The 
Christian who is advanced in knowledge and experience 
in the heavenly way will on the contrary be so filled 
with a realization of his own ignorance and insufficiency 
that he will rather go to the Lord praying, Lord teach 
us thy will, show me what is thy way and plan of salvation 



for Christendom and for the heathen, and show 

me how I may best be a co-worker with thee in the 

accomplishment of thy great and wonderful, wise and 

good purposes. Indeed, as the Christian's experience 

grows he is apt to come more and more to the condition 

of heart where his prayers to God will be chiefly 

thanks for mercies and favors already received, expressions 

of confidence in the Lord's willingness and ability 

to fulfil all the gracious promises of his Word, temporal 

and spiritual, and request merely that the divine will 

be done. 

"Your Father knoweth what things ye have need 
of before ye ask him." The Christian's prayer therefore 
is not for the purpose of giving information to 
God, nor for the purpose of calling attention to matters 
which he might overlook or forget; but on the contrary 
he is enjoined to pray and required to pray, because 
it will benefit himself: God withholds many of his 
blessings until we approach to ask them in prayer, in 
order that we may realize our need of his aid, and our 
dependence on him. Our prayers therefore are not to 
induce God to give us things which he desires to withhold 
from us, but are merely to secure the things which 
he desires us to have and has promised to us, and is more 
willing to give than to withhold. And how wise is 
this divine arrangement: how many of God's people 
have realized great benefit from this divine arrangement 
that we must ask if we would receive, must seek 
if we would find, must "knock if it be opened unto us." 
And thus, in addition to the favors asked and received, 
the very necessity of prayer itself has brought us into 
close fellowship with the Lord— into the enjoyment of 
one of our greatest privileges and blessings. 

"AFTER THIS MANNER PRAY YE." 



"Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be 
thy name." This address of God as our Father, as we 
have just seen, does not imply the fatherhood of God 
to all mankind; for on the contrary we remember that 
our great Teacher declared to some, "Ye are of your 
father, the devil." And the Apostle declares that we 
were "children of wrath" even as others still are. We 
have "escaped the condemnation that is on the world," 
and have been translated out of the kingdom of darkness 
into the Kingdom of God's dear Son— out from 
amongst those who are children of wrath into the family 
of God; so that now, as sons of God, all who believe in 
Jesus may pray, "Our Father, which art in Heaven." 
This portion of the petition is an address of reverence, 
an acknowledgment of God's greatness, and implies our 
humility and littleness. It implies that the worshiper 

R2253 : page 29 



reverences God and is not undertaking to address him 
in a light or irreverent manner: even his very name is 
revered as holy by the true worshiper. 

"Thy Kingdom come: thy will be done in earth 
as it is in heaven." This petition is not in the nature 
of a demand, nor even an expression of impatience. 
Rather it is an acknowledgment on the part of the 
worshiper that he has faith in the divine promise that 
a Heavenly Kingdom shall in God's due time be established 
in the earth. It is an acknowledgment that 
the worshiper not only believes God's promise but that 
he is in sympathy with it and desires the Lord's Kingdom 
—longs for it. It thus implies that he is not in sympathy 
with sin, nor with the kingdoms of this world and 
the present order and its imperfect social, financial, political 
and ecclesiastical arrangements. It is an acknowledgment, 

R2253 : page 30 

furthermore, that the worshiper is longing for 
the condition in which no sin will be possible;— in which 
God's will shall prevail on earth as well as in heaven. 
It thus implies that he is out of harmony with sin and in 
harmony with righteousness, truth, goodness. It is 
an acknowledgment, nevertheless that God's will is 
not done on earth, that his Kingdom has not come to 
earth as yet; for when his kingdom comes, when Christ, 
the appointed King, shall take unto himself his great 
power and reign, the result will speedily be as shown 
in the Scriptures, that Satan will be bound, evil in 
general restrained, and on the contrary knowledge, 
peace and blessing shall fill the whole earth. (Rev. 20:1-3; 
21:1-5; 22:1-6.) There is no attempt here to 
tell the Lord, what must be done, and how and when 
his Kingdom must be established: the rightly instructed 
worshiper is supposed to know that he who made 
all things is thoroughly competent to govern and direct 
and overrule all things, and that he is "working all 
things according to the council of his own will." The 
worshiper, it is supposed, has gone to the divine Word 
for instruction and will continue to receive his instructions 
there respecting the divine purposes: in this petition 
he is merely expressing his full acquiescence to 
the divine arrangement and rejoicing therein. 

"Give us this day our daily bread." The words 
of Matthew here differ slightly from those of Luke. 
Literally translated Luke's statement is, "be giving 
continually our daily bread." Matthew says "this day," 
while Luke says "day by day." The thought is practically 
the same, however. It is not an appeal to God 
for superabundance and much goods laid up for many 
days; nor is it a request for luxuries: but merely asking, 
Lord, give us those things which are needful to 
us daily. Contentment is the very spirit of this petition. 
Whoever prays to the Lord after this manner, 



and from the heart, will surely be a very thankful and 
very contented person. And this petition is as broad 
as the divine promise respecting earthly things would 
warrant. "Thy bread and thy water shall be sure," 
leaves no room for requests for luxuries. Moreover, 
while this petition is the only one in the prayer of an 
earthly character, the only one taking hold upon earthly 
affairs and interests, it also may be understood as 
relating to spiritual things; indeed, we believe it will 
be so applied by all God's children, in proportion as 
growth is made in grace and knowledge and spirituality. 
The spiritually minded will be asking for the 
spiritual food, the spiritual necessities, day by day and 
will more and more realize that as the Heavenly Father 
clothes the lilies and feeds the ravens, so, much more, 
he will care for the temporal interests of all who are 
seeking first the Kingdom of Heaven and its righteousness, 
—the righteousness which it will enforce. 

"And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors." 
What a thought! Who can offer a prayer "after 
this manner" and yet be under control of the evil 
spirit— filled with malice, anger, envy, hatred, strife, 
being unforgiving, unthankful, resentful, backbiters, 
slanderers? All these works of the flesh and the devil 
proceed from evil conditions— not one of them is prompted 
by true love, such as the Lord inculcates and his 
spirit inspires. The very essence of Christian principle 
is love, sympathy, forgiveness of the faults of others, 
even as we realize we have faults ourselves and that 
God has graciously forgiven us these for Christ's sake. 
Our Lord emphasizes the importance of this forgiving 
spirit before we can be children of our Father in 
Heaven, saying, in another place, "With what judgment 
ye judge, ye shall be judged;" and with what 
measure ye measure others, your own conduct shall be 
measured. (Matt. 7:2.) We remember, also, that he 
gave a parable illustrating the subject, representing 
his forgiven disciple as a servant who owed ten thousand 
talents, whose debt he had freely set aside, and 
did not press; but when that follower manifested so 
different a spirit that, finding a fellow servant who 
owed a few pence, he treated him unmercifully, then 
the Lord's mercy and generosity were likewise withdrawn 
from him.-See Matt. 18:23-35. 

Let every Christian in approaching the throne of 
the heavenly grace, daily inquire of his own heart, 
whether or not he has forgiven those who are indebted 
to him, as he desires that God should freely forgive 
him for Christ's sake. This does not mean the forgiving 
of financial indebtedness and destruction of our account 
books, except that on the debtor willing but unable 
to pay, we should have mercy and patience, even 
as we hope for mercy of our Lord. Its special application 
is to moral obligations, transgressions and indebtedness. 
Nor does this imply that we should pay 
no attention to the transgressions of others against 



ourselves— that we should not recognize offences. True, 

we should not be swift to take offense, we should be 

slow to anger, we should never take offense unless offense 

is most evidently intended. And then, while we 

may not forgive in the absolute sense until our forgiveness 

is asked, according to divine pattern on this 

subject, yet we should be always in a forgiving attitude 

of mind: that is to say, we should harbor no vindictive 

or malicious feelings, we should have no feelings 

except those of love and sympathy, and a desire 

to forgive the wrong that has been done us, as soon as 

possible, and an anxiety to make the way of reconciliation 

as smooth and easy as possible for the wrong-doer; 

and we should be on the alert to discover and prompt 

to rectify any missteps or wrong doings on our own 

parts. 

R2253 : page 31 

And "Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us 
from evil." The thought here is slightly obscure; for 
we all remember that "God tempteth no man." Amplifying 
the sentence so as to give us what we believe 
is the literal translation of it, and adding in brackets 
some suggestive words to make more plain our conception 
of the Lord's full thought here, as it was understood 
by those who heard him, this passage reads 
thus:— "And bring us not into temptation [merely], 
but [also] deliver us from the Evil One." It is a part 
of the divine arrangement to bring us or permit us to 
be put into positions of trial or testing. We are not 
to rebel against the divine wisdom in this matter, but 
quite to the contrary to acquiesce in it, and to realize 
that trials are essential to our development. Hence, 
instead of praying to be kept from temptations, our 
prayer rather is that when our Lord in his providences 
brings us into places of testing, he will also stay with 
us during the trial, and let his grace be sufficient for 
us, and not suffer us to be tempted above that we are 
able to bear, but with the temptation provide also a 
way of escape— delivering us from the Evil One, Satan. 

"For thine is the kingdom, and the power and the 
glory, forever. Amen." These words, altho found in 
our Common Version and in some of the Greek manuscripts, 
are not found in the oldest Greek MSS., the 
Sinaitic and the Vatican. These would therefore seem 
to have been human words added to the words of our 
Lord. So far as this earth is concerned, these words 
have not been true throughout the Gospel age; the 
dominion of the earth has not been the Lord's; the 
power of earth has not been the Lord's; and the glory 
of the earth has not been the Lord's. On the contrary, 
Satan has been "the prince of this world" and has 
worked in the hearts of the children of disobedience, 
and has blinded the minds of them that believe not the 
gospel. And the kingdoms and powers of this world 



have been Satan's, and God's people are waiting for 

God's Kingdom to come, as represented in verse ten, 

to overthrow the kingdoms of this world, and to establish 

the Kingdom of righteousness: to bind Satan 

and to destroy the works of the flesh and the devil. 



page 3 1 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 



Kansas. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-It seems to me there 
should be a million of the booklet on Spiritism circulated 
this year. The error of Spiritism is increasing 
in a wonderfully rapid manner, and the regions here 
about seem pervaded with it. The "angel of light" 
phase seems to be wonderfully successful. How blessed 
the thought that the Lord will take care of his own. 
"I pray for them which thou hast given me out of the 
world." What joy to know that the Father hears the 
prayer of his dear Son. What a privilege to know 
that we may "abide under the shadow of the Almighty." 

I enclose you a little booklet which I think should 
be titled "The Methodist Tenth," instead of "God's 
Tenth." I sometimes think if the Lord wanted to get 
money as badly as the preachers do he would get it. I 
hope it is not wicked to think such thoughts. Certainly 
my ideal of the Most High is very different from 
that. When the great work is completed, we will all 
see that He has done it all, and to Him belongs all the 
glory. Blessed be his holy name! 

Yours for the truth, W. H. HOUGHTELIN. 



Missouri. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have to report a 

splendid meeting at ; a regular camp meeting, 

where my audiences varied all the way from 50 to 200 
people, many of whom were deeply interested in the 
truth, as never before. Three Universalists threw 
away their arms of rebellion, came forward, two of 
them for the 1st volume of DAWN, and the third one 
subscribed for the TOWER, overjoyed at the wonderful 
plan of redemption when brought forward from a true 
and reasonable standpoint. Many others were deeply 
affected by such a grand harmony of the Word of God. 
Certainly it was a feast of fat things. 

With Christian greetings to yourself and Sister 
Russell and all the dear brethren and sisters, 

Yours in the bonds of love and service, 
Z. A. RANSOM. 



Ohio. 

DEAR FRIENDS: -Please find enclosed M.O. for 
$1.00 to pay for my TOWER of '98. "To pay for" are 
not the words, however, to express my sentiments, as 
there is not money enough in the world "to pay for" 
the grand things it has been my great privilege to 
have, through the TOWER. May it please the Lord to 
continue the TOWER a true Herald of Christ's Presence 
and a firm defender of the Ransom, so as to keep it a 
true helper to us at all times. 

Yours very truly, J. G. KUEHN. 



R2253 : page 31 

Illinois. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The TOWER arrived 
this morning, announcing the death of your father. I 
was deeply touched by your article, and you have my 
earnest sympathy in your loss. What you said of his 
burdens and disabilities made me think of some verses 
in the poem, "Mortally Wounded,"— 

"I lay me down to sleep, with little thought or care 
Whether the waking find me here— or there; 

A bowing, burdened head, only too glad to rest, 
Unquestioning, upon a loving breast; 
Not eager, bold nor strong— all that is past, 
Willing not to do, at last, at last! 

My long day's work is done, and this is all my part; 
I give a patient God my patient heart." 

R2254:page31 

What a great blessing this dear old father must have 
been to you ! In his own quiet way, loyal to the truth 
and to you. I can understand well how his noble efforts 
to "hold up your hands" must have comforted 

R2254 : page 32 

and strengthened you through dark times when Satan 
assaulted the work. His was indeed— 

A ROYAL SERVICE. 

"Among the Master's callings of high honor, 

One oftentimes we miss, 
Because our hearts in their impatient yearning 

Fail to perceive its bliss; 
Fail to perceive the grandeur of its service, 

The deep, sweet joy it brings, 
And deem some other easier, or nobler, 



With richer harvestings. 

"And so we may not choose, but Christ appoints us 

The work of sitting still, 
And saith, My child, in quietness and patience 

This service now fulfil. 
We learn that we are given this sweet service, 

Because the Master sees 
That thus his delegates must oft be fitted 

For higher embassies. 
Until at last we hear his dear voice saying, 

Child, I have need of thee 
To fill this vacant place of trust and honor, 

To do this work for me. 

"And then, as fellow-workers with the Master, 

We shall arise and go 
Forth to the harvest fields of earth, it may be, 

The reaper's joy to know; 
Or to some perfect, wondrous service yonder, 

Within some Holy Place, 
Where, veilless, in its full transfigured glory, 

His servants see his face." 

Your father's humility and child-like faith in our 
blessed Lord were beautiful: and you could not have 
paid a higher tribute to him than this brief, loving article 
in the TOWER. While your present separation 
from him is sad, yet we sorrow not as those who have 
no hope, and we have probably only a few more years 
in the flesh. Then we, too, shall enter that better, 
more blessed life, and understand fully what now we 
know only in part. With much Christian love to you 
and to Sister Russell, I am 

Yours in our dear Redeemer, 

HATTIE O. HENDERSON. 

[The EDITOR desires to express deep appreciation 
of all the many loving and sympathetic letters received 
from every quarter;— Love's testimonies and benedictions. 
What better evidences have we of the Lord's 
spirit than "brotherly love" and sympathy? Verily, 
"If one member suffers, all the members suffer with 
him." Please, dear Brethren and Sisters, accept this 
as an acknowledgement of all your kind and highly 
esteemed expressions of sympathy; and excuse me 
from a personal reply by letter, for we are extremely 
busy with the "harvest" work— as you will be glad 
to know. -EDITOR.l 



New Zealand. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I cannot tell you how 
deeply thankful I feel for being enabled to come to a 
knowledge of present truth as set forth in MILLENNIAL 
DAWN and ZION'S WATCH TOWER. It has strengthened 



and deepened my love for God and my desire to 
be of some use in the work of the present "harvest." 
There is a good field here for work, and I earnestly 
desire to engage in it. I do firmly believe that the Lord 
is calling me to it. 

I have fully counted the cost, and I am prepared 
to devote my time, my talents, my all, in the Lord's 
work, and I wish to colporteur and devote the most of 
my time to spreading the truth. I have no one depending 
on me, so that I am entirely free to devote 
myself to the work. I enclose five dollars for renewal 
of TOWER and tracts, also some 1st volumes of DAWN. 

Yours in the Lord, ANDREW ANDERSON. 



Denmark. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: --MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
VOL. IV. and your welcome letter of the 12th inst. came 
safely to hand. Many thanks ! I am reading the book 
with much interest and profit. It opens up many 
truths to me, so important for God's people to know; 
it is "meat in due season" for me. Oh, how I wish 
those books could have a wide circulation among the 
people, and enable many to see this wonderful light! 

On the 17th of October there happened an event 
here that should not be left entirely unnoticed. The 
Salvation Army was then officially legitimized in Denmark. 
General Booth was then visiting here and 
opened up several new homes for destitute. And at 
one of his meetings he had some very big(?) people on 
the platform. Judge of Supreme Court F. Larsen, privy 
Counselor of State Goos, Lieutenant-General Bahnson, 
Secretary of State Tierry, Chief of Police Madsen, 
and several others, solemnly pronounced the Salvation 
Army legitimized as a useful institution for the present 
order of society, and promised it their best support. 

But, for all that was said there, we know that it 
is not the promotion of Christianity these men are 
expecting by the efforts of the Salvation Army. It is 
not for the sake of Christianity, but for their own sakes, 
for the sake of Capitalism, that they have now legalized 
the "Army." And because the "Army" supports 
Capitalism, the great men bless its doings and step forth 
on the platform to thank the "Army" for all the good 
it has accomplished. 

Please give my Christian love and regards to the 
office helpers and receive a large share to yourself and 
Sister Russell, from 

Your loving brother in Christ, J. S. WINTER. 



Bermuda. 
MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I am writing to 
thank you for the generous supply of tracts you sent 



me and to tell you I arrived here after a very smooth 
and pleasant voyage. The people are very much scattered 
over the island, and in no place is there any very 
dense population, and as horse, steam or electric cars 
are entirely unknown here it entails considerable walking 
to make a thorough canvass of the entire colony; 
but (D.V.) I hope after about a week to start in and 
distribute the tracts and at the same time solicit orders 
for DAWNS, and as this is a virgin field, I trust my labor 
will not be in vain. 

I hope, dear Brother, that you will remember me 
at the throne of grace that He may use me in this 
solemn harvest time in making me His humble instrument 
in this colony for separating the wheat from the 
tares, and that whatsoever I may do, it may be entirely 
for His honor and glory who has called us to be fellow-heirs 
with Jesus. 

"Emptied, that so he might fill me, as forth to his service I go; 
Broken, that so unhindered his love through me might flow." 

Yours in the love of Jesus, WALTER YARDLEY. 

[This dear brother has already had 100 copies of 