Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Bible Truth “Exerts Power”
THIS world spends much time and money trying to control the actions of bad people. Laws are enacted against crimes such as drug abuse, theft, and murder; but these laws do not make bad people good. On the other hand, God’s Word, the Bible, has transforming power, and people who apply its laws and principles become upright, honest, and mild-tempered persons.​—Romans 12:2.
□ For example, two Witnesses in Australia made a return visit on several young, unemployed men. As they entered the house where the men were, they came into a dark, smoke-filled room. There were marijuana implements on the table and large rock posters lining the walls. Along one side of the room were huge electric guitar amplifiers. It was a rock band’s practice room. They were able to start a Bible study with three of these men who were fleshly brothers. Some years earlier their mother had studied the Bible with the Witnesses, and with the aid of the book You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth, she had taught the boys about God’s promise of a future paradise. Then the family moved, and the study was stopped. Now, with their love for the truth renewed, they were soon joined in their study by two friends.
Within three months, one of them was witnessing, and a month later he was joined by the other two. They quit the band, and within four months, all three were sharing in the preaching work. In the meantime, their mother, younger brother, and older married sister started to study the Bible. Shortly afterward another friend asked for a Bible study. What a joy to see five of them baptized on the same day at a circuit assembly! Two others are working toward baptism, while the mother and the daughter continue to make good progress. Truly, the Word of God exerts power.
□ A man in Argentina had an employee who was lazy and deceitful and owed him a lot of money. One day the worker disappeared. Then, years later, in the street near his home, the man met his former employee. The ex-employee greeted him, saying: “I was just going to your house to pay back the money I owe you. Here is your money. Thank you very much, and please forgive me for not returning it sooner.” Surprised, the man asked him why he did this. He answered: “I am now studying the Bible, and I am one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. The Bible says that we are not to owe anyone anything except love. That is why I returned what is yours.” The man asked: “What power does the Bible have to produce such a change in a man?” A Bible study was started with him, and now he too is learning the truth, all because of the great change Bible truth made in his former employee.
Many honesthearted people in Argentina are accepting the transforming truth of the Bible and are changing their way of life, as the following experience shows.
□ “One day when we knocked on a door while in service,” relates a Witness, “we heard screams coming from within the house. In answer to our knock, a man came out​—very, very angry. We began to explain the purpose of our visit, but he threatened to throw us off his property. We continued to talk quietly and calmly. Little by little he calmed down. Noting this, we explained to him more about Jehovah’s marvelous purpose for mankind. Impressed by this, the man startled us by saying: ‘God sent you here.’ He then invited us into the house. There, huddled in a corner, were his ‘wife’ and children, crying. Then he confessed: ‘When you came, I was about to kill my family and myself. I’m desperate! I lost my job, and now they are going to kick us out of our home, and I have many debts to pay.’”
This experience had a happy ending. A sister found a job for the man, and he got another house. He and his “wife” began to study the Bible and got married after living together for 15 years.
Bible truth “exerts power” as these experiences show, and it can do that for anyone with a humble heart who will study the Bible and apply it.
[Blurb on page 7]
“The word of God is alive and exerts power.”​—HEBREWS 4:12

