Announcements
MATURITY BY THE SPIRIT
“Solid food belongs to mature people, to those who through use have their perceptive powers trained to distinguish both right and wrong.” (Heb. 5:14, NW) That is why mature Christians press on beyond elementary doctrine. They follow the leadings of Jehovah’s spirit, “for the spirit searches into all things, even the deep things of God.” (Heb. 6:1; 1 Cor. 2:10, NW) They press on to mature works, too, based on their mature understanding and appreciation of the marvelous secrets contained in the Holy Scriptures. During the month of April you can help others press on to maturity by telling them the truth about God’s Word and its importance to all men in these difficult times. Present them with the opportunity to subscribe for The Watchtower, sent twice a month for a year, for only $1. Three booklets are given as a premium. Some may wish both The Watchtower and Awake! 48 issues during the coming year, for only $2. There can be no maturity without spiritual food that builds strength. The Watchtower and Awake! are invaluable aids to this end.
A REVISED SECOND EDITION
“Let God Be True” in its first edition reached a circulation of 10,003,000 copies, in 30 languages. A second edition has now been printed with revisions to bring the book into line with more advanced Bible translation. The revised edition also presents more accurate information on doctrine due to increased understanding of the Scriptures, plus additional new data on the preservation and continuance of the Bible itself, as well as convincing argument showing the fallacy of the evolution theory. Even if you have read the first edition of “Let God Be True” you will not be amiss in obtaining the second edition for reference purposes, because of its valuable additions. If you have enjoyed “Let God Be True”, why not encourage your friends and neighbors to obtain a copy so they too can enjoy it. The book lives up to its name in presenting the Scriptures so that you may have the mind of God on the subjects discussed. The cost is only 50c per copy.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of May 10: Doing the Work Approved by God.
Week of May 17: “Do Not Loiter at Your Business.”

