Do You Read the Magazines?
1 A missionary couple in Africa had this to say about our magazines: “The Watchtower helps us to keep spiritually alert in our territory. We derive encouragement and strength from each issue.” Do you have the same deep appreciation for our journals? And are you as eager to read them?
2 It takes considerable time to prepare magazine articles that can be read in only a few minutes. Knowing this, will you just skim the articles, look at the pictures, or occasionally read an article that happens to catch your eye? We are wise if we do more than that. We should take time to read and analyze all the articles in every issue of our magazines. The Watchtower is our principal journal for timely spiritual food. Awake! carries interesting and informative articles on a variety of subjects. What we learn by reading these magazines not only strengthens us spiritually but also prepares us for a more effective share in the ministry. Being faithful readers ourselves, we will be enthusiastic about offering the magazines to others.
3 How to Improve Reading Habits: Could you do better in keeping up with your reading of the magazines? Here are two suggestions that work for many. (1) Establish a regular reading schedule. Just by setting aside 10 or 15 minutes each day to read, you will be amazed at how much you can read in a week’s time. (2) Have a system to keep track of what you have read. Perhaps you can put a check mark at the beginning of each article you read. Without this, you could miss reading some articles or even a whole magazine. It is important to create a reading routine that works for you and to stick to it.​—Compare Philippians 3:16.
4 “The faithful and discreet slave” has wisely responded to changing times by publishing articles that come to grips with the real needs of people. (Matt. 24:45) Truly, the magazines have touched our lives. The rate of our spiritual progress is, to a large extent, governed by the quality of our theocratic reading habits. A rich spiritual blessing is in store for those who make time to read all the magazines.

