Service Meetings for October
Week Starting October 5
Song 199
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
15 min: “We Benefited From the ‘God’s Way of Life’ Conventions.” Questions and answers. Display the new book and brochure, and point out ways we can put them to good use.
20 min: “‘Sowing Kingdom Seed’ on Magazine Routes.” Audience discussion. Have some explain how they started and maintain a magazine route. Then demonstrate a magazine presentation where arrangements are made to return with the next issues. Suggest how the donation arrangement can tactfully be mentioned.
Song 133 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting October 12
Song 42
 5 min: Local announcements. Accounts report.
10 min: “Overseers Taking the Lead​—The Secretary.” A talk by the congregation secretary, reviewing his assigned duties. He emphasizes that all can cooperate by turning in field service reports promptly.
10 min: They Have an Enthusiastic Pioneer Spirit. An encouraging talk based on the 1998 Yearbook, pages 104-7. Explain why there are so many pioneers in Japan, what allows housewives there to give priority to spiritual interests, what is behind every application to pioneer, and who make up the majority of the pioneers. Illustrate the fine influence that pioneering parents exercise. Highlight what conviction it takes to make the necessary adjustments in one’s life to pioneer. Encourage all to give serious, prayerful thought to reevaluating their prospects for pioneering.
20 min: “Do You Read the Magazines?” Questions and answers. Review practical suggestions for scheduling time for personal reading that are found in the School Guidebook, study 4, paragraphs 5-6.
Song 107 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting October 19
Song 16
10 min: Local announcements. Review talking points in the latest issues of the magazines. Relate experiences from 1997 Yearbook, page 45, and October 22, 1996, Awake!, page 32. Encourage all to share in magazine distribution this weekend.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: How to Prepare for the Watchtower Study. Audience discussion conducted by Watchtower Study conductor, based on the May 15, 1986, Watchtower, pages 19-20, paragraphs 16-18 and School Guidebook, study 7, paragraph 11, and study 18, paragraphs 4-6. Call for comments on the following questions: (1) Why is it vital that we get the maximum benefit from each study article in The Watchtower? (2) What should we do when we receive a new issue? (3) What is a good way to prepare for the Watchtower Study? (4) What attention should be given to the cited scriptures and the theme of the lesson? (5) How can we review what we learned? (6) What key points should we meditate on when we conclude our personal study of the lesson? (7) How should we prepare a comment? (8) How might a variety of comments be given on a single question? Have some relate what they have personally done to help them derive the greatest benefit from the Watchtower Study.​—See also Organized to Accomplish Our Ministry, pages 65-7.
Song 95 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting October 26
Song 98
10 min: Local announcements. List the older publications that are in stock locally and that can be offered in the ministry as opportunities arise. Since there are vacation periods coming up in November and December, this would be a good time for baptized youths and others to consider auxiliary pioneering.
20 min: Godly Obedience in a Religiously Divided Family. Talk based on June 1, 1995, Watchtower, pages 26-9. Offer kindly encouragement and admonition that will help those with unbelieving mates to maintain a positive attitude and to associate actively with the congregation.
15 min: Getting to the Meetings on Time. Discussion among two or three Congregation Book Study conductors or ministerial servants about the problem of arriving late for meetings. They acknowledge that unusual situations, including emergencies, weather conditions, traffic, and so forth, can cause anyone to be delayed. However, some are chronically late. In a positive way, the group discusses and illustrates what is needed to be punctual: (1) wholehearted appreciation for the privilege of attending meetings and for the spiritual food and association that are provided there, (2) good advance planning and organization of personal affairs, (3) willing cooperation among family members, (4) leaving early and allowing time for unexpected problems, and (5) being genuinely concerned not to cause distractions for others in attendance. All agree that this problem of arriving late can be remedied by putting forth a consistent effort to improve.
Song 86 and concluding prayer.

