Become Skillful in Your Ministry
1 The apostle Paul encouraged the developing of skill in the ministry. He wrote: “Do your utmost to present yourself approved to God, a workman with nothing to be ashamed of, handling the word of the truth aright.”​—2 Tim. 2:15.
2 Skill in the ministry is acquired. Therefore, we must ‘do our utmost’​—put forth earnest effort—​if we are going to be skillful ministers. But what will help us?
LEARN FROM GOD’S WORD
3 Our personal knowledge of the Scriptures has a direct bearing on our effectiveness as ministers. The better acquainted we are with what the Bible teaches, the more effective we will be in “handling the word of the truth aright.” So it is vital to set aside time for personal study.​—1 Tim. 4:15, 16.
4 Another means of getting acquainted with God’s Word is “to pay more than the usual attention” to the Bible-based instruction received at congregation meetings. (Heb. 2:1) Excellent talking points for the ministry are discussed in public talks or can be gleaned from the Congregation Book Study. The Theocratic Ministry School furnishes us with valuable training to be skilled teachers, and the Service Meeting provides helpful suggestions and practical demonstrations to assist us in becoming more proficient as ministers. However, to gain the greatest benefit, we need to be well-prepared and actively participate in all the meetings.
APPLY SUGGESTIONS
5 Paul told the congregation in Philippi to practice the things they learned in connection with him. (Phil. 4:9) We too need to put into practice the things we learn through Jehovah’s organization. For example, in the July 15, 1988, issue of The Watchtower, pages 15-20, we learned ways in which we can develop “new” territory in areas that are frequently worked. In addition to emphasizing the need for a fresh, appealing, and positive approach, the article encouraged us to condition the householder to expect us to call regularly. Counsel was given to be thorough in searching out deserving ones, seeking out different individuals living under the same roof. By applying these suggestions, we are practicing the things we learn and improving our skills in the ministry.
6 Do we regularly use the Reasoning book in the field ministry? The suggested introductions as well as the section on how to respond to potential conversation stoppers can sharpen our witnessing skills. Additionally, preparing and rehearsing the Topic for Conversation and the way we will present the offer for the month will contribute to our success in the ministry.
7 If you would like additional suggestions on how to improve your ministry, approach the service overseer or your book study conductor and ask for assistance. All of us can improve our skills as ministers, “handling the word of the truth aright.” In just a little while, Jehovah God will bring an end to this wicked system. Until then, our heartfelt desire is to help as many people as we can to gain salvation and thereby bring honor to our God Jehovah.​—John 15:8.

