Presenting the Good News​—As a Family
1 A dedicated family fully engaged in sacred service​—with the father, mother, and children serving God whole-souled—​is a praise to Jehovah’s great name. We are happy that many such families are to be found in congregations of Jehovah’s people earth wide.
2 Of course, the father has the first responsibility to care for the spiritual needs of his family. (1 Cor. 11:3) With the cooperation of his wife and children, his family can exert a strong influence on others. (Matt. 5:16) What are some areas where this cooperation can be manifested?
PARENTS TAKE THE LEAD
3 In many instances, the father may be an elder or a ministerial servant. This means that in addition to the interests of his family, some of his time and attention must be given to congregation matters. The father’s responsibility is to see to it that the available time is apportioned so that his family is not neglected. This may not always be easy in view of the demands made on his limited time. But because his family is his primary responsibility, he should regularly schedule some of his valuable time to be with his family in study, in field service, at meetings, and in suitable recreation. Circumstances and other responsibilities may alter the father’s schedule on occasion, but how rewarding it is when he can spend time every month in field service with members of the family!
4 Cooperation from the wife is vital. She can complement her husband in a most important way by helping train the children in the ministry. Her exemplary zeal and devotion will do much to influence the children to grow in their appreciation for the ministry.​—2 Tim. 3:14, 15.
5 There are many fine examples of situations in which one parent carried the spiritual load of responsibility and successfully trained the children in the ministry. Because of the excellent example of their mother or father, many young people have taken a firm stand for the truth, even taking up the full-time ministry.
CHILDREN’S RESPONSIBILITY
6 What about the responsibility of the children? Even the perfect Son of God, Jesus, while still a young child, was subject to the direction and instruction of his parents. (Luke 2:51) Therefore, when father and mother arrange for the family to spend time together in the ministry, it is the obligation of the children to show their godly devotion by cooperating with their parents.​—Eph. 6:1-3.
7 Worshiping together as a family​—studying, sharing in the field ministry, and attending meetings—​strengthens the bonds of love and unity in the family circle. Parents and children share responsibility in this regard.

