Question Box
● Before being approved for baptism, to what extent should an unbaptized publisher be sharing in the field ministry?
One who qualifies as an unbaptized publisher has already demonstrated in a variety of ways his strong desire to be one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. (Ps. 110:3) A diligent study of the Scriptures has brought about a change in his thinking, attitude, and way of life. Stemming from a heartfelt desire to please Jehovah and do His will, such a serious Bible student associates regularly with Jehovah’s people at congregation meetings, assemblies, and conventions. (Heb. 10:24, 25) Besides regular attendance at such Christian gatherings, likely he has also been moved from the heart to make public declaration of his faith by offering comments at the meetings, and probably he has enrolled in the Theocratic Ministry School.​—Ps. 40:9, 10; om p. 73.
Once a Bible student embraces the truth and shows he genuinely appreciates the value of the Kingdom message, he may have the privilege of sharing in the house-to-house ministry. This is the primary work of Jehovah’s Witnesses. (Matt. 24:14; 28:19, 20; om p. 111) In this connection, both the publisher conducting the study and the elders have a serious responsibility to make certain that the student’s entire life is in harmony with Christian principles. He should have a real desire to be one of Jehovah’s Witnesses and appreciate the privilege of sharing in the Kingdom-preaching and disciple-making work.​—Gal. 6:6; w88 11/15 p. 17; om pp. 98-9, 174.
It need not be a very long time from when a Bible student qualifies to share with us in the ministry until he is able to present himself for water baptism. By now his life course is already in full harmony with Christian principles, but he lacks experience in the public ministry. He should be allowed sufficient time to demonstrate that he is steadfastly determined to have a regular and zealous share in the field ministry.​—Ps. 40:8; Rom. 10:9, 10, 14, 15.
By the time the person is ready for baptism, most likely he will be regularly sharing the good news with others, spending more than just an hour or two in the field service each month. (w84 6/1 p. 8 par. 2) Of course, the personal circumstances of each one requesting baptism should be reviewed, taking into consideration background, age, limitations, and so forth. The elders will want to be guided by the direction given to them on page 175 of the Our Ministry book: “Our interest is in those whose hearts are turned to Jehovah and who have grasped the sense of fundamental Bible truths. With your loving assistance, those being baptized will be encouraged and helped to enter into the Christian ministry, adequately prepared to accomplish that important assignment.”​—Matt. 16:24; John 4:34; 1 Pet. 2:21.

