Satisfying Your Spiritual Need
1 Jesus said: “Happy are those conscious of their spiritual need.” (Matt. 5:3) Why is it so important to be conscious of our spiritual need? How can we manifest that we are conscious of it? What pitfalls must we avoid, and what blessings will result from being conscious of our spiritual need?
2 Doubtless all of us are familiar with the relationship between our physical well-being and proper diet. A person cannot continually neglect his physical needs and expect to perform quality work day in and day out. The same principle applies if we neglect feeding ourselves spiritually.​—Matt. 4:4; John 17:3.
MEETINGS HELP TO SATISFY NEEDS
3 There is a direct relationship between our spiritual well-being and our spiritual feeding program. At our meetings, “the faithful and discreet slave” provides a fine spiritual menu to satisfy our need. (Matt. 24:45-47) Each meeting serves a specific purpose, and none should be neglected. Do you prepare for all the meetings and attend them regularly?
4 Let us briefly consider just three of our five weekly meetings. The principal meeting designed to keep us abreast of advancing truth is the Watchtower Study. The Theocratic Ministry School can help us to become proficient as ministers. The Congregation Book Study provides for a careful study of various Bible subjects.
5 Do you prepare for congregation meetings? Some may skim through the study material, quickly underlining answers to the questions, but not look up the cited scriptures. They may be somewhat prepared to comment, but do they get the full amount of spiritual nourishment available? Is there room for improvement in the way that you and your family prepare for meetings?
BUY OUT TIME
6 When you set aside time to prepare for meetings, do not permit television or any other less important activity interfere with your plans. Family heads, especially, should help their families stick to a regular program of Bible study, preparation for meetings, and participation in field service. All should take seriously the apostle Paul’s counsel to ‘buy out the opportune time’ and give priority to our spirituality.​—Eph. 5:15-17.
7 By being conscious of our spiritual need, we will avoid the pitfalls of complacency, or self-satisfaction. As individuals and as families, we have real spiritual needs. Our everlasting happiness depends on the efforts we put forth to satisfy our spiritual need.

