Seize Opportunities to Witness During Summer
1 The Scriptures urge us: “Whether you are eating or drinking or doing anything else, do all things for God’s glory.” (1 Cor. 10:31) Summertime affords opportunities to do this in a number of ways.
2 Many will be taking a vacation this summer. However, none of us should neglect our work of preaching and teaching no matter what the season. Therefore, while on vacation, attending a convention, or during school vacation, be eager to witness to others. How can we do this?
WHILE ON VACATION
3 Are you planning to visit relatives this summer? Most of us enjoy renewing family ties. If your relatives are not in the truth, you may be able to share the Kingdom message with them. Many brothers have had good success by patiently waiting until the right moment to witness to their relatives. In this way, some of their relatives have learned the truth.​—See The Watchtower, February 15, 1990, pages 25-7.
4 If you plan to travel away from home for a vacation this summer, why not make arrangements to attend meetings and work in field service with the local congregation? We “have love for the whole association of brothers,” and working in the field service with them gives us an opportunity to benefit from their experience in the truth while getting to know them better. (1 Pet. 2:17) By attending meetings and engaging in the preaching work while on vacation, we can benefit ourselves and enjoy true refreshment with our brothers.​—Matt. 11:28, 29.
WHEN ATTENDING THE CONVENTION
5 When attending the district convention, witness to others. Wearing our badge cards can arouse the curiosity of others and open the way for us to speak with them about the truth. Look for opportunities to witness when stopping for fuel, eating at restaurants, or taking public transportation. Informal conversations in these settings often produce good results. So have your Bible and appropriate literature handy, and be prepared to give a witness.
INCREASED ACTIVITY AS A FAMILY
6 Since many of us will be out of school or have time off from secular work during the summer months, why not spend more time in the field ministry by auxiliary pioneering? You can improve your field ministry and “widen out” in your love by working with others. Why not work with as many as possible in the congregation? (2 Cor. 6:11-13) Entire families have used the summer months to auxiliary pioneer together. This has strengthened their faith and bonded them closer to Jehovah and to one another as a family. Also, this encourages the congregation, and others may be stimulated to greater activity as a result.
7 Summertime is usually filled with activity. Because so many things can occupy our time, we need to be conscious of keeping a good routine so that we can make the most of our time. By setting spiritual priorities now, we will ‘let our light shine before men.’ As they see our fine works, some may be moved to give glory to Jehovah, all because we seized every opportunity to share the truth with others during the summer.​—Matt. 5:16.

