From Our Readers
Oceans  Today I read the series “The Oceans Reveal Their Deepest Secrets.” (November 22, 2000) I love nature, but the ocean abyss was unfamiliar to me. Truly, the more one learns about the earth and its wonders, the more one should respect this dynamic planet and its infinitely wise Creator.
C. F., Italy
Thank you for this fascinating series. I had always wondered why Jehovah created such organisms as the tube worm, when most of mankind is unaware that such creatures exist. I liked the point that the existence of these creatures shows Jehovah’s concern for the cleanliness of the earth—a concern we should imitate.
H. S., Britain
Reading this series was like making an actual visit to the seabed and watching the wonders of the deep while receiving a detailed and competent explanation. Your presentation helped me to perceive more clearly God’s qualities as evident in the things he has made.
J.M.M., Zambia
This is one of the most fascinating series I have read in Awake! It presents further proof that only an intelligent Being could have created our planet in all its detail. Articles like these strengthen our desire to serve our Grand Creator.
S. G., Brazil
Absent Fathers  My father left home when I was six years old. I am now 20, and I have not seen him since he left. I have always felt that his leaving was my fault and that he didn’t love me. The article “Young People Ask . . . Why Did Dad Leave Us?” (November 22, 2000) answered everything clearly. Thank you for understanding the hearts of children without fathers.
K. M., Japan
More than two years ago, my husband and I got a divorce. I have tried to do everything possible to get my son to talk to me about the family breakup, but nothing has worked. Now for the first time, my son has admitted that he was affected by the divorce. That was a huge breakthrough. Very gradually, he’s opening up. I can’t express how thankful I am for the many helps you provide for young people in all their distresses.
D. H., United States
With the exception of one brief statement, the article said that fathers leave home because of misconduct on their part. However, there seem to be a growing number of wives leaving their husbands. After 18 years of marriage, my wife began a promiscuous life-style. I was driven out of my own house. I feel I had to mention this aspect of the problem.
L. G., United States
As you mention, we acknowledged that some fathers leave home because of the wife’s misconduct. Many of the principles discussed in the article would apply in this situation as well.—ED.
Anesthesia  In the article “From Agony to Anesthesia” (November 22, 2000), you state that there was no anesthesia prior to the 1840’s. Operations were performed successfully in Japan by Seishu Hanaoka long before the 1840’s.
S. A., Japan
In general, the medical world did not embrace the use of anesthesia prior to the 1840’s. However, the “Kodansha Encyclopedia of Japan” says that Seishu Hanaoka (1760-1835) prepared an anesthetic substance called “mafutsusan” by mixing “six crude drugs.” He “used it successfully in a surgical operation for breast cancer in 1805, about 40 years before the first use of ether at Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston.” Seishu subsequently used his anesthetic in a number of operations.—ED.

