page 1 

VOL. XXXV JANUARY 1 No. 1 
A. D. 1914-A. M. 6042 



CONTENTS 

Views From The Watch Tower 3 

The Days Are at Hand 4 

Time Features Unpopular 4 

"Rest in the Lord" 4 

Unrest on Every Side 5 

A Famine— But Not for Bread 5 

"Our Deliverance Draweth Nigh" 5 

The Great Privilege of True Service 6 

Selfishness Unfits for the Kingdom 6 

Our Responsibility as Stewards 7 

The Humble to Be Exalted 8 

The Millennial Reign a Service 8 

Who May Pray and for What? 8 

"Seek, Knock, Ask— And Receive" 9 

Prince of Darkness Vs. Prince of Light 10 

Names Written in the Lamb's Book of Life 11 

Two Books of Life 11 

Introduction to the Father 12 

Thanksgiving With Prayer and Supplication 12 

Some Interesting Letters 14 

Berean Questions in Scripture Studies 15 

page 2 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:-All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 



SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



THE MEMORIAL SUPPER- 19 14 

Friday evening, April 10th, after 6 o'clock, will be the proper 
date for the celebration of the Memorial Supper, according to 
the lunar or Jewish reckoning— Nisan, 14th, twenty-four hours 
in advance of the Jewish Passover— Nisan, 15th. 



HOW YOU CAN ASSIST US 

Our dear readers can save much of our time: 

By writing their letters plainly. 

By putting their full address at the head of the letter. 

By putting their orders on a separate piece of paper from 
their other correspondence. 

By giving our file reference in replying to any communications 
from our office. Write "File A," "File B" or "File R," 
as the case may be, on face of your addressed envelope or 
postal card and at beginning of your letter. 

Some, we notice, are using a small rubber stamp for their 
address. This is convenient and may also be used for stamping 
return address on your envelopes. 

We thank you for interesting clippings sent in, but request 
that you give name and date of the publication. If you send 
the paper entire be sure to mark the interesting items. 



When sending remittances to the Society, please remember 
to make them payable in all cases to the Watch Tower 
Bible and Tract Society. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR FEBRUARY 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens 
to the reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in 
prayer. At the breakfast table the Manna text is considered. 
Hymns for February follow: (1) 14; (2) 208; (3) 
46; (4) 147; (5) 311; (6) 43; (7) Vow; (8) 145; (9) 12; (10) 
259; (11) 65; (12) 78; (13) 221; (14) 105; (15) 34; (16) 240; 
(17) 307; (18) 313; (19) 87; (20) 303; (21) 113; (22) 130; (23) 
152; (24) 286; (25) 176; (26) 300; (27) 191; (28) 224. 



R5373 : page 3 



VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 

FROM every point of view the Year 1914 seems 

big with possibilities. The headlines of all 

the newspapers of the world tell that our 

Master's prediction of nearly nineteen centuries 

ago is being fulfilled— "Men's hearts 

are failing them for fear and for looking 

after those things which are coming on the 

earth" in the present social order of affairs. 

Evidences multiply on every hand that the 

teachings of the Colleges for the past thirty 

years along the lines of human Evolution and destructive 

Higher Criticism of the Bible are bearing their fruitage. 

What only the educated and the wealthy a few years ago 

knew respecting these matters, people of all classes now 

know. Doubts about the inspiration of the Bible have 

led people to guess for themselves and to realize that 

all who reject the Bible are merely guessing at the 

future. 

This matter affects the industrial classes as it does 
not affect the wealthy and the learned. The industrial 
classes, with little financial backing, do not feel satisfied 
with their own or other men's guesses respecting a future 
life. The next logical process of their minds is to 
inquire how we may know that there is a God, and in general 
to doubt everything. The next step in order is a 
determination to make the most of the present life, in 
view of their uncertainty about the future one. Under 
such conditions, can we wonder that Socialism in its various 
forms and phases is growing— that a general spirit 
of doubt and discontent is increasing? 

So long as employment continues at profitable wages, 
the majority of these people are too cautious to desire 
a wreck of the social system, through whose operation 
they have a comfortable living and by whose destruction 
their comforts might be diminished. The world, therefore, 
must face the fact that, if dire necessity comes, as 
it has done in the past, the common people, the artisans 
of the world, will meet the situation differently from 
what their fathers did. Faith in God and in the Bible 
shaken— gone with most of them— we may be assured 
that a stoppage of the wheels of industry would speedily 
bring a terrible Time of Trouble to the civilized world. 
And these very conditions are threatened at the present 
time. It is on this account that many of the rich and 
influential are trembling as they face the near future. 

The man or the woman possessed of a hope beyond 
the grave has in the storms of life an anchorage for the 
soul which others do not have. Should the time come, 
soon or later, when the social fabric will be stretched to 
the breaking point, when banks suspend payment of 
money to their depositors, when factories and mills are 
closed, when people are hungry, we may be sure that a 
roar and an explosion will not be long deferred. This 
awful condition is just what the Bible portrays. So far 



as our judgment goes, the Year 1914 is the last one of 
what the Bible terms "Gentile Times"— the period in 
which God has allowed the nations of the earth to do 
their best to rule the world. The end of their "Times" 
marks the date for the beginning of Messiah's Kingdom, 
which the Bible declares is to be ushered in with a great 
Time of Trouble, just such as we see impending. 

As already pointed out, we are by no means confident 
that this year, 1914, will witness as radical and swift 
changes of Dispensation as we have expected. It is beyond 
the power of our imagination to picture an accomplishment 
in one year of all that the Scriptures seem to 
imply should be expected before the Reign of Peace is 
ushered in. 

Letters from all over the world assure us that the sentiment 
of THE WATCH TOWER readers is in full accord 
with that of the Editor in a resolution that, whatever may 
occur or may not occur during these years, our faith in 
the great Divine Plan of the Ages and in the Harvest 
shall not be one bit shaken. We know in whom we have 
believed. We consecrated our lives to His service— even 
unto death, whether that death shall come within this 
year or at another time. 

The signs of the times clearly indicate the near approach 
of the very trouble for which we have for forty 
years been looking. The signs of the Son of Man in the 
wonderful inventions and progress of the world are manifest 
to us. We believe that the Parousia of our Redeemer 
took place thirty-nine years ago and that He is 
the potent Factor in all the affairs of His Church and 
the Supervisor now of the conditions which will shortly 
lead up to the establishment of His own Kingdom and 
the binding of Satan, the Prince of Darkness. 

We believe that the Year 1914 gives evidence of 
greater possibilities of service for the Truth than has 
any previous year of the Harvest. Moreover, all those 
who have tasted of the good Word of God and who are 
rejoicing in the light of Present Truth seem to be actuated 
by zeal for God and for His Cause and for His 
people, both in Babylon and out of Babylon, more than 
ever before. Besides, the number of these fully consecrated 
ones increases every day. Also the conditions are 

R5373 : page 4 

favorable to the opening of the eyes of understanding 
and the unstopping of the deaf ears of our dear brethren 
of various denominations. 

Let us be more than ever on the alert, therefore, to 
be used and useful in the service of our King. Let us 
remember that the moments and the hours are important, 
that no matter how many cares of life we may have, we 
can always find some time for the service of the Truth, 
not only in our own hearts and homes, but also in doing 
good to all men as we have opportunity, especially to the 
Household of Faith. 



While watching for the consummation, while realizing 
that it will bring the Time of Trouble, while seeking 
to be as fully prepared as possible for whatever share 
we may have in that Trouble, let us not unduly emphasize 
this feature of the Divine Plan in presenting matters to 
our Christian friends of the world. Let us more and 
more cultivate a sobriety of mind, a loving tenderness of 
disposition, which will seek to tell only so much as may 
be necessary to be known. Let us emphasize the goodness 
of God and the great blessing that is in store for 
mankind and the nearness of this blessing and the grand 
results to be obtained. Let us tell that the fulfilment of 
our Lord's prayer, "Thy Kingdom come," is close at hand! 



R5374 : page 4 

"THE DAYS ARE AT HAND" 

"For the vision is yet for an appointed time; but at the end it 
shall speak, and not lie; though it tarry, wait for it, because 
it will surely come; it will not tarry."— Habakkuk 2:3. 

GOD'S PLAN OF THE AGES is the vision 

seen by the Prophet Habakkuk, who was 

told to write it and to "make it plain upon 

tables, that every one may read it fluently" 

(Leeser's translation); that in the end the 

vision should "speak and not lie;" though it 

would seem to tarry, yet it would not tarry. 

It would seem to all that the great Plan of 

God was long delayed. The groaning creation 

would think the Heavenly Father was 

very slack. Many would be inclined to lose their faith in 

respect to the Seed of Abraham, and to think that God 

had forgotten the promise which He had made to Abraham. 

We know that disappointments have come to God's 

people along this line. The Jews were disappointed in 

their expectations. Christians in this Laodicean period 

were disappointed at first, not clearly understanding what 

to expect. 

During the early persecutions of the Church, it was 
believed that those who suffered would soon enter into 
glory. They thought the Kingdom was near. Some of 
the disappointed ones continued to wait and hope and 
pray. Others organized the great Papal System, and declared 
that the Church should have her glory now, that 
the Kingdom of Messiah was here, and that the representatives 
of Messiah should sit upon a throne and personate 
Messiah and bring the kingdoms of the world into 
subjection. They were evidently led to this by Messiah's 
not coming at the time expected, and they thought that 
they must bring about a fulfilment of the Scriptures 
which foretold His Coming and Reign. 



TIME FEATURES UNPOPULAR 

This has brought serious disaster in many respects; it 
has made all Christendom "drunk." (Rev. 17:2.) Many, 
even today, are in bewilderment. Some, getting out of 
that darkness, have stumbled into other errors. The 
majority have lost all faith in prophecy. God foreknew 
all these things and foretold them, and they will not interfere 
with the Divine Program. Just as the wrong impression 
that our Lord was born in Nazareth was a reflection 
upon Him, so that many would not accept Him as the long 
promised Messiah, so these have said, Can any good thing 
come out of the prophecies, or anything relating to the 
Second Coming of Messiah? These people who proclaim 
His Second Advent are laboring under a hallucination! 
Are not the things written in the prophecies merely fanciful 
dreams of men— of the rebuilding of Zion and the 
restitution of Jerusalem? 

Thus they scoff. They are inclined to feel an opposition 
to everything in the Scriptures regarding the return 
of our Lord to accomplish His foretold work. The Lord 
tells us that although the vision may seem to tarry, yet 
we are to exercise faith, because in the end it will speak; 
it will make itself heard, and will not lie. It will then be 
seen to be the Truth. The Divine Plan of the Ages is to 
be made plain upon tables. It will be made so very plain 
to us that he who runs may read. He who is asleep may 
not read; he who is drunken with the wine of false doctrine 
may not read; he who is standing in the way of 
sinners may not read. But he who runs may read, if his 
heart be teachable and pure. 

"REST IN THE LORD" 

This vision is to be made clear at the appointed time. 
We may not read the time features with the same absolute 
certainty as doctrinal features; for time is not so definitely 
stated in the Scriptures as are the basic doctrines. We 
are still walking by faith and not by sight. We are, however, 
not faithless and unbelieving, but faithful and waiting. 
If later it should be demonstrated that the Church is 
not glorified by October, 1914, we shall try to feel content 
with whatever the Lord's will may be. We believe that 
very many who are running the race for the prize will be 
able to thank God for the chronology, even if it should 
prove not accurate to the year, or even out of the way several 
years. We believe that the chronology is a blessing. If 
it should wake us a few minutes earlier or a few hours 
earlier in the Morning than we would otherwise have 
waked, well and good! It is those who are awake who 
get the blessing. 

If 1915 should go by without the passage of the Church, 
without the Time of Trouble, etc., it would seem to some 
to be a great calamity. It would not be so with ourself. 
We shall be as glad as any one if we shall all experience 
our change from earthly to spirit conditions before 1915, 



and THIS IS OUR EXPECTATION; but if this should not be the 
Lord's will, then it would not be our will. If in the Lord's 
providence the time should come twenty-five years later, 
then that would be our will. This would not change the 
fact that the Son of God was sent by the Father, and that 
the Son is the Redeemer of our race; that He died for our 
sins; that He is selecting the Church for His Bride; and 
that the next thing now in order is the establishment of 
the glorious Kingdom at the hands of this great Mediator, 
who during His Mediatorial Reign will bless all the 
families of the earth. These facts remain the same. The 
difference would be merely that of a few years in the time 
of the establishment of the Kingdom. 

If October, 1915, should pass, and we should find ourselves 
still here and matters going on very much as they 
are at present, and the world apparently making progress 
in the way of settling disputes, and there were no time of 
trouble in sight, and the nominal Church were not yet 

R5374 : page 5 

federated, etc., we would say that evidently we have been 
out somewhere in our reckoning. In that event we would 
look over the prophecies further, to see if we could find an 
error. And then we would think, Have we been expecting 
the wrong thing at the right time? The Lord's will might 
permit this. Our expectation as a Church is that our 
change is near. Nothing of Restitution blessings can 
come to the world until after the Church has been 
glorified. 

Another thing to be considered, should our hopes not 
be so soon realized as we expect, would be as to whether 
we were surely of the elect class. But we are not worrying 
ourself at all. "Sufficient unto the day is the evil 
thereof." There are no people in the world so blessed 
as those who have the Truth and are serving the Truth. 
There is plenty of work to do. 

UNREST ON EVERY SIDE 

The remainder of mankind are dissatisfied— not only 
the nominal Church, the professedly godly, but all others 
also. They are disappointed in all they undertake to do. 
There is failure on every hand. Not long since we were 
speaking to a business man, and our conversation turned 
to religious matters. He is a very fine man; whether a 
Christian or not we do not know. We find that there 
are a great many pleasant and very honorable people who 
are not Christians at all. This man, speaking of the 
Churches, said, "It is a sad thing— the condition of the 
Churches. I am particularly interested in the Methodist 
denomination. Some time ago our Church had a fortunate 
sale of their property, and they purchased a new 
site and built a fine church. And they think now that if 
there are sixty who attend service there it is a good congregation. 
And it is the same elsewhere. People are 



all going pleasure-mad. Every one wants to go on some 
pleasure excursion— to the beach, or what not. No one 
seems to care for religion now." This man voiced the 
general spirit of disappointment. But a better Day is 
near. 

In San Francisco, a year or more ago, at a Sunday 
School Convention, one speaker gave quite a long address 
on getting the children into the Church. He said that 
the whole Church institution was likely to be foundered. 
He said that every member brought into any of the 
Churches had cost six hundred and fifty dollars. Then 
he proceeded to tell how many workers were employed, 
and yet they were bringing only these comparatively few 
into the Church. 

And we know that the great majority of those who 
are brought in would not think of calling themselves 
saints, or of professing consecration at all. This gentleman 
seemed to think that there is not much in the Gospel 
for a mature mind. He said that the way to do was to 
train a child up for the church, and then he could not 
get away from it. Yet the statistics show that out of 
the thousands in Sunday Schools only a very small 
number ever go into the church. 

SORROW AT MAGNITUDE OF OUR WORK 

Some say they are sorry that our sermons are being 
printed in the newspapers all over this country, Great 
Britain, etc.; and that our seats are free, and that no 
collections are taken. One minister said, "By and by 
people will think it is a crime to take up a collection, and 
then where shall we be? Pastor Russell is bringing us 
all into disrepute." Another thing they say is, "When 
those doctrines are preached, they influence the best ones 
that we have." 

So we have every reason to feel that it is wonderful, 
very wonderful, that when we are comparatively so few, 
and with so comparatively small an amount of money 
used, we have so great privileges and opportunities in 
the Lord's service. In EVERYBODY'S PAPER was given, 
more than two years ago, the report of the American 
Tract Society, and next to it was given the report of the 
Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society. The former 
showed "excess of assets over liabilities, $851,092.53." 
The latter showed no assets in excess of liabilities. The 
reports show that the one without excess of assets is 
putting out vastly more literature than the other. We 
think this goes to show that we have miracles in our day. 

R5375 : page 5 

A FAMINE-BUT NOT FOR BREAD 

When we were in Boston some time ago, an Editor of 
a Boston religious journal said to us on the Monday following 
our discourse, "I was at your meeting yesterday; 



I saw that immense congregation. I looked it all over 
and said to myself, What is it that brings these people 
here? I remembered that there were seaside attractions, 
parks— everything to induce people to stay away. Yet 
on that warm summer afternoon there were four thousand 
present at the meeting, and two thousand turned away. We 
have many ministers in Boston, good choirs, and everything 
to attract; but these ministers at this time of the 
year have only forty or fifty at their services. How is it 
that so many came out to your meeting, and sat there 
for two hours?" 

We replied that it seems to us that we are seeing the 
fulfilment of the prophecy: "There shall be a famine in 
the land, not a famine for bread nor a thirst for water, 
but for hearing the Word of the Lord." (Amos 8:11,12.) 
We further remarked that the people have been 
feeding on very unsatisfactory nourishment, and that 
they are not satisfied with the chaff they have been receiving, 
and that they do not go to the churches for the 
reason that they do not believe in the eternal torment 
doctrine— the preachers do not believe it, and nobody 
believes it, except a comparatively small number, and that 
number is constantly diminishing. 

We reminded him that these people, instead of hearing 
of eternal torment, now have offered them suggestions 
from the colleges to the effect that their forefathers were 
monkeys; that there are large interrogation points in the 
minds of the people; that they are hungry to know the 
Truth. We told him that we believe this accounts for 
the large number present to hear us, that they were hearing 
something more rational, something more Biblical, 
than they had heard before. So we have everything for 
which to be thankful. 

"OUR DELIVERANCE DRAWETH NIGH" 

So far as we have been able to see up to the present 
time, the failure of a full development of matters in 1915, 
or before, would imply that all the chronological arrangements, 
as we have them, are wrong— our view of the 
Harvest and all. And we have no reason to believe that 
these are wrong. We remember that we are not infallible, 
and that our judgment is not infallible; but the 
wonderful inventions of today, and the light that is dawning 
in every direction, as well as the universal unrest, 
seem in corroboration of the chronology— that we are 
in the dawning of the New Age. But just how far along 
we are we do not positively know. We are waiting for 
the Sun of Righteousness to appear. 

The fact that the Vision is now speaking, and is made 
plain upon tables, is very convincing. We believe truly 
that "the days are at hand, and the effect [matter or 
thing (as spoken)] of every vision."— Ezek. 12:21-23. 



R5375 : page 6 

THE GREAT PRIVILEGE OF TRUE SERVICE 

"The Son of Man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, 
and to give His life a Ransom for many."— Matthew 20:28. 

THE word minister has the same import as the 

word serve. The Master tells us that the 

purpose of His coming into the world was 

not a selfish one. He had been quite content 

with the glory and honor which He had 

with the Father before the world was. 

(John 17:5.) While it is true that the 

Savior is now exalted to a position very 

much higher than His previous one, yet He 

assures us that it was not with the spirit, 

the desire, for exaltation that He came into the world. 

On the contrary, He wished to serve. He said, "I delight 

to do Thy will, O My God! Thy Law is written in 

My heart. "-Psalm 40:8. 

In obedience to this Divine will, our Lord left the 
glory which He had with the Father, came down to earth 
and gave Himself up to death, even the death of the 
cross. On the night of His betrayal and arrest He said, 
"The cup which My Father hath poured for Me, shall I 
not drink it?" He was obedient even unto the end. 

Before coming into the world, our Lord had perceived 
that mankind was in need of a Savior, and no doubt this 
had to do with His gladly accepting the Divine arrangement. 
He saw something of the Father's purpose in 
regard to fallen humanity. And when, during His 
earthly life, He saw these poor creatures in sin, degradation 
and weakness, He did not try to make them slaves. 
He did not try to use His power, His intelligence, selfishly 
for His own comfort; but He laid down His life unselfishly. 
He set Himself to work out the Plan which the 
Father had arranged. 

Our Lord came not to be ministered unto. He did 
not come into the world to have servants and to get all 
that He could in return for the expenditure of a small 
amount of His own energy. He came not from any 
selfish motive whatever, but to serve others— to do good. 
As He Himself testified, "Greater love hath no man than 
this, that a man lay down his life for his friends." This 
He did in harmony with the Father's Plan. 

We do not understand, however, that our Lord refused 
to have any one serve Him. He accepted service 
from others. The thought of our text is that He came 
to render a service; not that He might be served; and in 
order that He might carry out His purpose it was necessary 
for Him to become a servant. Had there been no 
need for that service, we cannot think that the Lord 
would have humbled Himself and taken the bondman's 
form, or have undergone the severe trials of His earthly 
existence. But He came to render a service that was 



necessary to the well-being, happiness, yea, the very life 
of the entire human family. 

Through Adam's disobedience sin had entered into 
the world. God's Law pronounced the penalty of death 
for that sin. Thus the whole race of mankind was 
perishing; and if they were ever to be rescued, so that 
they would not perish like brute beasts, they must be 
redeemed. According to the Divine Law, there must be 
a Ransom-price for the first perfect man, who had 
sinned. The Only Begotten was willing to meet this 
necessity. He rejoiced to do this work, to be the servant, 
the minister of God for this purpose, because of the need 
of the service, because it would bring blessing to others. 

This is the spirit that should actuate every one of us. 
We should desire to incorporate into our character this 
principle of service. We should not serve merely because 
we like to work, like to be busy, but because we perceive 
there is a work necessary, and we are glad to lay down 
our lives in this blessed service. 

THE ATTITUDE OF TRUE CONSECRATION 

There are some who think it necessary to wash the 
feet of others. But since there is no real good to be 
accomplished by such a ceremony— nothing desirable- 
there is no reason why it should be performed. We cannot 
think that Jesus would have washed His disciples' 
feet unless they had needed washing. But if at any time 
we can thus render a real service, any of us should be 
glad of the opportunity to serve a fellow-member of the 
Body of Christ— by washing his feet, or in any manner. 
The thought is to appreciate the privilege of real service, 
rather than the opportunity of doing something merely 
because it is menial. Jesus did what He did because it 
was helpful service, and was the Father's will. He 
wished also to teach His disciples that they should not 
be above doing the humblest service for each other as 
brethren. In addition, Jesus' words on this occasion 
seemed to emphasize the thought of the need of daily 
cleansing of the Lord's disciples from earth-defilement. 
See John 13:6-10. 

The laying down of our Lord's life was accomplished 
moment by moment, day by day, in teaching, in healing 
the sick, the deaf, the blind, and in instructing His disciples. 
In nothing did He seek to serve Himself. Therefore 
the record is, "He went about doing good." We 
should make application of this principle to ourselves; 
for "as He was, so are we, in this world." The attitude 
of true consecration is that we walk in Jesus' steps, and 
that we seek to know the Father's will in order to do it. 
This implies that we be Bible students, like the Bereans 
of old, who "searched the Scriptures daily." 

If we have the Master's spirit, we shall be desirous of 
"doing good unto all men as we have opportunity, especially 
unto them who are of the Household of Faith." 
(Galatians 6:10.) And this is the advice of St. Paul, 



who urged that we be followers of himself, even as he 
followed Christ. The lives of Jesus and the Apostles 
stand out very distinctly on the pages of history as 
notable for their unselfish service of others. 

Many have lorded it over God's heritage. The context 
shows that our Lord had this class in mind. He declares 
that the rulers of the Gentiles exercised authority 
over their people; and that this was at the expense of the 
ruled, and was very rarely accompanied by a desire to 
serve the people. 

SELFISHNESS UNFITS FOR THE KINGDOM 

We see how our Master came to use the words of our 
text. The disciples were afflicted with a common ailment 
—love of honor of men and also love of honor of 
the Lord. Two of them had made an earnest request 
to have a place of special honor in His Kingdom. Their 
request aroused a spirit of indignation among the other 
ten, and a controversy resulted. They had the thought 
fixed in their minds that Jesus had promised them a share 
in the Kingdom. (Matthew 19:27-29.) If it had been 
wrong for them to have this promise in mind, it would 
have been wrong for the Lord to give them the promise. 
But they failed to see that the Father would give that 
place to none who would not manifest fullest loyalty to 
Him and to His Word. 

The disciples had at that time a certain amount of 
false dignity, or pride, that would have made them unfit 
for a place in the Throne. Hence the Lord reminded 
them that the conditions upon which a seat in the Throne 
would be given to any one were that such a one should 

R5376 : page 7 

manifest so great loyalty to the principles of God's Government, 

and so great humility of spirit, that he would 

be glad to render service to any one in need. And He 

set Himself forth as an Example. 

We paraphrase our Lord's words: Do you think 
that I left Heaven and came down to earth that people 
might serve Me? No. The conditions to which I have 
come are very inferior to those which I left. But the 
Father gave Me the privilege of service in this matter, 
and I am glad to have this service, because it is the 
Divine will. I have come to minister, to serve, to give 
My life as a Ransom-price for all. 

This thought, then, He set before them— that they 
should rejoice in the privilege of service— rejoice in having 
the privilege of doing something really helpful to 
others, especially the brethren in the Body of Christ. As 
we apply this principle broadly, we see how it is exemplified 
in the world, in the affairs of every day life. 
The whole human family are servants. One man serves 
as a jeweler; another as a manufacturer of woolen 
goods. He serves by buying wool, converting it into cloth 



and into garments. Another serves as a grocer and supplies 
food. Some are chiropodists; some, barbers; some, 
tailors; some, physicians; etc. In every case it is a service 
to others. 

Bringing the matter still lower, we see that the principle 
extends even to service of the dumb brutes. A 
horse cannot curry himself; and even a hog needs to be 
served— needs a trough, a bed, and food. We in turn 
are served by the brute creation. Whoever separates 
himself from this arrangement of service is getting away 
from his own good, and violating a Law of the Universe. 
Whoever gets to the place where he does no service, but 
has others to serve him, is to be pitied. He will be 
unhappy, be he ever so wealthy. Whoever would take 
this attitude would be arrogant and selfish, and his life 
would be devoid of beauty or of worth. 

SERVICE A DELIGHT TO THE CHRISTIAN 

The true Christian enters into the spirit of service, as 
did his Master, and delights to do a good turn to any one 
as he has opportunity. If there are those who are helpless, 
who are sick, these are calls upon his services as he 
has ability and is able to lend a helping hand. We are 
to serve all men "as we have opportunity, especially 
those who are of the Household of Faith." 

Where shall we draw the line? The answer is that 
we must use moderation. We find ourselves every day 
passing by services that others have needed, but that we 
have not been able to perform. How then shall we 
regulate the matter, since we cannot do all that we 
would? Our own family should be our first charge, or 
responsibility. He who neglects his own is worse than 
an unbeliever. Charity begins at home. If we have responsibilities 
there, we could not give so much comfort, 
so much time, so much money, to others as we would to 
those of our own family. 

LAZINESS NOT TO BE ENCOURAGED 

Those who have money have a talent that they can 
use in doing good. They will not find very much opportunity 
so far as the world is concerned. Even if we had 
millions of dollars, the spirit of a sound mind should 
govern us in its expenditure. To give money to encourage 
anybody in wastefulness, slothfulness and idleness 
would be to misuse it, and not to do good. God 
Himself declared, "In the sweat of thy face shalt thou 
eat bread." The happiest people are those who are employed; 
the most unhappy are those who have nothing 
to do, those who have no ambition. 

We cannot do even for our own families all that we 
would wish to do; for in the case of our own there is 
often a lack of appreciation. Some of our relatives would 
never have enough. We could never do sufficient for 
them. We should exercise the spirit of a sound mind, 



then, in deciding what to do. Let us ever remember 
that when we have entered the service of the Lord we 
are given a new commission, a special work to do in the 
world. 

What kind of service are we then given? It is the 
service of ambassador of the Lord. We are to preach 
the Truth wherever there is an ear to hear and an eye to 
discern. Those who have not the hearing ear and the 
seeing eye might rend us, as the Master foretold. 
(Matthew 7:6.) We are therefore to use the spirit of 
a sound mind in discriminating between those who are 
good subjects for the Truth, and those who are not. 

We say to the Master, Lord, we will give all of our 
time to Thee and to Thy Truth. Then He replies, But 
you are not to go ragged or naked, in order that you 
may preach the Gospel. It is proper that you provide 
the things needful. But do not think to get a certain 
amount of money laid up for yourself first, and then 
afterwards go and proclaim the Kingdom. 

We may ask, Does this excuse us, Lord, from doing 
anything for our fellowmen and for our own families? 
He answers that we should not neglect our own families, 
but should care for them according to their necessities. 
We are, however, to guide our affairs with economy. If 
our family fail to do their part, and will not put forth any 
effort when of sufficient age and able to earn a livelihood 
for themselves, then we are to do nothing for them; for 
having their own strength, they do not need our assistance. 
We are to do for them only the things that 
are needful. We believe this is the mind of the Lord. 

OUR RESPONSIBILITY AS STEWARDS 

While we are to do good to all men, yet our special 
service is to be rendered in the Lord's work, the work of 
the Father— in dispensing the Truth. But while we are 
so doing, we may be able to speak a kind word to those 
with whom we come in contact. If we have money we 
may help in that way. But we should remember that we 
do not own even a penny of what we possess, or a 
moment of our time. All belongs to the Lord and should 
be spent along the lines of spiritual things, except where 
there is real necessity along earthly lines. To be sure, the 
world will not esteem us so much as if we would do 
more along earthly lines; but we have not received our 
commission from the world. 

We perceive that the spirit of the Lord Jesus has had 
great influence in the world. It has made a deep impression 
upon noble souls, and has led them to the establishment 
of Orphans' Homes, Hospitals for the blind, Homes 
for the incurable, etc.; and these institutions are provided 
for by the public. It is recognized today to be 
proper to provide for those unable to provide for themselves. 
Since the world has settled this matter from a 
business point of view, the Lord's people are excused 
from personal responsibility which they have as God's 



ambassadors. It is the proper thing to care for the sick 

and the maimed; but because the city and state have provided, 

individual responsibility is largely lifted. 

There are wealthy people who say, I prefer to look 
after my sick friends myself, and send them to a high-priced 
institution. If any do so, this is their own business. 
They may also say, I prefer to live in a million 
dollar house. This, too, is their own business. They 
have a right to do so; and they may also have their automobiles 
and private yachts for pleasure, etc. But with 
the Christian it is different. All he possesses belongs to 

R5376 : page 8 

the Lord. He therefore is in a different position from 
any others. He is not to be like the world. All that 
he does is for God— because of his relationship to Him 
as a son. "Now are we the sons of God." 

THE HUMBLE TO BE EXALTED 

In the words of our text, the Master was instructing 
His disciples that they should not desire to rule— that 
He desired as His followers those who had most of His 
spirit of humility and service. If any man were to 
exalt himself, they were to have correspondingly a lower 
esteem for him; for "He that exalteth himself shall be 
abased, and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted." 
The Lord will send the experiences which will exalt or 
abase, and it is for us to show our appreciation where 
we see the right principles in operation. Whoever manifests 
most of the Spirit of Christ is to be highest in our 
esteem. Whoever has less of the Spirit of Christ is to 
be lower in our esteem. These characteristics are to be 
quietly observed by us. 

The basis upon which the world operates is selfishness. 
This is the secret of war, rebellion, revolution, etc. 
—one party and another seeking selfishly to control riches, 
honor, power or authority. We are delighted, as Christians, 
to note the difference in the spirit which we are of. 
We are to remember that we are by nature "children of 
wrath even as others." We are not to suppose that we 
shall be changed instantly; but the mind will be changed, 
we shall grow more Christlike. And as New Creatures 
in Christ we are to keep a diligent watch lest the service 
we are so desirous of rendering to the Lord become 
vitiated more or less, after the fashion of the spirit of 
the world. 

THE MILLENNIAL REIGN A SERVICE 

Our Lord, when He takes His great power to reign, 
will not have the same motive as have the rulers of the 
present time— merely to assume power for His own 
glory and for vaunting Himself. He will, indeed, have 
great power and authority, but it will be in harmony with 



what the Heavenly Father has arranged. It will be a 

R5377 : page 8 

manifestation of glory and power, not to crash the world, 
but to bless and uplift it. This work will be accomplished 
from the standpoint of service, with a view to helping 
mankind to be the real rulers of the world; for the Messianic 
Kingdom will cease when the world shall be able 
to take care of itself. 

We perceive that this is the way it was purposed from 
the first. The Heavenly Father made man the king of 
earth. God crowned man with glory and honor, and set 
him over the works of His hands. (Psalm 8:5,6; 
Hebrews 2:7.) It is not His purpose to keep mankind 
under the iron rod forever. The rod will be merely for 
temporary service, for man's true development, that the 
race may be brought back to the full blessing of their 
original privilege as kings of earth. 

The Lord's Kingdom, we see, will be very different 
from any other ever instituted. Our service, as members 
of Christ's Body, will be the same as His. We shall 
share with Him in the uplifting of humanity. "God hath 
raised us up together, and made us sit together in 
Heavenly places in Christ Jesus; that in the ages to 
come He might show the exceeding riches of His grace 
in His kindness toward us through Christ Jesus."— 
Ephesians 2:6,7. 



R5378 : page 8 

WHO MAY PRAY AND FOR WHAT? 

-FEBRUARY l.-LUKE 11:1-13.- 

"Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, 
and it shall be opened unto you."— LUKE 11:9. 

APPARENTLY Jesus usually prayed alone. 

We read that on some occasions He spent 

the entire night in prayer to God. How inconsistent 

that would have been if He Himself 

were the Father, who for a time was 

with men and outwardly appeared as the 

"Man Christ Jesus" ! But how consistent 

is the thought of Jesus' prayer to the Father 

when taken in connection with His own 

declaration: "My Father is greater than I" 

(John 14:28); "I came not to do Mine own will, but the 

will of Him that sent Me" (John 6:38); "Of Mine own 

self I can do nothing; as I hear [of My Father], I 

judge."— John 5:30. 

Instead of being the Father masquerading as a man, 
Jesus was the Logos, the Word, or Message of God, whom 



the Father had sanctified and sent into the world to be 
the world's Redeemer, and who by and by is to be its 
King, to deliver it from the power of Satan and sin, and 
to restore the willing and obedient to the Divine likeness, 
the Father's favor and everlasting life.— Isaiah 25:6-8; 
Romans 8:21. 

Realizing the importance of His mission, Jesus kept 
properly in touch with the great Author of the Plan of 
Salvation, His Heavenly Father. His prayers were not 
mockeries; they were sincere. He worshiped the Father 

R5379 : page 8 

in spirit and in truth, as He declared all must do who 
would be acceptable to the Father. 

No doubt the disciples noted the Master's frequency in 
prayer, and the blessing which He seemed to receive 
therefrom. Instead of urging them to pray, Jesus by His 
example taught them to desire the privilege and blessing 
of prayer. In due time they requested instruction, saying, 
"Lord, teach us to pray!" It is well that we inquire 
who may pray, and for what things we may petition the 
great Creator, else we might be praying without authority, 
or praying amiss, as St. James declares some do. 

There is a difference between worship— adoration, 
homage— and prayer. Any one may offer homage to the 
Lord, bow the knee or express thanks and appreciation. 
But as for making requests of God, prayers, this privilege 
is distinctly limited. The Jews were privileged to offer 
prayer, because they as a nation were in typical relationship 
with God under the Law Covenant, as a "House of 
Servants." But the Gentiles had no privilege of approaching 
God in prayer until after the Jewish favor had 
ended— three and a half years after the crucifixion of 
Jesus. 

The first Gentile whose prayers were received, according 
to the Bible, was Cornelius. And even his prayers 
were not acceptable until he had been instructed respecting 
Christ and His redemption work and had become a 
follower of Jesus. Then his prayers and his consecration 
were acceptable to the Father, and he was received into 
the family of God as a son. Then as a son he had the 
right or privilege of prayer.— Acts 10:25-48. 

So today while any one may offer worship and reverence 
to God, none is privileged to pray unless he has 
become a consecrated disciple of Jesus, except it be the 
immature children of such consecrated persons. All over 
the world today's lesson will be misinterpreted. Jesus' 
words, "Our Father," will be misinterpreted to signify the 
"Fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man." The 

R5379 : page 9 

context will be ignored. The fact that these were consecrated 
disciples, and not mankind in general, who were 
instructed to pray "our Father," will be ignored. 



There is a general tendency to ignore personal faith 
in the redeeming blood— to ignore the fact that no man 
cometh unto the Father but by the Son. (John 14:6.) Adam 
indeed was created a son of God; but his disobedience 
and death sentence cancelled the relationship, which cannot 
be restored except in God's appointed way— through 
Christ. Prayer is a wonderful privilege. It is not for 
sinners, but for those who have been justified by the 
great Advocate whom the Father has appointed— Jesus. 

"AFTER THIS MANNER PRAY" 

The model prayer which Jesus gave His followers is 
grandly simple. It is devoid of selfishness. Instead of 
"I" and "me," the prayer is comprehensive of all who 
are truly the Lord's people, in any class— we, us, our. It 
is unselfish, too, in that it is not a prayer for earthly 
blessings. Only one petition, "Give us this day our daily 
bread," can be construed to apply to even the simplest of 
earthly blessings. And this may also be understood to 
signify more particularly spiritual nourishment. 

The prayer opens with a reverent acknowledgment of 
the greatness and sacredness of the Heavenly Father's 
name, or character. Next comes an acknowledgment of 
the present condition of sin in the world and an acknowledgment 
of faith in the promise that God has given, that 
eventually His Kingdom shall be established in the earth, 
and shall overthrow the reign of Sin and Death which has 
prevailed for six thousand years, and will bind Satan, 
"the Prince of this world." (Rev. 20:1-3.) The petition, 
"Thy Kingdom come," not only manifests faith in God 
and in His promise to abolish sin and establish righteousness 
in the earth, but it means more; namely, that the 
suppliant is in his heart in sympathy with God and His 
righteousness and out of sympathy with the reign of 
Sin and Death. 

The next petition is, "Thy will be done on earth, as it 
is done in Heaven." This signifies full confidence in the 
promise of God that His Kingdom when it shall be established 
will not be a failure— that Satan will be bound; 
that the reign of Sin and Death will end; that the light 
of the knowledge of the glory of God will fill the whole 
earth and triumph, destroying all wilful opposers, until 
finally every knee shall be bowing and every tongue confessing, 
to the glory of God. 

It is an expression of confidence that the Kingdom 
will effect the full restoration of the earth to its Edenic 
condition and of man to his primeval perfection in the 
image of his Creator; for not until such conditions prevail 
will it be possible for God's will to be as perfectly 
done on earth as it is now done in Heaven. An included 
thought is that when sin and death shall thus have been 
effaced, the world of mankind will be as happy in God's 
favor as are the angels now. This Jesus clearly expressed 
later, assuring us that eventually there will be no more 
sighing, crying or dying, because all the former things of 



sin and death will have passed away.— Rev. 21:5. 

The request for daily bread implies our realization 
that our sustenance, both temporal and spiritual, must 
come from God. And the failure to specify any particular 
kind of food implies not only a hunger and desire on our 
part, but a full resignation to the provision of Divine 
Wisdom. 

When the justified pray, "Forgive us our trespasses," 
they do not refer to Original Sin; for they were freed 
from that condemnation in their justification. By trespasses 
are signified those unintentional imperfections 
which appertain to all, and which all the followers of 
Jesus are striving to overcome. The request that we shall 
have forgiveness of our blemishes as we are generous and 
forgiving toward those who trespass against us is a reminder 
of the general terms of our relationship to 
God. We cannot grow in grace and abide in the sunshine 
of God's favor except as we cultivate the spirit of love, 
which is the spirit of God— a forgiving spirit, a generous 
spirit, in our dealings with others. God thus purposes to 
favor more especially those who particularly strive to 
exemplify His gracious mercy. 

"Abandon us not in temptation" indicates that we are 
aware that we are surrounded by the powers of evil, and 
that as New Creatures we would be unable to withstand 
these successfully except as we should have Divine aid. 
"Deliver us from the Evil One" is a recognition that 
Satan is our great Adversary; and that we are on the 
alert to resist him, and yet realize our own insufficiency, 
our need of Divine aid. "We are not ignorant of his 
[Satan's] devices." (2 Corinthians 2:11.) "We wrestle 
not against flesh and blood [merely], but against wicked 
spirits in high positions."— Ephesians 6:12. 

"SEEK, KNOCK, ASK-AND RECEIVE" 

In the concluding verses of the Study, Jesus admonished 
that the prayer should be with fervency or earnestness, 
and not merely lifeless, formal words. He gave 
the illustration of the man who at first refused to be 
disturbed, even by his friend, but was finally moved by the 
earnestness of his friend's petition. So when we pray for 
God's Kingdom to come and His will to be done, as it 
delays long, we are not to think that our prayers are 
unheeded. We are praying in harmony with the Divine 
promise, and although we are not hastening the Kingdom 
by our prayers we are entering into a blessing of rest 
through faith, by continually bringing before our minds 
these promises of God, and thus waiting upon the Lord 
for the fulfilment of His promise. 

What God really wishes to give to His people is His 
Holy Spirit. Because of the imperfections of the flesh 
none of us can be filled with the Spirit at first, as was our 
perfect Master. But as we come to God desiring to be 
filled with His spirit, desiring to be in harmony with Him, 
desiring to be in His character-likeness, by the seeking 



we find, and to our knocking the door is opened. 

Nor should we be afraid that our Heavenly Father 
would give any bad answer to our requests. Would an 
earthly parent give to a hungry child a stone when it 
asked for bread; a serpent when it asked for fish; a 
scorpion when it asked for an egg? Surely not! We 
are to know that our Heavenly Father is much better than 
we, much kinder, much more just and loving, and that 
He delights to give His good gifts, His Holy Spirit, to 
those consecrated disciples of Jesus who earnestly seek it. 



R5373 : page 9 

"A little talk with Jesus- 
How it smooths the rugged road! 

How it seems to help me onward, 
When I faint beneath my load! 

When my heart is crushed with sorrow, 
And my eyes with tears are dim, 

There is naught can yield me comfort 
Like a little talk with Him. 

"The way is sometimes weary 

To yonder nearing clime, 
But a little talk with Jesus 

Has helped me many a time. 
The more I come to know Him, 

And all His grace explore, 
It sets me ever longing 

To know Him more and more." 



R5377 : page 10 

PRINCE OF DARKNESS VS. PRINCE OF LIGHT 

-FEBRUARY 8. -LUKE 11:14-26,33-36.- 

"Look therefore whether the light that is 
in thee be not darkness."— LUKE 1 1:35. 

HOWEVER much the worldly-wise may scoff 

at the Bible teaching that there is a personal 

Devil, and that he is a prince over a 

demon host of spirit beings— rebels against 

God's government— let us always remember 

that this is the teaching of the Bible, from 

Genesis to Revelation. The difficulty with 

the worldly-wise is that their good reasoning 

faculties are not guided by the Word 

of God. They say it is difficult enough to 

believe in a God and an angelic host, His servants, spirit 

beings and invisible to men. Much more difficult is it— 



yea, to them unreasonable— to believe in another spirit 
ruler and another spirit host, the adversaries of God. 
They reason that it would not be thinkable that God 
would create beings opposed to Himself; or that if, created 
holy, they became the adversaries of righteousness, 
an all-powerful Creator would not destroy them, but permit 
them to continue their evil opposition. 
The Bible explains that Satan was the first transgressor, 

R5378 : page 10 

in that previously he was a cherub, an angel of superior 
rank and nature, who lost his loyalty to God 
through pride and ambition; and that he seduced into 
disobedience those whom the Bible now designates a 
demon host. Everywhere the Scriptures set forth that 
this host of spirit beings are associated with our earth, 
and not in some far-off fiery furnace torturing the human 
dead. 

The Bible indicates that God does not lack the power 
to deal with these rebels, but that He is permitting them 
for a time, allowing them to manifest the fruitage of 
sin, anger, malice, hatred, envy, strife— as a lesson for 
angels and men. They are under certain limitations 
which the Apostle styles "chains of darkness." They 
have not been permitted to materialize as men since the 
Deluge. But they have sought intercourse with humanity; 
and in proportion to their success their victims are 
said to be obsessed by evil spirits. When the victory 
is complete, the victim is said to be possessed of 
a demon and insane. 

It is estimated that fully one-half of those in insane 
asylums are demon-possessed— the demons belonging to 
the very class so frequently mentioned in connection 
with our Lord's ministry. As in the past, intercourse 
was sought through witches, wizards, necromancers, etc., 
so today, intercourse with humanity is sought through 
ouija boards, planchettes, and spirit mediums. Humanity, 
deceived by the doctrines of these demons inculcated 
in the Dark Ages (1 Timothy 4:1), has neglected God's 
testimony in the Bible to the effect that the dead are 
asleep, and "know not anything." (Ecclesiastes 9:5.) 
"Their thoughts perish," until their awakening in the 
morning of the New Dispensation, otherwise styled "the 
Day of Christ"— "the Times of Restitution"— the Millennial 
Day. (Philippians 1:10; Acts 3:21.) Today's 
Study introduces the Master delivering a man from demon 
possession. The people rightly understood what 
was the difficulty; but, being opposed to the Master, 
some of them evilly declared that the demons obeyed 
Jesus because He Himself was Satan, Beelzebub, the 
Prince of devils. Others said: Your miracles are all 
earthly; show us some sign from Heaven. 

Jesus answered the accusation that He was the Prince 
of demons rather than the Prince of Light by showing 
that for Satan to cast out his own hosts would signify 



a warfare in the camp of the evil ones, which would imply 
that Satan's house was divided and that it would 
soon fall. It would be foolish, therefore, for Satan to 
cast out Satan; consequently such an argument should 
have no weight. But, said Jesus, other Jews have exercised 
this same power of casting out devils, and you 
never charged these with being the Prince of demons. 
And how could there be several princes of demons? 
Judge according to this whether your argument against 
Me is good. But, on the contrary, to those of you who 
realize the truth that I am casting out demons by the 
"finger" of God, the power of God, there will be no 
doubt that this power, which I possess more than others, 
and which I have exercised through My Apostles also, is 
an evidence of special favor from God and a corroboration 
of My testimony that God's Kingdom is near you— 
that the power of that Kingdom is being exercised in 
your midst. 

But, as a matter of fact, when that nation rejected 
Christ, the Kingdom which God offered them was taken 
away from them. The offer was discontinued. They were 
turned aside for a time from God's favor, while the 
Message of Grace and Truth has since been gathering 
another Israel— drawing first of all from the Jews such 
as were Israelites indeed; and later, going hither and 
thither, it has gathered for this same class saintly ones 
out of every nation. 

The power of Jesus in casting out demons showed 
that He was thoroughly competent to deal with the 
Prince of this world, the Prince of Darkness, Satan; 
and that, had the Kingdom been set up at that time, Satan 
and his angels would have been bound or restrained 
then. However, in view of the foreknown and foretold 
rejection of Jesus and the Kingdom, the work of binding 
Satan did not progress, but delayed until the Second 
Coming of Jesus. Then, His Bride class having meantime 
been selected to be His joint-heirs in the Kingdom, 
He will take His great power and reign. At that time 
He will deal with Satan and his subordinate demons; 
yea, with all that have cultivated sin and the spirit of 
Satan, which has so seriously gotten hold of humanity 
under the conditions of the fall. 

THE BINDING OF SATAN 

Our Lord tells that in the end of this Gospel Age 
Satan shall be bound for a thousand years (the thousand 
years of Messiah's glorious Reign), that he may deceive 
mankind no longer, as he has been deceiving and deluding 
them for six thousand years, putting darkness for 
light and misrepresenting the Heavenly Father as the 
worst being imaginable, plotting and predestinating thousands 
of millions to be born and to go to eternal torture. 

Jesus pictures Satan's control of the world at the 
present time, likening him to a strong man armed and 
guarding his palace. He can maintain his control until 



a stronger comes, overcomes him and takes possession 
of his wrongly-acquired valuables. Thus Jesus foretold 
that His own Messianic Kingdom will be stronger than 
that of Satan, and will control it and bind him. The result 
will be the deliverance of mankind from the curse 
of sin and death which has rested upon the race for now 
six great Days of a thousand years each. Messiah's 
Kingdom will be in the great Seventh Day, or Sabbath, in 
which all who will accept the Savior may enter into rest. 
Meantime Jesus, according to the Father's Plan, during 
this Gospel Age, through His own Message and the 
Message of the Apostles, has been gathering out of the 
world a Bride class, to be His joint-heirs in the Kingdom. 

R5378 : page 1 1 

Satan is allowed considerable liberty in the testing 

of the loyalty of all these. There can be only the 

two masters. Knowingly or ignorantly, people are serving 

either the One or the other. As Jesus said, "He 

that is not with Me is against Me." 

THE WHOLE WORLD OBSESSED 

St. Paul declares that the Prince of this world (Satan) 
"now works in the hearts of the children of disobedience." 
Jesus took up this same thought, and likened 
the world to the poor demoniac whom He had released 
from Satan's grasp. Similarly, all who accept 
Christ are delivered from the power of Satan. Let not 
sin, therefore, have dominion in your mortal bodies. 
—Romans 6:12. 

Jesus represents such hearts as swept and garnished 
—sins forgiven and grace of God received. But He declares 
that Satan will seek to regain control of such 
through the spirit of the world— pride, anger, malice, 
hatred, strife, works of the flesh and of the Devil. (Matthew 12:43-45.) 
"Whom resist, steadfast in the faith," 
writes the Apostle. (1 Peter 5:9.) If Satan be not resisted, 
the danger is that the light and the blessing received 
through the knowledge of God will become a 
curse and an injury; and that the result with such a person 
will be worse than before he came into relationship 
with Christ. 

Jesus emphasized this, declaring that as a candle 
should not be put under a bushel and hidden, but should 
be exposed so as to do good, so also the light of the 
Truth, the grace of God received, must not be hidden, 
but must be let shine to the glory of God. Otherwise, 
the light would become extinguished and the darkness 
would prevail. The eye represents intelligence; and as 
long as we have the true enlightenment, or intelligence, 
the whole body is blessed thereby; but if the intelligence 
be destroyed, if the eye be blinded, the whole body will 
suffer and be in darkness. 

Every one, therefore, receiving the light should take 



heed to it as a precious thing lest he lose it, and have 
darkness instead. The eye, the light, here represents the 
enlightenment of the Holy Spirit, which has the greatest 
power to bless us; and this, if lost, would mean to us 
even a greater darkness than that we experienced before 
coming to a knowledge of the Lord. 



R5377 :page 11 

NAMES WRITTEN IN THE LAMB'S BOOK OF LIFE 

"He that overcometh, the same shall be clothed in white 
raiment; and I will not blot his name out of the Book of 
Life, but I will confess his name before My 
Father, and before His angels."— REV. 3:5. 

THE invitation of this Gospel Age is to a 
special class, a class which professes to be 
out of harmony with present conditions- 
out of harmony with sin. 

Those who may become of this class 
are such as have been granted a knowledge 
of God's arrangement through Christ, and 
these may avail themselves of this privilege 
without delay, if they choose, by making 
a consecration to the Lord. 

As Jesus laid down His earthly life in the service of 
the Father and of the Truth, and was misunderstood by 
those about Him, so those who follow in Jesus' footsteps 
must in like manner suffer disappointments in 
earthly matters, if they would be sharers in His glory and 
immortality. As Jesus overcame and sat down with the 
Father in His Throne, so those who overcome will sit 
down with Jesus in His Throne. 

We must distinguish between the overcoming of Jesus 
and that of His followers. His was a perfect overcoming. 
While He had the instruction of the Father and the 
help of the angels, He had no one as a sin-bearer, no one 
to impute any righteousness to Him. His overcoming 
was full and complete. His followers, being imperfect in 
the flesh, cannot do perfectly; and therefore by the grace 
of God it has been so arranged that these may be acceptable 
through Jesus, if they have the spirit to overcome, 
the desire to overcome— if they manifest righteousness 
of heart. But they must show this overcoming spirit, 
else they can never be associated with our Lord in His 
Kingdom. They must be copies of their Master in spirit, 
even though imperfect in the flesh. 

Thus the very moment that we take the step of consecration 
and are accepted, all our blemishes and imperfections 
are covered by the robe of Christ's righteousness. 
But it is not only while we have blemishes that we 
need to be covered; even all those represented in the 
symbolic pictures of the Scriptures are there shown as 



clothed. The pictures given of the Heavenly Father 
represent Him as clothed, and the pictures of our Lord 
represent Him as clothed. The Revelation pictures represent 
our Lord and the saints as clothed in white garments. 
The angels who appeared at the time of our 
Lord's resurrection are represented as clothed in white. 
Our Lord said: "Blessed is he that watcheth, and keepeth 
his garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame." 

The glorified Church is represented, not as taking 
off the robe of righteousness, but continuing to walk in 
white raiment. It will no longer be an imputed robe of 
righteousness, however; our righteousness will be our 
own. To be clothed in white garments then will be to be 
recognized as one of the pure ones— not as now, in a robe 
of reckoned righteousness, but in a robe of actual righteousness. 
"It is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption; 
it is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory; 
it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power." 

TWO BOOKS OF LIFE 

The Bible mentions two books of life— one appertaining 
to the present time, and the other to the Millennial 
Age. As we read: "He that overcometh, the same shall 
be clothed in white raiment; and I will not blot out his 
name out of the Book of Life." Again, "And the books 
were opened; and another book was opened, which is the 
Book of Life." (Rev. 3:5; 20:12.) The special Book 
of Life that is open at this present time is the one in 
which the names of all the overcomers of this Gospel Age 
are written. When we take the step of consecration 
and are begotten of the Holy Spirit, it is appropriate that 
we should be reckoned as belonging to the family of God. 
Just as a family will keep a record of its members- 
Joseph, Mary, Martha, etc.— so with those who become 
members of the family of God, through Christ; their 
names will be recorded. 

This recording has been going on throughout this 
present Age. This means that those whose names are 
therein written are not only members of the family of 
God, but also members of the Bride class. In order to 
maintain this position, they must be overcomers. In 
some Scriptures it seems that the Great Company class 
are included; in other passages it is not so. Those who 
will constitute the Little Flock, or those who will be of 
the Great Company, or those who will attain perfection as 
earthly beings by and by, must all be overcomers. The 
Bride class is referred to as "more than conquerors." 

R5377 : page 12 

They will gain the abundant entrance into the Heavenly 
Kingdom. -2 Peter 1:10,11. 

In our text we may not be sure whether or not 
the Great Company is included. From one standpoint it 
looks as though they were; from another, as though they 



may not be. We do well not to settle it too definitely in 
our minds, but wait to see what the Lord's intention is. 
We know that there will be some names blotted out. All 
those who go into the Second Death will be blotted out 
of the special record, and their names have no place in 
the Book of Life. Perhaps the Great Company class will 
also be blotted out of the special Record. But we are not 
anxious to put that construction upon it. They are our 
brethren, they also are brethren of the Lord, and we 
would like to think of them as favorably as possible. 

INTRODUCTION TO THE FATHER 

"I will confess his name." This gives us, first of all, 
the thought that, although we have been begotten of 
God, we have never been introduced to Him— in His 
actual presence. Our Lord is not only represented as our 
Bridegroom, but also as our Elder Brother, and is pictured 
as waiting on the other side until we, His brethren, 
shall pass over. And as we shall pass over, Our Lord 
being the One to whom the Father delegated the work 
of instructing us in the School of Christ, it will be appropriate 
that He should introduce us to the Father. 

In another place, our Lord says that if we are 
ashamed of Him, He will be ashamed of us. This expression 
would rather imply that the Great Company class 
would not be included here. But we are sure respecting 
the Little Flock class, that they will be introduced to 
the Father and to the holy angels as the Bride of Christ. 
This is pictured in the 45th Psalm: "She shall be brought 
unto the King in raiment of needlework; the virgins, her 
companions that follow her, shall be brought unto Thee." 
Those especially confessed, introduced, are the Bride class 
only. And we are to hope and strive that we may have 
a place amongst these. The place that the Father would 
prefer us to have is the place we would prefer to have. 



R5379 : page 12 

THANKSGIVING WITH PRAYER AND SUPPLICATION 

The following Scriptures have been compiled by Brother 
Daniel Toole: 

TAKE TIME TO PRAY. 

For my love they are my adversaries; but I give myself 
unto prayer.— Psalm 109:4. 

But we will give ourselves continually to prayer and to 
the ministry of the Word.— Acts 6:4. 

He went out into a mountain to pray and continued all 
night in prayer to God.— Luke 6:12. 

Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be 
hasty to utter anything before God; for God is in Heaven 



and thou upon earth.— Eccl. 5:2. 
PRAY IN SECRET. 

Thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when 
thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in 
secret; and thy Father which seeth in secret shall reward 
thee openly.— Matt. 6:6. 

And when He had sent the multitudes away, He went up 
into a mountain apart to pray; and when the even was come 
He was there alone.— Matt. 14:23. 

R5380 :page 12 

PRAY IN GOD'S PRESENCE. 

Draw nigh to God and He will draw nigh to you. Cleanse 
your hands, ye sinners, and purify your hearts, ye double-minded. 
—James 4:8. 

Have faith in God. What things soever ye desire when 
ye pray, believe that ye receive them and ye shall have them. 
-Mark 11:22,24. 

O, Lord God of our Fathers, art not Thou God in 
Heaven? and rulest not Thou over all the kingdoms of the 
heathen? and in Thine hand is there not power and might 
so that none is able to withstand Thee?— 2 Chron. 20:6. 

AS A CHILD OF A FATHER. 

If a son shall ask bread of any of you that is a father, will 
he give him a stone? or if he ask a fish will he for a fish 
give him a serpent? or if he shall ask an egg will he offer 
him a scorpion? If ye then, being evil, know how to give 
good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your 
Heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask 
Him?-Luke 11:11-13. 

ANSWER CERTAIN. 

Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; 
knock, and it shall be opened unto you; for everyone that 
asketh receiveth, and he that seeketh findeth; and to him 
that knocketh it shall be opened.— Matt. 7:7,8. 

If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth 
to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given 
him.— James 1:5. 

And whatsoever ye shall ask in My name, that will I do, 
that the Father may be glorified in the Son.— John 14:13. 

PRAY HAVING FAITH IN GOD. 

And Jesus answering saith unto them, "Have faith in 
God."-Mark 11:22. 

And this is the confidence that we have in Him, that if 
we ask anything according to His will, He heareth us: And 
if we know that He hear us, whatsoever we ask, we know 



that we have the petitions that we desired of Him.— 
1 John 5:14,15. 

And they were helped against them, and the Hagarites 
were delivered into their hand, and all that were with them; 
for they cried to God in the battle and He was entreated of 
them because they put their trust in Him.— 1 Chron. 5:20. 

Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence 
toward God. And whatsoever we ask, we receive of 
Him, because we keep His commandments, and do those 
things that are pleasing in His sight.— 1 John 3:21,22. 

Having, therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into the 
holiest by the blood of Jesus by a new and living way, which 
He hath consecrated for us, through the veil, that is to say, 
His flesh.-Heb. 10:19,20. 

But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering; for he that 
wavereth is like a wave of the sea driven with the wind and 
tossed. For let not that man think that he shall receive anything 
of the Lord.— James 1:6,7. 

Therefore I say unto you, what things soever ye desire, 
when ye pray, believe that ye shall receive them, and ye shall 
have them. -Mark 1 1:24. 

PRAY BEING FREE FROM CONDEMNATION. 

Let us search and try our ways, and turn again unto the 
Lord. Thou hast covered Thyself with a cloud that our 
prayer should not pass through.— Lam. 3:40,44. 

Come and hear, all ye that fear God, and I will declare 
what He hath done for my soul. I cried unto Him with my 
mouth, and He was extolled with my tongue. If I regard 
iniquity in my heart the Lord will not hear me.— 
Psalm 66:16-18. 

Likewise, ye husbands, dwell with them according to 
knowledge, giving honor unto the wife as unto the weaker 
vessel, and as being heirs together of the grace of life; that 
your prayers be not hindered.— 1 Peter 3:7. 

For if our heart condemn us, God is greater than our 
heart, and knoweth all things. Beloved, if our heart condemn 
us not, then have we confidence toward God, and 
whatsoever we ask, we receive of Him, because we keep His 
commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in His 
sight- 1 John 3:20-22. 

WITH THE WHOLE HEART. 

I cried with my whole heart, hear me, O Lord; I will 
keep Thy statutes.— Psalm 119:145. 

Thou hast given him his heart's desire and hast not withholden 
the request of his lips.— Psalm 21:2. 

TRUSTING GOD'S FAITHFULNESS. 

Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without 
wavering, for He is faithful that promised.— Heb. 10:23. 

Know, therefore, that the Lord thy God, He is God, the 
faithful God, which keepeth covenant and mercy with them 



that love Him and keep His commandments to a thousand 
generations.— Deut. 7:9. 

For from the top of the rocks I see him, and from the 
hills I behold him. ...God is not a man that He should 
lie; neither the son of man that He should repent; hath He 
said, and shall He not do it? or hath He spoken, and shall 
He not make it good?— Num. 23:9,19. 

Through faith also Sara herself received strength to conceive 
seed, and was delivered of a child when she was past 

R5380 : page 13 

age, because she judged Him faithful who had promised.— 
Heb. 11:11. 

Their children also multipliedst Thou as the stars of 
Heaven, and broughtest them into the land, concerning which 
Thou hadst promised to their fathers, that they should go 
in to possess it— Neh. 9:23. 

PRAY TRUSTING GOD'S POWER. 

Is anything too hard for the Lord? At the time appointed 
I will return unto thee, according to the time of life, and 
Sarah shall have a son.— Gen. 18:14. 

Ah, Lord God, behold Thou hast made the heaven and 
the earth by Thy great power and stretched-out arm, and 
there is nothing too hard for Thee.— Jer. 32:17. 

For with God nothing shall be impossible.— Luke 1:37. 

And Asa cried unto the Lord his God and said, Lord, it 
is nothing with Thee to help whether with many or with 
them that have no power; help us, O Lord our God; for 
we rest on Thee, and in Thy name we go against this multitude. 
O Lord, Thou art our God; let not man prevail 
against Thee.— 2 Chron. 14:11. 

Now unto Him that is able to do exceeding abundantly 
above all that we ask or think, according to the power that 
worketh in us.— Eph. 3:20. 

TRUSTING IN GOD'S LOVE AND MERCY. 

Have mercy upon me, O God, according to Thy loving-kindness; 
according unto the multitude of Thy tender mercies 
blot out my transgressions.— Psalm 51:1. 

O my God, incline Thine ear and hear; open Thine eyes 
and behold our desolations, and the city which is called by 
Thy name; for we do not present our supplications before 
Thee for our righteousness, but for Thy great mercies.— 
Dan. 9:18. 

Good and upright is the Lord; therefore will He teach 
sinners in the way. ...Remember, O Lord, Thy tender 
mercies and Thy loving-kindnesses, for they have been ever 
of old.-Psalm 25:8,6. 

Make Thy face to shine upon Thy servant; save me for 
Thy mercies' sake.— Psalm 31:16. 

Let, I pray Thee, Thy merciful kindness be for my comfort, 
according to Thy word unto Thy servant— 



Psalm 119:76. 

And being not weak in faith, he considered not his own 
body now dead, when he was about an hundred years old, 
neither yet the deadness of Sarah's womb: He staggered not 
at the promise of God through unbelief, but was strong in 
faith, giving glory to God, and being fully persuaded that, 
what He had promised, He was able also to perform. ~ 
Romans 4:19-21. 

PRAY PLEADING OUR NEED. 

Be not far from me; for trouble is near; for there is none 
to help.— Psalm 22:11. 

Attend unto my cry; for I am brought very low; deliver 
me from my persecutors; for they are stronger than I.— 
Psalm 142:6. 

For he shall deliver the needy when He crieth; the poor, 
also, and him that hath no helper. He shall spare the poor 
and needy, and shall save the souls of the needy. He shall 
redeem their souls from deceit and violence; and precious 
shall their blood be in His sight. -Psalm 72:12-14. 

Truly my soul waiteth upon God; from Him cometh my 
salvation. ...He only is my Rock and my Salvation; He 
is my defence; I shall not be greatly moved.... My 
soul, wait thou only upon God; for my expectation is from 
Him. -Psalm 62:1,2,5. 

PRAY PLEADING GOD'S GLORY. 

And Moses said unto the Lord, "Then the Egyptians shall 
hear it (for Thou broughtest up this people in Thy might 
from among them); and they will tell it to the inhabitants 
of this land; for they have heard that Thou, Lord, art 
among this people, that Thou, Lord, art seen face to face, 
and that Thy cloud standeth over them, and that Thou goest 
before them, by day time in a pillar of a cloud, and in a pillar 
of fire by night. Now if Thou shalt kill all this people as 
one man, then the nations which have heard the fame of 
Thee will speak, saying, Because the Lord was not able to 
bring this people into the land which he sware unto them, 
therefore He hath slain them in the wilderness."— 
Num. 14:13-16. 

O Lord, what shall I say, when Israel turneth their backs 
before their enemies! For the Canaanites and all the inhabitants 
of the land shall hear of it, and shall environ us 
round, and cut off our name from the earth; and what wilt 
Thou do unto Thy great name?— Joshua 7:8,9. 

And it came to pass at the time of the offering of the 
evening sacrifice that Elijah the Prophet came near and 
said: Lord God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, let it be 

R5381 :page 13 

known this day that Thou art God in Israel, and that I am 
Thy servant and that I have done all these things at Thy 
word.... Hear me, O Lord, hear me; that these people 



may know that Thou art the Lord God and that Thou hast 
turned their heart back again.— 1 Kings 18:36,37. 

For Thou art my Rock and my Fortress! Therefore for 
Thy name's sake lead me and guide me.— Psalm 31:3. 

Now, therefore, O our God, hear the prayer of Thy servant, 
and his supplications, and cause Thy face to shine upon 
Thy sanctuary that is desolate, for the Lord's sake. O my 
God, incline Thine ear and hear; open Thine eyes and behold 
our desolations, and the city which is called by Thy 
name; for we do not present our supplications before Thee 
for our righteousness, but for Thy great mercies. O Lord, 
hear; O Lord, forgive; O Lord, hearken and do; defer not, 
for Thine own sake, O my God; for Thy people and Thy 
city are called by Thy name.— Dan. 9:17-19. 

PRAY PLEADING GOD'S JUSTICE. 

That be far from Thee to do after this manner, to slay 
the righteous with the wicked; and that the righteous should 
be as the wicked, that be far from Thee; shall not the Judge 
of all the earth do right?— Gen. 18:25. 

In Thee, O Lord, do I put my trust; let me never be 
ashamed; deliver me in Thy righteousness.— Psalm 31:1. 

PRAY PLEADING OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS. 

I beseech Thee, O Lord, remember now how I have 
walked before Thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and 
have done that which is good in Thy sight. And Hezekiah 
wept sore.— 2 Kings 20:3. 

Think upon me, my God, for good, according to all that I 
have done for this people.— Neh. 5:19. 

And before this, Eliashib the priest, having the oversight 
of the chamber of the house of our God, was allied unto 
Tobiah.-Neh. 13:4. 

PRAY PERSEVERINGLY. 

And He said unto them, Which of you shall have a friend, 
and shall go unto him at midnight, and say unto him, friend, 
lend me three loaves; for a friend of mine in his journey 
is come to me, and I have nothing to set before him? and 
he from within shall answer and say, Trouble me not; the 
door is now shut, and my children are with me in bed; I 
cannot rise and give thee. I say unto you, though he will 
not rise and give him because he is his friend, yet because 
of his importunity he will rise and give him as many as he 
needeth. And I say unto you, ask, and it shall be given you; 
seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto 
you. For everyone that asketh, receiveth; and he that seeketh, 
findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened. 
If a son shall ask bread of any of you that is a father, will 
he give him a stone? or if he ask a fish, will he for a fish 
give him a serpent? or if he shall ask an egg, will he offer 
him a scorpion? If ye then, being evil, know how to give 
good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your 



Heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask 
Him?-Luke 11:5-13. 

And He spake a parable unto them to this end, that men 
ought always to pray, and not to faint; saying, There was 
in a city a judge, which feared not God, neither regarded 
man; and there was a widow in that city, and she came unto 
him saying, Avenge me of mine adversary. And he would 
not, for awhile; but afterward he said within himself, 
Though I fear not God, nor regard man, yet because this 
widow troubleth me, I will avenge her, lest by her continual 
coming she weary me. And the Lord said, Hear 
what the unjust judge saith. And shall not God avenge His 
own elect, which cry day and night unto Him, though He 
bear long with them? I tell you that He will avenge them 
speedily. Nevertheless when the Son of Man cometh, shall 
He find faith on the earth?-Luke 18:1-8. 

I waited patiently for the Lord; and He inclined unto me, 
and heard my cry. He brought me up also out of an horrible 
pit, out of the miry clay, and set my feet upon a rock, 
and established my goings. And He hath put a New Song 
into my mouth, even praise unto our God; many shall see 
it, and fear, and shall trust in the Lord.— Psalm 40:1-3. 

And Jacob said, O God of my Father Abraham, and God 
of my Father Isaac, the Lord which saidst unto me, Return 
unto thy country, and to thy kindred, and I will deal well 
with thee; I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies, 
and of all the truth which Thou hast shown unto Thy 
servant; for with my staff I passed over this Jordan; and 
now I am become two bands. Deliver me, I pray Thee, 
from the hand of my brother, from the hand of Esau; for 
I fear him, lest he will come and smite me, and the mother 

R5381 :page 14 

with the children. And Thou saidst, I will surely do thee 
good, and make thy seed as the sand of the sea, which cannot 
be numbered for multitude.— Gen. 32:9-12. 

And it came to pass when he saw the earring and bracelets 
upon his sister's hands, and when he heard the words of 
Rebekah, his sister, saying, Thus spake the man unto me; 
that he came unto the man; and behold, he stood by the 
camels at the well.— Gen. 24:30. 

He took his brother by the heel in the womb, and by his 
strength he had power with God; yea he had power over 
the angel and prevailed; he wept, and made supplication 
unto Him: he found Him in Bethel, and there He spake 
with us; even the Lord God of Hosts: the Lord is his 
memorial, therefore turn thou to thy God; keep mercy and 
judgment, and wait on thy God continually.— Hosea 12:3-6. 

PRAY WITH PURE MOTIVES. 

Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye 
may consume it upon your lusts.— James 4:3. 

PRAY WITH THANKSGIVING. 



Continue in prayer, and watch in the same with thanksgiving. 
-Col. 4:2. 

Be careful for nothing; but in everything by prayer and 
supplication with thanksgiving let your requests be made 
known unto God.— Phil. 4:6. 

By Him, therefore, let us offer the sacrifice of praise to 
God continually; that is, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks 
to His name.— Heb. 13:15. 

I will offer to Thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and will 
call upon the name of the Lord.— Psalm 116:17. 

I will praise the name of God with a song, and will magnify 
Him with thanksgiving. This also shall please the Lord 
better than an ox or bullock that hath horns and hoofs.— 
Psalm 69:30,31. 

STIR YOURSELF TO IT. 

And there is none that calleth upon Thy name, that stirreth 
up himself to take hold of Thee; for Thou hast hid 
Thy face from us, and hast consumed us, because of our 
iniquities.— Isa. 64:7. 

Or let him take hold of My strength, that he may make 
peace with Me; and he shall make peace with Me.— 
Isa. 27:5. 

Wherefore I put thee in remembrance that thou stir up 
the gift of God, which is in thee by the putting on of my 
hands.— 2 Tim. 1:6. 

LET YOUR FAITH GROW STRONG BY MEDITATION UPON THE 
PROMISES. 

The workman melteth a graven image, and the goldsmith 
spreadeth it over with gold, and casteth silver chains. He 
that is so impoverished that he hath no oblation, chooseth 
a tree that will not rot; he seeketh unto him a cunning 
workman to prepare a graven image, that shall not be moved. 
Have ye not known? have ye not heard? hath it not been 
told you from the beginning? have ye not understood from 
the foundations of the earth? It is He that sitteth upon 
the circle of the earth and the inhabitants thereof are as 
grasshoppers; that stretcheth out the heavens as a curtain, 
and spreadeth them out as a tent to dwell in; that bringeth 
the princes to nothing; He maketh the judges of the earth 
as vanity. Yea, they shall not be planted; yea, they shall 
not be sown; yea, their stock shall not take root in the 
earth; and he shall also blow upon them, and they shall 
wither, and the whirlwind shall take them away as stubble. 
To whom, then, would ye liken Me, or shall I be equal? 
saith the Holy One. Lift up your eyes on high, and behold 
who hath created these things, that bringeth out their host 
by number; He calleth them all by names by the greatness 
of His might, for that He is strong in power; not one faileth. 
Why sayest thou, O Jacob, and speakest, O Israel, my 
way is hid from the Lord, and my judgment is passed over 
from my God? Hast thou not known? hast thou not heard, 



that the everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator of the ends 
of the earth, fainteth not, neither is weary? there is no 
searching of his understanding. He giveth power to the 
faint; and to them that have no might He increaseth 
strength. Even the youths shall faint and be weary, and the 
young men shall utterly fall: But they that wait upon the 
Lord shall renew their strength; they shall mount up with 
wings as eagles; they shall run and not be weary; they shall 
walk and not faint.— Isa. 40:19-31. 

And call upon Me in the day of trouble; I will deliver 
thee, and thou shalt glorify Me.— Psalm 50:15. 

The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and His 
ears are open unto their cry. The righteous cry, and the 
Lord heareth, and delivereth them out of all their troubles. 
-Psalm 34:15-17. 

For Thou, Lord, art good and ready to forgive; and 
plenteous in mercy unto all them that call upon Thee.— 
Psalm 86:5. 

The Lord is righteous in all His ways and holy in all His 
works.— Psalm 145:17. 

For there is no difference between the Jew and the Greek; 
for the same Lord over all is rich unto all that call upon 
Him.— Romans 10:12. 

R5382 : page 14 

If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that 
giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall 
be given him.— James 1:5. 

Let us, therefore, come boldly unto the throne of grace, 
that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of 
need.-Heb. 4:16. 

And I say unto you, Ask and it shall be given you; seek, 
and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. 
For every one that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh 
findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened.— 
Luke 11:9,10. 

And whatsoever ye shall ask in My name, that will I do, 
that the Father may be glorified in the Son.— John 14:13. 

Hitherto have ye asked nothing in My name; ask, and ye 
shall receive, that your joy may be full.— John 16:24. 

ENCOURAGED AND INSTRUCTED BY PRAYERS OF THE SAINTS. 

Moses for help to judge Israel.— Num. 11:11-15. 

Moses for Israel's forgiveness.— Exod. 32:11-13. 

Moses for Miriam.— Num. 12:13. 

Moses for murmurers.— Num. 14:13-19. 

Moses for Pharaoh.-Exod. 8:12,13,30,31; 9:33. 

Moses in the case of fiery serpents.— Num. 21:7,8. 

Moses for Aaron.— Deut. 9:20. 

Samuel for Israel.— 1 Sam. 7:5-10. 

Elijah for the widow's son.— 1 Kings 17:20-23. 

Hezekiah against the king of Assyria.— 2 Kings 19:15-20;32-37. 

Hannah for a son.— 1 Sam. 1:9-11,27. 

Abraham's prayer.— Gen. 18:23-33; 20:17. 



Lot's prayer.— Gen. 19:17-22,29. 
Isaac's prayer.— Gen. 25:21. 
Jehoahaz for Israel.— 2 Kings 13:4,5. 
Asa's prayer.— 2 Chron. 14:11,12. 
Jehoshaphat's prayer.— 2 Chron. 20:1-24,26. 
Manasseh's prayer.— 2 Chron. 33:10-13. 
Job for his friends.-Job 42:7-10. 
Ezra's prayer.— Ezra 8:21-23,31. Chaps. 9; 10:1-19. 
Nehemiah's prayer.— Neh. Chaps. 1; 2:1-8. 

David's.-Psalm 18:6; 28:6,7; 31:22; 34:1-10; 118:5; 116:1,2; 138:3. 
Paul and Silas. -Acts 16:25,26. 
Manoah's prayer.— Judges 13:8,9. 
See Psalms 62:1-5; 145:15; James 1:17. 
Prayer a necessity.— Luke 21:36; 1 Peter 4:7; Eph. 6:18. 
"Consider what I say, and the Lord give thee understanding."— 2 Tim. 2:7. 
"When prayer delights thee least, 

Then learn to say, 
Now is the greatest need 

That I should pray." —See Romans 10:12. 



R5382 : page 14 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
WATCHING LEST HE SHOULD SEEM TO COME SHORT 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Greetings in the name of our precious Redeemer! During 
the weeks that have intervened since leaving Bethel en route 
for the South, it has been on my mind to write you; and I 
have refrained from so doing merely because I know that 
your time is so thoroughly occupied in the Master's service. 
However, I want to say that the Truth is becoming more 
precious; and that my appreciation of spiritual things is daily 
increasing and I am rejoicing in the many, many evidences of 
the Lord's love and care. 

The last few TOWERS have been so grand and truly a 
spiritual feast; especially those articles re the time features 
of the Divine Plan. While I have full confidence in the chronological 
features of the Plan, yet nevertheless my consecration 
is unto death and forever; and I am trying to live each 
day as if it were my last, and then there is just ONE DAY between 
me and the Kingdom. 

My heart has been grieved, as I have come in contact with 
the dear brethren in different parts of the country, to note in 
many the tendency to complain and to find fault on the slightest 
pretext. I feel we are drawing very near a time of testing 

R5382 : page 15 

for the Church. Surely if we have a deep heart appreciation 

of the Truth, we would not be so prone to find fault and 

to criticize. Personally, the Truth is so precious and so all-absorbing 

that I feel less inclined to murmur, and more and 



more inclined to be thankful for every experience in life, be 
it pleasant or unpleasant. The resolution not to murmur or 
complain has been so helpful, for which I thank the Lord. 

Every day sees fresh cause for thankfulness for "The 
Vow." As I see the wave of immorality and debauchery 
which is sweeping the country, and the generally prevailing 
tendency to lower the standards of morals and propriety, I 
am sure the Lord has given us the Vow for our protection. 
Some of the dear friends seem to think they are strong 
enough without the Vow, and perhaps they are; but for my 
part I am glad for any protection and help which will enable 
me to stand more firmly. 

Another thing that comes under my observation is this: 
Some of the friends seem inclined to be rather lax or careless 
in their deportment, with the excuse that their motives 
are pure and that they mean no harm; and it seems to anger 
them if their actions are called in question. Sometimes I wonder 
how many of those who profess to be in Present Truth 
will be "overcomers." The standard is so high and we have 
so much to fight against! Many seem to be lacking in a deep 
spiritual appreciation of the Truth. I cannot judge the motives 
of the dear friends; and therefore I am trying by the 
Lord's grace to walk more circumspectly and watch myself 
closely lest I would even "seem to come short." 

Oh, that prize is so wonderful, so glorious, and the Kingdom 
so near, "what manner of people ought we to be in all 
holy conduct"! Praise the Lord, we are almost home! The 
lights of the Eternal City are almost discernible, and soon we 
shall be at Home and at Rest! 

In conclusion, dear Brother, let me assure you of my hearty 
co-operation in the promulgation of the Harvest Message, 
with which I am in perfect harmony. I hope, if it should be 
the Lord's will, to see you some time this winter. In the 
meantime, I hope and pray the Father's smile of approval will 
continue to be your daily portion. Pray for me, as I do for 
you and all the family. 

The classes throughout the South send their love and 
greetings. With much Christian love, I am 

Your Brother, by His Grace, J. P. MACPHERSON. 



"CAST NOT AWAY YOUR CONFIDENCE" 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

Although our Heavenly Father sees fit to try the faith of 
His people along various lines, yet it seems that during the 
coming year we may meet a more severe testing of our confidence 
in God and His Word. 

I am aware, however, that the faith of the dear brethren 
and sisters is very strong, and believe they will continue to 
fight the good fight of faith successfully to the end. 

Pastor Russell, as I have always understood him, never 
claimed his interpretation of the time prophecies to be infallible. 
His writings have always impressed me that way. 

Should the year 1915 come and not witness all that many 



of the brethren expect, it will matter but little to me. We 
know still that "Thy Word is Truth," and that not one jot 
or tittle will pass till all be fulfilled. We know further that, 
according to the signs of the times, the Day is not far distant. 

When fiery trials assail us, let us remember the words of 
inspiration, "Cast not away, therefore, your confidence, which 
hath great recompense of reward." 

Yours in faith and hope, N. E. BUTLER, N.S. 



WITHOUT HIS CONSENT 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

A copy of 1913 "Convention Report" has just come to my 
attention. It contains what purports to be a report of a discourse 
delivered by me at the Springfield Convention. 

I have not the disposition nor the power to control the actions 
of others in the publication of what I say at Conventions; 
but I would like to have the friends know that such 
publication is without my consent. A stenographic report of 
the above mentioned discourse was handed me at Springfield, 
but I declined to read it, not wishing to have anything to do 
with its publication. 

Yours in His service, J. F. RUTHERFORD. 



page 15 

BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
FEBRUARY 1 
Read p. 715, par. 1, to p. 719, par. 1. 

(35) What will be the special advantage in the awakened 
ones being able to remember their past experiences? P. 715, 
par. 1. 

(36) How will these experiences and the lessons of the 
Millennial Age benefit mankind? And what is the relation 
between their judgment and the present trying experiences 
of the Church class? P. 715, par. 2. 

(37) Into what classes does the Prophet Daniel divide the 
awakened ones? P. 716, par. 1. 

(38) How does the Prophet's declaration support our position 
that the world will not be awakened to instantaneous 
perfection? P. 716, par. 2. 

(39) Explain how Nero may be used as an illustration of 
those who will "come forth to shame and lasting contempt." 
P. 716, par. 3, to P. 718. 

PUNISHMENTS FOR SINS OF THIS LIFE 

(40) Will mankind be punished in the Millennial Age for 
the sins of this life? If so, for what kind of sins? P. 718, 



par. 2; P. 719, par. 1. 

FEBRUARY 8 
Read p. 719, par. 2, to p. 722, par. 2. 

(41) Explain the meaning of the statement, "Some men's 
sins go before to judgment, and some they follow after," 
using Nero as an illustration. P. 719, par. 2; P. 720, par. 1. 

"THUS IS THE (CHIEF) RESURRECTION OF THE (SPECIAL) DEAD. 
(1 COR. 15:42.) 

(42) Why is the resurrection of the Church designated 
"the First Resurrection"? And what two other classes will 
experience an instantaneous resurrection to perfect life? 
And what is the meaning of the statement, "The rest of the 
dead lived not again until the thousand years were finished"? 
(Rev. 20:5.) P. 720, par. 2. 

(43) What are some of the characteristics of the First 
Resurrection— with what bodies and powers will the New 
Creation come forth? P. 721, par. 1, 2. 

(44) How does the Apostle Paul in 1 Cor. 15, guard against 
the thought that all mankind shall eventually bear the image 
of the Heavenly Father? P. 722, par. 1. 

(45) What does the Apostle declare respecting "flesh and 
blood" inheriting the Kingdom? P. 722, par. 2. 

FEBRUARY 15 



Read p. 723, par. 1, to p. 726, par. 1. 



(46) Is it difficult to fully grasp the thought of this complete 
change from fleshly to spiritual conditions? And how 

has the Apostle anticipated this difficulty in 1 Cor. 15:51,52? 
P. 723, par. 1. 

(47) Why has so plain a statement been so generally misunderstood? 
P. 723, par. 2. 

(48) What will be the experience of the Lord's people who 
remain until His Second Advent— will they not die? Quote 
Scriptures to support position taken. P. 724, par. 1, 2. 

"IT DOTH NOT YET APPEAR WHAT WE SHALL BE" 

(49) While all the perfected New Creatures will have the 
same kind of glory, will they all enjoy the same degree of 
glory? P. 725, par. 1. 

(50) How has the Lord indicated these differences in two 
of His parables? P. 725, par. 2. 

(51) Judging from the different degrees of nearness to the 
Lord among His Apostles, would it not be reasonable to 
expect various positions of power, honor and closeness of 
relationship to Him in the Kingdom? P. 726, par. 1. 

FEBRUARY 22 



Read p. 726, par. 2, to p. 728, par. 3. 



(52) In the Apostle's description of the First Resurrection 
in 1 Cor. 15:42-44, to what does "It" refer? P. 726, par. 2. 

(53) What is the nature of the spiritual body in which "It" 
shall be raised? P. 727, par. 1, 2. 

(54) Why is the statement, "It is sown in dishonor," specially 
applicable to the New Creation in the trial state? P. 727, 

par. 3. 

(55) What is the significance of the statement, "It is sown 
in weakness"? P. 728, par. 1. 

(56) Explain, "It is sown a natural body; it is raised a 
spiritual body." P. 728, par. 2. 

(57) If the very thought of the future glory lifts us above 
our earthly cares and sorrows, what must the realities mean, 
and how should we strive to be overcomers and so receive an 
abundant entrance into the Kingdom? P. 728, par. 3. 



page 17 

VOL. XXXV JANUARY 15 No. 2 
A. D. 1914-A. M. 6042 



CONTENTS 

A Prophecy Nearing Fulfilment 19 

Sorrow Turned Into Joy 20 

"Cut Off From the Fold" 20 

Pastoral Advice on Prayer and Testimony 20 

A Model Testimony Meeting 21 

Formal Prayer Often Mockery 22 

Faithfulness in Our Stewardship 23 

The Parable of the Talents 23 

The Parable of the Unjust Steward 23 

Significance of One Pound to Each 24 

Rest for the People of God 25 

Moses' Need of Encouragement 25 

Woe Unto You, Pharisees! 26 

Good Confession Vs. Bad Confession 28 

St. Paul's Exhortation to Elders 29 

Responsibility Proportionate to Ability 30 

Leviticus Nine and Sixteen 30 

Some Interesting Letters 31 

Assurance of Confidence 31 

Was in Deepest Despair 3 1 



page 18 



PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 



BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:-All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



JEWISH HOPES AND PROSPECTS 

We have a good supply, and now offer these booklets 
FREE, postpaid. 



HOLLANDISH AND SYRIAN TRACTS 

We have a good stock of these, and invite orders for such 
quantities as can be profitably used— FREE, postpaid. 



HYMNS OF DAWN WITH MUSIC 

We have this in handsome cloth binding and at cost price. 
It is the best and the cheapest hymn book in the world, at 35 
cents per copy, postpaid, and contains 333 of the choicest 
hymns of all ages. By express, collect, 25 cents each, in any 
quantity. 



RE CLIPPINGS 

We wish to express thanks for interesting clippings, and 
also for clippings containing attacks upon us. We request 
that you give name and date of paper each time, or, preferably, 
the whole page. If the whole paper be sent, please 
mark the article plainly and address W.T.B.& T. Society, 



File H, 17 Hicks Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 



RE REMITTANCES 

When sending remittances to the Society, please remember 
to make them payable in all cases to the Watch Tower 
Bible and Tract Society. 



R5383 : page 19 

A PROPHECY NEARING FULFILMENT 

"Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be 
in the vines; the labor of the olive shall fail, and the fields 
shall yield no meat; the flock shall be cut off from 
the fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls; 
yet will I rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in 
the God of my salvation. "-HAB. 3:17,18. 

HABAKKUK'S entire prayer, recorded in this 

chapter of his prophecy, is so symbolical 

that it would be scarcely in keeping with it 

for us to give the words of our text the 

plain, simple interpretation that we would 

be otherwise inclined to give. This simple 

interpretation would be that although the 

conditions were such that famine stalked 

everywhere, and there was nothing of 

earthly hope, nevertheless God's people at 

any time and in any place would rejoice in God and give 

Him the glory. 

It would seem very strange, however, if the Prophet 
should wind up the whole chapter, so highly symbolical, 
with anything so plain and literal as we have suggested. 
With so much imagery in his mind, it would seem but 
reasonable that the words should be interpreted in keeping 
with their context, and that we should regard it as 
the Prophet's expression of some deep truths. Much of 
the language of the Bible is figurative; and in our common 
conversation we also use many figures. For instance, 
in the Scriptures a vine is a figure used for the 
Church: As our Lord said, "I am the Vine; ye are the 
branches."— John 15:5. 

The flock of God— the sheep— are common figurative 
expressions for the same class. Our Lord speaks of the 
Little Flock. We are His sheep. The Jews were also 
referred to as God's sheep, by the Psalmist David, in 
Psalm 74:1; 79:13, etc. 

So with the word olive. The olive tree is mentioned 
by St. Paul in referring to the special people of God, His 
peculiar people— those in relationship with Him. He 
speaks of the natural olive tree— shows that the Promise 



applied originally to the Jewish nation: "In thee 
[Abraham] and in thy Seed shall all the families of the 
earth be blessed." He says that because of unbelief the 
natural branches were broken off. Thus we locate the 
vine and the olive both as representing the Church of 
Christ, from different points of view. 

When the Little Flock shall have passed beyond the 
veil, there will still be the Great Company of the Lord's 
people left here. Many of these will apparently continue 
in Babylon until the time of trouble shall cause Babylon 
to fall. And by the fall of Babylon these will be set free. 
Before all this is made plain to them, they may use the 
language of our text, and later come to see clearly. In 
the 19th of Revelation this company are spoken of as 
rejoicing in the fall of Babylon and saying, "Let us be 
glad and rejoice, and give honor to Him; for the Marriage 
of the Lamb is come, and His Wife hath made Herself 
ready." (Vs. 7.) All things had seemed to them 
to be failures; and now they see that God's Plan has not 
failed, but has been fulfilled. 

EARTHLY GOVERNMENTS A FAILURE 

The Church has not yet blessed the world. The fruit 
of the Vine will feed the world in the coming Age. 
Neither the olive nor the vine will give life to the world 
at the present time. This will come in the New Dispensation, 
during the Messianic reign. 

The Lord has used the word field to represent the 
world: "The field is the world." The world have been 
hoping to better their affairs. They have been hoping to 
manage matters successfully. And so the various universal 
empires have sprung up. First the Babylonians 
tried to give the world a better government, but their 
efforts were of no avail. Then the Medes and Persians 
tried, and also failed. Next the Greeks and later the 
Romans took the reins of universal government, and likewise 
failed. Finally Papacy came forward, claiming to 
be the Kingdom of Christ that would rule the world. 
She failed. Of late years Socialism has come to the 
front, saying that it can better the world, but the prospects 
for social improvement are no better. 

"NO HERD IN THE STALLS" 

The expression, "herd in the stalls," seems a little 
obscure. The Scriptures liken our Lord Jesus to a 
bullock— and in the coming Age mankind, on reaching 
perfection, will be symbolically represented by a bullock. 
The suggestion of the Prophet David is that mankind 
then shall offer bullocks on God's altar. (Psa. 51:19.) 
This cannot refer to the Church in the present time; for 
in the Atonement Day type the Church is represented by 
a goat, and our Lord— a perfect Man when His sacrifice 
was made— is represented by a bullock. But in the end 
of the next Age, when the world shall be perfected, they 



shall offer bullocks on the altar. This represents how 
mankind will make a full consecration of themselves, 
their perfect powers. 

We know nothing better in the application of the 
bullock than that suggested by the Psalmist. At the close 
of this Gospel Age, when all the Church shall have 
passed beyond the veil, there will be no perfect men. In 

R5383 : page 20 

other words, there will be a point of time when the 
Church will be glorified and when the Ancient Worthies 
will not yet have appeared. The people will stand 
amazed, not seeing any way out of their troubles. Only 
those who have the light of the Lord's Word will be able 
to appreciate the condition at all. 

Those who will then understand— the Great Company 
—will rejoice in the Lord. They will be able to trust in 
God, even though conditions in the world are distressing, 
and the Ancient Worthies not yet here to take hold of 
matters. They will see that the conditions are really 
leading up to the great blessing— that the great Time of 
Trouble is the necessary preparation for blessing. And 
they will say, Let us rejoice and give glory to the Lord, 
for the Bride hath made herself ready! We see in this 
glorification of the Church the beginning of the great 
blessing. Soon we may expect to see the Ancient 
Worthies here. Then will come the fulfilment of all 
God's gracious promises. So we will not lose heart, but 
will trust in the Lord. 

Our Lord Jesus spoke of the Great Company— the 
foolish virgin class— in His Sermon on the Mount. 
(Matt. 7:21-23.) After the last member of the Little 
Flock has gone beyond the veil, the Great Company will 
be thoroughly awakened and will say, "Lord, Lord, may 
we not come in? We are ready now, dear Lord; we see 
where we have made our mistake. We see matters differently; 
we realize what privileges and opportunities for 
sacrifice we once enjoyed, but missed. May we not enter 
even now?" But the Lord will answer, "Depart from 
Me. I do not recognize you." This word depart does not 
mean that they will depart into eternal torment, as we 
once thought. The Lord does not say, "Depart, ye 
cursed," for cursed means to be set apart for punishment. 
He merely says, "Depart from Me." 

The Kingdom of Heaven is elsewhere (Matt. 25:1-12) 
likened unto ten virgins who took their lamps and 
went forth to meet the Bridegroom. Five of them were 
wise and took oil in their vessels with their lamps; but 
five were foolish virgins and took no oil with them. 
When the Bridegroom came, the foolish virgins said to 
the wise ones, "Give us of your oil; for our lamps are 
gone out." But they could not do so, they had enough 
only for their own lamps. After the wise virgins had 
entered with the Bridegroom, the door was shut. Then 
came the other virgins saying, "Lord, Lord, open unto 



us!" But he answered, "Verily I say unto you, I know 
you not." 

These words of our Lord, "I know you not," do not 
mean that these were not virgins. What do they mean? 
He means that, having recognized His Bride, He does 
not know any other woman. These were desiring to be 
recognized as a part of the Bride. And the Lord says, I 
do not recognize you. My Bride is complete. So the 
foolish virgin class are rejected from a place in the 
Bride class, but they are received as associates and assistants. 
Their rejection will give them cause for grief. 
Realizing that the door of opportunity is closed to them, 
they will cry, Oh, we have lost the great prize! They may 
become despondent. We do not know. 

SORROW TURNED INTO JOY 

But this Great Company are afterward pictured as 
saying, Let us be glad! Let us rejoice! Let us glorify 
God, because the Bride has been taken! Should any one 
say to them, But you are not of the Bride class, their 
reply might be: Nevertheless, the blessings are coming to 
all— even to us ! The Bride class are the First-fruits of 
God's people. It is our own fault that we failed to get 
into the Bride class. If we had seen a while ago as we 
now see, we would have striven harder and we should 
not have failed. We would not have listened to what 
Babylon had to say, We would have "run with patience 
the race set before us." We were stupefied by the "doctrines 
of demons." (1 Timothy 4:1.) We are glad that 
we are now awakened. We rejoice that God's Plan is 
being so gloriously outworked. Our lamps are burning 
now. We are blessed as never before. Let us be glad 
and rejoice in that the Bride is glorified. 

R5384 : page 20 

"CUT OFF FROM THE FOLD" 

"The flock shall be cut off from the fold." As applied 
to the elect Church, this is viewed from the earthly 
standpoint. There is an earthly fold and a Heavenly 
fold. We are now in the fold on earth. We must die in 
order to enter into the glory that is promised us— to enter 
into the Heavenly fold. 

Our Lord Jesus was cut off from the earthly fold 
when He died. And as with our Lord, so with us. We 
must be cut off from the fold here before we can enter 
into the fold above. It may appear to the Great Company 
for a time as though all things are failing, and not 
coming to pass; but from God's standpoint the fig tree 
will be budding and the olive will be bringing forth her 
fruit. There will be no miscarriage of God's purposes. 
The Church will reach her full glorification, and then the 
vine will bear glorious, ripe fruitage for all mankind. 



R5384 : page 20 

PASTORAL ADVICE ON PRAYER AND TESTIMONY 

THE New Creation needs a special meeting of 

a devotional kind once a week for prayer 

and testimony. We believe that the friends 

would find it very profitable to set aside at 

least one night in the quarter as a prayer 

meeting in a very general sense. Our suggestion 

has been that the middle Wednesday 

evening of the quarter be the one selected 

for this purpose. This meeting should be 

devoted to prayer rather than to testimony. 

It may be opened with a prayer by the leader, who could 

then call for two or three prayers. Afterward he might 

read the text for the week, and comment upon it for 

about three minutes; or if the Class were very small, 

comment about five minutes; if very large in numbers, 

about two minutes. The length of the comment would 

be according to the size of the Class. 

Then the leader might say, This is the evening we 
have arranged to be especially for a prayer service. We 
have all found, no doubt, that it is a special privilege 
for the Christian to worship the Lord, to offer prayer, 
praise. With the heart, we believe; with the mouth, we 
confess. During this service we prefer not to call by 
name, but desire that all present participate. If you have 
only a few words, no matter. Indeed, we would rather 
encourage the thought that the prayer should not be too 
long. Now we will give opportunity for three to rise- 
two brothers and one sister; after that we will have a 
hymn; following the hymn we will have another opportunity 
for prayer— one brother and one sister (according 
to the general make-up of the class), and thus give 
an opportunity all around. 

We find that a great blessing comes to the Lord's 
people from the exercise of the privilege of prayer. 
They need to be encouraged, for many of them have not 
had such encouragement in their earlier life experiences. 

R5384:page21 

We think that once a quarter for the special prayer 
service would serve the purpose better than once a month. 
More than once a quarter might prove tedious; and if 
such order has been followed in any Class, we recommend 
that it be changed. 

A MODEL TESTIMONY MEETING 

As a rule the mid-week meeting should be set aside 
for praise and testimony. As before stated, the Christian 
needs a special devotional meeting, with opportunities 



for relating his experiences. Up-to-date testimonies are 
very helpful. All the Lord's people have trials and difficulties, 
and by hearing of one another's experiences, we 
learn to sympathize with each other. 

Such meetings should begin with a hymn or two, followed 
by one or more short prayers. The brother who 
is to open the meeting with prayer, should be instructed 
before the meeting what to do and what not to do. And 
the opening prayer should be merely a request for Divine 
blessing upon the hearts and the minds of those 
assembled, that they might be in the right condition to receive 
the Lord's blessing. 

Suppose that the text for the evening read, "Humble 
yourselves under the mighty hand of God that He may 
exalt you in due time." The leader would say something 
like this: Our text for the week reads thus (here read 
the text). ...Apparently, in God's sight the quality of 
humility is one of the most important qualities for any 
one of His people to possess. The entire Scriptures seem 
to indicate that when we have humility we are pleasing 
in God's sight; and that unless we have this quality we 
could never be fit for the Kingdom. We can see the 
wisdom of this requirement, too; for if God should exalt 
to a high position those who are not humble, it might 
lead to further difficulty in Heaven. 

We can see that Satan was not properly submissive 
to God. After he had gotten into this proud condition 
he probably thought that he could do better than God; 
and in his endeavor to show what he could do, he brought 
his own downfall and brought the human family into sin 
and death. No wonder, then, that God required Jesus to 
show that He had submitted Himself to the Father's 
will. We see the course of Jesus in this matter, and how 
the Father afterwards exalted Him. It is for us to submit 
ourselves to everything which God's providence 
brings to us. "Humble yourselves, therefore, under the 
mighty hand of God, that He may exalt you in due time." 

Now, dear friends, perhaps you may have something 
to tell us of your experiences this week, along the line of 
humility, or its opposite— pride. This is not to be a dissertation 
on Scripture. We already know what the text 
means. We want you to tell us of your own personal 
experiences. What experiences have you had that have 
tended to impress this Scripture on your mind? Let us 
have some little page from your personal experience. 
We will begin with Brother A, and then have Sister B, 
and then will alternate between the two sides of the 
room, and thus progress. Will you give us your testimony, 
Brother? 

HOW TO GET DOUBLE EFFECT 

By following the method of calling upon one here, 
and one there, we get double effect. If the testimony 
begins at one end, some who are far away might think: 
Oh, it will not come my turn for a long time! But if 



the method is adopted of calling one here, and then one 
there, and there and here, it makes all more alert, and 
will keep them awake to the whole subject. 

In leading a testimony meeting ourself, we keep the 
thought in mind that we want a good testimony to begin 
with and a good testimony to close with. So we start 
with some one who will give a good, wide-awake testimony, 
and thus give a good impetus at the beginning. 
When we are singing the opening hymn, we have in mind 
Brother So-and-so, or Sister So-and-so, to begin with or 
to end with. And thus we are sure of having a good 
beginning and a good ending. 

If in the middle of the service there are some who 
seem to stumble a little, and do not seem to know how 
to proceed, we say, We understand, then, brother (or 
sister) that your experience has been thus and so. We 
would take what we surmise to be his real thought, and 
state it for him, if we think he is unable to complete it. 
We should be able to do this. Any leader ought to be 
able to do so, and thus kindly to encourage him. 

We would be careful not to make it so rankly different 
from the thought that the brother or sister will 
feel like saying, Oh, that is not it at all! But we try to 
give his thought so that he could say, Brother Russell 
understands my thought! But if we should look sour 
and say nothing, the brother (or the sister more especially) 
might feel too much discouraged to try at all the 
next time, thinking that she might better keep quiet. 

In a testimony meeting, where there are sixty to one 
hundred present in the Class, there is not the best opportunity 
for the most helpful meeting. The most profitable 
number would seem to be twelve to fifteen. Then 
there is sufficient variety, and none too much time to 
spare, yet enough time for all to testify. 

If the first who testifies has a wrong thought or 
course of action, he may say: This week I had a conversation 
with a preacher who thinks that he knows a 
great deal about Scripture— I asked him several questions, 
which he could not answer; and all the people 
could see that he could not answer at all! 

The leader might say to him, Brother, I have no doubt 
that you meant that well, but I am not so sure that you 
did it wisely. It might have been better if you had done 
it gently. We are not to be rude, but gentle, in meekness 
instructing those who oppose. You must remember that 
it would be a very difficult matter for a man of years, of 
standing, of education and reputation to see these things. 
You should, therefore, be doubly on guard not to arouse 
antagonism. So I would advise that in a case like that, 
we would simply drop a little word, and this word would 
be more in harmony with the suggestions of gentleness, 
meekness. In speaking as you did, that minister might 
have thought that you were not humble enough. 

There might be another one who would have the 
thought all twisted in another way. The art of testifying 
well is one that the leaders of testimony meetings should 



cultivate in the class. They should have right ideas 
about these matters, so that the Class would get proper 
thoughts as to how to deal with what comes up. In this 
way they have something fixed in their minds. 

R5385 : page 21 

TESTIMONY MEETING NOT FOR A DISCOURSE 

If one attempts to give a sermon, the leader might 
say, Excuse me, Brother, but this is not a meeting for a 
discourse. This is a testimony meeting. Perhaps at 
some other time you can speak more at length. 

It might be well for the leader to give in advance a 
definition of what a testimony is, something as follows: 
Presumably we all know what a testimony is. It is not a 
discourse or a dissertation on Scripture. This is a meeting 
especially for testimonies. I will give a dissertation 
myself on the text for the evening, now, at the beginning; 
but later we will wish to have the personal experiences 
of the friends. 

We take it for granted that all the friends mean well; 
anything that is not just in order is not seen by them to 

R5385 : page 22 

be out of order. But by the leader's remarking that he 
would read the text and give a few words regarding its 
signification, and would then hear testimonies, they will 
see what is expected. By the leader's giving his own 
personal testimony at the close of the meeting, they will 
also get the proper thought. 

Our thought is that it would not be best for the 
friends to depart for their homes with any unseemly 
haste, but to tarry for a word of greeting. That is our 
custom. We do not know any Scripture bearing directly 
upon this subject, and we would have no right to lay 
down a rule or law; we merely give the suggestion that 
nothing would be gained by entering into too much conversation 
at the close of the service. There is a danger 
of the after-meeting crowding out the benefits and blessings 
of the service. Of course, if they leave promptly the 
friends have not so much opportunity for fellowship, unless 
they come a little earlier— a little ahead of time— to 
the place of meeting. If some can do this it would not be 
amiss for them to have a little friendly interchange before 
the coming of the leader, and before the hour for meeting. 
This would seem to be a very profitable opportunity. 

PROPER ATTITUDE IN PRAYER 

Nothing in the Scriptures limits the Christian as to 
the attitude of his body when he goes to the Lord in 
prayer. Standing and kneeling are both mentioned. One 
would have to be guided by the spirit of a sound mind. 
If he were out on the street, it would surely be undesirable 



to kneel. If he were on a stone floor, it might also 

be undesirable to kneel. If he were in private, it would 

seem best to kneel in prayer. Some have told us, however, 

that when they get upon their knees they are likely 

to get very sleepy. We would wish to be in that attitude 

which would enable us best to think of what we are doing. 

If we found that on our knees we were apt to grow 

sleepy, we would assume some other attitude which would 

keep us awake and attentive to prayer. 

As for congregational prayer, it is our thought that it 
can generally be best observed sitting, with the head 
bowed. Of course, the preference of attitude is largely 
a matter of education, of habit. It has been our thought 
to say to the friends everywhere, that in public service 
this attitude would best be observed during prayer. 
Where the gathering is small and there is a carpet on the 
floor, it might be as well to kneel. 

As for testimony meetings, it is our opinion that unless 
the class be a large one, it is better that they sit when 
testifying; for by remaining seated the giving of a testimony 
is easier. A difficulty with some in giving a 
testimony is that they rise and, becoming embarrassed, 
forget what they are going to say. So it reduces the 
nervous excitement of some to remain sitting. In a large 
meeting, it would be better for the person to stand, so 
that the voice can reach all. 

STANDING DURING CONGREGATIONAL SINGING 

In the matter of singing, we believe that the custom 
of standing, which prevails in Great Britain, is a very 
good one. It would seem to be too much to stand during 
a praise service, where a number of songs follow each 
other. But standing in singing has its advantages generally. 
A person in standing is putting himself in a distinctive 
attitude; and he can sing better because of thus 
putting his vocal chords in better position. It is desirable, 
therefore, when a hymn is announced, that the 
friends stand. 

The invitation to rise should always be given in an 
appropriate way and not in a peremptory manner. The 
leader should not say, The congregation will rise, but, 
Let us rise and sing. There might be some who are in 
such physical condition that they would better remain 
sitting; hence the invitation, Let us rise and sing, is particularly 
intended for those who wish to rise. We think 
it would be a great mistake to say, Let us rise and sing, 
and then add— as some do— Let us remain standing while 
Brother A offers prayer. This might in many cases be 
imposing a real hardship. 

TOO MUCH SELF-CONCEIT 

But in the closing hymn, if the audience rise, then instead 
of having them sit down for the closing prayer, it 
would be well to remain standing, and the prayer should 



be merely in the form of a benediction, which should not 
be distressing in length to anybody. If there had been 
one prayer before, there would not be further necessity 
for more than could be offered in a few words. Most 
prayers are too long. 

One who is leading in prayer should not interfere with 
the liberties and rights of the entire congregation by the 
length of his petitions. We do not read that our Lord 
made very long prayers. It is true that He sometimes 
continued all night in prayer, alone; but He offered no 
lengthy prayers in public. The "Lord's Prayer" is quite 
brief and to the point. Those people who think they 
should tell the Lord all about how He should run the 
Universe, have too much self-concern, too much self-conceit. 
When we learn how poorly we are able to run 
ourselves, it should make us very slow to advise the 
Almighty as to how to manage His affairs. 

FORMAL PRAYER OFTEN MOCKERY 

A Boston newspaper, in referring to a prayer offered 
by a prominent minister, stated the next day that Rev. 

delivered the most eloquent prayer ever offered to 

a Boston audience! The Editor evidently knew that the 
prayer was not addressed to the Lord! We need to have 
much of the spirit of a sound mind. We presume the 
Lord sees that all our intentions are good. But He has 
not told us that we are to pray to be heard of men. We 
are to pray to the Lord. 

In private prayer we are told to "enter into thy 
closet," and we suppose that no one should pray in a 
tone that could be heard outside the door. Prayer, either 
in private or in public, is to be addressed to the Almighty, 
in reverent terms, and should express the desire of the 
heart appropriate to the occasion. We should know for 
what we are going to the Lord. It would be better that 
we should not go to the Throne of Grace unless we have 
something that we wish to say. 

At the close of any meeting we think it would be very 
unwise for the speaker to pray for ten or fifteen minutes, 
or even five minutes. Two or three minutes would be an 
abundance, we think. The Lord knows about all our 
needs, and we should have consideration for the 
congregation. 

It is something of a matter to sit for an hour, and 
then to prolong the service by a lengthy prayer is unwise. 
Lengthy prayers should be offered in private. Some 
Christians, however, need to be encouraged along the line 
of prayer— some are not disposed to pray as much as they 
should. Prayer is a most wonderful privilege, but one 
that should not be abused by endless repetition of the 
same thoughts. 



"We will watch while we pray, 



With our lamps trimmed and burning; 
We will work while we wait, 

Till the Master's returning; 
We will sing and rejoice, 

While each omen discerning." 



R5385 : page 23 

FAITHFULNESS IN OUR STEWARDSHIP 

"It is required in stewards that a 
man be found faithful."-l COR. 4:2. 

EVERY great business enterprise employs various 
classes of workers. This does not imply 
that the firm approves of all the moral qualities 
of their employees. They may employ 
some laboring men who are of good moral 
character and some who are of poor character; 
for they do not hold the working men 
responsible in that sense. But the most 
responsible positions are given to those of 
recognized good character. 

So God makes use of different agencies to do His 
service. These are sometimes animate, sometimes inanimate. 
(Isaiah 45:1-4; Jer. 10:13.) But those whom He 
recognizes as specially His servants are the Church of 
this Gospel Age— a special class of servants on special 
terms and agreements. These special servants are also 
called sons; that is to say, they are adopted, and promised 
that they will be fully inducted into the Divine family if 
they are faithful in God's service in the present time. 

These servants represent a stewardship— a term common 
in olden time. The servant did with his master's 
goods as though they were his own. At the same time, 
while given this privilege, he was required to give an account 
to his employer. The master did not give him 
these goods and say, Use them as you like, and I will call 
for them when I want them. On the contrary, his 
stewardship was to be a faithful one, and would be examined 
later with this end in view— to see if he had been 
faithful. A faithful steward would be on the lookout for 
everything that represented the master's interests— would 
be as careful of these as he would be of his own. He 
would use his every power for increasing the talent— 

R5386 : page 23 

represented by the money in his care. 

THE PARABLE OF THE TALENTS 

In the parable of the Talents the Lord represented a 
man as going into a far country and leaving the talents 



in the care of his stewards. They were entrusted with 
these goods in a very special way. Thus it is with us. 
Each of us is entrusted with certain talents. At the time 
of consecration we gave our all to God. Having given 
all that we have and are to the Lord, He accepts our 
offering and appoints us His stewards over these goods— 
these things that we had. This would include our all- 
time, influence, various talents— for business, music, or 
what not. All these are the Master's after we have made 
consecration. We belong to Christ. He is the Head, He 
is Lord. But He commits to us as His faithful servants 
all these talents, to use for Him. And He says, "Occupy 
till I come." 

This parable applies to all the Church all the way 
down this Age. Each servant is to be diligent in occupying 
the position of steward until he is released from it. 
The steward who would use his position merely to glorify 
himself would not be a faithful steward. The faithful 
steward would be the one who would desire to so use 
the talents as to increase the Master's wealth, the Master's 
glory. 

The Lord gave an illustration of the faithful and unfaithful 
stewards at His Second Coming— before He will 
deal at all with the subjects of the Kingdom— mankind 
in general. He showed how He will call these servants 
to whom He has given the talents; for He has promised 
them that He will make them rulers with Him in His 
Kingdom, if they are faithful in the use of their talents. 
In the parable, the one who received five talents doubled 
them, and made them ten. The one who had received two 
talents made them four. But the one who had received 
one talent gave the excuse that he had buried it in the 
earth, because afraid. And he was declared to be an unfaithful 
servant. 

This servant was not sent to eternal torment, but the 
talent was taken from him. It was of his own volition 
that he became a steward. Seeing that he had become a 
steward, he deserved to be punished because he did not 
use that which his lord had entrusted to him. That talent 
belonged to his lord. 

An unfaithful steward will be punished for his unfaithfulness. 
Better that we should not enter into the 
Lord's service at all than that we should enter and then 
hold back, neglect our opportunities. If the one who 
had the five talents had held back, his simply doing 
nothing would have made him responsible. In showing 
how he dealt with the one who had the one talent, the 
Lord is emphasizing the matter the more. These talents 
represent our opportunities for service according to our 
several abilities. The one who had less ability was given 
less opportunity than the one who had more ability. 

So with us. Some may have handicaps of various 
kinds. Some have more talents, or abilities; some have 
less. We cannot use talents we do not possess. It is 
required of a man that he be found faithful with what he 
has. This matter of using all the talents calls up the 



thought of full, complete loyalty of heart devotion. We 
should not say, I am doing better than somebody else, as 
the man with five talents might have thought had he used 
but three or four of them. But the one who is using 
his talents to the full capacity is specially pleasing to the 
Lord. Those who have two talents and use them faithfully 
receive the same commendation as the one who has 
five talents and uses the five. 

THE PARABLE OF THE UNJUST STEWARD 

The parable of the unjust steward (Luke 16:1-9), 
which impresses this same lesson, was primarily addressed 
to Jesus' disciples, in the presence of the Pharisees and 
those who sat in Moses' seat, who were the representatives 
of the Divine order of things in the Jewish Age. 
In this parable the Lord emphasizes the fact that a wise 
steward would be alert to his own future welfare. If a 
debtor could not pay one hundred per cent., but could pay 
fifty, it would be wise for the steward, in consideration of 
his own interests, to keep the future good will of the man, 
and let him pay half. This steward was commended by 
his lord for his shrewdness in taking this course, even 
though he had previously been unfaithful to him. 

The Scribes and Pharisees are scored in the parable. 
Our Lord's words intimated, You know that you are not 
yourselves able to pay the Divine requirements of the 
Law— you are not able to pay fifty cents on the dollar, 
and you ought to feel sympathetic with some of these poor 
Jews who cannot keep the Law. You should say to them, 
Cut it down somewhat— keep half the Law, if you cannot 
keep it all. Can you keep half? Yes? Well, go ahead 
and keep half. 

But, said the Lord, you despise all these— you do not 
want to "brush garments" with them as you pass them in 
the streets. You know that you cannot keep the Law 
yourselves. You are in the position of the steward of 
My parable. You should take the same course as that 
steward took with his master's debtors. He was about 
to be dispossessed. So you are near the end of your 
term. When you get out of office the people will not 
think much of you. You would better help your case out. 
You sit in Moses' seat. You should tell your brethren 
that while they are not keeping the Law in full, they are 
pretty nice people; and you should encourage them to do 
the best they can. You should help them along. 

R5386 : page 24 

After giving this parable respecting the Pharisees, 
Jesus turned to his disciples, saying, "I say unto you, 
Make to yourselves friends with the mammon of unrighteousness. 
That is to say, Applying this to yourselves 
now, consider that your earthly possessions are an earthly 
stewardship. Live in harmony with the people as far as 
justice will permit. Do not in any way exact the last 



thing possible from them. Be generous in all your affairs 
—not only in financial matters. Instead of condemning 
everybody and threatening them with eternal torment, 
tell them that God is very merciful. Tell them that God 
has provided a Redeemer for all mankind. Tell them to be 
of good courage and to do the best they can— that they 
may be sure that God through Christ will be very merciful, 
and that they will have better dealings at His hands 
when the time of their testing shall come. 

By teaching the people thus, we may get the ill-will of 
the scribe and Pharisee class; but we are getting the good 
will of the people and of those who are in harmony with 
God and righteousness. And although we may be excluded 
from the high functions of the nominal systems, 
many of the common people are hearing gladly and sympathetically, 
and are wishing to share their homes with 
us. And so we have homes all over the world, wherever 
God's people are; for they have the ear and eye to appreciate 
the Lord's arrangement. Furthermore the Lord 
Himself will ultimately receive us into everlasting habitations. 
We are wise stewards in this respect. We are 
living so as to use our time and strength to the best of 
our ability to do good and to instruct others to do good. 

TWO PARABLES COMPARED 

The parables of the Talents and of the Pounds are 
much alike, both representing a great householder, or 
lord, dealing with his servants. In the parable of the 
Pounds, a certain nobleman went into a far country to 
receive for himself a kingdom and to return. This parable 
is based upon the fact that when an under-king, like King 
Herod, would hear that a new Emperor had come to the 
throne of Rome, he would be anxious for a re-appointment 
to his own kingdom. Knowing that the Emperor 
had power to reinstate him, he would be desirous to know 
whether he would receive his kingdom again, or whether 
someone else would receive the place. So when such 
under-king went to Rome, it was with the view of returning 
with his kingdom, or a commission from the new 
Emperor. 

Our Lord in this picture represents Himself as a 
Nobleman who had been called to a Throne, and who was 
going to a far country, to Heaven itself, to receive the 
investiture of His Kingdom. In due time He was to be 
the great Messiah; and He must first be invested with the 
authority, and then return and establish His Kingdom. 

In the parable of the Talents, the lord, before leaving, 
called in his servants and committed unto them his goods, 
his property. He said, I will make these servants 
stewards. He gave one talent to one, two talents to another, 
and five to still another, according to their several 
ability. They were all remembered. When he returned 
he called his servants and reckoned with them. The one 
with two talents came and said, Lord, thou gavest me two 
talents. Here I make my report. I have gained two other 



talents. The one with the five talents said, Lord, thou 
gavest me five talents; lo, I have gained other five! I 
have doubled the amount and gotten ten! The Lord said 
to each, "Well done, thou good and faithful servant! 
Enter thou into the joys of thy Lord. Thou hast been 
faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over 
many things." 

Then came the servant with only one talent. Although 
he returned it, he had failed to use it. He said, I have 
not lost a penny; here is thine own. His Lord said unto 
him, Thou art a slothful and wicked servant! The 
servant was punished because he was unfaithful. 

OPPORTUNITY MEASURES RESPONSIBILITY 

The Lord gave this parable as an illustration of our 
experiences now. These talents consist of opportunities. 
To illustrate: We recently had the talent, or opportunity, 
of speaking the Truth to 5,000 people. Therefore we had 
a responsibility. But if we do not have such an opportunity, 

R5387 : page 24 

we do not have the responsibility of it. This is 
what the Lord meant, we understand. One may have 
more opportunities granted him than another. One person 
might be a good writer; another a good speaker; another 
a good exhorter; and another may be good at all 
three of these things. The one good at all three would 
have thereby three times as much responsibility as the 
one with only the one ability. 

The talent in Bible times represented a certain amount 
of money. According to the most recent figures available 
(Am. Bib. Soc'y, 1895), the talent mentioned in the 
Scriptures was either gold or silver. The value in U.S. 
money of the gold talent is $32,689, while the silver talent 
was but $1,563.37. Our Lord, however, used the talent, 
not to represent gold or silver, but as well representing 
the opportunities His people have to do God's will and to 
serve the brethren; for He says that whoever does good 
to one of the least of His will receive a blessing. 

The lesson taught in the parable of the Pounds seems 
somewhat different. In this the lord gave each of his 
servants one pound, to do what he could with what was 
given him. One gained five pounds, and one gained ten. 
The third gained nothing. The Pound (Mina, or Maneh), 
is equivalent, if gold, to $6,537.80; if silver, $312.67-1/2. 

SIGNIFICANCE OF ONE POUND TO EACH 

In the application of the parable, to our understanding, 
the Pound represents the blessing of justification 
given to each of God's children. When did He give us 
the Pound? When He accepted us as His servants. 
When did He accept us as servants? We were not 
servants when we first turned from sin. To turn from 



sin is not to become a servant. The first step toward 
God is to turn away from sin toward righteousness, and to 
attempt to draw nigh unto God; for God says, "Draw nigh 
unto Me and I will draw nigh unto you." 

This one is walking in the way to justification, but has 
not gotten it. He is getting nearer and nearer to the 
right place in his ideas, etc. Finally he comes to the 
place where he says, Lord, if Thou wilt accept me, I will 
give Thee all I have. He offers himself to be God's 
servant. 

One is not yet a servant of the Lord when he turns 
from sin. We never had a right to do wrong; and in 
getting away from sin and wrong, we were not serving 
God. God has no servants in this Age except those begotten 
of the Holy Spirit. Others may in some sense be 
used as servants; for God can use even the wrath of 
man to serve Him. In a certain sense the Devil may be 
His servant; for sometimes he does what the Lord wishes 
to be done. We think the Devil was serving God when 
he got the Jews stirred up to crucify Jesus. Demons 
often serve the Lord in bringing tribulation upon His 
people, for these tribulations are like the turning of the 
grindstone, that polishes the jewel. God wishes to use 
some means at the present time to polish His jewel class. 

But the servants referred to in the parables are the 

R5387 : page 25 

Lord's consecrated people; for it is only those who have 
reached the point of full consecration to God that He 
calls His servants. Those who gave up the service of sin 
and unrighteousness, became their own servants, the 
servants of self, until they gave up their lives to the Lord. 
They then said, I have no will but Thine. I will serve 
Thee faithfully, even unto death. As the Lord accepts 
these as His servants, He gives each one a pound. 
What is this pound? It is justification to life— a 
valuable thing. Now, being justified by faith, and being 
thus accepted as a servant of God, and begotten of the 
Holy Spirit, each one has the opportunity to do what he 
is able as a servant of the Lord. He uses whatever 
talents the Lord gives him. He must do his best with all 
that is entrusted to his care, as a faithful steward of the 
King of kings, and Lord of lords. 



R5387 : page 25 

REST FOR THE PEOPLE OF GOD 

"My Presence shall go with thee, and 
I will give thee rest."-EXOD. 33:14. 

WE ARE NOT to think of our Heavenly Father 
as literally walking through the wilderness 



with the children of Israel, as leaving the 

affairs of the Universe and going with them 

in their journey. Nor are we to get the 

thought that God is everywhere at the same 

time. This unscriptural thought has been 

the foundation for much error. Christian 

Scientists say that God is everywhere— in 

every piece of wood, of china— in everything. 

When we ask what they mean, they say that since 

the word God simply stands for good, and since there is 

good in everything, therefore God must be in everything; 

for God means good and must be everywhere, even in 

every atom of matter. So on this erroneous doctrine of 

God's omnipresence they build their theory. But theirs is 

not the Scriptural thought. 

The Scriptural thought is that God specially manifests 
His Power and Love to His people. God is in Heaven; 
the earth is His footstool. But by His various powers 
and agents, and by His intelligence and knowledge, He 
can be as if present everywhere— through His angels, His 
messengers. Just as we by the telegraph and the telephone 
can have communication with the uttermost parts 
of the earth, so God can exercise His Power in every part 
of the Universe. 

The words of our text, we remember, were the Lord's 
answer to Moses when that great statesman was in perplexity. 
He had been commanded to go forward as the 
leader of Israel, and through Divine favor to bring them 
into the land of Canaan, there to give them rest. 

From the beginning of the wilderness journey, there 
was more or less of disinclination or fear on the part of 
the people. They realized that they were breaking up 
their homes and going forth into a strange land. Even 
though they had been oppressed by the Egyptians, they 
reasoned that if they went out into the wilderness with 
no Egyptian taskmasters, this would mean that they would 
have no food. Thus they were stiff-necked— like an ox- 
difficult to turn about. 

The Lord's promise to Moses was, "My Presence 
shall go with thee, and I will give thee rest." And He 
promised to be with the Israelites. He gave them assurance 
that they might recognize His power in their midst; 
for God's energy in all the affairs of earth, as of the 
Universe, is not merely a power to know the things that 
are happening, but to control all events that they may 
outwork His designs. He guides and assists the efforts 
of His people. Additionally, the angels of the Lord quite 
probably were employed in this special work of superintending 
the affairs of the Israelites. 

This thought is in harmony with the Scripture which 
intimates that there is a guardian angel for each one of 
the Lord's saints, who has supervision over him. We 
read, "In Heaven their angels do always behold the face 
of My Father which is in Heaven." (Matt. 18:10.) They 
have immediate communication with the Father; and thus 
He has direct oversight of all who belong to Him. 



The Divine Power was manifested directly with the 
Israelites in the Shekinah glory over the Mercy Seat in 
the Most Holy, which indicated the Lord's presence with 
them. And when they were to journey onward, the pillar 
of cloud went before them by day, and the pillar of fire 
by night. When they were to stop, this cloud would stand 
still. While they were encamped, the cloud would rest 
over the Tabernacle, and the Shekinah glory rested between 
the cherubim on the Mercy-Seat in the Tabernacle. 
Thus the presence of God went with them to the Land 
of Canaan, and gave them all things which He had promised 
-Joshua 23:14. 

MOSES' NEED OF ENCOURAGEMENT 

From our context we perceive that Moses' meekness 
was again manifesting itself. He had previously asked 
for some one to be mouthpiece for him, and the Lord 
had said that Aaron might be his mouthpiece. Rash 
people often get into trouble, because there is a lack of 
meekness, modesty. But it was not so with Moses— "the 
meekest man in all the earth." Humility is a most important 
element of character. The meek man will find it 
easier to be gentle and patient than will the man who lacks 
meekness. And so in enumerating the fruits of the Holy 
Spirit St. Paul mentions meekness.— Gal. 5:23. 

When the Lord promised that His presence should go 
with Moses, He was speaking to him as the Mediator. 
Therefore He said, "My Presence shall go with thee." 
As soon as Moses had inaugurated the Law Covenant at 
Sinai, Israel was in covenant relationship with God, and 
the Lord with Israel. 

ISRAEL'S FAILURE TO ENTER REST 

One might get the thought that God's promise to give 
rest would signify that Moses should have a rest of mind, 
and that all who would come into line with Moses and 
with God's promises would also have a rest of mind. But 
this mental rest is not what is here meant. The Israelites 
were going from the land of Egypt into the Land of 
Promise, which was to be an everlasting inheritance to 
them, if they would keep their Covenant. But of all the 
adults who came out of Egypt, only Caleb and Joshua entered 
into Canaan. (Num. 32:11,12.) The majority failed 
to enter in because of their lack of faith. The forty 
years' wandering in the desert was because of their fearfulness 
and consequent rebellion. 

When on the wilderness journey Israel came finally to 
the place where they could see the land of Canaan, spies 
were sent to make investigation and to report as to which 
would be the best way to enter the promised land. All 
of the spies save Caleb and Joshua, gave an unfavorable 
report. Then through timidity the people said, "We cannot 
go up and take that land. Those people are giants, 
and we look like grasshoppers beside them." So in their 



lack of faith they murmured against going up. Therefore 
God sware in His wrath, "This people shall not enter into 
My rest."— Hebrews 3:11. 

R5388 : page 26 

TYPICAL AND ANTITYPICAL REST 

The Apostle Paul shows that the rest in Canaan was a 
type of the rest of the people of God, in this Gospel Age. 
(Heb. 4:3,9.) By faith we rest in God— we rest in His 
promises. We are not moved away by any of the adverse 
conditions of the present time. Our rest is the reality; 
the rest of Israel was the type. 

The antitypical rest, into which the Lord's people 
enter, has two phases. We who believe enter into rest 
now. We have the peace of God ruling in our hearts 
and guiding our lives. We have the peace of faith, the 
rest of faith, the confidence that God will direct our 
course. Therefore we are contented, even though not yet 
satisfied. We shall not be satisfied until we enter into 
our complete rest. Our true rest will be that glorious, 
perfect condition beyond the veil, which we shall attain 
through the First Resurrection. 

St. Paul, in discussing this question in the 3d and 4th 
chapters of Hebrews, declares that the people of Israel 
failed to enter into rest, not because God did not perform 
His part, but because they failed to exercise the proper 
faith in the Lord; they had "an evil heart of unbelief." 
And he proceeds to say, "Let us therefore fear, lest a 
promise being left us of entering into His rest, any of you 
should seem to come short of it." (Heb. 4:1.) There 
are requirements; there are conditions. The Apostle 
means that whoever would be of this overcoming class 
must take heed, or he will fail to enter into the eternal 
rest of God. There will be such a class of overcomers; 
and God has predestined and foreordained that they shall 
enter into this glorious and perfect rest. If we are faithful 
unto death, we shall attain this glorious rest by the 
resurrection "change." 

JOSHUA A TYPE OF CHRIST 

The world is not now able to enter into rest. They 
are like the raging sea. They have not come into relationship 
with God. As the Scriptures tell us, mankind is 
a poor, groaning creation, travailing together in pain. 
They do not see the rest which God has provided. We 
see, however, that when the antitypical Moses, the great 
Mediator, shall have been completed, He will lead the 
people into rest— Deut. 18:15; Acts 3:22. 

Moses did not lead the people into the Land of Promise; 
it was Joshua— their new leader— who led them over 
Jordan. Thus the type shows that mankind will enter 
into the promised land, not by the Law, but by a Savior. 
The name Joshua means savior— Greek Jesous. (Heb. 4:8, 



margin.) So Jesus will lead all of mankind who will, 
into the true Land of Promise— into love and loyalty to 
God and to the principles of righteousness. It will take 
the entire thousand years of the Messianic Kingdom to 
bring the world into condition for all the blessings which 
God has in store for them. 

Our Lord Jesus entered into rest by trusting the 
Heavenly Father to fulfil all His gracious promises. 
Jesus, the Head of the antitypical Moses, thus enjoyed 
perfect rest of heart, and realized the Heavenly Father's 
continual presence with Him. This continued for three 
and a half years; and then He entered into the rest complete, 
by the First Resurrection. 

The same is true of all the members of the Body of 
the antitypical Moses— The Christ. God's presence goes 
with them. The world at present is not in a condition to 
enter into the Father's rest. Only the members of the 
Body of Christ have entered into this rest of faith, trusting 
in the Lord. And none except those who continue 
faithful will be recognized as members of the great antitypical 
Mediator. All who lack faith lack proof that they 
are in the Body of Christ. If, then, our hearts are disturbed 
and we cannot enter into this rest of faith, the 
proper course is to seek the Throne of Grace, that we 
may overcome the difficulty. 

THE REST PROVIDED FOR MANKIND 

As for those Israelites who the Lord said should not 
enter into His rest, we understand Him to mean, not that 
no Jew will enter into the true rest of God, but rather, 
that this was a prophecy of the end of the Jewish Age- 
that they as a nation would not be ready to enter into 
this rest of faith which was then offered them— that as a 
nation they would fail. They did fail; for "they knew 
not the day of their visitation." 

As soon as the great Messiah shall establish the New 
Covenant, both Jews and Gentiles will enter into peace 
and prosperity, as rapidly as they enter into that New 
Covenant. But the disobedient, after a full, fair trial, 
will go into the Second Death. Throughout the Millennial 
Age mankind will be entering into the actual rest, 
which will mean deliverance from the bondage of Sin 
and Death. Before Messiah's Reign shall have ended, 
they will have fully entered into that rest and into perfection 
of life, and will be counted in as a part of the 
seed of Abraham, according to the promise, "I have constituted 
thee a father of many nations." (Gen. 17:5; 
Rom. 4:17.) The blessing of the Lord will be upon them 
all. Any refusing to enter into the rest of God will be 
cut off— the wilful sinner shall die at one hundred years 
of age.— Isa. 65:20. 



R5389 : page 26 



"WOE UNTO YOU, PHARISEES!" 

--FEBRUARY 15. -LUKE 11:37-54.- 

"Be not deceived; God is 

not mocked. "-GALATIANS 6:7. 

AMONGST the various sects of the Jews of 

our Lord's day we have every reason to 

believe that the Pharisees constituted the 

best— the one most loyal to God and His 

Law. The Sadducees professed no faith 

in a future life. They were infidels and 

politicians. The Essenes were a small sect 

not mentioned in the Bible, a kind of Higher 

Critics, of little faith and confused by 

mixing paganism with Judaism. The Pharisees 

were what might be termed the orthodox body of 

Jews. Their name signifies "holy people." In today's 

Study, Jesus, not deigning to mention the other sects, 

which had entirely departed from God, addresses Himself 

especially to the Pharisees, pointing out wherein, 

with all their boasted holiness, they came far short of 

what would be acceptable to God. 

A Pharisee invited Jesus to dine with him at his 
house. The invitation was promptly accepted, and Jesus 
passed in and sat down at the table with the others, without 
going through the formalism of washings, customary 
to the Pharisees. We are not from this to suppose that 
Jesus was careless. Rather, we are to recognize that 
the washing of hands by the Pharisees was a ceremony 
which Jesus especially wished to ignore, in order that He 
might have the opportunity of criticising that spirit which 
the ceremony well illustrated. 

The host thought of Jesus as a holy man, not a publican 
or a sinner, and remarked that it was strange that 
He had not performed the usual ceremony of washing. 

R5389 : page 27 

This remark gave opportunity for a discourse on the 
subject. Jesus pointed out that a great deal of the religion 
which even the holiest of the Jews practised was 
merely ceremony, formalism, and not true religion. Outwardly 
they were clean, but inwardly their hearts were 
unclean— given to extortion— spiritual wickedness. The 
Lord sought to show that in God's sight the heart is the 
important matter and that the outward cleansing is quite 
secondary. The inside of the cup should first be attended 
to, and afterward the outside. 

As a matter of fact, those who do come into heart 
harmony with the Lord, and who are cleansed by obedience 
to His Message and its spirit, are thereby made 
clean every whit— outwardly, as well as inwardly. It is 
safe to say that every one who is pure in heart will, according 



to his circumstances and opportunities, seek to 
be clean in person, in speech, in every way. The principle 
working in his heart will exercise an influence upon 
all his words and thoughts and doings— all his days and 
all his hours. 

From the expressions of our Lord here and elsewhere 
it would appear that one of the great failings of the 
Pharisees was covetousness. According to the Greek, 
Jesus called them "money-lovers." On one occasion He 
told them that this covetousness, greed, love of money, 
led them to disregard dishonestly the rights of others. 
He said: Ye devour widows' houses, meaning that they 
would take advantage of widows to accumulate property 
for themselves. As a matter of fact, it would appear 
that many of the Pharisees were quite rich. 

Jesus pointed out that with such wrong conditions of 
heart God could not be well pleased with them, even 
though they ever so carefully observed the outward regulations 
of the Jewish Law. He called attention to the 
fact that in their outward observance of the tithing (giving 
one-tenth of their income every year) they were 
particular even to those small seeds of which they grew 
but a trifling quantity. In everything they were careful 
to give one-tenth, but they neglected the weightier matters 
of the Law— to do justice in their dealings and to 
have mercy toward others. The Master did not object 
to their giving one-tenth of everything, but declared 
that these things they should do and not to leave the 
more important things undone. 

Another time He reproved them, saying, Ye strain 
a gnat and swallow a camel— a strong hyperbole, a figure 
of speech, showing how inconsistent were their reasonings 
and doings. The straining out of a gnat represented 
their carefulness to avoid things strangled. The swallowing 
of a camel meant that, on the contrary, while careful 
about the little things, they would be thoroughly disregardful 
of God's Law on the weightier matters. Jesus 
declared that they should be benevolent rather than covetous 
and self-seeking, and that if this were their disposition 
of heart the outward cleanliness would be less 
important. 

He declared that they chose the chief seats in the 
synagogue and salutations in the market-places. Their 
covetousness took the form of pride, as well as dishonesty. 
They wanted to be very prominent in things religious, 
to be very popular and to be hailed as "Rabbi" 
—master, learned one. Jesus declared that they were 
like sepulchres, outwardly clean and whitewashed, but 
inwardly full of death, corruption, uncleanness, unholiness. 
They were holiness people merely in the outward 
form or ceremonial. 

It is not for us to judge all or any of the sects of 
Christendom and to apply the Master's words to them. 
Unlike Jesus, we have not the power to read men's 
hearts, nor the authority to pronounce them hypocrites. 
The Lord's message to us is, "Judge [condemn] nothing 



before the time." At His Second Coming, He declares, 
everything will be revealed. The true status of each 
will be shown. He declares that at that time many will 
be saying, Lord, have we not done many mighty works 
in Thy name? but that He will, nevertheless, declare to 
them: I do not recognize you. Ye have been workers of 
iniquity— workers of unrighteousness— in My name. 

Without judging personally, we may all fear that much 
of the Christianity of our time is well described by the 
Apostle Paul. Speaking of our day he says, "Having a 
form of godliness, but denying its power"— outwardly 
Christians, but inwardly skeptics— covetous, extortionate, 
unjust. Men are not able to judge rightly of such 
matters today. Some who are loyal and zealous for the 
Lord are branded as hypocrites and deceivers; while others, 
disloyal, merely whited sepulchres, may be lauded to 
the skies as denominational idols or generous benefactors 
of earthly systems. 

Some of the Pharisees, especially educated, talented 
and well-versed in the teachings of the Law and the 
Prophets, were styled lawyers— Doctors of the Law, the 
equivalent of what today are termed Doctors of Divinity. 
Turning to these, Jesus upbraided them, saying that 
they placed upon the common people grievous burdens 
which they themselves would not bear. He meant that 
they gave such hard interpretations of God's Law as 
were discouraging to the common people— setting before 
the publicans and sinners standards of excellence and 
perfection which they themselves would not think of 
even trying to live up to. Apparently the thought was 

R5390 : page 27 

thereby to impress the common people with the sanctity 
of the clergy, that they might be the more reverential 
toward them. They builded sepulchres for the Prophets 
of old, forgetful that their fathers, whose same spirit 
they had, were the very ones who had killed those 
Prophets— had persecuted them to death. 

WOE! WOE! WOE! WOE! WOE! 

While Jesus prophesied woes against the Pharisees, 
we are not to think of Him as condemning them to eternal 
torment, nor as intimating that this would be the 
nature of the woe that would come upon them. The 
woe to the Pharisees was that they were about to miss 
the great blessing which God had promised to the Jewish 
nation; namely, that of chief association in Messiah's 
Kingdom. (Genesis 12:3.) The Promise belonged to 
Israel primarily. Because of their unpreparedness for it, 
this was taken from them to be given to another Israel. 
Had enough of them been "Israelites indeed" to complete 
God's foreordained Elect, the Bride of Christ, the 
Kingdom offer would not have gone to the Gentiles. 

The Pharisees, of all the Jews, were in the most favored 



place for attaining to joint-heirship with Messiah; 
but they recognized not what they were losing, as Jesus 
recognized it. His expression, "Woe unto you," is therefore 
to be regarded sympathetically, pityingly. This 
thought is borne out in the context, which proceeds to 
declare the great time of trouble which came upon their 
nation at the time of Jesus' crucifixion, and reached its 
completion in A.D. 70 in the total destruction of their 
city and polity. 

As the Lord here declares, that awful trouble was a 
settlement of Jehovah's account with the Jewish nation 
for all the righteous blood which had been shed and for 
which no expiation had been made. Little did those 
Pharisees know that their hypocrisy was not only hindering 

R5390 : page 28 

themselves from preparation to be joint-heirs with 
Messiah in His Kingdom, but was also hindering the 
masses of the people, who relied upon them for information. 
Jesus refers to this in the succeeding verse (52), 
saying, Ye have taken away the key of knowledge. Ye 
neither enter into the Kingdom yourselves, nor do you 
permit others to enter who would be glad to do so, but 
who are misled by relying upon your judgment. 

Bible students very generally believe that the great 
time of trouble which closed the Jewish Age was an advanced 
picture, or prophecy, of the still wider spread of 
the Time of Trouble which will close this Gospel Age 
and bring woe to many of the Pharisees of our day, as 
well as tribulation upon all evil-doers in connection with 
the overthrow of present institutions, as a prelude to the 
establishment of Justice— the Messianic Reign of Glory. 



R5390 : page 28 

GOOD CONFESSION VERSUS BAD CONFESSION 

-FEBRUARY 22. -LUKE 12:1-12.- 

"Whosoever shall confess me before men, him shall the Son 
of man also confess before the angels of God."— V.8. 

A LARGE crowd surrounded the Savior, anxious 

to hear Him who "spake as never man 

spake." Ignoring the multitude, Jesus 

addressed His disciples, saying: "Beware 

ye of the leaven of the Pharisees, 

which is hypocrisy." Here, as elsewhere in 

His teachings, Jesus uses leaven as a symbol, 

or figure, of an evil influence. We 

know not of one instance in which leaven 

is used to represent anything good or pure. 

During the Passover season Jews were prohibited from 



using it, thus symbolizing the putting away of sin. 

Jesus declared that the hypocrisies practised by the 
Pharisees— the learned people of that time— were leaven, 
impurity, sin, contaminating in their influence. His disciples 
should be honest, sincere, pure, free from cant and 
deception. Their words and works should be such as would 
not need to be covered. Jesus declared that ultimately all 
hypocrisies and sins will be uncovered, revealed. Undoubtedly 
He meant that during His Kingdom, when the 
power of the resurrection will be exercised, all the hidden 
things of darkness will be abolished, the secrets of 
mankind will be exposed. No doubt this will constitute 
the basis of the shame and contempt which will be the 
punishment of many, as foretold. 

Thus we read that in the resurrection some will come 
forth to shine as the stars of heaven, and others to shame 
and everlasting contempt. (Daniel 12:2.) However, it 
is comforting to know that the Hebrew text signifies lasting 
and not everlasting. The shame and contempt will 
last as long as the shameful and contemptible conditions 
last— until the reformation of the individual or, that failing, 
until his destruction in the Second Death. 

FEAR NOT PERSECUTIONS 

Jesus intimated that honesty of life would bring His 
followers persecution from the hypocrites; but that they 
should not fear, even though the persecution resulted in 
their death. The present life is but ephemeral, at best. 
The life that is worth considering is the everlasting one 
which God has provided for all the willing and obedient, 
and which may eventually be attained through the merit 
of Jesus' sacrifice. Those who thus believe should have 
no fear of what man can do to them, but rather should 
be fearful of anything that would separate them from 
God and His gracious provisions of a future life. 

"Fear Him who after He hath killed hath power to 
cast into Hell." The word Hell here is Gehenna in the 
Greek. Primarily, this is the name of the valley outside of 
Jerusalem, into which the offal of the city was cast for 
utter destruction, and into which the vilest criminals 
were cast after execution— not to torment them, but to 
imply symbolically that there was no future for the 
wicked. Jesus used Gehenna as a type of the Second 
Death, which will be the portion of all who wilfully, intelligently, 
deliberately, sin against light and knowledge. 

The fear of God is the beginning of wisdom, and a 
reverential fear is always proper. But as God's people 
become intimately acquainted with Him, learning of His 
Justice, Wisdom, Love and Power, and realize that He 
is the Friend of all who love righteousness, they come to 
love God; and, as the Apostle declares, "Perfect love 
casteth out fear [dread to offend]," which signifies rest. 
The Lord's disciples were to realize their Heavenly 
Father's care for them and His Wisdom— that as He forgets 
not the sparrows, so He will not forget them; and 



that not even a hair of their heads could be injured without 
his knowledge and permission; that everything that 
He permits to come to His people, to His children, He 
assures them, will work out for them some blessing. 

CONFESS ME BEFORE MEN 

Whoever would be in accord with God must confess 
Him and must confess Jesus, His Representative, whom 
He sent into the world. Whoever confesses Jesus, confesses 
the Father who sent Him. And all such will be 
in the Lord's favor, and ultimately be acknowledged in 
the resurrection by the Father and the holy angels, as 
members of the Bride of Christ. But those who, after 
becoming disciples of Christ, deny Him, He will not acknowledge 
as disciples in glory. 

Jesus' words were addressed to the disciples, not to 
the masses. Whoever would confess Christ would become 
His disciple. None could deny Him who had never 
acknowledged Him. He is to be confessed, not merely 
by baptism, nor by any outward form. He is to be confessed 
in the life, in the conduct, in the words, of His 
followers. They are to have His Spirit and to "show 
forth the praises of Him who hath called them out of 
darkness into His marvelous light." Whoever makes a 
profession of being a disciple, and then ignores the Master's 
teachings, misrepresents Him, slanders Him, denies 
Him, and will not share in the glorious presentation of 
the Bride, in the end of this Age. 

The masses, of course, were in doubt, and did not become 
disciples at all. Some even derided Jesus, saying 
that He had a devil and was mad. The Master declared 
that such misunderstanding of Him and such slanders 
were quite forgivable, if done ignorantly. But when some 
went beyond this, and declared that His good works of 
the Holy Spirit were accomplished through the power of 
Satan, Beelzebub, they were committing inexcusable sins 
which would not be passed over. 

Such sin must be wilful; for their accusations had no 
basis whatever. The Master's teachings were purity itself. 
His conduct, His sayings and His miracles were all 
good works. Only a wilful perversity could attribute 
these to Satan. The fact that they would never be forgiven 
does not signify, however, that the vilifiers were 
hopelessly lost. They would suffer punishment proportionate 
to the degree of their wilfulness. If the punishment 
would bring reformation, well and good; but if not, 
it would eventuate in utter destruction— the Second 
Death. 

R5391 : page 29 

Few subjects are less understood than this one— the 
sin against the Holy Spirit. The word spirit in such a 
case as this stands for power, or influence. For instance, 
the spirit of Satan would be the power, or influence, adverse 



to God and to righteousness. The spirit of error 

would be the power, or influence, of falsehood. Contrariwise, 

the spirit of Truth, the Spirit of God, the Holy 

Spirit, represents Divine influence and power, wherever 

recognized. The responsibility of each individual is proportionate 

to his enlightenment. The mentally and morally 

blind have comparatively little responsibility, because 

they do not appreciate clearly the distinction between 

the spirit of Truth and the spirit of error, the 

Spirit of God and the spirit of Satan. 

Man was not created in this condition of inability to 
discern right and wrong, good and evil. He was created 
perfect, in the image and likeness of God. Sin has 
wrought death, not merely to man's body, but also to his 
mind, his conscience. The ability to discern between 
right and wrong varies, therefore. Additionally, some 
have opportunities for instruction more than others, and 
thus their responsibility is increased. The world in general 
knows not God, and hence could not sin against the 
Holy Spirit in that full sense or degree which would be 
punished with the Second Death. "The god of this world 
hath blinded the minds of them that believe not."— 
2 Corinthians 4:4. 

Some knowledge is necessary to bring us to an appreciation 
of Christ as the Sent of God. Then if we 

accept Him and become His consecrated disciples, or followers, 
we receive the begetting of the Holy Spirit. This 
brings us to a vantage point where our eyes of understanding 
open more and more widely, in proportion as 
we are filled with the Holy Spirit. Our responsibility increases 
with our joy in the Lord and our preparation for 
the Heavenly glories to which we have been called. It 
is these advanced disciples of Jesus that are in danger 
of grieving the Holy Spirit whereby they were sealed— 
of quenching the Spirit of holiness in their hearts. (Ephesians 4:30; 
1 Thessalonians 5:19.) While the quenching 
and the grieving are not instantaneous works, they 
are the paths which lead to the Second Death. Every 
Christian, therefore, should press on toward perfection 
of holiness— the filling with the Spirit. 

The Apostle presents this thought in Hebrews 6:4-6, 
declaring that those who have tasted of the good Word 
of God and the powers of the Age to come, and who 
have been made partakers of the Holy Spirit, cannot be 
renewed unto repentance, if they with full wilfulness and 
deliberation reject Christ and righteousness, and turn to 
sin. Again, later on, he says (Hebrews 10:26,27), "For 
if we sin wilfully after that we have received a knowledge 
of the Truth, there remaineth no more a sacrifice 
for our sins, but a certain fearful looking for a decision 
and a fiery indignation which shall devour the adversaries" 
—of God. The Apostle mentions especially the rejection 
of the atoning work of Christ, saying that such 
count the blood of the covenant wherewith they were 
sanctified a common thing, and do despite to the Spirit of 
favor which has brought them thus far. 



Those who quench the Spirit of holiness, or "grieve 
the Spirit," are described by St. James (5:14) as spiritually 
sick. Cut off from fellowship with God, they have 
one last resort; viz., to request the assistance of sanctified 
elders of the Church to pray for them and to anoint them 
with oil, symbolic of the Holy Spirit. The prayer of 
faith shall save these spiritually sick; and the Lord will 
raise them up; and though they have committed sins, 
these shall be forgiven them. 

"THE HOLY SPIRIT SHALL TEACH" 

The Lord's faithful followers were to expect that 
amongst their tribulations would be false accusations 
which would bring them before magistrates. For the 
most part the disciples were unlearned, and would feel 
great trepidation in the presence of educated officials. 
They were to know, however, that the Lord's blessing 
would be upon them; and that they would have wisdom 
superior to that which was naturally theirs. They need 
not anxiously premeditate what their answers would be, 
but commit all to the Lord, expecting Divine assistance. 

Nothing in this implies that the ministers of Christ 
either in the pulpit or in the class meeting should attempt 
to represent the Lord without studying their subject. On 
the contrary, each should accept to himself St. Paul's 
words to Timothy: "Study to show thyself approved 
unto God, a workman that needeth not to be ashamed, 
rightly dividing the Word of Truth." (2 Timothy 2:15.) 
There is a difference between standing before a congregation 
of God's people as a mouthpiece of His Word and 
being called before magistrates. 



R5388 : page 29 

ST. PAUL'S EXHORTATION TO ELDERS 

"Take heed to yourselves, ...for grievous wolves shall enter 
in among you, not sparing the flock. Also of your own selves 
shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw 
away disciples after them."-ACTS 20:29,30. 

THESE words were addressed to the Elders of 

the Church at Ephesus. St. Paul, going 

toward Jerusalem, had found himself not 

far from Ephesus, and had sent word to the 

Elders that he would remain there a little 

while, and would be glad to meet them 

once more. They came and held a lengthy 

conference with him. This text is part of 

his message to them. He told them that he 

would not see them again, and exhorted 

them to take heed to themselves. It behooves every one 

to take heed to himself more than to others. And unless 



a man learns to rule his own spirit, he could not be in a 
proper condition to rule others. 

This is particularly true of all Elders. They should 
watch themselves. Because of the honor which the 
Church gives them, they are in danger of being carried 
away by a feeling of self-importance— self-conceit. They 
are in danger of becoming arrogant. But the message is 
to take heed to themselves, and to the flock of God, over 
whom they are made overseers. They are to recognize 
their position as representatives, not only of the Congregation, 
but also of the Lord. This position being 
given them in the appointed way— an election by the 
stretching forth of the hand— they are not only to take 
this as the word of the Church, but also to realize that 
they are chosen of the Holy Spirit. They are to recognize 
this care of the Church as their great mission, an 
important service to be rendered in the name of the Lord. 

WOLVES AND APOSTATE SHEEP 

There are two particular reasons why Elders need 
to be on guard. The first reason, as given by the Apostle, 
was that grievous wolves would enter in among them, who 
would not spare the flock. The intimation seems to be 
that the wolves are not part of the flock at any 
time. They would not represent themselves as wolves, 
however. The Apostle's warning would seem to 
imply that a certain class of people of a wolfish nature 

R5388 : page 30 

would seek to associate themselves with the Church. Our 
Lord warned, "Beware of false prophets, who come to 
you in sheep's clothing, but inwardly they are ravening 
wolves." (Matt. 7:15.) This seems to imply the thought 
of deception— walking like sheep, going about amongst 
the sheep and representing themselves to be sheep, wearing 
sheep's clothing, but never being real sheep. Their 
object in coming into the flock is selfish, their influence 
is that of a wolf amongst sheep. A wolf worries the 
sheep— his intention is to kill them, to suck their blood. 

So there seems to be a class who, for no reason that 
we can imagine, pervert the truth, injuring the flock, 
stirring up arguments that confuse the flock, destroying 
them as New Creatures, and dragging them down to 
death. Presumably there has been such a class all the way 
down through the Age. While our text does not imply 
that sheep could ever become wolves, perhaps some of 
us have known persons who at one time were sheep, but 
who after a while manifested a wolfish disposition, and 
took pleasure in doing all that they could to injure the 
flock. The Lord and the Apostle warn us that we should 
beware of those who come in amongst the sheep, palming 
themselves off as sheep. 

In addition to this danger from wolves, there will be 
dangers among themselves. The Apostle points this out 



as a very subtle danger. In addition to those of the 
wolfish nature, some in a class will engage in service 
as teachers, and by speaking perverse things will seek 
to draw away disciples unto themselves. They seek 

R5389 : page 30 

to draw them away as their own. Their sentiment 

seems to be, This is my class, my flock— not recognizing 

that the Church is the Lord's Flock, that they are the 

Lord's sheep. In this there is a selfish attitude quite 

contrary to the Spirit of the Lord and to the Scriptures. 

"He that exalteth himself shall be abased, and he that 

humbleth himself shall be exalted" is a principle of the 

Divine Government. If any one would be a true Elder, 

a real servant of the Lord, he is to remember these 

things, and to avoid everything that would be of a self-seeking 

spirit. Otherwise, he may be sure that he will 

do injury, not only to himself, but to others also, by 

such a course. 

RESPONSIBILITY PROPORTIONATE TO ABILITY 

Sheep are very timid animals and need some kind of 
leading. In the absence of a shepherd, they need some 
one of their own number to be, as it were, leader for 
them. In flocks of sheep there are wise sheep— rams of 
the flock, leaders— that the sheep learn to follow, in the 
absence of the shepherd. These old rams of the flock 
would represent Elders in the Church of Christ. The 
ram's horns constitute a means of defense, with which 
he could drive off adversaries in a time of attack, and 
the sheep would be able to get behind him. 

But the Scriptures speak of danger as respects some 
of the rams of the flock— certain leaders of the Lord's 
people. (Ezek. 34:17-23.) These rams got into the 
stream and made it muddy, defiling the water. He-goats 
are also mentioned; this is an illustration of the disposition 
of some Elders of the Church of Christ, and should 
not be lost upon us. We are told that owners of sheep 
sometimes use a goat as a leader of the flock, because a 
goat is more combative than a sheep, and thus supply the 
sheep courage, etc. We do not know how many of the 
Lord's Flock are being led by a goat. But whenever any 
one manifests the goat disposition, the Ecclesia should 
strictly avoid making him a leader. 

The proper leaders are those who show the proper 
disposition. The Church is very much at the mercy of 
the leaders; hence the latter have the greater responsibility. 
So the Apostle says, Be not many of you teachers, 
my brethren, knowing that a man who is a teacher has 
the severer trial, the severer test. (Paraphrase of James 3:1, 
R.V.) He has the greater responsibility in proportion 
to his ability. It would seem, then, that all who 
accept the position of Elders are, to some extent, representing 
the Lord, who is the great Shepherd of the Flock. 



R5391 : page 30 

LEVITICUS NINE AND SIXTEEN 

APPARENTLY we have failed to make clear 
our thought respecting the teachings of 
these two chapters. Our statement in 
TABERNACLE SHADOWS that they both picture 
the Day of Atonement sacrifices has 
been misunderstood. We do not mean to 
say that the two ceremonies took place on 
the same particular Day of Atonement. Our 
thought is that the antitype of the two took 
place at the same time in the antitypical 
Atonement Day— the Gospel Age. 

The record of the Ninth Chapter relates to the 
consecration of the priests. The service there pictured 
represents the consecration of Aaron, and was to be repeated 
in the case of every priest who attained the office 
of high priest. That is to say, this service was to be 
repeated only when a high priest should die and his 
successor in the office should be inaugurated. Thus the 
ceremony might be performed several times in one year, 
if several high priests, one after another, died in one 
year and successors took their places. Or this ceremony 
of Leviticus 9 might not be repeated for many years; as, 
for example, Aaron lived nearly forty years after his 
appointment to the office, and hence not until his son 
Eleazar became high priest would this consecration service 
be repeated. On the contrary, the Day of Atonement 
described in the 16th Chapter recurred every year. 

The lines of harmony between the two ceremonies 
are indicated by the sacrifices, which in both cases were 
a bullock and a goat. These represented the same sacrifices 
in antitype— the bullock representing the high priest 
and the goat representing the under priests; for Jesus 
died only once— not twice. Therefore the death of the 
bullock in both instances represented the one sacrifice 
of Jesus. And because the Church dies only once, therefore 
the sacrifice of the goat in both instances represents 
the death of the Church as members of the antitypical 
priesthood under the Headship of their great High Priest. 

Why, then the two pictures? may be asked. We 
reply, Because the death of Jesus had two distinct 
aspects, and similarly the death of the Church has two 
aspects. Only by dying to the earthly nature was it possible 
for Jesus and the Church to attain the Heavenly 
nature and the office of the Royal Priesthood— to qualify 
for the work of Messiah. Even, therefore, if the world 
had not needed to be redeemed from sin, the Priest 
must have given the same sacrifice exactly, in order to 
attain His high position. And so would the under-priests. 
On the other hand, as mankind are sinners, needing to 



be redeemed, atonement for sin would have been necessary 
before the work of Restitution could go on, entirely 
regardless of the exaltation of Christ and the Church 
to the Heavenly plane. 

Thus the "better sacrifices" of Messiah cover two distinctly 
separate, yet both important, works. It was necessary 
that Jesus and His followers should suffer and 
enter into their glory. And this is emphasized by Leviticus 9. 
It was also necessary that a sacrifice for sins 

R5391 : page 31 

should be offered on behalf of mankind, in order to permit 
them to come to Restitution blessing; and this is 
typified in Leviticus 16. So we repeat that the sacrifices 
of Leviticus 9 and those of the 16th chapter are identical 
sacrifices, accomplished in this same antitypical Atonement 
Day— the Gospel Age. 



page 3 1 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
ASSURANCE OF CONTINUED CONFIDENCE 

OUR DEAR BROTHER AND PASTOR:- 

The little Class of Shawnee appointed me to write and tell 
you that we passed a resolution assuring you of our steadfast 
faith in you and your leadings. We got the thought from 
reading the Nov. 15th WATCH TOWER, the article on "What 
Course Should We Take?" that you had almost decided that 
the things we have been expecting in 1914 would not come to 
pass on time— since you said it is possible, but not probable. 
Now, dear Brother, if these things do not come to pass until 
2014, instead of 1914, our faith in you will be as great as it 
ever has been, for we believe that you have fought a good 
fight, that you have kept the faith, that you have almost finished 
your course, and that there is laid up for you a glorious 
Crown. 

It seems to us that it would not be strange if the dear 
Lord would permit a short delay to try the faith of some who 
had perhaps consecrated to 1915, instead of until death. 

May the dear Lord's richest blessings be upon you. In behalf 
of the Class, your brother in the Lord. 

N. B. RANKIN.-Okla. 



SAW NEED OF CRUCIFIED ONE AND THE VOW 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have intended writing you for some time to tell of my 
acceptance and appreciation of Present Truth, and of my experience 
with the Vow. 



I am a girl of twenty-four years, and my father and my 
mother have been in the Truth about six years, during which 
time I have heard the Truth constantly in my home. Being 
of rather a studious nature, the knowledge appealed to me; 
but my heart refused to be touched. I could not doubt the 
verity of the Truth, but my stubborn will refused to bow in 
the subjection of full consecration. 

However, the Lord in His mercy and wisdom permitted 
the very experience which, although bitter indeed, caused me 
to see the unreliability of my own judgment, and the need of 
a wiser hand than my own to guide my affairs. Our dear 
Brother Cole came just at that time, and pointed me to the 
only One who can lead us safely through all of life's affairs. 
I renewed my reading, and within two weeks made a consecration 
of myself on January 26, 1913. I cannot tell you of the 
deep joy with which my heart has since been filled. 

But alas! from being too slow, I rushed to the other extreme 
and became too hasty, taking the Vow without duly 
considering its importance and all that it contains. Again 
our dear Lord gave me the necessary experience to show me 
my wrong course, which led me to make a serious and prayerful 
study of the Vow and all its different features; after 
which I took it again, and have been blessed and protected by 
it more than words can tell. 

I desire to express to you my deep and heartfelt appreciation 
for all the grand truths I have received from the Lord 
through you as "that faithful Servant." May our Heavenly 
Father strengthen and sustain you until the work He has 
given you to do shall be finished. With much Christian love, 

I am your sister in the Lord, . 



WAS IN THE DEEPEST DESPAIR 

MY DEAR BROTHER AND PASTOR:- 

Since the desire to write to you does not want to be put 
down, am writing to express a little of my love and gratitude 
toward you. I thank the Heavenly Father for His Truth, for 
you and for all His dear people. 

That I should be privileged to know the Truth, or to be a 
Christian at all, is still a source of amazement to me, for truly 
I was one of the mean of the earth, a chief among sinners. 

Until December of 191 1 I did not even believe the Bible. 
Jesus was beautiful, but imaginary, impossible. 

The child of ungodly parents, whom I never knew or met 
until I was grown up, my life was a horrible one. That December, 
through reading a book (not one of yours) I was 
convinced through sound reasoning that Jesus really was the 
Son of God, and that it was possible for Him to become flesh. 

That was the starting point. What a hopeless muddle I 
had made of my life! How could I possibly extricate myself 
from the net of circumstances in which I was living ! But I 
did what I could— right about faced— and prayed with all my 
strength for more light and to be shown the next step. There 
were nine whole months of that, with apparently no answer to 



prayer; but thank God for His Grace; I had set my face heavenward, 
and held on. Then God took a darling three-year old 
daughter from me in four short days! Dear Brother, isn't 
death horrible, a dread enemy indeed! But thank God for 
that, too ! That opened up the way, and I left the old lifelong 
associations behind in Cornwall— walked out penniless, no 
luggage, no coat even, but knowing it was right, even if it 
meant sleeping in the fields. I didn't look back or I should 
have turned back. 

There is no room for details, though they simply teem 
with the love and the overruling providence of God. I finally 
reached London. Within a few weeks I had Vol. I of your 
STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES sent from the very place and people 
I had left. They had just got the Truth and appealed to me 
to read the volume. 

I was so hungry for it; it was just what I wanted. The 
very next Sunday a brother and sister took me to the Tabernacle 
(London) to hear you, and though I really believe I 
had given up my will nine months before, I knew the real 
meaning of consecration during your address, and was one of 
the first to rise when you gave the invitation to all desiring to 
symbolize. 

That was a year and a half ago. I have indeed had a wonderful 
and blessed experience; but I do find the Christian warfare 
a fierce fight. How grateful I am, and how I long to 
grow more like my Lord and Head each day! I have taken 
the Vow, believing it one more piece of armor to help withstand 
the Adversary. 

THE WATCH TOWERS come just in time always— just as I 
need some special help. My little boy prays the evening prayer 
you suggested, and will shortly learn the morning prayer also. 

Don't trouble to answer me personally, my dear Pastor. I 
shall know you have read, and then rejoiced for one 
more. You always have my sympathy and prayers. My heart 
has often gone out to you when you have been passing through 
particular trials. God bless and keep you. 

Your privileged sister in the dear Lord, 

ELLEN E. CORMACK. 



GREETINGS FROM THE LENS CONVENTION-FRANCE 

BELOVED BROTHER AND PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

"It is of the Lord's mercies that we are not consumed; because 
His compassions fail not. They are new every morning: 
great is Thy faithfulness."— Lamentations 3:22,23. 

Our hearts cannot find any expression noble enough and 
powerful enough to show their adoration toward our Heavenly 
Father for all His benefits toward us. The Bible is a beautiful 
Book to us, dear Brother. What a treasure has God 
put into our hands, and what beautiful things has He not 
in reservation for us ! Therefore, from the bottom of our 
hearts we can say: "Bless the Lord, O my soul"! 

It is understood that our thankfulness ascends also to Him 
for the means He has established in the Body— toward our 



lovable Head and toward the brethren whom He has chosen 
to impart to us His goodness. The Lord bless you and keep 
you, as well as the dear class in Brooklyn. Although far away 
from each other, we are often united at the Throne of Grace, 
asking our Heavenly Father to pour more and more of His 
compassion on you and on us in return. 

We would have liked to send to you sooner the expression 
of our sympathy and our love, assuring you of the part we 
take both in your joys and in your sorrows. Please excuse us 
that we have waited until the present Convention; it was in 
order that the 200 brethren and sisters present could join us 
in an expression of love. 

Having had a part in your blessings it is only just that we 
should share in your tribulations. Truly these tribulations are 
permitted of God in order to fashion our character to the 
likeness of that of His dear Son, our beloved King. 



AS VALUABLE AS THE GOLD OF OPHIR 

I wish that every soul in Christendom and also in heathen 
lands might have a copy of THE WATCH TOWER of January 
15th, 1913, containing an article entitled, "Covenant Relationship 
with God Essential to Life Everlasting." The article ought 
to be studied and thoroughly absorbed. Every word is 
of the value of the Gold of Ophir. Many thanks for sending 
copy to me. 

Very truly yours, MRS. H. LOUNT. 



page 33 

VOL. XXXV FEBRUARY 1 No. 3 
A. D. 1914-A. M. 6042 



CONTENTS 

The Anointed— The Messiah— The Christ 35 

The Mystery of Christ 36 

Gifts Vs. Fruits of the Spirit 36 

Hindrances to Fulness of the Spirit 37 

Anointing and Begetting 37 

Two Classes of First-Borns 38 

Godliness Attracts Persecution 39 

Specially Godly Are Specially Persecuted 39 

Professed Christians Persecuted 40 

The Solitary Way (Poem) 40 

1913— Reports from Foreign Branches— 1913 41 

"Where Your Treasure Is" 44 

Seek First the Kingdom 45 

The Faithful Are Watchful 45 

Re the Lord's Second Presence 45 

Some Interesting Letters 47 

Heard Him Lecture 70 Times 47 

Experience of Two Colporteurs 47 

Sword of Truth Flashing Right and Left 47 

page 34 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:-All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



R5401 : page 34 

PILGRIM BROTHER HAYDEN SAMSON-DECEASED 

Many of our readers knew and dearly loved Brother Hayden Samson, 
who has served the Lord and the Brethren under 
the auspices of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society for 
the past fourteen years. For several years past he has been 
in feeble health— yet persevered to lay down his life in the 
service of the Lord, the Truth and the Brethren. Returning 
home he experienced a severe attack of indigestion January 
Twenty-Fourth. He got relief, however, and went to bed 
as usual. The next morning, Sunday, his body was found in 
bed apparently asleep. He had passed beyond "in a moment, 
in the twinkling of an eye," with evidently no struggle, no 
pain. We rejoice with the dear Brother, believing that he has 
gone before to the heavenly condition— where so many of 
us are hoping ere long to join the Savior and him and all the 
members of the Body of Christ. 

page 34 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR MARCH 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
March follow: (1) 266; (2) 47; (3) 12; (4) 325; (5) Vow; (6) 
313; (7) 60; (8) 310; (9) 130; (10) 110; (11) 7; (12) 27; (13) 
191; (14) 87; (15) 145; (16) 129; (17) 78; (18) 4; (19) 105; 
(20) 16; (21) 155; (22) 160; (23) 240; (24) 260; (25) 267; (26) 
40; (27) 324; (28) 88; (29) 14; (30) 39; (31) 170. 



R5391 : page 35 

THE ANOINTED-THE MESSIAH-THE CHRIST 

THE teaching of the Law, in type and testimony, 
is to the effect that God purposed to 
raise up a great Priest, who would also 
be a King; and that this priestly King and 
kingly Priest should cancel the sins of the 
people, and be invested with power to rule, 
and with authority as a Mediator to help 
them back to God. To the surprise of the 
typical people, Israel, instead of assuming 
the office of Priest and King in conjunction, 
He merely died! -Luke 24:20,21. 



Then came the time for the Holy Spirit to reveal to 
the Church what had previously been a mystery; for 
when God had through the Prophets spoken of Messiah 
as a King upon His Throne, He had declared that which 
would be mysterious to the people— would not be easily 
understood. God had purposely kept His Plan a secret 
until the due time for revealing it should come. The 
secret was— "Christ in you, the hope of glory."— 
Colossians 1:26,27. 

In other words, our Lord Jesus is, primarily, the 
Anointed One and, according to the Scripture testimony, 
is very highly exalted. But He was not the completion 
of the Divine arrangement regarding the Anointed. The 
Heavenly Father purposed not to have Jesus alone, but 
that He should be the Head of the Anointed, and the 
Church the Body. (Eph. 1:22,23; 5:29-32; Col. 1:24.) 
This was the Mystery. The great Messiah was to bless 
the world as the an ti typical Prophet, Priest, and King. 
God appointed Jesus as the Head, and elected certain 
saintly ones to be the members of His Body. Until this 
Body of Christ was complete, the blessing promised to 
Abraham could not come upon the world.— Gal. 3:16,29. 

R5392 : page 35 

The terms upon which any may come into membership 
in Christ's Body— may be members of the anointed 
Priest and King— are that they walk in His steps. If 
we desire this privilege, we must present our bodies living 
sacrifices, as He presented His. Additionally, we 
must have Him as our Advocate, that we may be enabled 
to fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of 
Christ. So, the Apostle says, we were called to suffer 
with Christ, that we might reign with Him.— Col. 1:24; 
2 Tim. 2:12. 

Not until this work is completed can there be Restitution 
to the world. The blessing of the world cannot 
begin until this great Priest-King is complete and inducted 
into office. Then as the Mediator of the New 
Covenant, He will bring the promised blessings to mankind 
in general. The entire Scriptures seem to give this 
thought, and this alone. In no other way can we explain 
why, after God's promise to send a Redeemer, and after 
that Redeemer had come, and had died, "the Just for the 
unjust," the work of Restitution (Acts 3:19-21) should 
not have immediately proceeded. Throughout this Age 
there has been the work of selecting the Church. In the 
immediate future are the Times of Restitution, when the 
Lord, at His Second Coming, shall have received His 
members to Himself on the plane of glory. 

The Scriptures declare that our Lord Jesus was holy, 
harmless, undefiled and separate from sinners. Hence 
He would need no sin-offering on His own behalf. Yet 
the Scriptures say that He needed first to offer for Himself, 
and then for the people. (Heb. 7:26,27.) Here we 
see clearly shown the Church as a part of Himself— different 



from the world in general. 

The entire work of the Church at the present time is 
the sacrifice of the human life. As Jesus will be the 
King of Glory, so we shall be the under-kings; as He 
will be the great Priest, so we shall be the under-priests. 
The parallel is found throughout the entire Scriptures. 
If our understanding of this were taken away, we should 
be practically in the same darkness as we were before 
we got the Truth. The Mystery is that we are to be 
associated in the sufferings of Christ now, and in His 
glory in the future. Whoever has not yet found this 
key has not yet found the Plan of God, in its simplicity 
and beauty. 

God ordained that the kings of Israel should be anointed, 
and that the High Priest of Israel should be especially 
anointed. We are to remember that there is an 
antitypical King and an antitypical Priest— Christ, the 
great Prophet, Priest and King— who is to bring blessing 
to the human family as a whole. We perceive 
that in the type there was an under-priesthood, and 
the Apostle points out that there is an antitypical under-priesthood 
associated with Jesus and His work. 

The word anointed is the English translation of the 
Hebrew word Messiah, and its equivalent in the Greek 
is Christos, Christ. So, then, our thoughts properly turn 
to Christ as the Anointed of God. He is to do the great 
work appointed by the Father. We look back and see 
when He received His anointing. It was not when He 
was in the Heavenly courts, nor when He became a human 
being. He was not yet the Anointed One, though 
He was in full harmony with the Holy Spirit of God. 

But there came a certain experience to our Lord 
when He was thirty years of age. At that time He consecrated 
Himself to do the Father's will and work. Then 

R5392 : page 36 

it was that He received the special anointing. This constituted 
Him in an incipient sense the anointed King and 
Priest of God. Still He was not ready to take His great 
power and reign; but if He proved faithful in carrying 
out His covenant, He would in due time become in the 
fullest sense the great Anointed of God, would reign over 
the earth for a thousand years, and subsequently would 
have further great honors and privileges. We can see 
all this very clearly portrayed in respect to our Redeemer. 

THE MYSTERY OF CHRIST 

To whom, then, does the Apostle in 1 John 2:27 refer 
in the words ye and you? The Heavenly Father purposed, 
as previously stated, that more than our Lord 
Jesus should constitute this Anointed One. He purposed 
that the Lord Jesus should be the Head of an 
anointed company, who should constitute His Body. And 
this is implied in the type in the under-priesthood, who 



received a measure of the anointing oil. They prefigured 
the real Priesthood to come: "Ye are a Royal Priesthood, 
a holy nation, a peculiar people, that ye should 
show forth the praises of Him who hath called you out 
of darkness into His marvelous light."— 1 Peter 2:9. 

And as we further study, we find that this is the 
Mystery mentioned in the Scriptures: to wit, that the 
great Messiah so long promised should be composed of 
many individuals; and that these many individuals, with 
the exception of the Head, should be gathered out from 
the children of wrath, from fallen mankind, and should 
be justified through the merit of their Head— the merit 
of His human sacrifice. 

All, then, who have joined the Lord are counted as 
members of that one Body, "the Church of the Living 
God," "the Church of the first-born," whose names are 
"written in Heaven." (1 Tim. 3:15; Heb. 12:23.) Looking 
back to the institution of the Church, we see that it 
could not be instituted until Jesus had presented Himself 
as a sacrifice, that the merit of His sacrifice might 
be made applicable to all those who would become members 
of His Body— those who would make the same consecration 
unto death that He had made, and who would 
then walk in His footsteps. 

At that very time there were some of this class waiting. 
They had been Jesus' disciples, hearkening to His 
words. They believed His testimony that if they would 
take up their cross and follow Him they should partake 
of His glory. Under the influence of this promise they 
became His followers. But they could not receive the 
anointing until He had made satisfaction for their sins. 
Therefore our Lord instructed them to wait at Jerusalem 
until this blessing came upon them. The Scriptures tell 
us that the anointing came upon them at Pentecost. It 
came from the Father through Christ, after His ascension. 
Indeed, St. Paul tells us that all blessings come 
from the Father, who is the Fountain of blessings; and 
all come through the Son, who is the Channel.— 
1 Corinthians 8:6. 

Just what the anointing is, is difficult for us to comprehend 
or to explain. Only in proportion as we comprehend 
it can we make it plain to others. The Lord has 
endeavored to make it as plain as possible to us by the 
use of various terms and figures. He calls it a begetting, 
in the sense that a new life is started. The spiritual nature 
begins in us at the moment we receive this begetting. 
And whoever receives it cannot retain it unless 
he grows and has the Lord's Spirit perfected in him. 

VARIOUS QUALITIES OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 

This Spirit is spoken of in the Scriptures from various 
standpoints— apparently with a view to giving us a 
conception of it, and with the thought that it is a difficult 
matter to grasp. It is called the Spirit of Truth. No 
one can have the Holy Spirit and be in ignorance of 



God; and his growth in spiritual things will be in proportion 
to his growth in knowledge. If he does not grow 
in knowledge, he cannot grow in the Spirit; therefore 
this Spirit is called the Spirit of the Truth. 

It is called also the spirit of a sound mind; for our 
judgments are all imperfect and human and naturally, 
therefore, contrary in some respects to the mind of the 
Lord. And the transforming influence which gives us 
a new view of matters and enables us to see things from 
God's standpoint is the influence of the Holy Spirit; 
therefore, it is called the spirit, or disposition, of a sound 
mind. 

It is called the spirit of love; for only in proportion 
as we cultivate this Godlike quality can we receive this 
spirit. Whoever has not the spirit of love cannot have 
the Holy Spirit. Love is necessary before we can receive 
this Spirit. God is Love. And so all must be of 
this disposition who would be His— they must be in sympathy, 
in harmony with Him. 

It is also called the spirit of obedience in the sense 
that those who possess this Spirit desire to do the will 
of God. It is an anointing in the sense that it is the 
qualification by which God recognizes us as His children 
and as those who are heirs of His promises and who are 
to consider themselves His ambassadors. He recognizes 
only those who are thus designated by the Holy Spirit. 
These are to fill the office of kings and priests. 

These various definitions and descriptions of the 
power and influence of the Spirit enable us to better 
understand the matter. The term Holy Spirit stands in 
a broad sense for any holy influence or power or disposition 
emanating from God. The phrase covers the 
thought of the spirit of Truth and the spirit of righteousness, 
because all that is true and right is of Divine arrangement 
and order. This is the Holy Spirit, or holy 
influence, or holy power, then, that works in any way 
that God may choose. It may be through the Word of 
Truth given out through the printed page, or it may be 
made manifest through the influence of the life and example 
of some of God's people— but in whatever way it 
operates, it always operates for good. 

GIFTS VS. FRUITS OF THE SPIRIT 

Because the matter was so hard to understand, the 
Lord, in the first place, gave the early Church special 
signs, which were called gifts. Some received the gift 
of tongues, some the gift of performing miracles, and 
some the special gift of healing. Then there were 
other gifts that the Lord gave, such as Apostleship, 
etc. But these different gifts were merely manifestations 
of the Holy Spirit at that time. The gifts were not the 
Holy Spirit, but were manifestations of the Holy Spirit. 
After they had accomplished their work in the early 
Church, those gifts passed away. This does not mean 
that the Holy Spirit ceased to be the begetting power 



amongst the Lord's people; but unless there had been 
some such manifestation of the power of God in the 
beginning, we would not have been so well able to understand 
the facts. Jesus, before Pentecost, communicated 
His Spirit to His disciples and enabled them to work 
miracles.— Luke 10:17-20. 

A measure of the Spirit is given to all the Lord's 
children to be profited by, to make use of. And so we 
see that when the gifts of the Holy Spirit passed away, 
the fruits of the Spirit remained, to be manifested and 
developed. "The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, 
longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance" 

R5393 : page 37 

(Galatians 5:22,23); and a person after receiving 

the Holy Spirit will begin to manifest this fruit 

of the Spirit. If one does not manifest this fruit, there 

is every reason to doubt if he has been begotten of the 

Spirit. 

If a person has some of these qualities, we are to remember 
that some are naturally quite gentle, meek. We 
are not, therefore, to think it a proof of the possession 
of the Holy Spirit, if one has a little meekness and gentleness. 
He might have these qualities naturally. But we 
should expect that when a knowledge of the Truth comes, 
instead of being heady and puffed up, he would be all 
the more gentle and meek. Wherever we see a boastful, 
heady, haughty spirit, unloving, unkind, etc., we would 
have reason to think that the Holy Spirit had not been 
received, or was not making proper development in that 
heart. 

This is a matter regarding which the Lord does not 
allow us to judge others; but He expects us to judge 
ourselves. Whoever has this Holy Spirit should develop 
it. Those who have been begotten of the Holy Spirit 
had previously come into the proper attitude of mind to 
receive it, and the Lord is pleased to begin there the 
work which is so difficult for us to understand. This 
Spirit of God brings rest, peace, joy, because we have 
submitted ourselves to God. And this peace and joy 
should increase more and more, as we are more and more 
filled with the Holy Spirit. 

HINDRANCES TO FULNESS OF THE SPIRIT 

The Bible tells us that the Lord Jesus had the Spirit 
without measure. But we, in our imperfect state, are 
not able to receive the Holy Spirit in the same measure. 
If our hearts are entirely emptied, then they may be made 
the fuller. But if there be errors of doctrine in our mind 
and heart, these will prevent us from receiving the fulness 
of the Holy Spirit. Gradually the New Creature will cast 
out the earthly mind, and will get rid of the errors of 
doctrine, etc., that have been hindrances. And as we 
get rid of these we shall be made partakers of the Holy 



Spirit in an abounding measure. 

The Holy Spirit that we receive of Him is our assurance 
that we belong to the Lord. And as long as this 
Spirit abides in us, it is a witness and a guarantee that 
we are still the Lord's. Both classes, the Little Flock 
and the Great Company, receive the anointing of the 
Lord, the begetting of the Holy Spirit. The Apostle says 
that "we are all called in the one hope of our calling." 
(Eph. 4:4.) We all have received this Anointing of the 
Holy Spirit, or we could not belong to the Body of 
Christ at all. It is now a matter of development. 

Those who continue to develop in the Spirit of the 
Lord will attain a place on the Throne with Jesus. But 
there will be some who will not be accounted worthy to 
reign with Him; yet they have received of the Lord this 
anointing, this begetting. These will not be of the Body 
of Christ, because they failed to progress on account of 
lack of zeal in carrying out their covenant. 

In the type of the high priest the anointing oil ran 
down over the garments. In the antitype the anointing 
of our Lord Jesus has flowed down over all the Body 
since Pentecost, giving us this special relationship with 
the Heavenly Father. The anointing which comes upon 
the Lord's people must sooner or later affect their outward 
conduct by manifestations of greater meekness, patience, 
brotherly-kindness, affection and generosity of 
word and deed. All of this is illustrated in the anointing 
oil used upon the kings and priests of Israel, which 
typified the Spirit from which we have an anointing, or 
lubrication. 

But this smoothing and softening of character must 
not be expected to take place suddenly, as was the case 
with the change in our minds; on the contrary, it will 
come gradually. Nevertheless, the renewed will is to 
take control of the earthly body and impart its spirit and 
disposition to it so far as possible, and should begin the 
work at once. If the spirit, or disposition, of love to 
God dwell in one richly, it will soon be manifest to some 
extent. Let us be constantly on the alert to grow in the 
spirit of love and obedience, and to let the Spirit of 
Christ dwell in us richly and abound. 

CONSECRATION AND BEGETTING 

No one can be a member of the New Creation before 
being anointed of the Holy Spirit, or begotten of the 
Holy Spirit. The purport of the Scriptures is that a 
double work is necessary, the one part applying to the 
flesh, the other to the New Creature. That which is 
sacrificed is not the New Creature, and that which is 
anointed is not the old creature. We repeat: It is the 
New Creature that is anointed, and it is the old creature 
that is sacrificed. 

The anointing and the begetting of the Holy Spirit 
are practically the same thing and quickly follow justification. 
It is as justified men that we are baptized into 



death, and it is as members of the New Creation that we 
are constituted members of the Ecclesia, or Body of 
Christ. It is the Father's acceptance of us that is the 
basis of our begetting of the Holy Spirit, our anointing. 

While the two terms, begetting and anointing, are 
used to represent what is to us practically the same thing, 
they are two different figures. The begetting thought 
is one that pertains to the state of the new life, the state 
of the new nature. The anointing thought pertains to 
the office. God is calling out a people to become joint-heirs 
with Christ in the Kingdom. The anointing is the 
Divine recognition of them as kings and priests. So far 
as we are concerned, the matter is represented by both 
expressions. 

The word Christ signifies anointed. God has declared 
that He will have an anointed King and High 
Priest to be His Agent in the blessing of the world. He 
has declared that that great King is, primarily, the Lord 
Jesus Christ. He also declares that instead of the Lord 
Jesus being the sum-total of the Anointed One, it is His 
good pleasure that there shall be members added to Him. 
And the adding of these members has been the completing 
of this Anointed One. 

Our coming into the Body is our coming under the 
anointing. One is a member of the Anointed the instant 
he is begotten. In thinking of the begetting and the 
anointing, we are merely viewing the matter from two 
different angles. We of today were not anointed eighteen 
hundred years ago, although the anointing came at that 
time upon the Church. The anointed office may be forfeited, 
without the spirit-begotten life being forfeited, as 
in the case of the Great Company. 

But the instant we are individually inducted into that 
Body, that instant we come under the anointing. "The 
anointing you have received of Him abideth in you." 
Our share of it is just as much a personal matter as was 
the begetting. Let us repeat the statement: Our begetting 
is individual— our baptism, or anointing, is collective, 
but the one is as personal as the other. 

SAME ANOINTING FOR BOTH JESUS AND THE CHURCH 

The anointing that came upon the Church at Pentecost 
and that ran down upon all added Jewish members 
subsequently, was the same anointing that Jesus received 
at Jordan, the same anointing that was later poured out 

R5393 : page 38 

upon the Gentiles, as manifested first in the case of Cornelius 
and his friends, when "the Holy Spirit fell upon 
all them which heard the Word" at the mouth of St. 
Peter. It is the same anointing that has come down 
throughout the Age upon all the members of the Body- 
all the one anointing. 
But while it is the same anointing, or baptism, yet 



Cornelius had no share in the anointing, or baptism, at 
Pentecost, nor had the disciples any share in the anointing 
at Jordan; for it did not become a personal matter 
to any member until he was individually begotten, and 
thus inducted into the Body. To our understanding the 
one thought appertains to both of these different features, 
as illustrating different parts of the process. 

At the beginning, Jehovah God foreknew and foreordained 
that one hundred and forty-four thousand 
should constitute the Anointed One, of which Jesus is 
the Head. And He made the arrangement that all those 
begotten of the Spirit should thereby come into that 
Body, and be counted as its members. These have their 
names written as such in the Lamb's Book of Life. But 
He also made the arrangement with them that if any of 
them failed to keep the terms of their covenant, they 
would cease to be members of that Body class. And this 
class evidently will in glory consist of the one hundred 
and forty-four thousand, although many other thousands 
have been associated with them all through the Gospel 
Age; not all, however, have maintained their standing. 

"To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with Me 
in My Throne." (Rev. 3:21.) The grand outcome of 
the matter, the fixity of the matter, is in the future. All 
those who come to the Lord, come through consecration, 
and are for the time being counted in as members of this 
anointed class. And the anointing will abide with them 
so long as they continue in this condition of obedience. 

DOUBLE RELATIONSHIP TO CHRIST 

The expression, begetting of the Spirit, then, is used 
in the Scriptures to describe that personal experience by 
which God accepts the individual as a New Creature, 
and starts the new nature. This new nature subsequently 
prospers, develops, and if faithful will be born of the 
Spirit. The terms begetting and birth are used symbolically 

R5394 : page 38 

to represent the beginning and the completion 
of the New Creature. 

The baptism, or anointing, of the Spirit, of course, 
relates to the same Holy Spirit, and in some measure to 
the same experiences as the begetting, but from a different 
angle. The baptism of the Holy Spirit is not a 
thing that comes to us individually, but collectively. The 
baptism of the Holy Spirit came upon the Church at 
Pentecost and was not repeated day by day, nor ever, 
except in the case of Cornelius, the first Gentile convert, 
and "his kinsmen and near friends," whom he had called 
together in his house to hear the words from the lips 
of the Apostle Peter. At that time a similar baptism to 
that of Pentecost was granted— "the Holy Spirit fell 
upon all them which heard the Word" (Acts 10:24,44), 
indicating that the Gentiles also were to have an opportunity 



to become members of the Anointed. 

The word baptism signifies immersion. St. Paul explains 
that we are all baptized, or immersed, or anointed, 
by the one Spirit into one Body. The anointing, or baptism, 
of the Spirit came first to our Lord Jesus, extended 
down to the Church at Pentecost, and has been 
with the Church as an anointing ever since. All of us 
who come to God, by Christ, confessing our sins and 
asking forgiveness through His merit, and who yield 
ourselves to be dead with Him, by baptism into His 
death, are immersed into membership in His Body, thus 
coming under the anointing. 

The result of this action is two-fold; we become, first 
of all, members of Christ in the flesh, and He accepts us 
and treats us as such. We are first baptized, or immersed, 
into death— His death, His Baptism. Then 
the figure changes; and we are raised up out of this baptism 
into death, as New Creatures. Thereafter our flesh 
is counted as His flesh. So our relationship to Christ 
is two-fold: one appertaining to the flesh, the other to 
the spirit. 

Very many have not noticed this double relationship 
to Christ— as New Creatures, and also in the flesh. The 
force of this is brought to us in the words of the glorified 
Christ to Saul of Tarsus: "Saul, Saul, why persecutest 
thou ME?... I am Jesus whom thou persecutest." 
(Acts 9:4,5.) Thus our Lord declared that 
the persecution of the Church in the flesh was a persecution 
of Himself. What the Church suffers is a part of 
the sufferings of Christ. The sufferings of Christ will 
not be filled up until the last member of His Body shall 
have finished His course. 

THE LORD'S DECISION STILL FUTURE 

Our membership in the spiritual Body of Christ is 
also two-fold. First we have a tentative membership 
at the present time— though we are accepted of God as 
if it were complete. Thus the moment of the acceptance 
of our consecration is the moment when we receive the 
Holy Spirit. We are consecrated with Christ unto death 
—we are risen with Him as New Creatures, sharers with 
Him in His resurrection. And yet this number, begotten 
of the Holy Spirit and thus associated with Christ in 
membership in the spiritual Body, contains three classes: 
(1) The Little Flock, which will be the Body of Christ 
beyond the veil, the "more than conquerors"; (2) the 
Great Company, who will fail of being of that highest 
class, but who will be companions of the Bride class 
(Psalm 45:14); (3) some who will become reprobates 
and go into the Second Death. 

It is not for us at the present time to pass judgment 
upon any one. It is not for us to say that this one or 
that one belongs to the Little Flock or to the Great Company. 
According to the Scriptural instructions, we know 
that the Lord will not make public His decision of this 



matter until the end of this Age. Then He will make a 
decision as to those who will receive the higher nature 
and those who will receive the subordinate nature. 
We are all "called in the one hope of our calling" 
(Eph. 4:4), and it is for each of us to make our calling 
and election sure. Our trials, our difficulties, our weaknesses, 
are so different that only the Lord will know or 
can determine who are worthy. The Apostle declares 
that He would not even judge himself, let alone others. 
There is one that judgeth, even Christ. 

TWO CLASSES OF FIRST-BORNS 

The Church of the First-borns, that is to say, all 
who will attain to perfection of life, everlasting life, as 
the First-born company, are in comparison with the world 
a small number. The picture of humanity that our Lord 
gave in the Sermon on the Mount represented the world 
of mankind in general as going down the broad road to 
destruction. Then He depicted a narrow way leading 
to life, a way that He Himself opened up and made possible. 
He tells us that of those who find this narrow 
way only a few, comparatively, will enter it and walk 
in it. 

In another Scripture we are told that all who go on 
the broad way will ultimately be brought to a knowledge 

R5394 : page 39 

of the Truth, and by Messiah's Kingdom will be enlightened 

and blessed with an opportunity for coming 

into harmony with God; and that in that time there will 

be a Highway for their return to human perfection. 

Here, then, we find three ways. In the present Age, 

however, there is only one way leading to life. 

Examining what the Scriptures say as to who will 
gain life everlasting as a result of the present life, we 
find that merely the Church of the First-borns get this 
blessing. The life that will come to the world will be 
attained gradually during the thousand years, when step 
by step they will rise up, up, UP to perfection. But the 
life that is offered now must be striven for under adverse 
conditions. We are to receive it by (1) begetting, 
and (2) resurrection to perfection. This resurrection 
we shall receive at the close of this Gospel Age. 

The Scriptures show us that of the two classes who 
will attain this great blessing, one class will come off 
conquerors and get spiritual life, but not the highest. 
The other class will come off "more than conquerors," 
and reach resurrection on the highest plane. These will 
be of the Divine nature. In this class we are striving 
to have a place— to share with Christ in the Chief Resurrection. 
Those who lag behind and are careless of their 
consecration vows will nevertheless be finally put to the 
test. Matters will so narrow down with them that they 
will be obliged to determine whether they will prove 



their loyalty to God or not. Those among them who 
wilfully sin will go into the Second Death. Those who 
strive for everlasting life will be brought to perfection 
in a great time of trouble, even though they will lose the 
great prize of joint-heirship with Christ. 



R5394 : page 39 

GODLINESS ATTRACTS PERSECUTION 

"Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ 
Jesus shall suffer persecution."— 2 Tim. 3:12. 

GODLINESS represents in general the condition 

of righteousness, opposition to sin, as 

God is opposed to sin— a condition in harmony 

with justice, as He is just; generosity 

and kindness and love, as He is generous 

and kind and loving. There are kind, 

generous and noble characters in the world 

who are not Christians. These may have 

more or less of opposition from others who 

are evilly disposed— as darkness always opposes 

light; yet these noble people exercise moderation 

in their righteousness— they are not righteous overmuch. 

They do not go to an extreme in their religion, as it is 

sometimes expressed. These fine characters might occasionally 

get some persecution, politically or otherwise; 

but even the enemies of such would have respect for 

them. 

But the Apostle in our text limits persecution to "those 
who live godly in Christ Jesus." What is the difference 
between living godly and living godly in Christ 
Jesus? We answer that because of their special relationship 
to Christ Jesus, God's people have a special enlightenment. 
They see more clearly the principles of 
God's Justice. They have a more exacting rule by which 
their lives are governed. Others do not see these deeper 
things of the Divine Plan and the special arrangement 
God has made with the Church. 

Those who are "in Christ Jesus" have an intelligent 
knowledge that they have entered into a Covenant of 
Sacrifice. They realize that they are not to compromise 
their religion in any way; they are not to compromise 
with sin, nor with the world. They must uphold the 
principles of righteousness, even to the detriment of their 
own earthly interests. 

The godly not in Christ Jesus— those who have a 
measure of Godlikeness— may indulge in a great many 
things that would not be wrong for the world— not sinful, 
not immoral, not unkind. With the Christian, however, 
all of his time, talent, influence, money, are consecrated 
to the one service, according to what he understands 
to be the Lord's Word and the spirit of that 



Word. The worldly man who is righteous might feel 
perfectly free to give of his money for various causes 
and purposes, that would be reasonable and proper in 
themselves; while the Christian would ask himself, What 
is the Lord's will, the Lord's way? 

THE CHRISTIAN STEWARD RESTRICTED 

The Christian is restricted in his use of money; for 
he always considers as to how the Lord would have him 
use it. The Christian uses his money for the preaching 
of the Gospel and the publishing of it in various ways; 
while other people might use their money for large benefactions 
and endowment of colleges. The Christian 
would reason: There are many opportunities for people 
to get education along earthly lines, and I believe the 
Lord would have me as His child to use His money to 
help people get spiritual education. 

R5395 : page 39 

Likewise in the use of his time; the natural man might 
say, We will have a certain evening for attending a good 
opera. We will not go to any disreputable place, but 
we will spend a certain amount each season on the opera. 
Or, we will be patrons of art and music and literature. 
We must adopt a course that will win the approval of 
society. That will be the wise thing to do. But the 
Christian says, My time, my money are consecrated to 
the Lord. I am His steward, I can use these in a better 
way. A worldly man may be a patron of art and spend 
a thousand dollars— or ten thousand dollars— on a single 
painting, because he wants art to flourish. Or he might 
buy a fine piece of sculpture to adorn his home, but this 
is not the course for me. I must consider the Lord's 
will for me as His servant. 

The Christian has limitations which the worldly do 
not have. But we are glad for all good men and good 
women, who can be good and noble even though not in 
Christ Jesus. We are glad to esteem them. There are 
noble people in the world. There are some godly ones 
outside the Church, godly to a certain degree; and 
they are likely to come to see something of the Truth, 
if they are really noble characters. The godly of this 
world will get a blessing in the Restitution time. Every 
godly thing that they have done, every act of generosity, 
will get its reward. And by cultivating their higher 
sentiments, they will have fewer steps to retrace. 

SPECIALLY GODLY ARE SPECIALLY PERSECUTED 

The persecutions which come to the godly in Christ 
Jesus are special persecutions. We are not to expect 
much of this from the Body of Christ. A man is not 
expected to use his fist to strike his own eye, nor is it 
to be expected that one hand will injure the other hand. 



It may be that the skin on one hand is rough, and will 
sometimes scratch the other one. But we cannot be members 
of the same Body and persecute each other. Persecution 
is something that is intended and pursued, or 
followed up. Persecution is not merely one act or one 
word— it is a succession of unkind words and acts with 
a view to punishing some one for adhering to an opinion 
or course of conduct. 

R5395 : page 40 

So persecution comes from a certain class called by 
Jesus the world. But the class that Jesus called the 
world are those who had a form of godliness, but did 
not have the power thereof. Christianity has its counterfeits, 
as has money. So the Apostle speaks of a class 
who would take the name of the Lord upon them and 
misuse that name. And there are people in the world 
today who do not know the difference between the genuine 
and the counterfeit— between Truth and error— and 
who do not want to know, and who keep out of the way 
of being told. They somehow know that there would 
come a certain measure of condemnation to themselves 
if they recognized the real facts and did not act in accordance 
with them. 

They are not all bad people by any means. There are 
very many good people among the tares; but there is no 
real wheat among the tares— no real nutriment. But these 
tares pose as the Church of Christ; the tare systems pose 
as Christianity. And from this class usually come the 
persecutions. They try to crowd out the wheat, or to 
choke it and make it unfruitful. It was so in our Lord's 
day. Those to whom the Lord referred as persecutors 
were not the Gentile world of His day, but the worldly 
ones of the Jews— those who were not fully consecrated 
to the Lord, but who thought they were. 

Nicodemus was a fine character, and Gamaliel was a 
fine character— and so were a great many who did not 
become Christ's disciples at all. Evidently many were 
seeking after righteousness; as, for instance, the young 
man who came to the Lord and asked Him, "Good Master, 
what shall I do that I may inherit eternal life?" 
The Lord answered, "Thou knowest the commandments." 
The young man said, "Master, all these have I observed 
from my youth up." He was a noble character, and 
Jesus looking on him loved him, even though he was not 
a disciple. And Jesus said to him. "One thing thou 
lackest; go thy way, sell whatsoever thou hast, and give 
to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in Heaven; 
and come, take up thy cross, and follow Me." But he 
went away sorrowful. He did not want to become a 
member in Christ Jesus. He did not want to give everything 
to the Lord. He was very rich— "had great possessions," 
and he preferred to hold on to his wealth.— 
Mark 10:17-22. 

There were others who went through many of the 



forms and ceremonies, and who kept the various admonitions 
of the Law, and its feasts and fasts; but they 
were not the "Israelites indeed in whom was no guile." 
And later they became the persecutors of Christ and 
those who walk in His steps of sacrifice. 

PROFESSED CHRISTIANS PERSECUTORS 

And so those who live godly in Christ Jesus have 
their persecutions, not so much from the worldly class 
as from professing Christians. There is a class in Churchianity 
today that has a great deal of pride and self-satisfaction. 
They are upholding a large institution. If 
anything seems to be inimical to that institution, they are 
wrathful and wish to persecute. Some say respecting 
those who proclaim Present Truth and who live saintly 
lives as followers of Jesus Christ: If we let these people 
alone and let them teach these things, all that we 
have been upholding for centuries will crumble. Did 
not Luther hand down Truth to us? Did not Calvin 
give the Church Truth? Have we not the teachings of 
Wesley? No, no; we will not have these "new doctrines"! 

But we see that these people are persecuting the 
Truth and its representatives because of misunderstanding. 
We should have a great deal of sympathy and not 
feel specially angry with them. This does not mean that 
we should be glad of persecution— no persecution "for 
the present seemeth joyous, but grievous." (Heb. 12:11.) 
But if we know that we are suffering for righteousness' 
sake, then we know the Spirit of God rests upon us. It 
is those who know that they suffer for Christ's sake, and 
who take it gladly because it is the will of God, that may 
rejoice, because the persecution is working out in them 
blessed effects. Let us then 

"Be still beneath His tender care, 

For He will make the tempest cease; 
And bring from out the anguish here, 
The afterward of peace." 

"THE LORD YOUR GOD DOTH PROVE YOU" 

Why does God permit His people to suffer? Why 
does He not shield those who are His from suffering, 
just as a loving parent would shield a child? The Scriptures 
reply that it is because God is working out a great 
Plan that will eventually bring blessings to all who will 
do righteously; for God wishes to show the evil effects 
of sin, its deteriorating effects. God's purpose is that after 
the Six Days of Sin and Death are ended, in the Seventh 
Day there shall be a blessing for the whole groaning 
creation. "Jehovah God will wipe away tears from off 
all faces."— Isa. 25:8. 

And there is a particular reason why God should permit 
persecution to come upon His consecrated ones. 
"The Lord your God doth prove you," test you. Why? 
What is He proving? We profess to be His loyal children. 



We profess to be laying down all that we have. 
And now "the Lord your God doth prove you, to know 
whether ye love the Lord your God with all your heart 
and with all your soul."— Deut. 8:2; 13:3. 

How much will you endure? How patiently will you 
endure? To what extent will you endure? Those who 
will endure most, and endure most patiently, will give 
evidence of the best character. And those who demonstrate 
the best character will have the highest positions 
in the Kingdom. Each will get a position according to 
his faithfulness. But as star differeth from star in glory, 
so it will be in the Kingdom. He who fights the greatest 
fight against his own nature and demonstrates most the 
love and zeal of his heart, such is the one who will have 
a high place. 

"How goes the fight with thee? 
The lifelong battle with all evil things? 
Thine no low strife, and thine no selfish aim; 
It is the war of giants and of kings. 

Heed not the throng of foes! 
To fight 'gainst foes is still the Church's lot. 
Side thou with God, and thou must win the day; 
Woe to the man whom Satan fighteth not!" 



THE SOLITARY WAY 

Alas! How few may know the grace it takes 
To tread the solitary way. Alone! 
Ah, yes, alone! No other human heart 
Can understand the nameless sorrows there- 
Trie nights in weeping spent, and yet, when dawns 
The day, to greet the world with radiant smile, 
And scatter sunshine while you whisper low 
To your poor heart, "Canst bear a little more?" 

Alone! Poor heart, and dost thou question, Why? 
Dost think it strange that thou must walk this way? 
Ah, no! Thou dost but follow in His steps 
Who went before, and of the people there 
Was none with Him! Alone? Yet not alone— 
Hath not thy blessed Lord and Master said, 
"My presence shall go with thee"? Ah, my soul, 
No longer, then a solitary way! 
December 24, 1913 G. W. SEIBERT. 



R5397 : page 41 
1913-REPORTS FROM FOREIGN MISSIONS-1913 
BRITISH BRANCH REPORT 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Enclosed is a summarized report of the work of the 
British Branch for the year ending October 31, 1913. 
We are very glad to be able to report continued increase 
in almost every branch of the work— in the output of 
SCRIPTURE STUDIES and in the Volunteer matter, but 
specially in the distribution of literature to advertise 
public meetings in connection with Class Extension and 
other special work. The total output of STUDIES from 
London is 138,717 volumes, the local (British) sales being 
111,630 volumes, an increase for the year of 27,418 volumes. 
The Volunteer matter has been well distributed 
during the whole of the year, and the demand still continues. 

Altogether during the year we have dispatched 1 1,627,000 
copies of the BIBLE STUDENTS' MONTHLY and EVERYBODY'S 
PAPER, a circulation approaching a million copies 
per month. This shows an increase over last year's figures 
of 4,250,000 copies. The Colporteurs have on the 
whole done better, and all have done very well. With 
improved methods of canvassing better results are 
gained; indeed, some of the latest additions to the Colporteur 
force are doing best of all. Two young brothers 
recently sold in one of the towns in the north of Scotland 
330 books in one week. Certainly the work is easier in 
some places than in others, and Scotland has always been 
easier than England; but the growing interest aroused by 
the sermons, by the special meetings and the general unrest 
of our times has created a demand which makes the 
work of colporteuring less difficult. Even the opposition 
lends a hand to some extent; it helps to advertise the 
work. 

Book-loaning has made considerable increase during 
the year; good work is reported both from the larger and 
the smaller centres. The visits of the Pilgrim brethren 
are still greatly appreciated by the classes, and opportunity 
for public witness is usually taken advantage of. 
Class Extension work has greatly extended during the 
past year and the results are very encouraging indeed. 

In this small country, so thickly populated comparatively, 
it has been found advantageous to link the classes 
within prescribed areas, for the furtherance of the Harvest 
Work. Results so far are satisfactory and prospects 
good. Considerable encouragement has attended Evangelical 
work in certain centres where the population is 
particularly dense. Nearly three hundred meetings have 
been held, and quite a few study classes have been formed. 
In the scattered parts of Wales the Truth has been witnessed 
to, sometimes in the open air, in accordance with 
the custom of the country. There is no difficulty in securing 
a good audience amongst the Welsh people, but it 
seems that there are but few of the "wheat" class amongst 
them. 

The loyalty of the brethren has been demonstrated, 
and their strength greatly taxed by the distribution of no 
less than 6,000,000 tracts to advertise public meetings during 



the year. The difference of late in the attitude of the 
masses in this country towards the Truth was clearly 
shown at the successful meetings held lately by yourself 
and Brother Rutherford. Naturally our enemies feel disturbed 
and, being impotent, wreak their spleen upon the 
Lord's messengers, especially yourself. However, no 
weapon formed against us has been allowed to prosper, 
and we are encouraged by the many evidences of the 
appreciation of the Message. We are looking forward to 
a strenuous campaign until the work given into our hands 
is finished, when we hope to share with our Lord, yourself, 
and all the saints in the privileged work of healing 
the nations. With much love in the Lord, 
We are your servants in Him, BRITISH BRANCH. 

SUMMARY OF OUTPUT OF SCRIPTURE STUDIES-YEAR ENDING 
OCTOBER 31, 1913: 

1913 1912 Increase 

STUDIES, all kinds 138,717 106,097 32,620 

(To Australia, out of above 27,087 21,885) 

Total British local sales 111,630 84,212 27,418 

Total increase 32,620 

Local " 27,418 

OUTPUT BIBLE STUDENTS' MONTHLY AND OTHER TRACTS: 

B.S.M 5,661,020 

E.P 5,618,900 

Tracts 297,000 

Hz 50,295 



11,627,215, or tract pages... 185,365,600 

Books (Manual, Manna, Poems, etc.) 3,248 

Booklets (h, s, t, p, etc.) 19,817 

Letters-out 18,601 

Letters-in 19,508 



SWEDISH BRANCH REPORT 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

It is once more my highly appreciated privilege to send 
you the usual Annual Report of this Branch of the 
wonderful Harvest work, and I hope that you, as the 
Great Chief Reaper's special representative, will be 
pleased with the results it shows— the results of our 
humble efforts to uphold the banner of our Redeemer 
and King— the results of our efforts to proclaim that joyful 
Message, now "meat in due season" for the "household 
of faith," and to "lay down our lives for the brethren," 
even as He laid down His life for us. Our constant 
prayer has been, and continually is, that we, by the Lord's 
grace, may be enabled to please Him in all our doings, so 
that at the end of our race-course (which we now believe 



to be very near), we may hear His blessed "Well done." 

Although we most heartily wish (in order to prove 
our love to the Lord and our appreciation of the Truth 
given us) that we were in a position to report ten times 
as much work accomplished, and that all of that work 
had been much more perfectly executed, yet we cannot 
but give praise to God for the rich blessings granted us 
in so many ways. 

Since Present Truth (as a result of your faithfulness 
and zeal) reached our shores, between fifteen and twenty 
years ago, the true Spiritual Israelites in this country have 
not experienced a more interesting and successful year 
than the one just closed. This is surely due in great 
measure to the fact that the Lord's people here have been 
appreciating more than ever the "fat things" spread upon 
His table by receiving the Swedish WATCH TOWER twice 
every month, the two encouraging and helpful sermons 
published in different Swedish newspapers every week, 
and the regular Swedish PEOPLE'S PULPIT, to say nothing 
of the six volumes of the STUDIES, the different pamphlets, 
etc. Notwithstanding the fact that during this year we 
have experienced some severe testings and trials in the 
work, in that some of our co-laborers seem to have grown 
faint and weary, it has in many respects considerably exceeded 
other years, as the appended figures show. 

The spiritual condition of the Swedish brethren in 
general, as far as we are able to judge, is better than 
ever. The development of the fruits of the Spirit 
amongst the brethren everywhere in this land is very 
gratifying. We have had the pleasure of seeing the Harvest 
Message accepted with great joy by many humble and 
truth-hungry souls, some of whom are already engaged in 
the various branches of the work. 

R5397 : page 42 

Forty dear brethren and sisters are giving either all or 
part of their time to the Colporteur work, and the prospects 
are encouraging for an increase in numbers. 

The number of books sold is about equal to that of the 
preceding year. The free distribution of Volunteer matter 
has also been comparatively good. Of the nearly 700,000 
"Eko fran talarstolen" (PEOPLE'S PULPIT) the largest part 
have been used in connection with the advertising of 
public meetings held in practically all parts of the 
country. 

The list of subscribers to the Swedish WATCH TOWER 
has grown from 1,881 to 2,174, who have paid kronor 
5,244 (one kronor equals about 27c) in subscriptions 
against kronor 2,995 the foregoing year. Yearly subscriptions 
to the Swedish newspapers which publish your 
sermons have been received through this office to the 
number of 1,919, and half-yearly subscriptions to the number 
of over 1,500. 

The regular Pilgrim service, in which five Swedish 
brethren have taken part during the year, has been extended 



greatly. The friends appreciate these visits very 

much, and write us frequently to this effect. Besides this, 

more than 100 extra public meetings were held all over 

the land, many in places where we had never held meetings 

before. 

About 3,500 copies of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
were sold at these meetings, which had a total 
attendance of nearly 50,000 very attentive listeners. We 
also had two good General Conventions (the first in 
Orebro and the second in Stockholm), and a large number 
of well-attended and spiritually profitable local Conventions 
in different parts of Sweden. 

The voluntary donations to the Tract Fund have increased 
by several thousand kronor. Seeing that all of 
the many donors have little of earthly possessions, this 

R5398 : page 42 

sum (kronor 32,887) represents a great deal of self-denial 
and sacrifice for the Truth's sake. As the different 
branches of the work have grown from year to year, the 
office-work has increased correspondingly. Twelve noble 
brethren and sisters in Christ have given very faithful and 
unselfish service in the office during the year (and several 
of these for many years). I am often tempted to 
feel proud of their record. 

The prospects for the New Year are brighter than 
ever in different lines, and we are firmly resolved to use 
every opportunity as faithfully and wisely as possible, 
realizing that the great Storm of Trouble is near at hand. 
Louder and louder peals the thunder, and darker grow 
the clouds. 

As the harvesters in the fields of the land often 
find it necessary to withdraw, as the clouds become 
threatening and the winds blow, so the reapers in the 
Lord's Harvest field may by and by be compelled to cease 
active service. But as every tiller of the soil knows that 
just before a storm is an excellent time to sow certain 
kinds of seed, so those engaged in the service of the Truth 
are determined, by the Lord's grace, to use every opportunity 
to sow the precious grains of Truth during the 
remaining months, realizing that the crop of the future 
will be of enormous proportions. 

Please find enclosed herewith a list containing thirty-one 
new names of those who have taken the Vow. We 
daily remember you, our beloved Pastor and brother, and 
"all saints," in our petitions to the Heavenly Throne, and 
are glad to know that you continue to remember us. 

With much Christian love from the Bible House 
family of Orebro, and, indeed, from all the Swedish 
brethren, I am 

Your co-laborer in the Harvest, AUG. LUNDBORG. 

SUMMARY OF THE WORK. 
Copies of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES circulated 



at cost 25,357 

Vol. I., Magazine edition, sold at cost 15,104 



Total 40,461 

Various other books and booklets— MANNA, 
TABERNACLE SHADOWS, etc 18,465 



Total 58,926 

Eko fran talarstolen (PEOPLE'S PULPIT), 

issued free 696,895 

Other free tracts and copies of the Swedish 
WATCH TOWER 86,704 



Total 783,599 

Amounting in tract pages to 14,591,320 

Number of subscribers to the Swedish 

WATCH TOWER 2,174 

Number of sermons in newspapers 312,500 

Bibles sold 124 

Number of meetings held under the auspices 

of the Society 1,576 

Number of miles traveled in preaching tours... 102,903 

Letters and cards sent out 6,470 

Letters and cards received 5,485 

Total shipments by mail and by railroad 59,637 

EXPENDITURES. 

Pilgrims, Conventions and 

other meetings kr.20,965.37 = $5,666.32 

Translations, printing, binding, 

paper, etc "30,283.78= 8,184.81 

Freight and postage " 3,712.56= 1,003.39 

Special services " 6,094.86= 1,647.26 

Office expenses, rent, light, 

heat, etc " 6,839.69= 1,848.56 

Total kr.67,896.26 =$18,350.34 

RECEIPTS. 

Voluntary donations to the 

Tract Fund, 1,928 kr.32,887.01 = $8,888.38 

Swedish TOWER subscriptions " 5,244.92= 1,417.54 

Receipts from publications "28,383.43= 7,671.20 



Total kr.66,515.36 =$17,977.12 

Deficit received from 
Brooklyn " 1,380.90= 373.22 



kr.67,896.26 =$18,350.34 



DANISH BRANCH REPORT 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have the pleasure to submit to you a report of some 
of the work done in connection with our efforts to spread 
the Harvest Message in Denmark. Ours is a small country, 
the laborers are not many, and the prejudice is great, 
yet the testimony has somewhat influenced quite a number, 
and a few honest souls, more awake to the signs of 
the times than the majority, have been reached, and are 
being garnered. We believe that the friends are growing 
in grace and knowledge, and we find that the public is 
now more willing to attend the public meetings. 

Public lectures have been delivered in 45 different 
places— in some of these places several lectures, in a few 
regular lectures every month. The cards sent in, and the 
books sold at the meetings, show that some, at least, 
became somewhat interested through the lectures. Some 
of the work in connection with the public lectures has 
been done by brethren sent out by the Copenhagen class. 
Class meetings have been held by brethren doing Pilgrim 
work in all the places where the friends meet to study 
Present Truth. Now we have several brethren with 
good qualifications for Pilgrim work, and we hope to accomplish 
more during the remainder of the time before 
the Night comes. 

More free literature has been distributed than formerly. 
We count it a great privilege to know the precious 

R5398 : page 43 

Message, and to be able to do our little part in proclaiming 
it. 
Your brother and fellow-servant in Christ, 

CARL LUTTICHAU. -Copenhagen. 

SUMMARY OF THE WORK. 

Output of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 3,122 

Output of various booklets 3,343 



Total 6,465 

Tracts free 365,000 

Letters and cards received 1,250 

Letters, cards and parcels sent out 2,148 

Copies of the Danish WATCH TOWER sent out 
monthly 909 



AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH REPORT 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

It is with great thankfulness to the Lord of the Harvest 
that we present herewith the annual report of Harvest 
work done in these lands. The report is far beyond 
what we had dared to hope for. If you will compare the 
figures with those of last year, you will see that they speak 



of a great increase of zeal and willingness to sacrifice 
both self and substance in the interest of bringing others 
to the same joy and peace and consolation which have 
come to our hearts. The friends have co-operated splendidly 
in the work and those who could not engage in much 
activity have helped some, and thus made it easier for 
others to do so. 

There are about twenty-one Colporteurs in the field, 
and others are doing a little as they are able. All the 
ground has been gone over. Indeed, it seems to be getting 
near the time when the "man with the ink-horn" can 
report, "It is done." Yet the volumes have gone out this 
year as never before in Australia, notwithstanding the 
virulent opposition. It has seemed that just as soon as a 
spark of interest was aroused, the great Adversary had 
his messengers here ready to oppose and slander. Nevertheless, 
the number of interested ones keeps increasing. 
We have about 980 WATCH TOWER subscribers and, comparing 
the population of Australia and New Zealand with 
that of America, it is possible that the proportion of subscribers 
is not much, if any, below that of the United 
States. 

For the first time in the history of this Branch we 
have gone through the year without increasing our indebtedness 
to Brooklyn, and we are sure that in the 

amount contributed to the Tract Fund, etc., there is represented 
much noble sacrifice and methodical planning. 

The friends in the various States have again undertaken 
to write wrappers for the posting of the PEOPLE'S 
PULPIT to each house in the country, and in N.S.W., 
W.A., S.A., Queensland and Tasmania they have also 
undertaken to pay the postage. This might have been 
added to the Tract Fund contribution if we had particulars. 

We believe that the Classes are growing in numbers 
as well as in interest and grace. We are realizing more 
and more that the day of our deliverance is not far distant, 
and this inspires us the more earnestly to seek to be 
ready for the great consummation of our hopes. 

No doubt a visit here by you would do us all a great 
deal of good. We hope it may be the Lord's will for you 
to come. 

We are glad that Brother Hollister is on his way, and 
will arrive in time to spend Christmas with us. Our 
Christmas Convention promises to outdo anything that we 
have previously held. These Conventions have been a 
source of great encouragement, and have given an impetus 
to the work. 

R5399 : page 43 

There has been a steady flow of inquiries from the 
output of the PEOPLE'S PULPIT, and we now have about 
1,300 names on the subscription list, many of whom take 
a number of copies each month for distribution. We 
believe that one copy of the social number has been delivered, 
either by mail or by hand, to every house in 



Australia and New Zealand. While the expense is great 
the result is splendid. 

We are looking forward with hope to the opportunities 
of the New Year. We know not what may be in store 
for us, but we are resolved to endeavor to trace the 
Lord's will, and to trust in His grace for help in every 
time of need. It seems that the coming year is bound to 
be full of testings, and one feels how much he needs to 
guard his heart in all humble loyalty and faithfulness if 
he is to come off an overcomer and share in the prize of 
the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. 

We are yours in the service of Christ, 

Australasian Branch W. T. B. & T. Soc'y. 
R. B. NICHOLSON, Sec'y. 



SOUTH AFRICAN BRANCH REPORT 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Once again it is my privilege to submit the Annual 
Report re the progress of the Harvest Work in Africa. 
While there has not been an increase in the number of 
volumes put out from this office, still I am convinced that 
the influence of the Truth in South Africa is greater than 
it was twelve months ago. 

Since that time we have added eight newspapers to the 
list of those publishing the Sermons in this sub-continent. 
The sermons are now in circulation in eleven papers and 
in four different languages. We frequently hear from 
readers who, having received blessing through the Sermons, 
are anxious to inquire further into the Truth. 

During the year the work among the natives has advanced 
considerably. A class of about fifty Zulus has 
been gathered out by Brother Tshange. This work is 
receiving our special attention and, with the aid of the 
recent issue of the Zulu tract, "Where Are the Dead?" 
we hope to see the class grow still further. 

The work among the white population continues to 
enjoy the Lord's blessing. Class meetings are now held 
at Durban, Johannesburg, Pretoria, Balfour and Pt. 
Elizabeth. 

There is one brother colporteuring in the Cape Province 
and he is meeting with fair success. A dear brother 
from Durban is, at my suggestion, spending his holiday 
with the brethren at Johannesburg, to help build them up 
in the knowledge of the Truth. His services are much 
appreciated by the brethren there. 

During the year I have made two Pilgrim tours, one 
in the Transvaal and Orange Free State, and one in the 
Eastern Province of Cape Colony. Reports of both of 
these are already in your hands. 

We are duly impressed by the thought that we have 
entered what may be the last year of the Harvest Work, 
and earnestly desire grace and strength to embrace every 
opportunity for service ere the Night close down. The 



financial and statistical report for 1913 is enclosed. Asking 
for a continued remembrance in your prayers, I am 
with much love to yourself and to all the dear brethren, 
Your brother and co-laborer, WM. W. JOHNSTON. 

1913 SUMMARY FOR SOUTH AFRICA. 

Bibles sold at cost 45 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 1,264 

DAILY HEAVENLY MANNA 204 

Other Bible-help booklets 1,053 

Free papers 47,632 

Letters despatched 1,197 

Meetings held 325 



R5396 : page 44 

"WHERE YOUR TREASURE IS" 

-MARCH l.-LUKE 12:13-34.- 

"Where your treasure is, there will 
your heart be also."— V.34. 

JESUS was surrounded by a multitude of Jews, 

one of whom, recognizing Him as influential, 

requested that He admonish his 

brother to give him a share of the family 

inheritance. Jesus declined, saying that He 

was not a judge or a divider. It would be 

well if the followers of Jesus would follow 

their Master in this, as well as in other matters. 

Too many are disposed to be busybodies 

in other men's matters, and overlook 

the fact that their commission of the Lord is to preach 

the Gospel. 

Society has provided certain rules, laws and regulations 
—"the powers that be are ordained of God." Whatever 
these laws will not accord us we should let drop. 
We should be content with such things as we have and 
such things as Divine providence insures us. As Jesus 
had another work to do, so have His followers. That 
other work is the preparation for the glorious Messianic 
Kingdom. The riches which it promises us so far transcend 
all earthly riches as to make them appear, as St. 
Paul declared, loss and dross, not worthy to be compared 
with the blessed things our Lord promises. 

Jesus backed up His refusal to intervene with a caution 
against covetousness. This implies that the estate 
properly belonged to the brother, and that the one who 
addressed Jesus desired more than his legal rights. He 
was coveting that which legally belonged to another. 
Jesus would have him, and us all, see that the abundance 
of earthly possessions, wealth, is not the sum of life. A 



man may be miserable while rolling in wealth, or he may 
be happy in comparative poverty. The basis of happiness 
is measured by the soul's relationship to God and hope 
in Him. 

The Jews were a typical people— Natural Israel, in 
comparison to Spiritual Israel of this Gospel Age. God's 
promise to Natural Israel was that if they would keep the 
Law, they would inherit the Promise made to Abraham, 
and be used by God as His Kingdom to bless the world. 
Their difficulty was that, being sinners like the remainder 
of men, they were unable to keep the Divine requirements, 
hence were not qualified to be used of God as His 
Kingdom for scattering His blessings to the nations. 
Nevertheless, the hope of the Kingdom was the thing 
ever uppermost in their minds, sought for by all of them. 

Jesus came into the world to give Himself a "Ransom 
for all" (1 Timothy 2:6), and to begin the work of calling 
and drawing "Israelites indeed," to constitute His 
associates in the Messianic Kingdom. He could, and did, 
keep the Law perfectly, and additionally, laid down His 
life sacrificially for Adam and his race. This sacrifice 
permitted Him to make good for the unintentional shortcomings 
of all "Israelites indeed," in whom was no 
hypocrisy. While they could not keep the Law and thus 
obtain the Kingdom, they could by accepting Christ have 
the righteousness of the Law imputed to them, and thus 
be acceptable with God. Hence Jesus' preaching was 
wholly along the lines of the Kingdom to the people who 
had for centuries been striving to approve themselves to 
God as worthy to constitute that Kingdom. The first opportunity 
for membership in the Kingdom class was 
granted to the Jewish people; and only in proportion as 
they rejected the favor did it pass beyond them to the 
Gentiles. As St. Paul said to some, "It was necessary 
that the Gospel should first be preached to you; but seeing 
ye reject the grace of God,...lo, we turn to the 
Gentiles." (Acts 13:46.) In view of these facts, we see 
that the teachings of Jesus were not addressed to the 
world, but to people who claimed to have separated themselves 
from the world, and to be seeking or desiring to 
attain a joint-heirship in the Messianic Kingdom. 

Indeed, the entire teaching of the New Testament is 
to such persons. These alone have the hearing ear; and 
we are instructed that "He that hath an ear, let him hear." 
Again, we are instructed that the Gospel of the Kingdom 
is to be preached to the meek, the humble, the broken-hearted; 
for only these are in any sense of the word prepared 
to receive the Message. All others are blind and 
deaf to the Gospel of the Kingdom. All who do not now 
hear or see will have their eyes and ears opened by and 
by, during Messiah's Reign, because He tasted death for 
every man. But such will fail entirely as respects the 
glorious High Calling of this Gospel Age— the Kingdom. 

"SOUL, TAKE THINE EASE" 



Our Lord gave a parable illustrating the comparative 
foolishness of all earthly ambitions. This does not 
mean that earthly ambitions are the worst things; but 
rather that they are poor in comparison to the one great 
possibility, the Kingdom. It is a pearl of great value, to 
obtain which all other pearls— all other valuables, all 
other ambitions, and all other hopes— are to be set aside, 
and counted as dross. 

The parable tells of a rich farmer who, instead of 
using his riches in doing good, was miserly— taking pleasure 
in accumulations. He built greater barns and storehouses, 
and consoled himself with the thought that he 
had plenty and more than enough, and could thenceforth 
take his ease. The parable points out that ere long he 
died. We query, What advantage did the man really 
have through his accumulation of great wealth, which he 
failed to use? He left it for others to quarrel over, and 
possibly to be more or less injured by. He was a foolish 
rich man. Instead of leaving his wealth thus, he should 
have enjoyed himself in spending it wisely for the good 
of others and to the glory of God. Thus he would have 
been rich toward God. But on the other hand, he was an 
illustration of those who are not rich toward God; for 
he laid up his treasure for self. 

Many read into this parable things that it does not 
contain. They infer that the rich man went to eternal 
torment, but nothing in the Lord's words so intimates. 
The expression, "this night shall thy soul be required of 
thee," signifies this night you lose your life— you die in 
poverty. Earthly riches will be of no account to you in 
the future if you have not laid up spiritual riches in the 
heart, in the mind and in good works, which would make 
you rich in the future. 

That rich man, instead of being benefited by the riches 
which he accumulated, will in the future life be disadvantaged. 
He might have used his riches sacrificially, or 
he might have consecrated his entire life to God through 
Christ and then faithfully laid down time, talent, opportunities, 
wealth. Thus he would in the same proportion 
have been laying up treasures in Heaven, so that in the 
resurrection he would have been received of the Lord as 
a faithful follower, to share His glory, honor and immortality 
—to be a member of His Kingdom class, whose 
commission it will be for a thousand years to scatter the 
Divine blessings secured by the death of Jesus to all of 
Adam's race. 

That rich man, having missed his opportunities, will 
nevertheless come forth during Christ's Millennial Kingdom; 

R5396 : page 45 

for we read that all that are in their graves shall 
hear His voice and come forth. But instead of coming 
forth approved, to a share in the First Resurrection, he 
will come forth disapproved of God, and his resurrection 
opportunities will be those described as the Resurrection 



of Judgment. (John 5:29, R.V.) He will come forth to 
shame and contempt, which will continue until he shall, 
under the judgments of that time, learn his lesson and 
form a better character; or, refusing so to do, he will be 
cut off in the Second Death. 

SEEK FIRST THE KINGDOM 

We are not to understand the good Teacher to mean 
that we are to look amongst the kingdoms of earth hoping 
to find one of them His Kingdom. On the contrary, He 
informs us that His Kingdom is future. "My Kingdom 
is not of this world"— this order of things. (John 18:36.) 
For His Kingdom, God's Kingdom, we pray, "Thy Kingdom 
come." We hope, we wait, we prepare, for that 
Kingdom. We are to seek it in the sense of seeking to do 
those things which will make us "meet for the inheritance 
of the saints in light." We are to lay up treasures 
in Heaven. We are to use our pounds and our 
talents so wisely that at the Second Coming of the Savior, 
when He calls first for His servants and reckons with 
them, we may not only be amongst His servants, but hear 
His "Well done, good and faithful servant, enter thou into 
the joys of thy Lord"— the Kingdom joys— "Have thou 
dominion over two cities" or "five cities." 

There is one definite procedure for those who would 
be heirs of the Kingdom. (1) They must recognize themselves 
as sinners, unworthy of Divine notice. (2) They 
must recognize Jesus as "the Lamb of God, which taketh 
away the sin of the world." (3) They should realize that 
while His sacrifice is the basis for the ultimate cleansing 
of the world, the reconciliation of all the willing and 
obedient to God, nevertheless that work has not yet begun. 
That work is to be accomplished by Him during the thousand 
years of His Kingdom Reign. (4) They are to hear 
the Lord's Message declaring that He is now seeking the 
members of the Kingdom class, and that the way to membership 
is a narrow way. "Whosoever will be My disciple, 
let him deny himself, and take up his cross and 
follow Me, and where I am there shall My disciple be." 
They are to realize that the testing of this class is through 
much tribulation; that God is calling for not only saints, 
but those whose saintship will endure fiery trials, testings, 
in respect to their love for God and for the brethren, and 
in respect to their loyalty, even unto death. 

From the time of making their full consecration to be 
the Lord's servants, faithful unto death in the service of 
righteousness, they will regard that Heavenly Kingdom 
as the great treasure beyond all comparison of value. 

R5397 : page 45 

They will seek it daily, hourly. Their hearts will be there 
—with the treasure. It will be the theme of their 
thoughts by day and of their meditations by night. Earthly 
occupations will still be necessary to them, in order to 



provide things needful and honest; but no earthly prize 
will have any value in comparison to the Heavenly prize, 
in their estimation. Such will be the successful heirs of 
the Kingdom which God hath promised to those that love 
Him more than they love houses or lands, parents or 
children or self. 



R5399 : page 45 

THE FAITHFUL ARE WATCHFUL 

--MARCH 8. -LUKE 12:35-48.- 

"Blessed are those servants, whom the Lord 
when He cometh shall find watching."— V. 37. 

TODAY'S lesson continues the Master's exhortations 

to His faithful ones— that they 

prepare themselves for His "Well done!" 

and the participation with Him in His Kingdom. 

He had said, "Fear not, Little Flock; 

it is your Father's good pleasure to give you 

the Kingdom." (V.32.) The Lord purposely 

left His followers without definite 

information respecting the time for the establishment 

of His Kingdom. He had illustrated 

the interim of time between His going and returning 

in the Parable of the Talents. He as the Master had left 

His servants in charge of His goods while He went to a 

far country, even Heaven itself, to be invested with the 

Kingdom authority; and at an appropriate time He would 

return to receive His servants, and according to their 

faithfulness would make them sharers with Him in His 

Kingdom, and then would begin His rule over His subjects, 

for their blessing and uplift out of sin and death 

conditions— for their deliverance from the reign of Sin 

and Death. 

REGARDING THE LORD'S SECOND PRESENCE 

Today's lesson opens with a parable. If in a great 
house, the master were about to be married and to bring 
home his bride, the servants would on that particular 
night be especially active, wakeful, attentive, that they 
might receive their lord with proper attention. They 
would not know exactly the time of their master's coming; 
but they would be continually on the alert that they 
might hear his knock and open instantly. So Jesus declared 
all of His followers should be on the alert for His 
Second Coming. It was not that He would bring His 
Bride with Him, rather He comes that He may receive 
His Bride here. Indeed, the faithful servants are then 
to be made the Bride, according to the other picture. 

The thought is that Jesus' followers should take their 



ideals of alertness from the extremest experience of 
earthly service. Jesus intimated that His followers might 
be looking for Him sooner than He would come, saying 
that if He shall come in the second watch or in the third 
watch or whenever, blessed are those servants if he finds 
them watching for Him, alert, ready to receive Him. He 
declared that He will grant such servants a special honor. 
He will gird Himself, make Himself their servant, and 
cause them to sit down to a sumptuous feast which He 
will provide. 

This Bible students understand to signify that at the 
Parousia of Jesus, His Second Presence, He will first of 
all make Himself known to His faithful followers, while 
the world in general will be ignorant of the fact that He 
has come. His manifestation to the world will come later; 
as we read, "He shall be revealed in flaming fire"— judgments. 
When He shall appear [to the world], we [the 
Church] shall appear with Him in glory.— Colossians 3:4. 

It is our Lord's Parousia that is described in today's 
lesson— His earliest manifestations of His Second Advent. 
The world will see Him not, and know not of His presence, 
and His Church will know of His presence only by 
His "knock"— by the intimations given in the Scriptures— 
the fulfilment of prophecy. It will then be for the watchful 
ones to recognize this fulfilment, and by faith to open 
their hearts and minds promptly to acknowledge the Master's 
presence and all that Presence implies of the nearness 
of His Kingdom and of the proving of all who will be 
found faithful, worthy to share in that Kingdom as members 
of His Bride. 

R5399 : page 46 

For such as receive Him He will make a feast. Out of 
the Divine Word He will bring things new and old, for 
their refreshment and comfort. The Bible will become to 
them a new Book; they will feast upon the riches of God's 
grace, and the dark things will become clear, the hidden 
mysteries shall be revealed. The Master Himself will be 
the Servant, the Revealer, the Setter-forth of these viands 
of Truth. Many Bible students believe that we are now 
living in this very time; and that each faithful, watchful 
follower of Jesus will be granted a hearing of the knock 
and the privilege of participating in this feast, which 
many tell us they are now enjoying. 

"But know this, that if the master of the house had 
known in what hour the thief would come, he would have 
watched, and not have suffered his house to be broken 
into." The great Teacher here intimates that Satan, the 
Prince of this world, is the master of the present order of 
things on earth; and that at His Second Coming He 
will bind this strong man, or master of the present order, 
and overturn present institutions and establish instead the 
long-promised Reign of Righteousness. It will be this 
thorough transition from the Reign of Sin and Death to 
the Reign of Righteousness and Life, which will cause the 



great Time of Trouble mentioned everywhere throughout 
the Bible as marking the closing of this Gospel Age— "a 
Time of Trouble such as never was since there was a 
nation. "-Daniel 12:1; Mark 13:8; Matthew 24:21. 

Here and elsewhere Jesus speaks of His Second Coming 
as thief-like. The thought is that He will be present 
for a time, unobserved by the world, known only to the 
Bride class, the salt of the earth, whom He will remove- 
changing them from earthly nature to Heavenly. Verse 40 
confirms this thought, and instructs all the Lord's faithful 
that they should be ready for His presence, to render 
up at any hour their accounts and experience the change. 

R5400 : page 46 

"TO GIVE THEM THEIR PORTION" 

St. Peter was perplexed. Was this parable especially 
for the Apostles, that they should watch, etc., or was it 
for all the people? he inquired. But the Lord did not 
answer him directly. He merely assured St. Peter that 
at the appropriate time the Lord would appoint a steward 
over His household, to give them their portion of food in 
due season. This is not very different from what has 
been the Lord's usual method of dealing with His family. 
While a measure of the Spirit is given to each for his 
profit; and while the Holy Spirit thus given is to guide 
the recipient into a knowledge of the things of God, 
nevertheless the Lord has been pleased to use special instrumentalities 
at various times. 

For instance, St. Peter apparently for a time was a 
leader amongst the Apostles, in opening the Pentecostal 
door, and later in opening the door to the Gentiles- 
preaching to Cornelius, the first Gentile convert. Later 
on, the Lord seems to have specially chosen St. Paul to 
be His particular messenger to the Gentiles; as we read, 
"He is a chosen vessel unto Me, to bear My name unto 
the Gentiles." (Acts 9:15.) Similarly Enoch, Abraham, 
Moses, the Prophets, and others during this Gospel Age, 
have seemed to be especially used of the Lord to draw the 
attention of His people to His Word. In the case of the 
Apostles, there was of course a plenary or special inspiration, 
which does not appertain to others of this Age since. 

While the Lord has thus appointed special servants in 
handing to His household meat in due season at various 
times, it was required of each one who would partake that 
he should prove, test, determine whether or not the teaching 
was of God. He was to prove all things by the 
written Word of God, which the Apostle Paul declared is 
sufficient that the man of God may be thoroughly furnished. 
Any servant not found faithful, it is intimated, 
would be supplanted by another. 

The servant at the end of the Age, at the time of the 
Master's coming, if found faithful, would be especially 
blessed, and be given a general charge respecting the 
spiritual food to the Lord's family, the "meat in due season." 



But if he should prove unfaithful and fail to recognize 
the Master's presence, and manifest an unkind spirit 
toward the household, ministering to his own earthly 
wants rather than to the spiritual needs of the family of 
God, he would be removed in that day— cut asunder, 
separated, allowed to go into outer darkness with the 
world in general, in utter ignorance of the times and seasons, 
etc., of his Lord. The assumption is that the displacement 
of the one servant would mean the recognition 
of another to supply the Household of Faith. 

On the basis of this parable the Lord explained a general 
principle of His dealings; viz., that any servant, 
knowing his Master's will and not doing in harmony 
therewith, would receive stripes, punishments, tribulations, 
of some sort, in proportion to the degree of his 
knowledge and opportunity. On the other hand, any 
servant, even if he did things worthy of stripes, yet did 
them ignorantly, would receive proportionately fewer 
stripes. In a word, the general principle is that "to whom 
much is given, of him much is required." 

OUR GOLDEN TEXT 

The heart of this lesson is found in Verse 37, which 
refers to all of the Lord's servants who will be living at 
the time of His Second Coming— who in the earliest 
stages of His Second Coming, in the time of His Parousia, 
His presence, will be faithfully watching, on the alert to 
serve every interest of the Lord's cause, seeking His 
will, doing His will, searching the Scriptures, obeying the 
Scriptures, to the best of their ability. These will be informed 
to a certain degree respecting the time in which 
they will be living, as the Apostle points out, saying: "Ye, 
brethren, are not in darkness, that that day should overtake 
you as a thief." "Ye are all children of the light, 
children of the Day." "For the Day of the Lord shall 
so come as a thief in the night, in the which they [the 
world] will say, Peace and safety; and they [the world] 
shall not escape [the tribulations of that day]." "But ye, 
brethren, are not in darkness, that that Day shall overtake 
you as a thief." "Ye are all children of the light, children 
of the Day." (1 Thessalonians 5:1-8.) "Let us therefore 
walk, not in darkness, but in the light." 

The secrecy observed respecting the time and the manner 
of the Second Coming of Jesus will prove to be a 
strong test. All of the Lord's consecrated ones who are 
overcharged with the cares of this life— business, pleasure, 
etc.— will be slow to hear the knock; and even when 
they hear, they will be too much engrossed to give heed. 

However, there will be a great blessing on those servants 
whom the Lord at that time shall find watching— 
not watching the sky, as though they would see Jesus, 
when He is now a spirit being, invisible to humanity, but 
watching the Bible testimonies, watching the trend of the 
times, watching their own hearts, watching also the interests 
of the Church of God, seeking to build one another 



up in the most holy faith, laying aside every weight and 
every besetting sin. Let all of us who claim to be virgins 
—pure ones— who claim to be the Lord's servants as well 
as His brethren— let us be found of Him in peace, seeking 
first the Kingdom of God and the righteousness which it 
inculcates; let us be found alert, watching for opportunities 
of usefulness in the proclamation of the Kingdom 
Message, and in helping the Bride to make herself ready. 
-Revelation 21:9; 19:7. 



R5400 : page 47 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
HEARD HIM LECTURE SEVENTY TIMES 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Just a little anniversary note: Twelve years ago today, in 
Marten's Hall, St. Louis, I met and heard you for the first 
time— having since listened to you seventy times. 

You discoursed that day on THE RESURRECTION OF THE GOOD 
UNTO LIFE, AND THE RESURRECTION OF THE EVIL UNTO DAMNATION. 
One of my eyes was opened by the unreasonableness 
of a twenty-four hour Judgment Day, as exposed by you— a 
sort of a burlesque on my Methodist training. The other eye 
was opened by the reasonableness of the Scriptural Thousand- Year 
Day of Judgment, which you explained. 

I had been reading THE WATCH TOWER about five months, 
and had "gathered in" a little of its Message, as indicated by 
the notations on their margins; but I think the impression 
made on me that day fixed upon me, somehow, a determination 
to know God— to study His revealed Word. What it 
would lead to, of course, I could not comprehend. But I 
thank our dear Heavenly Father for His merciful and patient 
leading. I thank Him for the great responsibilities which are 
now mine! I am happy to be in the Truth and to know the 
Spirit of the Lord; and my earnest prayer is for wisdom to 
properly manifest in my daily life the fruits and graces of 
that Spirit. 

I wish to express to you my gratitude for your helpfulness 
all along the way. I love you for it. I pray daily for the all-sufficient 
grace to you-ward— for the Heavenly Father to sustain 
and cheer you, and to make you the happiest of men. 
Your confidence in, and loyalty to, Almighty God has borne 
much fruit for others as well as for yourself, and will certainly 
meet with a great reward— shortly. 

Somehow— I don't know how— I thought I could see a 
climax to culminate in the Seventh Volume, and from the 
first I have prayed that God might prepare my heart for that 
Seventh Volume. This Harvest Message as a whole has included 
so much. I feel confident that this great anticipation 
for the consummation of the Divine Plan of the Ages, in 
narrowing down the rays of prophecy and Present Truth to 
the focal-point, "It is Done," has carried me over many 



bridges where rails, ties and pillars had been removed. 

I am praising God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
and our Father, for an appreciation of, and a participation in, 
the Precious Blood! With tenderest love to my Pastor, I 
remain, 

Your fellow-servant in Christ, C. E. STEWART. 



EXPERIENCE OF TWO COLPORTEURS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Having heard of an experience of two Colporteur sisters, 
I thought that I would acquaint you with the same; for a 
word from you in THE WATCH TOWER would prevent a recurrence 
in other places. 

These two sisters, both of them full of zeal, had gone to 
canvass a town assigned to them. There is a small Class in 
the town; so they first sought to get acquainted with its 
members. 

The town had been canvassed before, and bitter opposition 
had been aroused by the preachers and others. Instead of 
encouraging the sisters, the Class commenced to tell them 
that it would be no use to canvass there— "Why, you will not 
sell any books here," etc. 

This discouraged them for a time; but realizing that they 
were in the Lord's work, and looking to Him for strength, 
they determined to go forth and colporteur in His name and 
strength. 

The result was that in ten weeks they took orders for 
1550 volumes and delivered the most of them, as well as assisting 
with a series of four meetings. If these sisters had followed 
the advice of the Class, this splendid opportunity for 
witnessing would have been lost. 

May the Lord continue to bless and keep you in all your 
ways and His presence be with you to the end! 

R5401 : page 47 

THE WATCH TOWER is getting better and better as we near 
the end; and how precious are its lessons to all! As we visit 
each place we hear many expressions of appreciation from 
the friends. I close with Christian love. 

Your loving brother in Christ, THOS. P. YATES. 



SWORD OF TRUTH FLASHING RIGHT AND LEFT 

BELOVED BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Wherever I go, among college men or others, I find Present 
Truth permeating remarkably, able financial and business 
men even conceding that an unparalleled panic is coming. 
Great numbers advance some of Present Truth that must 
have come from the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, and do not 
know where it came from. This demonstrates to my mind 



that these fundamental truths which are to unify all the 
human race are making rapid advance beyond those of the 
ideas of federation that are now operating to some extent 
among the denominations. Ashamed of the spectacle of a 
house divided against itself, as nominal Christendom is, they 
are striving for an impossible unity, which at best can be but 
nominal. 

The triumph of Truth is now beginning to show a glorious 
reality; thanks be to our Heavenly Father and our Lord 
Jesus, and to you, the faithful under-shepherd, and to all of 
the coworkers for the Kingdom of Heaven! 

Standing on the "sea of glass" we are lost in wonder as 
we see clearly this mighty conflict— the Sword of Truth flashing 
right and left, forcing out the Adversary from his refuge 
of lies. The words of a poet, "Lean far out into silence and 
listen for the thunder of the voice of God," have now a literal 
application for those who have the hearing ear. Marvelous! 

Surely Satan is being bound! Longing for that Day when 
Truth shall triumph, the whole groaning creation have cried 
in hope, 

"Truth crushed to earth shall rise again; 
The eternal years of God are hers." 
O glorious Day! At last it has come— literally in sight! 

Your Brother trying to help in the Harvest work, 
NEWTON T. HARTSHORN.-N.H. 



page 47 

FOUND "THE STUDIES" HER PANACEA 

BELOVED BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

"My lines are fallen in pleasant places; my soul rejoices in 
the Lord." 

But there was a time when I thought the Lord had forgotten 
me. In years past I was a diligent Bible student, and discovered 
many buried truths of the Bible and errors of the 
teachings of the system, such as the two phases of the Kingdom, 
the inconsistency of the Trinity doctrine, etc. But yet I 
believed in the immortality of the soul and a literal hell— not 
eternal though. You can better imagine my confusion than I 
can describe it. 

I still clung to the Bible; would rather die than reject it, 
but being unable to divide the Word of God rightly, I felt 
that death was sure if I could not be delivered from confusion. 

The precious volumes were the appointed helps. Five years 
ago the first volume came to my hands. I took to it for doctrinal 
help only; but how surprised, how joyful, how grateful 
I was when I discovered the spiritual food! As my cup up 
to that time had overflowed with consuming controversies, it 
now overflowed with heart-reviving blessings. 

Your sister in the Grace of our Lord, HANNAH HEGGE. 



R5401 : page 47 

THINKS "WATCH TOWER" TIMED TO MINUTE 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

A deep sense of appreciation to the Lord for the results of 
your labors in His name, particularly for the many blessings 
I am receiving from the reading of back TOWERS, and especially 
from the one just finished (June 1, 1900), urges me to express 
my thanks to you and to the Lord. I never received so 
much in such a short space as in this WATCH TOWER. It 
seemed as if almost every paragraph was written specially for 
me and timed right to the minute. I notice in so many of the 
letters written by the dear friends that questions which perplexed 
them were so often answered in the next TOWER, without 
suggestion. I have the same experience, both with the 
current TOWERS and the old ones; in fact, some of my experiences 
and the reading following them have startled me by 
their remarkable evidence of the Lord's leading and Providence. 

Some of the letters are so inspiring, and it is so interesting 
to watch the Truth grow! I read a little faster than a year's 
WATCH TOWERS a month, so while I have lost many blessings 
in experiences, yet the Lord makes up to me in this way. 

I have recently seen a little souvenir with your picture and 
some quotations, with comment. It touched me deeply, and I 
hope to get some when I place my next order. 

My wife (Sister H.) continues to make beautiful progress 
along the narrow way, and is truly a great help and inspiration 
to me. In harmony with comment on the MANNA text 
for Sept. 1 , we are very thankful to God for the leading He 
provides for us. It is our prayer that you may be kept faithful 
and strong till all the Divine pleasure may be fully accomplished 
in you. May we all meet soon in the General Assembly 
of the Church of the first-borns ! 

Your brother in hope, W. E. HULLINGER. 



page 49 

VOL. XXXV FEBRUARY 15 No. 4 
A. D. 1914-A. M. 6042 



CONTENTS 

Job's Experiences Typical of Human History 51 

Job's Hope of a Resurrection 52 

Difficult Lesson for Many 53 

False Peace of Many 53 

Restitution for Mankind Pictured 54 

Enduring Hardness as Good Soldiers 54 

Terms of Warfare Stated at Beginning 54 

Self, Our Special Foe 54 

Careless Living, a Form of Profanity 55 



Lawful on the Sabbath 56 

Seventh Day— First Day 56 

Parables of the Kingdom 57 

What Doth Jehovah Require? 59 

Interesting Questions 61 

How Did Saul of Tarsus See Jesus? 61 

Giving Counsel to One in Trouble 61 

Some Interesting Letters 62 

Personal and Class Rights 62 

End of Antitypical Atonement Day 63 

Berean Lessons in Scripture Studies— Vol. II 63 

page 50 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:-All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



R5410 : page 50 

THE PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION 

Answering various inquiries, we report that the DRAMA is 
not a mere statement of the Divine Plan— not a mere sermon. 
It therefore appeals to the public. We trust that its effect 
will be a broadening of human intelligence and interest in 
respect to the Bible and the Plan of God therein set forth. 
It is in four parts of two hours each. All witnessing it, we 
believe, will have larger conceptions of God, of the Universe 
and of humanity— everything. Freed from some of the 
shackles of error and superstition and ignorance, some, we 



hope, will be the better enabled to receive the knowledge of 
God which the Bible sets forth. Many who have witnessed 
the DRAMA and heard its lectures express great delight. One 
minister is reported to have said: "I have learned more in 
these two hours than I learned in the entire three years of 
my theological course in the U.B. College at Dayton, Ohio." 
Catholics, Protestants and Jews— all come, all are interested, 
and no ground for offense is given to any. 

The DRAMA is exhibited in Cincinnati at MUSIC HALL; in 
Cleveland at THE TEMPLE, Prospect Ave. and E. 22nd Street, 
at VICTORIA THEATRE in St. Louis, and at the AMERICAN 
THEATRE in Toledo— twice every day. In Boston it is shown 
in THREE PARTS every Sunday. Approximately twelve thousand 
people are now being reached daily in the cities 
mentioned. 

Our pictures are very beautiful, very costly, and require 
a great deal of time for preparation. We are, therefore, 
limited as to the number of sets of the DRAMA we can put 
forth; we are limited also by the expense incidental to each 
presentation— for rent, light, operators, etc. We shall not be 
able to reach very far for some months. 

Many more brethren have prepared themselves to be operators 
than we shall be able to employ for a good while. 
However, we have in mind something which we will mention 
as soon as it is ready, which may give opportunities of service 
to many more than are now employed. As for the sisters, 
we are relying upon the Classes at the various cities where 
the Exhibition is shown to supply the necessary Volunteers 
for ushers. 



R5382 : page 50 

"WONDERFUL COTTON SEED "-FREE 



Last year we offered our readers a few grains each from 
a wonderful stalk of cotton seven feet high, bearing hundreds 
of bolls. The only conditions were that they should send us 
one-half the seed of their crop, keeping the remainder for 
their own use. As a result we have received some sixty or 
seventy pounds of cotton seed. We will be pleased to send 
this to cotton-growers, giving a preference to those whose 
names are found on THE WATCH TOWER lists— on the same 
terms as that sent out last year. However, because of the 
better supply, we can increase the quantity sent to you. 

Write soon, and then wait. We will allow reasonable time 
to elapse before sending any, so as to determine what quantity 
may go to each. 



page 50 



CO-OPERATION OF FRIENDS APPRECIATED 



Our dear readers can save much of our time: 

By writing their letters plainly. 

By putting their full address at the head of the letter. 

By giving their orders on a separate piece of paper from 
their correspondence. 

By giving our file reference in replying to any communications 
from our office. Write "File A," "File B" or "File R," 
as the case may be, on face of your addressed envelope or 
postal-card and at beginning of your letter. 

Some, we notice, are using a small rubber stamp for their 
address. This is convenient and may also be used for stamping 
return address on your envelopes. 

We thank you for interesting clippings sent in, but request 
that you give name and date of the publication. If 
you send the paper be sure to mark the articles distinctly, so 
we will have no difficulty in locating the desired part. 



R5401 : page 51 

JOB'S EXPERIENCES TYPICAL OF HUMAN HISTORY 

"All these things happened unto them for ensamples [margin, 
types], and they are written for our admonition upon whom 
the ends of the ages are come."— 1 Corinthians 10:11. 

THE Book of Job is credited with being the 

finest piece of literature in the Hebrew language. 

It is a poem: and all scholars admit 

that no translation yet given does it justice. 

Martin Luther, after reviewing his last effort 

to translate it into the German, said, 

"Job is suffering more from my version 

than from the taunts of his friends, and 

would prefer his dunghill to my translation 

of his lamentation." The Book of Job 

"is admitted, with hardly a dissenting voice, to be the 

most sublime religious poem in the literature of the 

world," said Samuel Cox. "I call that one of the grandest 

things ever written with pen. ...There is nothing 

written, in the Bible nor out of it, of equal literary merit," 

said Thomas Carlyle. 

Whoever was used of God as the penman, his name is 
not given. The book is introduced with a prose narrative 
of Job's losses and sufferings. (The account of Satan's 
conversation with God concerning Job should be considered 
as allegorical— after the style of Pilgrim's Progress.) 
Then his patient endurance is set forth. Next 
follow the poetic colloquies between Job and his three 
friends, then Elihu's argument, then the Almighty's address, 
then Job's confession. The conclusion, relating to 



Job's return to favor and blessing, and his death, is in 
prose. 

Some have assumed that the Book of Job is merely a 
parable; and that Job himself is merely an imaginary 
character. But if this were the case, the teachings of 
the book would not be different. However, we see no 
cause to doubt that such a person did live and pass 
through the experiences related. In Ezekiel 14:14 and 
James 5:11, Job is classed with other holy men, which 
would not be the case were this narrative merely a parable. 
Besides, there are particular details given, such as 
are not common to parables. 

The fact that Job lived a hundred and forty years 
after his adversities, or probably over two hundred years 
in all, together with the fact that neither he nor his 
friends make any allusion to Israel or Moses or the Law, 
nor to Abraham and God's Covenant made with him, 
seems to indicate beyond doubt that he belonged to the 
Patriarchal Age. Possibly he lived about the same time 
as Abraham. His home was evidently in Arabia, and 
probably not far from Palestine. 

Job is introduced as a man of great learning and influence; 
as a man of great piety, who knew and reverenced 
God and appreciated justice; as a man of great generosity, 
who considered the widow and the orphan; and as 
a merchant prince of great wealth, who by his numerous 
servants and three thousand camels, carried on an extended 
and very prosperous traffic. 

Suddenly disaster came upon him and he was bereft 
of his children, his wealth, his influence and his health. 
He sought in vain for an explanation as to why God 
should permit such evils to befall him. Yet still he 
trusted in God, saying, "Though he slay me, yet will I 
trust in Him!" His wife urged that it had been without 
Divine appreciation that he had sought to do justice 
and mercy all his life, and exclaimed, "Curse God and 
die!" 

His three friends came to visit him, and, taking much 
the same view, told him in lengthy argument that he 
must have been a great sinner and a hypocrite. But, conscious 
of his own heart-honesty toward God, Job defends 
himself and goes to too great an extreme in declaring his 
innocence, but silences his critics. He seems to realize 
his need of some one to represent his cause before the 
Lord. He cries out that he is as righteous as he knows 
how to be; that he cannot reason the matter with God, 
being so much beneath Him in knowledge and power. He 

R5402:page51 

declares that the wilfully wicked are not so troubled, 
while he who has pursued righteousness is so afflicted that 
life has no further pleasure and he wishes that he had 
never been born. (Chapters 9, 10, and 16.) Feeling his 
own insufficiency to state his case before the great Jehovah, 
he desires a "daysman [a mediator] betwixt" God 



and himself.— Chapters 9:33; 16:21. 

Job's masterly reply to the false reasonings of his 
friends (which many improperly quote as inspired), and 
his expressions of confidence in God and of his ultimate 
deliverance, are clearly presented in Chapter 13:1-16. And 
then, with prophetic wisdom, in Chapter 14, he presents a 
most wonderful statement of the course of God's dealing 
with mankind. 

THE PROBLEM OF THE AGES 

The question which perplexed Job and confused his 
reasonings was the same that for centuries has confused 
others of God's people; namely, Why does God permit 
evil (calamities, afflictions, etc.) to come upon His faithful 
servants? and why are the wicked permitted to flourish? 
But not until the Gospel Dispensation was it possible 
for any to know the mind of God on this subject; 

R5402 : page 52 

for it is one of the deep things which could be revealed 
only by the Spirit of God, and only to those begotten of 
that Spirit, as St. Paul explains. (1 Corinthians 2:9-14.) 
And the Holy Spirit was not thus given, as a guide and 
teacher, until after Christ had redeemed us and ascended 
up on High, there to present His sacrifice as the price of 
our return to Divine favor, peace and communion. 

Although many are still in the dark on this subject, it 
is now open and clear to all the earnest ones to whom "it 
is granted to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of 
Heaven," to understand "the deep things of God." (Matthew 12:11; 
1 Corinthians 2:10.) These see that the 
reign of evil, the reign of Sin and Death, under Satan, 
the Prince of this world, is permitted for two reasons: 
first, that all men may gain a full experience of the exceeding 
sinfulness of sin and the bitterness of its legitimate 
fruit; and, second, that God's people may be fully 
tried and tested as to their loyalty to God in the shadow 
of affliction and trial, as well as in the sunshine of health 
and prosperity. 

Thus while God did not directly cause the evil state 
of things which surrounds us in nature and among men, 
but let it come upon men as the legitimate result, or fruit, 
of disobedience, sin, yet He does make use of the wrath 
of man and the sins of men and the animosity of Satan 
to work out grand designs which they do not comprehend, 
and of which His children know only by faith in 
His Word of revelation. For instance, how little did 
Satan and those malicious Jewish priests and Pharisees 
and those heartless Roman soldiers know that they were 
assisting in the working out of the Divine Plan when 
insulting, mocking and crucifying the Lamb of God! 

And so it is with the many afflictions of God's people 
—especially those of the Little Flock, the Bride of Christ. 
Trials are designed to fit and polish them for the greater 



usefulness and honor in the future developments of God's 
great Plan. Thus, regardless of the wilfulness or the 
ignorance of the persecutors, these trials of faith and 
patience are working out for such a "far more exceeding 
and eternal weight of glory." This they do by preparing 
the called ones to be heirs of glory, by cultivating 
patience, experience, brotherly sympathy and love— which 
is God-likeness. Such, and such only can rejoice in tribulation 
and realize that all things— bad as well as good; 
unfavorable, as well as favorable— will be overruled in 
God's providence for their ultimate benefit. 

JOB'S HOPE OF A RESURRECTION 

But, returning to our consideration of Job, let us note 
in Chapter 14 some of his prophetic wisdom. The first 
four verses graphically picture what all of experience 
realize— that human life under present conditions is full 
of trial and sorrow, from the cradle to the tomb. And 
Job shows that he realizes that as a son of fallen parentage 
he could not be perfect, free from sin, clean, in the 
full sense of the word. 

In verses 5,6, he tells the Lord that he recognizes the 
fact that the authority and power to limit man's days are 
in His hands, but urges (not seeing the ministry of 
trouble), Why not let me and all men live out our short 
time in peace— even as we would not afflict a hireling 
who already has a heavy, burdensome task! 

Verses 7-10 are close reasonings respecting the utter 
hopelessness of man in death, so far as any powers of 
his own are concerned. A tree may die and yet its root 
retain life, which, under favorable conditions, may spring 
up into another tree. But when man dies there is no 
root left, no spark of life remains. He giveth up the spirit 
of life, and where is he? 

Having confessed that there is no ground for hope inherent 
in man, Job begins to express the only, the real 
hope of our race— a resurrection— see verses 12,13. Man 
lies down in death and loses all power to arouse himself 
—nor can he be resuscitated from the sleep of death by 
any one, until God's due time. This will be the Resurrection 
morning, the Millennial Day, when the present symbolic 
heavens shall have passed away, and the new 
heavens or new spiritual ruling power— Christ's Kingdom 
—shall have come into control of the world. In this Job 
fully agrees with the teachings of our Lord and the 
Apostles. 

The more he thinks of that blessed time when evil 
shall no more have dominion, but when a King shall 
reign in righteousness and princes shall execute judgment, 
the more he wishes he might die and be at rest. 
He exclaims (verse 13), "Oh, that Thou wouldst hide me 
in the grave [sheol]; that Thou wouldst keep me secret 
[hidden] until Thy wrath be past; that Thou wouldst appoint 
me a set time and remember me!" Job had faith in 
a resurrection, else he would never have uttered this 



prayer for death— for hiding in the grave. But he preferred 
death, and desired to sleep (verse 12) until the 
morning, for one reason only— that he might have no further 
experience with sin and with God's wrath— evil. 

A short period in the end of the Gospel Age is specially 
called "the day of wrath and revelation of the 
righteous judgment of God," because it will be "A time 
of trouble such as was not since there was a nation." Yet 
the entire period from the time Adam fell is called a time 
of Divine wrath, and properly so; for in all this long 
period "the wrath of God is revealed against all unrighteousness," 
in a variety of ways. While Love is a controlling 
principle in the Divine Government, it can operate 
only in harmony with Justice and Wisdom. It was both 
just and wise to let man feel the real weight of condemnation 
to death incurred by wilful transgression, in 
order that when Love should in due time provide a Ransom 
and a Resurrection, the culprit might the more gladly 
avail himself of the provided favors of Restitution and 
everlasting life. Thus death and all the evils permitted 
to come upon the culprit race are manifestations of God's 
wrath, which will be yet further shown in the great Time 
of Trouble. This will be followed by full and clear manifestations 
of God's Love and favor in Christ and the glorified 
Church during the Millennial Age.— Romans 1:18. 

In verses 14 and 15, he puts the question pointedly, as 
though to determine and settle his faith; but he immediately 
answers affirmatively: "Thou shalt call, and I will 
answer Thee [and awake out of the sleep of Adamic 
death— compare John 5:28,29]; Thou wilt have a desire 
to the work of Thine hands"— for His people are His 
workmanship, created in Christ Jesus.— Ephesians 2:10. 

ELIHU'S HOPE OF A REDEEMER 

When Job had refuted the arguments of his three 
friends, Elihu (whose name signifies God Himself) spoke 
from a different standpoint, reproving the three friends 
as well as Job. Elihu shows Job that he had been reasoning 
in part from a wrong premise— that he must not 
expect to fully comprehend all the ways of One so far 
above him, but must trust in God's Justice and in His 
Wisdom. And in Chapter 33:23,24 he shows the one 
thing necessary to man's recovery from the power of 
death, and his restoration to Divine favor, saying, "If 
there be with Him a Messenger as defender, One of a 
thousand [i.e., a rare One] to declare His own righteousness 
for man, then will God be gracious unto him [man] 

R5402 : page 53 

and say, Release him from going down to the grave; I 
have found a Ransom." 

This is indeed the case with man. God's Wisdom and 
Justice cannot be impugned. The sentence of death is 
justly upon all men through Father Adam. (Romans 5:12.) 



But God has provided us a Redeemer, Christ Jesus 
our Lord; and He, in harmony with the Father's Plan, 
became a man, and then gave Himself a Ransom-price 
for all by paying the death-penalty that was upon Adam. 
And as soon as the Bride, otherwise called His Body and 
the Temple, is complete, this great Mediator will stand 
forward to declare His righteousness as for, or applicable 
to, every one who will accept it. 

Then will follow Restitution, as pictured in verses 25 and 26. 
Physically, these for whom the Mediator stands 
shall be restored to a perennial youth, in which death 
and decay will find no place. They shall find acceptance 
and communion with God in joy and peace; and He will 
restore them to the original perfection, lost through sin in 
Eden. But an acknowledgment that God is just, and that 
the Restitution was unmerited will be required. This is 
indicated by verses 27,28: "He will chant it before men, 
and say: I have sinned and perverted the right; and it was 
not requited me. He has redeemed my soul from going 
into the pit and my life that it may be brought to the 
light." 

Elihu's words were as wise as any of those spoken by 
Job's comforters— probably wiser; but they were merely 
human wisdom, so far as we can discern. In Chapter 34:29 
he asks the question, "When He [Jehovah] giveth 

R5403 : page 53 

quietness, who then can make trouble?" Evidently the 
young man sought to draw a line in the criticism of Job, 
agreeing with neither Job nor his friends, but endeavoring 
to be moderate in his position. He defended the 
Almighty, claiming that if God had not so ordered, Job's 
adversities could not have come upon him. 

To Elihu it seemed clear that God had a hand in Job's 
experiences. Satan could not have sent all these calamities 
unless God had permitted it. Neither man nor angel 
of whatever rank could thwart the Divine will. God, not 
Job, had the authority to decide what should be done. God 
alone had the right to order all of life's affairs. Incidentally 
Elihu showed that Job was more righteous than 
were his friends; and that while he was imperfect, like 
all, yet he was not being punished on this account. 

A DIFFICULT LESSON FOR MANY 

The Christian may very well draw a lesson from 
Elihu's question. Although the words are not inspired, 
yet they are very wise. We can recognize the truth they 
contain— that when God purposes to give peace, quietness, 
the whole Universe will be in obedience to His Laws, and 
none can make trouble. 

If we have difficulties, if we have persecutions, if we 
have troubles of any kind we should look to God. We 
should say: This thing could not happen to me unless the 
Lord permitted it. We have come under special Divine 



care. God has promised that all things shall work together 
for good to us who are His children. The lesson of trust 
is one of those difficult lessons for us to learn and apply- 
to realize that all of life's experiences are under Divine 
supervision and that nothing can happen to us but what 
is for our highest good. This is not now true of the 
world, but merely of God's family. By and by God will 
make all things work out blessings for the world. 

It is in respect to these who are His children that all 
things now work for good. When we are in difficulty, we 
are to look up in confidence and trust to the Lord. Our 
Heavenly Father wishes us to exercise faith in Him. St. 
Peter tells us that we are "kept by the power of God, 
through faith unto salvation." Therefore we greatly rejoice, 
even "though now for a season we are in heaviness 
through manifold trials" and temptations. "The trial of 
your faith is much more precious than that of gold that 
perisheth."— 1 Peter 1:5-7. 

FALSE PEACE OF MANY 

There is another way by which some may have quietness. 
Many in the world enjoy a measure of peace, or 
rest from worry. Yet they are unaware of the great 
truths which we enjoy, and are in blindness, ignorance, 
superstition, error, through Satan's delusions. They have 
a feeling of security and ease, through the blinding influence 
of error and falsehood. Those of the world who 
come into relationship with God, are therefore sometimes 
awakened from false security. Then they gain the true 
peace and rest of heart. The Lord says: "Come unto 
Me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give 
you rest." No true rest can be gained otherwise. 

The Lord's people have a peace and rest of mind 
through the knowledge of the Lord's Plan, the knowledge 
of His Justice, Mercy and Love, and a blessed realization 
that He is our God. All these things give us peace and 
quiet and rest of mind. While the world are troubled 
more or less, God's children have a peace that the world 
knows not of, that the world can neither give nor take 
away. And when the trials are all over, the Lord will 
make up for all the troubles of the present time, for all 
His children have suffered. We shall then look back on 
these trials and consider them but light afflictions, only 
for a moment— 2 Corinthians 4:17. 

TESTS OF LOYALTY AND DEVOTION 

When the Lord permits great clouds of trouble to 
come upon us, we should first look to see if we can discern 
any wrong-doing in ourselves which might properly 
bring chastisement. We should have joy in the Lord. 
But perhaps we have not been living close enough to the 
Lord. Yet these clouds of affliction do not necessarily 
mean that we have not been living close to Him, as we 
have seen in the case of Job. 



We remember likewise in the experiences of our Lord 
Jesus in the Garden of Gethsemane the night before His 
crucifixion, how He said to His disciples, Peter, James and 
John, "My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death." 
We remember that God did not give Him quietness, but 
allowed trouble like a great flood to sweep over His soul. 
He was troubled to know surely whether He had been 
entirely loyal, faithful and obedient, as was necessary to 
maintain the Father's favor. We are told by the Apostle 
Paul that our Lord Jesus "offered up prayers and supplications 
with strong crying and tears unto Him that was 
able to save Him out of death— and was heard."— 
Hebrews 5:7. 

We find that the Father sent His angel to minister 
unto His dear Son, in His deep distress. As soon as the 
angel had given our Lord the assurance of the Father 
that He was well pleasing in His life and conduct, He 
became perfectly calm. And the assurance sustained Him 
in all the trying experiences which followed— the trial 
before the Sanhedrin, before Pilate, the treatment of the 
soldiers, the journey on the way to Calvary, and in the 
midst of the trying process of execution which followed. 

Only at the last, when the Father, because Jesus must 
take the sinner's place, withdrew His presence from Him 
in His dying moment did our Lord manifest disturbance of 
mind. Then He cried out in agony of soul, "My God, My 
God, why hast Thou forsaken Me?" It was necessary for 
our Lord to experience the entire cutting off from God 

R5403 : page 54 

and from all relationship to God, in order to pay the full 
penalty for Adam's sin. This experience was at the very 
last moment. The Heavenly Father permitted this, for it 
was necessary to our Lord that He should realize the 
meaning of the sinner's separation from God. 

We do not consider it necessary that in every case 
our Lord's true and faithful followers should have a 
similar experience. We are not, as was our Redeemer, 
the Ransom, the Sin-bearer for the world; but it would 
not be surprising if some may have similar experiences 
to those of our Lord. Some of the saints have died, exclaiming 
"I am sweeping through the gates of the New 
Jerusalem!" while others have had dying experiences 
more like those of our Lord, and have cried out, "My 
God, My God, why hast Thou forsaken Me?" 

We can be content to leave our experiences entirely in 
the hands of Him who loves us, and can have an inward 
peace and calm and a rest of soul, knowing that no outward 
storm will be permitted but such as the Father sees 
will bring forth in us the peaceable fruits of righteousness, 
if we are properly exercised thereby. 

RESTITUTION FOR MANKIND PICTURED 

In the concluding chapters of the Book of Job, Jehovah 



addresses His afflicted servant, reproving his temerity in 

attempting, with his little knowledge, to judge God. This 

Job acknowledges, and finds peace in trusting God. Job's 

three friends, however, are severely reproved by God. 

But when they obey God and go to Job and offer up for 

themselves a burnt offering according to the Lord's commandment, 

and Job prays for them as God further instructed, 

they are restored to Divine favor. At once Job's 

prosperity returns— his friends and influence are restored; 

his wealth was exactly doubled, for he had twice as many 

flocks and herds and camels. He had also the same number 

of sons and daughters as before, and the Scriptures 

note that there were "no women found so fair as the 

daughters of Job." 

This ending of Job's career with a general Restitution 
is incomprehensible to those who have never seen that the 
Plan of God in Christ provides for a "Time of Restitution" 
of all things lost in Adam, to all of his race who 
will accept them under the terms of the New Covenant. 
(Acts 3:19-21.) But those who do see this Plan of God 
can readily see, too, that Job's experience was not only 
actual, but also typical. He seems to represent mankind. 
Man was at first in the Divine likeness and favor, with all 
things subject to him. (Psalm 8:4-8.) Because of 
Adam's sin Satan obtained an influence in human affairs 
which has resulted in degradation, sickness and death. 
God, however, has never really forsaken His creatures, 
and is even now waiting to be gracious unto all in and 
through Christ Jesus our Lord. 



R5403 : page 54 

ENDURING HARDNESS AS GOOD SOLDIERS 

"Thou, therefore, endure hardness as a good 
soldier of Jesus Christ."— 2 Tim. 2:3. 

THERE are many illustrations used in the 
Bible, and all of them very forceful. The one 
which represents the Christian as a soldier, 
has a great deal of meaning. We are not 
to suppose that the angels in Heaven are 
soldiers, nor that that term would be applicable 
to them. There is no war going on 
in Heaven, but there is a war going on here 
on earth. 

Six thousand years ago our first parents 
became entrapped, and the whole race was sold under 
Sin— became the servants of Sin and Satan. More and 
more this influence has prevailed— not that all willingly 
surrender to Satan, but that he puts darkness for light 
and light for darkness, and thus deceives mankind and 
leads them captive at his will. 

All who desire to be in harmony with God would be 



out of harmony with Satan and Sin. And they might at 
times have resisted these, and have tried to do God's 
will. But there was no organized undertaking for the 
overthrow of Sin until Jesus came. His mission was to 
overcome Satan, overcome Sin, and to bring everything 
into full harmony with God's arrangement. Earth, this 

R5404 : page 54 

province of God's great Empire, being in a rebellious 
state, needed to be conquered and restored, and Jesus 
undertook the work, with Divine backing. 

The first step was laying down His own life as a 
Ransom-price for the sin of the whole world, and thus 
making good for the original transgression. But before 
taking His power and exercising it in the overthrow of 
Satan and Sin, Jesus, according to the Father's will, 
began the selection of a Church class, variously styled 
members of His Body, His Bride, His companions and 
brethren in the Kingdom, His Royal Priesthood, under 
Himself as the great Royal High Priest. All those who 
have heard the Message, and whose hearts have been 
responsive, who have recognized the wrong conditions 
here prevailing, and who have felt sympathy for the race 
that is here sold as slaves of Sin and Death— all these 
have been invited to become members of this select class. 

TERMS OF WARFARE STATED AT BEGINNING 

These were informed at the very beginning that it 
would be necessary for them to fight a good fight. They 
were invited to enlist in the army to battle against Satan, 
and instructed that they should have full confidence that 
ultimately faith would have its victory. They were also 
told that they must suffer, laying down their lives as their 
Head and Forerunner laid down His life— not living for 
the world, but contrariwise, accepting His arrangement 
and living altogether for the purpose of carrying out their 
consecration with Him. 

The final honor to which God has invited them is to a 
share in His great Kingdom, with His Son. This implies 
a change of nature to all who have become soldiers of 
the Cross, followers of the Lamb; for "flesh and blood 
cannot inherit the Kingdom of God." These are called 
to forego the rights and privileges of the present time, 
and by their lives to leave their mark, for a testimony to 
the world, for the benefit of mankind, and especially for 
the glory of God and for the calling out of others who 
might desire similarly to walk in the narrow way. 

The warfare that these are called upon to wage is a 
warfare against sin and the powers of darkness. (Eph. 6:11.) 
They are pledged to the Lord for right, for truth, 
for goodness. They are thus to fight the good fight. 
These soldiers will find, too, that some of their greatest 
difficulties are right in their own person. They have 
tendencies toward sin, because of being members of the 



human family, children of wrath, of sin, even as others. 
Their relationship to the Lord is as New Creatures. 

SELF OUR SPECIAL FOE 

The New Creature is obliged to fight against and to 
control the flesh. This is a great battle which each fights 
for himself. Each soldier may more or less assist and 
set an example to the other soldiers, but the chief battle 
is with himself. It is a hand-to-hand conflict. Although 
he is expected at all times to be on the alert against the 
wiles of Satan and the world, yet his special fight is with 

R5404 : page 55 

the enemies in his own flesh. St. Paul himself had taken 
the shield of faith— wherewith to quench the fiery darts 
of the wicked— and the helmet of salvation, and the Sword 
of the Spirit, which is the Word of God. Timothy was a 
young soldier, and the Apostle was encouraging him with 
advice. He had already come into the Lord's company, 
under the Lord's standard. 

THE QUALITIES OF A GOOD SOLDIER 

St. Paul intimates that any one of us may be a good 
soldier, or contrariwise, a bad soldier, a poor soldier. 
We can imagine some soldiers who would be very disregardful 
of orders, not prompt to obey the command of 
the Leader. We can see that a good soldier is (1) one who 
is very much in sympathy with the Captain of his Salvation. 
He is an intelligent soldier, and sees that he has on 
the proper armor, that he wears it properly and that he 
gets the very best possible use out of this armor. He 
sees that in his walk he has a soldierly bearing, as a 
proper representative of the King, and of the great Kingdom 
so near at hand. 

(2) He is not ashamed of his flag, nor of the garment 
of Christ's righteousness. He is to lift up the standard 
of righteousness everywhere. He enlists in this warfare, 
knowing that it means his death— the death of the flesh, 
of the human nature. He is to be a good soldier— not 
merely outwardly loyal, merely wearing the uniform, but 
having the full spirit of the Cause. This means that 
whatever experiences come to him he is to receive these 
thankfully, and be glad to have the privilege of enduring 
something for His Captain and in the interests of the 
Kingdom to which he has sworn allegiance. 

The thought which the Apostle is impressing is that 
all good soldiers should endure hardness— hard, distressing 
conditions, circumstances that are quite unpleasant, 
difficult. Earthly soldiers are obliged to tramp 
through water and mud, enduring long, wearisome 
marches. Sometimes they are short of rations, sometimes 
obliged to sleep on the ground. Sometimes their 
battles are waged in the face of great opposition. 



So the soldier of Christ is to endure whatever experiences 
may come to him, under the guidance of his 
Captain, not only willingly, but gladly, rejoicing that he 
has been permitted to enter this army of the Lord, knowing 
that these experiences are working out for him "a 
far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory." These 
various hard experiences of the Christian are designed 
to work out for his good, that he may "lay hold on 
eternal life," and gain a share in the Kingdom with his 
Redeemer. 



R5404 : page 55 

CARELESS LIVING A FORM OF PROFANITY 

"Thou shalt not take the name of the 
Lord thy God in vain."— Exodus 20:7. 

THIS command was not given to the Gentiles; 
for the Lord had no dealings with the world. 
It was given to the Jewish people, who had 
come into relationship with God through the 
Law Covenant. We have every reason to 
believe that many of the Jews tried very 
hard outwardly to keep the Ten Commandments, 
the keeping of which meant life, the 
failure to keep which meant death. All of 
their endeavors failed, and they continued 
to die.— Romans 7:10. 

Notwithstanding the endeavor of many to observe this 
command of our text, St. Paul declared respecting them 
that the name of God was blasphemed through them 
amongst the Gentiles. (Romans 2:24.) We cannot suppose 
that the grosser meaning of blasphemy was the 
Apostle's thought. Blasphemy was a terrible thing among 
the Jews. Even a parent who heard his own child 
blaspheme was instructed to stone that child to death for 
so doing. We suppose the Apostle meant that the kind of 
living practised among the Jews really blasphemed God's 
name before the world. They were professedly God's 
people. And if under Divine instruction, Divine care, 
and Divine recognition, they did the things dishonoring 
to God, they were blaspheming His name. 

While the Ten Commandments were not given to the 
Church, yet every feature of the Ten Commandments is 
a command; for by the character of our consecration we 
are bound to seek to know God's will, even beyond 
the mere letter of His Word. Hence, while the Church 
is not under the Law Covenant, we are under the general 
instruction of the Ten Commandments. Therefore the 
Apostle says that "the righteousness of the Law [the 
true meaning of the Law] is fulfilled in us, who walk 
not after the flesh, but after the Spirit."— Romans 8:4. 

It is not supposable that any real child of God, any 



consecrated follower of Christ, could have a desire to 
take the name of the Father in vain. Hence the apparent 
meaning of this command is not applicable to us; 
for since we have become His children, and have received 
His Spirit, it would be the farthest thing from us to wish 
to profane His name. But as the Jews profaned the 
name of the Lord by careless living amongst the Gentiles, 
so there is great danger of Christians profaning His name 
by careless living. And this is indicated in the Scriptures 
as being a danger. 

Our Lord speaks of some who, at His Second Coming, 
will say, "Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in 
Thy name, and in Thy name done many wonderful 
works, and in Thy name cast out devils?" And He will 
say, "I do not recognize you." They have been deceiving 
themselves. (Matthew 7:21-23.) They did not come in 
by the door of the sheep-fold, and have never been recognized 
by the Lord as His sheep. Amongst them there 
will perhaps be a great many who have done philanthropic 
and reform work. 

But the thousand years of Christ's Reign will be the 
time when God will institute the real Reform Work, 
through Christ's Kingdom. Now the Lord is working 
in the hearts of His people, through His promises, seeking 
the particular class who are moved and exercised by 
these promises. Thus He is finding a Little Flock, a 
peculiar people, to be joint-heirs with Christ in His 
Kingdom. 

LET US TAKE NOT HIS NAME IN VAIN 

From this standpoint, all of God's people should be 
very much on guard that they do not take the name of 
the Lord in vain when they profess to be His people, His 
children— when they profess to be the followers of Jesus 
and call themselves Christians. It would be far better if 
many professed Christians did not take the name of 
Christian at all. The only ones who may properly take 
Christ's name are those who really become His disciples. 
The only condition under which any may become His 
disciple is to take up his cross and follow Him— give up 
his life, surrender his will. 

Although this commandment was not given to Spiritual 
Israel, we can readily see how the spirit of it applies to 

R5405 : page 56 

us. We have taken the name of Christ as our name. We 
profess to be members of the Body of Christ. And the 
holy name of the Head belongs to all the members of His 
Body. The honored name of the Bridegroom belongs to 
His Espoused. What carefulness the thought of this 
should give us, and how appropriate it is that we should 
see to it that we have not taken that blessed name in 
vain; that we appreciate the honor, the dignity, the 
responsibility, of our position as His representatives and 



ambassadors in the world! Let us, therefore, walk circumspectly, 
taking earnest heed that we bring no dishonor 
to that hallowed name; but on the contrary, that 
we honor it in our every thought and word and deed. 
"What manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy 
conversation [behavior] and godliness?" "As He which 
hath called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of 
conversation [behavior]; because it is written, Be ye 
holy; for I am holy."-2 Peter 3:11; 1 Peter 1:15,16. 



R5405 : page 56 

LAWFUL ON THE SABBATH 

--MARCH 15. -LUKE 13:10-17; 14:1-6.- 

"The Sabbath was made for man, and 
not man for the Sabbath."-MARK 2:27. 

MUCH confusion prevails amongst Christian 

people respecting the Sabbath day. One 

fruitful source of this confusion is that 

few realize that God's arrangements with 

the followers of Jesus are totally different 

from those which He made with Natural 

Israel under the Law Covenant. Everything 

under that Covenant was a type and 

contained a valuable lesson for Christians, 

but to mistake the type for the antitype is 

to confuse our minds and to miss the beauty and force of 

the antitype. 

There was no Sabbath day before the Jewish Law, 
except in the sense that the word Sabbath signifies rest, 
and that we are informed that God rested on the seventh 
great Day, or Epoch, of the Creative Week. Enoch, who 
walked with God; Abraham, the friend of God, and others 
pleasing to the Lord, knew nothing about the Sabbath, 
even as they knew nothing about the Atonement 
Day and its sacrifices, or other matters appertaining to 
Israel's Law Covenant. 

The Apostle Paul explains that the Israelites were a 
House of Servants, under Moses; but that the Church is 
a House of Sons, under Christ. (Hebrews 3:1-6.) God's 
method of dealing with the House of Servants would 
very properly be different from His method of dealing 
with the House of Sons. Commands are given to the 
servants without explanation why or wherefore. But the 
Apostle explains that God deals with us as with sons. To 
the true Christian the Heavenly Father makes known 
His plans, His purposes, His arrangements, in order that 
His sons, who have His Spirit, may sympathetically enter 
into those plans, by obedience to the extent of self-sacrifice, 
not because of command, but because of joy to 
do the Father's will. 



Jesus and the Apostles were Jews, and were under 
obligation to the Law Covenant up to the time that Jesus 
by His death became the "end of the Law for righteousness 
to every one that believeth." Since that time the 
followers of Jesus are in no sense of the word bound by 
the Jewish Law. They are interested in the Ten Commandments, 
because those commandments in an outward 
way indicate the will of God; and all the sons of God 
are anxious to know the Father's will, that they may voluntarily 
do it. But God does not address the House of 
Sons, "Thou shalt not kill; thou shalt not steal"; for so 
surely as they have been begotten of the Holy Spirit at 
all, they will not wish to kill, nor wish to steal. 

In dealing with the House of Sons God, through the 
Head of the House, has set up a new law, which is all-comprehensive 
and means much more than the Law of 
Moses was previously understood to signify. It is the 
Law of Love. As the Apostle declares, "Love is the fulfilling 
of the Law." The Law is comprehended in the 
one word Love— love supreme for God, and love for our 
fellow men. Finally, Jesus declared, "A new command I 
give unto you, that ye love one another as I have loved 
you." This He said to us who are laying down our lives 
one for the other. 

SEVENTH DAY-FIRST DAY 

Early in the Gospel Dispensation the followers of 
Jesus began to meet on the first day of the week. Apparently 
the custom had its start in the fact that Jesus 
rose from the dead on that day, and appeared several 
times on that day to His followers; and on the following 
first day of the week He appeared again. It became a 
custom amongst the disciples to have their fellowship on 
that day, not that it was commanded of the Lord, but because 
of their desire to remember the Master and to have 
fellowship with each other. Quite probably they kept the 
Sabbath day and the first day as well, for a time. They 
evidently had difficulty in realizing how completely they 
had passed from the domination of Moses and his Law 
to be under the headship of Jesus and His guidance— 
"the liberty wherewith Christ makes free" indeed. 

Although Christians have now abandoned the observance 
of the seventh day in favor of the first day of the 
week, many erroneously think that God authorized the 
change. But not so; the Christian is not under law, but 
under grace. It was from privilege that the early disciples 
met together on the first day, and not by instruction 
of God. So it should be still, and so it is yet with some. 
True Christians cannot have too much opportunity for 
fellowship together for the study of the Heavenly Father's 
Word, and for offering Him the worship and homage 
of their hearts. 

True Christians undoubtedly are glad that there is a 
special day of the week set apart, in which they can more 
particularly give themselves to prayer, worship, praise 



and Bible study, and good works— even though the enforcement 
of such a Sunday be by human law and 
through a misconception. Glad would many of the Lord's 
people be if their earthly affairs were so arranged as to 
permit of two Sundays in each week, or more. But in 
order to enjoy Sunday properly, the Lord's consecrated 
people should be freed from the misconceptions which so 
generally prevail. 

THE SABBATH OF REST 

Israel's Law provided two Sabbaths. One, every 
seventh year, found its multiple and fulfilment in the 
fiftieth year, the year of Jubilee and of full release. The 
other was every seventh day, and found its fulfilment 
through its multiple, in the fiftieth day— the day of Pentecost 
—the day which foreshadowed the rest into which 
the people of God may enter even now. 

The Apostle refers to both of these in Hebrews 4:1-1 1. 
The Sabbath day has its fulfilment in the rest and 
peace of heart enjoyed by the antitypical Israelites. It 
is a perpetual Sabbath with them. They enter into rest. 

R5405 : page 57 

They have reached that place where they have the peace 
of God ruling in their hearts. They rest from their own 
works— from all hope that they could commend themselves 
to God by works of any kind, Sabbath keeping or 
otherwise. They enter into rest because they see that 
God has provided in Jesus the help necessary for all, that 
they are "complete in Him." This rest or peace no man 
taketh from them. It is theirs so long as they abide by 
faith in Christ, in God. 

But, as the Apostle points out, "there remaineth a rest 
for the people of God"— a future rest. The Church will 
enter into that rest when they experience their resurrection 
change, when they are made like the Savior and enter 
into the joys of their Lord. That will be the complete 
rest. So far as the world is concerned, the great Messiah's 
Reign of a thousand years will be the Sabbath of 
the world in general, in which they will have the privilege 
of attaining perfection in every sense of the word 
and thus will enter into rest by coming into harmony with 
God. 

Jesus did many of His miracles on the Sabbath days, 
partly no doubt to emphasize the fact that the great Sabbath, 
the thousand-year Day, the seventh thousand-year 
Day of earth's history, will be the time of His Kingdom, 
in which all mankind will be privileged to be healed from 
sin and sickness, sorrow and pain, and to be brought to 
the full perfection of human nature, to all that was lost 
in Adam and redeemed at Calvary. 

TO DO GOOD ON THE SABBATH 



Since Jesus according to the flesh was a Jew, and 
therefore bound by all the commandments of the Jewish 
Law, it follows that He could do nothing contrary to 
that Law. He could not set it aside, nor was it proper 
that he should explain to the Jews the real meaning of 
the Sabbath. All that would come later, under the Holy 
Spirit's instruction, after Pentecost, after the begetting of 
the Spirit; for "the natural man receiveth not the things 
of the Spirit of God, neither can he know them, because 
they are spiritually discerned." But Jesus could, and did, 
correct certain of the misapprehensions of the Law which 
had crept in through the teachings of their rabbis, the 
Doctors of the Law, and the Pharisees. 

These for show exaggerated the letter of the Law in 
some respects, while they entirely ignored its spirit. Thus 
when the disciples of Jesus, passing through a wheat field, 
rubbed some of the grains in their hands to hull them 
before eating, the Pharisees complained that they were 
breaking the Sabbath— they were threshing and winnowing. 
Jesus showed that this was not the purport of the 
Law. It was not made to hinder any good or necessary 
work, but to benefit the people. According to the Doctors 
of the Law, to search for a biting flea would be sin 

R5406 : page 57 

on the Sabbath day, because it would be "hunting." Thus 

in various ways they made the reasonable Law of God 

to appear unreasonable to the people; and while thus particular 

in trifles, they ignored the weightier matters of 

the Law, which appertained to justice, love and mercy. 

In the lesson before us we have two instances of healing 
on the Sabbath. A woman had an infirmity which 
had bowed her down for eighteen years. Jesus released 
her from her bondage on a Sabbath day. He laid His 
hands upon her and said, "Thou art loosed from thine 
infirmity"; and she was made straight and glorified God. 
But the ruler of the synagogue was indignant and said 
unto the people, There are six days in which you can 
come and be healed, and not on the Sabbath day. 

This was intended as a special rebuke to Jesus, intimating 
that He was not so holy and so careful of the 
Sabbath as He should be, but was a violator of the Law. 
But Jesus replied: "Ye hypocrites! doth not each one of 
you on the Sabbath loose his ox or his ass from the stall, 
and lead him away to water? and ought not this woman, 
whom Satan hath bound, lo, these eighteen years, be 
loosed from this bondage on the Sabbath day?" And His 
adversaries were put to shame. 

The other case was that of a man troubled with 
dropsy. Jesus, knowing their attitude of mind, discussed 
the subject in advance on this occasion, asking the Doctors 
of the Law and the Pharisees, "Is it lawful to heal on 
the Sabbath day or not?" They made no answer. Then 
He took the sick man and healed him, and inquired of 
the critics, "Which of you having an ass or an ox fall 



into a pit would not straightway draw him out on a 
Sabbath day?" But they could not answer. 

A proper understanding of the Sabbath, the rest 
which God has provided for His people, is a great blessing. 
"We who believe do enter into rest"— an abiding 
rest, a perpetual Sabbath. And all such are glad to have 
special opportunities, as these may present themselves, 
for gathering together in the name of the Lord, for worship, 
praise, study and fellowship. Without regard to 
which day, the Apostle suggests to us, Let us forsake not 
the assembling of ourselves together as the manner of 
some is; and so much the more, as we see the Day drawing 
on— the glorious Day of Messiah's Kingdom approaching, 
and the shadows of night and darkness, of 
ignorance and superstition passing away.— Heb. 10:25. 



R5406 : page 57 

PARABLES OF THE KINGDOM 

-MARCH 22.-LUKE 13:18-30.- 

"Not every one that saith unto Me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into 
the Kingdom of Heaven; but he that doeth the will of My 
Father which is in Heaven. "-MATTHEW 7:21. 

FEW apparently have noticed that nearly all 

of Jesus' teachings related to the Kingdom 

of God. This was because the Kingdom 

of God is the great Divine remedy promised 

for the release of mankind from the 

curse, and the blessing of the willing and 

obedient with an uplift out of sin and 

death conditions, a return to harmony 

with God and the everlasting life which 

He is pleased to give to all who love Him. 

All that took place in the world prior to the coming of 

Jesus was merely preparatory. Life and immortality 

had not even been brought to light before the First Advent. 

Thus we read, "Christ hath brought life and immortality 

to light through the Gospel." There were 

hints, suggestions and promises of coming blessings; but 

the method of procedure, etc., was not brought to light. 

The typical sacrifices of Israel taught a great lesson; 
viz., that better sacrifices must be offered before the 
blessings could be received. The typical kingdom of 
Israel taught that Messiah would be a great King, and 
rule with great power. But when the last of the kings 
of David's line, Zedekiah, was dethroned, the Lord 
through the Prophet declared, "I will overturn, overturn, 
overturn it: until He come whose right it is; and 
I will give it unto Him."— Ezekiel 21:25-27. 

R5406 : page 58 



The work of Jesus at His First Advent, His sacrificial 
death as an Atonement for man's sin, was necessary 
as the foundation or preliminary to the setting up 
of God's Kingdom for man's deliverance from the power 
of sin and death. But, although the Redeemer died 
eighteen centuries ago, the Kingdom is not yet set up. 
We are still praying, "Thy Kingdom come." Nevertheless, 
when enlightened by the words of our Lord and 
the Apostles, we see that the Divine program has not 
stopped. An elect Church is being sought, which is to 
be the Bride of Christ and His Joint-heir in His Kingdom, 
and not until this great work shall have been accomplished 
can the Kingdom come. After the full number 
of His elect Church shall have been perfected in the 
First Resurrection, they shall reign with Him, as He 
promised— "a Royal Priesthood"; "kings and priests 
unto God." 

There should be no doubt that these features of the 
Plan of God constitute quite sufficient reasons why the 
Savior should preach and teach so much respecting the 
Kingdom. The different parables illustrative of the 
Kingdom treat it from different standpoints, just as we 
might take different photographs of persons or of a 
building, or of the same person or thing at different ages 
or stages of development or from different angles. So 
some of the parables of the Kingdom tell about the persecutions 
which would come upon those who would be the 
heirs of the Kingdom. Others tell that there would be a 
great outward appearance of prosperity, while the true 
Kingdom class would be still a Little Flock. 

One parable at least tells about the future work of 
the Kingdom, after the Church is completed and sits 
with Christ in His Throne. This is the Parable of the 
Sheep and the Goats, which has its fulfilment positively 
dated by the expression, "When the Son of Man shall 
come in His glory, and all the holy angels with Him, 
then shall He sit upon the Throne of His glory; and 
before Him shall be gathered all nations; and He shall 
separate them the one from the other, as a shepherd 
divideth his sheep from the goats."— Matthew 25:31,32. 

This dividing of the world, the Gentiles, will progress 
for a thousand years, and eventually will make a most 
complete separation, identifying the sheep of the Lord's 
favor and introducing them to the blessings intended for 
them, and destroying the goat class as being really servants 
of sin and of Satan. These will go away into everlasting 
punishment, symbolized by fire. The punishment 
will be everlasting, even though they will be unconscious; 
for "the wages of sin is death," not torment. 
Therefore the everlasting punishment will be an everlasting 
death, from which there will be no redemption, 
no future recovery. 

A GRAIN OF MUSTARD SEED 



Two illustrations of the Kingdom occur in this lesson. 
In the one the Lord likens the Kingdom to a grain 
of mustard seed, which from a small beginning would 
become quite a large bush, and the birds of the air 
would lodge in its branches. This evidently was intended 
as a picture of the outward appearance of the 
Church— very prosperous, so prosperous as to invite the 
birds. Elsewhere Jesus declared that the birds represented 
the Wicked One and his agents, ever ready to 
take away the seed of Truth and to work adversely as 
respects the Gospel program. (Matthew 13:4,19.) In 
Revelation also the great Teacher speaks of the Church 
as becoming Babylon, confusion, and as being "a cage 
of every unclean and hateful bird." (Revelation 18:2.) 
The picture fits. 

Again the Master illustrated the experiences of His 
Church as an embryo tic Kingdom. His second parable 
tells of a woman who hid some leaven in three measures 
of meal until the whole batch was leavened. This, 
Bible students are coming to understand, signifies a corrupting 
of the Divine Message— the spiritual Food 
which God had prepared for the Church. A woman in 
symbolic language represents a church system; and the 
Master tells us that such a church system will mix 
leaven, or ferment, in the food of the family of God 
until the whole mass will be corrupted. For be it noted 
that leaven in the Bible is always used as a symbol of 
corruption, of sin. This parable shows that the faith 
once delivered to the saints would be lost, vitiated, mixed 
with error, until it would no longer be nourishing to the 
family. St. Paul pictures the same matter, saying that 
in the latter days "some shall depart from the faith, giving 
heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of demons."— 
1 Timothy 4:1. 

These false doctrines are what are troubling the people 
of God today. Our hearts are better than our heads; 
for the hearts of the consecrated are in tune with the 
Infinite One, while the creeds of the Dark Ages are quite 
out of tune. The blessings that are lately coming to Bible 
students are largely the result of breaking loose from the 
creeds formulated in the Dark Ages, and getting back to 
the teachings of Jesus, the Apostles and the Prophets— 
the only inspired authorities. Their words alone constitute 
the proper food whereby we are to be nourished. 
The Word of God is sufficient, that the man of God may 
be thoroughly furnished.— 2 Timothy 3:16,17. 

Some dear Christian people, looking at matters evidently 
from a wrong angle, are still deceived into thinking 
that it is possible for the Church, as the Kingdom of 
God in an embryotic condition, to do the work which God 
assigns to that Church in her future glorified, perfected 
condition. Such shut their eyes to the fact that the number 
of heathen in proportion to the number of Christians 

R5407 : page 58 



doubles every century. Such try to count up Christians 
by the hundreds of millions, entirely ignoring the fact 
that Jesus has declared that the Gospel Church, the Elect, 
who are walking in His steps, will be altogether but a 
Little Flock. --Luke 11:32. 

THE CALLED SAVED 

The blessing of the heathen is not merely for those 
now living, but for all who have ever lived. Messiah's 
Kingdom will triumph gloriously in the Lord's due time. 
The knowledge of the glory of God will fill the whole 
earth (Isaiah 1 1:9), until none shall need to say to his 
neighbor or to his brother, Know thou the Lord; for all 
shall know Him. (Jeremiah 31:33,34.) It is in order 
that all may come to a knowledge of the Truth that God 
has promised that "there shall be a resurrection of the 
dead, both of the just and of the unjust"; that "all that 
are in their graves shall hear the voice of the Son of 
Man and shall come forth." A faithful few will come 
forth to glory, honor, immortality and a share in the 
Kingdom; and the unreconciled many will come forth 
later, that the Love of God may be testified to them, and 
that they may have the opportunity of the rewards and 
chastisements of the Kingdom, to help them back to all 
that was lost in Adam and redeemed at Calvary. 

Some inquired of the Lord, Will there be but few 
saved? Jesus did not give a direct answer to the question, 
doubtless for two reasons: (1) The Holy Spirit had not 
yet come, and His followers could not then be prepared 
to understand the Plan of God thoroughly. (2) It was 

R5407 : page 59 

not due time to explain all the particulars of the spiritual 
salvation of the Church, to be like unto her Lord, and 
then later the human Restitution of the world to the 
image and likeness of the first Adam. Jesus applied the 
matter to His hearers personally, saying: "Strive ye to 
enter in [to the Kingdom] by the narrow door; for many, 
I say unto you will seek to enter in, and shall not be able. 
When once the Master of the House is risen up and shut 
to the door, and ye begin to stand without, and to knock 
at the door, saying, Lord, open unto us, He shall answer 
and say to you, I know you not whence ye are." 

For a certain period of time the door to the High Calling 
of the Church stands ajar. Jesus opened up this new 
way of life through the veil; that is to say, His flesh— 
His sacrifice. (Hebrews 10:19,20.) The possibilities of 
entering into this way were first presented to the Jews; 
and after finding the suitable ones of that people, God 
has directed the Message hither and thither amongst the 
Gentiles for these more than eighteen centuries. Apparently 
the gathering of the Elect has been nearly completed. 
As soon as the last one completing the elect 
number shall have qualified for glory and shall have 



passed through the door, it will shut. 

About that time, a great awakening of religious 
thought will come to the world, in the midst of a great 
Time of Trouble. Then many will begin to say that they 
have been neglecting the great Prize, that they have failed 
to purchase the pearl of great price on the cheap terms 
on which it was offered to them— their little all. Then 
there will be great lamentation amongst this class, and a 
crying, Lord, Lord, are we not to be of the Bride class? 
But the Lord will disown them as respects the Bride company. 
Then they will be in great sorrow. Weeping and 
gnashing of teeth will prevail. This will not be in some 
far-off place of eternal torment, as once we supposed; 
but, as the narrative intimates, it will be right here on 
the earth, amongst a class who neglected the privileges 
of the High Calling when they knew of it. 

Bringing the matter down to His hearers, but still 
leaving it applicable to all who have heard the Message 
throughout the Gospel Age, the Lord intimates that some 
of these will have been in close touch with Him and His 
followers. They had a form of godliness and claimed to 
have done many mighty works, yet the Lord will disown 
them as respects any privileges in the Kingdom. They 
will not even have a share in the earthly kingdom. It will 
be given to the Worthies of the past who lived and died 
before the High Calling was opened up. 

Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and all the Prophets and faithful 
ones of the past are to be Princes in all the earth, the 
visible representatives of the invisible Messiah and His 
Church in glory. The heirs of the Kingdom will not be 
entirely Jewish, because the Jews as a nation were not 
sufficiently holy and because the Lord could accept only 
the holy. When the call to joint-heirship in the Kingdom 
would go out to the Gentiles, some would come from the 
East, the West, the North and the South, and have a 
share in the Kingdom. The Jews were first in God's 
favor and the Gentiles last; yet some of the first with 
privilege and opportunity would fail. 



R5407 : page 59 

WHAT DOTH JEHOVAH REQUIRE? 

-MARCH 29. -MATTHEW 7:24-29.- 

"What doth Jehovah require of thee, but to do justly, and to love 
kindness, and to walk humbly with thy God?" -MIC AH 6:8. 

JESUS sought to impress upon His hearers 
that it was not sufficient for them to hear 
that a Kingdom of God was coming, and 
that it would bring certain blessings to the 
world. It was not sufficient that they should 
know that a Kingdom class was being called 



out of the world to be Messiah's joint-heirs 

in that Kingdom. Action would be necessary 

on their part if they would attain to 

this high privilege which God had granted 

to them. "Show me thy faith without thy works, and I 

will show thee my faith by my works," wrote St. James. 

Not that we are to attain the Kingdom by our works; 

for, imperfect through the fall, we are unable to do perfect 

works, acceptable to God. It will be our faith in 

God and in the Lord Jesus that will bring us the victory, 

if we gain it; but the victory will be accounted only to 

those who shall, to the best of their ability, work out 

their salvation with fear and trembling. God will work in 

such, and through Christ bring them off conquerors, yea, 

more than conquerors. 

Jesus gave an illustration, or parable, declaring that 
those who heard His Message and rendered obedience 
thereto would be like a wise man, who built his house 
upon the rock, where the descending rains would not 
wash away the foundation from underneath, nor in any 
wise harm it. The storms of life are sure to come; and 
the great crisis of life, death, is sure to come. Amidst 
those trials there will be calmness, confidence and security 
for such as have accepted the Lord's arrangement 
and have been walking to the best of their ability in the 
footsteps of Jesus. To them death will be merely a 
transition from the earthly state to the Heavenly, by the 
power of the First Resurrection— "changed in a moment, 
in the twinkling of an eye"; for "flesh and blood cannot 
inherit the Kingdom of God." (1 Corinthians 15:50-52.) 
Their faith and confidence, built upon God's promises, 
can never fail them. For such there is laid up a crown 
of life, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, will give 
them at that Day.— 2 Timothy 4:8. 

On the other hand, Jesus intimates that many who 
heard His words and expressed great appreciation of 
them, would fail to take the proper steps to attain the 
glorious Kingdom privileges which He presented. They 
would allow custom, habit, love of pleasure, love of ease, 
the spirit of the world, to hinder them, either from 
making the proper, full devotion of themselves to God, or 
from carrying out that purpose. Such indeed might to 
some extent encourage themselves with hopes of the 
Kingdom which would never be realized, because they 
never took the proper steps. They did not build their 
faith upon the proper foundation. Perhaps some of them 
built upon the Law, and thought that they could commend 
themselves to God by their own endeavors, without 
the imputation of the merit of Christ. Such would be 
greatly mistaken. "Other foundation can no man lay 
than that which God has laid— Jesus Christ." His death 
is our redemption-price, and His appearance in glory as 
our Advocate is to make good for our unintentional 
shortcomings. 

With all such, the day of stress and trial will surely 
come; and their faith structure, being without a proper 



foundation, will give way. They will suffer the loss of 
all their hopes. This, however, does not signify, as many 
of us once supposed, that they will go to eternal torment. 
Evidently nearly all Christian people, misled by the 

R5407 : page 60 

creeds of the Dark Ages, read into the Word of God 
many things which it does not at all contain. 

COMPARE ST. PAUL'S PARABLE 

The Apostle Paul used a similar illustration, saying, 
"Other foundation can no man lay than that which is 
laid— Jesus Christ." "But let every man take heed how 
he buildeth thereupon"; for the Day that cometh shall 
try every man's work of what sort it is. Those building 
with the gold, silver and precious stones of Divine Truth, 
developing their faith and character in harmony with the 
Divine requirements and arrangements, will suffer no 
loss in the great trial day at the end of this Age. But 
others who build with the wood, hay and stubble of 
human tradition and self-complacency, will find that 
their entire faith structure will be consumed; for the fire 
of that Day shall try every man's work of what sort it 
is.— 1 Corinthians 3:10-15. 

Nevertheless, the Apostle tells us that even those who 
will suffer the loss of their faith structure, if they have 
built upon Christ, will themselves be saved, though so as 
by fire. They will be what is sometimes termed a tribulation 
class, described in Revelation 7:14-17: "These are 

R5408 : page 60 

they that have come out of great tribulation, and have 
washed their robes and made them white in the blood 
of the Lamb. Therefore are they before the Throne of 
God, and serve Him in His Temple day and night." On 
these, God has various blessings to bestow. These will 
be in proportion to their obedience and loyalty and faith. 

The class that the Apostle mentions as building with 
gold, silver and precious stones, will be a Little Flock, a 
Royal Priesthood, who will sit in the Throne, wearing 
the crowns, and be joint-heirs with Jesus in the Kingdom. 
But the class building upon the Rock without 
proper materials, yet saved so as by fire, will be the 
Great Company class, the antitype of the Levites, who instead 
of being in the Throne, will before the Throne 
serve those in the Throne; instead of wearing crowns, 
they will be granted palm branches, indicating a victory 
of an inferior kind. The priestly class will be the antitypical 
Temple of God; the Levite class, the Great Company, 
will serve God in and through that Temple class. 

Nor is this all of the salvation which God has purposed. 
These two classes include merely the spirit-begotten 
ones of this Gospel Age. The Ancient Worthies 



are to constitute another class of saved ones— saved to 
an earthly perfection, to be princes in all the earth, 
glorious representatives of the invisible, spiritual, 
Heavenly Kingdom class. Then finally will come the 
blessing of all the families of the earth who shall prove 
willing and obedient during the thousand years of the 
Kingdom Reign, and who will be gradually lifted up, up, 
out of sin and degradation, by resurrection power, back 
to all that was lost in Adam and redeemed through the 
precious blood of Jesus. On the other hand, all intelligent, 
wilful opposers of God and righteousness, after a 
certain period of opportunity, will be destroyed in the 
Second Death— whether they belong to the class that is 
now on trial, a class of spirit-begotten ones, or to the class 
which will be on trial during the period of Messiah's 
Reign. "All the wicked will God destroy." 

THE PEOPLE WERE ASTONISHED 

No wonder the people were astonished at such doctrines 
as Jesus gave forth, even though they but imperfectly 
understood these, for none could perfectly understand 
except through the enlightening influence of the 
Holy Spirit, which was not yet given because Jesus was 
not yet glorified. (John 7:39.) The teachings of Jesus 
had a positiveness quite different from the various speculations 
and wonderings of the scribes. So it is always 
with the Truth. Wherever there is confusion and 
mysticism, we may be sure there is error and ignorance. 
Hence the necessity that all who preach Christ should 
have the anointing, or ordination, to preach, which God 
alone gives through the begetting of the Holy Spirit. 

OUR GOLDEN TEXT 

"What doth Jehovah require of thee, but to do justly, 
and to love kindness, and to walk humbly with thy God?" 
At first one might be inclined to say, Why, that is different! 
There is nothing in that text of Scripture to say 
that in order to be an heir of the Kingdom one must take 
up his cross, deny himself and follow in the footsteps of 
Jesus, self-sacrificingly! 

This is true; but we should notice that the one is a 
requirement and the other a privilege. God does not require 
sacrifice. What He requires is loyalty and obedience, 
but not sacrifice. Whatever is sacrificial is so much 
more than the Divine Law requires. Thus in the case of 
Jesus, the Divine Law could not require Him to do more 
than to obey it— to love God with all His heart, mind, 
soul and strength, and to love His neighbor as Himself. 
But could not all this have been done by Jesus without 
the laying down of His life at all! Surely! Hence the 
Scriptures represent that when Jesus presented Himself 
at Jordan, He consecrated all that He had to do the 
Father's will, even unto death— not merely to keep the 
Law. He delighted to do the Father's will, even 



beyond what the Father demanded in the Law. 
(Hebrews 10:5-7.) And so must it be with all 
who would be acceptable footstep followers of Jesus and 
attain with Him glory, honor and immortality on the 
Heavenly plane. 

The Prophet Micah addressed the Jews, and his message 
was from the standpoint of the Law. He was encouraging 
the Jews to do their best to fulfil its requirements. 
Nevertheless, we know that no Jew ever fulfilled 
the Law except Jesus, because all except Him were fallen, 
imperfect. He alone was "holy, harmless, undefiled and 
separate from sinners." 

During the Millennial Kingdom of Messiah, this same 
Law of God, given to the Jews through Moses, will be 
given to the whole world of mankind through Messiah. 
The requirements will be to do justly, to love kindness, to 
walk humbly with God. The reason why Messiah's ministration 
of this Law will be a success, while Moses' 
ministration of it was a failure, so far as bringing any 
to perfection was concerned, is that Messiah's Kingdom 
will be fully prepared and authorized to forgive sinners 
and to help them up out of their imperfections— back to 
the image and likeness of God as it was originally represented 
in Father Adam. 

The privilege and right to thus forgive sins and to 
thus lift the sinner out of degradation belongs to Messiah, 
by virtue of His sacrifice for sins which He finished on 
Calvary. The right to life which He there laid down 
without forfeiting He will be prepared to give to mankind 
during the Millennium; and only the wilful rejectors 
will perish in the Second Death. 



"O! we long to see Thy glory 

Streaming wide o'er all the earth; 

Every error, old and hoary, 

Flee to realms that gave them birth. 

"For this glorious culmination, 
Not for long shall Zion wait: 

Soon will come her coronation; 
Lo, her King is at the gate." 



R5408 : page 61 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS 

HOW DID SAUL OF TARSUS SEE JESUS? 

QUESTION.-"And last of all He was seen of 
me also, as of one born out of [before the] 
due time." (1 Cor. 15:8.) How could Saul 
of Tarsus have seen Jesus, if He was personally 



in Heaven, and was to remain there 
until the end of the Age? 

Answer.— The Lord evidently designed 
that Saul should have the opportunity of 
being the twelfth Apostle, to take the place 
of Judas. In order to be an Apostle, it 
was necessary that he should be a witness to our Lord's 
resurrection. And so Saul of Tarsus was given a demonstration 
which made him an eye witness to the fact of 
the Lord's resurrection from the dead. He tells of it in 
this way: after detailing how Jesus had been seen of 
above five hundred brethren at one time, St. Paul says, 
"And last of all, He was seen of me also, as of one born 
out of due time." 

The miracle that was performed to enable Saul to see 
Jesus was not sufficient to save his eyes. If Jesus had 
been a flesh being, Saul's eyes would have been spared. 
But the fact that he was permitted to see, and with unveiled 
eyes (for it is not the natural order of things for 
a natural eye to see a spirit being), is a proof that some 
power was miraculously exercised which enabled him to 
see the Lord. 

As to how this comports with the thought that Jesus 
went away, and that the Heavens were to retain Him 
until the end of the Age, we have this to say: He left 
the world, telling His disciples that in the end of the Age 
He would come in great glory to establish His Kingdom. 
But nothing in this statement indicates that He might not 
be present at some time previous to this. This may be 
illustrated in the typical Atonement Day sacrifices. The 
High Priest went into the Most Holy and offered the 
blood of the bullock; then he came out again and offered 
his second sacrifice, the goat. He then returned to the 
Most Holy. 

"SITTING ON THE RIGHT HAND" A FIGURE 

The Lord came to earth and was present among men. 
He finished the work that He had to do here. Then He 
ascended and appeared in the presence of God (the antitypical 
Most Holy) to make an appropriation of His 
merit (the blood of the antitypical bullock) on our behalf. 
We read that, having finished this work, He sat down on 
the right hand of the Majesty on High, until the time 
should come when the Kingdom would be delivered over 
to Him, and His enemies would be made His footstool. 
But the words sat down do not mean that He sat down 
on a literal seat, and has remained inactive during this 
Age. The thought is that He was seated at the Father's 
right hand in the sense of being given this permanent 
position of honor, dignity. 

The Scriptures declare that at His Second Coming, 
our Lord will be seen "sitting on the right hand of power, 
and coming in the clouds of Heaven." (Matt. 26:64.) 
We understand, then, that it was in the official sense that 
He left the earth for the entire Gospel Age, giving up all 



work as a man— and all work directly for mankind, 
until the close of the Age. But He appeared to Saul, to 
enable him (as before stated) to be the twelfth Apostle, 
in order to fulfil the Scripture statements concerning 
Judas. (Psa. 109:7,8; Acts 1:15-20.) This seems to have 
been an exceptional matter; for the power of the Holy 
Spirit was to operate in the world during this Gospel Age. 
We understand that Saul of Tarsus had only a momentary 
glimpse of our Lord. 

R5409 : page 61 

GIVING COUNSEL TO ONE IN TROUBLE 

Question.— If a person in deep distress of mind should 
appeal to us for counsel, should we refuse to listen lest 
we thereby be hearing evil or evil speaking of another? 

Answer.— We should not refuse to hear one who is 
in deep distress of mind and who comes to us for counsel. 
But we should suggest to the one in trouble, Now perhaps 
there is something about this matter which might be a 
reflection upon another. Perhaps you can state the trouble 
in such a way as not to tell me the name, and without 
even describing the person, so that I would be able to 
recognize him from the description. Thus, too, I might 
be able to give unbiased advice. If we found that another 
was involved, we would inquire, Have you fulfilled 
the requirements of Matt. 18:15? Have you spoken to 
the person? 

If he answers in the affirmative, we should ask, And 
it makes no impression? And is he [or she] still continuing 
the wrong-doing? If he says that the party is 
not now continuing the wrong, but that he has made no 
apologies, then we would say, But we cannot require one 
to apologize. We can merely require him to cease from 
doing injury. You may be very thankful to the Lord 
that you have been relieved from the pressure of the trial. 

Or the person might tell us that he had taken the 
Scriptural step, and that the party still continues to do 
injury. Then we would say, Have you taken the next step 
—to take two witnesses and go to Him? If he says Yes, 
we would advise, Then just continue to the conclusion. 
You have done well thus far. If he said that he had 
taken the two witnesses and they had followed the course 
laid down in Matt. 18:15 very carefully, and that the 
injury had been stopped, we would say, Well, then, I 
would stop also. You have no authority to punish him. 
That belongs to God. 

If the brother should say that he had taken the two 
parties and had gone to the offender, and that he would 
not listen to them, and that the wrong still continues, then 
we would advise that he go to the two and ask them to 
join him in bringing the matter before the Church- 
preferably one of the two being an elder— for they should 
go primarily to the Elders. If the Elders are not such 
persons that confidence could be placed in them in such a 



matter, they are not suitable for Eldership. And the one 
who was the Elder would be the proper one to bring the 
matter before the Church. Up to this time the case should 
not be discussed outside of these two witnesses. 



THE LORD LOVETH A CHEERFUL GIVER 

Question.— "Upon the first day of the week let every 
one of you lay by him in store, as God has prospered him, 
that there be no gathering when I come." (1 Cor. 16:2.) 
Does this injunction apply to all the Lord's people? 

Answer.— We understand that the principle applies to 
all. This is not a law, however. The Apostle did not 
make laws for the Church. He would not have had authority 
to make laws. He taught that all of the Lord's 
people are put on their own responsibility as to the use 
of the things they have sacrificed to the Lord. 

What God commands is to be esteemed, not as a 
matter of sacrifice, but of obedience. Under the Jewish 
Law, each of the Lord's people, each Natural Israelite, 
was directed to give a tithe, a tenth. If he made a hundred 
dollars a month and gave one tenth of it, it would 
be ten dollars; if he made fifty dollars a month and gave 
a tenth of it, it would be five dollars. But the fifty 
dollars, or the one hundred dollars would include all that 
he would earn each month— not the net earnings, but the 
gross earnings. 

R5409 : page 62 

If out of a hundred dollars the Israelite, after paying 
his tithe, was obliged to spend forty dollars for rent, ten 
dollars for gas, thirty dollars for food, ten dollars for 
himself and ten dollars for his wife, he would be out 
exactly ten dollars, or he would have to cut off five dollars 
from his wife's allowance and five from his own. 

But Christians are not compelled to give one tenth. 
There are some in the Bethel family, however, who are 
giving one tenth. One of the family recently gave one 
fifth out of the net. We think a principle is here involved 
—a principle of sacrifice; and that if we follow 
the Apostle's advice, we would lay by something every 
week or every month to give to some who are in real 
need, and thus exercise a spirit of benevolence, like our 
Heavenly Father, and that we may be able to have at 
least a small share in the support of the Lord's work. We 
believe that to whatever extent we have this thought 
before our minds we are likely to have a special blessing. 
"He that watereth shall be watered also himself."— 
Prov. 11:25. 



"THE RIGHTEOUSNESS WHICH IS OF FAITH" 



Question.— "But the righteousness which is of faith 
speaketh on this wise, Say not in thine heart, Who shall 
ascend into Heaven (that is, to bring Christ down from 
above), or who shall descend into the deep (that is, to 
bring up Christ again from the dead)?" (Romans 10:6,7.) 
What is meant by one's descending into the 
deep, to bring Christ from the dead, and by ascending into 
Heaven to bring Him down from Above? 

Answer.— The Apostle here means that some in his 
time were doubting and did not believe the Message that 
the Messiah had come. They might have said that Jesus 
was a wonderful man, and that He did many wonderful 
works. But they were saying, "We do not believe that 
He was the Messiah and was put to death and then rose 
again. If you are willing to say that He was only a good 
man, we can accept that assertion, and are ready to call 
ourselves Christians. But harmony with God can be attained 
only by keeping the Law." 

This, the Apostle said, is not the language of faith. 
The Christian exercises faith in the Gospel Message. He 
does not ask how any one could go to Heaven to bring 
Jesus down to earth, or how any could go down to the 
grave and bring Him up. A Christian will accept the 
facts as they are. Others are not in the attitude to believe 
God. The essential features of the Gospel are that Jesus 
came from above— that He was holy, harmless and undefiled, 
and gave Himself a Ransom-price for sinners. 
God recognized the merit of His work and raised Him 
from the dead, and He ascended on High, there to appear 
in the presence of God— first for the Church class, later 
for the world. All this the Christian accepts by faith. 



R5409 : page 62 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
PERSONAL AND CLASS RIGHTS 

DEARLY BELOVED PASTOR:- 

I have never thought it wise or expedient to write to you 
before, except on one occasion, and then only to express my 
love and to inform you that I had taken the Vow. I feel the 
same reluctance in writing now, lest I unwisely interfere 
with your time, but feel that it is the proper thing to do. 

For a time some of the brethren have been holding in 
their homes regular meetings which have not been arranged 
for by the Church. In some cases these meetings are conducted 
by brethren who are neither Elders nor Deacons. In 
other cases, certain Deacon brethren in their love and zeal 
found an opportunity for assisting some beginners, and after 
a time began holding regular meetings in their interest, confining 
their meetings to evenings which did not conflict with 
the regular meetings of the Church. 



These matters came before the Church and were discussed, 
resulting in the following Resolution, which was voted 
upon and carried: 

Resolved— That, while we do not question for one moment 
the good intentions, love and zeal for the Lord and the 
brethren, on the part of those who may participate, in our 

judgment, the holding of regular meetings in , apart 

from those arranged by the Church as a whole, are not to the 

spiritual benefit of the Church of , tending, amongst 

other things, to prevent amongst the whole body here, that 
full measure of fellowship which we feel so greatly in need 
of at the present time. 

Personally, I supported the Resolution when it was voted 
upon. Later, after some misgivings as to whether I had acted 
wisely, I began giving the matter much prayerful thought, 
searching through the TOWERS and the Volumes for all the 
help I could find. Eventually, I came to the conclusion that 
so far as I was concerned I had made a mistake, and had 
participated in a Resolution that to my mind has the tendency 
to interfere with the freedom and liberty of others. 

Last night at a regular business session, the matter came 
up again for discussion, the brethren interested in some of 
these meetings having addressed a letter to the Church, requesting 
the Church to appoint a chairman for their meetings. 
After three hours' discussion the matter remains unsettled. 
And now I find myself confronted with a serious problem, 
which is giving me much concern. I find myself taking the 
opposite view from the other Elders, and standing alone as 
an Elder in the position I have taken; namely, that the Resolution 
which we passed was unwise and inexpedient, having a 
tendency to destroy personal liberty, and being specially injurious 
to some of our brethren. 

The position is taken that the passing of this Resolution 
does not tend to bondage nor in any way to interfere with the 
rights of others. But to me it now appears as being in a 
measure, "an appearance of evil," which I desire to avoid, 
having in my mind this thought, that the good which might 
be accomplished by the Resolution from one standpoint, 
would be more than offset by the injury it might do from 
another viewpoint. 

I have not been and will not be contentious, but I do want 

R5410 : page 62 

to know and to do the Lord's will; and finding myself taking 
the opposite view from the other Elders and some of the 
other members of the Class, I feel greatly concerned and ask 
your advice. Taking into consideration the present and future 
interests of the Class, I feel that the matter is now too important 
to be in doubt about. I am, 
Your brother in His blessed service, J. J. B. 

OUR REPLY TO THE FOREGOING 

We have endeavored to set forth in STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES, Vol. VI., what we believe to be the Scriptural 



teaching covering the queries of this letter. Repeating now, 

and seeking to make the matter applicable to the case in question, 

we would say: 

Each spirit-begotten child of God, by virtue of his anointing, 
has a right to speak, to preach, to declare his Heavenly 
Father's Word and Message. The right to preach is not confined 
to bishops, nor to those upon whom they lay their hands, 
nor to Elders and Deacons chosen in the Scriptural manner 
by the stretching forth of the hands of the Ecclesia. There 
are natural limitations, of course, such as lack of ability, from 
any cause, to hold the attention of an audience. Except the 
Apostle's restriction that the sisters are not to do public 
preaching, there are none. 

With this broad view of the Divine commission, the anointing 
or authorization of the Holy Spirit, we perceive that none 
has a right to interfere with another. As Jesus said to the 
Apostle John, "Forbid him not."— Mark 9:39. 

However, while none may interfere with or bind his 
brother, we may give over some of our own liberties. Recognizing 
that God is a God of order, and that every good work 
is prospered by order, and following the instructions of our 
Lord that His followers should assemble themselves together 
as one body, we realize that in taking our places in the body, 
we lose some of our own personal independence, liberties, privileges. 
We are glad to do this, for we believe it to be the 
Lord's will, because He instructs us: "Forget not the assembling 
of yourselves together." So all who thus become 
associates, or members, in a class of Bible students thereby 
surrender individual rights. They operate as a Class, deciding 
which meetings are necessary and which are unnecessary, 
which of their number would best lead and serve the class, 
which render other service, etc. 

R5410 : page 63 

From this viewpoint, it would not be proper for brethren 
associated in a Class to start new Classes and still consider 
themselves members of the original Class. For a member of 
a Class to individually start another Class separate from anything 
provided for by his Class, would mean to ignore it, to 
break off his relationship with the older Class and would indicate 
that he would no longer in any sense of the word 
recognize himself, either as a servant of that Class, or as a 
member of it, or as a sharer in its privileges. In reassuming 
his own personal liberty he laid down his privileges as a 
member of the Class. 

Hence from this standpoint we would say, that the 
brethren and sisters who participated in the organizing of the 
new Classes evidently had only the best intentions, and quite 
probably did not consider at the time the real force and 
meaning of their action in organizing the Classes. 

It would look, too, as though the parent Class and its 
Elders and Deacons had not fully provided for all the desires 
and necessities of the Class; otherwise there would 
have been no incentive or reason for the starting of new 
Classes aside from their arrangements. A sharp look out by 



the servants of the Class should always be maintained, to see 
that the spiritual needs of the interested are supplied; and a 
sufficient number of Elders and Deacons should be chosen 
and appointed. 

While we sympathize with the sentiments of those who 
drew up the Resolution, we incline to doubt the wisdom of 
the movement. We believe that the better way for all concerned 
would be for all parties to confess their error. The 
Class and the Elders might very properly say: "We regret, 
dear brethren and sisters, that we had not such a grasp of 
the situation as would have enabled us at the time properly 
to supply the needs of the Class as respects meetings. We 
promise to do our duty more faithfully in the future." 

Those who started the new Classes would, we think, do 
well to say: "We regret, dear brethren and sisters, that we 
did not take a broad enough view of the subject and put in a 
request for the meeting, to the intent that the need might 
have been supplied through appointments by the Class." 

With such apologies and resignations, we believe the entire 
matter will adjust itself and everybody feel relieved of a 
tension, and quite probably the results will not be far different 
from what they are now, except that the new meetings 
will be under the appointment of the original Class. 



CLOSE OF THE ANTITYPICAL ATONEMENT DAY 

DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

Loving greetings in the dear Redeemer. Our prayers are 
daily offered for you, dear Brother, both on your own personal 
account and as the Lord's servant in this, the time of 
the Harvest. 

We have read with deep interest the various articles which 
have appeared in THE WATCH TOWER, especially those of recent 
date, re 1914 as the end of the Harvest, or more strictly 
speaking, the end of the Times of the Gentiles. We have 
seen nothing in these articles which justifies the statement of 
some of the friends that "Pastor Russell has changed his 
views respecting what may be expected in October, 1914." On 
the contrary, if we have read the articles aright, and we believe 
we have, your views are still the same. We think, however, 
that these articles express the greatest moderation 
towards any who may desire to think otherwise. 

To come to the point, or the reason for intruding this letter 
upon your valuable time, may we offer the following for your 
consideration? 

Recently, when thinking over Amos 8:9, we were impressed 
with the thought that the Lord Jesus as Lord of the Harvest 
holds in His own power the closing of the present noon-day 
favors and privileges which are ours; and further, that the 
Lord Jesus Himself will close the present Harvest work suddenly. 
This thought stimulates us to greater zeal. 

The thought later came into mind that as our Lord's 
earthly career was marked at its close by an eclipse in the 
physical heavens, the sun being darkened, perhaps the Lord 



might mark the close of Harvest privileges by a similar 
eclipse. I attach hereto a sheet taken from a 1914 Almanac. 
Please note No. III., "A Total Eclipse of the Sun, August 
21st, beginning at sunrise, visible to the northeast portion of 
the United States and Canada. Visible also to North Atlantic 
Ocean, Europe, Asia and Africa"— practically the entire 
world. 

Reference to the little "Morning Resolution" card shows 
that following this day there are just forty days left to the 
close of September. If the above surmise be true, how fitting 
it is that the last forty days of the Age should be the testing 
time of the Feet Members of the Body of Christ under the 
fiery trials already promised! Such a fact would again demonstrate 
that our God is an exact Timekeeper to a day. 

Excluding the above speculation, the year 1914 presents 
some extremely interesting chronological data, as follows: 

I. STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, VOL. 2, page 60, paragraph 
3, points out that the fourteenth of Nisan rarely falls on a 

Friday. This date, marking the Passover celebration of the 
Jews and the Memorial of Christ's death among Christians, 
falls on Friday, April 10th, this year. This enables Christians 
of practically all denominations to celebrate the same event on 
the same day, likewise the friends in Present Truth. 

II. The Jewish New Year does not come about October 
1st, as is generally the case. The attached Calendar sheet 
shows that it begins with sunset, September 20th. Ten days 
later is the marked off period, or day, for the annual Atonement 
Day of the Jews. How fitting it would be for God to 

have marked the close of the great Atonement Day of this 
Age with the anniversary of the typical Atonement Day! 

Ever praying the Lord's rich blessing upon you, and that 
the end of the way may be crowned with an abundant entrance 
into His everlasting Kingdom, I am, 

Yours in the service of our dear Redeemer, . 



HOPE BUILT ON JESUS' BLOOD AND RIGHTEOUSNESS 

OUR DEAR BROTHER IN THE LORD:- 

A number of the brothers and sisters of the Winnipeg 
Ecclesia have expressed their desire to write you, and as 
each gave expression to the thought, we decided that one 
letter would suffice, knowing that we are all partakers of the 
same grace and baptized with the same spirit; therefore our 
thoughts in this are one. 

The circumstances which have given rise to this desire 
have been many, but chief among them has been our appreciation 
of the "meat in due season," on which we have been 
feasting through the columns of THE WATCH TOWERS and 
DAWNS. Truly can we say that we thank God upon every 
remembrance of you, always making mention of you in our 
prayers to the Throne of Heavenly Grace. The fact that the 
realization of our glorious hope is now fast approaching, yea 
even at the door, has caused one and all to look to the source 
from which our first light came, and to earnestly look for 



and appreciate more. Our hearts therefore are brimming 

over with love and affection for you, also with humble gratitude 

to our Heavenly Father for the way in which he has 

used you and ourselves in this most wonderful Harvest Work. 

The time features, which have been the general trend in 
the last issues of THE TOWER, remain the same to us. With 
great distinctness do they point out to us that each must 
work out his own salvation with fear and trembling. We 
most heartily coincide with your viewpoint in the matter that 
if it is His will we should be required to wait a little 
while longer, we will still glorify Him for the privilege of 
witnessing to the world the fact that our hope is not built 
upon the close proximity of the consummation, but rather 
upon Jesus' blood and righteousness. 

Our Beloved Brother, we have taken as our slogan the 
few words you gave us— "Let brotherly love continue"— and 
we one and all find in it, not the word of man only, but 
verily the Word of God, whom we all adore. Using it as a 
touchstone to all of our diseases it works as if by magic. 

Were we to write innumerable letters we could not express 
all we wish to say, so we hope and trust that from these 
few words you may receive a little comfort and assurance 
that your short sojourn with us last Summer has borne much 
fruit, and should it be our Father's will that we may not be 
permitted to see your dear face again this side of the veil, we 
know we shall see you at the Great Assembly of the Firstborns 
in the Kingdom. 

Leaving you with that peace which is the heritage of our 
Master, and in which we all rejoice, bound by that blest tie, 

Your co-laborers in His Service, 

SIGNED BY EIGHT BROTHERS AND TWO SISTERS. 



page 63 

I.B.S.A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 
FOR THE MONTH OF MARCH. 
QUESTIONS FROM MANUAL ON SECOND SERIES, "STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. 

Week beginning March 1 Questions 1 to 8 

" 8 " 9 to 16 

15 " 17 to 24 

22 " 25 to 31 

29 " 32 to 40 

Question Manuals on VOL. II., STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 
5c. each, or 50c. per doz., postpaid. 



page 65 

VOL. XXXV MARCH 1 No. 5 
A. D. 1914-A. M. 6042 



CONTENTS 

Consecration as Related to Present-Day 
Conditions 67 

Progressive Steps of Justification and 
Sanctification 67 

Those Consecrating Since 1881 67 

The Spirit of Helpfulness 69 

Responsibility for Our Influence 69 

Re Sunday Observance 69 

The End of the Age a Perilous Time 70 

Prevalence of These Conditions Universal 70 

A Subtle Test 71 

Courageous Dealing— Past, Present, Future 71 

Bible Brings Spirit of Liberty 71 

Church to Judge Courageously in Next Age 72 

Profitable Bible Talks 72 

God's Great Feast 73 

"Jesus Himself Drew Near" 74 

"Naught That I Have, My Own I Call" 76 

Life Rights Lost to Mankind 77 

Importance of Attaining Balance of Mind 77 

God's Use of Things In Our Hand 78 

The Spirit-Begotten in the Holy 79 

page 66 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:-All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



1914-GENERAL CONVENTION- 19 14 
CLINTON, IOWA-JUNE 28-JULY 5. 

It is proposed that the INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS 
ASSOCIATION shall this year hold an eight-day General Convention 
at Clinton, Iowa, June 28th to July 5th, and we are 
thus giving timely notice to permit the friends to arrange 
their affairs accordingly. Clinton is commended as an ideal 
convention city. It is reached by several prominent railroads 
and is quite central to St. Louis, Louisville, Cincinnati, 
Indianapolis, Chicago, Toledo, Detroit, Cleveland, St. 
Paul, Minneapolis, Madison, Omaha, Kansas City, etc. The 
large Coliseum which has been secured for our meetings 
stands near two beautiful parks, along the Mississippi River. 



MEMORIAL SUPPER-APRIL TENTH 

This year we will celebrate the Memorial Supper on the 
evening of Friday, April 10th. Further particulars in next 
issue of THE WATCH TOWER. Also carefully read over again 
Study XI, pp. 457 to 484, Vol. VI, STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR APRIL 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. 
At the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns 
for April follow: (1) 260; (2) 7; (3) 25; (4) 130; (5) 112; (6) 
12; (7) 155; (8) 313; (9) 307; (10) 318; (11) 113; (12) 310; 
(13) 8; (14) 152; (15) 1; (16) 168; (17) 314; (18) 295; (19) 
Vow; (20) 179; (21) 144; (22) 114; (23) 326; (24) 129; (25) 
227; (26) 203; (27) 229; (28) 18; (29) 281; (30) 208. 



R5410 : page 67 

CONSECRATION AS RELATED TO PRESENT-DAY CONDITIONS 

CONSECRATION is another name for sanctification, 

and signifies a setting apart. Sanctification, 

consecration, is intimately related 

to justification, because, although there 

is a partial justification when one turns 

from sin to God, there could not be a full 



justification, a justification to life, until 

such time as the person had made a full 

consecration. It would appear, then, that 

from the time when one starts toward God, 

when he turns away from sin, and seeks to know and to 

do God's will, there is a certain degree of consecration, 

setting apart to God, as in contradistinction to following 

evil. Each step that he takes toward God is a step toward 

sanctification and toward justification. 

Looking back to the picture in the type as illustrative 
of this, we see that a Levite or a priest when first approaching 
the Tabernacle, desiring to enter, would discern 
in the distance the wall of white surrounding the 
Court. With more or less knowledge of what was 
inside he would approach it. When he reached the gate, 
he would see that the Court was a sacred place, and that 
none would be received in any sense within its enclosure 
except as he recognized the sacrifice on the brazen altar 
just inside. 

PROGRESSIVE STEPS OF JUSTIFICATION AND 
SANCTIFICATION 

And so with a person who is in a semi-consecrated 
condition— a semi-justified condition. His first great 
lesson at the gate of the Court is that he is a sinner, that 
God accepts not sinners, and that only those who approach 
Him through recognition of the great Sacrifice will be 
received. Having recognized the Sacrifice, having trusted 
in the death of Christ for justification from sin, his next 
step would be a deeper consecration, and thus a fuller 
justification. If he proceeds, this would bring him to the 
brazen laver of the Court, which would represent a washing 
away of the filth of the flesh— the becoming more and 
more clean in life, doing all in his power to free himself 
from sin. This also is acceptable to God. 

But still he is neither justified completely nor sanctified 

R5411 : page 67 

completely. As he presses on, earnestly desiring to come 
still nearer to God, he comes to the door of the Tabernacle. 
There he finds that he can go no further except 
by death— the death of his human will, the surrender of 
all human rights and interests. He recognizes, further, 
that this death must be a sacrificial death, and that he 
needs to be accepted of the High Priest, that the High 
Priest must make good for his imperfections by the 
imputation of His merit before the Heavenly Father will 
accept his full consecration. 

His consecration takes place, therefore, before his 
justification to life. He must present himself in sacrifice 
before Jesus can accept him, before He can present him 
to the Father, that he may become one of His members. 
It is to be a membership in the earthly Body of Christ, 
for suffering and death, and a membership also in the 



spiritual Body, for life and glory. The sealing of his 
consecration will be the Divine acceptance of that consecration, 
which is indicated by a begetting of the Holy 
Spirit. And begetting of the Holy Spirit is indicated by 
his appreciation of the deep things of God, as represented 
in the altar of incense and the table of shew-bread; in 
experiences of chiseling and polishing, and by opportunities 
to serve. In some cases these various steps are taken 
almost simultaneously. 

After acceptance on the part of God, the consecration 
must be persisted in, maintained. We must abide in 
Christ, in order to be sharers in the Royal Priesthood beyond 
the veil, heirs of God, joint-heirs with Jesus Christ 
our Lord. If we in the present time suffer with him, 
then we shall also reign with Him in glory. 

AS TO THOSE CONSECRATING SINCE EIGHTEEN 
HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-ONE 

Some have been concerned as to what evidence, if 
any, a person consecrating himself since 188 1 would have 
that his consecration had been accepted of God. We 
would say regarding this that something would depend 
on how recently the person had made the consecration. 
If very recently, he would have no sure means of determining. 
If a year or two had passed, and he had not in 
the meantime received any evidences of the Holy Spirit's 
begetting— if he had not received increased ability to 
understand and appreciate the Truth; if he had not experienced 
a love for the Truth and a desire to serve it; 
if he had not found some opportunity for serving the 
Truth, and some experiences of trial— in such case he 
would have reason to doubt the Divine acceptance of his 
consecration. 

But in such a case we would be inclined to wonder if 
the consecration had been properly made. Our thought 
would be that in one way or another God accepts every 
consecration, that a broken and contrite heart He will in 
no way despise. He did not despise those in ancient 

R5411 : page 68 

times who consecrated their lives to Him— the Prophets 
and the faithful Israelites of old. They were not despised 
nor rejected. They found opportunities for service and 
they had this testimony (Hebrews 1 1:7), that they 
pleased God; and they received a special blessing as a 
reward for their obedience and for all the sacrifices they 
had made. But this did not mean with them a begetting 
of the Holy Spirit. 

We have every reason at present to believe that the 
number of the Elect is not yet completed, because of 
many crowns having been forfeited. We see coming in, 
day by day and week by week, some who give evidence 
of the Lord's acceptance, who evidence that the Lord is 
permitting them to lay down their lives in His service. 



But the time will undoubtedly come in the near future 
when the number of the Elect will be complete. Then 
only such vacancies as might still occur by some falling 
out would remain. In that case there might be a 
number in the consecrated attitude, whom God would accept 
to take the places of some who would drop out. 
These would receive the begetting of the Holy Spirit, 
and would find opportunities for serving the Truth and 
for suffering for the Truth's sake. 

The evidences seem to be that there are still quite a 
number of vacancies in the elect number, because there 
are people coming into Present Truth and consecrating 
who have come directly from the world. This would 
seem to indicate that there are not at present a sufficient 
number fully consecrated to complete the 144,000. If 
there were, these would be given the preference over 
those not consecrated. 

THE AVERAGE CHRISTIAN'S PRESENT POSITION 

It would seem that throughout Christendom we can 
see today a great many who have taken the steps of consecration 
to a greater or less degree and more or less intelligently. 
Some recognize the Redeemer and the necessity 
for His work of salvation, and the fact that He 
gave His life as an offset for sin. Some have gone further, 
and with more or less intelligence have "washed at 
the laver." 

But it seems that the great majority have not gone 
much further— that they do not see the propriety of going 
further. The majority of professed Christian people 
today do not go any further than to live a moral life. 
They have not reached the point of consecration to God, 
and hence have not yet reached the point of vital justification. 
The majority have perhaps gotten to the laver, 
and are desiring to wash and be clean. 

As such come to learn the Message of the Kingdom 
as it is now going forth— that a full consecration to 
death is the only condition upon which any may be followers 
of Jesus— some of them gladly avail themselves 
of this knowledge and offer. They gladly go forward to 
the extent of full consecration, full justification; and by 
reason of their surroundings, and the fact that the majority 
of professed Christian people in the various denominations 
are behind them as regards attainment, instead 
of being ahead of them, these are looked upon as 
peculiar. The majority do not discern that this peculiarity 
is the very thing that God requires of those who 
would be joint-heirs with Christ— of those who would 
follow in the path of devotion and faithfulness, that 
they may be accounted worthy of reigning with Christ 
in His glorious Kingdom. 

THE GREAT COMPANY 

A class mentioned in the Scriptures as the Great 



Company, who will come up out of great tribulation and 
wash their robes and make them clean in the blood of 
the Lamb (Revelation 7:14), and who will eventually attain 
to the position of antitypical Levites, is worthy of 
consideration. These have passed the various stages of 
full consecration and Divine acceptance and the begetting 
of the Holy Spirit. They became New Creatures in 
Christ Jesus and entered into the Holy. But through an 
insufficiency in the matter of zeal, and a lack of stamina, 
because of their unfavorable environment in Babylon, 
these are failing to go on, failing to see that a full sacrifice 
of earthly things is the only condition upon which 
they can gain the Heavenly things. 

These are seeking to be followers of Christ and followers 
of Mammon, seeking to please the Lord and to 
please the world, having some of the Lord's Spirit and 
some of the spirit of the world, and in general not making 
progress, and not putting off the things of the flesh 
—anger, hatred, malice and strife, envy and evil speaking, 
the works of the flesh and of the Devil, and therefore 
are not putting on the fruits of the Spirit— faith, 
fortitude, knowledge, self-control, patience, godliness, 
brotherly-kindness, meekness, gentleness, love. 

It must be admitted that these have not had the right 
instructors, and they have gotten wrong conceptions- 
misunderstandings of the Lord's Word. Nevertheless, 
we cannot but have faith that God will guide these who 
are really His children, and will, through suffering, lead 
them to take a positive stand. 

We do not think we should understand the Scriptures 
to teach that the Great Company will attain to the same 
degree of spiritual development as the Little Flock. It 
is true that God has only the standard of perfection for 
any of His creatures; but there are many who demonstrate 
by their lives that, if everything were favorable, 
they would be very loyal to the Lord and very loyal to 
righteousness. It is merely because the narrow way is 
so steep, so up-hill and rugged, that they have not the 
courage to go on. They fail to display that love and 
zeal which the Lord has set as the mark for participation 
in the Royal Priesthood. 

We believe that the Lord would probably expect no 
more from the Great Company class than He would expect 
from the angels— as though He would say of each 
of these, Doubtless this person, under favorable conditions, 
would prefer to be My child and to live in harmony 
with Me, and he would not think of living in sin, 
and would even suffer death rather than deny My name. 
If such be the test of the Great Company class, there 
might be a million who have demonstrated this degree of 
loyalty in the past, during this Gospel Age. Some of 
these probably have even suffered martyrdom, when they 
were put to the final test. 

OPPOSITION OVERRULED FOR BLESSING 



We think there is good reason to believe that a considerable 
number who have made consecration are still in 
Babylon. We do not know this, however. We are near 
to the Battle of Armageddon, near the time of the overthrow 
of Babylon; and we are seeking to give the Message 
of the Truth as wide a circulation as possible, to 
the intent that this class may hear and come out, even 
though too late to win the great prize. That they are 
considerable in number is intimated in the 19th Chapter of Revelation, 
where we are told that when Babylon falls 
the number of those released at that time will be a great 
multitude, that the voices of these will be "as the voice 
of many waters." 

We believe that at the present time there are a great 

R5412:page69 

many in the nominal Churches whose minds are gradually 
becoming more and more awake to the Truth. In 
various pulpits, where the Truth is opposed, many things 
of the Gospel of the Kingdom are being proclaimed; and 
this will have the effect of awakening and informing 
some of this class. Even though those bringing forward 
these truths declare them in spite and envy, nevertheless 
the Message of the Gospel is preached. (Philippians 1:15-18.) 
Many thus have their attention called to certain 
truths, which we would never be able to give them 
—many whom we could not reach. 

For instance, some of these ministers mention that 
we believe the nominal Church to be Babylon; others say 
that we believe that our Lord is now present, in His 
Second Advent, and is gathering His jewels (Malachi 3:17); 
still others are telling that we believe the end of 
the Gentile Times will come in October, 1914. All these 
truths are being stated in a slanderous way. But we 
should not be surprised if the Lord will overrule for the 
good of His people many of these things. 

Not long ago, to our great surprise, a brother 
told us that his first knowledge of the Truth came 
to him through a Morehead Tract. Another man heard 
his preacher say that we were the Anti-Christ. He 
wanted to see what Anti-Christ looked like, and he came 
to see and hear us, and got the Truth, just on account 
of slanderous statements. So we have to be a target, 
that the Lord's Message may go forth. We are not to 
think it strange, as though some strange thing happened 
unto us, that we are caused to be a gazing stock, and 
pass through fiery trials. Let us rejoice that we are accounted 
worthy to suffer with Christ, that when His 
glory shall be revealed, we may be glad also with exceeding 
joy.-l Peter 4:12-14; Hebrews 10:32,33. 



R5412:page69 



THE SPIRIT OF HELPFULNESS 

"Let every one of us please his neighbor 
for his good to edification."— Romans 15:2. 

THE Apostle Paul does not say in our text, Let 
the younger ones please their neighbor, nor 
does he say, Let the older ones please their 
neighbor; but he says, "Let every one of us 
please his neighbor." All of the Lord's 
people should have such an interest in one 
another and in the Lord's cause, and should 
have so much of the spirit of the Master, 
that they would seek rather to sacrifice 
themselves than to gratify self, especially 
at the expense of others. 

If we have the spirit of the Master, we shall find 
various ways in which we will sacrifice self without waiting 
for specific directions. The Law of Love will incite us 
to act contrary to our own natural preferences, if by so 
doing we shall help one another in the good way. 

In his letter to the Corinthian Church the Apostle 
illustrates this principle by a practical application re the 
Greek custom of offering their meat in their temples. 
After having been thus offered to the idols, the meat was 
considered to be especially sacred. Thus nearly all of the 
meat available was offered to idols, so that whenever one 
wished to have meat he could find none that had not been 
thus offered. 

Those who had come out of idolatry into Christianity, 
knew that the worship of idols was wrong; for they had 
learned that there is only the one true God. They also 
knew that the meat itself had not been hurt by being offered 
to idols; for an idol is nothing. But they should 
have been willing to deny themselves meat rather than to 
injure the conscience of a weak brother who still thought 
that the meat thus offered was sacred, or who thought that 
it was contaminated. The Apostle declares that he would 
abstain altogether from eating meat rather than risk 
stumbling a brother who could not take the broader, truer 
view. To stumble such a one, might be to throw him out 
of the right way entirely. 

RESPONSIBILITY FOR OUR INFLUENCE 

The Apostle did not say that it is not right to eat 
meat; but that he was willing to forego his rights and 
privileges in order to edify another. These others of 
whom he spoke had not come to appreciate fully the fact 
that meat offered to idols had not been hurt thereby. To 
set meat before a piece of stone would not injure it; and 
so to set it before an idol would not hurt it. But St. Paul 
could better afford to give up eating meat altogether than 
to stumble a brother. 

The principle is obvious. We should, if necessary, be 
willing to deny ourselves some of our privileges if this 



course would be of any assistance to a brother and would 
avoid stumbling him. Some of the Lord's people have 
very sensitive consciences, others are less sensitive. The 
longer one has been in the School of Christ and the more 
ability he has, the more easily should he discern what 
would be pleasing to the Lord. As a Christian, he would 
not want to do anything to offend the Lord, even if he 
were to go without meat for the remainder of his life. 

But if he could take the position that his own conscience 
would approve of a certain course, then the question 
would be, Would he allow his intelligence, his poise 
of mind, to work injury to a brother? Would he wish to 
stumble a brother, to make him weak, to lead him to 
violate his conscience? Or would he wish to lose all his 
influence for good over his brother? The Apostle answers 
this suggestion in the negative; he says, When ye sin so 
against the brethren, and wound their weak consciences, ye 
sin against Christ. "Wherefore, if meat make my brother 
to offend, I will eat no flesh while the world standeth, lest 
I make my brother to offend."— 1 Cor. 8:1-13. 

RE SUNDAY OBSERVANCE 

Applying the above principle— our responsibility for 
our influence— to Sunday observance, we are not to feel a 
bondage, as the Jews did on their Sabbath day. But we 
should avoid driving tacks or making any unnecessary 
noises. We should avoid singing or playing on an instrument 
anything that would not generally be recognized as 
in keeping with things sacred. We should avoid what 
would be considered by others as not observing the Sabbath. 
We should do this for the sake of our influence. 
To our understanding every day is a part of the great 
Sabbath into which we have entered— rest in Christ. We 
have a greater liberty. But we are not to use this liberty 
to the injury of others. 

Many people think that any kind of labor is a violation 
of the Fourth Commandment. From our viewpoint we 
know that the Sabbath of the Jew was typical; and we 
see what the antitype is. We are enjoying the antitype 
of that Sabbath. But while we might have liberty to 
work on Sunday, our so doing might stumble our neighbor. 
We would not be violating any principle in not observing 
Sunday; but for the sake of not stumbling our 
neighbor, we are glad to rest from our work and to give 
ourselves to the study of God's Word. 

Christian people generally do not observe Sunday in 
the way they think they should observe it. The conception 
of many is that they should observe it as rigidly as 

R5412:page70 

the Jewish Law set forth; and that neither the ox nor the 
ass, the automobile, the street cars nor the steam cars 
should be used. Indeed, they would not think it right to 
go any great distance on the Sabbath. 



As a matter of fact, the nominal church of today 
are not living up to their own conceptions of God's Law. 
As we get opportunity, we would like to assist these 
people to get a truer meaning of the Sabbath, that their 
consciences be not hurt, but be free from uneasiness. 
Sunday should be a day that is quiet and reverential in 
every way, and devoted specially to the service of 
God— a day in which business is restricted, and as far 
as possible eliminated. But the interests of the Lord's 
work forbid our always refraining from the use of steam 
cars, street cars, etc., on Sunday. 

Remembering that the word Sabbath signifies rest, as 
the Apostle used it (Heb. 4:9, margin), we can see that 
the Church of Christ keeps the Sabbath, or rest, every 
day, and recognizes God's arrangement in connection 
with this matter. Those who keep every seventh day as 
a Sabbath, but who fail to enter into and keep the rest 
of faith, are not keeping the true Sabbath, but keeping 
another, so far as the Church is concerned. 

The Sabbath arrangement was for the Jews. We 
have the better arrangement under our Covenant. We 
enter into rest, our Sabbath, every day; and we are hoping 
soon to enter into the still Greater Sabbath. In that 
Sabbath, the Millennium, we shall have not only rest of 
heart, but also perfection; and we shall then not be beset 
by the trials and difficulties of life. During His ministry 
Jesus chose the Sabbath day in which to perform miracles, 
heal the sick, that He might show forth the kind of works 
which He will perform during the Great Sabbath Day, 
the seventh-thousand-year day— the Millennium. 

HELPING, NOT HINDERING, OUR NEIGHBORS 

We can apply this principle in a general way. We 
can apply it to our conversation with Christian people. 
There is a way of taunting people on their ignorance, etc. 
This is not love; for love does not delight to expose another's 
weaknesses. The more careful we become in our 
words and our actions, the more polite we shall be, the 
more helpful. 

"Politeness is to do and say 

The kindest thing in the kindest way." 

One may be polite for the sake of policy or for the 
sake of principle. Our pleasing of our neighbors should 
be for their edification. We should be glad to do all that 
we can for their assistance, their edification, their uplift, 
their upbuilding. If we can speak a pleasant word, a 
kind word, it would be for upbuilding; and we should 
speak it, instead of speaking an unkind word. 

In our desire for the upbuilding of others we are to 
have in mind primarily the upbuilding of the Lord's 
people in spiritual things. As the Apostle says, we are 

R5413 : page 70 

"to provoke one another." We know that there are different 



ways of provoking others, and St. Paul shows us 
the right way. What the Apostle had in mind was the 
reverse of provoking to anger, hatred and strife. Some 
of the dear brethren who are evidently very sincere have 
not caught the spirit of the Truth on this subject; and 
wherever they go, they are apt to stir up the evil mind of 
others, instead of stirring up their good mind and provoking 
to love and good works. 

We are to please our neighbors so far as it would be 
for their good, and according to right principles. But to 
upbuild one in injustice would not be right. We should 
not think it right to let our neighbor's chickens run all 
over our garden; and we think that he would thus be 
more edified by our firm stand for right. But we must 
not tell him how to manage his chickens. We must do 
our best to keep his chickens off our place; but we would 
make a mistake if we were to go in and order our neighbor's 
chickens, house and children. To do so would be 
busybodying. We shall have enough to do to look after 
the weaknesses of our own family. 



R5413 : page 70 

THE END OF THE AGE A PERILOUS TIME 

"In the last days perilous times shall come; men shall be traitors, 
heady, ...lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God."— 
2 Timothy 3:4. 

THE expression, "the last days," or the latter 
days, the closing days, refers, not to the 
end of the world in the sense that many 
expect this event, but is a Scriptural designation 
of the present time, the end of 
this Age, when the Reign of Righteousness 
is about to begin. We are glad to be 
living now in this Harvest time! "The 
Harvest is the end of the Age." (Matthew 13:39. 
— Diaglott.) The warning given by 

the Apostle is that, instead of the world's being Christianized 
and converted to God at this time, the reverse 
condition will prevail. It will be a time of great peril- 
peril to the Lord's people— peril for those who have 
started out to follow Christ. However, it will not be so 
much a perilous time for the world. 

The only ones who are on trial for life or death are 
those who have been released from the Adamic condemnation. 
To these the time described by St. Paul will 
be one of severe testing. The whole course of the 
world will be turned aside from the high standard that 
might have been expected. Men will be traitors. As 
long as it will be of advantage to them to perform a 
contract they will do so; when not advantageous they 
will not fulfil the contract. It will be a time when every 



man's hand will be lifted against his neighbor. Selfishness 
will be rampant. Each will do what will be to his 
own interest, regardless of obligation. There will be 
manifest headiness and selfishness and self-conceit. Men 
will be "lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God." 
This condition is to be a sign of the end of the Age. 

Every thoughtful person must perceive that this condition 
of things is prevailing now. Whenever a contract 
is found to be unsatisfactory— whether it be a marriage 
contract or a business contract— the dissatisfied contractor 
is liable to break the agreement. This party to 
the contract then assumes the attitude of one who declares, 
Force me to keep it if you can. The Lord's people 
will keep their word and be firm for principle and 
true to their contracts, even when these prove disadvantageous 
to them. This attitude is pleasing to the Lord. 

PREVALENCE OF THESE CONDITIONS UNIVERSAL 

We find headiness of spirit in the world everywhere 
—a loss of respect for authority. No doubt there has 
been too much respect for authority in the past. Now 
the pendulum is swinging to the other side, and there is 
no respect for authority. This condition has been 
brought about by a lack of reverence for God— the inevitable 
result of loss of faith in the Bible as the Word 
of God. As people lose faith in the Bible, they lose faith 
in God, and become more selfish and more self-willed. 
This condition of affairs has been brought about by false 

R5413 : page 71 

doctrine, error. People think that God is their Adversary, 
purposing to do them harm. 

The Higher Critics have been seeking to put away 
what they have considered the absurdities of religious 
thought, and to this end have done away with the Bible. 
Bible students see that the absurdities have been brought 
about by the creeds and not by the Bible. But the world, 
losing confidence in God, are becoming more heady than 
ever before. Even the reverential fear which once held 
them is departing, and there is a disposition to doubt 
everything. People are in the condition of mind where 
they say, "Let us eat, drink and be merry"; nobody knows 
about the future; the preachers are all confused. Everything 
has come about by evolutionary processes. Let us 
enjoy the present. Let pleasure be our aim in life. This 
would seem to be the attitude of the world. They are 
lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God. 

WORLDLY SPIRIT IN SOME OF THE CONSECRATED 

These conditions of our day make it a perilous time 
for the Church. Do you ask, Would not the Church, on 
the contrary, be more than ever led to love God? And 
would this not guard them and keep them from danger? 



We answer that some of God's people are becoming 
more and more immersed in the world. The spirit of the 
world surges all around them. With great difficulty could 
these come to realize that the whole world is astray in 
their ideas and ways. The tendency of all such is to 
have the mind of the world, even though they be 
spirit-begotten. 

This worldly spirit, the Apostle suggests, would affect 
the Church to some extent. Consequently some of the 
Lord's people would thus come into special peril at this 
time, because of neglecting their Covenant with the 
Lord. Others would remember that Covenant, and watch 
and pray, and so make good progress. Those who are 
living close to the Lord are, for this reason, developing 
in mind and heart. But these are few. 

The Great Company class, while still loving the Lord, 
are becoming immersed in the spirit of the world. Even 
those who are living nearest to the Divine standard will 
be more or less imperiled through this spirit, unless they 
continue diligent in prayer and the study of God's Word. 
What we see going on about us seems natural to our 
minds. The way in which other people spend time and 
money is a temptation to the Lord's people which must 
be steadfastly resisted. 

A SUBTLE TEST 

The Lord's people spend and are being spent in His 
service— by volunteer work, by attending meetings, by 
holding meetings and in various ways, according to opportunity. 
They are living separate from the world- 
distinct lives, lives of consecration. The world now has 
an eight-hour day. The Lord's faithful people would, on 
the contrary, make theirs a sixteen-hour day. But all 
these present-day conditions constitute perils. For us to 
do what others do, and to devote to the Lord's service 
only what the world considers a reasonable day's work, 
would not be fulfilling our Covenant of Sacrifice at all. 
Those who seek merely to do right, and to put in eight 
hours or so a day faithfully, after the manner of the 
world, will be judged from this standpoint; and they will 
merely obtain a place in the Great Company. They are 
not fulfilling the conditions of the Covenant of sacrifice. 

But the Little Flock will serve the Lord with such 
delight that they will scarcely know how to cease their 
efforts. They recognize that their bodies are fully consecrated 
to the Lord, and they are daily putting them to 
death in a reasonable, rational manner. In view of these 
perilous times, let us each ask himself the question, To 
which class do I belong? 



R5413 : page 71 
COURAGEOUS DEALING-PAST, PRESENT AND FUTURE 



"Deal courageously, and the Lord will 
be with the good."-2 Chron. 19:11. 

THERE is a Divine oversight of the affairs of 

those who serve God recognized here, and 

a Divine blessing may be expected eventually 

upon all who deal justly. All heathen 

religions, as well as the Christian religion 

—the religion of the Bible— incline to lead 

the devotee to expect Divine blessing. But 

no other religion sets forth, as does the 

Bible, a just God. No other religions are 

founded on the principle of Justice. This 

is one reason why the Bible has had potent influence 

for liberty. Wherever it has gone, it has been "Liberty 

enlightening the world." 

There is no partiality with the Creator— no class distinction 
with Him— neither high nor low, rich nor poor, 
noble nor peasant. It is for this reason that when the 
teachings of the Lord were before the Israelites they 
were a liberty-loving people. In proportion as they fell 
into idolatry, they lost this spirit. 

BIBLE BRINGS SPIRIT OF LIBERTY 

With the spirit of liberty, of course, will go the 
spirit of heroism. Therefore the Bible is the source of 
the valiant qualities of the early Church in their withstanding 
persecution. Later on, when human traditions 
and heathen philosophies were heeded instead of the 
writings of Jesus and the Apostles and Prophets, the 
spirit of subjection, the spirit of slavery, the spirit of 
fear, the spirit of ignorance, proportionately prevailed, 
and brought on the Dark Ages. With the blessed influence 

R5414 : page 71 

which comes from the Word of God, we see, 
since the time of the Reformation, the spirit of liberty 
more manifest. Wherever the Bible has gone, the spirit 
of liberty has gone. Wherever the Bible has not gone, 
the spirit of liberty has not prevailed. 

Witness, too, the so-called Christian countries where 
the Bible has been ignored— Russia, Spain, Portugal and 
large districts of France, Poland, etc. Wherever the 
Bible is, liberty is more and more manifest. Even where 
the people do not recognize the Bible, the spirit of its 
teachings has had its effect. There is something of a 
realization that all are of one flesh and blood, one common 
brotherhood. God created of one blood all people 
that dwell upon the face of the whole earth. (Acts 17:26.) 
There are, of course, advantages in the way of 
birth, education, etc. Various circumstances affect conditions. 
But all mankind are responsible to the Creator, 
who is the great Judge over all. He is to be looked to 



as the One who will give rewards and punishments. 

SPECIAL DEALINGS UNDER LAW COVENANT 

Our text gives the words of the great king of Judah 
who became a reformer. He found that various degrees 
of injustice had crept into the customs of the people 
under the previous kings. In appointing officers and 
judges, King Jehoshaphat exhorted them to give their 
opinion according to the principles of justice. He said, 
"Deal courageously, and the Lord will be with the 
good." The Lord would bless those who would be faithful. 
The Lord would be with the good work that they 
would do, if they would do it faithfully. 

We are to remember that there was a special arrangement 

R5414 : page 72 

existing between God and the people of 
Israel. Under that arrangement the Lord was to bless 
them in proportion as they were loyal to Him and to the 
principles of His Government. We are not, therefore, 
to apply these words indiscriminately to other nations, 
if some in other nations had attempted some kind of 
reform. God was not undertaking to deal with other 
nations at that time. He was letting them get a general 
lesson under their own supervision. 

TEXT NOT APPLICABLE TO NATIONS TODAY 

God intervened only where it would be injurious to 
allow certain peoples to carry their evil course any further; 
as, for instance, in the case of the Ninevites, the 
Sodomites, and the Amalekites. We could not say that 
we could apply this text today; and that if some good 
people were in public office and should deal courageously 
and put down all the wrong and uplift the right, God 
would give them success in the work. God is not dealing 
with the nations at all. 

His whole dealing at this time is with the Church. 
The world today is still doing as it has always done, 
seeing what it can do for itself. In all probability these 
reformers today who would deal courageously would 
bring upon themselves great persecution if they should 
attempt to interfere with many of the entrenched vices. 
We have an example of this in New York City at the 
present time. Entrenched vice is hard to handle. Occasionally 
the world produces men who handle such 
things in a noble way. There are noble men inside and 
outside the Church. But we cannot say that the Lord 
would be with all of them. 

It is a mistake to say that the present governments 
are under the grace of God. The Bible says that the 
governments of this time are under the influence of the 
Prince of this world, and that he has the upper hand at 
the present time. But when Messiah takes His great 



power and reigns, then Satan will be bound. Then all 
the evil influences will be brought under the control of 
the Messianic Kingdom. From that time onward, the 
saints will deal courageously in Messiah's Millennial 
Kingdom, and shall reign for the purpose of putting 
down sin, until eventually Christ shall have accomplished 
the work of causing God's will to be done on earth, even 
as it is done in Heaven. 

CHURCH TO JUDGE COURAGEOUSLY IN NEXT AGE 

The point we notice, then, is that our text was applicable 
to the Jews, because they were a typical people 
of God. The king of Israel made use of these words 
to certain ones whom he appointed judges in his day. 
The Church is now being prepared for the work of 
judging in the Kingdom. The Lord distinctly tells us 
that we are not to judge before the time. In the 
Kingdom we shall judge. Then it will be our business 
to judge. Then we shall be required to render righteous 
and courageous judgment, in full accord with the Lord's 
instructions. 

As the Apostle Paul says, "Know ye not that the 
saints shall judge the world?" (1 Cor. 6:2.) We do 
know it. Our experiences now are fitting us to judge 
the world later, that we may do it successfully, courageously, 
lifting up all mankind who will to the glorious 
standard of perfection. All the evil doers shall be cut 
off. Then every knee will bow and every tongue will 
confess, to the glory of the Father and of the Son. 

CHURCH NOW JUDGES ALONG CERTAIN LINES 

The Scriptures instruct us that now the Church 
should judge its members along certain lines. We are 
not to judge one another's hearts. On the contrary, we 
are to take one another's word for their heart condition. 
But we are to judge one another's conduct. If 
one should live immorally, it would be the duty of the 
Church to deal with him according to the immorality of 
his conduct. The Apostle asks, Why should you go to 
law with the brethren before unbelievers? If you are 
unprepared to judge yourselves in small matters, how 
would you ever be prepared to judge in great matters? 

In our judging, we are to remember the lines along 
which the Lord would have us judge. The Lord will 
be with the good, we may be sure of that fact. But we 
are to deal kindly, affectionately. "Be kindly affectioned 
one toward another, with brotherly love." In dealing 
with one another, in proportion as we lay down hard, 
inflexible lines of judgment, in that proportion we would 
be fixing the gauge of the Lord's judgment with us. "For 
with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged." With 
what allowance we mete out to others, the Lord will 
judge us. We are to be sympathetic with others, and 
to remember that all need mercy and forgiveness, even 



as we hope for these for ourselves. 

Whoever has a duty to perform, let him not fear 
but be courageous; and if doing unpleasant tasks which 
are necessary, let us perform them in a kindly manner, 
both justly and lovingly. Let us not fear man, but rather 
fear the Lord, and be intent on pleasing Him. 



R5414 : page 72 

PROFITABLE TABLE TALKS 

--APRIL 5. -LUKE 14:7-24.- 

"Every one that exalteth himself shall be humbled; and 
he that humbleth himself shall be exalted."— Verse 11. 

A CONSIDERABLE number of advanced 

Christian people, Bible students, have in an 

informal way recently adopted the custom 

of having Bible talks during the meal hour. 

We know of many who are finding it profitable. 

To partake of Heavenly food at the 

same time that we appropriate the natural 

is quite proper; the lifting of the mind 

from the things of the world to the consideration 

of Heavenly things is advantageous 

in every way. We see that this was Jesus' custom. 

Today's lesson shows the Master a guest at the table 
of a prominent Pharisee, speaking in a manner that 
would not be appropriate to any but Himself. In a parable 
He criticised the gathering guests, because He noted 
that they selfishly chose the chief seats of honor, and 
because He would have them see that this selfish spirit 
would have to do with their character-building and with 
their fitness or unfitness for the honors of the Kingdom 
for which they hoped. 

When bidden to a public function, they should humbly 
take very lowly, inconspicuous places, not knowing 
how many might be more worthy than they in the estimation 
of the host. Then, if the host noticed them in 
a very humble place, and so desired, he might ask them 
forward to a more prominent place. Thus they would 
be honored and the honor would reach them in a proper 
manner; whereas, in taking a prominent place uninvited, 
they at least ran the risk of displeasing the host or the 
possibility of being asked to take an inferior place, the 
more honorable one being given to one considered more 
worthy; and thus they would be, in a measure, disgraced. 

R5414:page73 

The Master declared that this principle held with 
Him and with the Father; namely, that "whosoever exalteth 
himself shall be humbled, and he that humbleth 



himself shall be exalted." The Apostles set forth the 
same proposition, saying, "God resisteth the proud, but 
showeth His favor to the humble"; "Humble yourselves 
therefore under the mighty hand of God, that He may 
exalt you in due time."— James 4:6; 1 Peter 5:6. 

The thought is that the self-seeking, the proud in 
spirit, could not be trusted by the Lord in a high position. 
They might do damage to themselves and to His 
cause, with such a spirit. On the contrary, He will seek 
those who are of humble mind and who would not be injured 
by the exaltation, nor in danger of deflecting in the 
future work to which all of the Kingdom class are called. 

Turning to His host, Jesus gave him something of a 
compliment, saying, "When thou makest a dinner or a 
supper, call not thy friends, nor thy brethren, nor thy 
kinsmen, nor thy rich neighbors; lest they bid thee again, 
and recompense be made thee. But call the poor, the 

R5415 : page 73 

maimed, the lame, the blind: and thou shalt be blessed; 

for they cannot recompense thee; for thou shalt be recompensed 

in the resurrection of the just." 

The Pharisee had done something of the very kind 
in inviting Jesus and probably His disciples to dinner. 
He well knew that they were poor and would be unable 
to ask him in return. The Master's words may have 
been comforting to him. At all events, they set forth a 
grand principle, which should be recognized by all, rich 
and poor alike. If we get our rewards for good deeds 
in the present life, how will there be anything coming to 
us in the future? 

Let us therefore follow the Master's instruction and 
seek to do kindnesses to those who cannot return the 
favor, assured that God will appreciate such things as 
done for mercy's sake, for righteousness' sake, and will 
give a proper reward. We do not understand the Master 
to mean that it would be wrong to invite friends or 
neighbors or kinsman who might invite us in turn, but 
that we are not to think that in so doing we are laying 
up any treasure in Heaven. 

There was more reason for the calling of the poor, 
the lame, the maimed, in Jesus' day than now. Today, 
by common consent, civilized people recognize a duty 
toward the poor, the maimed, the lame and the blind. 
Homes are provided for them out of the public purse, by 
general taxation. Whoever enters into this matter of 
paying for the support of the poor in a proper spirit is 
doing something that in the sight of God is meritorious; 
but whoever pays such taxes from compulsion merely, 
without appreciation, evidently would not be deserving 
of any credit. However, all such institutions should be 
conducted in such a manner as would afford reasonable 
comfort and be good enough for ourselves or for our 
relatives, were we or they the persons in need. 

Under such conditions it would be almost wrong to 



fail to co-operate with these provisions, to refuse such 
provisions and to expect private support from friends 
and relatives, at an additional cost over and above the 
taxes they pay. Everything in God's Word seems to 
inculcate the spirit of justice first, and the spirit of love, 
kindness and sympathy beyond justice. But it should be 
voluntary and not enforced, and an indication of the 
measure of the Holy Spirit which we possess. 

GOD'S GREAT FEAST 

A person at the supper, after hearing Jesus' comments, 
remarked that it would be a blessed thing to have 
a share in the great Feast with which the Kingdom of 
God will be inaugurated. Jesus seized upon this as a 
text, and preached another sermon in a parable. As 
usual, His parable-sermon was in respect to the Kingdom 
of God: 

A man made a great supper and bade many guests. 
When the time for the supper arrived, he sent his servants 
to inform them, saying, "Come; for all things are 
now ready." But these with one accord began to make 
excuse. One said, I have bought a field; I must go and 
take a look at it; please excuse me. Another said, I have 
bought five yoke of oxen, and I must be proving them; 
please excuse me. Another said, I have recently married; 
therefore I cannot come. When the servant returned 
and told his experience the Master of the house 
was provoked, and said to the servant, Go out quickly 
into the streets and the lanes of the city, and bring in 
the poor, the maimed, the blind and the lame. 

The meaning of the parable is not far to seek. God 
had indeed provided a great Feast. Long years before 
He had sent word to the Jewish nation that in due time 
such a great blessing would be open to them— the privilege 
of becoming members of the Kingdom of God- 
sharers of it with Messiah. Yet, when Jesus appeared 
and the time came for the feast to be spread, those who 
had been bidden were careless. 

Jesus and His disciples had been going about for some 
time declaring that the Kingdom of Heaven was at hand, 
and that all who believed should make haste to associate 
themselves with it— to come to the Feast— should be getting 
a part of the blessing. But the invited ones were 
full, covetous, money-lovers. When they heard the Message 
of the Kingdom they said, I am too busy with my 
worldly prospects. And so they slighted God's invitation, 
extended to them through Jesus and the Apostles. 

The ones especially invited were the ones who specifically 
claimed to be the "holiness people"— the Pharisees 
and the Doctors of the Law. In the parable, the rejection 
of the ones originally invited led to the invitation's 
being sent to others, in the streets and the lanes of the 
city. This meant that the poor had the Gospel preached 
to them. Publicans and sinners were received by our 
Lord, told about the Kingdom, and invited to leave all 



their sinful and injurious practises, to accept forgiveness 
of sins, and to come in and participate as heirs of God's 
promise of joint-heirship with Jesus Christ their 
Redeemer. 

Nearly all the preaching of Jesus and of His disciples, 
up to Pentecost and after, was to the poor of Israel— the 
publicans and sinners. The charge made against our 
Lord by the Pharisees who rejected Him was that He 
received sinners, and that He ate with them. 

GREAT FEAST REPRESENTS RICH BLESSINGS 

The great Feast of the parable figuratively represents 
rich blessings of God's providence for the Church— the 
knowledge of the Truth, justification from sin, the begetting 
of the Holy Spirit, the privilege of appropriating 
the exceeding great and precious promises of God's 
Word. All this is the Feast which the Lord has spread 
for now eighteen hundred years, and to which He has 
been inviting, or calling, certain ones. First the Pharisees, 
the "religious lights," representatives of Moses, and secondly 
the poor, the sinful, the weak, the outcasts of 
Israel, the Prodigal Son class, were invited. 

Some of the latter class came, but not enough to fill 
the places already provided. In other words, not enough 
of the Jews were "Israelites indeed," acceptable to God, 
to fill the foreordained number of the elect Church. Hence 
the Master sent out His servants the third time, saying 

R5415 : page 74 

that they should go outside the city, into the highways 
and hedges, and urge the people to come in, that His 
House might be filled— not a seat left vacant. 

This applies, evidently, to the sending of the Gospel 
to the Gentiles. For eighteen hundred years the Message 
has been going up and down through the highways 
and hedges, calling and inviting, drawing, such as have 
hearing ears and responsive hearts. In all, they will not 
be a great company. In all, they will not represent very 
many of the Lights of the world. The Apostle writes, 
"Ye see your calling, brethren, how that not many wise 
men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble," 
hath God chosen, but chiefly "the poor of this world, rich 
in faith," to be heirs of the Kingdom.— 1 Corinthians 1:26,27; 
James 2:5. 

Ultimately the full number purposed by the great 
Householder will have been called, accepted, and found 
worthy through Christ to have a place at that table— to 
share in that great Feast. It will be the Nuptial Feast, 
in honor of the marriage of the Lamb, after His wife 
hath made herself ready. (Revelation 19:7-9.) At that 
feast, we are assured, will be a secondary company, not 
worthy to be of the Bride class. These may be figuratively 
styled the bridesmaids, the Great Company class; 
for after the account of the gathering of the Bride we 



have the Lord's message to these subsequently delivered 
from Babylon, saying, "Blessed are they that are called 
to the marriage supper of the Lamb." 

You can imagine the honors and joys of that great 
banquet! The aroma of the good things coming, already 
reaches us in the anteroom, before we enter the banquet 
hall. These odors come to us through the exceeding great 
and precious promises of God's Word, assuring us of His 
faithfulness and of His provision of the things which 
"eye hath not seen, ear hath not heard, neither have entered 
into the heart of man," but which "God hath provided 
for them that love Him" supremely. 

Those originally bidden will not taste of that supper, 
though, thank God! Divine provision has arranged for another 
banquet, which through the Kingdom will be spread 
for all nations, kindreds, tongues and peoples— "a feast 
of fat things."— Isa. 25:6-8. 



R5415 : page 74 

"JESUS HIMSELF DREW NEAR" 

-APRIL 12.-LUKE 24:13-35.- 

"It is Christ that died, yea, rather, that was 
raised from the dead."— Romans 8:34. 

WE ARE to study today one of the most striking 

manifestations of Jesus to His disciples 

after His resurrection. Early in the morning 

of the day of His resurrection He had 

appeared to the women who came with 

spices to embalm His body. They had communicated 

to St. Peter and St. John that the 

Lord had been with them. These two most 

energetic Apostles vied with each other 

to get to the sepulcher with speed. But 

they saw merely the empty tomb. 

The disciples of Jesus were dazed, perplexed. Although 
He had told them that He would be crucified, 
and that He would rise from the dead on the third day, 
they had not comprehended the teaching. Even after 
hearing of His resurrection they were seemingly slow to 
connect it with what He had previously told them. 

In the afternoon, two of the company were walking 
home, discussing their disappointment in Jesus— how, 
instead of becoming a great king, He had been crucified, 
and their hopes of associating with Him in dignity and 
honor had all been dashed. Jesus had been proven a 

R5416 : page 74 

fraud, to the satisfaction of their rulers. The fact that 
He was crucified seemed to settle the matter that He 



could not have been the Messiah, as He had declared and 
as they had believed. 

THAT JESUS IS STILL FLESH IS UNSUPPOSABLE 

While they thus talked, Jesus overtook them. They 
knew Him not, because of His resurrection change. The 
Apostle Peter tells us that He was "put to death in flesh, 
but quickened in spirit." We understand this in the 
light of the explanation given of the resurrection change 
of the Church. The Apostle Paul declares: "Sown in 
weakness, raised in power; sown in dishonor, raised in 
glory; sown an animal body, raised a spirit body." (1 Corinthians 15:42-44.) 
And, of course, if the Church is 

to experience such a resurrection change in order to be 
like her Lord, He must have experienced just such a 
change. 

The same thought is impressed again by the Apostle's 
statement: "We shall all be changed, in a moment, in 
the twinkling of an eye"; for "flesh and blood cannot 
inherit the Kingdom of God." The change which the 
Church is to experience, in order to be fitted for the 
Kingdom of God is the same change which Jesus experienced 
when He was raised from the dead, a life-giving 
Spirit— no longer a man. 

Our Lord's title, "the Son of Man," still belongs to 
Him, just as the title, "the Word of God," the Logos, 
still belongs to Him. When the Logos was made flesh, 
the identity was not lost. Respecting our Lord's human 
experiences, we read: "A body hast Thou prepared Me" 
—for the suffering of death. (Hebrews 10:5-10.) When 
He had accomplished that purpose, He no longer had 
need of human nature; but, as He had foretold His disciples, 
He ascended up where He was before— to the 
spirit plane, to the spirit nature, as well as, later on, to 
Heaven itself. 

To assume that Jesus is a fleshly being in Heaven, 
bearing wounds and scars to all eternity and surrounded 
by spirit beings on a higher plane than the human, is to 
suppose that the Father never really exalted Him again 
to the glory which He had with God before the world 
was (John 17:5), and is unsupposable. We must bear in 
mind, therefore, the Scriptures, which show that the 
Father highly exalted the Redeemer, not only restoring 
Him to spirit-being, higher than human, but exalting Him 
"far above angels, principalities, powers and every name 
that is named. "-Phil. 2:9-11; Eph. 1:20-23. 

"JESUS SHOWED HIMSELF" 

St. Luke declares that Jesus showed Himself alive 
after His resurrection. (Acts 1:3.) Again he speaks of 
Him as appearing. The narrative shows both terms are 
justified by the facts. He appeared and disappeared. He 
showed Himself to some and not to others, and in every 
way manifested the fact that some great change had 



taken place in Him after those three days. Not only did 
He appear and show Himself in different forms, in different 
bodies, unlike each other, but also in different 
clothing. Then, too, when He suddenly disappeared, the 
clothing disappeared also. 

When we say that Jesus, a spirit Being, materialized, 
we are not to be understood as in any way sympathizing 
with the class called Spiritualists, who produce materializations 

R5416 : page 75 

of the dead. If we desire an illustration, let us 

go back to the Bible account of how Jesus, when He was 

the Logos— before His nature was changed from Spirit 

to human— appeared to Abraham, in company with two 

angels. We read that the Lord and two angels did eat 

and talk with Abraham, who knew them not, but "entertained 

angels unawares" until, eventually, their identity 

was revealed. 

Just so it was with the two disciples en route to 
Emmaus: The stranger who overtook them sympathetically 
inquired, Why look and talk so sadly? They opened 
their hearts to Him, astonished that He did not know. 
They told of Jesus the Nazarene, a Prophet mighty in 
deed and word before God and all the people; and they 
explained to Him how the chief priests and rulers had 
delivered Him up and crucified Him. They explained 
that theirs was a double disappointment, in that not only 
had they lost a Friend, but their hope that He was the 
Messiah, who would have redeemed Israel, had been 
crushed. They proceeded to tell Him of the events of 
that very morning— that some of the women of their 
company had found the tomb empty and had seen angels, 
who said that He was alive, etc. 

This gave Jesus the opportunity He sought— to explain 
to His disciples quietly, without any excitement, 
that the experiences they had had were part of the Divine 
Plan. He said to them, "O foolish men, and slow 
of heart to believe all that the Prophets have spoken!" 
He declared that it was necessary that He should thus 
suffer in order to enter into His glory— that without such 
suffering He never could be the King of Glory, with 
power to bless and restore humanity, by and by.— 
Acts 3:19-21. 

Then He began to point out from the writings of 
Moses and all the Prophets what God had foretold respecting 
Messiah's experiences. He probably reminded 
them of how Isaac had been offered up by Abraham, explaining 
that Abraham typified the Heavenly Father and 
Isaac typified Himself; and that the offering, even 
though not fully carried out, represented the death of 
Himself as it had taken place, the subsequent life of Isaac 
representing the resurrection of Jesus, to be with His 
Father again. 

He doubtless told them about the smitten rock, from 
which gushed the waters— that that rock represented 



Himself, who must be smitten in order to give the Water 
of Life to the dying world. He doubtless told them how 
Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, and explained 
that the serpent represented sin; and that 
He, in being crucified, was made to take the place 
of the sinner, that the sinner might, through faith, be 
made righteous in God's sight through the Redeemer's 
sacrifice. 

He doubtless explained to them the sacrifice of the 
Atonement Day, in which the bullock, which died, represented 
Himself in the flesh; and in which the high priest, 
who lived, and who entered into the Most Holy and 
sprinkled the blood for the forgiveness of the people, 
also represented Himself, a spirit Being, who after 
resurrection would go into Heaven itself and eventually 
offer up full sin-atonement on behalf of the world, and 
would come forth again at His Second Advent to bless 
those for whom He had died. 

"HE OPENED THE SCRIPTURES" 

He doubtless explained to them respecting the passover-lamb 
—that it typified Himself, "the Lamb of God, 
which taketh away the sin of the world." We may assume 
that He proceeded to the Psalms, Isaiah and the 
other Prophets, explaining all the prophetic passages relating 
to the sufferings of Christ and the glory that 
would follow. No wonder those disciples afterward declared 
that their hearts had burned within them while 
He opened to them the Scriptures ! 

As the early disciples were refreshed by the Message 
of God's grace and the fulfilment of His promises, so it 
is sure to be with all the followers of Jesus. The Lord 
prophetically declared, "My people perish for lack of 
knowledge." Evidently there can be only a dwarfed 
Christian life and experience except as the Word of 
God is understood and assimilated. Hence we have the 
frequent exhortations of Jesus and the Apostles that the 
people of God should grow in grace and knowledge, 
should search the Scriptures, etc. Let those who are cold 
and indifferent unite with those who are dejected and 
despondent, in coming to the Master for the "meat in due 
season." Such surely will not be turned away empty by 
Him who said, "Seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it 
shall be opened unto you." And in proportion as they 
find their hearts also burning within them, as they realize 
the fulfilment of God's promises in the past, so shall they 
develop faith in the fulfilment of those promises which 
relate to the future. 

Jesus could have manifested Himself to His disciples 
otherwise than He did. Instead of appearing as the 
gardener and as the traveler, etc., in different forms, and 
then vanishing after communicating with His disciples, 
He could have done just as He did with Saul of Tarsus, 
the last one to whom He appeared. As we read, "Last 
of all He was seen of me also, as of one born before 



the time." (1 Corinthians 15:8.) Those begotten of 
the Holy Spirit now are to be born of the Spirit in the 
resurrection. Then they will be spirit beings, like the 
Redeemer, see Him as He is and share His glory. That 
will be the due time for all of His followers to see Him 
as He is— not as He was.— 1 John 3:2. 

But Saul of Tarsus saw Him thus as a spirit Being, 
"shining above the brightness of the sun" at noonday- 
saw Him before the time. The effect upon him was disastrous 
to his eyes, and required a miracle for his recovery 
of sight. And even then apparently a certain 
blemish was allowed to be a thorn in his flesh to his 
dying day, as a reminder of God's great mercy toward 
him, and to keep him humble in connection with his 
powerful ministry.— 2 Corinthians 12:7. 

"THEY KNEW HIM -HE VANISHED" 

When the travelers arrived in Emmaus Jesus, after 
being urged, accepted their hospitality. We have every 
reason to suppose that if they had not urged, He would 
not have stopped with them; for "He made as if He 
would have gone farther." And so it is still; He does 
not intrude upon His disciples. Rather, He encourages 
us to recognize our need of Him and to ask, that we 
may receive, that our joy may be full. So it was with 
those brethren at Emmaus. They were appreciative of 
what they had learned. "Never man spake like this 
Man." If He had ministered to them so much spiritual 
joy, they would delight in showing Him every courtesy 
in their power; and perhaps this might give further opportunities 
for conversation. 

And so it was. When they sat down to supper, their 
guest assumed something of the manner of Jesus; and 
the way in which He asked a blessing upon the food 
reminded them, evidently, of Jesus. Their eyes of understanding 
began to open. Immediately they realized that 
no one but their own Master could have given them the 
lessons just enjoyed on the journey. And thus having 

R5417 : page 76 

fulfilled the purpose of His materialization, He immediately 
vanished out of their sight— clothes and ail- 
instantaneously. 

Their joy was too great to permit them to sleep. They 
must hasten to carry the good tidings to the other disciples. 
So they journeyed back to Jerusalem, and there 
found the others rejoicing in the fact that the Lord had 
manifested Himself to Simon Peter. Then the two told 
the story of their experiences; and faith, hope and joy 
began to grow in all their hearts. 

Who cannot see that the Lord's way of manifesting 
Himself after His resurrection was in every way the 
best! Had He appeared to many of them, or to all of 
them, as He appeared to Saul of Tarsus later, they would 



have been bewildered, shocked. They would not have 

been so well able to identify "the light shining above 

the sun at noonday" with their Master, Jesus. Even if 

a voice from Heaven had declared the fact of His resurrection, 

Jesus would not have had the same opportunity 

of explaining to their minds the prophecies; and they, 

perturbed and excited, would not so well have been able 

to receive the instruction. 

It should be remembered that out of fewer than ten 
appearances during the forty days between our Lord's 
resurrection and ascension, He only twice appeared in a 
form similar to that which they had seen, and bearing 
the marks of crucifixion; and that on both of these occasions 
He appeared while the doors were shut, and later 
vanished while the doors were still shut, in order that His 
followers might learn a double lesson: 

(1) That He was no longer dead, but alive, 
resurrected; 

(2) That He was no longer flesh, but Spirit— "Now 
the Lord is that Spirit." 



R5417 : page 76 

"NAUGHT THAT I HAVE MY OWN I CALL" 

"The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away, 
blessed be the name of the Lord."— Job 1:21. 

ALL that we have should be regarded as a gift 

from God, whether it be much or little. 

God's gift to our first parents was a very 

munificent one— perfection of life. They 

were made in the image and likeness of God 

in the flesh— only "a little lower than the 

angels." Because of disobedience this perfection 

was forfeited. Obedience was the 

condition on which Adam would be permitted 

to remain in the Garden of Eden. 

If he was obedient he might live and enjoy it, might 

fill the earth with posterity and gradually bring the 

whole world to the blessed conditions which he himself 

found in the Garden. 

It was when Adam sinned that God rejected him from 
being a son. After that time no man was ever called 
a son of God until Jesus came. And no man since Jesus 
has been called a son of God, except those who have 
come to God through Jesus, and have been accepted by 
Him. Adam was cast out of his Eden home for the 
very purpose of bringing upon him the penalty of sin 
—death. The angel of the Lord drove Adam out. We 
remember God's expression on this: "In the day that 
thou eatest thereof, thou shalt surely die." (Gen. 2:17.) 
The dying process began at once and continued until 
completed after 930 years. 



Since the penalty of sin was death, it was of God's 
mercy that He allowed our first parents to live at all 
after their disobedience. While it was a curse He inflicted 
on our race when He drove Adam and Eve out 
of Eden, nevertheless there was a blessing connected 
with that curse. When God drove them out of the Garden, 
He said, "Cursed is the ground for thy sake. Thorns 
and thistles shall it bring forth unto thee. In the sweat 
of thy face shalt thou eat bread, till thou return to the 
ground whence thou wast taken; for dust thou art, 
and unto dust shalt thou return." Here was the curse. 
They were to die by gradual processes. 

ALL OUR BLESSINGS OF GOD'S MERCY 

Adam and Eve might do all in their power to prolong 
their lives, but it was not possible for them to live 
out the full thousand years, which constitute one of the 
Lord's Days. Adam lived out nearly an entire Day, but 

R5418 : page 76 

he was gradually going down to the tomb all the while. 
His mental, moral and physical powers were waning. 
And so all of his race are a groaning creation. 

It was not an unjust sentence, nor an unfair sentence. 
It is a favor from God that we have life at all. 
The privilege He gives us of living even a few years 
is a great boon. And so it is true of all of us, as 
described by the Prophet Job in relating his experience, 
that naked came we into the world. We have nothing 
that is really our own. It is of God's providence that we 
enjoy the privileges that we have. 

It was true of Job that it was of God's permission and 
mercy that he had his flocks and herds and children. Then 
fire came down from heaven and burned up his sheep 
and the attending servants. Enemies killed his camels 
and oxen and asses, and still other servants. The hurricane 
came and killed his children. But Job said, "The 
Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away. Blessed be 
the name of the Lord!" Job had no claim on everlasting 
life, although he had a hope of it. He realized that all 
he had possessed belonged to God; they were not his own. 

Life and immortality were not brought to light until 
Jesus came. (2 Tim. 1:10.) The great Message of salvation 
which before was only hinted at was in due time 
clearly stated by Jesus. He came to give His life a Ransom-price, 
to give a life that corresponded to the life that 
Adam lost. We see the beauty of the whole arrangement, 
that as by a man came death, by a man also should 
come the resurrection of the dead. Whereas "by one 
man's disobedience many were made sinners, even so by 
the obedience of one shall many be made righteous" 
(Rom. 5:19)— made free from the death penalty— and 
ultimately shall have a resurrection. 

Those who get the first benefit of this provision in 



Christ are the Church. The Apostle says that we are 
risen with Him to walk in newness of life. And we have 
faith that God is able to fully complete this resurrection 
as He has promised. We do not claim that we do not 
die, which is contrary to all the facts and to the Scriptures. 
We, on the contrary, admit that we die. But we 
believe that He who raised up Jesus from the dead will 
raise us up also by Him. Jesus has effected an atonement 
for the sins of the whole world, upon the basis of which 
those who believe now may have reconciliation with God. 
And by and by the world will have the benefit of Christ's 
atoning work, and opportunity for reconciliation. 

LIFE RIGHTS LOST TO MANKIND 

The hope of the Church is that she shall reign with 
Christ for a thousand years, bind Satan, uplift mankind 
from sin and pain and death, and, as the Scriptures declare, 
"wipe away the tears from off all faces." (Isaiah 25:8.) 
And this is the work of God in that He planned, 
designed, the whole matter. It is the work of Christ in 

R5418 : page 77 

that He purchased the race and is the Father's Agent— 

who is "the Beginning of the creation of God," "the Beginning, 

the First-born from the dead; that in all things 

He might have the pre-eminence," not pre-eminence over 

the Father, but above all others.— Rev. 3:14; Col. 1:18. 

We can see more clearly than did Job, that all our 
blessings are of God, not of ourselves. We can see more 
clearly because we are spirit-begotten. We know that 
we have no rights whatever. All we can do is to call 
upon God's mercy. But all are not able as yet to hear 
the Message of mercy. "The god of this world hath 
blinded the minds of them which believe not."— 
2 Corinthians 4:4. 

And so only those whose eyes are especially anointed 
can see. As Jesus said in His day, "Blessed are your 
eyes, for they see, and your ears, for they hear" (Matt. 13:16.) 
And so St. Peter confirms the same thought of 
blindness, respecting those who crucified the Lord: 
"Brethren, I wot that through ignorance ye did it, as did 
also your rulers."— Acts 3:17. 

So then from our favored vantage ground we, still 
more than Job, can take in perfect submission whatever 
experiences God in His wisdom and love sees fit to allow 
to come upon us. If we are His children, we are bound 
to accept all our experiences as being of His providence 
and order and arrangement. 

"Naught that I have my own I call, 

I hold it for the Giver; 
My heart, my strength, my life, my all 
Are His and His forever." 



R5417 : page 77 

THE IMPORTANCE OF ATTAINING BALANCE OF MIND 

"Let all your deeds be done in love." 
-1 Corinthians 16:14.~Diaglott. 

GOD is the very personification of sympathy 

and love. As the Scriptures declare, "God 

is Love." And all who will be God's children, 

developed in His likeness, will be 

loving children. As St. John says, "He that 

dwelleth in love, dwelleth in God, and God 

in him." (1 John 4:16.) In proportion as 

we develop strength of character as New 

Creatures, this quality of love increases. In 

addition, we should find our judgment also 

becoming more accurate. Those who are developed in 

the Spirit of the Lord have better judgment than they 

formerly had. As the days go by, they know better how 

to sympathize with the world; how to deal with mankind; 

they are getting more and more of the wisdom which 

cometh from above. 

CAREFUL PREPARATION FOR KINGDOM NECESSARY 

Before we became Christians at all, we may have 
been under-balanced, or over-balanced— we may not 
have known how to deal properly with our families or 
our friends. Out of kindness and sympathy we may 
have been inclined to give them money, or to yield to 
their wishes in a way that was injurious to them; or we 
may have been too severe and unyielding. But as we 
grow in the spirit of a sound mind, we learn better how 
to deal with others, so as to be in harmony with the 
Divine will, the Divine Spirit. 

When we shall have experienced our change and 
have become like our Redeemer, all of our powers will 
be perfect. Our love, our conception of justice, and 
also our conception of how to deal with others, will then 
be perfect. Every one who does not develop this character 
of love, mercy, justice, etc., will be unprepared for 
the Kingdom work. 

The next Age is to be a time of purification, of purgation, 
to the world; and those of the Lord's people who 
do not now have character enough to give necessary 
stripes are not worthy of a position in which authority 
must be exercised. On the other hand, those who would 
give too many stripes would not be fit to deal with mankind. 
Therefore we all need this balance of mind in 
order to be ready for the work of the next Age. 

PROPER AND IMPROPER OCCASIONS FOR ANGER 

As we come to see that the whole race of Adam is 



fallen— some more, some less— we develop a broad sympathy 
for mankind. We grow compassionate. We desire 
to lift them up out of their degradation. We would 
like to help them as much as opportunity affords. Hence 
we are far from wishing to render evil for evil. We 
wish to be peacemakers as far as possible. Therefore, 
unless it would be injustice to refrain from speaking 
sharply, we should be careful that our words are kind 
and loving. However, even though our words might not 
be angry, there are times when sharp utterances might 
be helpful, but even these should be tempered with love; 
tempered with the spirit of the Master. 

"BE YE ANGRY AND SIN NOT" 

There is a difference between anger that would be 
righteous indignation and anger that would be unloving, 
unkind, unjust. We know that God is angry with the 
wicked, for the Scriptures so tell us. (Psalm 7:11.) This 
fact shows us that anger of itself does not necessarily 
imply a sinful condition; for God has no sin, and He 
judges Himself by the same regulations under which He 
judges His creatures. Therefore anger in itself is not 
sin. 

In God's case there is no danger that He will make a 
mistake and be angry with the right or approve the 
wrong, or that He will be lenient with the wrong and 
thus oppose the right. His knowledge is perfect; therefore 
His conduct is perfect. In our case, however, if we 
feel that anger is proper for us, we should use a great 
deal of discretion. As the Apostle Paul says; "Be ye 
angry and sin not."— Ephesians 4:26. 

In a case where an innocent person is suffering wrong, 
and we have full knowledge of the matter, then it might 
be our duty to manifest anger, righteous indignation. It 
would be proper to manifest a certain degree of anger 
if we saw even a dumb brute mistreated. If we saw the 
principles of righteousness being outraged, it might become 
necessary to manifest some anger, some indignation. 

But these cases would probably be very rare, for the 
circumstances would not often be a matter of our business. 
As St. Peter remarks, we are none of us to suffer 
as busybodies in other men's affairs.— 1 Peter 4:15. 

If we see a parent doing to his child something 
that is not right, we should not interfere unless the 
child's life is endangered. If it is merely a case of 
switching or a box on the ear, we must not interfere. It 
is not our business. Let us as the Lord's children, ambassadors 
of the King of Heaven, seek more and more 
to exercise the spirit of a sound mind, the spirit of love 
and reasonableness. 



R5418 : page 78 



GOD'S USE OF THINGS IN OUR HAND 

"And the Lord said unto Moses, 

What is that in thine hand?"— Exodus 4:2. 

MOSES had been called of the Lord to the 

great and honorable work of delivering His 

people from the bondage of Egypt. He 

was now eighty years of age. His long experience 

in the Egyptian court had given 

him an insight into the affairs of government. 

Stephen tells us (Acts 7:22) that 

"Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the 

Egyptians, and was mighty in word and in 

deed." Tradition says that he was also an 

able general in the Egyptian army. 

Yet he relinquished all these earthly advantages to cast 
in his lot with the despised people of God. (Heb. 1 1:24-26.) 
"Moses. ..refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's 
daughter; choosing rather to suffer affliction with the 
people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a 
season; esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches 
than the treasures of Egypt; for he had respect unto the 
recompense of the reward"— he preferred to share with 
God's chosen people, Israel, in their affliction, and to 
have part with them in the Promise made to their fathers. 

How appropriate it was that the man whom God called 
to be the leader of Israel out of bondage should be a 
learned man, and one well equipped to be at the head of 
such a people and under such circumstances! We cannot 
doubt that his wandering as a shepherd in the wilderness 
for forty years, tending the flocks of Jethro, his father-in-law, 
made him thoroughly familiar with every road, 
every hill, every stream; and that this was subsequently 
of great advantage to him, when, under the Lord's direction, 
he became leader of Israel through this wilderness 
en route to Canaan. 

MEEKNESS TAUGHT BY EXPERIENCE 

But this forty years' experience in Midian had taught 
Moses another important lesson— the lesson of meekness. 
And his long isolation had made him reserved. Furthermore, 
soon after severing his connection with the royal 

R5419 : page 78 

house of Egypt, he had made an attempt to deliver his 
people; but they had not wished his services, and had 
rather resented his interference. So now, when the Lord 
would send him to do this great work, he was distrustful 
of his ability to lead the people of Israel out of bondage 
into the land of Canaan, and was fearful and reluctant. 
The Lord had appeared to Moses in the burning bush 
which was not consumed, had given him his commission, 
and had assured him that He, Jehovah, would certainly be 



with him. Moses, however, very properly felt the magnitude 
of the undertaking and his own insufficiency. He 
urged that he was incompetent, that it would require 
some one more powerful than he to influence the heart 
of the king of Egypt. He knew that it would be entirely 
contrary to the purpose and policy of the Egyptians to 
let the Israelites go from their service. He said to the 
Lord, "Who am I, that I should go unto Pharaoh, and that 
I should bring forth the children of Israel out of Egypt?" 
But the Lord assured him that He would Himself be 
responsible; that He would direct in the matter. 

"WHAT IS THAT IN THINE HAND?" 

Still Moses wanted some demonstration of God's approval 
and power. He asked, How shall I make Israel 
know that Thou hast sent me? for they will not believe. 
Then the Lord asked, "What is that in thine hand?" 
Moses answered, "A rod." And the Lord said to him, 
"Cast it upon the ground." Moses did so, and the rod 
became a serpent, and Moses fled from it. If he had not 
particularly noticed what he had in his hand, he might 
have thought that possibly it had been a serpent before. 
But he had looked, and was sure that it was a staff which 
had been changed into a serpent. Then God told him to 
take up the serpent by the tail. He did so, and it again 
became a rod in his hand. 

THE LESSONS FOR US 

From this we would take the lesson that if the Lord 
sends us on any mission, we should not have the feeling 
that we could conquer the world, but should realize our 
own littleness and should properly feel wholly insufficient 
of ourselves. We should realize that without His assisting 
grace we could accomplish nothing. We should be 
very sure that He has commissioned us, and that our mission 
is not some foolish thought of our own. We should 
be very sure that the Lord is back of the whole arrangement. 
Then we should have full confidence in Him. 

We should feel like saying with Moses, "I cannot do 
anything." But if we wish to serve the Lord, we are to 
look to what we have in our hands, whether it be one 
talent or another. God is so wise that He can use our 
humblest talent to His praise. What He wants us to use 
may be right in our hands, and we may not have noticed 
it. No matter how ordinary our lives may be, God is 
able to use us, and to give us also the needed lessons in 
connection with our experiences. 

Another lesson that we could draw from the Lord's 
dealings with Moses is that the things which we have in 
our hand, those things closest to us, might become injurious 
to us, if it were not that the power of God is 
able to make everything work together for our good. If 
we have the spirit of service, the Lord can and will use 
things right at our hand— not necessarily things afar from 



us; and the Divine power over evil can make all things 
work out good to those who love Him. More and more 
we are learning these lessons. If, then, we would serve, 
we should look to see what we have in our possession; 
what things we can make use of. 

FAITHFUL IN LEAST-FAITHFUL IN MUCH 

A great many people would like to serve the Lord 
with a thousand tongues. If they had a thousand tongues, 
they feel sure they would sing with them all. How do 
we know that we would use a thousand tongues, if we do 
not faithfully use the one we have? "He that is faithful 
in that which is least" will be faithful in the greater 
things. 

There are plenty of people who like to address thousands. 
But if we cannot address thousands, it is all the 
more necessary to address one. Some say that if they 
had a million of dollars they would give it to the Lord. 
But the Lord is not likely to ever give them the chance 
of giving large sums if they do not manifest a disposition 
to give of the small amounts already in their possession. 
"To him that hath [through use of his talents] shall be 
given, ...and from him that hath not [from neglect of 
his talent] shall be taken away even that which he hath." 

So the lesson to us of Moses' experiences would seem 
to be— the use of things we have in our hands. The same 
lesson is taught in another way in the case of the poor 
widow who cried to the Prophet Elisha for help. She 
was in poverty, and her creditors were about to take her 
two sons for debt. "What hast thou in the house?" 
asked Elisha. The woman replied, "Not anything in the 
house save a pot of oil." Then the Prophet told her to 
go and borrow empty vessels from her neighbors— "not 
a few"— and to then begin to pour out the oil into the 
vessels. The woman obeyed, and all the vessels were 
filled with oil, and she had oil to sell and thus pay her 
debt. The Lord used what she had in her hand. 

R5419 : page 79 

It was the same way with the Lord's miracle in feeding 
the thousands. He asked, What have you on hand? 
He did not say, How far is it to town? And He did not 
tell the Apostles to get wagons and go to town for bread 
and meat. But He said, Use what you have. And He 
blessed the five loaves of bread and the two small fishes, 
to the abundant feeding of the five thousand; they all ate 
"as much as they would," and of what remained the disciples 
gathered up twelve baskets full. (John 6:5-13.) 
So we should use all our talents and opportunities. The 
Lord is looking for us to use what we have, and we 
shall receive blessing therefrom; and the more faithful 
we are in the performance of our privileges, the greater 
will be our blessings from Him. 



MOSES' EXPERIENCES TYPICAL 

In addition to the lessons just noted, we believe there 
is a further significance in the experiences of Moses, and 
the deliverance of Israel. We are to see something representative 
of conditions in our day. Moses was acting 
under Divine instruction. Many things connected with 
this mission of Moses to the Israelites seem typical of the 
deliverance of God's people from the power of evil. 
Pharaoh was typical of Satan. We are living in the corresponding 
time, when God purposes to deliver all from 
the power of Satan. Jesus and the Church will be the 
Agent of Jehovah— the deliverance will be the work of 
Messiah as God's Representative. 

The rod represents authority. This was illustrated at 
the time when the Lord instructed that Aaron should 
represent Him as the head of the tribe of Levi. There 
had been murmurings in Israel, and the principal men of 
the twelve tribes were instructed by the Lord through 
Moses to take each man his rod, write upon it his name 
and send it into the Tabernacle. (Num. 17: 1-9.) Aaron's 
rod was to go in with the others, because it was the rod 
of his father's family. And when they examined the rods 
in the morning, Aaron's rod had budded, blossomed and 
brought forth almonds. 

This would give us to understand that a rod might 
generally be considered to represent authority. As the 
hand is power, so the rod is authority. Thus the rod 
would seem to be a special manifestation of Divine Power 
and Rule. We may not speak too positively of the antitypical 
fulfilment of this experience of Moses. But we 
might think that in some way or other the power of God 
would appear to be evil— the serpent was evil. Evil has 
seemed to triumph for these six thousand years. When 
Moses and Aaron went into the presence of Pharaoh, 
Moses' rod became a serpent there also. Then the 
magicians cast down their rods, and they became serpents. 
But Moses' rod swallowed up all the rods of the magicians. 

RESUMING THE ROD OF POWER 

We would very much like to know just what these 
things signify— just how God will permit the world under 
the power of Satan to have an hour of triumph. There 
is to be permitted a great Time of Trouble, and it will be 
because of the casting down, for a time, of Divine authority 
and rule. 

We think this condition is present now. People 
are losing confidence in God. They are feeling, for 
the time, as though there were no God. The tendency 
of Higher Criticism and Evolution is to give humanity 
the impression that there is no God but Nature. And 
as mankind get this idea of a Nature-god that is ruthless, 
relentless, impersonal, it is very likely to efface all thought 
of a living God of Justice and Love. "There is no fear 
of God before their eyes," the Scriptures say. So we 



may expect a great Time of Trouble, when the power of 
God will seem to be a further manifestation of evil— as 
the power of evil. The taking up of the rod of power 
again, a little later, will be the resuming of Divine 
authority. 



R5418 : page 79 

THE SPIRIT-BEGOTTEN IN THE HOLY 

OUR ears and our tongue bring us many blessings 

and in general are grand servants. 

Nevertheless, sometimes they are difficult 

so to manage as not to be misleading. 

Fully half the difficulties everywhere are, 

apparently, the results of misunderstanding. 

God has been misunderstood, the 

Bible is misunderstood and preaching is 

misunderstood. We cannot wonder, then, 

that STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES and TABERNACLE 

SHADOWS and THE WATCH TOWER have been 

misunderstood. All that we can do is to restate matters 

afresh, hoping that our tongue or pen will serve us better, 

or that the eyes and the ears of our readers will 

serve them better. 

BEGETTING THE TRANSFORMING POWER 

Repeatedly we have endeavored to show that the begetting 
of the Holy Spirit, in the case of each individual 
Christian, is the transforming power by which he passes 
from the human nature to the new nature. This transfer 
is beautifully pictured in the Tabernacle types by the 
priest passing from the Court into the Holy. The Court 
represents, in the present time, the earthly condition of 
those who are approaching God, but have not yet made a 
full consecration of their lives to Him and His service. 

When the step of consecration is taken, Jesus, acting 
as our great High Priest, imputes His merit to cover our 
deficiencies of the flesh, and forthwith presents us to the 
Father. Our consecration of the earthly nature is thus 
made acceptable, and in the Divine reckoning we are 
from that moment dead according to the flesh, but alive 
according to the spirit— begotten again, not with corruptible 
seed, but by the Spirit of God. All thus begotten 
are in the Holy in their relationship to God— that 
is to say, they are children of God, heirs of God. Thereafter 
they have the enlightenment of the Truth as represented 
by the Golden Lamp-stand with the seven burners; 
the spiritual food as represented in the Table of 
Shewbread, and the privileges of worship and prayer as 
represented in the Incense Altar. 

This condition continues until the end of this Age, 
when a judgment, or testing, or distinction, will be made 



as between the most faithful, the Little Flock, the Royal 
Priesthood class, and the less faithful class of the Great 
Company— the latter thereafter being typed by the tribe 
of Levi. 

In the new order of things, after the establishment 
of Messiah's Kingdom, this distinction between the 
Church proper, joint-heirs with Christ, and the larger 
company of antitypical Levites, will be perpetual, and the 
services of the two will be different. The former will be 
a Priesthood corresponding to that of Melchizedek— a 
Priest upon His Throne. The work of the latter will correspond 
more to that accomplished by the Levites; namely, 
teaching the people, etc., as servants of the Priests, from 
whom they will receive their directions. 



page 8 1 

VOL. XXXV MARCH 15 No. 5 
A. D. 1914-A. M. 6042 



CONTENTS 

The Memorial Supper April 10th 83 

Eating and Drinking It Worthily 83 

"Are Ye Able?" 84 

Are We Willing to Share His Ignominy? 85 

Drinking the Lord's Cup by the Church 85 

Love and Loyalty Manifested by Submission 85 

Our Reasonable Service 86 

The Terms of Discipleship 86 

Consecration Not the End of Our Work 87 

The Completeness of Our Offering 88 

Let Us Go On "In Full Assurance of Faith"! 88 

Cost of Discipleship 90 

Definition of Cross-Bearing 91 

Salt is Good, But- 92 

Heavenly Interest in Sinners 92 

The Value of a Man 93 

Interesting Questions 94 

Some Interesting Letters 95 

I.B.S.A. Berean Studies-Vol. II 95 

page 82 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 



Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:-All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



LITERATURE FOR THE BLIND 

Requests for Bible literature for the Blind should be sent 
direct to Gould Free Library for the Blind, South Boston, 
Mass. 

Brother Gould has to loan the six volumes of STUDIES in 
English Braille; also Vols. I. and II. in New York Point, and 
Vol. I. in American Braille. Besides this, he has translated, 
and ready to loan, many of the booklets issued by our Society, 
as well as special sermons. 

When returning books or pamphlets for the Blind, please 
return them direct to the Gould Library. The Post-Office will 
handle them without postage if the package is plainly marked, 
"Literature for the Blind, Postage Free." 



RE CLIPPINGS 

We wish to express thanks for interesting clippings, and 
also for clippings containing attacks upon us. We request 
that you give name and date of paper each time, or, preferably, 
the whole page. If the whole paper be sent, please 
mark the article plainly and address W.T.B.& T. Society, 
File H, 17 Hicks Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 



JEWISH HOPES AND PROSPECTS 

We have a good supply, and now offer these booklets 
FREE, postpaid. 



When sending remittances to the Society, please remember 
to make them payable in all cases to the Watch Tower 
Bible and Tract Society. 



R5420 : page 83 

THE MEMORIAL SUPPER APRIL TENTH 

WE WILL celebrate the Memorial Supper on the 

evening of Friday, April 10. We trust that 

all of the Lord's consecrated people everywhere 

will avail themselves of their privilege 

of memorializing the death of the Redeemer 

for our sins and— as the Apostle 

points out— our participation with the Redeemer 

in His sufferings and death to human 

conditions. As our Lord and the 

Apostles met and symbolized His death in 

advance of the event, so it is appropriate for us to meet 

on the anniversary to celebrate His sacrifice. 

The doing of this annually, in harmony with the evident 
purpose of the Lord in establishing this Memorial 
instead of the Jewish Passover, makes the occasion a very 
impressive one, much more so than any celebration which 
ignores the anniversary feature and celebrates occasionally 
—monthly, weekly, quarterly, etc. Let us not find 
fault with others who do differently; but, as opportunity 
offers, let us inform them of our reasons for observing 
this great event on its anniversary. 

As often as we do this (yearly) we do show forth the 
Lord's death until He come. While we believe that our 
Lord has been present for a number of years— during the 
Harvest— this does not hinder us from continuing the 
blessed Memorial of His death. Our thought is that our 
Lord meant that we were to continue celebrating His 
death until, at His Second Coming, the full Harvest work 
of the Age shall be completed, and the entire Body of 
Christ, the Church, shall be received into glory. Then, as 
He declared, we shall drink of the New Cup with Him. 

Whereas now we drink of His Cup of suffering, 
shame, ignominy, reproach, the world's derision and opposition, 
His New Cup will be a Cup of joy, blessing, 
glory, honor, immortality— the Divine nature. The Father, 
who poured for our Lord the Cup of suffering, has already 
poured for Him the Cup of blessing and glory. As 
we are privileged to share with Him in this Cup of suffering, 
so with our resurrection "change" we shall be privileged 
to share with Him the Cup of glory and blessing. 
Yea, ours is a mingled Cup now, a bitter-sweet; for 
by faith we already enjoy many of the things which He 
has in reservation for them that love Him. 

In the Lord's arrangement the moon symbolized the 
Jewish prospects, while the sun symbolized the prospects 
of the Gospel Age. The Law Dispensation was a shadow, 



or reflection, of the things future, as the moon's light is 
the reflection of the rays of the sun. We are near the 
time of the rising of the Sun of Righteousness with healing 
in His beams, to flood the world with the light of the 
knowledge of God. Seeing this, we lift up our heads and 
rejoice, as the Master directed. Since all the overcoming 
members of the Church are included in that Sun of 
Righteousness, according to our Lord's parable (Matthew 13:43), 
it follows that the Elect Church must all be 
gathered, and her glorification must be completed before 
the full light of the Millennial glory will shine forth upon 
the world. 

In partaking of the Memorial we may look forward 
with the eye of faith to the rising of the Sun of Righteousness, 
in contrast with the conditions which prevailed 
at the time when the first Memorial was observed. Then, 
the Moon (the Law Covenant) was at its full; and immediately 
after the rejection of Jesus and His crucifixion 
the Jewish polity began to wane. It is worthy of note 
that the very day on which Jesus was crucified the moon 
was at its full, and the waning began at once. So this 
year, on April 11, the moon will be at its very full, and 
will then begin its wane. The 1 1th, therefore, corresponds 
to the day on which our Lord was crucified; and 
the evening of the 10th corresponds to the night of the 
first Memorial Supper. 

EATING AND DRINKING IT WORTHILY 

As from the intelligent appreciation of the fact symbolized 
by the Memorial Supper a great blessing comes, 
and a joy proportionate to the participator's faith and 
obedience, so also a condemnation attaches to an unworthy, 
improper participation in the Memorial. None are 
to participate except those who have come into relationship 
with the Lord by consecration of their hearts— their 
all— to Him and His service. 

None can come into this consecrated condition except 
as they have recognized themselves as sinners and the 
Savior as the Redeemer from sin, whose merit is sufficient 
to compensate for the defects of all those who 
would come unto the Father through Him. All such should 
partake with a great deal of joy. Remembering the 
sufferings of the Master, they are to rejoice in those sufferings 
and in the blessings that these have brought to 
their hearts and lives. None are to drink of the fruit of 
the vine on such occasions except those who have appropriated 
the merit of the sacrifice of Christ and who fully 
realize that all their blessings are through Him. None 
are to drink of the Cup except those who have given up 
their all to the Lord, for this is what the Cup signifies— 
it is the Cup of suffering, the Cup of death— a full submission 

R5420 : page 84 

to the will of God. "Thy will, O God, not Mine, 



be done," was the prayer of the Master, and is to be the 
sentiment and petition of those who partake of the 
Memorial Supper. 

For others to participate in this Memorial Supper 
would be a farce, would be wrong, and would bring more 
or less of condemnation, disapproval, from God and from 
their own consciences— and that in proportion as they 
realized the impropriety of their course. 

But let none think that they should remain away from 
the Memorial because of imperfections of the flesh. This 
is a great stumbling-block to many. So long as we are in 
the flesh, imperfection of word, deed and thought are possible 
—yea, unavoidable. St. Paul says that we cannot do 
the things that we would. It is because we need Divine 
grace to forgive our daily, unintentional, unwilling trespasses 
that all whose sins have been forgiven and who 
have been accepted into fellowship with Christ are encouraged 
to come to the Throne of Heavenly Grace in 
prayer. The Apostle says, "Let us come with courage to 
the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain mercy and find 
grace to help in time of need." (Hebrews 4:16.) It was 
because of our needs that God opened up the way and 
made this arrangement for us. 

By God's provision for the forgiveness of our sins, of 
which we have repented, and for which we have asked 
forgiveness in Jesus' name, we may realize ourselves as 
no longer sinners under condemnation, but as clothed 
with the robe of Christ's righteousness. This is the 
thought behind St. Paul's expression, which applies to 
every day: "I beseech you, brethren, by the mercies of 
God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, 
acceptable to God, which is your reasonable service."— 
Romans 12:1. 

All Christians should keep their accounts squared with 
the Lord. If they come short, they should lose no time 
in getting the account squared, in obtaining forgiveness 
through the merit of the Savior's sacrifice. Such accounts 
with the Lord should be settled promptly at the time of 
their occurrence, or not later than the day of their occurrence. 
They should not be allowed to accumulate; for 
they will rise as a wall between the soul and the Heavenly 
Father. But whatever has been the condition in the past, 
the Memorial season, above all others, is the time for 
making sure that no cloud remains between the Lord and 
us, to hide us from His eyes. 

Thus forgiven, thus cleansed of any defiling spot on 
our robe of Christ's righteousness, let us keep the feast 
—the Memorial of our Lord's death. In it let us afresh 
acknowledge and impress upon our minds the importance 
of the merit of His sacrifice and death, and how it represents 
the grace of God to us, as it will by and by represent 
the same grace extending through the Millennial 
Kingdom to the whole world. Let us remember also our 
devotion of ourselves, our consecration to be dead with 
our Lord, to be broken as members of His Body, parts of 
the One Loaf, and to participate in the drinking of His 



Cup of suffering and shame and death. "For if we suffer 
[with Him], we shall also reign with Him."— 
2 Timothy 2:12. 

We trust that the celebration of the Memorial this 
year may be a very deeply impressive one, an occasion of 
rich blessing to all of the Lord's consecrated people 
everywhere. "For even Christ our Passover is sacrificed 
for us; therefore let us keep the feast."— 1 Cor. 5:7,8. 

We trust that each little class, or group, of Bible students 
celebrating the Memorial together will appoint one 
of their number a secretary to write a post-card to THE 
WATCH TOWER office, stating briefly the interesting facts 
connected with the celebration, the number present, and 
the number participating, so far as can reasonably be 
estimated. 



R5421 : page 84 

"ARE YE ABLE?" 

"Are ye able to drink of the Cup that 
I shall drink of? "-Matthew 20:22. 

WE RECALL the circumstances under which 

these words were uttered by our Savior: It 

was just a few days before His crucifixion 

Jesus had promised His disciples that they 

should sit with Him in His Throne in His 

Kingdom. So confident were they that this 

would be as the Lord had said that they 

were discussing the position they might 

occupy. The mother of the two disciples, 

James and John, came to Him and asked 

whether her two sons might sit, the one on His right 

hand and the other on His left, in the Kingdom. And 

Jesus, turning to the two disciples, replied by asking them: 

"Are ye able to drink of the Cup that I shall drink of, and 

to be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?" 

We know that Jesus' baptism in water took place at 
the beginning of His ministry. In harmony with the 
Divine Plan, He was to die as the Savior of men. And 
He symbolized this death as soon as He was thirty 
years of age— as soon as was possible under the Law. 
During the three and a half years of His ministry, He 
was accomplishing this baptism, He was pouring out His 
soul unto death, and this death He finished at Calvary. 
Jesus said, "The baptism that I am [being] baptized with" 
—now— not a baptism which was either future or past. 

But He spoke differently of the Cup— "the Cup that 
I shall drink of." He thus implied that the Cup was 
future— not in the present nor in the past. He had told 
His disciples that He would go up to Jerusalem; and 
that there He would be crucified, and on the third day He 
would rise again. And He said on another occasion, 



"Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink His 
blood, ye have no life in you." What the Master said 
about His being crucified the disciples did not understand 
But Jesus understood the situation, and He knew that 
this Cup was about to be poured for Him. And so He 
spoke of it again, saying of Himself, "The Cup that My 
Father hath poured for Me, shall I not drink it?" 

OUR LORD'S SPECIAL TRIAL 

We might think of the word, Cup as representing various 
experiences of life— that everybody has his Cup of 
mingled joy and sorrow. But Jesus used the word in a 
different sense. When He was in the Garden of Gethsemane 
He prayed, "O My Father, if it be possible, let 
this Cup pass from Me! Nevertheless, not as I will, but 
as Thou wilt." And again, the same night He prayed, 
saying, "O My Father, if this Cup may not pass away 
from Me, except I drink it, Thy will be done!" In the 
matter of His baptism into death, there was no hesitation 
on our Lord's part. On the contrary, from the very beginning 
He voluntarily participated in it. The ignominious 
death was the thing that He prayed might pass, if it 
were possible. But this was what He learned was the 
Father's will for Him, and He was content to have it so. 

There was nothing in the Law to indicate that our 
Lord should be executed as a blasphemer of the Divine 
Law. Yet blasphemy was the charge preferred against 
Him. The Sanhedrin decided that He was a blasphemer 

R5421 : page 85 

in that He had said, "Destroy this Temple, and in three 
days I will raise it again," and also in claiming that He 
was the Son of God. Apparently, then, the thing which 
was specially weighing on His mind and from which He 
would have liked to be relieved was the ignominy and 
shame of being crucified as a criminal, as a blasphemer of 
the Father He loved so well. 

Jesus knew that He had come into the world to die, 
and that He must suffer. But this part of His experience 
He had not fully understood. Evidently He knew that "as 
Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so 
must the Son of Man be lifted up"; for comparatively 
early in His ministry He had stated this in His conversation 
with Nicodemus. But as He came down nearer and 
nearer to the time of His humiliation, His degradation, 
and realized all that it meant, He felt a great shrinking 
from it and poured out His heart in the cry, "If it be possible, 
let this Cup pass from Me!" But immediately- 
proving that His affirmation, at the time of His consecration, 
"Lo I come to do Thy will, O God," was not empty 
words— He added, "Nevertheless, not as I will, but as 
Thou wilt! "-Matthew 26:39. 

ARE WE WILLING TO SHARE HIS IGNOMINY? 



And so to His disciples our Savior said: Are you 
able to lay down your lives completely, even though this 
shall mean to you injustice in the taking away of your 
lives? Are ye able to drink of the Cup that I shall drink 
of? There will be disgrace and ignominy connected with 
it all. Are ye willing to share with Me in this, My Cup? 
They answered: "We are able." They were willing. 

This, we see, is the same Cup represented in the Communion 
Service. The bread represents the body and the 
wine the blood of our Lord. The Cup especially represented 
the shame and ignominy connected with His death; 
and the two disciples said that they were willing to share 
His Cup— they had no hesitancy. At any cost they would 
be faithful. They would comply with any conditions He 
would make. They did not, of course, yet know the full 
import of the word baptism or of the word cup. These 
were things all His disciples were feeling after. When 
Pentecost should come, these things that Jesus had spoken 
to them would come to their remembrance, as He had 
foretold. (John 16:4; 13:19.) But they were willing and 
anxious. And that is all that we can be. Jesus guaranteed 
that, being willing, they should have these experiences; 
that, continuing willing, continuing to suffer with 
Him here, they should reign with Him in His Throne. 
But as to the particular place for each in the Throne, that 
would not be for Him to say, but for the Father. 

The courage, the fortitude, of our dear Redeemer in 
walking the narrow way fills us with admiration. How 
strong and brave was His character! He had no thought 
of looking back; His whole being was intent upon accomplishing 
the will of His Father in Heaven— upon sacrificing 
Himself in the interest of the world. What a noble 
Example was set before the Apostles!— greatness in 
humility, victory through entire self-surrender! 

DRINKING OF THE LORD'S CUP BY THE CHURCH 

The drinking of the Lord's Cup by the Church, represents 
our participation in the sufferings of Christ in 
the present time. None shall be a member of the Body 
of the great Mediator of the New Covenant unless he 
come in now under the proper terms. The drinking of 
the blood, then, is the sharing of the Cup. For if we 
drink not of His Cup, neither shall we share with Him in 
His glory. He said, "Drink ye all of it." All must drink, 
and the entire Cup must be drained during this Age. 

It is a very great privilege that we are permitted to 
have a share in the sufferings of Christ. "If we suffer 
[with Him], we shall also reign with Him." We shall 
participate in the inauguration of the New Dispensation, 
and in dispensing its blessings. The Antitype of Moses, 
who will do the sprinkling, is Christ the Head and the 
Church His Body, glorified, of whom we read in Acts 3:22: 
"For Moses truly said unto the fathers, A Prophet 
shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your 



brethren, like unto me"— that is, Moses was His type, on 
a smaller scale. The Body is now being raised up. Jesus 
was first raised up, then all the Apostles; and following 
after, the remaining members of His Body. 

As Moses sprinkled all the people, so this antitypical 
Moses, when completed, will "sprinkle" the world of mankind; 
and this will mean the bringing of them into harmony 
with the Divine Law. It will require the thousand 
years to "sprinkle" mankind. So there is a great difference 
between the drinking of the Cup and the sprinkling 
of the blood. The sprinkling with the blood represents 
justification, while the drinking of the Cup by the Church 
represents, not only justification, but sanctification. 

OUR LORD'S RECOGNITION OF THE DIVINE PURPOSES 

Our Lord, in His memorable words to St. Peter— "The 
Cup which My Father hath given Me, shall I not drink 
it?"— referred, evidently, to His dying experiences, which 
were severe in the extreme. He was dishonored of men 
and reckoned as an enemy of God— a blasphemer. His 
physical sufferings He knew would be intense, but to His 
perfect mind the shame and desisted, the opprobrium, 
added greatly to the poignancy of His anguish. Yet this 
was the Cup the Father had given Him; it was the Divine 
purpose respecting Him. 

Our Lord had all the experiences necessary for proving 
and testing His loyalty; for it was necessary that He 
manifest His loyalty before both angels and men. The 
whole matter had been Divinely arranged from before the 
creation of man. He was "the Lamb slain from the 
foundation of the world." (Rev. 13:8.) Everything pertaining 
to that slain Lamb was foreknown by the Father. 
Jesus was to drink the Cup which belonged to the sinner, 
in order that He might redeem man and might thus be a 
faithful and merciful High Priest. This was the Cup of 
suffering and death. It was necessary that Jesus should 
suffer the death of the cross, in order that He might 
redeem the Jew. 

LOVE AND LOYALTY MANIFESTED BY SUBMISSION 

All His sufferings were foretold in the Scriptures. 
The crucifixion was pictured by the lifting up of the 
brazen serpent in the wilderness. All of His experiences 
were foreknown, forearranged and necessary. When He 
came to earth to do the Father's will, He did not know of 
all that was to come. But He learned obedience by the 
things which He suffered, the things which were "written 
in the Book." He submitted Himself to all the Father's 
will, and thus He proved His loyalty. As He Himself 
declared, "I came not to do Mine own will, but the will of 
My Father which sent Me!" As the hour of the consummation 
of His sacrifice drew near, in the lonely shades 
of Gethsemane, the Master prayed, "My Father, if it be 
possible, let this Cup pass from Me!" We are not to 



suppose that He prayed for the Cup of death to pass 
away; but He wondered whether or not the ignominious 
experiences of the crucifixion might pass. Yet we find 
that He did not murmur nor rebel, but said, "Not My will, 
but Thine, be done!" 

SPECIAL SUPERVISION OF OUR CUP 

We see that our beloved Lord drank of the bitter Cup 
to its dregs, and did so thankfully. And we are to remember 

R5422 : page 86 

that He gave the Cup to us, that we should all 
drink of it— not that we should all have exactly the same 
experiences that He had, but that we must all drink of 
the Cup of suffering and death in the Father's own way. 
Jesus was the Perfect One, and the Father dealt with 
Him in a very particular manner. 

In our cases the experiences would be different; because 
of our imperfection we could not be dealt with 
from the standpoint of perfection. We are, therefore, 
not to think of our Cup as a definite, fixed program as 
was the Master's, but rather that the Father permitted us 
to have a share in the Cup of death with His Son. Our 
Cup is supervised by our Savior, although it is the Cup 
poured by the Father; for it is the Father's Program. 

In the Master's case the Cup was necessary for the 
sins of the whole world. In our case it is not necessary, 
but it has pleased the Father to grant us a share in the 
sufferings and glory of our Lord. Jesus makes good our 
deficiencies and develops our characters, fashioning us 
into His own glorious Image. Without this supervision of 
our Cup by our Lord, we might be very poorly developed 
in many qualities; therefore our Cup needs to be specially 
supervised. And so He assures us that, while the necessary 
experiences are coming to us, at the same time His 
grace will be sufficient; and His strength will be made 
perfect in our weakness, and all things will be made to 
work together for our good. 

Let us never forget that unless we partake of His Cup, 
unless we are immersed into death with Him, we can 
have no share in His Kingdom of glory, we can never sit 
with Him in His Throne. Let us then count all the things 
of this earth as loss and dross that we may attain this 
Pearl of Great Price. As the experiences of suffering 
come to us, let us not be affrighted, nor "think it strange 
concerning the fiery trials that shall try us, as though 
some strange thing happened unto us"; for even "hereunto 
were we called," to suffer with our beloved Master now, 
and by and by be glorified together with Him in the Kingdom 
eternal! 

"Are ye able to walk in the narrow, strait way, 

With no friend by your side, and no arm for your stay? 

Can ye bravely go on through the darkening night? 



Can ye patiently wait till the Lord sends the light? 

"Ah, if thus ye can drink of the Cup He shall pour, 
And if never the banner of Truth ye shall lower, 
His beloved ye are, and His crown ye shall wear, 
In His Throne ye shall sit, and His glory shall share!" 



R5422 : page 86 

OUR REASONABLE SERVICE 

"I beseech you therefore, brethren by the mercies of God, that 
ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto 
God, which is your reasonable service."— Romans 12:1. 

THIS exhortation of St. Paul's is based upon 

the preceding statements of the eleventh 

chapter of this same Epistle, as is shown by 

the connecting word therefore— because of 

those things recited in that chapter. The 

eleventh chapter tells of the mercies of God 

toward both Natural Israel and Spiritual 

Israel— not so much to the world. But the 

tenth chapter takes up in elaborate form the 

mercies of God toward all His creatures. In 

this Epistle the Apostle is addressing those who had been 

Gentiles. In view of these mercies of God (His Plan of 

Salvation and the call of some of the Gentiles to take the 

places in the Body of Christ, lost by Natural Israel) St. 

Paul exhorts his hearers to present their bodies living 

sacrifices, holy and acceptable. 

The question naturally arises, Whom did the Apostle 
address? He evidently is using these words as an exhortation, 
not to the world, but to believers. The introduction 
to the Epistle indicates that it was written to 
those already consecrated. But evidently some connected 
with the Church at Rome had not yet made a consecration. 
Some who were believers, who had come to a knowledge 
of the Lord and had counted the cost of self-sacrifice, but 
who had not given themselves fully to the Lord, might 
yet become brethren in the Truth in the full sense. The 
Apostle's words would apply equally to both classes— 
those who had presented their bodies living sacrifices, 
and those contemplating doing so. It would have been 
fully as proper to say, Brethren, you who have already 
given yourselves to the Lord, I beseech you that you fulfil 
your Vow of Consecration; for your bodies are holy 
and acceptable to God. 

The Heavenly Father never forces anybody; but He 
tells them that He is willing to accept sacrifices, and that 
now is the acceptable time to present them. He sets 
forth the fact that self-denial and sacrifice are the only 
terms upon which one can come into fellowship with 
Him. But nowhere does He urge or command any one 



to make a consecration. To do so would be to change 
the matter from sacrifice to obligation; and the very 
thought of sacrifice is in opposition to requirement. 

THE TERMS OF DISCIPLESHIP 

Our best example of what we should do in shown by 
our Lord and the Apostles, the chief members of God's 
royal family. Our Lord did not seek to entrap any into 
His service— as we see done today. On the contrary, He 
proceeded along high and noble lines. He said, "Come 
unto Me, all ye that are oppressed and heavy-laden." 
This is an appeal to reason. If you have found that you 
are sin-sick, come unto Me— I have the will and the way 
to help you to come to the Father. 

When talking to the young ruler of the synagogue, 
our Lord set forth the terms of discipleship. He did not 
say, Never mind; do not make it too serious a matter. On 
the contrary, He stated just what are the terms of consecration. 
No man could be His disciple unless he would 
surrender all. To this rich young man our Lord showed 
that with all his morality there was inconsistency. He 
possessed wealth, and should use that wealth to the glory 
of the Lord. He must not be selfish, or he could not be 
Christ's disciple. 

The young man might have said, I have some children 
for whom I must make provision. But the Lord said, 
Give all that you have to God. A parent can consecrate 
his children, so far as he is concerned. The Lord would 
not ask any one to do that which he was unable to do. 
But he said, "Take up your cross and follow Me," if you 
would be My disciple. -Mark 10:21. 

Again our Lord said, "He that putteth his hand to 
the plow, and looketh back, is not fit for the Kingdom." 
(Luke 9:62.) We should make up our mind to use all 
of our powers, or else stand aside. The Lord's method 
should be our guide. We should not try to entrap any 
one or resort to hocus-pocus to convince any one. We 
should not plead what there is to be gained in a material 
way by becoming a Christian. We should tell people 
that there is no other way to come into Christ but by 
the way of the cross. We cannot reach Him in any 
other way. It is the Lord's way or no way. We must 

R5422 : page 87 

bear the cross, as He bore it. We believe that we do the 
people more good by setting forth the Message with no 
uncertain sound than trying to entrap them. Nevertheless, 
in putting before them the trials and cross, 
we should also put before them the glory to follow. 

TEXT APPLIED TO THE CONSECRATED 

To those who have already made a consecration the 
thought would be, You have entered into a Covenant with 



God to follow Jesus. You have given up your own human 
will. Remember that this includes your mortal 
body. Continue the work of presenting your body— of 
dying daily. Keep before your mind this Covenant of 
Sacrifice; for it is not yet fulfilled. The mere promise 
to fulfil a covenant is not fulfilling it. 

The Father begets us of the Holy Spirit, and gives us 
the great privileges that belong to those who have become 
New Creatures in Christ. Then it is for us to go 
forward, and day by day lay down our lives in His service. 
It would be appropriate, therefore, for the Apostle 
to say to such, Lay down your lives daily. Remember 
that it is your mortal bodies which you are to sacrifice 
in the Lord's service. It is yourselves as old creatures, 
human beings, and not as New Creatures, that are being 
sacrificed. Yours is a living sacrifice in the sense that 
this body, reckonedly passed out of sin, is being continually 
sacrificed. It is not given to preserve, or to be 
your everlasting possession; but it is your covenant and 
privilege to accomplish the sacrifice of your flesh. Therefore 
I beseech you to do this. 

TEXT APPLIED TO THE TENTATIVELY JUSTIFIED 

To those whose justification has not been vitalized, 
the text might mean, You are desirous of serving God. 
This is indicated in your attending the meetings of the 
Church. The fact that you assemble with the saints of 
this congregation signifies that you love holy things— 
that you desire to know the will of God. Now then, 

R5423 : page 87 

brethren, I beseech you to make a full consecration of 
yourselves to God. Consider your body as a living sacrifice 
—not that you are to commit suicide and destroy 
your body, but that you are to esteem your body a living 
sacrifice, day by day using your strength and your life 
in the Lord's service. 

The exhortation, "Present your bodies," then, would 
seem to be applicable both to the consecrated and to those 
who are following on to know the Lord. The next statement 
should be understood to be in harmony— "holy and 
acceptable to God." If this statement be taken in relation 
to those who are already consecrated, then the Apostle 
is saying, This vitalization of your justification which 
the Lord has granted you has constituted you holy. And 
because the Lord counts you holy, and yourselves wholly 
acceptable to Him, you should continue to do good works 
—complete the good work which you have begun. The 
sacrifice being esteemed of God holy and acceptable, the 
results will be grand and glorious. 

This exhortation, viewed from the standpoint of one 
who has not completed his consecration, might be understood 
to mean, if you take this step of consecration, remember 
that then the merit of Christ will be imputed to 



you, and that through the arrangement which He has 
made in Christ God is willing to accept you. 

CONSECRATION TO DEATH MOST REASONABLE 

Every one who recognizes God's mercies and blessings 
finds it a "reasonable service" to sacrifice the earthly 
things for the precious privilege of serving Him. If it 
was a reasonable service for Jesus to leave the Heavenly 
glory, to become a man, and to sacrifice Himself unto 
death, then surely ours is most reasonable. We, being 
imperfect, have very little to give; and when there is an 
opportunity for showing our appreciation of the Heavenly 
Father, then we should make haste to use it. 

The Father made a proposition to the Lord Jesus, and 
it is not to be supposed that He would suggest anything 
but a reasonable service. To have asked Jesus to sacrifice 
His life for humanity without any reward of a future 
life would have been a most unreasonable thing. The 
Father set before the Redeemer a great joy, to be the 
recompense of His obedience. And so with us. The 
Lord does not invite us to sacrifice ourselves at the present 
time without any reward from Him. He tells us that 
if we do this He will make us joint-heirs with His Son, 
participators with Him in all the joys of the Kingdom. 

CONSECRATION NOT THE END OF OUR WORK 

The term Brethren may be viewed from two different 
standpoints. On the one hand, we may apply it to those 
who are in the state of prospective justification, in a justified 
attitude of mind, and whose justification is growing 
by every step they take toward God. On the other 
hand, it would refer to those who have become brethren 
in the fullest sense— who have taken the step of consecration, 
and whose consecration has been accepted by the 
Father through the Lord Jesus. With these there is a 
continual, a daily presentation. This morning we presented 
ourselves before the Lord and asked His blessing 
on the day. It is a presentation day by day and hour by 
hour. It is a constant surrender of self-will, in this way 
and in that way— a daily waving of our offering before 
the Lord. So it was with our Lord Jesus. He not only 
made the full consecration at the beginning, but day by 
day He laid down His life, until the sacrifice was completed 
on Calvary. 

For one to make a consecration of his time and his 
talents, and then to withhold his offering, would insure 
his not gaining the great prize for which the Father invited 
him to run. The Great Company will be made up 
of those who have presented their bodies, but who neglected 
their opportunities for laying down their lives— their 
time, influence, money, all— in the Lord's service. 
This neglect will lose them their place in the Throne, 
their privilege of being a part of the Bride class. The 
Bride will be made up of those who not only have presented 



their bodies in the beginning, but have faithfully 
continued that presentation unto death. 

CONSTRAINED BY GOD'S MERCIES 

The Apostle states the reason why we should make 
this presentation of ourselves as being the "mercies of 
God"— "I beseech you by the mercies of God, that ye 
present your bodies." God's mercies are to a certain 
extent over all. He sends His sunshine and His rain 
upon the evil as well as upon the good. For many 
centuries God's special mercies were granted only to the 
Jews. But the arrangement of God's Plan is such that 
Gentiles, as well as Jews, may now come into God's favor. 
God broke down the middle wall of partition through 
Christ, and thus gave all people an opportunity to come 
back into harmony with Him and to have Him as their 
Father, their Life-Giver, and through Christ to share 
His blessings. 

As many as see and hear and have the eyes of their 
understanding opened, should consider this a reason for 
a full consecration, a full surrender, to the Lord. It is 
truly a most reasonable service, as the Apostle points out; 
and the prize which He attaches to the matter makes it 
unspeakably desirable and precious. It would be very 
unreasonable to accept God's marvelous favors and then 
neglect to live up to the conditions attached to them. If 

R5423 : page 88 

we really believe God, if we have a proper faith in His 
exceeding great and precious promises, we will joyfully 
and faithfully meet the requirements. 

A lady said to us recently: You put more stress on 
godly living than we in our Church have done. You say, 
"Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and you shall be 
saved." You put a special stress on believing. Yes, we 
replied, this word believe has a most important bearing 
on the entire matter. If we should say to you that if on 
your way home today you would stop at a certain house, 
of a certain number, you would find, in a particular 
corner under the steps, a little bag, and that it contained 
valuable treasure which should be yours— if you believed 
our words you would go and get that bag. If you said 
that you believed us, and then went another way altogether, 
we would be sure that you had not believed us. 
Your course would prove it. 

Now the Lord has offered us the opportunity of being 
joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord in "an inheritance 
incorruptible and individual and that fadeth not away." If 
we believe this fact, we will seek to know just what the 
conditions are. Whoever really believes will find that the 
conditions are very easy in comparison with the great 
reward. But if he fails to put forth his greatest effort 
to win this great prize, he will show that he has not believed 
the Message; for if he recognizes the offer and 



believes it, he will surely be eager to lay aside every 
weight and encumbrance and run patiently to the end to 
obtain the crown.— Hebrews 12:1,2. 

THE COMPLETENESS OF OUR OFFERING 

It is, therefore, a reasonable service. The Apostle 
tells us the conditions. All who would have this great 
blessing must offer themselves living sacrifices, holy and 
acceptable to God. It is ours to present our bodies. It 
is not the New Creature who does the presenting; there 
in no New Creature at the time the body is presented. 
Our natural mind discerned from the Message of the 
Lord that there is a more excellent way— of harmony 
with the Lord— and we desired to come thus into 
harmony with Him. And that new, or changed, will presents 
our earthly interests and all that we have in sacrifice. 
We are altogether human when we offer ourselves 
to the Lord. We are then begotten to a new mind, a new 
hope, and thus are New Creatures. 

While we present ourselves to God, we do not come 
to Him directly with our presentation. We come through 
the great High Priest— as in the type, the offering of the 
Lord's goat was presented by the high priest. We come 
to the Father through the Redeemer. We do not offer 
a justified sacrifice, but come with all our sins, for 
cleansing in that fountain opened for us. The sentiment 
of our hearts is: 

"Just as I am without one plea, 
But that Thy blood was shed for me, 
And that Thou bidst me come to Thee— 
O Lamb of God, I come! " 

But God could not accept a sacrifice in that imperfect 
condition; it is only as we come through the Priest that 
He recognizes us. If we were perfect, we might come 
in our own name; but we are not perfect, and so we come 
only through this High Priest, Jesus. The great High 
Priest then imputes His merit, and includes our sacrifice 
as a part of His own. The Divine blessing then comes 
upon us— we are begotten of the Holy Spirit. Thenceforth 
we are New Creatures in Christ. We have been 
presented in God's way and have been accepted. 

REFUSAL TO ACCEPT SHOWS LACK OF APPRECIATION 

Now we are dead; and our life is hid with Christ in 
God. We presented our bodies, and they were made living 
sacrifices: they were then received by God and were 
slain with Christ and we arose to walk in newness of life. 
By the body is meant also all the earthly interests, both 
present, past and future— every interest that we ever had 
or might ever have. Such a one gives up all the hope or 
right he might otherwise have had in a future Restitution. 
The covenant is a complete one. The sacrifice of 
such became holy and acceptable to God as soon as the 
merit of Jesus was imputed; and our offering continues 



to be acceptable to the end. And as day by day we lay 
down our lives in the Lord's service, it brings us more 
and more of the Lord's blessings, and we are more and 
more filled with His Spirit. 

R5424 : page 88 

To render all that we have in the service of the Lord 
is not only a most reasonable thing, but an offering far 
too small. It is far less than we would gladly render to 
Him who has manifested toward us such wondrous compassion 
and grace. When God has offered us so great a 
reward and blessing in return for our poor lives, we 
should feel that a refusal to accept this offer would be 
an indication not only of a pitiful lack of appreciation 
of Infinite Goodness, but also a weakness of mind. It 
would show a puerility of judgment which is unable to 
weigh and compare the trifling and transitory pleasures 
of self-will for this brief life with an eternity of joy and 
blessing and glory on the Divine plane, far above angels 
and principalities and powers and every name that is 
named, next to our glorious Lord and Head— a station so 
glorious, so exalted, that no human mind can grasp its 
infinitude. Let us be faithful— even unto death! 



R5424 : page 88 

LET US GO ON "IN FULL ASSURANCE OF FAITH"! 

"Having an High Priest over the House of 

God, let us draw near with a true heart, 

in full assurance of faith."— Hebrews 10:21,22. 

THE Apostle Paul is here drawing to the attention 

of the Church, and especially to those 

familiar with the Jewish arrangements of 

that day, the fact that the Aaronic priesthood 

was only a typical one, designed for a 

time to illustrate greater things; that God's 

real Plan was not to be carried out by the 

Aaronic priesthood from the House of Levi, 

and that their sacrifices of bulls and goats 

could not take away sins; but that from 

year to year this arrangement merely shielded God's 

typical people— typically covered them— through their 

Covenant. The Apostle points out that there is to be a 

greater Priesthood, after the Order of Melchizedek; that 

our Lord is the Head of this Priesthood, and that the 

Gospel Church are His members, the under-priesthood. 

He then asks, why should a better priesthood be needed 

than the one that God provided in Aaron and his sons? 

The answer is that they were sinners, and could never 

really cancel sin; and the blood of those animals possessed 

no real merit. Those priests themselves never 



really got back into favor with God. They merely had 
access into a typical Holy and Most Holy. 

But now we have Christ as the Head of this new 
Order of Priesthood; let us realize our position as under-priests 
of this order. Our High Priest has entered into 
the true Most Holy. The evidence of this came in the 
Pentecostal blessing showing that the Father was well 
pleased with the sacrifice made by our Lord, and that all 
things were then ready to permit us also to come near to 

R5424 : page 89 

God, sharing our Redeemer's experiences, that we might 
later go to Him beyond the veil and share His glory. 
Seeing that God has thus made all these gracious provisions, 
and has accepted us as the House of God to take 
the place of the House of Aaron— and so much greater 
than his House— let us enter into the real Holy and Most 
Holy, "with a true heart, in full assurance of faith." 
The under-priests were permitted to enter into the 
Holy, and after the Day of Atonement into the Most 
Holy. All, in this Gospel Age, who have made consecration 
to God, and have been begotten of the Spirit, 
are in the first Holy. Aaron and his sons were a type of 
the true Priesthood; but we are not of the order of 
Aaron; we are not members of the Aaronic priesthood, 
but of the Melchizedek Priesthood, under its great High 
Priest. "Ye are a Royal Priesthood, a holy nation, a 
peculiar people, that ye should show forth the praises of 
Him who hath called you out of darkness into His 
marvelous light."— 1 Peter 2:9. 

LET US COME WITH TRUE HEARTS 

Seeing, then, that we have confidence that God has 
made this arrangement, confidence to take the proper 
steps, and have presented our bodies living sacrifices, 
have gone through the antitypical consecration, and received 
the begetting of the Holy Spirit, let us begin at 
once the work of the new Order of Priesthood. There 
are great things to be accomplished: let us fully enter in 
with Him— let us become full participators in this work- 
in everything that God has for us to do. Let us come 
with true hearts, however, realizing how wonderful are 
our blessings, how precious is the provision of the covering 
of our Savior's merit. Let us be true and loyal to this 
Covenant into which we have entered with God. 

The Lord's call under this Covenant is, "Gather My 
saints together unto Me, those who have made a Covenant 
with Me by sacrifice." (Psalm 50:5.) This call, or invitation, 
has been going forth during the entire Gospel 
Age. And all the holy ones, all who have entered into 
this Covenant, are privileged to have a share in the 
sacrifice of Christ and to co-labor with Him. 

Let us come with full assurance of faith in the sense 
that we shall have no doubt whatever that God's promises 



are true and for us. The world sees no cause for sacrificing 
in the present life, and they count us fools all the 
day long, as the Apostle says. But nevertheless in full 
assurance of faith, let us go on! Let us loyally press forward 
unto the end of the way, until we shall be joined 
to our great High Priest, and enter into His rest! 

ANOINTED IN HIM 

The anointing of the high priest in the type represented 
the Divine appointment to office. Aaron was thus 
anointed of God. The Apostle Paul says that "no man 
taketh this honor unto himself, but he that was called of 
God, as was Aaron." Even Christ took not this honor 
upon Himself. God appointed Him, saying, "Thou art a 
Priest forever, after the Order of Melchizedek." 
(Hebrews 5:4-6.) God's direct dealings were with the 
Lord Jesus Christ. He was the One acceptable to the 
Father. God gave His Holy Spirit to our Lord in fullest 
degree. Jesus Himself tells us that God gave not His 
Spirit by measure unto Him, because He was able to receive 
the Holy Spirit in full measure. Those who are 
counted as His members are not able to receive the Spirit 
in full measure, because of their imperfection. The less 
fallen man can receive more of the Spirit, and the more 
fallen man can receive less. 

When Christ appeared in the presence of God for us, 
and applied His merit for those who would offer themselves 
to become members of His Body, to be associated 
with Him in the glorious Kingdom work, He received 
Divine approval and sanction, which was manifested by 
the begetting by the Holy Spirit of those who had presented 
themselves in consecration, the Holy Spirit being 
first given at Pentecost. The Apostle Peter says that God 
fulfilled His promise to Jesus by granting Him the Holy 
Spirit to shed forth upon His disciples. (Acts 2:33.) It 
is of the Father, and by the Son. 

It was not necessary that the Heavenly Father should 
pour out His Holy Spirit upon each individual member of 
the body. We understand that the picture given in the 
type is quite complete. The Holy Spirit being poured out 
upon the Head of the great High Priest, and flowing down 
over the skirts of His garments, all His Body is thus 
anointed. We each receive our share of the anointing 
when we come into the Body, and under the Robe. 

FULL ASSURANCE BASED ON KNOWLEDGE 

Speaking to those who are privileged to come to God 
in prayer, the Apostle says, "Let us draw near in full assurance 
of faith." He is speaking to the House of God 
class. Natural Israel were of the House of God, too, but 
they were servants. The servants belong to the House, 
of course, but not in the very special sense, as do the 
children. We have the suggestion given us that Moses 
was faithful as a servant over his House, but that the 



Church of Christ are a House of Sons, and that Christ is 
Head over this House. It is this House of Sons that may 
draw near to God. The assurance with which these may 
rightly approach is dependent upon certain conditions 
here indicated. They must have a true heart, and are not 
to be double-minded. Entire heart loyalty must be theirs; 
they must fully demonstrate that they meant what they 
said when they gave their lives to God. Then they may 
come to the Lord with holy boldness, in full assurance of 
faith. All the steps of God's true people are steps of 
faith, of realization of His care. But there is a full assurance 
of faith in contrast with a lesser faith. A faith that 
is only partial will bring us somewhat near to God. A 
faith that is strong will bring us nearer. But a full assurance 
of faith is that faith which, if retained, will bring 
us off "more than conquerors," and make us at last members 
in full of the Royal Priesthood— in glory. 

This full assurance of faith cannot be attained in a 
day. It requires quite a degree of information. And 
God has provided this information by instructing us in 
His Word as to what Christ did for us, and what He is 
willing to do; why He died for us, etc. All this is furnished 
us as a basis for faith. Then to further strengthen 
our faith, we have all the exceeding great and precious 
promises, and His daily providences over us. Therefore 
this fully consecrated class may draw near, and have the 
full assurance that they may attain all the glorious things 
to which God has invited them— to be heirs of God and 
joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord "to an inheritance 
incorruptible and undefiled, and that fadeth not away." 

FULL ASSURANCE NECESSARY TO GOD'S APPROVAL 

The Apostle intimates that without this full assurance 
of faith the child of God cannot come close to Him. Only 
those who trust the Father as a little child would trust its 
earthly parent, can expect to make good progress in the 
narrow way and have the courage and confidence which 
it is the privilege of all who are His to have, and without 
which we cannot have the perfect peace and rest of heart 
promised. "According to your faith be it unto you," is 
the promise. The desire to draw nearer and nearer to 
God must be in our heart; else we shall fail to go on and 

R5425 : page 90 

attain our privilege in Christ. Such a desire is a manifestation 
of our hunger and thirst after righteousness, 
which the Lord expects to see before He makes good to 
such His engagement that they shall be filled. 

There are definite conditions specified in the Word as 
necessary to continued progress along this line. As we 
cannot draw close to the Lord except through this full 
assurance, neither can we have the assurance unless our 
hearts are kept "sprinkled from an evil conscience," or a 
consciousness of evil; for, as the Apostle also declares, "If 



our own heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart, 
and knoweth all things." (1 John 3:20.) We may be 
sure that if our course as New Creatures in Christ is 
condemned by our own conscience it would also be condemned 
by God. 

Therefore, if the child of God would draw very near, 
and would have the blessed realization of the Father's 
smile of approval continually, he must seek to have a conscience 
void of offense toward God and toward men— a 
conscience which can truthfully say, I am striving to do 
that which would be pleasing to the Lord, that which is in 
full harmony with my Covenant of Sacrifice; and I am 
striving also to do that which would justly have the approval 
of righteous men. Nothing short of this is at all 
permissible in those who have consecrated themselves to 
be members of the Royal Priesthood, to sacrifice their 
lives in the Lord's service that they may reign with Him. 

CAUSE AND REMEDY FOR LACK OF FAITH 

He who has begun a good work in us is both able and 
willing to complete it. (Philippians 1:6.) But how few 
children of God, comparatively, have this "full assurance 
of faith" which is our glorious privilege! How few can 
say, "Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the 
days of my life, and I shall dwell in the House of the 
Lord forever!" Surely, by God's grace I shall ultimately 
gain the Heavenly Kingdom and the glorious things which 
He has promised to those who love Him. The few who 
can thus enter fully into sympathy with the Apostle Paul 
and the Prophet David in their expressions of confidence 
have therein a great joy, a great blessing, a great rest of 
heart which none others possess. 

Let us therefore inquire why it is that the number 
who thus enter into the rest of faith is so small. What 
are the hindrances to others, and how can these hindrances 
be removed? How can each one of the children of God 
enjoy fully this, his blessed patrimony? Many say, or 
think if they do not say, Oh, that I could feel sure that 
God's goodness and mercy would continue with me to the 
end! Oh, that I could remove my doubts of gaining the 
Kingdom, of being ultimately "more than conqueror"! 

What is the difficulty with these? Why do they not 
have the "full assurance of faith? of their acceptance? 
We answer that their difficulty is a lack of trust in God; 
and such a lack is not pleasing to Him, for "without faith 
it is impossible to please Him; for he that cometh to God 
must believe that He is, and that He is a Rewarder of 
them that diligently seek Him." (Hebrews 11:6.) Moreover, 
this lack of faith is a constant hindrance to their 
overcoming; as it is written: "This is the victory that 
overcometh the world, even our FAITH." (1 John 5:4.) 
The Christian who has not the shield of faith, and a large 
one, is continually at a disadvantage before the Adversary, 
and all the hosts of evil. 

Then let each one who realizes a lack in this direction 



pray earnestly, as the Apostles of old, "Lord, increase our 
faith!" And then, acting in harmony with this prayer, 
let such a one cultivate such faith in his or her own 
heart. (1) Let him refresh his memory continually 
with the precious promises of the Word, becoming very 
familiar with these. (2) Let him seek more and more 
to remember that, having made a covenant with the Lord, 
these promises are his; and in his heart and with his lips 
let him claim them as his before the Throne of Grace, 
with thanksgiving. Let him claim them in his thoughts, 
and in his conferences on holy things with the brethren. 

When trials or difficulties arise, he should call to mind 
these precious promises, remembering that they belong to 
him, because God has given these promises to such as 
love Him and have made a covenant with Him by sacrifice. 
(Psalm 50:5; Malachi 3:17.) He should resolve that 
henceforth he will trust the Word of his Heavenly Father 
implicitly. If some seeming accident befall him, let him 
call to mind the promise, "All things work together for 
good to them that love God, who are called according to 
His purpose." (Romans 8:28.) Let him thus assure 
himself that the seeming accident could not have occurred 
had God not seen a way to make it the channel of a 
needed lesson or blessing to him. 

Let us never forget that He who has begun this good 
work in us changes never, and that if we keep our hearts 
in harmony with Him, if our faith is still firm and clear 
in the great Atonement made for our sins, and we continually 
renew our consecration to Him, keeping our all 
on the altar of sacrifice, letting the Lord consume it in 
His own way, seeking not our own will, our own way, but 
His will alone, we have every reason to have full confidence 
that this good work in us will be finished, that we 
shall enter with joy into the everlasting Kingdom of our 
Lord, and shall hear His blessed words of approval, "Well 
done, good and faithful servant." 



R5425 : page 90 

THE COST OF DISCIPLESHIP 

--APRIL 19.-LUKE 14:25-35.- 

"Whosoever will save his life shall lose it; whosoever will 
lose his life for My sake shall find it."— Matthew 16:25. 

IT WAS at the close of the Great Teacher's 
ministry. Vast multitudes were following 
Him, all, according to the requirements of 
the Law, going up to Jerusalem to keep the 
Feast of the Passover, at which Jesus foreknew, 
that He would die as the antitypical 
Passover Lamb. Occasionally in the journey 
He would turn and address some of the 



multitude. Today's lesson gives us some of 
His teachings. It was the custom of teachers 
in those days to accept disciples, or pupils— those who 
considered them great teachers and desired to learn of 
them and profit by their instruction. To this day Christians 
claim to be the disciples, or followers, of Jesus, 
claim to be giving heed to His word and seeking the 
blessing which He promised to His faithful followers. 

The terms of discipleship which Jesus set forth, it will 
be noted, are very different from those proclaimed by 
some who profess to be His mouthpieces, His ministers. 
They sometimes proclaim that it is a sufficient sign of 
discipleship for persons to arise in a congregation and 
declare that they desire the prayers of God's people. Such 
are counted converts. To get them to take even this 
step requires the holding out of inducements. Sometimes 
the inducements are of a commercial kind— greater business 
prosperity to the merchant, greater favor with the 
employer for the clerk, an entrance into society or a better 
prospect of political preferment. 

If we contrast these methods with the words of Jesus 
in this lesson, we shall perceive that the vast number of 

R5425 : page 91 

nominal Christians have been, so to speak, inveigled into 
professing something that they never intended to profess. 
Many are entrapped into professing Christianity who 
never became Christians, according to the Master's conditions 
of discipleship, and who hearken not to His Word. 

"If any man come unto Me and hate not his father, 
and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren and sisters, 
yea, and his own life also, he cannot be My disciple. 
And whosoever doth not bear his cross, and come after 
Me, cannot be My disciple." Surely there is no excuse 
for us to misunderstand such plain terms and conditions. 
The Master did not say that only His disciples could ever 
gain everlasting life. His general teaching was that the 
whole world is lost, estranged from God and without the 
right to everlasting life. But He came to die, "the Just 
for the unjust," that all of the unjust might have the opportunity 
of returning to Divine favor. He did not say 
that none but His followers would have such an opportunity 
of future life. Those who so declare are adding 
to the Word and helping thus, eventually, to confound 
themselves. 

What Jesus did teach was that He would in due time 
be "the true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh 
into the world." The world had already existed for 4,000 
years before Jesus came, and no one will dispute that 
those who died previous to His coming had no opportunity 
of knowing Him and being His disciples. Yet He 
died to bless them, as well as to bless all who have been 
born into the world since. This blessing of the world, 
He declared, is to be accomplished by His Kingdom; and 
He told them plainly that His Kingdom was not of this 



world, age, or epoch, but of a future period. For the 

time being He was merely inviting disciples, and not attempting 

to reach the world. 

R5426 : page 91 

The disciples were invited to become joint-heirs with 
Jesus in His Kingdom, that they might sit with Him in 
His Throne and participate with Him in His great work 
of human uplift— Restitution of all that was lost in Adam 
and redeemed at Calvary. He told them plainly that only 
through much tribulation would they be able to enter the 
Kingdom class; that the tribulations would prove their 
love of righteousness, their loyalty to God; and that God 
had purposely made the way so narrow that only the 
few, the very choicest of humanity in God's sight, could 
find it— a very few walking in that way to its further end 
of glory, honor and immortality. 

With this view clearly before our mind's eye, there 
is a reasonableness in the hard terms of discipleship. Only 
those willing to comply with such terms, and thus to demonstrate 
their love and loyalty to God, could properly be 
entrusted with the great power, glory and honor which 
will be granted to the Kingdom class, in association with 
the Redeemer, as soon as it shall have been completed. 
Let us examine these words carefully, meanwhile measuring 
ourselves— not our flesh, but our spirit, our intentions, 
our desires. 

Well did Henry Ward Beecher say respecting this 
statement made by the Master: "Never was there before, 
and never has there been since, I apprehend, such a speech 
made to those that professed to be willing and desirous 
to follow another." And probably a parallel statement is 
found in Matthew's Gospel (10:37): "He that loveth 
father or mother more than Me is not worthy of Me." 
The word hate is apparently used in contrast with love. 
To be a disciple of Christ, then, means that we must love 
supremely the Lord and the principles for which He stands, 
so that love for others would comparatively be hatred. 

This proposition in its very start signifies a cutting-off 
—so far as the man is concerned, the will, the purpose 
—of every other love that would conflict with our love 
for the Lord and with our obedience to His will. Our 
earthly loves are to be counted as nothing in comparison. 
We are to be ready to sacrifice at the Lord's command 
every earthly hope, aim, object, and to lay down our lives 
willingly, gladly. Such as manifest a devotion of this 
kind can be trusted with anything. Of these the Lord 
speaks, saying prophetically, "They shall be Mine, saith 
the Lord, in that Day when I (come to) make up My 
Jewels."— Malachi 3:17. 

The fact that Jesus was of this character Himself, and 
placed the Father's will above all other considerations, is 
an assurance that all amongst His joint-heirs in the Kingdom 
will have the same mind, the same spirit. He assures 
us that the Kingdom will not be a selfish one, but 



the very reverse. The kings and princes and judges of 
that Kingdom will be not only irresistible in power, but 
incorruptible, unbearably. With them the Divine standard 
will be first, in the absolute sense. 

Such devotion to the Lord as is here described will 
necessarily at some time or other mean the severing of 
many earthly ties. It means that the followers of Jesus 
will be thought a peculiar people; and that many will 
think their course strange, unnatural, insane. Hence, as 
St. Paul said, we are counted fools all the day long for 
Christ's sake— because we preach the Wisdom of God and 
the Love of God in preference to the wisdom of humanity 
and the love of humanity. Of such St. John writes, saying, 
"As He was, so are we in this world"— ostracized, 
misunderstood; reproved, slandered. Only those who 
can stand such an experience can be winners of the crown 
to which Jesus referred, saying, To him that overcometh 
I will give a crown of life, and permit him to sit with 
Me in My Throne. 

Who is sufficient for these things? asks the Apostle. 
And he furnishes the answer: "Our sufficiency is of 
God"; and in the promises— "My grace is sufficient for 
thee; My strength is made perfect in weakness"; and 
again, "I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee." 

DEFINITION OF CROSS-BEARING 

Adding to the severity of the terms, Jesus declared, 
"Whosoever doth not bear his cross and come after Me, 
cannot be My disciple." It is not enough that we should 
start out with a courageous intention, a bold acknowledgment 
of Jesus, and a bold profession of discipleship. After 
we have been faithful in taking our stand on the Lord's 
side, we must be proven. Not merely those who have a 
little enthusiasm at the beginning, but those who shall 
demonstrate their worthiness by their faithfulness will be 
accounted worthy, and will be finally accepted by the Lord. 
Cross-bearing must be a daily matter. Our crosses are 
those oppositions of the world, the flesh and the Devil 
which conflict with the Divine will as laid down for us in 
the Lord's Word. The only proper sentiment is that which 
the Master expresses, saying, "Not My will, but Thine." 

As an admonition to all not to undertake discipleship 
without mature deliberation, our Lord gave a parable of 
a man who began to build a tower, laying the foundation, 
but who was not able to complete it, and thus wasted his 
effort and made himself ridiculous, foolish. Another 
illustration was that of going to war without adequate 
preparation— an undertaking which would result disastrously. 
All the followers of Christ set out to build characters 
and to "fight a good fight." Whoever enlists under 
the banner of Jesus takes his stand against Satan and 
sin, and must expect to have a hard battle, and not to receive 
the victor's crown, nor to hear the words, "Well 

R5426 : page 92 



done," except by faithful perseverance in well doing. 
What a blessing it would be if all who espouse the 
cause of Christ would do so with a full, clear understanding 
of what they are doing and with the fixed determination 
to go onward in the good way, not even to look back! 
The cause of Christ would be much further advanced 
amongst men; and while their number would be much 
smaller, their influence and power in the world would undoubtedly 
be much greater. 

"SALT IS GOOD, BUT--" 

Salt has preservative qualities in connection with whatever 
it touches. It also serves to bring out the flavor of 
our food. In olden times it was used as a symbol of faithfulness, 
loyalty; and it is said that even yet some of the 
Arabs would be faithful to death to any person in whose 
home they had eaten salt. To them it seems to mean a 
pledge of loyalty. 

Jesus used salt as a symbol, representing His own 
loyalty to God and the loyalty which all of His followers 
must have, and not only so, but which they must maintain. 
If salt lose its value for seasoning purposes, it is 
useless for anything else. It will not serve as a fertilizer, 
for it has an opposite effect. It is absolutely useless except 
for its intended purpose. So the Christian has a special 
purpose in the world— to be a preservative power, to 
have, as it were, antiseptic qualities, and to draw out all 
the good qualities of those with whom he is connected. 
This is the mission of the Christian in respect to the 
world. If he fail in this, he has failed in the purpose for 
which he was called, and is of no particular value in the 
Lord's service. 

"He that hath an ear to hear, let him hear," said Jesus, 
in conclusion. All of His followers are to take heed to 
these words. Whoever neglects them despises the One 
who gave them, and will surely fail of a blessing that 
might otherwise have been secured. But as for the world, 
"ears they have, but they hear not; eyes have they, but 
they see not." We are not to measure the world by the 
same standards that we measure ourselves and all who 
profess to be the followers of Jesus. The world's highest 
standard is the Golden Rule. The Christian's highest 
standard is self-sacrifice, doing God's will at any cost. 



R5426 : page 92 

HEAVENLY INTEREST IN SINNERS 

-APRIL 26.-LUKE 15:1-10.- 

"There is joy in the presence of the angels of 
God over one sinner that repenteth."— Verse 10. 



BIBLE STUDENTS should always seek to 

view the jewels of the Lord's Word in the 

settings in which they have been placed. To 

neglect this is to lose a portion of the lesson 

intended. The Scribes and the Pharisees 

held themselves aloof from the common people— 

the Scribes, because the masses were 

illiterate; and the Pharisees, under the claim 

that the people were sinners, cut off from 

relationship to God, and therefore not 

proper to be recognized by the holy of humanity, which 

they claimed to be. 

Jesus, however, received the common people, even the 
publicans, acknowledged sinners. His superior knowledge 
did not make Him haughty, and His superior righteousness 
did not make Him proud and unsympathetic. He 
has set His followers an example that they should walk 
in His steps. And the more closely they follow Him, the 
more pleasing will they be to the Father, and the more 
ready for a share in the Kingdom for which we pray, 
"Thy Kingdom come." 

Our lesson tells us how the Pharisees and the scribes 
murmured against Jesus, charging against Him as a sin 
that He received sinners and ate with them. Whatever 
did not harmonize with their standards they could only 
contest. Their difficulty in part was that they had too 
high an opinion of themselves. Their spirit in this matter 
was an evil one, begotten of the Adversary. Hence 
Jesus sometimes spoke of them as being children of the 
Devil, because his works they did, and his spirit they had. 
But even this does not signify that the Pharisees were 

R5427 : page 92 

beyond hope of salvation. Did not Jesus address St. Peter 

on one occasion, saying, "Get thee behind Me, Satan (adversary)"? 

He was an adversary, had the adverse spirit 

at the time; but, corrected in harmony with the Lord's 

spirit, everything was changed. 

So it is with us. "His servants ye are to whom ye 
render service." "By their fruits shall ye know them," 
said the Master. Applying His words to many who profess 
to be His disciples, we are bound to suppose that 
either intentionally or ignorantly they are in opposition 
to the Master's Spirit and teachings— adversaries of His 
teachings. 

Jesus, knowing the thoughts of the Pharisees, and 
perhaps noting their gestures and looks or hearing their 
words, answered them in a parable, saying, "What man of 
you, having a hundred sheep and having lost one of them, 
doth not leave the ninety and nine in the wilderness, and 
go after that which is lost until he find it?" And finding 
it, he lays it upon his shoulders rejoicing, and tells the 
fact to his neighbors exultantly. This course of the 
shepherd, Jesus declared, illustrates the attitude of God 



and all the holy angels associated with Him. They have 
a special feeling of interest in those who have strayed, 
and especially rejoice in the recovery of such. There is 
more rejoicing over the repentant sinner than over ninety 
and nine just persons needing no repentance. 

Oh, how encouraging it is to us to know that this is the 
sentiment of Heaven, and that the fall of man and our 
imperfections do not stand as a perpetual bar to recognition 
by the Lord, if we return to Him! He is merciful, 
and will abundantly pardon, and will remove our sins 
from us as far as the East is from the West. But this 
interest is in the repentant one or in the one who has 
not sinned beyond repentance. Any sheep, having been 
found by the Shepherd and then preferring the wolfish, 
would no longer be interesting to the Heavenly ones. 

Many apply this parable inconsistently. They seem 
to think of the whole world of mankind as representing 
the flock of a hundred sheep, and the one straying as 
representing the sinners of earth, comparatively few. 
Surely this cannot be the true interpretation! Rather, 
as the Prophet has declared, "All we like sheep have 
gone astray." "There is none righteous, no not one." 

Let us rather interpret the parable on a broader scale, 
in comportment with the facts and the Scriptures. Let 
us understand the one stray sheep to represent Adam and 
his family; and the ninety and nine just persons needing 
no repentance as representing the holy angels. To this view 
every feature of the parable inclines. The Good Shepherd 
left the Heavenly flock and came to earth to find, to redeem, 
to recover, mankind, the lost sheep; and there is 
more rejoicing in Heaven over human recoveries from sin 
and alienation from God than over the holy ones themselves, 
than over each other, who have never been 
alienated, never needed redemption. 

R5427 : page 93 

The lesson to the Pharisees is plain. They had a different 
spirit from that of the holy ones. Theirs was an 
earthly view, a selfish one, a proud and haughty one, out 
of accord with the Divine spirit, and not pleasing to God. 
Jesus would have all of His disciples copy God. "Be ye 
like unto your Father which is in Heaven." "He is kind 
to the unthankful." "His mercy endureth forever"— to a 
full completeness. 

His mercy sent His Son, the Under Shepherd, to be 
our Redeemer, and to help us back into His favor. His 
mercy will pursue the lost sheep until every member of 
Adam's race shall have been brought to a knowledge of 
the Truth and to a full opportunity of returning to the 
fold of God. To this end the Messianic Kingdom is to 
be established. To this end also is the present call for 
the Church, to be a Royal Priesthood, that under the 
guidance of the great Deliverer, they may be co-laborers 
with Him in carrying the Message of God's grace to all 
the members of Adam's family. 



Oh, how different this view of our loving Creator 
from the one which was handed down to us from the 
Dark Ages ! How different from the one which represented 
the Almighty as angry in a vicious sense!— as 
having prepared in advance a place for the eternal torture 
of the human family, except a few who would have 
the hearing ears and happen to hear the Message in the 
present life. On the contrary, we find that God's loving 
provision is only beginning to be manifested, in His 
favor toward Christ and the Church; and that ultimately 
the knowledge of the glory of God shall fill the whole 
earth, until every knee shall bow and every tongue confess, 
to the glory of God. 

THE LOST COIN 

In proportion as we become Godlike we have an interest 
in sinners— especially in those who through heredity 
or evil environment are more deeply steeped in sin, ignorance 
and superstition. Having God's Spirit, we are 
glad to do anything in our power to reach these sinners. 
Nevertheless, we are not to be wise above what is written. 
We are not to expect to find all the sheep. Rather, we are 
to prepare as many as the Lord our God shall call and 
draw to be associated with the great Chief Shepherd in 
the work which He shortly will institute, the work of 
seeking the lost sheep and finding it and restoring it— all 
the willing and obedient. 

"The Son of Man came to seek and to save (recover) 
that which was lost." The race was lost, not merely a 
few, the Church; and their recovery is to include all that 
was lost. This does not signify universalism, but will 
be accomplished in bringing every member of Adam's race 
to a full knowledge of God and to full opportunity of 
recovery from sin and death.— 1 Timothy 2:3,4. 

Jesus gave another parable of similar import, to illustrate 
the same great truth from another angle. It was 
the custom among Jewish women to wear on the forehead 
a fringe of coin bangles. These might be of gold or silver, 
and sometimes represented her dowry. The loss of one 
of these coins would represent more than its intrinsic 
value; for its absence marred the beauty of the bangles. 
The search for the coin would mean that, instead of its 
being abandoned as not worthy of consideration, it would 
be hunted for diligently until found. The female neighbors 
would learn of the loss, and also learn if it were 
found, and would rejoice with her greatly. This is another 
illustration of joy in the presence of the angels of 
God over one repentant sinner. 

THE VALUE OF A MAN 

Jesus said, "Are ye not of much more value than 
many sparrows?" And in the present lesson He intimates 
that a man is of much more value than many coins and 
of much more value than many sheep. We all agree that 



it would be difficult to estimate too highly, too fully, the 
value of a human life, especially if it were our own life 
or the life of some one dear to us. But to what extent 
do we manifest this in our daily lives? 

Each should put the question to himself first, before 
applying it to his neighbors. How do I manifest the 
spirit of God toward my fellow-men, in placing as the 
first object of my interest a human life? What am I 
doing day by day that substantiates my professed interest 
in humanity in general? How am I showing my interest 
in my friends, my relatives, my children, my brothers and 
my sisters? 

The manufacturer should take up this subject and ask 
himself, To what extent am I placing coin as of more 
value than humanity? To what extent am I allowing the 
accumulation of coin to interfere with the making and 
the giving of proper protection to my employees and all 
for whose welfare I have a care, a responsibility? Their 
fingers, their eyes, their limbs, their health, their lives, 
should be precious to every one who has the Spirit of 
God to the slightest degree. 

Each Christian should ask himself, How much of 
God's Spirit have I? How much of my time am I giving to 
helping my fellow-men out of their difficulties and trials 
back to God? How much am I sacrificing of my time and 
strength in going after the lost sheep? Hearken to the 
Apostle, "Be not deceived; God is not mocked." "He 
that doeth righteousness is righteous"— and not merely 
he that professes to be a follower of Jesus. 

Nevertheless, we are not to forget that God is the One 
chiefly interested in this great work, and that He has sent 
forth His Son for its accomplishment. We are not to 
forget that not only we have an interest, but that Divine 
interest and love are greater than ours, and that Divine 
wisdom is superior; and our course should be to give 
strict heed to "Him that speaketh from Heaven," to follow 
His course, His example. 

This may mean that we shall to some extent be misunderstood 
by others. There are many theories for saving 
the world by social uplift, political uplift, moral uplift, 
vice-fighting, etc. Undoubtedly, the principle remains 
always true that there are but two great Captains in the 
warfare between sin and righteousness; namely, Christ 
and Satan. It remains true also that whoever is fighting 
for the One is fighting against the other. It is for us to 
make sure, first of all, that we are on the Lord's side, on 
the side of righteousness, truth, purity and goodness. 
There is still a further step— to make sure that we are 
fighting as our Captain would wish us to fight; that we 
are laboring as He would wish us to labor; that we are 
spending ourselves as He would wish us to be spent. 

"This is the will of God (concerning you), even 
your sanctification." Thus our personal salvation comes 
first, in God's order. Reconciled to God ourselves and 
consecrated to His service, we inquire, What is the next 
step? The answer comes, "Feed My sheep; feed My 



lambs." At first we might be disposed to demur, to say, 
Lord, should we not rather go after the straying, after 
the lost sheep? The answer is given by the Lord, through 
the Apostle, that we are to "do good unto all men as we 
have opportunity, especially unto the Household of Faith.' 
If, therefore, the Household of Faith demands all of our 
time when we have the opportunity, we may be doing 
nothing for the lost sheep, but only helping to perfect 
those whom the Lord has already found. 

R5428 : page 94 

The circumstances of the Lord's providence alone can 
direct our course. When we see His purpose, His object, 
in this arrangement, all is clear. He is taking out of the 
world a peculiar people, to be joint-heirs with His Son 
in the Kingdom; and they all need education along 
spiritual lines for their own development, and to fit and 
prepare them to be the Royal Priesthood— to be kings 
and Priests unto God— who by and by are to judge, to 
chasten, to uplift, to bless, all the world, in proportion 
as they shall prove willing and obedient. 



R5428 : page 94 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS 
FORGIVENESS VS. EXPIATION 



QUESTION.— In relation to sins partly wilful, 
are stripes given for the portion of wilfulness? 
And when the sin is expiated, is it 
then canceled? 

Answer.— Our Lord died for the sin of 
Adam— for just the one original sin, and all 
sins which grew out of that original sin. 
This sin of Adam affected the body, mind 
and morals of all the race. Therefore we 
each have not only our own inherited imperfections 
to contend with, but also the imperfections of 
all those around us. 

From the time that any one is begotten of the Holy 
Spirit all things become new. The members of the Little 
Flock class have no record whatever of condemnation 
against them; all that condemnation is completely eliminated. 
The imputation of Christ's merit to their flesh 
made them perfect in God's sight, and they were brought 
forth as New Creatures. 

These New Creatures have entered into a Covenant 
with God to walk in the footsteps of Jesus. In the present 
time, as the Apostle says, we have this treasure of 
the new nature in an earthen vessel; that is, we have it 



under unfavorable conditions. We have also besetments 
from those around us and from the Adversary to oppose 
us. All sins, then, that are the result of these adverse 
conditions, and to which our will does not consent, are 
coverable by the merit of Christ. If any of these New 
Creatures unwittingly do that which is contrary to the 
Divine will, they need not remain in a condemned condition. 
The Word instructs us that we should go immediately 
to the Throne of Heavenly Grace and obtain mercy 
and forgiveness, and help for every time of need. 

But suppose that the sin is not merely one of temptation 
—suppose there is a measure of wilfulness or a measure 
of slackness, so that the child of God is thus far responsible, 
what then? We answer that he may still go 
to the Throne of Heavenly Grace, and the portion of his 
sin which was unwilling will be covered by the merit of 
Christ. Whatever portion of the sin is wilful is deserving 
of punishment, stripes; and these stripes he will 
surely get. The Father will not allow His children to 
wander away without help. The stripes complete the expiation 
of that sin; and it will be canceled from the record. 
Justice has no longer any charge against him. 

But the Scriptures clearly tell us that if any consecrated 
child of God should sin with full wilfulness there 
would be no forgiveness whatever for that sin, and it 
could not be expiated by stripes. The penalty would be 
death— the Second Death. If he sins with no wilfulness, 
in full ignorance, entirely without intention, the sin is 
entirely forgivable, by application for the merit of the 
precious blood. If he sins with partial ignorance and 
partial wilfulness, there is a portion that would be forgiven 
and a portion that must be expiated. 

The Apostle Paul declares that if we would judge 
ourselves we should not be judged of the Lord; but that 
when we are judged of the Lord we are chastened, that 
we may not be condemned with the world. (1 Corinthians 11:31,32.) 
And this chastening that comes upon us 
is the proper penalty for our degree of wilfulness. The 
object of the Lord in meting out this chastisement is that 
we shall learn the needed lesson, and be more watchful. 



CHILDREN OF THE FIRST, OR THE SECOND ADAM? 

Question.— Whose children will the world be when 
they awake in the Morning of the New Dispensation— 
the children of Adam, or the children of Christ, the Second 
Adam? 

Answer.— We understand that they will still be the 
children of Adam. When we think of our Lord as the 
Life-giver of the world, we should remember that He is 
the Life-giver only to those who come unto the Father 
through Him. When the masses of mankind awaken in 
the next Age, they will not have undergone any change 
which would lift them out of Adam and condemnation to 



death, into Christ and justification of life. 

The New Covenant which God will seal with the 
precious blood of Christ is to be a Covenant primarily 
with Israel— to those Jews who are His people, to those 
who will accept Christ. The faithful Israelites who will 
accept the Lord and the Covenant relationship through 
the Mediator which is thus inaugurated for their benefit, 
will, as soon as they do this, come under the blessings of 
this Covenant. But mankind in general, who will not yet 
have come to a position of acceptance of the Mediator, 
will still be in the same attitude of today— aliens, strangers, 
foreigners. The work of the Church during that 
time is described in Revelation 22:17, "And the Spirit 
and the Bride say, Come." But none will begin to live 
until they partake of the Water of Life. 

The world of mankind now go down into death as 
strangers, aliens from God, and it will be for them after 
their awakening to avail themselves of the privileges of 
that time. The Apostle John declares, "He that hath the 
Son hath life." Those who are awakened will not have 
this life, not having come into relationship with Christ. 
His relationship to them during the next Age will evidently 
be that of a benevolent Ruler, who is willing to 
enlighten them, to adopt them, if they will, as children, 
and who is willing to bring them up to the condition 
where they may have life everlasting. It will take the 
entire thousand years to fully perfect the race— to bring 
them up to perfection. 

"Tell the whole world these blessed tidings; 

Speak of the time of rest that nears; 
Tell the oppressed of every nation, 
'Jubilee lasts a thousand years!'" 

The Lord Jesus will become the Father of all, just as 
soon as they comply with the required terms. He will 
give them, first, enlightenment and knowledge. Then if 
they use this knowledge, light and opportunity, and desire 
to come into harmony with Him, He will receive 
them as His children, and grant them the blessings under 
the New Covenant. 

We recall the Scripture which says that the Law shall 
go forth from Mt. Zion and the Word of the Lord from 
Jerusalem. "And many people shall go and say, come 
ye, and let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, to the 
House of the God of Jacob; and He will teach us of His 
ways, and we will walk in His paths." 

R5428 : page 95 

These people represent the world in general outside of 
those who have accepted the terms of the Covenant. It 
represents them as learning a lesson and desiring to come 
into harmony with God. They say one to another, Let 
us go up to the Mountain of the Lord's House, and let us 
walk in His paths. Not until they do this will the Mediator 
recognize them in any sense of the word, nor will 
they be on probation for everlasting life. As soon as 



they are ready to walk in the way of holiness, they will 
be counted as His children. 



R5428 : page 95 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
FLEETING OPPORTUNITIES FOR SERVICE 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

My ever increasing love for the Truths now due, and my 
growing zeal for the scattering of the same among the masses 
of people who are beginning to hunger for something more 
satisfying than brilliant essays and talented choirs, prompts 
me to mention several opportunities for service which many 
might use if brought to their attention. 

Many Sisters have such splendid chances among their 
grocers, druggists, and others with whom they deal. The 
workers in Babylon are always begging these merchants for 
something for the church-fair, or asking them to buy tickets 
for the social. It has occurred to me, why not try to sell 
them the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES? Arrangements could 
be made to make purchases when no customers are likely to 
be present, and when the merchants would have spare time. A 
first volume might be carried, and after making purchases, inquire 
whether he has ever seen the book. He might be told 
how it has opened up the Bible to you and then he should be 
canvassed for a set. If he hesitates about taking a set, sell 
him a first volume. Say you will want to know how he likes 
it, as this will make him more likely to read. Try to make 
some of your purchases thereafter when he is not very busy, 
that opportunity may be had to water the seed sown. 

Brethren employed where there are fellow-workmen have 
in many cases a grand opportunity to witness to them. These 
might be canvassed for the STUDIES at the noon hour. Try to 
eat your luncheon (if you take it with you) near a different 
man each day, and in the course of conversation tell him 
about the blessing you have received from these Bible Helps, 

R5429 : page 95 

and arrange to sell or loan him one of them. 

If the Brother has some ability, he might do good by holding 
little question meetings while eating lunch. The answers 
should always be brief and to the point. To be helpful, such 
questions should be on the more simple features of the Plan; 
deep questions would choke those who are spiritual babes. 

For instance, the conversation might be turned to the subject 
of Hell. The Brother could insist that there is not a 
single passage in the Bible where the word means a place of 
endless misery, and the only places seemingly teaching so are 
very highly figurative passages. Then say, "I have a little 
book in which every passage in the Bible where the word 
hell occurs is explained. I will bring it here tomorrow and 



read you a couple of wonderful paragraphs in it." This will 
probably bring them together the next day; and by promising 
to consider further questions the third day, one might 
have a regular little lunch-time class. Of course, the majority 
will tire of it, but a few may stick. 

In the larger towns and cities the Truth-hungry might be 
advertised for. Some city-dailies will allow it among the miscellaneous 
religious advertisements; but in each case, judgment 
will have to be exercised as to where it should be placed, 
and how frequently inserted. The following is suggested as 
an advertisement: 

"Those who want to believe the Bible but have never yet 
found in it anything as satisfying and reasonable as they would 
expect God to give, are invited to send their names and addresses 

to P.O. Box . This is no scheme, but simply an 

effort to bring real religious satisfaction to those who feel 
their faith is shaking." 

Let some able, consecrated Brother call upon those who 
respond, and either sell or loan them "The Divine Plan of the 
Ages." He might first tell them of the blessing he is getting 
from the Word of God now, in contrast to the former conditions. 
He might call again, from time to time, to see what 
progress they are making, if the interest warrants. Sisters 
should call on the ladies who reply. 

I find that the Brethren are not sufficiently alert to the opportunities 
among the foreigners in their town. If there be 
Greek confectioners in your town, send for a half dozen 
Greek tracts to give them. The same might apply to Chinese 
in the laundries, Italians at fruit-stands and in street 
gangs, etc. 

"The Bible Students' Monthly," on "What is Baptism?" is 
specially good where Brother Russell has been misrepresented 
very much, because of the article by Prof. Ellis and letter by 
Rev. T. S. Thompson, endorsing him and his work. The 
Brethren sometimes forget that they are able to do more than 
merely circulate yearly Volunteer literature. Often a special 
tract will fit in very well with local conditions, if circulated at 
the psychological time. 

Every day makes me more desirous for the time when our 
service will not be limited by the weak, imperfect body in 
which we now dwell. I am glad that day is so near. 

I remain, with Christian love, on Jordan's Banks. 
B. H. BARTON. 



page 95 

GRATEFUL FOR THE LIGHT OF TRUTH 

MY DEARLY-LOVED PASTOR:- 

It is impossible for me to express in words the gratitude 
I feel to our Heavenly Father and to you for your faithful 
ministry. Ever since the light has been brought into my life 
by STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES I have been desirous of giving 
you a token of my esteem. 



God, in His mercy, has granted me the privilege of enclosing 
herewith a little gift to you. I realize your time is 
already very heavily taxed, and so do not wish you to feel it 
necessary to acknowledge this note. An interest in your 
prayers, which I know all of God's children have, is all anyone 
can desire. May God's richest blessings be yours! 

Yours in the Master's service, SISTER F.— Mass. 

IN REPLY. 

DEAR SISTER:- 

Yours of the 8th inst. reached me duly, and is much appreciated, 
not only for the intrinsic value of the gift enclosed, 
but also for the sentiments expressed— your Christian love. 
The money, $ 100, goes to your credit in the Tract Fund 
with heartiest appreciation. My personal needs are all supplied 
from the Tract Fund, as are those of all the Pilgrims. 

I am pleased to know that you are enjoying the Truth. 
I agree with you that it is the most wonderful thing and the 
greatest blessing that the Heavenly Father could give us in 
the present life— to know Him and something of His loving 
kindness, not only for the Church, but also for the world. 
With Christian love, 

Your brother and servant, C. T. RUSSELL. 



THINKING TOO MUCH ABOUT SELF 

MY DEARLY BELOVED BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I am writing to wish you a happy birthday, and a glorious 
"new birth day" at the day that God may choose; also, to say 
that the Lord has brought me safely to Trinidad— I believe in 
answer to prayer before leaving Jamaica. First this, that 
God would send me where I could best be transformed into 
Jesus' likeness; and then be a blessing to others, by His grace. 

So now I wish to say, I am looking for an answer to the 
latter prayer, and intend to co-operate in bringing the answer 
as best I can. 

Brother Coward is still away in Demerara; meanwhile I 
am seeking to assist those already interested. We expect his 
return soon, and I believe we shall co-operate well together. 

Dear Brother, I have just been thinking that possibly an 
article in THE WATCH TOWER dealing on the subject of too 
much approbativeness— thinking about self and what others 
think about us, etc.— might help some; that is, it might 
help them to overcome this tendency. As many of us 
ought to be approaching manhood in Christ, that very 
thing may tend to increase this trouble amongst us, especially 
as some seem inclined to criticize little things a good deal. 
This difficulty, over-approbativeness, seems to be something 
like a "will-o-the-wisp," very hard to catch hold of and kill. 

As ever, your brother in Christ, A. B. BLAKE. 



I.B.S.A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 
FOR MONTH OF APRIL. 
QUESTIONS FROM MANUAL ON SECOND SERIES, "STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. 
STUDY II. 

Week beginning April 5 Questions 1 to 8 

" 12 " 9 to 16 

19 " 17 to 24 

" 26 " 25 to 31 

Question Manuals on VOL. II., STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 
5c. each, or 50c. per doz., postpaid. 



page 97 

VOL. XXXV APRIL 1 No. 7 
A. D. 1914-A. M. 6042 



CONTENTS 

Jehovah's Character Manifested in His Great 

Plan of the Ages 99 

Temptation Comes to the Angels 99 

Justice— Righteousness— the Foundation of 

Christian Character 100 

Obedience a Test of Loyalty 101 

Fruits of Disobedience 101 

Peace With God and the Peace of God 102 

Peace Dependent Upon Full Obedience 103 

Faith the Basis of True Rest 104 

The Photo-Drama of Creation 105 

The Prodigal Son 106 

The Principles Apply Broadly 107 

The Unjust Steward 108 

Serving Two Masters 108 

"Under His Wings" 109 

Mount of Olives the Kingdom of Blessing 110 

The Color Line Found Necessary 110 

Some Interesting Letters Ill 

He Knows God Ill 

page 98 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:-All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



SCENARIO OF THE PHOTO-DRAMA 

The ninety-six short pithy lectures of the CREATION DRAMA 
can be supplied in print in four styles: 

(1) A free edition with one picture to each page. 

(2) A pamphlet edition with four times as many illustrations. 
Price 10 cents each part— three parts complete 25 

cents— postage included. 

(3) The same in cloth binding under one cover complete 
for 50 cents, postage included. 

(4) The same de luxe, gilt edges, finer paper, $1.00 each, 
postage included. 

RATES TO COLPORTEURS 

Wherever the DRAMA has been shown should be excellent 
territory for colporteuring these Scenario. Terms in lots of one 
hundred copies by freight or express collect— one-half the 
retail prices. 

Classes bunching their orders are entitled to colporteur 
rates on similar quantities. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR MAY 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
May follow: (1) 165; (2) 170; (3) 321; (4) 307; (5) 1; (6) 226; 
(7) 91; (8) 128; (9) 136; (10) 10; (11) 326; (12) 160; (13) 145; 
(14) 310; (15) 279; (16) 119; (17) 109; (18) 305; (19) 303; (20) 
221; (21) 293; (22) 63; (23) 333; (24) 235; (25) 188; (26) 194; 
(27) 217; (28) 164; (29) 43; (30) 78; (31) 162. 



R5429 : page 99 

JEHOVAH'S CHARACTER MANIFESTED IN HIS GREAT 
PLAN OF THE AGES 

WHY was Jesus Christ called upon to suffer 
and die? Could not the great God have 
accomplished the salvation of humanity in 
some other way, without the agony and 
death of His Son? These are questions 
which often present themselves to the 
thoughtful student of God's Word, and 
which can be answered very satisfactorily. 
God could have arranged the matter very 



differently; He is not an unresourceful 
God. He is an All-Wise God, an All-Powerful God. We 
can see, for instance, that God could have decreed that 
Adam should be excluded from the Garden of Eden for 
a time, and that after he had suffered somewhat for his 
disobedience, and had thereby learned a lesson, he should 
then be restored to favor. By that experience Adam 
would, no doubt, have been taught a very good lesson. 
So all of Adam's children might have undergone some 
penalty, some purging experiences, whereby they might 
have profited, and then have come back again into harmony 
with God. 

But the Wisdom of God is a Mighty Deep, and He 
has a great and wise Plan! He had purposed that all of 
His intelligent creatures— angels, cherubim, seraphim, 
and humans— who would gain eternal life, must be absolutely 
loyal to Him, and hence that they should all be 
tested in respect to their loyalty. They must all be tried 
and tested characters. It was His purpose, therefore, that 
all His intelligent creatures in Heaven and on earth 
should be brought to perceive His goodness and worthiness 
of all praise, that they might be able to exclaim 
from the heart: "Blessing and honor and might be unto 
Him that sitteth upon the Throne. ..forever!" 

Those who prove their loyalty to the Creator shall 
live everlastingly. Those who will not prove their loyalty 
shall die— go into absolute extinction. Up to the 
time man was created, God had not made known this 
feature of His Plan. He then declared that death should 
be the penalty for sin, in order that all might know the 
Law of His Government— that only the righteous shall 
live, and that all sinners shall eventually be destroyed. 
Hence God arranged beforehand that man's sin, which 
He foreknew, should bring upon Adam and his posterity 
the extreme penalty of His Law. 

Many would not have chosen sin if they had known 
its sure results, and had been born with perfect ability to 
choose the right. But God purposed that Adam's posterity 
should come into the world under fallen conditions, 
as the result of his disobedience. He purposed to make 
manifest here on the planet Earth what is the natural 
tendency and certain outcome of sin. Sin's tendency is 
always downward; and not only so, but it aggregates itself, 
and leads to ruin and death. 

God designed that this great lesson of the evil results 
of sin should be witnessed by the angels also, who before 
the creation and fall of man were surrounded by such 
conditions as presented no special temptation to sin. 

TEMPTATION COMES TO THE ANGELS 

God desires the worship of only such as worship Him 
in spirit and in truth. Any who will not worship from 
this motive shall eventually be destroyed. We see that 
God allowed sin not only to enter the world through the 
machinations of Satan, but to be a source of temptation 



to the angels. We see how all the angels became exposed 
to a peculiar temptation in connection with fallen 
mankind. (Genesis 6:1-5; Jude 6.) We believe that 
Satan instigated this temptation, as he did the temptation 
of Mother Eve. He himself was the first transgressor. 

Some of the angelic host succumbed to this temptation, 
and some remained loyal to God. So we know that 
all the angels of Heaven were subjected to a great test 
as to their obedience to their Creator. All those angels 
who are in harmony with God, according to the Bible, 
have stood their test. These, we understand the Scriptures 
to teach, have been granted the reward of everlasting 
life, because they proved faithful and obedient and 
demonstrated their loyalty. Those who fell were bound 
in chains of darkness unto the Judgment of the Great 
Day— now present, we believe. 

GOD'S ECONOMICAL PLAN 

Man has for six thousand years borne the penalty, 
"Dying, thou shalt die"— the penalty which the Bible declares 
to be the wages of sin— death and all the weaknesses 
and depravities of mind and of body which are its 
accompaniments. But God purposes that all shall have 
a full opportunity of recovery from this condition of sin 
and death; and the provision for man's recovery has been 
made in Christ. This provision is the most economical 
one that could have been arranged. If a thousand perfect 
men had sinned, it would have required a thousand 
perfect men to redeem them— one redeemer for each sinner. 
"An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth," a man's 
life for a man's life, is the requirement of God's Law.— 
Exodus 21:23-25; Deut. 19:21. 

R5430 : page 100 

Before the creation of our first parents God had arranged 
that only one man should have the opportunity to 
fall and to be sentenced to death, that thus only one man 
would be required as a Redeemer. This Divine arrangement 
was most economical because it will bring all the 
masses of humanity back to life at the cost of but one 
human life as the redemption-price. No fallen man could 
be a ransom, a corresponding price, for the perfect man 
Adam. Therefore God purposed from the very beginning 
that His Only Begotten Son, the First-born of all creation, 
should become man's Redeemer and that in order 
to become the Redeemer He should become a man. 

The death of an angel could not have redeemed man. 
Divine Justice required that a perfect human life must be 
given for a perfect human life. And God, knowing all 
this, sent His Son to carry out His great Plan of human 
Redemption and Restitution. Neither was there anything 
unkind or unjust to His Son in this, although for the Almighty 
to have forced the matter upon His Son would 
have been an injustice; and God could not be guilty of 



injustice. 

Thus the Scriptures inform us that the coming of the 
Logos into the world was a voluntary matter. He did 
this "for the joy that was set before Him," by the Almighty. 
The Father set before the Son that if He would 
suffer the ignominy of the transference of His being 
from the higher plane to a lower, a human plane, in order 
that He might redeem the lost race of Adam, He 
should be highly exalted, next to Jehovah; He should be 
made a partaker of Jehovah's nature— the Divine nature. 
All this was the inspiration of our Lord's course— the joy 
of doing the Father's will and of having His approval; 
the joy of restoring mankind and of being exalted to 
His Father's glorious nature. He who thus humbled 
Himself to become a man and die the ignominious death 
of the cross, has indeed been highly exalted as promised, 
and has sat down on the right hand of the Majesty 
on High.— Hebrews 1:3. 

INFINITE WISDOM OF GOD'S GREAT PURPOSE 

Thus we see that the Plan which God has adopted 
furnishes opportunity for the manifestation of the 
principles underlying His own glorious character, which 
neither angels nor men could so clearly have understood 
by any other means. When the great work of restoration 
is fully accomplished, angels and men will see the 
Justice of God— a Justice which permitted the penalty of 
death to be executed upon our race for six thousand 
years— a Justice which provided a Redeemer to pay this 
penalty for Adam, that he and all his posterity might go 
free— a Justice, too, which provided a great reward for 
the faithful Son who carried out, at such a cost to Himself, 
the Father's Purpose! This is the highest conception 
of Justice of which men or angels could conceive! 

By this means God will also manifest His sympathetic 
Love, which otherwise neither angels nor men might ever 
have known. Had there been no sin, no death, no sorrow, 
no pain, they might never have known the depths 
of Divine Mercy. After sin had entered the world, the 
angels beheld the Love of God, in that He "gave His 
Only Begotten Son, that whosoever [of mankind] believeth 
on Him should not perish, but have everlasting life." 
"Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay 
down his life" for another! The Father's Love was thus 
shown in His Plan to send His Son to die for the world. 
This Love will be manifested to all men in the incoming 
Age, now very near at hand. 

Through His Plan God will manifest His Power also; 
for while His Power has been shown in the creation of 
the worlds, of men and of the various orders of angels, 
still this manifestation of energy is small in comparison 
to the Power which He will yet exercise. This Power 
will restore every individual of the race to his former 
condition; every soul of man will be awakened from the 
tomb. This will be a manifestation of Power that is beyond 



the comprehension of humanity. 

Then, too, God's Wisdom will be wondrously manifested. 
When the grand outcome of the Divine Plan of 
the Ages shall have been seen in its glory and majesty 
by all the created intelligences of God, all will hail Him 
as the infinitely Wise One— who fittingly ordained that 
every creature formed in His image should be tested as 
respects absolute loyalty, that only the loyal and obedient 
should have life, and that all others should be destroyed! 

Thus we see that in His wonderful Program for dealing 
with sinners, angelic and human, God chose the very 
best way, the one most profitable to angels and to men, 
the one which most redounds to His own ultimate glory 
and honor. "Who shall not reverence Thee, O Lord, 
and glorify Thy name?... All the nations shall come 
and worship before Thee, when Thy judgments are made 
manifest!"— Revelation 15:4. 



R5430 : page 100 

JUSTICE-RIGHTEOUSNESS-THE FOUNDATION OF 
CHRISTIAN CHARACTER 

"To do justice and judgment is more acceptable to the Lord than 
sacrifice." "Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice, and to 
hearken than the fat of rams."— Proverbs 21:3; 1 Samuel 15:22. 

THESE words were addressed to God's chosen 

people, the Jews. The nation of Israel had 

come into special relationship with God. At 

Mt. Sinai, they had entered into a Covenant 

with Him and had pledged themselves to do 

justice and judgment. This was a requirement 

of Jehovah. But there seemed to be 

a tendency to think of sacrifices as being 

especially pleasing to the Lord. Some 

seemed inclined to feel that no matter how 

unjust they had been, they could offer a sacrifice and 

make it all right. But Jehovah pointed out that this would 

not do. His Law was a requirement, and must come before 

all else; whereas these special sacrifices of thanksgiving 

for victories, etc., were privileges, voluntary offerings. 

The Law demanded full allegiance to God. 

The relationship of Israel to God as His people was 
based upon the Law. This Law comprised justice and 
judgment. The Israelites were to do according to its 
commands— first Godward, then manward. They were 
not to steal, not to kill, not to covet, etc. The essence 
and substance of the Golden Rule was there embodied. 

To do justice is to do that which is just, right, equitable; 
to do judgment would be to render righteous decisions 
in the mind, to decide justly. One might be very 
just in his business dealings with his fellows. He might 
be very careful not to cheat any one out of a cent; and 



yet in his mind he might have unkind, uncharitable views 
of others, and perhaps say things about them that would 
be very unrighteous. This counsel of the Wise Man 
seemed to guard not only against the doing of injustice, 
but against having wrong thoughts. The decisions of our 

R5430 :page 101 

minds, as well as our actions, should be in harmony with 
the principles of righteousness. 

OUR INABILITY TO JUDGE OTHERS 

We are not to judge, decide, in an unfavorable manner 
in the case of any with whom we have to do, without 
indubitable proof. If they claim to be trying to do 
right, we should give them credit for sincerity wherever 
possible. We are not to call them hypocrites, for we cannot 
judge their hearts. Our Lord called some hypocrites 
in His day; but He had a superior power of discerning 
the heart, and we have not that power. We are not to 
judge the motives of others. We are not to go beyond 
their declaration, for we are not competent to do so. 

We may at times judge the outward action as wrong 
or improper, but we are not to attempt to judge the 
heart, where there is possibility of misjudgment. We 
have pledged ourselves to strive to observe the Golden 
Rule in our every action and word and thought, and we 
are to remember that God would be more pleased with us 
if we did not sacrifice and merely maintained our relationship 
to the Golden Rule, than that we should manifest 
ever so much zeal in sacrifice and yet violate the rule of 
justice. This rule requires love for our neighbor as for 
ourself. As the Apostle Paul reminds us in that matchless 
chapter on Love— 1 Cor. 13: "Though I give all my 
goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be 
burned, and have not love, it profiteth me nothing." 

The proper course for us as disciples of Christ is that 
we observe the Golden Rule in our conduct, watching 
over our thoughts and our lips; and also that we present 
continually all that we have and are in sacrifice to the 
Lord. But obedience, justice, must come first, for this is 
demanded by the Law of God. Before we can make much 
development in the cultivation of sacrificial love, we must 
learn to have a love of justice, righteousness. There is a 
trite and true proverb that a man must be just before he 
is generous. It behooves the children of God, as members 
of the New Creation, to study with diligence this 
subject of strict justice toward all, and to put into practice 
day by day this quality of character which is absolutely 
essential if we would be acceptable to God; for it 
lies at the foundation of all Christian character. 

We are not able while still in the fallen flesh, to keep 
perfectly this Law of strict justice in act, word and 
thought. But it should be our prayerful endeavor to do 
so as far as possible. The merit of Christ will then make 



up for all unintentional and unavoidable deficiencies. 
Those only who have this foundation of character well 
laid can make proper progress. A love which is built on 
a foundation of injustice, or wrong ideas of righteousness, 
is delusive, and is not the love which the Lord's 
Word enjoins and which He will require as a test of true 
discipleship. Obedience to God demands that we strive 
to be just in deed and word and thought. 

OBEDIENCE A TEST OF LOYALTY 

The lesson taught in the Lord's rebuke to Saul at the 
mouth of the Prophet Samuel, given in our second text, 
applies with much force to Spiritual Israel. How often 
today we see the need for this counsel amongst the professed 
followers of Christ! Many of these are Christian 
workers in the various denominations of Christendom, 
and many are their sacrifices of time, strength and 
money; but inasmuch as they are not obedient to the 
Lord they fail of the blessing they might have, and indeed 
cut themselves off from greater privileges and opportunities. 

R5431 :page 101 

Yea, many of them, we fear, are cutting 

themselves off from the Kingdom— from glory and joint-heirship 

with the Master in that Kingdom. We should 

learn from this lesson given us in the experience of Saul 

that our Heavenly Father wishes us to be very attentive 

to His Word, and not to think for a moment that we can 

improve upon it, nor that any circumstance or condition 

will excuse us from obedience to Him. 

Had King Saul obeyed God, and the results had 
seemed to prove disastrous, he would have had a clear 
conscience. He would have been obedient, and could 
have left the results with the Lord. God would have 
been responsible for the results. How many of the 
Lord's people in Babylon would be blessed by following 
the instructions in this lesson! 

Many have said to themselves again and again: I see 
that present arrangements and conditions in the churches 
are contrary to the simplicity of the Gospel of Christ and 
the practise of the early Church. I see that much is 
practised and taught that is not sanctioned in the Scriptures. 
But what can I do? I am identified with this system 
and am engaged in sacrificing for its upbuilding. If 
I now withdraw myself, it will mean more or less disaster 
or loss to it as well as to myself. I wish I were 
free from human institutions and that I had my hands 
filled with the Lord's work along the lines of His Word, 
but I cannot let go; necessity seems laid upon me. This 
seems to be the most convenient place for me to work 
and to sacrifice. 

The Lord is not pleased with such arguments. His 
message to us is that to obey is better than sacrifice, 
however active and busy we may be. He tells us plainly 



that no sacrifice we can offer will be acceptable to Him 

unless we are first obedient to His Word. He calls now 

to all the followers of Christ who are still in Babylon: 

"Come out of her, My people, that ye be not partakers 

of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues; for 

her sins have reached unto Heaven, and God hath remembered 

her iniquities."— Revelation 18:4,5. 

THE FRUITS OF DISOBEDIENCE 

We remember that Saul's error was his failure to 
carry out the command of the Lord in every particular. 
He slew all the Amalekites, old and young, except the 
king, whom he kept alive, possibly thinking to exhibit 
him in some kind of triumphal display. As for the 
flocks and herds, he consented that his people spare 
all that were goodly and desirable, but everything that 
was vile and refuse he destroyed utterly. 

As we study the narrative and note the indignation 
of Samuel, and the Lord's positive declaration of His 
displeasure and of the punishment to be meted out to 
Saul, we see clearly that the king had not misunderstood 
his instructions, but with considerable deliberation had 
violated them. Consequently we must understand his 
words of explanation to Samuel to have been to a considerable 
extent hypocritical. He first saluted the 
Prophet with blessings and assurances that he had performed 
the command of the Lord. But Samuel replied: 
"What means, then, this bleating of sheep and lowing of 
oxen which I hear?" He understood at once that the 
destruction had not been complete, that Saul had only 
partially obeyed the Lord. 

Saul, noting the displeasure of the Prophet of the 
Lord, began hypocritically to assure him that these fine 
sheep and oxen had been preserved that they might be 
sacrificed to the Lord. Alas, how fallen human nature 
ever seeks to justify itself in its course of perversity and 
disobedience to the commands of God! How much wiser 
and better would it be to obey under all circumstances ! 
Saul reaped the result of his disobedience in being rejected 
as king of Israel. How bitter are the fruits 

R5431 :page 102 

of following our own course, of compromising our 
conscience, of seeking to evade the responsibility which 
rests upon us as professed children of God! It is sure to 
bring trouble and spiritual disaster to the Lord's people, 
and the hiding of our Father's face. 

Ordinarily considered, sacrifice is a step beyond mere 
obedience. Obedience is a duty toward God. We ought 
to obey God. To His creatures God's will is Law. This 
is duty of the very highest type. But the privilege of 
sacrifice granted to the people of God goes beyond duty, 
beyond obligation. We may give unto the Lord what He 
has not required of us; but what we give in sacrifice is 



voluntary, not commanded. 

The question now arises, How can we apply these 
texts to ourselves? In the first place, we find some who 
desire to be the Lord's people, who seem to grasp the 
thought that there is a privilege of sacrifice in the present 
time, but who fail to note that the Lord has given some 
direct commands which must be considered first. Such 
should come to perceive that obedience is a prime 
requisite. No one can perfectly keep the Law of God, 
but he must exhibit the true spirit of obedience, the 
earnest endeavor to be in harmony with that Law. Then 
consecration to sacrifice is in order. For all who have 
met these conditions full satisfaction has been made, and 
they are accepted in Christ. And "if any man be in 
Christ, he is a New Creature; old things have passed 
away, and all things have become new."— 2 Cor. 5:17. 

St. Paul says of these, "The righteousness of the Law 
is fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after 
the Spirit." (Romans 8:4.) If we are not thus walking 
after the Spirit, we are not hearkening to the Lord; and 
while we are in that condition, He does not take pleasure 
in what we do. Even though we sacrifice some of our 
time for the Colporteur work, the Pilgrim work, etc., we 
shall not be pleasing to God if we do not keep His requirements 
of justice toward others. 

If when one decides to make a consecration of himself 
to God he realizes that he has been unjust to another, 
restitution must be made. No one has a right to be generous 
with the money of another— to take another man's 
money and offer it in service to God. This is a form of 
injustice which must be very offensive to the Father- 
one which He would disdain altogether as a sacrifice. 
Yet we see that this is very largely practised. There are 
a great many who have gotten money in a way not altogether 
right, and who, to quiet conscience, give some 
of it to religious work. This class are overlooking the 
weightier matters of the Law of God. They have taken 
from others unjustly; then they desire to give to the Lord 
that which belongs to another. God's Law demands 
justice, and it is no wonder that He is not pleased with 
this course of action. 

Coming down to the ordinary affairs of life, we see 
that justice should be the very foundation of everything 
—between husbands and wives, parents and children, 
brothers and sisters, teachers and pupils, employers and 
employees, etc. The lesson of our text is a very important 
one to us of the Church. In Christian character 
justice, obedience to God's Law, comes first; mercy and 
benevolence come afterwards. We do not know of a 
principle that the Lord's people need to learn more particularly 
than this one of justice. 

Injustice seems to crop out in many ways in the fallen 
human nature. Little injustices are daily practised in 
respect to trifles. These are thought not worth considering. 
But whoever cultivates injustice in even a 
small way is building up a character which will be unfit 



for the Kingdom. As justice is the foundation of God's 
Throne and of God's character, so justice must be the 
foundation principle governing the lives of His people. 

THE OBEDIENCE OF THE CHRIST 

The lesson of obedience is one which should be deeply 
engraved upon the hearts of all the sanctified in Christ 
Jesus. It is necessary, too, that we have the spirit of 
obedience and not obey merely the letter. Whoever has 
the true spirit of obedience will not only obey the expressed 
commands of the Lord, given in His Word, but 
will seek to know the Divine will in everything. He 
will seek to note the providences of his life, that he 
may be guided in the way the Lord would have him go. 
It is such faithful, obedient children of God who exclaim 
in the language of the Prophet: "Thy words were found, 
and I did eat them, and Thy Word was unto me the joy 
and rejoicing of my heart!" (Jeremiah 15:16.) These 
can say with our dear Master: "Lo I come! I delight to 
do Thy will, O my God!" Let all, then, who would be 
wholly acceptable to our Father in Heaven be very 
diligent to build character in harmony with His Law, 
having justice in thought, in word and in deed at the 
foundation, justice in our relationship to God, to the 
brethren and to all, and then building thereupon all the 
various qualities of love, that thus we may grow up into 
Christ our living Head in all things, and be able to render 
up our account at last with joy and not with grief. 



R5431 :page 102 

PEACE WITH GOD AND THE PEACE OF GOD 

"Therefore, being justified by faith, we have peace with God 
through our Lord Jesus Christ" (Romans 5:1). "Thou wilt 
keep him in perfect peace whose 
mind is stayed on Thee."— Isaiah 26:3. 

TO HAVE come into a condition of Peace with 

God means that one has become reconciled 

to God. This implies a former condition 

of alienation, of "enmity through wicked 

works." Peace with God, then, means that 

this estrangement from God is a thing of 

the past, and that the estranged one is now 

in harmony with God— that he has turned 

his back upon sin and is seeking to walk in 

the path of righteousness. This is a step of 

faith, and is accompanied by reformation of life. We 

rejoice with all who have come thus far; we are glad 

that they have this position of advantage over the masses 

of mankind whom the god of this world has so blinded 



R5432 : page 102 

that they cannot see the beauty of the Lord nor the 
desirableness of peace with Him, and who have not 
learned the bitterness of the fruits of sin. 

But in our second text above, the Prophet is referring 
to a class who have gone further than the condition of 
peace with God. He is speaking of a class who have 
come into possession of "the peace of God, which passeth 
all understanding," as the Apostle Paul declares. This 
peace can come only to those who have given themselves 
unreservedly to God— their time, their talents, their influence, 
their life, their all. These have a peace that 
none others can know. This peace of God rules the 
heart even amid turmoil and trouble; it is an inward 
tranquility and rest which is the direct result of a close, 
personal relationship of the soul with God. It is the 
peace of God because it is a peace that God only can 

R5432 : page 103 

give, a peace which only His very own can fully know. 

What a precious legacy our dear Lord left with His 
disciples when He went away from them! He said: 
"Peace I leave with you; My peace I give unto you; not 
as the world giveth give I unto you; let not your heart be 
troubled, neither let it be afraid." (John 14:27.) This 
was truly a legacy of priceless value, and it is the inheritance 
of the entire Church throughout the Age, even 
unto its close. To the world it may seem that the course 
of the Christian is far from peaceful, for the Lord's 
saints often have a stormy voyage. But if our hearts 
continue to be stayed on Christ by faith, and we do not 
let go our anchor, we shall be kept through all the tempests 
of life, however severely we may be tossed, however 
fiercely the storms may rage. 

Faith can exclaim with the Prophet Isaiah, "For the 
Lord will help me, therefore I shall not be confounded; 
therefore have I set my face as a flint, and I know that I 
shall not be ashamed." (Isaiah 50:7.) On the assurances 
of the Lord we may rest, because our anchor holds 
fast to the Throne of God. The language of our Master's 
heart was, "O righteous Father, the world hath not 
known Thee; but I have known Thee." He had been 
with the Father from the beginning and He knew His 
love and goodness; He had seen the manifestations of 
His power; He had marked His loving-kindness. So 
we who have come into similar relationship to God have 
come to thus know and trust His love and faithfulness. 

PEACE IN THE LORD 

The Lord does not bless His people with peace in an 
outward sense. The Master's special associates, the 
Apostles, were buffeted, and so all His followers have 
been. The Adversary does everything in his power to 



make their lives anything but peaceful and happy. This 
is true of all who walk in Jesus' footsteps. We have 
fightings without and fightings within, rather than peace 
without and peace within. We have fightings with our 
own flesh; and it is part of our victory that we "fight a 
good fight," a conquering fight. We are to put forth our 
best efforts in fighting against the world and the Adversary, 
against all the things that Satan would put into 
our minds and hearts, and we are to get the better of 
these things. The Lord blesses His people with strength 
to surmount these difficulties. 

We are not to be at peace with the flesh, but always at 
warfare with it. Yet there is a peace in the Lord that is 
born of faith in Him and in His promises. He has 
promised us grace sufficient; He has promised that we 
shall not be overcome through having trials and difficulties 
that are too great for us. We are assured that we 
shall have the victory if we trust in His strength. This 
gives us a rest and peace in all our experiences. 
"Through all the tumult and the strife 

I hear the music ringing! 
It finds an echo in my soul; 

How can I keep from singing?" 

We are resting in the Lord's promises— we are resting 
in His strength and in His ability to make good His 
promises; for we know that He who has called us is 
able to fulfil all His good Word. This peace, or rest, 
is the special blessing of the Holy Spirit. Only in proportion 
as we receive the Holy Spirit, the holy mind of 
God, the holy disposition, can we have this peace fulfilled 
in us. It is a matter of simple ratio. As we grow 
in grace and in the knowledge of the Lord, in the knowledge 
of the Truth, we shall have this to comfort and 
strengthen us; and we shall thus have more of the peace 
of God every day, and be able to abide in His love. 

It has been written for our instruction and comfort— 
"This is the victory that overcometh the world, even your 
faith." This faith is built upon the testimony of God's 
Word— a sure foundation. It is only through strong and 
unwavering faith that the peace of God will abide with 
His children. God has made us His sons and heirs, 
joint-heirs with our Lord. "No good thing will He withhold" 
from these; "All things shall work together for 
their good"; "He shall bear them up in His hands, lest 
they dash their foot against a stone"; "The eyes of the 
Lord are over the righteous, and His ears are open to 
their cry." Then let us be strong! 

PEACE FOUNDED UPON FAITH 

This peace of God is not dependent upon the smile of 
fortune, nor upon physical health, nor upon a host of 
friends. But it is a peace which abides even when health 
fails, or poverty comes in, or death steals from us the 
treasures of our hearts. It is a peace which none of the 
changes and vicissitudes of this life can take from us, 



and which enemies are powerless to touch. What gift so 
rich could our Father give to His children! 

How poor would be our inheritance today if we were 
without our anchorage in Christ! But with it we can 
endure all things which the Father's loving providence 
shall permit. Then let us face the coming days with 
calmness and courage. He who was with His dear disciples 
upon the stormy Sea of Galilee, and whose word 
of power quelled the mighty storm and stilled the raging 
of the sea, has the same care over His disciples today. 
When they cried out in fear, He quieted their hearts, saying, 
"Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith?" Nothing 
can in any wise hurt us if our hearts are stayed on Him. 

In order to enjoy this perfect peace we must have 
unswerving trust in our Father's love and abiding faithfulness. 
As we look out into the starry heavens we 
see a manifestation of God's mighty power and majesty, 
but our hearts and minds would not be stayed and sustained 
by this; we might receive gifts from Him, but 
without knowledge of His abiding faithfulness we would 
not know whether these might be only traps for our injury 
from the Adversary. But if we have this proper 
foundation for faith, if we learn to know our Father 
through His Word (the only way we can know Him), we 
come to have confidence in Him. 

If we trusted to our own reasoning, we would be in a 
very unsatisfactory condition. All would be uncertain; 
we would have no sure basis for faith or assurance. But 
when we see that the testimony of the Bible, from Genesis 
to Revelation, reveals to us a God of Justice, Wisdom, 
Love and Power, our minds and hearts have something 
reasonable and convincing to lay hold upon, and we say: 
We can trust such a God, because He is trustworthy. 
This conviction deepens into joy as we step out upon His 
promises and prove them for ourselves, thus learning 
their reality and realizing their fulfilment. We rejoice 
that this loving God has called us to redemption through 
His Son. We rejoice that He has offered us eternal life, 
and has called us even to a glorious joint-heirship with 
this Son.— Romans 8:17. 

PEACE DEPENDENT UPON FULL OBEDIENCE 

We rejoice, further, to know of the wondrous provision 
for the whole world in the future. All these 
things form a firm basis for peace and joy and confidence 
in the Lord. But our peace is proportionate to our constancy 
—our staying qualities. No one can retain this 
peace of God whose mind is not "stayed," fixed, on God. 
It is not a peace of recklessness nor of sloth, but a peace 
begotten of God Himself, through His promises, which 
we have made our own. It is dependent also upon our 
full obedience to the Lord. It is the peace of Christ— 

R5432 : page 104 



"My peace." This peace and the faith which inspires it, 
can look up through its tears with joyful expectancy for 
the glorious fruition of our hopes, which God has promised 
and of which our present peace and joy are but the 
foretaste. 

"Peace, perfect peace? our future all unknown? 
Jesus we know, and He is on the Throne! 

"Peace, perfect peace? death shadowing us and ours? 
Jesus has vanquished death and all its powers! 

"Peace, perfect peace? 'mid suffering's keenest throes? 
The sympathy of Jesus brings repose. 

"It is enough! Earth's struggles soon shall cease, 
And Jesus call us to Heaven's perfect peace!" 



R5433 : page 104 

FAITH THE BASIS OF TRUE REST 

"We which have believed do enter into rest."— Hebrews 4:3. 

IN OUR text St. Paul refers to the fact that 
the Law provided for the Jew a physical 
rest for the seventh day of the week, for 
the seventh year and for the forty-ninth and 
fiftieth years; and that these Sabbaths were 
typical of a better rest. He points out that 
all who believe in Christ enter into rest, and 
thus keep a continual Sabbath. As New 
Creatures we rest all the time, if so be we 
abide in the Lord and in His promises. 

The Apostle says that faith is necessary to rest. He 
tells us what to do in order to avail ourselves of that 
which God has already provided for us. He shows us 
that God made promises to Abraham, and these were reiterated 
to Isaac and to Jacob. God declared His purpose 
to have a special, holy nation, and promised Abraham that 
the blessing of the world should come through his Seed, 
who would constitute this chosen nation. The promises 
were great and precious. 

Abraham believed the Message and was glad. He 
rested. He did not know the way by which God would 
bring about the blessing, but he had the promise of God, 
confirmed by His Oath. He did not need to know then 
about the Lord Jesus or the Plan of Salvation. He had 
full rest in fully believing God; and so did as many of 
his posterity as exercised the same faith as Abraham. 
Isaac and Jacob and many of the Prophets, including the 
Prophet David, thus trusted God. Their writings show 
that they were fully in harmony with God. They realized 
that He had made a gracious provision for the future, and 



that this provision was for the world in general; yet they 
knew that they were to have a "better resurrection" than 
that of the world. They had a rest of faith in these 
things that God had not yet accomplished. 

Our Lord Jesus declared that Abraham saw His day 
and was glad. He did not see it with his natural eye, but 
with the eye of faith. He saw the Day in which Christ, 
who has died for all men, will uplift the human family, 
raising the world up out of sin and death— first exalting 
His Bride, and finally causing the blessing of God to extend 
to every creature. This is just what God promised 
to Abraham— "In thee and in thy Seed shall all the families 
of the earth be blessed." Abraham was glad, and 
everybody else is glad who sees it. Abraham was content 
to see that there was to be a great blessing for his posterity, 
and through them for the world. He did not see 
God's Plan clearly, as we see it, but he saw enough to 
make him rejoice.— John 8:56. 

INCREASING LIGHT AND GREATER TESTS 

Coming down to our own Age, we see that a greater 
light, a greater privilege, has brought greater tests of 
faith in many respects. Abraham was tested in that he 
was told to offer his son Isaac in sacrifice. He knew that 
the promises were to be fulfilled through this son, but he 
said, It is for me to be obedient; God can raise my son 
from the dead. This shall not hinder my faith in the outworking 
of God's Plan. 

We of the Gospel Age have not heard God's voice 
speaking to us audibly, as did Abraham; but we live in the 
time of a further development of the great Plan of God. 
He has sent His Son into the world, who was made flesh 
and dwelt among us, and who died, "the Just for the 
unjust." 

Unbelief would assert that if Jesus had been the Son 
of God He would not have died; but there was a mortgage 
held on the human race by Justice, and their case was 
hopeless unless a Redeemer should be provided. So the 
eye of faith today is able to grasp God's purposes in a 
fuller way than did Abraham. Yet we do not know that 
our faith is any greater than his; for even if we have 
more trials and difficulties, we have also greater opportunities 
and greater light. Abraham had full faith, full confidence 
in God, and no one could have more than this. 

The Lord's people of the present time believe that 
mankind are to be rescued from sin and death. Some 
have more knowledge than others, and more testing; some 
who have less capacity cannot endure so severe testing, 
nor can they enjoy so fully. But all can have the same 
rest that Abraham had— the rest of faith in God. God 
has promised to His saints a resurrection to glory and 
honor and blessing. But these are not actual as yet. We 
have now only the earnest of this inheritance. It is for 
faith to triumph and to realize that God can bring us to 
that glorious condition which He has promised; and He 



will, if we are faithful. Each in proportion to his knowledge 

and faith will have rest. The most learned and the 

most ignorant can have this rest, if only they believe God. 

REST PROPORTIONATE TO FAITH 

The rest we have entered into is not our ultimate rest. 
If we have the faith today, we may have the rest today; 
if we lose the faith, we also lose the rest. But a perfect, 
permanent rest awaits us. God has promised us certain 
great and precious things. He is our Creator and our 
Father, and will do for us the things He has promised. 
And according to our faith it will be unto us— much faith, 
much rest; little faith, little rest. Those who are in harmony 
with God believe His testimony. 

This does not imply that all who have been of God's 
children have believed all of the Divine Plan; for we see 
that this would not be possible. Some have had greater 
opportunity for believing; and some have had less. We 
who live today have much more advantage than those 
who lived prior to our day. Our test, then, does not 
come so much from lack of knowledge; but it is a test of 
faith in God, and obedience to the light now given us. 
Having this great flood of light now granted at the close 
of this Age, our faith should be very strong, and we 
should seek to increase it more and more by gaining all 
the knowledge now due. We should grow in faith, grow 
in grace, grow in knowledge and grow in love. We enter 
into a deeper and more intelligent rest if we avail ourselves 
of the helps which the Lord has provided for us. 
If we truly believe, we will manifest our belief by works 
in harmony therewith. 

R5433 : page 105 

In Scriptural usage the word believe implies much 
more than merely to acknowledge a fact or a truth. The 
great Truth before us all is what the Bible calls the Gospel, 
the Good Tidings. The belief referred to in our text 
is belief in this Gospel: We who believe the Gospel do 
enter into rest. What is the Gospel that we believe? It 
includes all the features of God's love and mercy to us as 
a fallen race— His proposition for eternal life through 
Christ, with all the blessings this involves. To the Church 
the Gospel— the Good Tidings— includes also the offer to 
us of joint-heirship with Christ in the Kingdom. 

One might have an intellectual belief in these promised 
blessings without entering into the rest mentioned in 
our text. But this form of belief is evidently not in the 
Apostle's thought. To the extent that the individual recognizes 
those facts, accepts them and acts upon them, to 
that extent he enters into rest. If he believes partially, 
he rests in that proportion; if he believes more, he rests 
more; if he believes perfectly, he has perfect rest, and 
will show his faith by his works. The Gospel Message 
is so wonderful that any one who believes it will desire 



to avail himself of its blessings. If the opportunity is 
presented of becoming a joint-heir with Jesus to the Divine 
nature, and the mind can grasp the proposition, one 
would really be a fool if he did not accept such an offer. 
So any one who does not accept does not believe, in the 
sense the word is used in our text. All who truly believe 
will accept such an offer and will enter into rest by faith. 

HEART CONFIDENCE ESSENTIAL 

The expression of the text, "We who have believed," 
implies that the belief has reached the heart, and will thus 
affect our course in life. And the second part of the statement, 
"do enter into rest," implies that the rest is gradually 
coming to him because he has believed. He has first 
believed; and the fulness of rest is a condition to be attained 
gradually as his faith grows stronger, and as he 
learns to appreciate more fully what he has accepted. 

"With the heart man belie veth," and not merely with 
the head. It is not a mere intellectual belief. When we 
accept the Gospel as a fact, and enter fully into it, we begin 
at once to have a measure of this rest; and as we 
learn by our experiences how true the Lord is to all His 
promises to us, the rest becomes more deep and abiding. 
The belief was at first a full belief in the Message of God; 
but as we grow in grace and in the knowledge of God, 
the more firm and established does our faith become, and 
our rest is proportionate. 



page 105 

THE PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION 

NATURALLY our readers are deeply interested 

in the PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION. 

All of you have heard more or less concerning 

its preparation during the past two 

years. The work has been much more 

tedious than we expected. All who have 

seen it concede that it is very beautiful. A 

minister, after seeing two parts, said, "I 

have seen only one-half of the PHOTO-DRAMA 

OF CREATION, but already have 

learned from it more about the Bible than I learned in my 

three years' course in the theological seminary." A Jew 

after seeing it remarked, "I go away a better Jew than 

when I came in." Several Catholic priests and nuns have 

visited the DRAMA and expressed great appreciation. It 

is our opinion that no one can see the four Parts (two 

hours each) and not be benefited for the remainder of 

life. We believe it to be the very best method of preaching 

the Gospel yet found. It gives a broad, comprehensive 

scope of the Divine Plan— a breadth of intelligence sure 

to be helpful to all who desire the right, the Truth. While 



it tells the Truth very plainly, it is not told offensively. 
Many ministers are visiting it— and Sunday School teachers 
and their classes. A very few of our friends have 
felt a little disappointment, we think, because the DRAMA 
Lectures are so mild and gentle in their language. We 
believe, however, that in this the DRAMA is right. The 
Sword of the Spirit, the Word of God, is quick and powerful. 
It is merely for us to present it and to allow it to do 
its own work of cutting to the heart, in its own way— 
without human force and asperity. 

It treats CREATION from the broad, general standpoint 
of the Bible and the Divine intention which it presents. 
When God made man in His own image and placed him 
in Paradise, that was not the end of the Divine intention, 
but merely the beginning of it. The CREATION there 
begun will be completed only when the earth shall have 
been filled with a population as perfect as was Adam 
before he sinned; and when Paradise shall have been extended 
to the utmost bounds of the earth. This fulness of 
the CREATION purpose of God He expressed to Adam, 
saying, "Be fruitful and multiply and fill the earth and 
subdue it." Had Adam and his children remained perfect, 
gradually, as needed, they would have subdued the earth, 
extending the boundaries of Eden until the whole earth 
would have been Edenic and fully populated. Then the 
Divine CREATION would have been completed. 

The interruption of this Divine Program by sin, the 
Lord foreknew. From the very beginning His wisdom arranged 
a plan whereby man would be permitted to have 
six days (of a thousand years each) of labor, sweat of 
face and failure, so far as extricating himself from sin 
and death is concerned. But God had purposed from the 
beginning that He would provide a Savior and Great One, 
who, as the Messiah, during the seventh day (a thousand 
years) would restore and uplift the willing and obedient 
of humanity from sin and death conditions to perfection— 
meantime also extending the boundaries of Eden worldwide. 
In a word sin has not caused the Almighty to 
change His original purpose one whit. He has merely 
adapted His Plan to the conditions. The permission of 
sin indeed will constitute a great, everlasting lesson for 
men and for angels, illustrating, as it does, the downward 
course of sin and the Justice and Love and Power of the 
Creator. When all those preferring sin shall have been 
destroyed in the Second Death, at the close of the Millennium, 
the creation of the world will be complete, perfected 
—man will again be in the image of God. 

DRAMA SHOWN IN FOUR PARTS 

The title of the DRAMA is along the lines foregoing. 
It therefore includes everything appertaining to the 
creation of earth— animals, man, the experiences of mankind 
for the past six thousand years and the work of the 
thousand years of Messiah's Kingdom. It divides these 
into four Parts— four Entertainments with appropriate 



music, etc. 

Part I. carries us from star nebula to the creation 
of the world and down to the Deluge— down to Abraham's 
time. 

Part II. reaches from Israel's deliverance from 
Egypt, wilderness experiences, etc., down through the 
period of the Kings to the time of Elisha, the Prophet. 

Part III. continues the story from Daniel's time 
down to the time when the Logos was made flesh 

page 106 

at the birth of Jesus, His boyhood, manhood, baptism, 
ministry, miracles, crucifixion, death, resurrection. 

Part IV. begins at Pentecost and traces the experiences 
of the Church, during the past nineteen centuries to our 
day and beyond for a thousand years to the glorious 
consummation. 

One of the great difficulties in our day seems to be 
that the people are losing all faith in God and in the Bible. 
And when faith in the Bible departs, when there is only 
human speculation in respect to a future life, hope becomes 
very vague. It is estimated that probably one-half 
of all the people of Germany have ceased to believe in a 
future life— believe that they die like brutes. Without 
hope of a future life, none but the well-to-do can be happy, 
contented. This accounts for the general growth of discontent 
-lack of faith. The DRAMA, we believe, will help 
to re-establish the faith of many, and thus not only prove a 
valuable instruction for the Church, but also a valuable 
aid to a hopeless class of the world. It makes for peace, 
by showing all that God is at the helm, and that ultimately 
"whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap." Visitors 
to the DRAMA are presented with a little Peace Pin 
as a souvenir. It is of celluloid and bears the head of the 
boy Jesus, with the Latin word for peace, PAX. 

The DRAMA is made up of pictures from all parts of 
the world— panorama, stereopticon views and films. Many 
of these are beautifully hand-colored, works of art. And 
art costs money! Some of our slides cost Ten Dollars to 
paint. Others of them, of course, were cheaper. The 
paintings from which these pictures were made cost large 
sums. For instance, we have one panorama representing 
Nero's Circus, the original of which was destroyed by fire 
and was valued at Two Hundred and Fifty Thousand 
Dollars. We have, we believe, the only panorama reproduction 
of it in the world. This large sum of money invested 
in the PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION was not allowed 
to interfere with the general harvest work, as noted in 
our last Annual Report; yet it is all under the care and 
supervision of the Watch Tower Society. In its operation 
we are seeking to avoid drawing upon the Pilgrim 
force and the Colporteur force, and, so far as possible, are 
enlisting those not already engaged in any department of 
the harvest field. 



TWELVE DRAMAS IN THIRTY-ONE CITIES 

Only twelve sets of the DRAMA are yet complete- 
more are in process. Nevertheless we have already reached 
and are serving thirty-one cities with the DRAMA. Over 
thirty-five thousand per day are seeing, hearing, admiring, 
thinking and being blessed. Each set of the DRAMA is 
capable of serving four cities. After serving one it is 
passed to another, another, another, and then back again 
to the starting point. This is giving the desired opportunity 
to many of the dear friends who have been 
learning how to operate the Moving Picture Machines. 
More is needed than merely to know how to turn 
the handle— a thorough knowledge of the Machine is 
necessary, and a considerable knowledge of electricity, 
wiring, etc. Friends who are unincumbered and who have 
learned the operation of a Moving Picture Machine, and 
especially those so proficient as to be capable of obtaining 
a license, are invited to advise us of their readiness for 
this means of serving the Lord. 

APPLICATIONS FOR THE DRAMA 

Applications for the DRAMA are coming from every 
quarter. All who desire it are requested to observe the 
following course at once: 

(1) A Committee of one, two or three of most businesslike 
Brethren, of good address-a PHOTO-DRAMA 
COMMITTEE— should be appointed. This committee should 
immediately address the I.B.S.A., DRAMA Dept, No. 124 
Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, N.Y., giving us the Committee's 
address, stating the population of their community, 

and the number usually in attendance at the 
I.B.S.A. gathering, male and female. 

(2) To all such we will as soon as possible communicate 
letters of instruction, outlining their further procedure. 

If your city is very small, and especially if it be 
remote from a large city, you may not hear from us very 
soon; but your letter will be on file and will have attention 
as soon as the general interests of the work will permit. 
We must serve the large cities first, and, while serving 
them, may have opportunity to serve smaller ones nearby. 
All this information may preferably be given on a postcard, 
as these can be more easily filed. Please keep 
strictly to these suggestions if you would advantage the 
work. Some, with best intentions, merely hinder by 
failure to follow directions explicitly. 



R5434 : page 106 

THE PRODIGAL SON 
-MAY 3. -LUKE 15:11-32.- 



"I will arise and go to my father, and will say unto Him, Father, 
I have sinned against Heaven and in thy sight."— V. 18. 

RESPECTING the parable of the Prodigal Son 

the following comments have been made: 

"One of the masterpieces of the Great 

Teacher."— David Gregg, D.D. "This has 

been fitly called the crown and pearl of all 

the parables— the Gospel within the Gospel!" 

-D. S. Clark, D.D. "Its beauty and 

its pathos are unequaled in the realm of 

fiction."— R. H. McKim, D.D. "It is more 

like a complete allegory than any other of 

our Lord's parables."— New Century Bible. "No other 

parable has touched so many hearts."— W. E. Burton, D.D. 

The setting of the parable shows the Master's object 
in giving it. He was seeking in this parable, as in those 
considered a year ago last fall, to show the Pharisees 
that their position respecting the publicans and sinners 

R5435 : page 106 

was wrong. He here pointed out that their wrong attitude 
toward the common people was likely to cost them 
their own share in the Kingdom. 

In the parable the father who had two sons evidently 
represents Jehovah God. The two sons here represented 
the two general classes into which the Jewish nation 
divided itself. The elder son represented those who sat 
in Moses' seat, and who remained loyal to God in their 
outward profession, at least, and in their endeavors outwardly 
to keep His Law. The younger son represented 
the common people, not so religiously strict as to their 
ideals. This class, the younger son, misused their privileges 
and opportunities as members of the nation of Israel, 
as beneficiaries of the Divine promises. They wasted 
their opportunities in self-gratification. They were 
known to others, and acknowledged by themselves, as 
publicans and sinners— not attempting to live godly lives. 

This younger-son class of publicans and sinners felt 
their degradation, just as described in the parable. They 
were spiritually hungry. They were ragged. They felt a 
longing to be back in the Father's House, yet they hesitated 
to go back. It was just such characters that Jesus 
especially encouraged, saying, "Come unto Me, all ye 
that labor and are heavy laden; and I will give you rest." 

R5435 : page 107 

Jesus represented the Father's House, and prompted the 
younger-son class of the Jews to have confidence that 
the Father would receive them when they had come to 
Him penitently. 

The parable tells us that some of this class, repentant, 
came back to God and were abundantly pardoned. And 
not only were they pardoned, but because of their penitence 



they were granted special manifestations of God's 
favor. Recurring to the parable, all this was illustrated 
by the prodigal's feeling his hunger and wretchedness 
and saying, I will return to my father's house. And while 
he was yet a great way off, the father saw him, ran to 
him, embraced him, had compassion on him and kissed 
him. And the prodigal said, "Father, I have sinned 
against Heaven and in thy sight, and am no more worthy 
to be called thy son." But the father said to his servants, 
Bring forth the best robe, and put it on him; and put a 
ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet; and bring hither 
the fatted calf and kill it. Let us eat and make merry; 
for this my son was dead and is alive again; he was lost 
and is found. 

APPLICATION OF THE PARABLE 

How grandly this illustrates to us the Love of God- 
its lengths and breadths and heights and depths! The 
best robe and the other attentions given to the repentant 
one well illustrate the provision God has made for all 
who return to Him from the ways of sin. The robe and 
all the blessings are provided through Christ— covering 
for all the imperfections of the fallen nature. The fatted 
calf well represents the "feast of fat things" which God 
has provided for the penitent class.— Isaiah 25:6-8. 

Making a particular application of the parable, we 
might say that the time when the Father accepted the 
prodigal, kissed him and put upon him the robe of Christ's 
righteousness, provided in His sacrifice and freely 
granted to all who during this Age come unto the Father 
through Him, was at Pentecost. The feast and merrymaking 
may well represent the blessed promises of God, 
which become applicable to those who are covered by the 
robe of Christ's righteousness and accepted into God's 
family by the begetting of the Holy Spirit. 

This is the Marriage Feast represented in another of 
our Lord's parables. (Matthew 22:2-14.) The elder 
brother of our lesson was indeed bidden, but refused. He 
would not go in. He was jealous that the father should 
receive the young spendthrift. This jealous spirit on 
the part of the Pharisees apparently kept many of them 
from appreciating the gift of God in Christ. Just as 
shown in the parables, they refused to enter in. 

The parable represents the father as entreating the 
elder son to come in and join in the feast, rejoicing in the 
reclamation of his brother; but he was angry and declined. 
Likewise the elder-brother class of Jews did not 
show the right spirit for those for whom the kingly 
privileges were intended, all of whom must be meek, 
loving, copies of God's dear Son in their generous good 
will toward all who desire to come to the Father. 

The refusal of the elder brother to participate in the 
festivities reminds us of another of the Lord's parables 
respecting the Marriage Feast. (Luke 14:15-24.) Those 
who were originally bidden appreciated not; one went to 



his farm and another to his merchandise. They dishonored 
the host who had invited them to his banquet. Then 
the servants were sent out into the streets and lanes to 
gather any who desired to come, and afterward they 
were sent to invite all everywhere who desired to share 
the feast; and finally the full number foreordained to be 
of this class was found. 

THE PRINCIPLES APPLY BROADLY 

While the parable of our lesson illustrated the two 
classes of Jews, the principles set forth in it are more 
generally applicable. For instance, there are noble characters 
in the world who love to do right— people who are 
well-born, and well-environed after birth, and who apparently 
should be the very first ones who would be 
chosen of God to be the joint-heirs with His Son in the 
great Kingdom that is to bless mankind in general. Nevertheless, 
the Scriptures make clear that not many of 
this kind may be expected to be of the Kingdom class- 
not that God is unwilling to have them because of their 
education, wealth and good morals, but that these very 
qualities make them less ready to accept the terms. 

All are sinners, whether they know it or not. All 
should be honest enough to confess the fact; and God 
requires this very honesty, this very confession of our 
need, before the merit of Christ can be imputed to us as 
covering our blemishes. This better class, represented in 
the elder brother, seem to feel that in contrast with the 
lower strata of society they are perfection itself, and 
that God would be sure to desire them. His declaration, 
however, is that not many great, not many noble, not 
many learned, not many wise, are being chosen, but 
chiefly the mean things of this world, rich in faith, to 
be heirs of the Kingdom. 

God evidently wishes to have a class honest enough 
to acknowledge their own imperfections and their own 
unworthiness of His favors. So doing, He will bless 
them with a knowledge of themselves and of His righteousness; 
whereas others, self-satisfied and unwilling to 
accept the grace of God in Christ or to confess their 
need of any covering for their blemishes, are not humble 
enough to be of the class that the Lord desires for 
the great work of glory by and by. 

Thus it comes about that the majority who accept 
God's favor and become His children are from the 
younger-brother class— that described by the Apostles— 
not many rich, not many noble, not many learned, and 
not many wise, but chiefly the poor of this world, rich 
in faith. These have the ear to hear the invitation, 
"Come unto Me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden; 
and I will give you rest." These have the hearts to respond 
to this invitation. They realize their wretched 
condition and their need of help, while frequently the 
others who have lived more open lives do not recognize 
their need of forgiveness and help. 



Perhaps no other parable has been so helpful to the 
poor and needy, the sinful and the weak who have a 
desire to return from the ways of sin and to be received 
back into the family of God. They see their own picture 
in this parable, and are encouraged by its representing 
the Father as willing to receive them. It is quite 
contrary to the thought generally entertained by sinners. 
The Heavenly Father's character has been so misrepresented 
to them by the creeds of the Dark Ages that they 
fear Him and expect no kind reception from Him. As 
the proper thought of God's character reaches the poor 
and the depraved, they receive a suggestion of hope from 
this parable and other Scriptures. This hope leads and 
assists many of them to a full return and a full surrender 
to the God of all grace. 

The prodigal is represented as coming to himself, as 
awakening to a realization of his dire necessities, as 
coming to a knowledge of the fact that his father has 
an abundance, and probably will be willing to let him 
have a share of the blessing which he no longer merits. 
His expression, "I will arise and go to my father," represents 

R5435 : page 108 

what should be the attitude of all repentant ones 
—the attitude which all Christian people should help 
them to attain— reliance upon the love and mercy of the 
Heavenly Father and the provision which He has made 
in Christ Jesus for the forgiveness of their sins and for 
their reception again to His love and care, for their return 
to the fold and to harmony with the one from whom 
all blessings flow. 



R5436 : page 108 

THE UNJUST STEWARD 

-MAY 10. -LUKE 16:1-13.— 

"He that is faithful in a very little is faithful also in much; 
and he that is unrighteous in a very little is unrighteous in 
much."-V.10. 

BECAUSE the Pharisees were the leading exponents 

of the Law, Jesus pointed many of 

His parables against them, while He comparatively 

ignored the irreligious Jews— the 

Sadducees, who made no profession of 

faith. Today's lesson is in line with this. 

This parable was spoken as a rebuke to the 

spirit of the Pharisees, who bound heavy 

burdens upon others, but shirked them 

themselves, while pretending hearty obedience 

to the Law. 



In olden times, more than now, it was the custom for 
rich men to appoint stewards. Such a steward had as 
absolute control of his master's goods as had the master 
himself; he had, as it were, the power of attorney. Some 
stewards were faithful; others extravagant. The one 
mentioned in our Lord's parable was extravagant, unsatisfactory. 
His master had concluded to dispense with his 
services, and had asked him to render up his accounts. 

On his books were the accounts of certain debtors who 
apparently were left with no chance of being able to meet 
their obligations. The steward concluded that he would 
scale off these debts, so that the debtors probably could 
pay before he turned over his office to his successor. He 
did so. One owing a hundred bath of oil was told that he 
might scale off the debt to fifty. Another owing a hundred 
measures of wheat (500 to 1400 bushels) was told 
that he might scale it down twenty per cent. And so he 
went down the list. Such a use of his authority made 
him friends amongst those whom he had favored; and his 
lord complimented him upon the wisdom he had displayed. 

Applying this parable, Jesus proportionately condemned 
the Pharisees for taking an opposite course. He 
had declared that the Scribes and the Pharisees sat in 
Moses' seat as interpreters of the Mosaic Law, and that, 
had they followed the course of this steward, they would 
have made friends of the poor publicans and sinners by 
trying to minimize their shortcomings, and to encourage 
them to do the best they could to comply with the demands 
of the Law. Instead, they bound heavy burdens 
upon the people and discouraged them. 

All this on their part was hypocrisy; for they could 
not help knowing that they themselves were unable to 
comply with the requirements of the Law, which is the 
full measure of a perfect man's ability. Their proper attitude 
would have been to confess their own shortcomings, 
to strive to do their best, to appeal to God for mercy 
and to teach the common people to do similarly. So 
doing, they would have been better prepared to be received 
into the Gospel favor in the end of their Age. As 
it was, by their hypocrisies they were hindering themselves 
from becoming disciples of Jesus and from seeking 
grace and forgiveness of sins. They were also hindering 
others from becoming disciples by claiming that it was 
possible to have God's favor through keeping the Law. 

APPLYING THE PARABLE 

Jesus then said to His disciples, Make to yourselves 
friends by means of the mammon of unrighteousness; 
that when ye fail— at the end of your stewardship, at 
death— the results of your benevolence may cause that ye 
be received, in the resurrection, into the everlasting habitations. 
—Verse 9, paraphrase. 

There is room for dispute in respect to the teachings 
of this parable, but to us it seems clear that Jesus meant 
that the wisdom of the unjust steward should be exercised 



by His disciples in their dealing with the mammon, the 
riches, of the present life. From the moment God's people 
give themselves to Him, they give also their earthly 
rights and interests, and become merely stewards of their 
time, talent, influence, wealth, etc. "Ye are not your own; 
ye are bought with a price; therefore glorify God." Use 
all that you have energetically in the Divine service. 

These stewards of the mercies of God have His approval 
in the use of all of earthly things to the forwarding 
of their spiritual interests; they will not be counted 
unjust squanderers, as they use their earthly opportunities 
for advancing their Heavenly interests. On the contrary, 
this will be reckoned to them for wise stewardship; 
and being found faithful in the use of earthly things in 
God's service, they can safely be entrusted with the 
greater things of the future. They will be received into 
the everlasting habitations and be granted a share with 
Messiah in His glorious Kingdom. They will be entrusted 
with all of God's favors to be bestowed upon 
mankind. Their unselfishness in the present time, their 
willingness to sacrifice, will be the basis of the Divine 
approval and glory to follow. 

Unfaithfulness in the present time respecting things 
of trifling value in comparison would mean unfaithfulness 
in the future great things. Whoever therefore selfishly 
appropriates to himself the things of which he is steward 
will not be trusted with the future great things; and whoever 
is sacrificing will thus demonstrate his faithfulness, 
his loyalty to God, and to such the greater things will be 
entrusted. Would God entrust the riches of the future 
life and glory and honor to any who now prove themselves 
unfaithful, selfish, covetous, using present blessings 
merely for self-gratification? Surely not! 

Jesus asks, "If ye have not been faithful in that which 
is another's, who shall give you that which is your own?" 
With the followers of Jesus all things of the present time 
are God's— the things of the present life belong to God, 
because we have consecrated or devoted them. The things 
of the future life belong to us, because God has promised 
them to us. But there are conditions; namely, our faithfulness, 
our loyalty. If we are not faithful in handling 
the things which we have devoted to God, He will not 
give to us by and by those things which He has promised 
shall be ours conditionally. If, then, we should misappropriate 
the things consecrated to God— if we should abuse 
our stewardship and use those opportunities selfishly, 
could we expect God to give us the things which He has 
promised to give only to the faithful? 

SERVING TWO MASTERS 

There are two great impelling powers; one evil, the 
other good. These are known by different names and are 
in every way opposite. God is the Good Master; Satan is 
the evil master; but each has representatives and various 



R5437 : page 109 

interests. Thus God, His Spirit and His teachings, are 

represented by the word Love; while Satan and his course 

are represented by selfishness, covetousness, mammon. 

Through the fall of man the whole world has lost the 

Spirit of God, and has been under the domination of 

Satan for centuries. All have become more or less evil. 

The spirit of selfishness, covetousness, leading on to unrighteousness 

in general, has gotten hold upon our race, 

so that even after we see the wrong course it is with 

great difficulty that its power over us can be broken. 

"We cannot do the things which we would." 

But here comes in the proposition of the Gospel: God 
desires some faithful souls to be associated with Jesus in 
dispensing His blessings. He offers this great prize of 
the Kingdom to those who will demonstrate that they have 
the right spirit. This prize is a pearl of great value. No 
other consideration can compare with it. Whoever intelligently 
accepts the Gospel call turns his back upon sin, 
selfishness and all the works of the flesh and the Devil 
related thereto, and sets his face Godward, loveward, 
rightward. 

But it is not sufficient that he shall enter into a 
covenant to give up the world and walk in the footsteps 
of Jesus. It is not sufficient that God accepts that 
covenant and begets such a one of His Holy Spirit. More 
than this is needed. He must demonstrate not only that 
he prefers right to wrong on equal terms, but that he is 
willing to suffer the loss of all things that he may be on 
the side of right, on God's side. 

Then comes in the trial and testing. He seeks to 
serve God and to gain the reward of glory, honor and 
immortality in the Kingdom with Jesus; but he finds a 
tendency in his flesh to look after and appreciate the 
rewards of mammon, selfishness. This brings about the 
great battle. One or the other must conquer. In addition 
to growing in grace, in knowledge and in love, the 
New Creature in Christ must feed upon the Divine encouragements 
and promises of the Bible. Otherwise he 
will be discouraged and utterly give up the fight against 
the world, the flesh and the Devil. 

The Lord has promised grace sufficient in every time 
of need, to the faithful. He tells us that He knoweth 
that we are dust; He remembereth our frame, that we 
cannot do what we would like to do. But at the same time 
He requires that we do all that we are able to do, assuring 
us that for all such His grace will be sufficient; that 
is to say, to all such He will make up the deficiency. 

In our lesson Jesus forewarns us that the choice we 
make must be a permanent one, that the supposition that 
we can serve God and mammon at the same time is a mistake. 
In proportion as we are faithful to one, we are 
unfaithful to the other. It is therefore for us to choose 
the service of God, counting it the greatest of our privileges, 
and its rewards the greatest of all rewards, and 



these for eternity. 

After all, much will depend upon the degree of our 
faith. If we have faith in God, in His promise of great 
reward, if we have faith in the promise of the Savior to 
give us His grace and assistance in every time of need, 
it will be quite possible for us to fight the good fight and 
to gain the crown which the Lord hath in reservation for 
all those who love Him supremely. 



R5437 : page 109 

"UNDER HIS WINGS" 

"He shall cover thee with His feathers, and under 
His wings shalt thou trust."— Psalm 91:4. 

THE 91st Psalm very clearly applies to the 

Church, and would seem to be especially 

applicable to the Church in the end of this 

Age. But since it is addressed in a personal 

way, as though to one person, it may 

be The Christ as a whole that is referred 

to, from the Head to the last member of 

the Body. Our Lord Jesus had trials and 

difficulties, and needed protection and care. 

He went to the Heavenly Father and 

sought the necessary aid. And so with all the Lord's 

people continually. 

But the Psalmist seems especially to refer to our day: 
"A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at 
thy right hand, but it shall not come nigh thee." Of 
course, there have been times in the past when thousands 
have fallen through persecution, etc., but the falling away 
mentioned here seems to be the falling away from God's 
people. Many will be turned aside, injured, wounded, if 
not killed, in the great battle pictured. 

This battle, we understand, is at the conclusion of 
this Gospel Age. The powers of darkness are now specially 
arraying themselves against the consecrated people 
of God, and all associated with them. There never was 
a time when God's people, as a whole, had so large opportunities 
or so great success as Christendom has had 
in the past century. Under the attacks of Satan that have 
been in progress for the last fifty, sixty or seventy years, 
many have fallen into unbelief, Higher Criticism, infidelity, 
the various features of which are represented as a 
great pestilence. We see that there is a pestilential infidelity 
abroad in the land. Its votaries are misled by 
the Adversary— quite probably without any such intention 
on their part. 

Very probably in the future, as they see the Truth, 
many of these will acknowledge their error; but for the 
time being there is a great drouth in Christendom. Church 
attendance is falling away. Many of the ministers are 



preaching what they themselves doubt. They have fallen 
from grace, fallen from Divine favor, fallen from an 
appreciation of the Word of God. 

THE FEET OF THE CHRIST 

This Scripture points out, too, the "feet" of this 
Christ class living in our day. "He shall give His angels 
charge over thee, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone." 
All the members have a relationship to the Head and to 
one another. These "angels" we understand to represent 
Divine promises and helpful assistances of the saints. 
These "angels" are represented as bearing up the feet, 
that they may not stumble over the Stone of Stumbling 
at this time. (Isa. 8:14.) Instead of stumbling over this 
Stone, they will be lifted up by it to greater appreciation 
and higher conditions. The feet shall not be moved. 

In the figure of our text, these who are to be covered 
represent all who are of this one class. As a hen gathereth 
her brood under her wings, so God will be as a 
mother-hen to His people, and will gladly gather them 
close to Himself and give them the necessary protection 
—under His wings. They may fully trust that all things 
shall work together for their good, because they are His, 
abiding "under the shadow of the Almighty." 

The Almighty here represents Himself as a mother-bird. 
The patience of the mother-bird with her young is 
remarkable, and she would sacrifice her own life for her 
little nestlings. So the Lord represents that He is ready 
to do anything for the protection of His own, who are 
under His care. Jesus would have received the Jews thus 
under His protecting care; but the people as a nation did 
not appreciate their need, and hence were overthrown in 
a great time of trouble. Jesus said to them, with weeping, 

R5438 :page 110 

"How often would I have gathered thy children together, 
even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her 
wings, and ye would not!" 

OUR FATHER'S "WINGS" AND "FEATHERS" 

We might exercise a particularity of inspection of our 
text, and say that the word feathers might carry a little 
further thought than the word wings. "He shall cover thee 
with His feathers, and under His wings shalt thou trust." 
The soft, downy feathers under the mother-hen's wings 
serve to keep the little chicks warm and to shield and hide 
them from enemies that would attack them. Not only 
the strong sheltering wings, but also the feathers of the 
hen-mother's breast are used to protect her young. We 
have seen alarm on the part of a mother-hen at the approach 
of danger, and heard her cluck to her little ones. 
Then they would run to her, nestle under her wings, and 
seem perfectly satisfied and free from fear in their place 



of safety. Presently you would see the little heads or 
eyes peeping out; but the chicks felt perfectly secure. 

And so with us. Our Heavenly Father's love and 
care and protection are His wings and His feathers, 
shielding us from all harm, keeping us warm and safe. 
He is able to make every experience in life work out for 
our good. We are, however, to remember that the promise 
that God will make all things work together for our 
good is a promise to the New Creature, not to the old 
creature. Oftentimes the interests of the New Creature 
and of the old creature are diverse. God has an interest 
in all that concerns us, but He overrules our temporal 
affairs for our best spiritual interests. If we were too 
prosperous, it might not be of advantage to us as New 
Creatures. 

Our temporal affairs may be permitted to go awry. We 
are not wise enough to know what is for our own best 
interests as New Creatures, and what would help us the 
most in our fight against the world, the flesh and the 
Devil. We are, therefore, to flee to the Lord and accept 
whatever experiences may come, as those which will be 
best for us; and we are to seek to get the designed lessons 
of faith and obedience from them. 



R5437 :page 110 

THE MOUNT OF OLIVES THE KINGDOM OF BLESSING 

"And His [Jehovah's] feet shall stand in that day upon the 
Mount of Olives, which is before Jerusalem on the east; and the 
Mount of Olives shall cleave in the midst thereof toward the 
east and toward the west, and there shall be a very great 
valley; and half of the mountain shall remove toward the 
north, and half of it toward the south."— Zechariah 14:4 

THIS text refers to the closing of the Day of 

Trouble and the manifestation of God's 

Power in connection with that trouble. The 

literal Mount of Olives may have, and probably 

will have, somewhat to do with the 

matter. It is referred to here as experiencing 

a great earthquake. No doubt the 

Israelites will be gathered at Jerusalem at 

this time, and no doubt the Lord's favor will 

be manifested to them there. This will be 

at the close of "Jacob's trouble," from which the Lord 

will be present to deliver them. Our thought is that this 

will be after the Church shall have passed into glory. The 

execution of what is here described seems to be a part of 

the work of the glorified Church. 

We understand that the Ancient Worthies will then 
appear, and that God's favor will have returned to the 
Jews, and that Israel's temporal blessings will there begin. 
This would imply that the Jews will then be under 



the New Covenant arrangement, and hence that the 
Church must have been completed. 

Symbolically, a mountain represents a kingdom. The 
Scriptures elsewhere declare that Jehovah will make the 
place of His feet glorious. The word olive always associates 
itself in the minds of the people of the Orient 
with the thought of light and nourishment. The olive oil 
they use regularly instead of butter. As the olive furnishes 
both light and food, the Mount of Olives would 
represent the Kingdom of God. Olive oil was poured 
upon the head of the Jewish kings and priests, and symbolized 
thus the Holy Spirit. God's Kingdom will be for 
the blessing of mankind. It will be of two phases— the 
Heavenly and the earthly— and all people may eventually 
come under its blessed condition. 

See STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, Vol. 4, pp. 649-656, 
for further elucidation of this passage. 



R5434:page 110 

THE COLOR LINE FOUND NECESSARY 

WE might have anticipated that many colored 

people would be deeply interested in THE 

PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION. But it did not 

impress itself upon us until gradually their 

number increased to about twenty-five per 

cent, of the whole audience. Of course, we 

were glad to see them, glad that they were 

interested in the DRAMA. We had the same 

feeling respecting them as others; but it 

was quickly discerned that it was not 

a case of feeling, but that, whereas the colored 

people of New York City are about five per cent. 

of the population, in our audiences they are about twenty-five 

per cent, and the number increasing. What shall we 

do? As the attendance of the colored people would increase, 

proportionately the number of the whites would 

decrease; for explain it how we will, a majority of whites 

prefer not to intermingle closely with other races. 

Recognizing that it meant either the success or the 
failure of the enterprise of the DRAMA as respects the 
whites, we have been compelled to assign the colored 
friends to the gallery, which, however, is just as good for 
seeing and hearing as any other part of The Temple. 
Some were offended at this arrangement. 

We have received numerous letters from the colored 
friends, some claiming that it is not right to make a difference, 
others indignantly and bitterly denouncing us as 
enemies of the colored people. Some, confident that 
Brother Russell had never sanctioned such a discrimination, 
told that they believe it would be duty to stand up 
for equal rights and always to help the oppressed, etc. 
We were obliged to explain the facts, assuring all of our 



loving interest in the colored people, and of our desire to 
do them good, and not injury. We again suggested that 
if a suitable place could be found in which the DRAMA 
could be presented for the benefit of the colored people 
alone, we would be glad to make such arrangements, or 
to co-operate with any others in doing so. 

Our explanations were apparently entirely satisfactory 
to all of the fully consecrated. To these we explained that 
it is a question of putting either the interests of God's 
Cause first, or else the interests of the race first. We 
believed it our duty to put God first and the Truth first— 
at any cost to others or to ourself ! We explained 
that we thought that all the colored brethren should know 
our attitude toward them— they should know that we love 
to serve them in any way possible and to give them the 
very best we have to give of the Gospel Message; and 
that it is only a question of whether our giving to them 
in one way would deprive us of giving the Truth to others. 

R5434 : page 1 1 1 

Some who were still tenacious and quarrelsome we 
merely reminded of our Lord's declaration that in inviting 
visitors into the house it is the place of the host to 
say where they shall sit, and then we showed them the 
parable of the man who chose the chief seat of honor and 
was given a lower one. 

In answer to the query as to how our course of conduct 
squared with the Golden Rule, we replied that it 
squares exactly. We would wish others to put God first. 
If our personal interests are or ever have been in conflict 
with the real and apparently best interests of the Lord's 
Cause, it is a part of our consecration vow to ignore our 
interests in favor of the interests of the Lord's Cause. 
This is what we mean by the declaration that we are dead 
to self and alive to our God as New Creatures. 

We reminded one dear sister that the Lord enjoins 
humility, and assures us that unless we humble ourselves 
we shall not be exalted. If nature favors the colored 
brethren and sisters in the exercise of humility it is that 
much to their advantage, if they are rightly exercised by 
it. A little while, and our humility will work out for our 
good. A little while, and those who shall have been faithful 
to their Covenant of Sacrifice will be granted new 
bodies, spiritual, beyond the veil, where color and sex distinctions 
will be no more. A little while, and the Millennial 
Kingdom will be inaugurated, which will bring Restitution 
to all mankind— restitution to the perfection of 
mind and body, feature and color, to the grand original 
standard, which God declared "very good," and which 
was lost for a time through sin, but which is soon to be 
restored by the powerful Kingdom of Messiah. 



page 111 



INTERESTING LETTERS 
HE KNOWS GOD 

BELOVED BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

For some time I have been wanting to write you re my 
special appreciation of the recent issues of THE WATCH 
TOWER, but circumstances would not permit before. Everywhere 
along the line I have heard the same general expression 
of approval; namely, "The articles in THE WATCH TOWER are 
getting better and better." 

What a flood of light came to me through reading your 
wonderful exposition of "Spirit-Begetting and Anointing," in 
the February 1st issue! I have been accustomed to thinking 
of and using these terms interchangeably; and while you state 
that the fact is one, you make a fine and most marvelous distinction 
in the viewpoint from which each is to be regarded. 
Your wonderful analysis makes the matter as clear as it seems 
possible to make anything by words. 

I wish to express my especial appreciation of the several 
timely articles which have appeared in THE WATCH 
TOWER recently, bearing upon the time features. You have 
stated your views therein as clearly and as pointedly as it 
seems possible to present any thought; nevertheless, I have 
found it necessary in several instances to interpret your perspicuous 
language for Elders as well as for others. You have 
even emphasized the thought in some instances, without its 
being noted by some of the dear friends. A few have seemed 
to think that you are changing your views along this line, but 
I have failed to note anything whatever in your recent articles 
which indicates that your present views are materially different 
from those expressed in the Second Volume of the 
STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. 

I have declared, "Brother Russell has not changed in his 
teachings so far as the Church is concerned. He has always 
set forth that the Chronology is a Faith Chronology; but to 
my mind it is as soul-satisfying, and, for the purpose, as easily 
demonstrated as that two and two make four. But all have 
not faith, therefore cannot exercise faith. 

Words fail me when I would express my appreciation of 
the article in THE WATCH TOWER of August 1, re "The Peace 
of God." You have written many things that are really sublime, 
inspiring, yet always in plain, simple English. But your 
wonderful analysis of Jehovah's character in this article is 
the most marvelous thing I have ever read from any pen. I 
have read and re-read this article many times, and each time 
with increasing joy and wonderment. It lifts me away from 
the earth and all things earthly, and in spirit seats me in the 
very presence of Jehovah. This sense of presence becomes 
almost a reality to me, as I follow your wonderful pen-picture 
of the Almighty God and loving Heavenly Father, who 
changes not at any time, yet is possessed of an emotional nature, 
as you so beautifully show. As I dwell on your presentations 
they cause me more and more to long to see Him face 
to face, and to redouble my energies. 



While in a vague way I have been able heretofore to comprehend 
the source of your marvelous strength and endurance, 
I can now appreciate, as never before, why and how you have 
been sustained in all your severe trials, your painful tribulations, 
your bitter, relentless persecutions, and under all have 
maintained a serene composure, even in great commotion, confusion, 
conspiracies. Outwardly nothing has seemed to "move" 
you, even when division has occurred and disorder has reigned 
in the "family of God on earth." The secret is now revealed 
to my mind: You KNOW God, "whom to know is life eternal." 

Every day seemingly increases my love for you and my 
confidence in you as the servant of Jehovah, raised up to give 
"meat in due season" to the entire household of faith. With 
much sincere Christian love in our dear Redeemer, 

Your humble brother by His grace, W. M. WISDOM. 



HOW HE FOUND THE NARROW WAY 

BELOVED PASTOR AND BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Greetings in the name of the Lord! Please accept the enclosed 
money as a birthday present. It comes from a sincere 
and honest heart, desirous of doing more and more each day 
for you and others of "like precious faith." It was through 
your Helps and Bible STUDIES that I found the Narrow Way. 
I was so far down on the broad road that it required considerable 
effort to get back and into the Narrow Way. 

I pictured myself in a canoe floating down stream, and attracted 
by the birds and flowers of worldly pleasure on the 
steep banks on either hand. Then, figuratively, I heard the 
Lord's voice calling me back and warning me of the shoals 
of trouble ahead. My attention drawn to it, I could see that 
I was approaching something terrible. What could I do? The 
banks were too steep for a landing. I called to the Lord to 
help me out of the difficulty. But the Message was, "I cannot 
help you where you are; you must turn your back to sin; you 
must put forth effort to stem the downward course." I seemed 
too weak to do this; but, encouraged with assurance from the 
Savior's sympathy, took courage to do my best in opposition 
to the course of sin in which I had been drifting. His Message 
then was, "Use the oar of faith; turn you! why will you 
die? But be careful not to strike the rocks of False Doctrine 
and Unbelief, lest you break your oar." 

I heeded, and I found no time to listen to the birds nor 
to look at the flowers of earthly pleasure. I had a new ambition 
—to get near to God. Thus striving against sin, I gave 
myself to the Lord to be His disciple and to have His blessing 
and care. The Lord's answer, through the Scripture was, 
"You must now be washed, justified, and put on the clean 
garment of My righteousness— justification by faith. Thus you 
will be acceptable to the Father." Washed and robed by faith, 
a child of God, I was taken into the Lord's Banqueting-house 
and given a foretaste of coming blessings, through a clearer 
understanding of the Divine Plan. I enjoyed the spiritual food 
so much that I prayed the Lord for more and more, and He 



has directed me onward in the Narrow Way with the assurance 
that so long as I am faithful to Him I shall never want; 
and I am finding it so. With much Christian love, 
Your brother and servant, M. L. STAPLETON. 

OUR REPLY 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

Thanks for your welcome letter written on my birthday, 
and for the money which was enclosed! My earthly needs 
are few, and these are abundantly supplied in the Lord's arrangement 
by the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY- 
food, shelter and $11 per month for clothing and incidentals. 
Your donation, therefore, received with much appreciation, is 
turned into the Tract Fund for the general use of the work 
—printing tracts, sending out Pilgrims, and now the presentation 
of the Divine Plan in the PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION. 

I am glad to note, dear brother, your progress in the Narrow 
Way. Remember the Lord's words, "Be thou faithful 
unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life." With Christian 
love, I remain 

Your brother and servant, C. T. RUSSELL. 



page 113 

VOL. XXXV APRIL 15 No. 8 
A. D. 1914-A. M. 6042 



CONTENTS 

Who Commits the Sin Unto Death?-Partl 115 

First Step Toward True Conversion 115 

New Creature Handicapped by Flesh 117 

"His Loving Kindness, O How Great!" 118 

"I Love to Tell the Story" 119 

The Great Day of Judgment, Etc 120 

Great Day of the Lord Now Present 1 20 

Church Federation Now Forming 121 

"Rich to Hell— Poor to Heaven" 122 

The Rich Man of the Parable 123 

"A Great Gulf Fixed" 123 

Dives' Five Brethren 124 

We Are Unprofitable Servants 124 

A Forgiving Spirit Necessary 125 

Faith Power— Credulity Power 125 

Christ-Likeness the Evidence of Sonship 126 

Profession Alone Insufficient 126 

How We Can Walk as He Walked 127 

Some Interesting Letters 127 

Berean Bible Studies, Vol. II 127 

page 114 



PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:-All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



COLUMBUS, OHIO, CONVENTION 

The Ohio Capital city has been selected as a central location 
for a General Convention this year. The dates are almost 
identical with those apportioned to Clinton, Iowa; they 
are June 26 to July 6. Able speakers will attend both conventions. 
Brother Russell expects to be present at both. 



R5451 :page 114 

THE PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION 

We are being swamped with applications for the PHOTO-DRAMA. 
Evidently the whole country wants it. Not only is 
our supply of pictures inadequate, but we would not have 
nearly enough operators to meet the demand; and the rent for 
the theatres would be impossible for us to pay. 

Under these conditions we shall be limited at first to the 
larger places. Later on, the DRAMA can be extended to smaller 
places. But do not expect too much; we cannot work miracles. 
Before the summer is ended we hope to have the work 
so expanded as to be able to reach many more cities and 
towns. Our plan for the present must be to prepare duplications 
of the DRAMA and to offer it free with booth operator 



to such cities as indicate their ability, willingness and desire 
to furnish suitable auditoriums, supply ushers, etc. Please 
exercise a little patience. Be assured the Society is doing all 
in its power to serve you and the Truth. Do not spend money 
going afar to see the DRAMA, but save your dimes to assist in 
getting it to your own town. 

We are pleased to remark that the public is taking a deep 
interest in the DRAMA, recognizing its educational value, the 
beauty of the pictures and the wider scope which it gives of 
human history. Unencumbered brethren of fair education and 
of experience as newspaper writers may be used in the work. 
We shall be glad to hear from volunteers. 



page 114 

BEREAN QUESTION BOOKS 

The six volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES are being 
used as text books in Bible Study quite extensively. This led 
to the preparation of lessons, or questions, on the topics covered 
by the volumes. These are arranged in the form of Lessons 
for Berean Bible Classes. We now have these Question 
Books for all six volumes. Price postpaid, 5 cents (2-l/2d.) 
each, any quantity. 



R5438 :page 115 

WHO COMMITS THE SIN UNTO DEATH7-PART I 

"Whosoever is begotten of God doth not commit sin, for His 
seed remaineth in him; and he cannot sin, because he is 
begotten of God."-l JOHN 3:9. 

PRIVILEGES, RESPONSIBILITIES AND 
DANGERS OF THE NEW CREATURE 

THERE is a certain amount of complexity attaching 
itself to questions relative to the 
Church's change of nature from human to 
spiritual. In order clearly to understand 
the initiatory process of that change, the 
begettal of the Spirit, we should have a 
proper understanding of what constitutes 
the human will; for it is that will which is 
changed. 

We cannot think of anything better as an 
illustration of the subject than a legislative body, such 
as Congress or Parliament. In these assemblies, a large 
number of members sit in session; but they are divided 
into groups known as parties. Some members belong to 
one party, others to another. But the dominating party is 
in control. 



So it is in the human brain. There we have numerous 
organs, representing variously religious sentiments, intellectuality, 
morality, the affections, etc. Then there are 
some that represent energy; others, acquisitiveness; 
others, combativeness. These different faculties, when 
called to consider a question, divide themselves into 
groups, the strongest of which is very apt to sway the 
others. 

When, for instance, any matter involving the interests 
of self comes up for consideration, acquisitiveness being 
strong, may lead combativeness to fight for possession of 
the thing desired. It may also lead destructiveness to 
help in the fight. And it may to some extent drown the 
voice of justice, or conscience, and offset the quality of 
love; for acquisitiveness may have schemes which would 
interfere with the operation of love. 

On the whole, the organs which dominate the world 
are the organs of self-protection, self-gratification, etc.— 
all the organs whose names begin with the word SELF. 
Even if the religious organs— veneration, hope, benevolence, 
spirituality, etc.— are strong, the selfish propensities 
generally overpower them, so that they co-operate with 
selfishness. For example, benevolence overpowered by 
the selfish propensities, will say, I will give some money 
to this project, in order that it may show a large return; 
but I will not give it unless it show such return. Thus the 
quality of acquisitiveness and others pertaining to self 
will go into agreement with benevolence, by bending it to 
the service of self. 

It is the usual thing to see such combinations in 
worldly people today. There are generous men with 
naturally noble impulses which they like to gratify. But 
in all that they do, SELF has become the preponderating 
factor. SELF gets in somewhere— self-esteem, self-interest, 
etc. This combination makes the selfish man; and 
though he may have considerable benevolence, veneration, 
etc., yet these noble qualities are under control of 
the selfish propensities. 

FIRST STEP TOWARD TRUE CONVERSION 

To this selfish man the Gospel comes, and offers a 
proposition which is unique, peculiar. It appeals to him 
through a new set of organs. It shows him that he should 
put God first, not self; that he should begin to see that the 
highest and noblest organs of the brain are those which 
recognize the Creator and man's responsibility as His 
creature. It shows him that he is thinking of self-aggrandisement, 
self-honor, self-everything ! 

Such a person, hearing the Gospel proposition, may 
be influenced to decide the matter either one way or the 
other. He may say, I do not like that thought. Selfishness 
may suggest that if he accepts the Gospel offer he 
must stop his questionable business methods. Then he 
concludes that he does not care to take such a step; for it 
would demand more than he is willing to give, and he 



might have trouble with his conscience. Later on, perhaps, 
something in the nature of adversity or calamity will 
awaken him to take a different view of matters, and he 
will see the subject in a different light and be glad to do 
God's will. Then he may say, I realize that my life must 
be different. I am God's creature. Therefore it is right 
that I should consecrate my all to Him. But I see that 
consecration will work a great transformation in my life. 
I shall be obliged to change my course. I must drop certain 
habits. 

This is the first step of true conversion. This is a 
turning from sin toward righteousness. It does not follow, 
however, that the person who takes this step will come 
up to the Divine requirements of a disciple of Christ. The 
rich young ruler who asked Jesus what he should do to 
gain eternal life was told to keep God's commandments. 
He replied that he had done this all his life. And Jesus 
loved him! The young man was trying to do right in 
everyway. Was he not all right then? No! Jesus said 
to him: "One thing thou lackest. Go and sell all that 
thou hast and distribute unto the poor, and then thou 
shalt have treasure in Heaven; and come, follow Me." 

The young ruler thought this strange advice: for he 
had all along been living a most exemplary life. He was 

R5438 :page 116 

correct in his estimate of himself; but he was merely 
doing his duty in so living. No one has a right to live a 
bad life; no one has a right to do wrong. That he was 
merely doing his duty— no more— was practically what 
Jesus told the young man. 

Continuing, the Master said: I have only one offer 
to make, but it is a very high one— join t-heirship with Me 
in the Messianic Kingdom. The life into which you may 
enter by becoming My disciple is a life of glory, honor 
and immortality— the Divine nature. If you desire this 
high position, you must do more than merely avoid sin. 
God is now calling for sacrificers. If you do not sacrifice 
yourself, you cannot become My disciple; for those only 
who thus sacrifice are received of the Father and begotten 
of the Holy Spirit, and can share My glory. Those only 
will be granted a part in the First Resurrection. And the 
young ruler "went away sorrowful, for he had great possessions. 
Alas; how many are likeminded! 

R5439 :page 116 

To turn away from sin is but a step toward conversion. 
That movement is an antitypical going toward the Tabernacle. 
"Draw nigh unto Me, and I will draw nigh unto 
you," is the Father's proposition. The Word of God 
points out to the seeker that only through Christ who 
gave Himself as our Ransom, can any come to the Father. 

He is also instructed that if he would retain God's 
favor he must become a disciple of Christ, by laying down 



his life in the service of the Lord and the brethren, doing 
good unto all men as he has opportunity. In this way he 
may become a member of Christ's Body. Then, after a 
while, if faithful unto death, he will have a share in the 
glory and honor which the Father has given our Lord. 
He will become a joint-heir with Jesus in the Kingdom. 

WHAT CONSTITUTES A NEW CREATURE? 

So this one becomes a New Creature when he has accepted 
the Divine will in this sacrificial sense; or, as the 
Scriptures present it, when he has made a full consecration 
unto death. "Gather My saints together unto Me," 
saith the Lord, "those that have made a covenant with 
Me by sacrifice." (Psalm 50:5.) Those accepting this 
call to enter into sacrifice are received of the Father; 
then they are begotten of the Holy Spirit. Thenceforth 
they are New Creatures: To them "old things are passed 
away, and all things are become new."— 2 Cor. 5:17. 

The question may arise: What part of the individual 
becomes the New Creature? It is the will that becomes 
new. The will is the determination, or decision, of the 
majority of those organs of the brain which form the 
mentality. The will considers the matter: Shall I continue 
to sin? No; I will abandon sin. Shall I go further 
and make a full consecration of myself to God? Yes; I 
will make this consecration. 

When he does so, God accepts him and begets him of 
the Holy Spirit, thus making him a New Creature. He 
makes up his mind— he determines the matter. He 
changes the direction of his will. At one time his will 
was inclined to sin. That was wrong. Then his will 
turned toward righteousness. This was right, so far as 
it went; but it did not make him a New Creature. Then 
he came to the place where He said, Lord, I consecrate 
my life to Thee— myself, with all my aims, hopes and 
ambitions. Thenceforth he is counted as dead to the 
world, and reckoned alive toward God, as a spirit being. 
This new will, this new mind, then, with its Heavenly 
hopes and aspirations, constitutes the New Creature. 

THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE NEW CREATURE 

To be begotten of one signifies to be a son of that 
father. The Only Begotten of the Heavenly Father— the 
only one directly so begotten— was our Lord Jesus— God's 
Son. And all the Church are also recognized as being 
sons of God; "and if sons, then heirs, heirs of God and 
joint-heirs with Jesus Christ." The first One of the spirit-begotten 
class was our Lord Jesus. When the Holy Spirit 
was given Him at Jordan, in this begetting sense, He was 
no longer counted of God as the Man Jesus. But He had 
this treasure of the new nature in an earthly body, an 
earthen vessel, until He finished His sacrifice at Calvary. 
Then, in the resurrection, God gave Him a perfect spirit 
body of the Divine nature. 



So it is with all of Jesus' disciples: They are invited 
to surrender themselves to God, consecrating their earthly 
interests to become followers of the Master. Jesus states 
the conditions: First, faith in Him as the Messiah, the 
Redeemer; and second, denial of self and the taking up 
of the cross and following Him. These New Creatures 
are all sons of God, though the world does not understand 
that they are in any way different from others in their 
relationship to God. "The world knoweth us not, because 
it knew Him [the Master] not." (1 John 3:1.) This 
new mind must increase. This New Creature must grow 
in knowledge and capacity. 

All of this makes the individual now very different 
from what he was as the old creature. If by nature he 
was depraved, and had violent passions prevailing in his 
flesh, he will now, having a better mind, be guided in the 
way of the Lord, and gradually become a copy of God's 
dear Son. This copy is primarily a heart-copy, though the 
change by degrees affects his life, bringing his body more 
and more into conformity to the new mind. 

THE NEW CREATURE ON TRIAL 

Since this new mind, the new will, the spirit-begotten 
New Creature, has its present residence in the old body, 
and since this body, the New Creature's only instrument 
of operation, has still its old tendencies toward sin— its 
weaknesses, its depravities— therefore there is a continual 
struggle between the New Creature and the old. It is a 
daily warfare, and either one or the other must perish. If 
the New Creature be not alert, thoroughly active, thoroughly 
loyal to God, the weaknesses of the flesh will 
gradually assert themselves, and the New Creature will be 
in danger of death. 

If, on the contrary, the New Creature remain loyal to 
God, the old creature will perish. The one or the other 
must die before the conflict is over. It is a fight to the 
finish. And this conflict is a test of the New Creature— 
not of the old creature. The New Creature has been 
called to glory, honor and immortality. In order to attain 
this state, it must prove unquestionably its loyalty to God. 
In proportion as the new mind controls, and we love righteousness 
and hate iniquity, in that same proportion shall 
we have strength in battling with the forces outside, with 
the conditions of the present time; and the greater success 
shall we have in battling with our own flesh. 

In this warfare there may be sometimes more and 
sometimes less success. But not until the victory is won 
will the Lord grant the reward. "To him that overcometh 
will I grant to sit with Me in My Throne." The thing to 
be demonstrated is loyalty to God, loyalty to the principles 
of righteousness, and to our covenant. Those who are 
most loyal and most devoted to God will come off "more 
than conquerors" and will gain the highest reward, will sit 
with Jesus in His Throne. 

Some will come off overcomers, but not on so high a 



plane, needing the special tribulations to assist them. But 
even though they fail to come to the highest standard, they 
will, nevertheless, come off overcomers; else they would 
never get any share in the Heavenly reward, nor life at 

R5439 :page 117 

all. These will form the Great Company, who come up out 
of the great tribulation and wash their robes and make 
them white in the blood of the Lamb. (Revelation 7:14.) 
They will be greatly favored in that they will be the honored 
servants of the glorified Bride class, who are to constitute 
the "more than conquerors." 

FALLING INTO TEMPTATION NOT SIN 

During this time of battling between the New Creature 
and the imperfections of the body in which the New 
Creature resides, the new mind should be developing and 
growing gradually stronger. The will of the body was 
reckoned entirely dead before the individual could be 
counted a New Creature. But the body has the old brain, 
which has the same tendencies as formerly. The work 
of the new mind is to bring this body into full subjection 
to the will of Christ. The child of God may, however, be 
attracted by business or pleasure, which may lead him as 
a New Creature into more or less of stupor. In such 
stupid condition of the New Creature, the flesh, wide 
awake, might get the advantage, not because the child of 
God has wilfully sinned, or because he has been intentionally 
negligent, but because he has yielded more or less to 
temptation. But it is one thing to yield thus under temptation, 
and another thing to go deliberately into sin. Whoever 
sins wilfully is counted a child of Satan, because he 
has Satan's spirit instead of God's spirit. 

If any of those who were once begotten of God should 
get into that attitude where they would wilfully desire to 
commit sin, it would indicate that they had ceased to be 
sons of God and had become sons of Belial. It would 
signify that the spark of the new life to which they had 
been begotten had become extinguished. "He that is begotten 
of God sinneth not." If he sin— deliberately, wilfully— 
he ceases that moment to be a son of God. Sons 
of God do not love sin. Any one, therefore, who would 
thus intentionally go into sin would give evidence that his 
new mind had entirely passed away, and that he had become 
dead to God, even as previously in consecration he 
had become dead to the flesh. 

We believe that not very many have ever taken this 
step of bold opposition to God, wilfully and intelligently; 
and we hope that there will not be a great many to go 
into the Second Death. However, it is for God's people 
to keep as far away as possible from this disastrous condition. 
This condition is reached by a gradual process, 
step by step. When we come to God we first repudiate 
sin. Later we come to the point of presenting our bodies 



living sacrifices, and are accepted. So, contrariwise, those 
who repudiate righteousness usually go back gradually. 
Step by step of indulgence in sin gradually leads away 
from God, until the New Creature ceases to exist. 

NEW CREATURE HANDICAPPED BY FLESH 

When the Apostle John, in our text, says that those 
who are begotten of God sin not, he means that the sin is 
not wilful. Is there, then, any other way to sin than to 
sin wilfully? We answer, Yes. It is wilful sin that is 
unto death. The Scriptures tell us that "all have come 
short of the glory of God"— there is none perfect, "none 
righteous, no, not one." The righteousness which is imputed 
to the members of the Church, is imputed to their 
flesh. The New Creature itself is perfect. But as a New 
Creature the disciple of Christ desires to put off from its 
flesh all the former things of sin and death and to be 
fully conformed to the image and likeness of God. Yet 
he is more or less handicapped, not only by the imperfections 
of his own fleshly body, but also by the imperfections 
of others. He has to contend with the evil tendencies in 
his fallen nature, and also with those around him. 

R5440 :page 117 

The same Apostle declares that if any shall say he 
has no sin, the truth is not in him, and he is making God 
a liar. (1 John 1:8-10.) And these two statements of 
the same writer are in harmony. The statement of our 
text applies to the New Creature itself, and the other 
applies to his fleshly body. He cannot fully avoid sin in 
his flesh, on account of its weakness, and the deceptiveness 
and unfavorable conditions surrounding him. 

These New Creatures, however, can maintain themselves 
in the love of God and as sons of God. "We have 
an Advocate with God, Jesus Christ, the Righteous." (1 John 2:1.) 
God knows our weaknesses, and has made this 
very provision for us. The Apostle says we may keep 
ourselves in the love of God by keeping ourselves clean. 
"If we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive 
us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness." 
(1 John 1:9.) Our daily trespasses are to be acknowledged 
to the Lord, and forgiveness sought and obtained. 
Thus we pray daily, "Forgive us our trespasses as we 
forgive those who trespass against us." 

STRIPES FOR PARTIALLY WILFUL SINS 

If these trespasses are merely weaknesses of the flesh, 
or of ignorance or stupidity, they are sins which will be 
fully forgiven of the Lord on application. If they be sins 
in which the new mind has been slack, in which it has 
been more or less culpable, through lack of sufficient positiveness, 
then to that extent the New Creature must be 
held responsible. And for all such trespasses, for which 



the New Creature is in any way at fault, there will be 
stripes, or punishments. It is for this partially wilful 
portion of the sin that the New Creature is responsible. 
This does not come under the head of Original Sin and 
its resulting imperfections. 

A Christian might have a natural tendency to anger, 
and it might be impossible for him fully to control this 
tendency. Before he as a New Creature would be able to 
realize the situation, his natural tendency to lose his 
temper would involve him in trouble. The New Creature 
in such case should do everything possible to overcome 
this, through prayer and persistent effort, and if necessary, 
by imposing upon himself a penalty for every failure in 
this direction— some self-denial, perhaps. But if the New 
Creature should say, Well, that is my flesh; I cannot help 
it, he might receive stripes, and an earthborn cloud might 
arise between him and the Lord; and that one would be 
spiritually sick until he should return to the Father and 
make proper amends and be re-instated. If this attitude 
continued, it would seem to make against his ever becoming 
a member of the Little Flock. He would have to 
decide positively for or against the right. 

So, then, there are sins that are not forgivable, but 
punishable. If the transgression should come to the 
degree of full, wilful sin, it would be a sin unto death. 
This means that the New Creature had ceased to be; for 
the Spirit of God, operating in the sons of God, always 
makes for righteousness and hates sin. Whoso loveth 
God "keepeth himself, and that Wicked One toucheth 
him not."— 1 John 5:18. 

THE PURPOSE SERVED BY TRIALS 

But, as the Apostle states, we have this treasure of a 
new mind in an earthen vessel. We are a combination of 
the Heavenly and the earthly— a Heavenly will and an 
earthly body. Sometimes the body will put the New 
Creature to the test, urging it to give up this matter of 
consecration. So he has trouble; for the earthly body is 
merely reckoned dead. But God, in harmony with His 
promises, ignores the old nature— the earthly— and recognizes 

R5440 :page 118 

only the Heavenly, so long as the will is loyal; and 
He has promised grace sufficient for every time of need. 
As before stated, there may come a time when the new 
will temporarily becomes drowsy, dormant. This is a 
cause for serious concern; for then the New Creature 
is in grave danger. There must be a determined will, a 
positive will for God, which will keenly regret any temporary 
deflection; otherwise there is no New Creature. 
As the battling goes on between the new will and the old 
body, the new will becomes stronger and stronger, if it is 
properly awake to the situation. Yet God may permit 
the flesh to have more and more severe temptations. He 



allows the world and the Adversary to bring pressure to 
bear upon the flesh, so that He may test, prove, the loyalty 
of the New Creature. It was because our Lord was found 
faithful "unto death, even the death of the cross," that He 
was counted worthy of the Divine nature. So it is to be 
with His footstep followers. The Father knows just how 
much we can stand, and will never suffer us to be tempted 
beyond what we are able to bear, but with every temptation 
will provide a way of escape.— 1 Corinthians 10:13. 

WHY SOME FAIL TO OVERCOME 

So the experiences of the way go on. As the Apostle 
suggests we are risen to walk in newness of life— our resurrection 
is already begun. (Rom. 6:4; Col. 3:1.) And 
this new walk will become more and more courageous, 
more and more successful, in proportion as we respond 
to the Lord's touch— the disciplinary experiences. And 
if we allow Him to mould us as He wills, we shall finally 
finish our course and be brought forth in full resurrection 
from earthly, human nature to Heavenly, Divine nature. 
Then the new will that has all along been progressing in 
an earthly body will thereafter make progress in a spiritual 
home; it will have a body like unto that of the risen and 
glorified Jesus.— 1 John 3:1,2. 

In the case of those not overcoming fully, we find this 
condition; they yield more or less to the besetments of 
the Adversary, and strive to avoid being too peculiar, to 
avoid giving any offense to their friends. Thus they become 
more or less overcharged with the cares of this life, 
or with the deceitfulness of riches, pleasures, etc. The 
Apostle urges that these lay aside all such weights, and 
run with patience the race set before them. Such a class 
never for a moment think of giving up the race; but in 
due time they will be put through fiery tribulations, which 
will destroy their flesh. Nevertheless, they will fail of 
the reward of the High Calling, which the more faithful 
will receive. 

(TO BE CONCLUDED IN OUR NEXT ISSUE.) 



R5440 :page 118 

"HIS LOVING-KINDNESS, O HOW GREAT!" 

"Because Thy loving-kindness is better than 
life, my lips shall praise Thee."— PSALM 63:3. 

GOD has a kindness of nature and disposition, 
a loving-kindness, that is general, that goes 
out, in one sense of the word, to all of His 
creatures— not only the intelligent, but the 
unintelligent creatures of His hand. He 
bestows His kindness, His favors, upon the 



just and the unjust. He sends His sunshine 

and His rain upon the good and the 

evil. But there is a special loving-kindness, 

a special love which He reserves for those 

who have lovable qualities of heart— those who have such 

traits of character as permit Him thus to love them— just 

as every good person loves every other person who is 

good and noble-hearted. 

God has such a love for the holy angels. He had such 
a love for Adam before he sinned. And since the sin, 
He has a sentiment of loving-kindness toward those of 
Adam's race who, realizing their sin, desire to turn back 
to Him and to do His will. His loving-kindness has led 
Him to make a wonderful provision for these. He has 
provided that some shall be of the earthly nature, to receive 
the blessing of life everlasting here upon earth, after 
it has been brought to Edenic perfection. He has provided 
for others to be of the spiritual nature. Truly, 
"There's a wideness in God's mercy 
Like the wideness of the sea!" 

But God does not love the wilful sinner. This is 
in harmony with righteousness. We may love the 
ignorant, who violate the Law of God because of a lack 
of knowledge, of proper information; but we could not 
rightly love one who is wicked, whose intention of heart, 
of will, is to do wrong. God has no love for the incorrigibly 
wicked. "All the wicked will He destroy." He has 
arranged that only those who shall come into accord with 
His righteousness may enjoy the blessing of eternal life. 
These shall have an eternity of happiness; they shall be 
the recipients of His loving favor everlastingly. 

The Psalmist had a taste of the loving-kindness of 
God in his own experiences. When he was anointed to be 
king of Israel, he knew that he had found favor in God's 
sight. And later, when he did things that were wrong, 
God chastised him, punished him in love, because David 
was a man after the Lord's own heart— had a desire to 
do right— to do God's will. As the needle of a compass 
may under certain circumstances be detracted from its 
normal condition of pointing toward the pole, just so some 
attraction at times influenced David and led him into a 
wrong course. But as soon as the besetment was past, 
or he was led of the Lord to see his sin, his heart returned 
fully to Jehovah, as the needle of the compass returns 
and again points to the pole. Therefore King David 
declared that life without God's loving-kindness would be 
worth nothing to him; he would not appreciate his life 
if cut off from the favor of the Lord. This being the case, 
his lips would always confess the Lord— tell forth His 
loving-kindness, show forth His praises. 

R5441 :page 118 

OUR ANOINTING FAR SUPERIOR 

And this is still more true of us who are now the 



Lord's truly consecrated children, who are daily striving 
to serve Him and to follow the Master. We who by 
the grace of God have come into covenant relationship 
with Him since the Atonement for sin has been made have 
become sons of God, and have been begotten of the Holy 
Spirit. We have come thus into the anointed Body of 
Christ. We have not been anointed to an earthly throne, 
as was David, but our anointing does more: it anoints us 
to a Heavenly Throne, to share in the rulership of the 
entire earth. 

No king or emperor on any earthly throne can hope to 
reign for more than a few brief years. But those who shall 
be accounted worthy to reign with Messiah, to share His 
Throne, shall reign for a thousand years. And this is 
only the beginning of their glory. Our Father in Heaven, 
who is now training and preparing us for this glorious 
exaltation through His Only Begotten Son, with whom 
we are to reign, gives us the assurance that He will be 
with us to guide our way; that all things shall work together 
for good to us, because we love Him and are called 
according to His purpose. 

So we, above all other people in the world's history, 

R5441 :page 119 

have the loving-kindness of God manifested toward us. 
We have His exceeding great and precious promises. We 
are the recipients of His special love. And the more we 
appreciate this love and these glorious promises and the 
bountiful provisions of His grace, the more our hearts respond 
in gratitude, the more His loving-kindness becomes 
a reality to us, and the more are we ready to lay down 
our lives in His service. 

It was thus with Jesus. He preferred the Father's 
favor above all else. And He, through the Father's arrangement, 
opened up this new and living way for us, 
that we, by becoming His disciples, may share with Him 
God's special loving-kindness and matchless promises, 
granted only to those "who follow the Lamb whithersoever 
He goeth." Surely our lips shall praise our God! And 
not only so, but our pocketbooks, our bank accounts, and 
our influence shall praise Him! All that we have shall 
praise the Lord; and all that we ever hope to have! 

"I LOVE TO TELL THE STORY!" 

We who have come to realize our Father's unspeakable 
favor to us as better than this present life with all it could 
have to give, we who have joyfully laid upon His altar 
every earthly good thing, every hope and ambition, every 
power of our being, rejoice to tell the Good Tidings of 
Salvation to others. We rejoice to sound forth the praises 
of Him who hath called us out of darkness into His 
marvelous light. The Message is too good to keep! If 
we could not proclaim it, it would be as a burning fire 
shut up in our bones; so we must tell it. And we are 



willing that the telling of it shall cost us trouble, cost us 
money, cost us the misunderstanding and persecution of 
former friends, and possibly the breaking of home ties. 
We are willing that it shall cost us the frown of the 
world and of organized churchianity. 

TEXT APPLICABLE ONLY TO SAINTS 

The Prophet David in our text spoke prophetically of 
the Church of Christ. These words could apply to none 
other than saints of God. None but those who walk and 
talk with God would esteem His favor more precious and 
desirable than their earthly life. If we ask the average 
nominal Christian to weigh this matter, and tell us if he 
would exchange this life for the favor of the Lord— putting 
in one side of the balance all the good things, hopes, 
ambitions, family ties, social position, churchianity, esteem 
of men, and putting in the other side of the scale God's 
favor— he will hesitate, and will eventually decide in favor 
of the things of this life. 

The reason for this is that such do not highly appreciate 
Divine favor. They have heard and believed certain 
things about the Almighty, some of them true and 
some false; but the misrepresentation of God's character 
and Plan, together with the worldly influences surrounding 
them, have largely neutralized and offset and made noneffective 
the truths which they have learned, and they 
lack confidence in the things unseen. Hence worldly interests 
outweigh their appreciation of Divine favor— ten 
to one. 

Those who have, through the Plan of the Ages, come 
to see the loving-kindness and mercy of the Lord are, if 
they are children of God at all, being put to the test. If 
they are merely glad to find out that there is no place of 
eternal torture, and that God's loving Plan includes the 
whole human race, their hearts are not touched to responsiveness 
by this manifestation of His great love. 
They will go on their way, rejoicing that they have been 
delivered from the bondage of error, but will be like the 
nine lepers who were healed by the Master, yet did not 
return to give Him the glory, nor to offer themselves in 
service to Him. And these, alas, are the majority! We 
are now in the great day of proving. Who will be able 
to stand the test in this evil time? 

GOD THE SUN OF OUR SOUL 

This loving favor of God, which is so appreciated by 
the true saints, is not a favor respecting future prospects 
and hopes merely, but it is the blessed possession also of 
the present life. Gradually these come to prize the communion 
and fellowship of the Lord to such a degree that 
any interruption of this communion produces misery of 
soul. It brings an aching void that nothing else can fill. 
This sentiment is beautifully expressed in the hymn we 
often sing: 



"Sun of my soul, my Father dear, 

I know no night when Thou art near; 

O, may no earth-born cloud arise 

To hide Thee from Thy servant's eyes!" 
The true child of God will walk so closely with Him 
that nothing, however sweet or precious to the natural 
man, will be permitted to shut from him his Father's face. 
This would be esteemed a calamity with which nothing 
else could compare. He would rather cut off anything 
as dear as a right hand, or pluck out of his life anything 
as precious as an eye, than that it should come between 
himself and his Heavenly Friend, whom He has 
come to love above all else beside. God is truly to these 
the Sun of their soul, without whom life would become 
the blackness of night. 

"THE DARKNESS HATETH THE LIGHT" 

Some professed disciples of Christ may say that a 
Christian life will not cost earthly friendships; that such 
an idea is an exaggeration; that it is an extreme view of 
what is required of a Christian; that a course which produces 
such a result is an unreasonable one. But no! 
Our Master's words are as true today as when they were 
spoken: "If ye were of the world, the world would love 
his own; but because ye are not of the world, therefore 
the world hateth you." (John 15:19.) The declaration of 
the Apostle still holds good: "Yea, and all who live godly 
in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution."— 2 Tim. 3:12. 

Why did the Master suffer the loss of social position 
and of favor with the churchianity of His day? Why 
did the Doctors of Divinity and the notables among the 
religionists hide their faces from Him? Why did they 
finally become so embittered against Him that they 
crucified Him? Was it because of evil-doing on His 
part? Nay; for He went about doing good. It was because 
He told the truth. He declared truths which they 
themselves recognized as such, but with which they had 
so mixed the "traditions of the elders" that they were too 
stupefied, drunken and blinded to take anything but a perverted 
view of our Lord's work and teachings. Their 
hearts were not in the right attitude before God. "The 
darkness hateth the light." 

The Master's persecutions came not from the outside 
world, but from the professed holy people of His time. So 
has it ever been since, and so is it today. Those who 
now oppose the Truth are not worldly people outside of the 
churches, with but few exceptions; but they are zealous 
sectarians, whom Satan has blinded with his false doctrines 
and misrepresentations. We are not to be surprised, 
therefore, that wherever the Truth goes it will be 
a Sword to separate, as our Lord declared. These conditions 
prove a test to the followers of Jesus. Are we 
willing to bear the hatred, the scorn, the contumely, which 
loyalty to the Truth brings? Is our Father's loving favor 
more, far more, to us than the favor and smiles of the 



R5441 : page 120 

whole world— even more, far more to us than life itself? 

THE GLORIOUS HARP OF THE AGES 

If so, we can go forth in His name, rejoicing as we 
go, praising Him with our lips, singing the New Song 
which he hath put into our mouths, "even the loving kindness 
of our God." It costs something to sing this song. 
Only those who have learned to play upon the Harp of 
God, who have all its strings attuned to perfect harmony, 
can properly render this "Song of Moses and the Lamb." 
Never until today has it been possible to produce such 
melody from this wonderful Harp; for never before have 
all its chords been properly placed and attuned. Now its 
music is entrancing! Then let us take this wonderful 
Harp of the Ages, and as we sweep its chords, let us sing 
with the spirit and with the understanding this wondrous, 
glad New Song ! 



R5442 : page 120 

THE GREAT DAY OF JUDGMENT-ITS NATURE AND OBJECT 

"Behold, the Lord cometh with myriads of His saints, 
to execute judgment upon all and to convince all that are 
ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds which 
they have ungodly committed." "Let the sea roar, and 
the fulness thereof, the world and they that dwell 
therein. Let the floods clap their hands; let the 
hills be joyful together before the Lord; for He 
cometh to judge the earth; with righteousness 
shall He judge the world, and the people with 
His Truth. "-JUDE 14,15; PSALM 98:7-9. 

THE above texts relate to the great Day of 
Judgment, which is to end the Gospel Age 
and inaugurate the Millennium. We should 
notice first of all what these texts do not 
say. They do not say that our Lord Jesus 
will come to destroy the earth, to burn up 
the world. They do not say that there will 
be a partial judgment at death, and that 
later all will be brought out of Heaven and 
Purgatory and a Hell of torment, which are 
their proper places, only to be sent back to these same 
places again. Not so. But this is supposed to be stated in 
the Scriptures, and is what we have thought. Our 
prejudices and misunderstandings have attached to the 
words of Holy Writ a wrong meaning. It is the Love of 
God which brings judgment to the world. 
The first judgment, or sentence for sin, was a sentence 



of death. Under that sentence the whole world was to 
perish, to be cut off from life, because of Adam's sin. But 
God had mercy, compassion, on humanity, and has provided 
that mankind shall have another trial, with experiences 
granted to enable them to realize the nature and results 
of sin. The first trial was a trial of Adam and Eve 
alone. Every member of the human family, however, will 
be given an individual trial for life everlasting, to demonstrate 
whether he will under favorable conditions come 
into harmony with God. 

CHARACTER THE BASIS OF JUDGMENT 

All hopes of eternal life for the race, therefore, hinge 
upon the results of that future trial. Men and women 
are in this life forming character— they are either improving 
or degrading themselves. Whoever is trying to 
do his best under present unfavorable conditions will enter 
upon that individual trial, or judgment, in a very much 
better condition than otherwise, and will progress more 
rapidly to perfection in that Day. 

The Church of Christ is an exception to this arrangement 
for the world. They will not have a part in that 
trial, because the Church is a special, called-out class, and 
will receive their trial in advance of the world. They are 
now on trial for life or death everlasting. But their trial 
is for life on the Divine plane. Those who are now 
being dealt with by the Lord will, if faithful, be with the 
Lord the Judges of the world in the next Age; as we read: 
"Know ye not that the saints shall judge the world?" (1 Corinthians 6:2.) 
It will be a time when punishments and 
rewards shall be meted out. 

Every evil-doer shall then be dealt with and receive 
punishment for his evil intent, and stripes for his correction. 
Every well-doer shall receive a reward. The 
work of that thousand-year Judgment Day will show men 
to what extent they are out of harmony with God, and 
will show them how to come into harmony with Him. By 
the conclusion of the Millennial Age none will be in 
ignorance. As it is written: "The earth shall be full of 
the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea." 
(Isaiah 11:9.) Furthermore, the Scriptures tell us that 
the judgments will be graded according to the light previously 
had and sinned against. The wilful sinner, after 
a hundred years' trial, will be cut off in the Second Death. 

All who shall make use of the opportunities of that 
time, making progress in character, will gradually go up 
the Highway of Holiness. They will be blessed more and 
more until they shall attain the full perfection of the 
earthly image and likeness of God which was lost in 
Adam. This will be the glorious outcome of the redeeming 
work of Christ. Then every knee shall bow and every 
tongue confess, to the glory of God. All who continue to 
prefer sin shall eventually be utterly destroyed in the 
Second Death. Then God will have a clean Universe. 



GREAT DAY OF THE LORD NOW PRESENT 

We are now in the beginning of this great Day of the 
Lord. All the forces which are to play a part in this 
mighty upheaval which is to introduce the Reign of Messiah 
are rapidly gathering. The nations of earth and all 
the various elements which form society as at present organized 
—political institutions, financial institutions, ecclesiastical 
systems, etc.— are now before the bar of Judgment, 
and are being found wanting. All Christendom is 
trembling before the mighty forces that are coming in 
today. Morals are at a low ebb. As the glorious Messenger 
of the Covenant is now present to sit as the great 
Judge, we may well ask the question propounded by God's 
Prophet of old: "Who may abide the Day [now present] 
of His Coming? and who shall stand when He appeareth? 
for He is like a refiner's fire, and like fullers' soap. And 
He shall sit as a Refiner and Purifier of silver; and He 
shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and 
silver."— Malachi 3:1-6. 

Ah, the world is longing for the blessing ! Men are 
realizing more and more every day their great need of a 
strong arm to deliver them as they face the grave crisis 
which they feel is drawing very near; but they see not to 
what extent the inbred sin of man is incompatible with a 
Reign of Righteousness which is desired and so sorely 
needed. Before the help and the blessing can be realized 
the Day of Wrath must come; the "fire of God's jealousy" 
must burn fiercely, and consume all the giant evils so entrenched 
in the world and in the hearts and minds of men. 
It is not to be a fire merely of destruction, but, thank God, 
also of purification! It will not be a literal fire, but a 
symbolic fire, following which the Lord will turn unto 
the people a pure language, a pure Message, and a clear 
declaration of the Divine will and Plan of Salvation. 

SONS OF LEVI JUDGED FIRST 

The earlier part of the judgment upon Christendom 

R5442:page 121 

will be especially upon the antitypical sons of Levi, the 
silver class. These made a consecration of themselves to 
the Lord, as did the gold class, the faithful overcomers, 
"more than conquerors." This silver class we understand 
to be the Great Company, who are to "come up" out of 
the Great Tribulation, and to "wash their robes [which 
have become spotted and soiled] and make them white in 
the blood of the Lamb." (Revelation 7:9-17.) These will 
be dealt with by the great Messenger of the Covenant, 
not with a view to their destruction or injury as individuals, 
but with a view to the destruction of their flesh, 
which they have failed to sacrifice in harmony with their 
Covenant— "that the spirit may be saved in the Day of 
the Lord Jesus." 



The fire of this great Day shall "try every man's work, 
of what sort it is." It will prove who of the professed 
disciples of Christ have built upon Him as their Foundation 
with the gold, silver, and precious stones of Divine 
Truth, and thus have constructed a true, strong, worthy 
character, unswervingly loyal to the Lord; and it will 
prove who have built with wood, hay and stubble. It will 
likewise discover who have built upon a foundation of 
sand.— 1 Corinthians 3:11-15. 

FLESHLY ISRAEL'S SHARE IN THE JUDGMENT 

A part of the prophecy of Malachi 3 seems to have 
an application to fleshly Israel. The Lord reproves them, 
showing that His course toward them as a people had 
been in conformity to His Covenant with them at Mt. 
Sinai. But they had been unfaithful to their part of the 
Covenant. At the appearing of this great Messenger of 
the New Covenant, which is to supersede the old Covenant, 
He will purge God's ancient people. The time is 
now due for favor to begin to be restored to them; 
but before their full restoration they must experience 
further chastisement for their purification and preparation 
for the great Messiah. 

In the "time of Jacob's trouble," now near at hand, 
Israel will come to see and recognize their King, whom 
they refused when He offered Himself to them at His 
First Advent. "They shall look upon Him [with the eye 
of faith] whom they pierced, and they shall mourn for 
Him as one mourneth for his only son." (Zechariah 12:10.) 
He will then receive them back to favor, under 
the terms of the New Law Covenant. "Then shall the 
offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the 
Lord, as in the days of old, and as in former years." 
(Malachi 3:4.) They shall then be used of Messiah as a 
channel of blessing to all the world. 

BLINDED TO THE REAL DIFFICULTY 

In this great Time of Trouble, the Lord will be a swift 
witness against every evil thing and will rebuke it, and 
thus all men will be taught of Him in the ways of 
righteousness. But as yet the poor, blinded world, bound 
by the shackles of Satan, do not know themselves. They 
do not yet see that selfishness is the basis of their every 
move and ambition; that the number who are not thus 
moved and controlled are so insignificantly small as to be 
without weight and influence. 

It is not our thought to deride any efforts toward 
righteousness, even though inspired by selfishness. We 
merely point out that the true, Christian view of matters 
is a much different one. It is the Bible view. It recognizes 
God, the Divine will, purpose, plan, revelation, as 
having to do with all this world's affairs. It sees in the 
present upheaval of politics, the present uncovering of 
financial and social scandals, etc., another force making 



R5443 : page 121 

ready for the great trouble time, the great "earthquake" 
predicted in prophecy, the great cataclysm, now about to 
be precipitated upon the whole world. The Scriptures 
indicate that this Time of Trouble will be upon us in 1915, 
and will be gradually approaching in the meantime. 

In the providence of God the gross superstition and 
ignorance of the Dark Ages has been gradually dissipated 
to a considerable extent, that the minds of the people 
might be set free, not only from religious superstition, 
but also from superstition respecting the Divine right of 
certain families to inherit the kingdoms, the dominions of 
the world, and to live on a higher plane of social privilege 
than others. All these matters are now coming in review 
before the world, and Socialism is rapidly coming 
to the fore as the world's savior, their deliverer from 
priestcraft and superstition, and from political and financial 
autocracy. The world is being invited to look, not to Him 
who redeemed us with His precious blood, and who 
promised to come again and establish His Kingdom in 
righteousness, but it is being called to look to itself, to its 
own affairs and selfish interests, as the only hope, thus 
ignoring God and His overruling providences, and ignoring 
Divine Revelation respecting the future outcome of 
present conditions, in the glorious Millennial Kingdom 
for the blessing of all the world. 

CHURCH FEDERATION NOW FORMING 

From our standpoint, the present gathering of the 
churches into a great Federation is the fulfilment of 
Scriptural prediction; and the Lord's intelligent, faithful, 
consecrated people are warned against having any part 
in any such Church Federation. The Word of the Lord 
regarding the matter is, "Say ye not, A Confederacy, to 
all them to whom this people shall say, A Confederacy; 
neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid; but sanctify the 
Lord God in your hearts, and let Him be your fear."— 
Isaiah 8:11-16. 

Dread to displease Him, but fear not men. It is the 
tares which have all along associated themselves with the 
wheat that are to be bundled, to be gathered together for 
a great trouble time. This is in the mighty revolution of 
society shortly to set fire to all the social, religious, and 
financial institutions and arrangements of this present 
time, eventuating in anarchy, which, through God's overruling 
providence, will overthrow all things incompatible 
with righteousness and prepare for the Kingdom of God, 
which will be manifested in power and great glory, for 
the deliverance and blessing of all the human family. 

We remember that as the Jewish Age drew near its 
close, John the Baptist, the forerunner of Messiah, declared 
to the Jews: "One mightier than I cometh, the 
latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to unloose; He 



shall baptize you with the Holy Spirit and with fire." 
(Luke 3:16.) We remember the fulfilment of this. The 
"Israelites indeed" were gathered into the garner of the 
Christian Church, and baptized with the Holy Spirit at 
Pentecost. The remainder of the Jewish nation, who 
"knew not the time of their visitation," were burned as 
"chaff," in a great time of trouble, which overthrew their 
nation. This great trouble is shown in Scripture to be a 
picture on a small scale of the conditions which will prevail 
in the closing days of this Gospel Age. 

In that trouble time which came to the Jews, though 
various steps were taken to hinder the destruction of the 
nation of Israel, all efforts failed. Even the Roman Emperor 
was desirous of preserving the nation and of establishing 
order; and the Roman army was sent, not to destroy 
them, but to establish peace in their midst. But the 
Lord had declared that the fire of trouble which He enkindled 
should not be quenched by any power, that it 
should do its work to the full; and it did. 

R5443 : page 122 

Likewise it will be with the great fire of trouble with 
which this present Age will end, and into which the "tare" 
class of Christendom will be cast. It will not be an utter 
destruction of life (although many lives will be lost in the 
awful trouble of this Day of Wrath), but it will completely 
consume all earthly governments and institutions 
and will overthrow Churchianity. These will be consumed 
in the fire of anarchy. Nothing shall be permitted 
to quench that fire, or hinder the utter destruction of 
present systems. But, praise God, when the fire shall have 
devoured the stubble and the falsities and deceptions of 
the present order, it will but have prepared the way for 
the great blessing which God has designed and provided, 
in His coming Kingdom. "When the judgments of the 
Lord are abroad in the earth, the inhabitants of the world 
will learn righteousness." (Isaiah 26:9.) It will be a 
terrible chastisement, but it will be the necessary work of 
the skilful Surgeon, who wounds but to heal. 

"REFUGE OF LIES" SWEPT AWAY 

In our Lord's parable of building a House upon the 
Rock or upon the Sand, He gives a forceful picture particularly 
of the tests to come upon Christendom at the 
close of this Age. Here His figure is that of a fierce 
storm, a flood, with mighty winds beating upon the faith 
structure of His professed followers, overthrowing the 
faith of those not built upon Christ, the Rock, but built 
upon the sand. And so we see it today. A mighty downpour 
of Truth is now in progress throughout Christendom. 
The great storm is now raging. The denominations 
of Churchianity are trembling under the shock. Their 
foundations of human tradition, man-made theories, 
ignorance, "doctrines of demons" (1 Timothy 4:1), are 



realized to be unsatisfactory. They are unable to stand 
before the great searchlight of Truth now being turned 
upon them. Ere long the storm of Truth will wash out 
the quicksand foundation upon which nominal Christianity 
is built, and her utter wreck will follow. Only the 
true people of God will be able to stand the test of this 
great Day— now upon us! 

This is the same storm and flood mentioned by the 
Lord through the Prophet Isaiah: "The hail shall sweep 
away the refuge of lies, and the waters shall overflow 
the hiding places. When the overflowing scourge shall 
pass through, then shall ye [false teachers] be trodden 
down by it. From the time that it goeth forth it shall take 
you; for morning by morning shall it pass through, by 
day and by night; and it shall be a vexation only to understand 
the report [the Message, the Truth]."— 
Isaiah 28:17-19. 

This overwhelming trouble will soon reach the entire 
world. Indeed, it has already begun among all nations 
to some extent. All men must be awakened by the judgments 
of the Lord and brought to a realization of their 
need of the Arm of Jehovah, to deliver them and to uplift 
and save. The whole world is to be judged by The 
Messiah. All will witness that this judgment, trial, could 
not come before the great Judge takes His seat and authority: 
hence none of all those who died before our 
Lord's First Advent could have been judged by Him. All 
should likewise be aware of the fact that the world in 
general has not been on trial since our Redeemer was appointed 
the Judge, that the world has not been on trial 
previous to the present time. Indeed, the great mass of 
mankind neither know the Judge nor understand His Law, 
nor have they any conception of the conditions and requirements 
necessary to life everlasting. This is in harmony 
with the presentations of Scripture on this subject. 

JUDGMENT DAY A TIME OF BLESSING 

The Apostle Paul declares (Acts 17:31), that God "hath 
appointed a day, in the which He will judge the world 
in righteousness by that Man whom He hath ordained 
[The Christ, Head and Body]; whereof He hath given assurance 
unto all, in that He hath raised Him from the 
dead." That appointed Day was future in the Apostle's 
time, and is still future, though now about to dawn. The 
Gospel of Christ, Good Tidings, is to the effect that He 
who bought the world with His own precious blood is to 
become the Judge of all men, the living and the dead. 
"All in the graves shall hear His voice, and shall come 
forth," "and they that hear shall live."— John 5:28,29,25. 

A new trial is to be granted to Adam and all his race. 
It will be an individual trial, under the enlightenment and 
uplifting influence of the great Messianic Kingdom. 
Truly, this is "Good Tidings of great joy" to the world, 
the "groaning creation." Even though the great Adversary 
has succeeded in deceiving the vast majority, 



even of Christians, into thinking to the contrary, this Trial 
Day, the Day of Judgment, is to come to all the sons and 
daughters of Adam for their deliverance and blessing, 
if they will. This Great Day, which will be "the desire of 
all nations," is forcefully depicted by the Prophet David. 
(Psalms 96-98.) The saints of the Lord, the faithful followers 
of Christ, those who "follow the Lamb whithersoever 
He goeth," shall be associated with their great Head 
as assistant judges, in His glorious work of human uplift 
and restitution to all that was lost in Adam. 

How glad we are that our eyes have been anointed to 
see all these wonderful arrangements of our God! How 
glad we are that we can understand the significance of 
the dark clouds now hovering over the world and soon to 
break! How we rejoice that we can discern the silver lining 
to these clouds of trouble, and know that the end will 
be glorious— that beyond the yawning chasm just before 
us, beyond the blood and tears of the coming whirlwind 
and tempest, the blessed Sun of Righteousness will rise 
with healing and blessing in His wings, and mankind, 
broken and helpless and despairing, shall be led into the 
light and glory of the Kingdom of God's dear Son! 



R5444 : page 122 

RICH TO HELL-POOR TO HEAVEN 

-MAY 17.-LUKE 16:19-31.- 

"Whoso stoppeth his ears at the cry of the poor, he also 

shall cry himself, but shall not be heard. "-PROVERBS 21:13. 

DID our Lord mean that all rich men and 

all rich women are to spend eternity 

in misery because of faring sumptuously 

every day, and wearing purple and fine 

linen? Can it be true that in order to get 

to Heaven we must be poor beggars, covered 

with sores, and have them licked by dogs, 

and must eat crumbs from a rich man's 

table? Has character nothing to do with 

future rewards and punishments? Again, 

will it be so that for all eternity the rich, tormented in 

fire, will see the poor in bliss, and the honored poor see 

the rich in eternal misery? Can this be the arrangement 

of an all-wise, all-loving Creator— one who knew the end 

from the beginning? 

For many years this parable has caused distress of 
mind to the more saintly of God's people; both heart and 
head have rebelled. We remembered that Abraham was 
very rich, likewise Isaac, Jacob, King David, King Solomon, 
etc. We remembered that God Himself is very 
rich. Then we looked up the subject in the Hebrew and 
the Greek, and found that Abraham did not go to 



R5444 : page 123 

Gehenna, the hopeless condition, the Second Death, but 
to Sheol, Hades, the tomb, the grave, the state of death, 
where there is no fire. 

Our greater knowledge increased the mystery; for the 
Scriptures declare that Sheol, Hades, the tomb, is to be 
destroyed, that all are to be brought forth from it in the 
resurrection. No other Scripture seemed to agree with 
this parable. It stands in a class by itself, except as we 
might use for its support one text in Revelation which 
speaks of a symbolic beast and a symbolic false prophet in 
torment. Thus have the thinking people of the Church 
been stumbled and perplexed by the story of this lesson. 

NOW ALL IS CLEAR, PLAIN 

Now we see that our lesson is a parable. It is not to be 
taken literally, any more than are the other parables and 
dark sayings of our Savior; such as, "Except ye eat the 
flesh of the Son of Man, and drink His blood, ye have no 
life in you"; or again, "If thine eye offend thee, pluck it 
out...; if thine hand offend thee, cut it off." Indeed, 
we find that Jesus spoke to the people only with parables. 
(Matthew 13:34.) None were ready for the depth of His 
teaching until after the Holy Spirit at Pentecost began 
to give qualification. 

How simple it all seems now! how beautiful! Many 
of God's people are rejoicing that in the light of the present 
understanding of the Bible the Divine character is 
shining forth, beautiful in its Justice, Wisdom, Love 
and Power. 

It is not difficult for us to understand that our lesson is 
a parable. To take it literally, as we have seen, would 
involve the absurdity of supposing that all beggars go to 
Heaven, and that all wealthy go to Hell; for the parable 
says nothing about character— either that the poor man 
was good or that the Rich Man was bad. Viewed as a 
parable, we see that the thing said is not the thing meant. 
Thus in other parables wheat and sheep represent children 
of God; tares and goats represent those dominated by the 
Adversary, the god of this world. 

THE RICH MAN OF THE PARABLE 

In the parable under consideration, the Rich Man represents 
a class, and the poor man, Lazarus, another class. 
Let us see: The Rich Man was the Jewish nation, which 
had been in God's favor for more than sixteen centuries. 
To the Jew had been given the promises, the Prophets, 
the blessings and privileges of the Law Covenant. These 
symbolically were their purple, fine linen and sumptuous 
table. The fine linen symbolized their typical justification 
through typical sacrifices. Their purple raiment symbolized 
royalty; for they were the typical Kingdom. Their 



sumptuous fare represented the Divine promises, as St. 
Paul's words imply.— Romans 11:9. 

In Jesus' day Jewish favor began to wane. They were 
completely cut off in A.D. 70, as all Jews will admit. 
During the interim of forty years the Rich Man, the Jewish 
nation, sickened, died and was buried. Nationally, 
they went to Hades, to the tomb; and their resurrection 
has not yet been accomplished, although Zionism is the 
beginning of it. 

But although nationally dead and buried, the Jews 
individually have been very much alive during the last 
nineteen centuries. They have had anguish of soul, as 
they have received persecutions— sometimes, alas ! from 
those who profess the name of Jesus, but who deny Him 
in their practises. For all these centuries the Jews have 
cried out to God, who in the parable is represented as 
Abraham, the Father of the Faithful. The only answer 
that they have had is that there is a gulf of separation between 
them and God. Thank God, this cannot much 
longer be the case! The New Dispensation dawns, in 
which the Rich Man will return from Hades. Israel will 
be nationally rehabilitated, and God's favor will again 
come to those of them who shall learn needed lessons. 

THE POOR MAN OF THE PARABLE 

The poor man of the parable represents an outcast 
class. It included publicans and sinners, who had alienated 
themselves from God's favor. It also included Gentiles, 
to whom Divine favor had never been extended— 
"aliens and strangers from the commonwealth of Israel." 
(Ephesians 2: 12.) These had no fine linen of typical 
justification, and no purple, representing a share in God's 
favor as part of His Kingdom. None of the promises belonged 
to them. All that they could have would be merely 
such crumbs as would fall from the Rich Man's table. 

The Scriptures illustrate two such crumbs given to 
this class by Jesus. When He healed the Roman centurion's 
servant, it was a concession at the request of the 
Jews, who declared that this man was a friend and had 
done them good, by building a synagogue, etc. The healing 
of this servant was a crumb. Similarly, the Syro-Phoenician 
woman got a crumb when she came to Jesus 
entreating the recovery of her daughter, who was possessed 
of a demon. The Master answered, "It is not 
proper to take the children's bread and give it unto dogs." 
He here used the customary Jewish phraseology respecting 
Gentiles— Gentile dogs. The Syro-Phoenician woman 
was not a Jewess and had no claim on God's favor, but 
she replied: "Yea, Lord, yet the dogs eat of the crumbs 
that fall from the children's table." Jesus noted her faith 
and gave her the crumb which she desired. 

As the Jews died to their favor, so the outcast publicans, 
sinners and Gentiles died to their disfavor; such 
of them as desired the favors of God, hungering and 
thirsting for His Word of promise, were received by 



Him. The early Church was made up of this Lazarus 
class, rejected by the Pharisees as publicans, sinners and 
Gentiles. Instead of being any longer alienated from 
God, these became the children of God and heirs of His 
promises. In the parable they are represented as children 
of Abraham— in his arms. In the type, Isaac was the 
beloved son of promise to the literal Abraham. In the 
antitype, Jesus and His followers are the Spiritual Seed 
of Abraham, received to God's bosom and favor. Thus 
St. Paul writes, "If ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's 
Seed, and heirs according to the Promise"— made to 
Abraham.— Galatians 3:29. 

"A GREAT GULF FIXED" 

The great gulf between Judaism and Christianity has 
been fixed for more than eighteen centuries. During all 
this period no Jew has been permitted to come near to 
God, and no Gentile permitted to take the former position 
of the Jew, or in any manner to claim favor aside 
from Christ. In the Divine Plan the gulf was fixed unalterably. 
"There is none other name given under 
Heaven amongst men whereby we must be saved"— 
whereby we may come into heart relationship with God. 
This gulf dates from the time that Christ came and 
offered Himself to Israel, and was rejected and crucified. 

Thank God, His Word points us to another change of 
dispensation at the Second Coming of Christ! Then the 
Lazarus class, now children of God by faith, will be made 
actually and gloriously His children beyond the veil. In 
association with Jesus their Lord, they will take control 
of the world; for they will be His Bride and Joint-heir 
in the Kingdom. What will happen to the Rich Man 
then? Oh, he is to have a resurrection from Hades ! 

R5444 : page 124 

While God's Kingdom will be represented on the 
spiritual plane by the Lazarus class, it will be represented 
on the earthly plane by another class, which will be Jewish. 
The Jews who crucified Jesus will not be made 
princes in the earth in association with Messiah's spiritual 
Empire, but some of their brethren will be— a class whom 
they have been accustomed to call fathers will be made 
Princes. These Scripturally are known as "Abraham, 
Isaac, Jacob and all the Prophets," and all who during the 
Jewish Epoch proved themselves loyal to God and faithful, 
described by St. Paul in Hebrews 11:32-40. 

St. Paul refers to this recovery of the Jews to Divine 
favor in Romans 1 1:25-33. He there points out that as 
we who are now the people of God were not always so, 
but were received to Divine favor when Israel was broken 
off from God's favor, so in due time those Israelites cut 
off from the favor of God will receive favor through our 
favor. That is to say, when the Church shall have attained 
the prize of glory, honor and immortality, as 



Spiritual Israel, then the gulf separating Natural Israel 
from God's favor will have been passed. Then favor will 
return to Natural Israel. Coming to them through the 

R5445 : page 124 

glorified Spiritual Israel, it will extend through them to 
all nations, peoples, kindreds and tongues of humanity, 
during the Millennial Age. 

This is the Divine Promise, "In thy Seed shall all the 
families of the earth be blessed." The Spiritual Seed of 
Abraham, the Church, gets the first share in this Promise, 
and the natural seed of Abraham gets the second part; 
but both together will be used by the Lord in rolling away 
the curse and pouring out, instead, favors and blessings 
upon humanity, upon whomsoever will accept them. 

DIVES' FIVE BRETHREN 

The parable represents Dives as praying for a drop of 
water to cool his parched tongue. Symbolically, parabolically, 
this represents the Jewish people in great distress, 
asking God to allow Christians to give them some 
help from their troubles. Have the Jews ever appealed 
to God for help? Have they prayed for relief from the 
persecutions which have come to them in the past and 
which to some extent still continue in Russia? Surely 
they have! Moreover, they have appealed to representatives 
of the Lazarus class— representatives of Christianity- 
desiring that their release and relief should come 
through them. 

An illustration of this prayer for relief in our own 
day was afforded in the appeal of the Jews to President 
Roosevelt that he would use his influence with the government 
of Russia for the amelioration of Jewish persecutions. 
Did they get this drop of water? Nay! Mr. 
Roosevelt replied that the comity of nations would not 
permit such a communication from a friendly nation. 

The parable goes further and develops the fact that 
the Rich Man had five brethren in danger of joining him 
in the trouble that was upon him. Who were his five 
brethren? We reply that the Jews of Palestine in Jesus' 
day represented chiefly the tribes of Benjamin and Judah, 
while the majority of the other ten tribes were scattered 
abroad in various lands. The question raised is, Did this 
trying experience affect merely the Jews of Palestine, 
who had enjoyed most of God's favors, or did it include 
also the Jews scattered abroad? The answer is given in 
the parable, "They have Moses and the Prophets; let 
them hear them." This proves that Jews only were referred 
to; for no Gentile had Moses and the Prophets. 
The number five is in full accord, also. Whereas two 
tribes, Judah and Benjamin, were represented by the one 
Rich Man, so proportionately the other ten tribes would 
be represented by five brethren. 

And so it was. The Message of the Gospel, which began 



with the Jews in Palestine, was extended to every 

land; and the Apostle Paul, in going to any cities amongst 

the Gentiles, preached first to the Jews, saying, It is expedient 

that the Gospel should be preached first to you; 

but seeing you reject the grace of God, lo, we turn to the 

Gentiles. (Acts 13:46,47.) In other words, the test upon 

all Israelites was the same. 

Thus we are finding a depth of wisdom in Jesus' teachings 
beyond anything we could even have dreamed. We 
are finding, too, that the horrible nightmare doctrines of 
the Dark Ages poisoned our judgments, crossed our 
spiritual eyesight, and hindered us from seeing the beauty 
of the Lord's Word. Thank God for the New Day and 
the light that it is shedding upon the Bible! 



R5445 : page 124 

WE ARE UNPROFITABLE SERVANTS 

-MAY 24. -LUKE 17:1-10.- 

"He that glorieth, let him glory in 
the Lord."- 1 CORINTHIANS 1:31. 

TODAY'S lesson is in four sections, each apparently 

distinct and separate. Even the 

connection in which these words were uttered 

is not given. Nevertheless, they manifest 

the Wisdom from Above. We shall 

consider them in their order. 

"It is impossible but that offenses will 
come." The word offenses more particularly 
signifies stumblings, or still more 
literally, ensnarement. The consecrated followers 
of Jesus are called little ones, because they are 
New Creatures who have only started in the new way of 
full consecration to God's will. "Babes in Christ," St. 
Paul styles these. (1 Corinthians 3:1.) "Little children," 
writes St. John. This infantile condition, however, 
should not continue. There should be growth in grace, 
knowledge, love. Strength of character should be attained, 
which would not only be wise, strong and difficult to ensnare, 
but able also to assist others less developed. 

Thus in the Church the more developed ones are styled 
Elders— literally, elder brothers. Such more particularly 
represent the Lord amongst the brethren; and Heavenly 
comfort and advice, reproofs, etc., may at times be sent 
through these to their younger fellows. The dangers of 
ensnarement exist because Satan is the prince of this 
Age, and because he has the majority of mankind more 
or less under his influence— blinded by error, superstition, 
sin, etc. "The god of this world hath blinded the minds 
of all those who believe not." (2 Corinthians 4:4.) That 
Jesus did not refer to infants is manifest from the words 



"One of these little ones which believe in Me." 

We may not suppose that Jesus would unjustly condemn 
or punish anybody for ignorantly or unintentionally 
offending His followers, His little ones. We must suppose 
that He meant to caution those who would deliberately 
attempt to deceive and ensnare, entrap, discourage, 
His followers, His little ones. We all have heard 
of instances of deliberate, intelligent plotting against the 
followers of the Lord; and to whatever extent this may 
prevail, it has indicated the Satanic spirit. 

Sometimes true people of God have been thus ensnared 
into the service of Satan, as intimated by the words, "His 
servants ye are to whom ye render service." Saul of 
Tarsus was thus ensnared and used for a time by the 

R5445 : page 125 

Adversary; and he explains that God had mercy upon 
him because he did this ignorantly. Had he done it with 
wilful intelligence, we may assume that God would not 
have had mercy upon him to the extent of rescuing him by 
a miracle, but that he would have continued in his intelligently 
wicked way and that it would have been better for 
him that a millstone had been hung around his neck and 
he had been drowned in the sea. 

This would be because a person thus drowned in the 
sea would lose merely the present life, and not the future 
life during the Millennium, after he had been awakened 
from the sleep of death. He would then have full opportunity 
for enlightenment through obedience and for recovery 
from sin and death. But those who intelligently 
persecute the followers of Jesus and seek to turn them 
aside from the way of righteousness, pervert their own 
conscience and so degrade themselves that it will be much 
more difficult for them to come into accord with the conditions 
of the New Dispensation beyond the grave. In a 
word, whoever sins against light and knowledge is endangering 
his own opportunities for everlasting life. 

A FORGIVING SPIRIT NECESSARY 

Verses 3 and 4 are apparently a part of the same discourse 
recorded in Matthew 18:15-22. The lesson is addressed 
to the followers of Jesus, not to the world. It 
relates primarily to their duty toward the brethren of the 
Household of Faith, but secondarily it has a broader application. 
It may at times be given this broader application; 
but the injunction in Matthew 18, that the counsel 
of brethren be brought in and that ultimately, if necessary, 
the matter come before the Church, proves to us that 
it is in reality not intended for any but the Church. 

The lesson is mercy— boundless mercy. The basis of 
the argument is that all need mercy, Divine mercy, because 
all are imperfect; and in order to assist us in the 
cultivation of this grace, the Lord has arranged that His 
blessings to us, His favor, shall be dependent upon our 



endeavor to exercise this Godlike quality. "Be ye like 
unto your Father; for He is kind to the unthankful." 

It seems strange that our forefathers and ourselves 
were so deceived by the false doctrines which St. Paul 
styles "doctrines of devils." (1 Timothy 4:1.) Once we 
thought of the Heavenly Father as absolutely unforgiving- 
full of hate for His human creatures, because they 
had sinned— instead of forgiving their sin. We insisted 
that the wage, or penalty, of sin must be torment, and that 
to all eternity. How little we understood the real character 
of the God of all grace, the Father of mercies ! 

Some of us, perhaps, endeavored to justify our error 
by assuming that God Himself was all goodness, kindness 
and love, but had behind Him an inexorable Law demanding 
the torture of His creatures— a Law from which He 
could not escape, and which bound Him to the doing 
of things which His own Law condemned in humanity. 

Others of us deluded ourselves into thinking that all 
mankind enjoyed at some time between birth and death 
a full opportunity for turning from sin to righteousness 
and of becoming saints. Only of late years are Bible 
students becoming aware of how absurd is this position. 
Now we are realizing that, for four thousand years, only 
the one little nation of the Jews had any knowledge of 
God, or any promise of eternal life held out to them, or 
any instruction respecting sin and its penalty. And even 
the Jews, to whom the Law was given, Jesus and His 
Apostles declared were blinded by Satan. Jesus, addressing 

R5446 : page 125 

His Apostles, said, "Blessed are your eyes, for they 
see; and your ears, for they hear." The great nation 
of the Jews neither saw nor heard. The same is true of 
nine-tenths of the population of Christendom, not to mention 
heathendom. 

Without the least warrant of Scripture, but in contradiction 
of it, many of us upheld the terrible theory that 
all who do not hear of Christ in the present lifetime and 
also all those who do not become saintly followers in His 
steps will be eternally tortured at the hands of 
devils. We now see that the Bible teaches that only 
a comparatively small class, who now have the hearing 
ear and the seeing eye and who enter into covenant relationship 
with God through Christ, can walk in Jesus' steps. 
For these only does the present life end all opportunity 
of attaining eternal life. For the remainder of mankind 
God purposes a future life by a resurrection of judgment. 

The resurrection is not merely for the Church class— 
the First, or Chief Resurrection— but it is for "the just 
and the unjust." (Acts 24:15.) The Church class will 
come forth to glory, honor and immortality. The unjust 
will come forth from the tomb to judgments, disciplines, 
rewards and punishments. It is in order to give them 
these judgments and opportunities to obtain everlasting 
life that Messiah's Kingdom will be inaugurated; and it is 



in order that He may appoint proper judges to assist the 
people and to reward and punish justly that He is now 
calling out the Church in the flesh. "Know ye not that 
the saints shall judge the world?"— 1 Corinthians 6:2. 

FAITH POWER-CREDULITY POWER 

A great deal passes for faith which is merely credulity. 
If some one were to swear to us that the moon is made 
of green cheese, it would be credulity to believe him— 
not faith. We should inquire, "Who is it that says this 
thing, and what does he know on the subject more than 
we may know?" The faith commended in the Bible is 
that which relates to things which God has promised. We 
are encouraged to be full of such faith in God— nothing 
doubting— not questioning that He is able to accomplish 
all His good promises. 

Our forefathers had too much confidence in men. 
What they thought was faith was mere credulity. They 
swallowed the creeds of the Dark Ages; and the more 
absurd the proposition, the more faith they thought they 
had. On the contrary, they should have said, "Where 
is the proof? Where has God declared such things?" 
Those who defended the creeds cried out incredulously 
against sober faith, branded it heresy, and many times 
burned the truly faithful at the stake. The lesson is that 
we should accept by faith only that of which the Lord has 
assured us in His Word; and this means that we should 
be particularly careful that we have the pure Word of 
God, sifting out mistranslations and interpolations. 

In our lesson, the disciples of Jesus were evidently 
impressed with the grandeur of His teachings, and the 
difficulties that must lie in the way of the accomplishment 
of all the wonderful things recorded in the Law and the 
Prophets, and told by Jesus— respecting His Messianic 
Kingdom, etc. They therefore asked the Lord to increase 
their faith. Jesus replied in words that are greatly misunderstood 
in our day. He said, "If ye had faith as a 
grain of mustard seed, ye might say to this sycamine tree, 
Be thou plucked up by the root, and be thou planted in the 
sea; and it should obey you." On two other occasions 
Jesus made similar remarks respecting mountains, saying 
that the word of faith would have been sufficient to remove 
them to the midst of the sea. 

WHAT DID HE MEAN? 

Evidently the Master did not mean to encourage the 
Jews to attempt to command the mountain to be carried 
into the sea; but rather He wished them to realize that 

R5446 :page 126 

if they had proper faith in the power of God, and should 
receive a command from God to move the mountain into 
the sea, and should give the command with faith, the results 



would follow. But God gave no such command in 
respect to the mountains nor in respect to the tree. Hence 
faith would have no basis for operation in such cases. 
The colored brother had the proper thought. When 
asked what he would do if God told him to jump through 
a stone wall, he replied, "I would jump at it." In a word, 
we are to have absolute confidence in the Word of God, 
not merely to make sure that we have heard and understood 
His Message. Then we may go forward with 
mountain-moving faith to accomplish His commands. 
But God does not command foolish or unnecessary 
changes. He leaves it for human ingenuity to uproot the 
trees and to tunnel the mountains, and never gives commands 
of this kind. And if some human being told us 
something of the kind, we would be credulous if we believed 
him. God is not working that way. 

NOT PROFITABLE TO OUR MASTER 

Some amongst the followers of Christ, naturally progressive, 
are sometimes too aggressive, self-conceited. Becoming 
His disciples does not change these traits instantly. 
The old things pass away gradually, and the new 
take their place. A lesson for all of His disciples to remember, 
but especially forceful to the classes mentioned, is 
taught in this Study. They must remember that the work 
of God's grace, of which they are subjects, is His favor 
toward them; and that their obedience to His commands is 
primarily for their correction and development, and a 
future life of blessing. They should remember that even 
their service for the Lord is a privilege— that God is not 
profited by their services. 

We are all unprofitable servants in the sense that God 
could just as easily do without us, indeed, could more 
easily do His work otherwise than through us. He could 
use as His messengers the angels or the various providences 
of life. None of us is indispensable to His work 
and to His glory. Quite to the contrary, the opportunity 
for entering into the Lord's vineyard and laboring therein 
is chiefly for our own advantage. The service brings us 
certain joys which we could not otherwise have. It brings 
us certain experiences necessary to our own development 
and qualification for higher services beyond the veil. 

As the Apostle declares, "By grace [Divine favor] 
are ye saved through faith." To some extent the faith 
is a matter of our own development. However, the 
Apostle hastens to add that the faith is not of ourselves, 
that even it is the gift of God— we have not the opportunity 
of glorying even in our faith. What have we that 
we have not received of the Lord? The elemental faith 
was based upon certain knowledge that God's providences 
brought to us, and possibly we were prepared for even 
that by a favorable parentage. 



R5446 : page 126 

CHRISTLIKENESS THE EVIDENCE OF SONSHIP 

"He that saith he abideth in Him ought himself 
also so to walk even as He walked."— 1 JOHN 2:6. 

TO ABIDE in Christ implies that one has first 

come into Him. This gives us the thought 

of a Body. The Scriptures everywhere 

represent the Church as being this Body, 

with Jesus as the Head. "God gave Him to 

be Head over the Church, which is His 

Body." During the Gospel Age an invitation 

has been given to certain persons to be 

of this Body of Christ. There is only one 

door by which these may come into the 

Body. It is the door of sacrifice, baptism into Christ's 

death. We are accepted only by giving up our own will, 

and taking instead the will of God. We pledge ourselves 

to walk in Jesus' steps, to become His followers, His 

disciples. We are buried with Him and rise to walk in 

newness of life.— Romans 6:4. 

But it is not sufficient that we take these steps, not 
sufficient that we have received the Holy Spirit, and have 
been accepted of the Father. We should be sure that we 
continue to abide in Christ. Let us ask ourselves, Are we 
having the experiences common to all who are associated 
with Jesus? One of the ways to be sure that we are abiding 
in Him is to realize that we still love Him. Another 
is to know that we are still in harmony with God's Word. 
A third way is that we have no will but the Lord's will. 
Still another is to have His peace in our hearts and lives 
as the ruling and controlling influence. 

PROFESSION ALONE INSUFFICIENT 

Many have made a profession of being members of the 
Body of Christ who do not give evidence of being His. 
Our text says that any one who professes to be in Christ 
ought so to walk even as the Master walked. And how 
did the Master walk? He lived daily in harmony with the 
will of the Heavenly Father. He was fully submissive to 
the Father's will. And this meant sacrifice unto death— 
the cruel death of the cross. 

Whoever has our Lord's spirit, and is controlled by the 
same will, is a member of the Body of Christ, and will 
seek to walk after this fashion, to do the will of God in 
all things. This will mean a walk of holiness, of full devotion 
to God, and of opposition to sin. Whoever is consecrated 
to God is opposed to every sinful thing; for God 
and sin are in antagonism. God stands for His own 
righteousness, and sin is a violation of that righteousness. 
(1 John 3:4.) Whoever walks as Jesus walked is in harmony 
with the Divine Word and will. We are not to trust 
to our impressions, our own conceptions of what is right 



and advantageous, as many others do; but the Word of 
the Lord is to abide in us, and to govern our lives. Jesus 
said, "I came not to do Mine own will, but the will of 
Him that sent Me"— "everything written in the Book." 
And so it is to be with us. We must abide in Him, walk 

R5447 : page 126 

in Him, and be willing to do "everything written in the 
Book"— not merely forcing ourselves to it, saying, I will 
take this course; but saying, "I delight to do Thy will, O 
my God; Thy law is written in my heart."— Psa. 40:7,8. 

PROOFS OF SONSHIP 

All who have accepted Christ claim, in a general way 
at least, to be sons of God, that Christ is their Elder 
Brother, and that they belong to this great family that 
God is selecting from the sons of men. They consider 
themselves heirs with Christ to the great Kingdom to 
come. But not all who claim to be sons of God are such. 
A great many are making this claim. Statistics tell us 
that there are four hundred millions of professed Christians; 
but we cannot think that many of these four hundred 
millions are sons of God. The Apostle Paul calls our 
attention to the fact that since we cannot read the hearts 
we must go by the professions which others make by 
mouth and by conduct. But professions of the mouth are 
not to be taken as final. We know that those who are 
sons of God will be led by His Spirit. "As many as are 
led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God." 

But what is the Spirit of God? Primarily it is the 
spirit of Truth, the spirit of holiness, the spirit of justice, 
the spirit of love. And as many as are God's children, 
begotten of His Holy Spirit, will make some manifestation 
of their harmony with this general Spirit of God. 

R5447 : page 127 

If they are, therefore, walking in unrighteousness, making 
no endeavor to stem the tendencies of sin in themselves, 
if they prefer error rather than Truth, their fruits 
condemn them; for God stands for Truth, and was 
exemplified in our Lord Jesus. 

Whoever, therefore, has the Spirit of God, is willing 
to sacrifice himself that he may serve the Truth. He 
loves the Truth, and will manifest this fact by the spirit 
of love and zeal. Satan is the personification of sin, 
envy, hatred, malice, strife. Righteousness, love, joy, 
peace, are fruits of the Holy Spirit. Wherever we see 
the works of the Devil manifested we have reason to 
question that such a one is a child of God. The spirit of 
envy, the spirit of hatred, the spirit of malice, the spirit of 
opposition to the Truth, the spirit of unrighteousness— 
these are to be repudiated and overcome by all who would 
be sons of God. 



Yet despite one's best efforts, he might still find in 
his flesh tendencies to sin which would give him a great 
deal of trouble. He may take courage from the assurances 
of the Scriptures that the Lord looketh on the 
heart. Likewise in regard to others, we should judge according 
to the endeavor, the intention. Wherever the 
Spirit of God is, there is the spirit of love. And this 
spirit will make one wish to make reparation, if he has 
done wrong or been in error. To do so shows that it was 
not his spirit, his will to do wrong, but that he was merely 
entrapped for a time. But one who continues to do according 
to his natural tendencies, with no evidence of 
going in the right direction and of serving the Truth, has 
reason to doubt that he is a child of God. 

HOW WE CAN WALK AS HE WALKED 

The Apostle's thought seems to be that those who profess 
to be the Lord's followers, profess to be Christians, 
should see to it that their walk in life is in harmony with 
their profession. The word disciple signifies one who 
follows— as a pupil follows his teacher. We recognize 
Christ as our Redeemer and also as our Pattern, our Instructor, 
in the glorious things which the Father has invited 
us to share with our Savior. If, therefore, we say 
that we are in Him, this profession should be borne out 
by our walk in life. We should walk as He walked. 

But we are not perfect— how can this be done? The 
answer is that we "are not in the flesh, but in the spirit." 
God does not look upon our imperfect flesh. As New 
Creatures we are not fleshly beings, but spiritual. The 
Apostle is in our text speaking of that walk that the 
Master had after He made consecration. He walked in 
this way three and a half years. It was a walk, not according 
to the flesh, but according to the Spirit. And 
so with us. We are walking, not according to the flesh, 
but according to the New Creature. We reckon ourselves 
dead according to the flesh, and the Lord so reckons us. 
If, then, we are dead to the flesh, we are not to walk according 
to the desires of the flesh. 

We are to walk as our Lord walked, in our general 
deportment. We are to love everything that is good and 
to avoid everything that is evil. We are to walk as nearly 
as possible in the footsteps of our Lord and Exemplar. 
We cannot in an imperfect body walk up to all the perfection 
of Jesus, who was perfect in His flesh as well as 
in His spirit. But we are to walk as He walked— in the 
same path, in the same direction, toward the same glorious 
goal toward which He walked. And so doing, faithful 
day by day, we shall by His grace attain the same exceeding 
great reward. 



R5447 : page 127 



SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
ORDAINED A MINISTER OF CHRIST 



Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

In view of the fact that on every hand our enemies are 
opposing us on the ground that our public speakers are not 
ordained, and that more opposition may be aroused along 
this line in the future, might it not be well for the Society 
to give some formal recognition of the Lord's ordination of 
the brothers who speak in public? 

The majority of our Pilgrims, when asked, "When were 
you ordained?" do not have a ready answer. They may give 
the date of their consecration, but while we understand the 
matter to our own satisfaction, this is not satisfactory to the 
inquirer, who usually entertains the thought that since we 
have not been regularly (?) ordained, we are not safe teachers 
for them to listen to. 

We realize that here at Bethel, we have by far the strongest 
Theological School, with daily studies and recitations, in 
the whole world. I read only today in the Christian Herald, 
a challenging query as to how many of us were regularly ordained, 
where we got our education, how many of us had any 
understanding of Greek or Latin, etc. Now, all of us understand 
Greek better than most orthodox (?) ministers; and if 
we could have some formal recognition of our ordination, 
perhaps referring it to the date of our individual consecration, 
I believe it would serve to stop the mouths of many, 
and would give the Truth much impetus in the public opinion, 
which would well serve the purpose in gathering the Lord's 
wheat. Even in our newspaper advertising it would be a 
telling point to state the time when our more prominent 
speakers were ordained. It seems to be a question which the 
public mind is always asking, and will never be satisfied till 
answered. In my colporteur work I sold the books twice as 
easily when known to be a minister. Others have had the same 
experience. 

I submit this merely as a suggestion, dear friends, and 
shall know that your decision, whether pro or con, is the 
Lord's will. With continued love and prayers, I am, 

Your brother in the Glorious Harvest work, which we all 
love so much, R. G. JOLLY. 

THINKS PHOTO-DRAMA WONDERFUL 



MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

My purpose in writing is to let you know of my strong appreciation 
of the PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION. Throughout it 
is a wonderful production; surpassing even my most sanguine 
expectations. 



I have met many Truth friends who have seen the DRAMA 
—at Cincinnati, Toledo, and Indianapolis— all of whom were 
delighted with and benefited by it. They expressed the opinion 
that the DRAMA will edify the Truth friends, as well as greatly 
enlighten and favorably influence others. The writer fully 
shares their opinion. 

I wish all who are interested in the Cause we so much 
love could see the production. I feel sure it would increase 
their love for the Truth, and also their interest in the work 
generally. I was very much in favor of the project before 
seeing the exhibition; but I am much more so since. 

It is marvelous to think of the thousands of people who 
are, through the PHOTO-DRAMA, hearing the precious Gospel 
preached, every day and night. I never heard the Gospel 
preached more plainly and impressively than it is for at least 
an hour, at each exhibition of the PHOTO-DRAMA. I presume 
that while the slide pictures are being exhibited, and the 
lecturing is in progress, at least an hour is occupied. And the 
motion pictures are so beautiful, realistic and instructive! 

Apparently, a large majority of those who witness the production 
are very favorably impressed thereby. In my humble 
judgment, the PHOTO-DRAMA is the most successful project 
the Society has ever inaugurated. 

Yours in Christian love and service, FRANK DRAPER. 



I.B.S.A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 
FOR MONTH OF MAY 
Questions from Manual on Series Second of 
"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 
STUDIES II. AND III., VOL. II. 

Week of May 3...Q. 32 to 38 Week of May 10.. .Q. 39 to 46 

17...Q. 47 to 53 " " " 24.. .Q. 1 to 7 

Week of May 3 1-Q. 8 to 14 

Question Manuals on Vol. II., STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 
5c. each, or 50c. per doz., postpaid. 



page 129 

VOL. XXXV MAY 1 No. 9 

A. D. 1914-A. M. 6042 



CONTENTS 

Views From The Watch Tower 131 

Forebodings of the Duke of Bedford 131 

Proper Perspective of the Situation 131 

The Nations Hurrying to Armageddon 132 

We Fulfil Our Promise 132 

Waters of Euphrates Drying Up 133 

"Now is Our Salvation Nearer" 134 

Chronology Based Upon Faith 134 

A Scripture to Be Fulfilled 135 

Who Commits the Sin Unto Death-Part II 136 

Esau's Loss a Warning to the Church 136 

Who Commits the Unpardonable Sin 136 

"Where Are the Nine?" 139 

Messiah's Kingdom to Be Invisible 140 

"Days of the Son of Man" 141 

Saints on the Housetop 142 

Creation Photo-Drama 142 

Memorial Supper Celebration 143 

Renew Requests for Pilgrim Visits 143 

page 130 

FOR SCANDINAVIAN FRIENDS 

We learn that the Svenska Folkets Tiding has contracted 
with the Newspaper Syndicate for the regular publication of 
a full report of the Pastor Russell Sermons and the Brooklyn 
Tabernacle Bible Studies. This should prove a means of 
interesting some of your friends in Present Truth. A six-months' 
subscription may do it. The price is one dollar a 
year. Send your subscriptions to us. 



"SCRIPTURE STUDIES "-POCKET EDITION 

We have the Karatol edition of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
in stock, 25c. each, postpaid. 

We have a new edition also on thin paper, red cloth binding, 
35c. per volume— $2.00 per set of six, in neat cloth holder. 
The set with THE WATCH TOWER for one year to any address, 
$2.65. 

Colporteur rates the same as on our regular cloth edition. 



1914- VOLUNTEER LITERATURE READY-1914 



All Classes desirous of engaging in the regular volunteering 
are invited to send in through their Secretaries information 
as to quantity of literature desired and proper place of 
shipment— not forgetting to mention the population of their 
city, and, if suburban towns are to be included, their population 
also. The quantity of literature should rarely exceed in 
number one-sixth of the population of the district, to give one 
paper to each English-speaking family. This Volunteer literature 
is provided free, including delivery charges. It furnishes 
a door of opportunity for the service of the Gospel 
to those who are seeking one. 



CLINTON AND COLUMBUS CONVENTIONS. 

The PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION will be presented each 
evening at both of these Conventions. Baptism symbolization 
opportunities at Clinton will be on June 29th, and at Columbus 
June 30th and July 3d. 

Brother Russell will be at Clinton on June 28th, 29th and 
30th; and at Columbus on July 3d, 4th and 5th. 

The Columbus Convention will hold over for July 7th to 
give three full presentations of the DRAMA there. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR JUNE 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. 
At the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns 
for June follow: (1) 179; (2) 101; (3) 25; (4) 94; (5) 43; 
(6) 72; (7) 305; (8) 160; (9) 47; (10) 28; (11) 259; (12) 155; 
(13) 274; (14) 129; (15) 22; (16) 333; (17) 307; (18) 170; (19) 4; 
(20) 376; (21) 283; (22) 38; (23) 279; (24) 130; (25) 113; 
(26) 178; (27) 12; (28) 188; (29) 77; (30) 240. 



R5448 :page 131 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
"IN UGLY TEMPER" 
FOREBODINGS OF THE DUKE OF BEDFORD 



IN A LETTER of apology for absence from 
the dinner of the Bletchley (Bedfordshire) 
Working Men's Unionist Association, the 
Duke of Bedford says: 
"The prospects with which 1914 opens 



are nowhere encouraging. Unrest prevails 

in every quarter of the habitable globe— 

from China to Peru. The difficulties of 

Great Britain are as great as, if not greater 

than, those of her neighbors, and her means 

of defense are less, for her Constitution has been deliberately 

destroyed to serve the cause of party. 

"The House of Lords is only retained to supply the 
Radical Party with money for electioneering purposes. 
The House of Commons is muzzled and gagged, and the 
salaried representatives of the constituencies serve the 
electorate or earn their salaries, not with their brains or 
their judgment, but with their legs; they walk into the 
voting lobbies whenever the Government Whips give 
them their orders. Legislation is a mere question of shoe 
leather. 

"When constitutional safeguards are swept away and 
no guidance is forthcoming, the only method of expressing 
discontent which remains is civil war. This is what 
we are now finding. 

"Now a new danger looms before us. It looks as if 
the problem of naval defense would be shirked, that a 
body of men led by persons with ostentatiously German 
names may continue the support of the Radical Party. And 
meanwhile by assiduous appeals to envy, hatred and 
greed, Ministers have spoiled the temper of the nation. 
The nation is not only out of temper, but in an ugly 
temper."— London Daily Mail. 



The foregoing shows some of the troubles of worldly 
princes and aristocracy. We cannot avoid a feeling of 
deep sympathy for the aristocracy in their present conditions. 
Jesus long ago foretold the conditions of our 
day, saying, especially of the rich and titled, "Men's 
hearts failing them for fear and for looking forward to 
the things coming upon the earth"— upon society. Special 
privileges have so long been enjoyed by the aristocracy 
that it is only natural that they should feel that 
these privileges are theirs by Divine right. 

On the other hand, the world of mankind are learning 
how the control of the earth came into the possession 
of so few people in olden times. They are learning 
that in less civilized times the better educated and more 
influential gradually gathered property and titles into 
their own hands. These have been transferred to their 
children from generation to generation, and laws have 
been framed which recognize their titles, until now any 
other laws which in any measure abrogate the title, or 
limit the special privileges, are felt to be unjust, ungodly 
—robbery. 

Much could be said on both sides of the question. It 
is ours to consider God's view of the situation and the 
relationship of the whole to the Golden Rule— the Divine 
Law. Viewing matters from this standpoint, the majority 



can agree that even if there was an excuse in 

the past for the usurpation of titles, privileges and possessions 

of land, those privileges would cease with 

changed conditions. In other words, if there was in the 

past a time when the masses of the people were too ignorant 

or too superstitious to appreciate self-government 

and to exercise it properly, and if at that time it was in 

the interest of all that the land and the privileges were 

seized by the more fit of the race for the general welfare, 

this did not mean that matters must so continue forever. 

It did mean, rather, that with general education and general 

fitness for self-government all such privileges should 

be relinquished or abrogated. 

THE PROPER PERSPECTIVE OF THE SITUATION 

To state the matter in different terms: If the educated 
in times past believed that they followed the Golden 
Rule in seizing land and authority, the same Golden Rule 
would demand that their power be used in the public interest 
and welfare— that the public be educated and that, 
as the masses became capable of self-control, power and 
authority should be gradually delivered to them. The 
whole question, according to this standard of the Golden 
Rule, would therefore be, Have the masses yet attained 
that degree of development which would permit them to 
handle their own, or should the aristocracy continue to 
handle it for them under the plea that the public is not 
competent— not wise enough to manage its own estate? 

Whenever the majority of the people reach the conclusion 
that they are competent to manage their estate, 
and whenever they learn that God gave the earth and its 
fulness not to the few, but to the many— then the people 
will take up their own inheritance and exercise their own 
control; and in that proportion the titles of lords, nobles, 
dukes, kings and emperors will be merely empty reminders 
of a darker time. Thenceforth, either by Parliaments 
or Congresses, the people will manage their own affairs, 
using the ballot for that purpose. 

This condition of things, which has been coming upon 
the world gradually, is evidently quite right, quite in accord 

R5448 : page 132 

with the Golden Rule. True, it would have appeared 
nobler had the titled aristocracy voluntarily surrendered 
to the people their rights. But we must remember that 
all mankind are innately selfish, and hence disposed to 
look upon matters from the standpoint of their own personal 
interest and that of their families. It has been fortunate 
for the world's peace that this turning of their 
rights over to the people has been proceeding gradually, 
rather than by violent revolution. Inch by inch the people 
have been taking back their rights, in proportion as 
they became intelligent enough to appreciate them. Perhaps 
sometimes in their zeal, they desired too much or 



sought to grasp too much, or at least sought to grasp 
more than they were qualified to use wisely. 

No wonder if many of the aristocracy feel deeply 
grieved, as does the Duke of Bedford. No wonder if 
many of them have dark forebodings respecting the future. 
No wonder if it seems to them as if justice is 
being violated. They have lost the proper perspective of 
the situation. They fail to see that as elder brothers to 
the remainder of the race, they should recognize that the 
masses are no longer "like dumb, driven cattle." They 
should recognize that a great awakening has come within 
the last century, and they should be as anxious to turn 
over the inheritance to their brethren as the latter are 
anxious to receive it. 

THE NATIONS HURRYING TO ARMAGEDDON 

The political battle which has been in progress in 
Great Britain in recent years, and especially within the 
past two years, is exciting the astonishment of the world. 
Kings and princes and nobles are in alarm, fearful of the 
results. The Bible alone makes the situation clear. It 
alone shows us that the wonderful changes of our day 
are incidental to the transfer of the kingdoms of this 
world to become the Kingdom of God's dear Son. 

We should not be misunderstood, however: We have 
no thought that the change of parties or of party leaders 
or of party policies in Great Britain, or in any other nation, 
will make that nation a holy nation, a member of 
the Kingdom of God. Indeed, we have no reason to believe 
that Socialists as a whole would or could give the 
world the blessing of perfect earthly government, establish 
human rights, etc. On the contrary, we are to remember 
that while kings and princes have ruled sometimes 
with a heavy hand, nevertheless, in recent years at 
least, they have found it necessary to give the people and 
their interests greater consideration than ever before; 
and that their experience and their education doubtless 
qualify them above the average of their fellows for the 
management of large questions of national import. 

Besides, the sudden change would involve not only 
great hardship to these lords of the land, but probably 
great distress and hardship to the masses as well. Indeed, 
this is just what the Bible points out to us. We 
are living in the time of Christ's presence. The selection 
of the Church of Christ to be the Bride-Consort in the 
Kingdom is nearly completed. The Kingdom will, therefore, 
soon be established. But those possessed of the 
power and authority, not realizing this, are holding fast 
to all that was seized by their forefathers under different 
conditions. 

To our understanding, the Bible teaches that this conflict 
of interests is about to precipitate a great Time of 
Trouble, the like of which never was before. (Daniel 12:1.) 
Nobody wants the trouble, everybody will be injured 
by it, and yet everybody is rushing toward it. Both 



the aristocracy and the masses are goaded on by fear. 
The former fear the loss of their earthly all; the latter 
perceive that the money of the world, and the land, the 
basis of all wealth, are in possession of the aristocracy. 
The masses realize that, with the bountiful blessings 
which God has been pouring out upon the world during 
the past century through increase of knowledge and invention, 
the world is becoming fabulously rich; and that 
these riches are gravitating toward the same hands that 
control the land. They are fearful that if they do not 
improve the opportunities now passing, they or their children 
will in time again become slaves or serfs. Hence 
the turmoil of speech and the conflict between classes, 
which are hurrying us toward the vortex of the great 
Armageddon.— Revelation 16:16. 

MAN'S EXTREMITY GOD'S OPPORTUNITY 

Although we are powerless to hinder either party, we 
are deeply interested in both, and sympathetic toward 
both; our own best consolation and the best which we can 

R5449 : page 132 

offer to either party of the strife is that which we get 

from the Bible. It tells us that in the darkest hour, when 

human passion will have reached its climax in anarchy, 

there still will be hope— the brightest of all hopes. Following 

the dark hour of trouble will come the glorious 

sunrise of the Millennial Kingdom, scattering earth's ignorance 

and superstition. Then the Kingdom, taking a 

firm hold upon the race, will properly conduct humanity 

to the full heights of perfection lost in Eden, but redeemed 

for all at Calvary. With such a hope we may 

well possess our souls in peace, awaiting so glorious an 

outcome of the Divine Plan. 

Although we are not to be active in the strife on either 
side, we cannot be without deep interest in both sides; 
and we must, to the extent of our opportunities and influence, 
tell the good tidings of the coming Kingdom to as 
many of the warriors in that battle as may have the 
hearing ear. To whatever extent they shall be able to 
hear, to believe, they will have blessing, peace, comfort. 
It is the portion of the Church to be faithful to the principles 
of the Divine character and to make known the 
Divine Program, to bind up all the broken-hearted with 
the blessed Message of Divine mercy and to teach all the 
lesson of patient endurance, loyalty and faithfulness. It 
is ours, as the Apostle says, to "do good unto all men, but 
especially unto them who are of the Household of Faith." 

Whether or not the climax of this trouble should be 
reached in 1915, is not for us to say. We should even 
have no wish on the subject, except that God's will shall 
be done. As we note the rapid changes which have taken 
place in the public sentiment in Great Britain within the 
past year, we cannot doubt that if the Gentile Times expire 



with the close of this year, 1914, a very short period 

might accomplish the full inauguration of the Day of 

Wrath, in which, as foreshown in Bible imagery, the ecclesiastical 

heavens and the political earth will be consumed 

in a wild revolution of human passion, which will 

thoroughly melt, or disintegrate, the elements composing 

the present order of things— the social element, the political 

element, the financial element, the ecclesiastical element. 

We know, however, that the great God of Love is 

so wise that He has known long in advance every feature 

of the great conflict and conflagration; and that His arrangements 

are ample for the arrest of the trouble in due 

time, by the establishment of the Kingdom of His dear 

Son with great and glorious power. 

WE FULFIL OUR PROMISE 

We had expected that if the Gentile Times should end 
with the present year, this would surely mean that all the 
Bride class would participate in the First Resurrection 
change from earthly conditions to Heavenly conditions before 
the end of the present year. Although this was not 
stated positively, it was pointed out to be the logical conclusion. 

R5449 : page 133 

Now it does not look so. We see Scriptures 

which are not yet fulfilled and which, we are convinced, 

could not find accomplishment before the end of this year. 

Of course, our conviction along this line is no stronger 
than it previously was in the opposite direction. Of 
course, with God all things are possible. Of course, the 
Scriptures most distinctly tell us that the catastrophe will 
come suddenly— "as travail upon a woman with child"— at 
a moment as unexpected to the mother as to others. Hence 
it is not impossible that all of our expectations may be 
realized before the end of this year. We consider, however, 
that this is highly improbable. We desire all of our 
readers to know this, whatever influence it may have upon 
their plans and arrangements. 

As for the Editor, he will be just as pleased to have 
the Lord's will done in the one way as in the other. Indeed, 
if allowed to have a voice in the deciding of the 
matter, we would feel afraid to exercise such a privilege. 
The poet has expressed the thought, saying: 
"We are afraid to touch 
Things which involve so much." 

If the year shall pass without a special manifestation 
of Divine favor toward the Church in the way of resurrection 
change from earthly to spiritual nature, we shall 
know that we erred in judgment in respect to the time 
when this glorious event might be expected. The great 
fact would still remain, however, that the hope of the 
Church of God is the resurrection change, "when this 
mortal shall put on immortality"— "changed in a moment, 
in the twinkling of an eye." If it be the Divine arrangement 



that we should remain longer this side the veil, we 
doubt not that He will have some service for us to perform 
here. And whether our service be on this side of 
the veil or on the other side, we should be fully content, 
knowing that He is too wise to err; nor should we lament 
our misunderstandings. Rather, we should be glad and 
rejoice, and continue active in the Divine service, as glad 
to serve on one side of the veil as on the other, with the 
assurance that God's will is being done in us. 

There is still a possibility that we have made no mistake 
in respect to the time, but have erred in respect to 
the things expected. For instance, it may be that the 
Times of the Gentiles do expire with the present year, 
but that the Lord will not dispossess them nor take from 
them their earthly dominion so quickly as we had anticipated. 
Considering that they have been in power for 
2,520 years, dispossession in one year might seem very 
sudden— indeed, to accomplish it in five, or ten, or twenty 
years, might seem not an unreasonable time. 



WATERS OF EUPHRATES DRYING UP 
REVELATION 16:12. 
CHURCH LIFE IN GERMANY 

Germany is being overwhelmed with a deluge of infidelity, 
unparalleled in its entire history. The Monist 
Federation is endeavoring to draw together the cultured 
strata of the people into a solid phalanx against Christianity. 
The Social Democrats are pushing the general 
masses into a fanatical hatred of Church and State, and 
in the pulpits a Liberalism is spreading, which is almost 
utterly devoid of the Spirit of the Gospel. 

While in believing circles earnest efforts are being 
put forth for individual salvation, and Mission Work is 
being done amongst the people, to stem the destructive 
tide, it becomes more evident every day, that "the State 
Church is doomed in her struggle with Infidelity." 

General strike against the Church is the latest slogan. 
The "No-Creeders" (Monists) in league with the 
Socialists, convened mass meetings in Berlin, Brunswick 
and Saxony, in which every means of incitation was employed 
in an appeal toward a secession from the State 
Church. At these meetings over 1,300 persons signed a 
declaration announcing their intention to secede from 
the Church. Four thousand more followed, and according 
to judicial court-records received towards the end of 
December, 17,000 secessions took place in December up 
to the 23d, and the day after Christmas 8,000 more announced 
their intention. These are alarming figures! 

To the Socialists the Church Boycott is a political 
campaign issue. They aim at depriving the Church of 
her revenues and thus result in her overburdening the 



State. 

The following press reports may serve as a typical 
illustration of the mode of procedure in such meetings. 
Said Dr. Liebknecht: "The Church (especially the Prussian 
State Church) is not a religious, but a purely political 
Institution. She constitutes a blasphemy against the 
claims of early Christianity. She does not aim at the 
closer Union and Development of man with man, but is 
a conscious instrument of the Ruling Class for the oppression 
of the Masses, and blandly supports the Capitalistic 
Element under the protection of the State. As such 
the Church is additionally a bulwark of militarism. On 
the other hand, the so-called Christian Prussian State is 
merely a state of Classes, reared upon the canonization 
of those 'treasures which moth and rust corrupt.' To belittle 
this Prussian State is therefore our aim. One means 
to that end is a strike en masse, which is inevitable. 

"In the meantime, however, the 'Church Boycott' is a 
still more convenient and none the less effective means 
as a political onslaught. Thereby the Church can eventually 
be starved financially. Whoever has severed with 
the Church at heart, and continues to remain in her, is 
a hypocrite. Come out of the Prussian Military Church! 
Away from the Church and thus from the Prussian Feudal 
State!" Thundering applause followed this reasoning. 

The second Socialist speaker of the day summed up 
the matter thus: "Whoever does not secede from the 
Church, with which he has nothing in common, is a 
scoundrel! Every Socialist must secede, for the Church 
combats Socialism by every available means." 

The Post writes: "We attended one of the twelve 
Mass Meetings convened by the 'No Creeders.' We looked 
forward beforehand to an uncomfortable evening. Nor 
shall we say anything respecting the vitriolic remarks of 
the two speakers, who had not a single commendatory 
word for the Church, and seemed to know only Clerics, 
but no Ministers. The painful fact was more than apparent, 
that Socialism is merely another name for Infidelity. 
But one thing really horrified us: Such a degree 
of vulgarity, such degeneracy of mind, we had not 
deemed possible! Without exception, every one who even 
by vague allusion, ventured to take a stand for his Church 
was howled down, hissed from the rostrum and subjected 
to filthy invectives. While appealing to the true, inner 
sentiments of man, supposing that every man must at 
least hold a faith in something higher, 'Whew'! burst from 
a thousand throats, piercing whistles were given, and loud 
hoots and guffaws greeted such an accession. It seemed 
as if one were in an assembly of criminals, and not 
amongst men of feeling and sense. 

"To illustrate: When a minister ascended the platform, 
the following was heard, 'He looks it'! 'Old Sky-pilot'! 
And from another part of the hall the same evening 
we heard the following words aimed at the ministers: 
'Damned Rags'! 'Pig -priests'! A gentleman who 
interrupted was yelled at 'Rous mit the Parsonface'! At 



one time a vulgar interjection reached our ears, one from 
the 'underworld,' wholly unfit for print. 

R5450 : page 134 

"The ministers had been invited. A few courageous 
men ran the gauntlet, and undertook the difficult task of 
obtaining a hearing amidst these roaring waves. Then 
one of them ascended the rostrum, a spirited character, 
whose mild facial expression alone invited reconciliation; 
with quiet, well-weighed words (Pastor Le Seur from 
Gross Lichterfeld, Berlin), attempted to make clear to 
the assembly the seriousness of the problem, with which 
unscrupulous agitators were here playing football. He 
frankly admitted that the State Church manifested serious 
faults. He withdrew amidst a flood of derision, ridicule 
and insults. Then came a woman of the working 
class. She yelled to the ministers, who stood close to the 
speaker's chair: 'I can believe in ten thousand devils in 
this world, but not in your God, Sir Pastor!' And the 
masses yelled applause." 

In the Vossische Zeitung, Prof. Oswald, President of 
the Monist Federation, expressed the aim which he pursues 
in the Secessional Movement, as follows: "Thus far 
all attempts for emancipation from Church Rule through 
Science have been confined to the comparatively small 
'Upper Strata' of the cultured. The present movement is 
characterized, in that it takes hold, not only of the influential, 
but an exceedingly large number of our people, 
amongst Organized Labor. If the present movement assumes 
the proportion of an avalanche, which is very probable, 
in a short time it will be no more a question of 
thousands or tens of thousands, but of millions." 

In an article, "Decay of the State Church," Die Welt 
writes in conclusion: "The rule of the 'Liberals' incites 
the 'Positives' to leave the State Church. While on the 
other side, Tndifferents' are leaving in ever-increasing 
numbers. As a result, we may finally reach a state of 
things in Berlin, when the State Church will collapse."— 
Translation from Der Apologete, Cincinnati, Ohio. 



R5450 : page 134 

"NOW IS OUR SALVATION NEARER" 

ST. PAUL WROTE, "Now is our salvation 

nearer than when we first believed." (Romans 13:11.) 

God's people of today are 

surely justified in expressing the same sentiments. 

The salvation of the Church 

through the glorious "change" of the First 

Resurrection is nearing every day, we are 

sure, even though we do not know exactly 

how many days still remain before that 



glorious consummation. So also the world's 
salvation— the world's rescue from Satan, sin and death 
—is nearing every day, notwithstanding the fact that we 
cannot say positively just what day or hour Satan will 
be fully bound for a thousand years and the Messianic 
blessings begin to supplant and to roll away the curse 
which for six thousand years has rested as a great pall 
over humanity— a dark night, soon to give place to the 
glorious Millennial Day and the bright-shining of Messiah's 
Kingdom. 

Nothing could shake our faith in the Divine Plan of 
the Ages epitomized in God's great Oath-bound Covenant 
made with Abraham, confirmed unto Isaac and Jacob 
and Israel. There is absolutely no ground for questioning 
that all the families of the earth will eventually 
be blessed. There is no room to doubt that God has laid 
a broad foundation for that blessing in the sending of 
His Son, who became man's Redeemer. There is no reason 
for questioning the fact that the Church for more 
than eighteen centuries has been called out of the world 
to be sharer with her Lord in the sufferings of this present 
time and in the glories that are to follow. 

There is absolutely no question about the fact that 
"faithful is He who called us, who also will do it." We 
have His promise that "if we are children, then we are 
heirs— heirs of God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ" 
our Lord. We have the Divine Word that Jesus the 
Head and the Church His Body, Jesus the Bridegroom 
and the Church His Bride, constitute the antitypical 
Spiritual Seed of Abraham, through whom, when glorified, 
God's blessing will be poured upon humanity. "If 
ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's Seed, and heirs 
according to the Promise" (Galatians 3:29), which 
promise reads, "In thee and in thy Seed shall all the 
families of the earth be blessed."— Genesis 12:3; 28:14. 

There is absolutely no ground for Bible students to 
question that the consummation of this Gospel Age is 
now even at the door, and that it will end as the Scriptures 
foretell in a great Time of Trouble such as never 
was since there was a nation. We see the participants 
in this great crisis banding themselves together under 
the leadership of Capital and Trusts, Labor and Trade 
Unions. The great crisis, the great clash, symbolically 
represented as a fire, that will consume the ecclesiastical 
heavens and the social earth, is very near. 

But when we have said this we have said about all 
that it is safe or proper for us to say. We have never 
claimed inspiration nor prophetic vision. All that we 
have ever claimed is that "Wonderful things in the Bible 
we see," and that the dearest is the love of the Heavenly 
Father and our Heavenly Lord Jesus, and that the time 
for the establishment of the Kingdom is very nigh. 

CHRONOLOGY BASED UPON FAITH 

We remind our readers here that in these columns 



and in the six volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
we have set forth everything appertaining to the times 
and seasons in a tentative form; that is to say, not with 
positiveness, not with the claim that we knew, but merely 
with the suggestion that "thus and so" seems to be the 
teaching of the Bible. The Berean Lessons are running 
now in Volume Second of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
in order that all of our readers may have fresh in mind 
the Bible chronology as furnished there in Chapter II. 
We have pointed out that the chronology is the basis of 
nearly all the suggestions of prophetic interpretations 
set forth in STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. We have 
pointed out there that the chronology of the Bible is not 
stated with great clearness, that fractions of years are 
ignored and that there are certain breaks in it. 

We have suggested that ordinarily the chronology 
would be quite insufficient as evidence and that our acceptance 
of it is based on faith— on the supposition that 
God wished to give us a chronology, wished that we 
might have some knowledge of the times and seasons, 
and yet wished that it might be so obscure and indefinite 
as to require faith on the part of His people. We 
pointed out further that we could not exercise that faith 
were it not for the fact that this chronology seems to 
be interwoven and interlocked with numerous prophecies 
—and these prophecies, in turn, interwoven and interlocked 
with other prophecies and fulfilments not dependent 
upon the chronology. Having thus set the matter 
before the minds of our readers, we asked each to judge 
for himself as to how much faith he would repose in the 
chronology and in the application of the prophecies connected 
with it. We announced that to our own mind it 
seemed reasonable to accept the chronology and the 
prophecies from this viewpoint. 

Having laid this broad foundation, having put all of 

R5450 : page 135 

our readers on notice to use their own judgment, we proceeded 
to use this chronology in connection with the various 
prophecies, drawing various hypotheses and conclusions. 
We did not in any case remind the reader 
afresh that all these conclusions were based upon the 
chronology, and that the chronology is admittedly supported 
by faith. We assumed that all intelligent readers 
realized this, and that all such were using their own 
judgment, not ours, in respect to the chronology and in 
respect to the applications of the prophecies along the 
lines of that chronology. We ask you all still to do this. 

The chronology still seems as strong as ever to the 
Editor. He sees nothing to alter or amend. Nevertheless, 
the Editor wishes to put all THE WATCH TOWER 
readers on notice, as he already has done twice this year, 
that to his judgment it now seems unreasonable to expect 
during the present year all that he had anticipated, 
as suggested previously. He sees no possibility that the 



Church Federation will reach its climax of organization 
and power, and then reach its fall, during the remaining 
months of this year. And he surely looks for this to occur 
prior to the full ending of this Gospel Age and the 
glorification of the last members of the Church, which 
is the Body of Christ. 

This does not prove the chronology wrong, nor does 
it prove that the Times of the Gentiles do not end with 
this year. It may be that Gentile Times will end before 
the ecclesiastical oligarchy attains sacerdotal power. We 
must wait and see. The Lord is still our Shepherd. No 
good thing will He withhold from those who follow Him 
as His sheep, harkening to His Voice and ignoring the 
voice of strangers. His promises will stand sure, and 

R5451 :page 135 

these, as all other things, shall work together for good 
to those who love Him— the called ones according to 
His purpose.— Romans 8:28. 

A SCRIPTURE TO BE FULFILLED 

The Lord declares through the Prophet David (Psalm 149:5-9): 
"Let the saints be joyful in glory: let them 
sing aloud upon their beds. Let the high praises of God 
be in their mouth, and a two-edged sword in their hand; 
to execute vengeance upon the heathen, and punishments 
upon the people; to bind their kings with chains and their 
nobles with fetters of iron; to execute upon them the 
judgments written. This honor have all His saints." 
Heretofore we had not questioned that this description 
of the glory of the saints applied to them beyond the veil 
—beyond the completion of the First Resurrection. But 
a more careful investigation of the words forewarns us 
that we may not be too sure in such a supposition. We 
suggest as a bare possibility that a time may come when 
a part of the saints will be in glory beyond the veil, and 
when those on this side the veil in the flesh will enter 
very fully into the joys of their Lord and into participation 
in His work. 

If we interpret the statement, "let them sing aloud 
upon their beds," in harmony with the significance of 
similar statements elsewhere in the Scriptures, the expression 
would signify that the saints in glory will be 
telling the good tidings of great joy— singing, presenting 
in melodious cadences the messages which none can learn 
except the one hundred and forty-four thousand. But 
the word beds here, in harmony with usage elsewhere in 
the Bible, would signify a rest of faith— that these saints 
were at rest in the midst of conditions to the contrary. 
This could hardly be the case if the reference be to those 
who have experienced the First Resurrection "change." 
Theirs will not be a rest of faith, but an absolute entering 
into rest. 

Again, while the high praises of God are in their 



mouth they have the two-edged sword in their hand, 
according to the prophecy. This "two-edged sword" is 
evidently, as elsewhere, the Word of God. We can 
scarcely imagine the saints beyond the veil as handling 
the Word of God. On the contrary, this would seem to 
imply that the saints described are on this side of the 
veil, using the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word 
of God, in connection with the showing of high praise 
to God— clearing His name from the dishonor attached 
to it through the ignorance, superstition and creeds of 
the Dark Ages. 

The next statement, that these saints will use the 
"sword" to execute vengeance upon the Gentiles and 
punishments upon the people [of Israel], seems to 
imply that these saints, whatever their condition, will 
be in authority; for the Scriptural injunction to them 
elsewhere is that they should "judge nothing before the 
time." This Psalm, therefore, describes the time when 
they are to do a judging work in respect to the world 
in general, as well as in respect to Israel, God's people. 

A SOMEWHAT SIMILAR SCRIPTURE 

A somewhat similar description of The Christ in 
glory is given us in Revelation 19:11, where He that is 
called "Faithful and True" goes forth in righteousness 
to judge and make war. The Heavenly armies follow 
Him (V.14), and out of His mouth goes a sharp sword, 
that with it He should smite the nations.— V. 15. 

We know not why this prophecy speaks of Heavenly 
armies— in the plural. We merely suggest that the Heavenly 
army may possibly be in two divisions— one on this 
side of the veil, the other on the other side of the veil. 
We are waiting to see, and merely watching while we 
wait, and noting with possibly still greater care our 
Father's Word. We may be sure that if any commission 
be given to the Lord's people to execute judgment this 
side of the veil it would be so explicit as to leave no 
room for doubt, remembering that the Divine requirement 
throughout the Age has been that the saints of 
God shall be subject to the powers that be. Any change 
from this order to the effect that we should execute 
judgments upon them will need to be very positively and 
very clearly understood before being executed. 

Just how the kings and nobles— financial, political 
and social— will be bound, and just what kinds of fetters 
of strength will be used, we may not know until qualified; 
but the outworking of all these will be, as expressed 
in Psalm 149:9, "to execute upon them the vengeance 
written; this honor have all of God's saints." 
Whether we participate in this work on this side of the 
veil or on the other side makes no difference to us. In 
any event, whatever we shall do at any time under the 
guidance of the Lord's Holy Spirit will be in harmony 
with justice and all the time intermingled with sympathetic 
love. None except those possessing and controlled 



by this, the Holy Spirit of God, will ever be permitted 
participation in the Kingdom glories and power. 



"Be patient and submissive— strength is given 
For every step along the weary way. 

And for it all thou'lt render praise to Heaven, 
When dreary night gives place to Perfect Day. 

"Yes, Perfect Day, the day of God eternal, 
When not a shadow shall flit o'er the scene 

In that fair land where all is bright and vernal, 
And we will be with Christ and naught between. 

"Wait, then, dear heart; control thy sad emotion; 

God will subdue each angry wind and wave; 
And when the voyage ends across life's ocean 

Within the haven of sweet rest will save." 



R5451 :page 136 

WHO COMMITS THE SIN UNTO DEATH7-PART II 

BESIDES the two classes of those who are 

saved among the spirit-begotten, there is a 

third class— those who go into the Second 

Death. The "sin unto death" is not only a 

failure to do something which is good, but a 

positive doing of something which is evil. 

The Great Company do not turn to wallow 

in the mire of sin; but this class now spoken 

of is a class of spirit-begotten ones that 

gradually turn from their Covenant until 

they fall away entirely. They become covenant-breakers. 

They have covenanted to lay down their lives, and then 

they break that Covenant, and turn again to sin and to 

hopeless darkness. This course, being a sin against clear 

light and knowledge, is a sin unto death. 

Who or what is it that sins the sin unto death? "Whosoever 
is begotten of God doth not commit sin [wilfully]; 
for His seed remaineth in him, and he cannot sin." That 
which is begotten of God is the new mind, the new will; 
and the person having that new will, desiring to be in 
harmony with God, cannot sin the sin unto death as long 
as he has the mind, the will, the Spirit, of God. As long as 
his will is in harmony with God he cannot sin with wilfulness 
and desire. He cannot be in harmony with sin. The 
new mind cannot consent to sin. If there be a consent to 
sin, it is an evidence that the old mind has taken control. 

We may understand the subject more clearly, perhaps, 
by considering the action of Congress. Suppose that the 
Republicans represent the natural man, and that the Republican 
party had had domination for a long time. Then 



there came a change of administration. There was a new 
sentiment, a new mind, there were new aspirations. Another 
party was in power, and the majority of Congress 
became Democratic. What made the change in the action 
of Congress? It was the new vote. The majority carried 
the day, and decided upon a Democratic form of government 
to control our Legislative Body. But if Congress 
should again change and vote the old way, it would no 
longer be Democratic. 

Just so the New Creature came into control of our 
mortal bodies. Then if the new will should again change, 

R5452 : page 136 

and advocate as before the things of the flesh, the New 
Creature is changed again into the old creature. It is 
not the New Creature, however, that is wallowing in sin. 
The will has committed the sin unto death. THE NEW 
CREATURE IS DEAD. 

ESAU'S LOSS A WARNING TO THE CHURCH 

The illustration used by the Apostle Paul of Esau's 
seeking vainly with tears to regain his lost birthright, has 
a lesson of deep interest for us. It may be applied in one 
way to the condition of the Jewish people, who, having 
lost the great privilege, or opportunity, of becoming the 
Spiritual Israel of God, could not get again, as a people, 
that lost opportunity. That privilege had gone from 
them; they could not recover it, although this would not 
hinder any individual Jew from becoming repentant and 
from becoming personally a member of the Church class. 

However, the Apostle's words (Hebrews 12:16,17) 
seem to apply especially to the Church, and to our danger 
of losing our birthright, as New Creatures. Esau, "for 
one morsel of meat sold his birthright." He typified those 
Christians who barter their glorious inheritance as prospective 
heirs of the Divine nature and the Messianic 
Kingdom for the enjoyment of the fleeting pleasures of 
the present life— "a mess of pottage!" 

WHO COMMITS THE UNPARDONABLE SIN 

As to the general proposition respecting unpardonable 
sin, we have endeavored to point out in STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES that sins are unpardonable in proportion as 
they are wilful. The only ones, however, who can commit 
a fully unpardonable sin are those who have come into 
the Church— who have made a consecration of their life 
and have been begotten of the Holy Spirit. If such should 
fall away, it would be a final matter. 

Before coming into Christ, before receiving the Holy 
Spirit, transgressions might have been committed, but 
these transgressions would not have the same degree of 
responsibility as would those of a consecrated Christian; 
for after one has come into the Lord's family, there is an 



increase of light and knowledge, and therefore there 
comes increased responsibility. The Lord said that those 
who knew His will and did it not would receive many 
stripes; but those who knew it not and did it not would 
receive fewer stripes. Many of the Lord's people have 
committed more or less wilful sins, and have received 
stripes more or less severe. 

The Scriptures tell of a degree of wilful sin that 
would be unto death, and such sin is mentioned as a sin 
against the Holy Spirit. This, we understand, is a sin 
against clear knowledge— a perception of the wrong, and 
a transgression of God's Law wilfully, deliberately. The 
Jews who crucified Christ sinned against light and had 
great responsibility. However, the Apostle Peter says, 
"I wot, brethren, that in ignorance ye did it, as did also 
your rulers." (Acts 3: 17.) They realized not that they 
were crucifying the Lord of glory. But if any begotten 
of the Holy Spirit should join in any similar crime, we 
understand that this would be a different matter. The 
penalty upon such spiritually enlightened ones would be 
nothing short of the Second Death. 

The Apostle Paul points out why the Church can sin 
this sin unto death. He says that if we sin wilfully, after 
we have received a knowledge of the Truth, and have 
tasted the good Word of God, and have been made partakers 
of the Holy Spirit— if then we should fall away 
(not if we should stumble, but if we should completely 
fall away, turning again to sin), it would be like a sow 
that was washed which returned again to wallow in the 
mire. In such case, the transgression would be to the full. 

DID ADAM SIN AGAINST THE HOLY SPIRIT? 

In answering this question we need to have a clear 
conception of what constitutes the Holy Spirit. The 
Scriptural answer is that the Holy Spirit, in one of God's 
intelligent creatures, is the spirit of sonship. The brute 
creation do not have this spirit of sonship. They were 
not made in the moral image of the Creator. The angels 
have the spirit of sonship. Adam was created in the 
moral image and likeness of his Creator— a son of God. 
Therefore we should understand that he had this Spirit of 
the Father, the Spirit of sonship. 

When Adam became disobedient, it meant a forfeiture 
of the Spirit of sonship, and the casting of him out from 
all relationship to the Father. And this relationship to 
God was forfeited for all his posterity. But God has 
made an arrangement by which Adam may come back to 
Him— and all his children may come, if they will. This 
operation of uplifting and restoring mankind is in the 
Scriptures spoken of as an impartation, or pouring out, 
of the Holy Spirit. 

This has not yet come to the world, but is now fulfilled 
in the Church. The Church, accepted to a new 
nature, under certain special conditions are, during this 
Gospel Age, begotten to sonship and are classed as sons 



of God. This receiving of the Church into the relationship 
of sons now, and the blessing of the world later, is 
referred to in the prophecy of Joel. There the Prophet 

R5452 : page 137 

speaks of the Lord as "in those days," pouring out His 
Spirit upon His servants and handmaids; and he declares 
that, afterwards, He will pour out His Spirit upon all 
flesh— that they also may come back into sonship, into 
relationship with God.— Joel 2:28-32; Acts 2:16-18. 
Adam had the Spirit of God. It was received in a 
natural way; and had it not been for the fall, this condition 
would have been maintained, just as with the holy 
angels. These angels, not having forfeited this relationship, 
need not a special impartation of the Holy Spirit. 

COULD ADAM HAVE REPENTED? 

Would it have been possible for Adam to repent, after 
committing this wilful sin? The word repentance may 
be used in two different ways. We frequently use the 
word to mean penitence, sorrow over a fault, etc., but this 
common use of the word is not its full import. It means 
to get back, to return to a former condition; or to take 
an opposite course from that in which one has been 
going. Adam could have repented in the sense of being 
penitent; but he could not have repented in the sense of 
getting back to the place where he was before he sinned. 
That would require the paying the price of his sin by 
another. St. Paul said of Esau, that he was a "profane 
person," and "that afterward, when he would have inherited 
the blessing, he was rejected; for he found no 
place of repentance, though he sought it carefully with 
tears." (Hebrews 12:17.) Esau found plenty of opportunity 
to cry and to be sorry; but he did not find an 
opportunity to get back that which he had forfeited. And 
so with Adam. 

But such inability to repent is entirely different from 
what the Apostle means in speaking of the Church. He 
says, "If we sin wilfully, after that we have received the 
knowledge of the Truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice 
for sins, but a certain looking for of judgment, and 
fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries." 
(Hebrews 10:26,27.) There could be no repentance for 
these. Their hearts have become too hardened. They 
cannot be renewed unto repentance. (Hebrews 6:4-8.) 
But the provision for Adam is God's arrangement that 
Christ should taste death for him. But now, Christ dieth 
no more; therefore, whoever receives once the benefit of 
Christ's death and misuses it, comes under the sentence 
of death a second time, and from this, the Second Death, 
there is no recovery. 

GROUNDLESS FEARS OF SOME 



We believe that the majority of people who think they 
have committed the sin unto death are merely being tormented 
by fears; and that in most cases they need only to 
have better instruction respecting the Lord, His character 
and arrangement. We have had people come to us 
in great terror of mind, believing that they had committed 
the sin unto death, and that there was no hope 
for their reconciliation to God. Sometimes they have 
merely told us of their fears, and we were puzzled; for 
their apparent penitence and regret were favorable signs. 
In some instances, where they have told us the facts of 
the case, we have been able in five minutes to relieve 
them entirely, and to show them that they had altogether 
misunderstood the matter. This gave them much peace. 
One person told us that the trouble had lasted for eighteen 
years. Since then this person has been rejoicing in the 
Lord and serving Him very acceptably. 

But the proper thought is that one could not be 
brought back if he were of the kind that have wilfully and 
deliberately renounced the Lord. God is looking for a 
loyal people; and if any show wilful, intentional disobedience, 
they would not be fit to live at all. However, 
when we see repentance, we may take a hopeful view. 

SIN AGAINST THE HOLY SPIRIT UNFORGIVABLE 

We are to recognize a difference between a sin against 
the Holy Spirit and the sin unto death. In other words, a 
sin against the Holy Spirit may be of various degrees of 
heinousness in the sight of God. We might think of small 
sins and of great sins against the Holy Spirit. No sin 
against the Holy Spirit is forgivable. But some of these 
sins might be punished with stripes, and others with death. 

The Holy Spirit of sonship was not possessed by the 
Pharisees, to whom Jesus directed His words. But they 
had some knowledge of the light of the Holy Spirit in 
our Lord's person. The Holy Spirit was manifest in Him 
in a remarkable degree. The Jews were in different 
degrees of condemnation, in proportion as they had the 
eyes of their understanding open. Those who received a 
little knowledge, and refused that little, had less responsibility 
than those who saw more and refused it. And 

R5453 : page 137 

those who misrepresented Him were not so much sinning 
against Him as against the Holy Spirit in Him. 

Our Lord said that all manner of sin and blasphemy 
would be forgiven men except a sin against the Holy 
Spirit. This would not be forgiven them. The Pharisees, 
not having been received into God's family, nevertheless 
had a large measure of light, and therefore a large measure 
of responsibility. And when they, with much light, 
misrepresented it, this showed a measure of wilfulness on 
their part which, Jesus said, would be sure to have punishment. 
Very few, we may say, at that time, had so full a 



knowledge that they could be culpable in the fullest sense. 
THE SIN OF JUDAS 

The sin unto death is a full sin against the Holy Spirit, 
the sin against full light and knowledge, deliberate, wilful 
sin. We know of only one person who had such 
full light and full opportunity prior to our Lord's resurrection 
and the coming of the Pentecostal blessing; and 
that one person was Judas. His special light consisted in 
that he not only saw Jesus, and saw His miracles, and 
was a witness of His noble character, but Judas had 
himself received of this holy Spirit by impartation from 
Jesus, and had used it, casting out demons, etc. 

Jesus said, "Woe unto that man by whom the Son of 
Man is betrayed! good were it for that man if he had 
never been born!" (Mark 14:21.) Judas had a sufficiency 
of light, not to condemn him merely to stripes and 
punishment, but so to condemn him that he would have no 
further opportunity and hope. He had sinned against 
very great light. Aside from Judas we know of no 
other who has ever sinned the sin unto death, except 
those who may have proven unfaithful after having been 
begotten of the Holy Spirit as New Creatures, and who 
had thus received the mind of God, the Holy Spirit. 

TREATMENT OF SPIRITUAL SICKNESS 

The Scriptures also imply that any who have gotten 
into a condition of very low spirituality might have a 
possibility of recovery, not through themselves, but 
through the ministry of faithful ones of the Royal Priesthood. 
The Apostle James speaks of some who are "sick." 
He says to let such a one call for the elders of the 
Church, and let them pray over him, and that the prayer 
of faith shall recover him to God's fellowship— and he 
adds: "He that converteth [recovereth] a sinner from 
the error of his way shall save a soul from death." 
(James 5:20.) Apparently that soul is in death's throes; 
but if he manifest a sufficiency of faith, and will call in 
some true brethren and humbly confess his sin and ask 
for prayers, he would seem to be taking a step that would 
be considered favorably by the Lord, who might give him 
a further opportunity and trial. 

R5453 : page 138 

Our thought is that, ordinarily, there would be no need 
for the individual to confess his trespasses to any one, 
unless it were to a person who had been trespassed against, 
and to whom, therefore, apologies would be due. Otherwise 
our sins are to be confessed only unto the Lord, unless 
under extreme circumstances, where one had lost 
fellowship with the Lord, and felt that there was nothing 
for him otherwise but complete alienation from God. In 
the latter case, we would advise such a brother to call in 



the Elders of the Church and make a confession, that his 
sin against the Holy Spirit may be canceled. 

LYING TO THE HOLY SPIRIT 

Some have asked: Was the sin of Ananias and 
Sapphira unpardonable? We answer, It was an unpardonable 
sin; for Ananias and Sapphira are both still lying 
dead. They may have some future opportunity, so far 
as we know. It is not for us to determine the degree of 
wilfulness connected with their wrong-doing. The Lord 
only would be able to know, and He has not yet manifested 
His decision. It may be that they were merely cut 
off from the present life, and will have some opportunity 
in the future. If they were really begotten of the Holy 
Spirit, this could not be; for all those who are to have a 
part in the Little Flock or the Great Company receive 
their chastisements and purifying experiences in this life, 
and none of them will receive any punishment in the 
future life. The Apostle says we will not come into condemnation 
with the world. We receive our trial for life 
or death everlasting in the present time. 

In the day of the Apostles, when a partial community 
of interest was established, a number of the faithful sold 
possessions and contributed to the general fund. Although 
there was nothing compulsory upon any in respect to this 
selling of property and giving to the common treasury, 
the very fact that those who did so were highly esteemed 
in the Church would naturally become a snare to some 
who, without the real spirit of helpfulness and sacrifice, 
would desire to have the approbation of the brethren. 

STARTLING RESULTS OF WILFUL DECEPTION 

Ananias and Sapphira were of this class, desirous of 
the approval of the Church, yet deficient in the real spirit 
of sacrifice. They had a property which they determined 
to sell; and in order to pose before the believers as saints 
of a high order, they pretended to give to the general fund 
the full amount received from the property. Secretly, 
however, they had much less generous sentiments. They 
agreed together that they would retain part of the sale-money 
for future contingencies, yet would pass as sacrificers 
to the full amount. 

The wrong of their course is manifest. As the Apostle 
Peter declared, the property was their own, and after 
they had sold it they still had a right to do as they pleased 
with the proceeds. But they should have been honest 
about the transaction, and if they wished to give a tenth, 
a half, or all of the amount, it was a matter of their own 
business alone, and no one would have had the least right 
to find fault with or criticize them. The entire wrong 
consisted in the deception practised— the palming off of a 
part of the price as the whole, for the purpose of deceiving 
the Church and of gaining applause for an amount 
of sacrifice more than they made. As St. Peter said, they 



lied, not to man, but to the Holy Spirit of God. In this, 
and in this alone, consisted the sin for which they died. 

The record is that "great fear came upon all the company" 
—great reverence for God and for the Apostles, His 
representatives. It brought also a realization that consecrations 
to the Lord were far from meaningless forms. 
This meant, not only to those who had already espoused 
the Lord's cause, but also to all who for some time thereafter 
would identify themselves with the Church, that 
any who were insincere would best make no pretensions to 
discipleship. Quite probably the influence of the lesson 
lasted for a considerable time— during the lives of the 
Apostles. 

We may consider a lesson which may properly be 
learned from this incident of the past by the Lord's consecrated 
people of today. The lesson is that God desires 
"truth in the inward parts"— in the heart— and that any 
who have not this quality— candor, honesty, truthfulness 
—cannot be pleasing to God; and therefore cannot share 
in the glories to be dispensed shortly to the Elect class of 
this Gospel Age.— Psalm 51:6. 

As we look at ourselves, we come to realize how imperfect 
are all the members of the fallen race; and when 
we consider God's perfection, we can conceive of only 
one quality that the fallen creature could possess that 
would meet with Divine approval. That one quality is 
honesty. The true Christian must, in honesty, confess his 
own shortcomings, his own deficiencies. He must, in 
honesty, acknowledge that his sufficiency is of God, 
through Christ, and not of himself. He must honestly 
strive for the standard set before him in the Gospel. He 
must honestly admit that he cannot do the things that he 
would. He must candidly and fully accept the righteousness 
of God in Christ Jesus, as the covering for his 
blemishes. We are inclined to the belief that the greatest 
sin in the Church— amongst the consecrated believers 
—is the sin of dishonesty; the sin for which Divine disapproval 
is so excellently illustrated in the case of Ananias 
and Sapphira. 

This is an individual matter still, as it was in the days 
of the Apostles. Each individual of the Lord's people 
must answer for his own course, to the Lord Himself. 
It therefore behooves all who are seeking Divine approval, 
to see to it that they are not influenced by the 
prevalent disposition to hypocrisy, but that they deal with 
the Lord in purity and honesty of heart. They should see 
to it that, having covenanted to give to God and His 
service their all, they keep nothing back, but consider that 
their time, their influence, their means, their lives, are 
fully devoted to the Lord, and that they use these as His— 
as they believe He would wish to have them used— as 
faithful stewards. 



R5457 : page 138 



STRENGTH-DEVELOPMENT 

The strong right arm is only strong 

Because an active will 
Has made it serve. But were that arm 

Left idly hanging still, 
Twould lose the hoarded strength of years, 

And lose more rapidly 
Than it was gained, by Nature's law 

Of inactivity. 

'Tis true of souls. They gather strength 

With every cross they bear, 
With every humble sacrifice, 

With every heartfelt prayer, 
With every conflict bravely met, 

And trial bravely borne; 
With every throb of anguish felt 

When tender ties are shorn. 

The tears and toils of His dear ones 

Are wisely, kindly, sent 
By Him who knoweth what they need 

For soul-development. 
The path of idleness is one 

By vagrant children trod. 
They grow in grace most rapidly 

Who labor most for God. Unknown. 



R5453 : page 139 

"WHERE ARE THE NINE?" 

-MAY 31. -LUKE 17:11-19.- 

"Were there none found that returned to give 
glory to God, save this alien?"— V. 18. 

THE essence of our lesson for today is gratitude. 

It is a most reasonable trait of character 

and is frequently found even in the 

brute creation. It is impossible to imagine a 

perfect human being or an angel acceptable 

to God without this quality. We might almost 

say that the degree of our acceptance 

with God is measured by our gratitude. It 

leads to obedience to the Divine laws and 

regulations, whether understood or not. It 

leads to self-sacrificing labors in the service of God, and 

according to a Divine automatic arrangement has its 

blessings. 

Our lesson tells us that the Savior was approaching 
Jerusalem by way of Samaria and Galilee. It is surmised 



R5454 : page 139 

that this was His last journey to Jerusalem, which eventuated 
in His death. His fame had spread abroad; and ten 
lepers sitting by the roadside heard that Jesus of Nazareth 
was passing by. Immediately they called to Him as 
loudly as the hoarse whisper of their disease would permit. 
Ordinarily their appeal was for money; but in this 
case it was, "Master, have mercy upon us!" 

Lepers are a class greatly to be pitied. Their disease 
has long been considered incurable, and hence in the 
Bible it is symbolically used to represent sin. It is an 
affection which seems to corrupt the blood. The joints 
twist, decay and slough off. Under the regulations prevailing 
at the time of our lesson, lepers were forbidden 
to enter the cities, under the penalty of thirty-nine strokes 
from a rod. They had no means of earning a living, and 
were always dependent upon the charity of their friends 
or the public. Nor were they allowed to approach others 
nearer than about one hundred and fifty feet, for fear of 
contamination. Theirs was a living death. 

The ten mentioned in this lesson were drawn together 
by their common trouble which ignored the racial barriers 
between Jews and Samaritans. In answer to their cry for 
help, Jesus, although full of compassion, seemed to treat 
their appeal coldly. He merely said to them, "Go show 
yourselves unto the priests." According to God's arrangement 
with the Jews under their Law Covenant, they 
were to have no sicknesses except as these should represent 
sins; and the priests were to pass judgment upon 
cases of leprosy, determining whether or not the disease 
were indeed leprosy, etc. Our Lord's direction that the 
lepers go and show themselves to the priests implied a 
healing, and suggested that by the time that they should 
reach the priest they would be ready to have him pronounce 
them clean. 

The lepers must have had considerable knowledge of 
the power of Jesus, and must have exercised great faith; 
for instead of crying out for instantaneous healing, they 
followed His direction and started for the priest to have 
an inspection. Doubtless they hoped that by the time they 
should reach him they would be well and would receive a 
bill of health. They had gone but a short distance when 
they found themselves cured. We can well imagine with 
what joy they hastened to have the priest approve them 
in order to return to their families, their business, etc. 
Surely they almost ran, as they felt the exhilaration of 
the cleansed blood! But one of them slowed up and then 
turned back; probably the others in their exuberance did 
not notice this. Back he came and fell at the feet of 
Jesus, giving Him thanks. His was a grateful heart, and 
we cannot doubt that he will receive a blessing eventually, 
though he did not receive it then, for he was a Samaritan, 
an alien, a foreigner from the commonwealth of Israel. 



ANOTHER CRUMB OF FAVOR 

In his case, the healing was a "crumb from the children's 
table;" for the rich man had not yet died— God's 
favor had not yet departed from Israel. Jesus had not 
yet uttered the fateful words, "Your House is left unto 
you desolate." Nay, the favor to Israel continued three 
and a half years after their House was left desolate— individual 
favor. It was three and a half years after the 
death of Jesus before the individual favor to the Jews 
terminated to such an extent as to permit the Gospel to 
go to the Gentiles— Cornelius being the first to be accepted 
into fellowship with God.— Acts 10. 

Had the returning one been a Jew instead of a 
Samaritan, no doubt he would have been invited by Jesus 
to become one of His followers— "Come, take up thy cross 
and follow Me!" But because he was a Samaritan, Jesus 
merely said to him, "Arise and go thy way; thy faith hath 
made thee whole." We cannot doubt, however, that the 
Lord's providence followed this grateful Samaritan; and 
that when the time came for the opening of the door to 
the Gentiles, he was amongst those who gladly received 
the Message, and made a consecration to become an heir 
of God and joint-heir with Jesus Christ our Lord to the 
Heavenly inheritance. 

We are not to understand that our Lord's words, "Thy 
faith hath made thee whole," meant that it was the man's 
faith aside from Divine Power that made him whole, but 
rather that it was the Master's using the Divine Power 
in connection with the faith of the individual. The Power 
of God and the faith of the man co-operated for his healing. 
They did the same for the nine others who were 
healed. They also had faith and were healed, and as 
Jews under the Law Covenant, they had more ground for 
asking forgiveness and healing than had the Samaritan. 

TEN HEALED-WHERE ARE THE NINE? 

Jesus called public attention to the fact that ten were 
healed, but that only one had returned to give glory to 
God. True, He had not asked them to come back and 
offer praise and acknowledge the Divine Power wrought 
through Him! True, they did what He told them to do- 
went and showed themselves to the priest— and no more, 
going then about their business. 

Why did He not, before granting the healing, bargain 
with them, saying, If I heal you, will you consecrate your 
lives and become My disciples? Undoubtedly they would 
have agreed to this arrangement. Who would not agree 
to any terms to be rid of so loathsome and incurable a disease? 
Why did not Jesus take this method of adding to 
the number of His disciples? Undoubtedly the answer 
should be that He was following the spirit of the Father's 
dealings, which He expressed in the words, "The Father 
seeketh such to worship Him as worship Him in spirit and 
in truth." As the Father seeks no others, so the Son 



seeks no others. 

In this respect the preaching of Jesus and the Apostles 
is in strong contrast with much of the preaching of 
evangelists, revivalists, etc. Never did Jesus or the 
Apostles urge worldly people to become disciples of 
Christ. They merely preached, or declared, certain great 
facts, and accepted those who came under that kind of 
preaching, influenced by the great facts set forth. They 
reasoned of sin, of righteousness and of a coming time of 
decision, or judgment, and left the matter with the individual 
conscience. They stated that those who forsake 
sin and turn to God may have forgiveness and reconciliation 
through the merit of the blood of Christ. They told 
of a High, or Heavenly, Call for all such penitents who 

R5454 : page 140 

would consecrate their lives wholly to the service of 
God, Truth and righteousness, willing to endure hardness 
as good soldiers. 

We remember that on one occasion Jesus apparently 
reproved even a spirit of enthusiasm that might becloud 
the cool judgment, saying, "Sit down and count the cost." 
(Luke 14:28.) It has pleased God through the preaching 
of the Truth to call out the class which He desires to be 
joint-heirs with His Son. They are not to be brought 
into the family of God by prayers or by excitement, but 
by the declaration of the Divine terms and conditions. To 
such as accept the grace of God the urgent message goes 
out that they receive it not in vain; that, having put their 
hand to the plow, they do not look back; that, having enlisted 
as good soldiers of the Cross, they endure hardness, 
rejoicing in the privilege of service and sacrifice. 

The point we make is that according to the Bible, no 
attempts were ever made by Jesus and His Apostles to 
obtain recruits for the army of the Lord by a "hip -hip -hurrah" 
process. In this we are not criticising others, 
but merely calling attention to facts which have much to 
do with the guidance of all God's people who seek to 
know and to do His will. 

OTHER TENS, HUNDREDS, THOUSANDS 

Let us view the incident of our lesson symbolically. 
Let the lepers represent sinners who, coming to realize 
themselves unclean, cry out to the Lord for cleansing, 
thus impliedly acknowledging His greatness and power as 
the Son of God, through whom only is forgiveness of 
sin, and impliedly declaring themselves as desiring to be 
His followers, His disciples, persuaded that sin is injurious 
and resolved thereafter to walk in the Lord's 
footsteps, fighting against sin in themselves and everywhere. 
How many of the tens, the hundreds, the thousands, 
whose devotion and faith the Lord has accepted- 
how many whom He has healed, forgiven and received 
according to their profession of discipleship— really have 



become His true followers? 

How many who have declared to the Lord their unhappiness, 
their desire for forgiveness of sins, and promised 
life-long gratitude and devotion to Him, to have His 
favor, have forgotten their privileges; and after receiving 
a blessing have gone, one to his field, another to his merchandise, 
another to pleasure, another to formalism! How 
few have remembered their prayers to the Lord for mercy, 
their resolutions in respect to what they would do if their 
prayers were answered! 

A REVIVAL IS IN ORDER 

Many Christian people are growing in the opinion that 
we are living today in a time of crucial trial as respects 
those who have made a covenant with God. They believe 
that we are nearing the time when the Church, the 
Body of Christ, will be received by the Lord in the 
Resurrection change to be His Bride. As the Apostle 
wrote, "We shall all be changed, in a moment, in the 
twinkling of an eye"; for "flesh and blood cannot inherit 
the Kingdom of God." The call of this Gospel Age has 
been to the finding of these who are to constitute the 
Bride class, the associates of Jesus in His Kingdom. 

Of the Jews Jesus said, in a time of testing in 
the end of their Age, "They knew not the time of their 
visitation." Only the comparatively few were in the heart 
condition of nearness to God which enabled them to understand 
the character of the times in which they were 
living and the change which was in progress. The 
thought is that a similar change is upon us now, which is 
being discerned by those who have had the eyes of their 
understanding opened. 

The Samaritan in our lesson seems to represent a 
class of grateful followers of the Lord who seek to give 
Him glory in their words, thoughts and doings, while the 

R5455 : page 140 

majority of those who have similarly received His favor 
are disposed to pursue the ambitions and pleasures of 
the present life. Neglecting to take the path which the 
Master trod, they will not reach the glory, honor and 
immortality which He attained and to which He has 
called this class. A lower place must be for them. In a 
little while, according to the Bible, the glories of the 
Kingdom will be revealed to an astonished world, but the 
glories of the present condition of affairs will fade away. 

The true Wisdom that cometh from Above was manifested 
by our Savior, who counted not His life dear unto 
Him, who freely made Himself of no reputation that He 
might do the Father's will, and who is now highly exalted 
as a reward. St. Paul expressed the same thought, 
saying that he counted all things as but loss and dross 
that he might win a place in the Body of Christ— the 
Church in glory beyond the veil. Great as will be the 



blessings of the Millennial Kingdom to the world, the 
blessings which the Church will have will be transcendently 
better. 



R5455 : page 140 

MESSIAH'S KINGDOM TO BE INVISIBLE 

--JUNE 7.-LUKE 17:20-37.- 

"Behold, the Kingdom of God is in your midst."— V. 21. 

OUR understanding of the Master's words depends 

considerably upon the setting in 

which we see them. John the Baptist preceded 

Jesus and preached the Kingdom of 

God at hand. In due time he pointed out 

Jesus as the Messiah that should come, the 

Lamb of God. After waiting for months 

for Jesus to establish Himself as an earthly 

king, and finding instead that his own work 

was closing, he was put into prison by 

Herod. John then sent to Jesus to inquire whether or not 

He was the One that should come or whether they should 

look for another. He was disappointed in not seeing evidences 

of the Kingdom, as he had expected. 

The Scribes and the Pharisees heard of the claim 
that Jesus was the long-promised King who would set up 
His Messianic Kingdom, and they derided Him. They 
looked at His motley company of followers— publicans 
and sinners as well as honorable people, but none of 
special rank, influence or wealth. They considered Jesus 
a deceiver and His followers dupes. Our lesson tells how 
they attempted to expose what they supposed was a 
deception of Jesus, thus to turn away the delusion of 
His followers. Therefore they asked Him in public the 
question, When will God's Kingdom come? How long 
will it be before you set it up? 

Doubtless they purposed to entrap Jesus; for if He 
should say, A long time, His followers would be disheartened; 
if He should say, A short time, they would 
proceed to query, Where will You get Your army? How 
will You pay Your soldiers? How will You supply them 
with food? Will You go to Rome to battle with the 
powers that be, that our whole nation has been unable to 
cope with? etc. 

But these Pharisees got only as far as their first question, 
because the answer to it confuted them, and no 
doubt perplexed them. Jesus answered that God's Kingdom 
would not come with observation; that is to say, 

R5455 : page 141 

when the Kingdom should come, people would not see it. 



Proceeding, Jesus elaborated, saying that when the Kingdom 
of God should be established, people would not see 
whether it was here or there; for the Kingdom of God 
would be the Power of God exerted everywhere in the 
midst of the people. 

Our translation is faulty, though evidently not intentionally 
so, when it reads, "For, behold, the Kingdom of 
God is within you." The translators, had they noticed 
carefully, would have been on guard against saying that 
the Kingdom of God was within those Pharisees that 
Jesus had designated hypocrites, whited sepulchres, etc. 
A closer examination of the original would have shown 
that the text would better be translated, "The Kingdom 
of God is in your midst." 

A kingdom is always represented by its king. Jesus, 
as the King, was present in their midst, but they did not 
recognize Him. "There standeth One among you whom 
ye know not." Similarly, all through the Gospel Age, 
the Church of Christ, His "Body," has been undiscerned 
by the world. "The world knoweth us not, even as it 
knew Him not." For eighteen hundred years this has 
been true in this sense; but Christ and the Church in the 
flesh are not the Kingdom of God in the full, proper 
sense that the Bible promises it— a Kingdom of power 
and great glory. Christ and the Church have been only 
the incipient Kingdom, an embryotic Kingdom— the Kingdom 
class, preparing for investiture of authority in God's 
due time, which we believe is now near. 

This Kingdom is to be a spiritual one, and hence its 
rulers will be as invisible as are the angels and the 
Heavenly Father. Jesus declared, "Yet a little while, and 
the world seeth Me no more." What was true of the 
Head will be true of every member of the elect Body 
of Christ, the Church. "Changed in a moment, in the 
twinkling of an eye," the world will see them no more; 
"for flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God," 
and flesh and blood cannot see that which is spiritual. 

During the Millennium, the Kingdom authority and 
power of God through Christ and the Church will be 
exercised amongst men; and yet they will not see it with 
the natural eye, but merely with the eyes of their understanding 
All the blind eyes will be opened. Thus every 
eye will see that the Kingdom is established; and every 
one will understand that He who suffered has entered into 
His glory, that the Church, His Bride, is with Him in 
glory, and that the blessings of the Millennium proceed 
from them.— Revelation 20:6. 

"DAYS OF THE SON OF MAN" 

Turning from the silenced Pharisees to His disciples, 
Jesus said, "The days will come when ye shall desire to 
see one of the days of the Son of Man, and ye shall not 
see it." This was astonishing news to the faithful. Yet 
they were accustomed to hearing from the Master things 
which they could not understand; such as that they must 



eat of His flesh and drink of His blood, that He must be 
crucified, etc. They took all these things figuratively and 
wondered what might be the real interpretation. How 
could Jesus be the great King, as they had expected, and 
yet they not see Him and His days? 

Jesus continued to discuss the enigma, saying, "They 
shall say to you, See here; or, See there: go not after 
them, nor follow." In a word, do not believe anybody 
who will thus tell you about My Second Coming; do not 
be deceived into believing that I will come in any such 
manner. I will tell you how I shall come: "As the 
lightning, that lighteneth out of the one part under 
heaven, and shineth unto the other part under heaven; so 
shall also the Son of Man be in His Day." 

This astounding statement is better understood when 
we translate the Greek noun astrape as "shining" instead 
of "lightning"; for evidently it refers to the sun, which 
rises in the east and sets in the west, shining out of the 
one part of the heaven even unto the other. But how 
will this represent the Son of Man in His Day? How 
will He be like the sun? We answer that the Day of 
Christ is a thousand-year Day, the Millennium; and our 
Lord's statement was one of the "dark sayings" of which 
Jesus said, "I have many things to tell you, but ye cannot 
bear them now," and promised that in due time the 
Holy Spirit would grant them an enlightenment, that all 
of His words might be clearly understood. This portion, 
now due to be understood, is therefore becoming 
clear to those of spiritual discernment. 

Then, that they might gradually learn that these things 
belonged to a distant time, Jesus explained that first He 
must suffer many things and be rejected of that nation. 
Coming back to an explanation of what would be the 
signs of His presence, in answer to their question as 
recorded in Matthew 24, He declared, "As it was in the 
days of Noah, so shall it be also in the days of the Son 
of Man." 

Here we have something definite, concrete. We know 
what to look for at the time when the Kingdom will be 
due for establishment— the time when the Sun of Righteousness 
will begin to shine forth from one end of 
heaven to the other. The signs of the times will not be 
in the outward condition of the world; for on the contrary 
everything will be going along in as quiet and 
orderly a manner as ever, just as in the days of Noah, 
just as before the Deluge came, and just as in the days 
of Lot, before the destruction of Sodom— they ate, drank, 
married, built, bought, sowed, planted, as usual. These 
things are not signs of wickedness, but are mentioned to 
show us that there will be no outward sign to indicate 
to the world the time of the Second Presence of Christ, 
when He will begin to deal with the world and to set up 
His Kingdom. 

THE DELUGE AND SODOM'S DESTRUCTION 



Why introduce these two pictures— the Deluge and 
the destruction of Sodom— in conjunction, while talking 
of the establishment of Messiah's Kingdom, which is to 
bless the world? The answer is that the Bible everywhere 
foretells that although Messiah's Kingdom is the great 
provision of God which will lift the curse and bring in 
blessings world-wide, nevertheless it is to be established 
upon the wreck of our present institutions. And it is this 
wreck of social, financial, political and religious institutions 
of the present time that Jesus illustrated by the 
Deluge and the destruction of Sodom. And His own 
presence preceding this Time of Trouble is to be unseen 

R5456 :page 141 

to the world, unknown to the world, unsuspected, unbelieved, 
until the cataclysm of trouble precipitates with 
suddenness. 

This is not a charming picture. We are glad that we 
may turn from it, and note the silver lining of the cloud, 
and the glorious blessings which will speedily follow the 
establishment of the Kingdom on the ruins of our human 
failures. 

Emphasizing the suddenness with which the calamity 
will overtake the world, Jesus said that on the same 
day that Lot went out of Sodom it rained down fire 
and brimstone from heaven; and He declared that 
thus it will be in the Day when the Son of Man is revealed. 
The Greek text shows a difference between the 
Parousia, or presence, of Christ before the Time of 
Trouble, and the later Epiphania, or revealing. 

The description of the revealing of Christ is given in 

R5456 : page 142 

the words, He shall be revealed in flaming fire. (2 Thessalonians 1:7,8.) 

Indeed, that Time of Trouble is frequently 

described symbolically in the Bible as a burning 

of the world— so much so, that all the creeds of Christendom 

express the thought that the earth is to be "burned." 

They overlook the fact that the heavens are to be 

"burned" also. 

In the symbolical usage of the Bible, the earth represents 
the social order of human affairs; the sea, the restless, 
discontented masses; the heavens, the ecclesiastical 
powers. St. Peter tells us that all these will pass away 
with a great confusion, and that instead will come the 
new heavens and the new earth which God has promised. 
(2 Peter 3:10-13.) The new heavens will be the new 
ecclesiastical society— the Church in glory, joint-heirs 
with Christ in His Kingdom. The new earth will be the 
new social order which Messiah's Kingdom will establish. 

SAINTS ON THE HOUSETOP 

Again recurring to the period in which He will be 



present before being revealed "in flaming fire," the Lord 
seems to assure us that all of His faithful ones will die, 
and be changed in the moment of dying, before the great 
trouble, the symbolic fire, will consume present institutions. 
In figurative language He says that in that Day 
(of His Parousia, presence, before His Epiphania, revealing) 
those on the housetop, with their goods in the house, 
should not leave to take them out. What is here meant? 

Briefly, we believe that the house represents the 
House of God, and those on the housetop represent the 
most saintly of the people of God. At that time such will 
come to realize the necessity for flight; and the question 
will arise, How much of their stuff, their valuables, will 
they seek to save? They are warned not to seek to save 
any of the stuff— considerations of social privileges, honor 
of men, sometimes titles of small offices; such as vestryman, 
deacon, elder, minister, etc. An attempt to save 
any of these things will mean disappointment. Everything 
must be forsaken, else the test of that time will not 
be successfully passed. 

Likewise, any in the field must not turn back. The 
field represents the world. And any of the Lord's people 
who have gone out into the world— who have left the 
church nominal— are not to go back; but learning the 
truth of the situation they are to flee to the Lord from 
the field. 

St. Matthew's account speaks of special troubles at 
that time upon such as are with child and give suck, which 
we believe is also symbolical, and refers to Christian 
people, seeking to convert the world and to teach beginners. 
These will be in special travail of soul, because of 
the change of dispensation and the call, "Come out of her, 
My people." It will be especially difficult for such to hear 
and to obey that call. 

In the flight from Sodom, Lot and his family were 
warned to make haste, and not even to look back to the 
things that were to be destroyed. So the Lord's people 
are not to look back at the things to be destroyed. Give 
them no thought. "Flee out of Babylon!" "Deliver every 
man his own soul!" Lot's wife, disobeying, looked back 
longingly to the things of destruction, and failed to escape. 
The Lord applies this illustration to His people, and 
urges that their flight be with a full renunciation of the 
things of the present time. Whoever shall seek to save 
his life must lose it. Whoever will lose his life will 
thereby be preserving it— gaining the everlasting life. 



R5456 : page 142 

CREATION PHOTO-DRAMA 

THE WATCH TOWER readers everywhere 
are enthused by the PHOTO-DRAMA OF 
CREATION. In response to our recent suggestion, 



we are flooded with applications 

from various Classes, giving the names of 

those appointed for the DRAMA COMMITTEE. 

We have answered many of these communications 

directly, but think it well to 

now give a general response and explanation. 

We started with the thought that the Association 
should put the DRAMA on in different cities and trust to 
voluntary support; but by the time we had gotten out 
twelve sets of the DRAMA, the expense was enormous— 
our express bills alone on printed matter, machines, etc., 
running up to $2,000.00 in one month, besides post and 
freight charges. Then came the realization that each 
one of those twelve sets could be serving four cities at one 
time. This meant four times the cost. We perceived that 
unless the Lord worked a miracle we would run out of 
funds, without accomplishing anything like the work we 
see before us to do. At the same time propositions began 
to come in from various cities and towns, assuring us 
that the I.B.S.A. Classes of these places would be glad 
to finance the DRAMA locally, if they were provided with 
operators, free literature, Pax Pins, etc. 

We take this to be the leading of the Lord's providence 
—an intimation that the Lord desires to give His 
people everywhere an opportunity to participate in the 
DRAMA'S great testimony in their own cities. We are 
following this plan now, and invite those classes of 
Bible students who desire to have the DRAMA to canvass 
the subject amongst themselves and then, through 
their Committee, to correspond at once with our office, 
advising us what they desire to do and are able to do in 
the way of meeting the expenses of presenting the DRAMA 
in their home cities. 

Such information should be sent to the Society's address, 
marked "DRAMA DEPARTMENT." Americans and 
Canadians should address Brooklyn, New York, Office; 
British Classes should address the London Office; 
Swedish Classes should address the Orebro Office; 
Danish Classes, the Copenhagen Office; German Classes, 
the Barmen Office; French and Swiss Classes, the 
Geneva Office. Act at once; and then, having done your 
part, wait patiently, assured that we will do all in our 
power to co-operate with you. 

On the same postal it will be well to state how many 
Sisters of medium age and of good address and good 
appearance would volunteer to serve as ushers, and 
whether or not one or two of them would learn to operate 
the phonograph under the instructor whom the 
Society would send. Advise also if there is a Brother in 
the Class of good address suitable to serve the DRAMA 
presentation as Floor Manager and who could, without 
injury to his interests, give the necessary time. 

We usually operate the DRAMA one week to each 
PART, afternoon and evening— four weeks to the FOUR 
PARTS. However, where very large Auditoriums are 
used or where the city is small, we sometimes run the 



FOUR PARTS in two weeks, beginning one PART with Sunday 
afternoon, another PART with Wednesday afternoon. 

Theatres are better places for the DRAMA than 
Churches, because Catholics do not care to go to Protestant 
Churches, nor Protestants to Catholic Churches, nor 
Jews to either— and all classes are interested in the 
DRAMA and it is for all. The dull season of the theatres 
has begun. Many of them are operating now at no 
profit; and, if run further, it would be at a loss. Under 
such circumstances, whatever amount is paid to the 

R5456 : page 143 

theatre people above the cost of light and janitorage is 
profit. Besides, many theatres are interested in bringing 
their name and location prominently before the public 
and would be benefited greatly by having the DRAMA. 

Under such circumstances the theatre owners often 
give us astonishingly low prices— five, ten, fifteen, twenty, 
twenty-five dollars per day, according to size and 
quality of the theatre and the size of the city. In no 
case should we use an inferior Auditorium, nor one in a 
poor location, even if it were offered free. Have these 
things in mind when writing to us. If you will, give us 
information respecting the best theatres, their seating 
capacity, the price at which they would be obtainable, etc. 

In any event, be sure to inform us very definitely just 
what amount of assistance your Class would need for the 
local presentation of the DRAMA. We must know this in 
every case hereafter, in order to know how to use the 
DRAMA most widely and how to use the Lord's money in 
connection with it most wisely. Give this immediate 
attention, if interested; for whatever is to be accomplished 
this Summer should be under way now, or projected. 

Toward fall there will be numerous Fairs and Expositions 
everywhere. The Fair and Exposition and Chautauqua 
Managers are interested in the DRAMA, as they 
would be in anything else that would help to attract to 
their enterprises. They frequently spend large sums for 
attractions. We have circulars to the effect that our 
Society is willing to supply the PHOTO-DRAMA OF 
CREATION free to those who proffer suitable Auditorium 
and other conveniences. We make no objection to the 

R5457 : page 143 

usual entrance fees charged by Expositions, etc., but 
merely require that the DRAMA shall be free to all those 
inside the grounds. Any of you acquainted with such 
Fairs may drop us a postal card giving us the date and 
the name and address of the Treasurer or Business Manager. 
Brooklyn address No. 124 Columbia Heights. 

In some places theatre managers are anxious for the 
DRAMA and are willing to show it free, provided that they 
are permitted to charge for one-third of their seating 
capacity as reserved seats. We have no objection to this. 



Evidently there are some people who would prefer to 
pay something, in order to have seats reserved. 



page 143 

RENEW REQUESTS FOR PILGRIM VISITS 

Please bear in mind that with this issue of the TOWER all 
requests for Pilgrim visits now on file expire. All who are 
desirous of securing the visits of the traveling brethren during 
the ensuing year should promptly notify us. No charge 
is made for this service, the expense being borne by contributions 
to the Tract Fund. The friends at each place provide 
proper places for the meetings, and are pleased to entertain 
the Lord's servants. 

We request that postcards be used in making applications 
for these visits, and specially desire replies to all of the following 
questions. The questions need not be repeated, but 
merely indicated thus: (a), (b), etc. 

(a) How many Bible Students in your vicinity use the 
STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES? 

(b) Are weekly meetings held? 

(c) How many are usually in attendance? 

(d) Where do you now meet on Sundays? (Give full street 
addresses and name of auditorium.) 

(e) At what hours are the Sunday meetings held? 

(f) Was a vote taken on the Pilgrim invitation? 

(g) How many voted for the invitation to be sent? 

(h) Do you desire Sunday appointments for Special Public 

Lectures? 

(i) How frequently do you desire such Special appointments? 

(j) Give seating capacity of Auditorium you could secure? 

(k) What attendance do you think could be secured for 

well-advertised public sessions in good Auditorium? 

(1) Would a suitable place be found for meetings not specially 

advertised? 

(m) Have the members of your class chosen leaders in 

accordance with suggestions of SCRIPTURE STUDIES, 

Volume VI., chapters 5 and 6? 

If so, give name and full address of each. 

(n) Give full names and full addresses of the two (2) to 

whom notices of Pilgrim visits should be sent. (Please 

notify Pilgrim Dept. as to any change or removal.) 

(o) If your town is not on a railroad give the name of 

proper railroad station at which to stop. 

(p) How many miles from station is meeting place, and 

which direction from station? 

(q) Would Pilgrim be met at station? 

(r) If not, how should Pilgrim get from said station? 

(s) Give writer's full name and address. 

(t) Any additional remarks. 



R5457 : page 143 

THE MEMORIAL SUPPER CELEBRATION 

So far as reports have reached us the celebration of the 
Redeemer's death this year has been one of the most interesting, 
most impressive and most widely observed. Naturally 
the larger number of reports represent small gatherings 
—fully in accord with the Master's promise that where two 
or three were met in His name, He would be in their midst. 

The reports show a steady increase in every direction over 
last year's reports. Be it remembered that these are not the 
names of persons or households that have been standing on 
a church register for a decade, and many of them dead and 
buried. Neither do these reports represent merely nominal 
church attendance. On the contrary, they represent people 
who with intelligence and deliberation have counted the cost 
and made a full consecration of themselves to the Lord and 
His service, even unto death. 

We give the showings of reports thus far sent to us where 
the Memorial was celebrated by thirty or more persons. On 
account of the fact that The Temple is being used for the 
PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION, the Tabernacle was used this 
year, but was taxed beyond its capacity. Suburban gatherings 
were proportionately larger; hence the real increase in 
the Brooklyn congregation was the less apparent: 

Brooklyn, N.Y 842 

London, Eng 741 

Chicago, 111 693 

Barmen, Germany 500 

Glasgow, Scot 464 

Boston, Mass 425 

Forest Gate, Eng 385 

Los Angeles, Cal 362 

Pittsburgh, Pa 345 

Philadelphia, Pa 317 

Seattle, Wash 219 

Minneapolis and St. Paul, 

Minn 206 

Toronto, Ont 204 

Cleveland, 203 

Vancouver, B.C 195 

Washington, D.C 192 

Portland, Ore 159 

Indianapolis, Ind 156 

Columbus, 144 

Providence, R.I 144 

Cincinnati, 140 

Copenhagen, Denmark 140 

St. Louis, Mo 136 

Liverpool, Eng 130 

Buffalo, N.Y 125 

Houston, Tex 121 

Dayton, 121 

Oakland, Cal 120 

Milwaukee, Wis 1 13 



Kingston, B.W.I Ill 

Bristol, Eng 110 

Winnipeg, Manitoba 105 

Baltimore, Md 102 

Sheffield, Eng 100 

Louisville, Ky 98 

Oldham, Eng 92 

Edinburgh, Scot 90 

Denver, Colo 85 

Birmingham, Ala 80 

Binghamton, N.Y 79 

Richmond, Va 79 

Bellingham, Wash 78 

Worcester, Mass 76 

Allentown, Pa 76 

Toledo, 74 

Tacoma, Wash 74 

Spokane, Wash 73 

Camberwell, Jamaica, B.W.I. ... 72 

St. Joseph, Mo 69 

San Francisco, Cal 69 

Hamilton, Ont 65 

Tampa, Fla 65 

Youngstown, 65 

Birmingham, Eng 64 

Springfield, Mass 63 

Grand Rapids, Mich 61 

Atlanta, Ga 60 

Memphis, Tenn 60 

Newark, N.J 59 

Altoona, Pa 58 

Hartford, Conn 57 

San Diego, Cal 55 

Nottingham, Eng 55 

Lynn, Mass 54 

Cumberland, Md 50 

Pasadena, Cal 50 

Dundee, Scot 49 

Wichita, Kans 49 

Schenectady, N.Y 49 

Valenciennes, Nord, Fr 48 

New Brighton, Pa 48 

Akron, 48 

Jackson, Mich 47 

Easton, Pa 46 

PortLimon, C.R 46 

Calgary, Alta 45 

Ancon, Panama 45 

Victoria, B.C 45 

Port Huron, Mich 45 

Middlesboro, Eng 44 

Scranton, Pa 44 

Rochester, N.Y 44 

Tamaqua, Pa 43 

Saginaw, Mich 42 

Topeka, Kans 42 



Terre Haute, Ind 42 

Jacksonville, Fla 42 

Knoxville, Term 40 

Des Moines, Iowa 40 

Oklahoma City, Okla 40 

Norfolk, Va 40 

Edmonton, Alberta 40 

Wheeling, W.Va 38 

Sharon, Pa 38 

York, Pa 38 

Duquesne, Pa 38 

Erie, Pa 37 

Chester and Moore, Pa 37 

Everett, Wash 37 

Gloversville and Johnstown, 

N.Y 37 

Lowell, Mass 37 

Belvidere, 111 37 

Greenock, Scot 37 

South Bend, Ind 36 

Chattanooga, Tenn 36 

Riverside, Cal 35 

Paterson, N.J 34 

London, Ont 34 

Syracuse, N.Y 34 

Wilmington, Del 34 

Warren, 34 

Sacramento, Cal 33 

Johnstown, 32 

Canton, 32 

Johnstown, Pa 32 

Brantford, Ont 31 

East Liverpool, 31 

Bradford, Eng 31 

Brockton, Mass 31 

Mattoon, 111 30 

Houston, Tex 30 

Santa Ana, Cal 30 

Watertown, N.Y 30 

Reading, Pa 30 

Tiffin, 30 

Fort Smith, Ark 30 



page 145 

VOL. XXXV MAY 15 No. 10 
A. D. 1914-A. M. 6042 



CONTENTS 

Giants In These Days 147 

A Show of Great Strength 148 



The Death Struggle Near 148 

Trials Essential to Development of Character 149 

A Word of Warning 150 

Causes Inducing a Fall 150 

"The Israel of God" 151 

The Church's Two-Fold Office 151 

What Constitute Good Works 152 

Expiation of Sin— Adamic and Partially 
Wilful 153 

Jewish Age Reckoning 153 

Legal Expiation by Scape-Goat Class 154 

Jesus Alone the Ransomer 154 

The Friend of Sinners 155 

Two Salvations— One Savior 156 

Difficulties of the Rich 157 

A Camel Through a Needle's Eye 157 

An Interesting Question 158 

Some Interesting Letters 159 

Berean Bible Studies, Vol. II 159 

page 146 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:-All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



LITERATURE FOR THE BLIND 

Requests for Bible literature for the Blind should be sent 
direct to Gould Free Library for the Blind, South Boston, 
Mass. It has for loaning the six volumes of STUDIES in 



English Braille; also Vols. I. and II. in New York Point, and 
Vol. I. in American Braille. Besides this, there are translated, 
and ready to loan, many of the booklets issued by our Society, 
as well as special sermons. 

When returning books or pamphlets for the Blind, please 
return them direct to the Gould Library. The Post-Office will 
handle them without postage if the package is plainly marked, 
"Literature for the Blind, Postage Free." 



RE CLIPPINGS 

We wish to express thanks for interesting clippings, and 
also for clippings containing attacks upon us. We request 
that you give name and date of paper each time, or, preferably, 
the whole page. If the whole paper be sent, please 
mark the article plainly and address WATCH TOWER BIBLE 
AND TRACT SOCIETY, File H, 17 Hicks Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 



RE REMITTANCES 

When sending remittances to the Society, please remember 
to make them payable in all cases to the WATCH TOWER 
BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, No. 17 Hicks Street, Brooklyn, 

N.Y. 



R5457 : page 147 

GIANTS IN THESE DAYS 

READERS of these columns, and especially 

such as are familiar with the presentations 

of the volume entitled "Armageddon," 

know quite well that it is our opinion 

that there is a correspondency to be noted 

between the conditions which will prevail in the 

days of Noah, prior to the Deluge, and 

the conditions which will prevail in the 

days of the Son of Man, prior to the great 

Time of Trouble, which the Bible declares 

will symbolically melt, or dissolve, as in a furnace of fire, 

the social elements of today. We have called attention 

to the fact that the Giants of Noah's day, according to 

the Bible, endangered the lives and the happiness of humanity; 

and that it was our thought that a counterpart 

of these Giants is to be found in the great institutions 

and trusts of our day, which have the power to throttle, 

to strangle humanity. 

We have pointed out that much could be said in favor 
of aggregations of wealth and intellect in mighty combinations, 
if properly used, not selfishly, but in the interests 



of the people. We have pointed out that although 
these Giant corporations have accomplished great good, 
which could not have been accomplished without their aid 
or without some Divine interposition, nevertheless, under 
present selfish conditions, they are a menace to the people. 

We should not be misunderstood. We do not mean 
even to hint that the men at the head of these Giant corporations 
are inferior to their fellows in sympathy and in 
wisdom. On the contrary, we believe that they are generally 
superior, and that had brutish men been at the 
head of these Giant corporations they long ago would 
have sought to squeeze the very life out of the people. 
But, as we have pointed out, there is continually a tendency 
on the part of all imperfect people toward selfishness, 
acquisitiveness. That "Eternal vigilance is the price 
of liberty" is as true today as ever it was. The people 
must watch the Giants lest they become autocratic. 

APPEARANCES SOMETIMES DECEITFUL 

But, say some, The Editor of THE WATCH TOWER 
must be behind the times. Does he not know that the 
trusts are being throttled, and that these Giants have been 
made the slaves of the people? 

R5458 : page 147 

The Editor is well aware that apparently much has 
been done to bind these Giants; and he well knows that 
they have apparently submitted and apparently acknowledge 
themselves the creatures, the servants of the people. 
But he also takes note that this transformation is merely 
an appearance. This docility is merely affected. The 
Giants of intellectual and monetary strength have not 
really surrendered, nor is it in harmony with the laws of 
human nature to suppose that they would ever capitulate. 
Instead, they have seemingly acquiesced to the laws and 
regulations while merely transforming themselves and retaining 
their power. In several instances they have demonstrated 
that they are as powerful today as they ever 
were. And in their behalf it should be acknowledged 
that much of the legislation enacted against them is mere 
demagoguery— the work of politicians, intended to curry 
favor with the people and not for practical use. 

We have no sympathy with those who make tirades 
against the courageous and brainy men who have, along 
purely commercial lines, done so much to help forward 
the world's condition— so much to prepare for the Millennium. 
Instead of being tantalized and hampered, these 
financial and engineering princes should be appreciated, 
honored. Then, while honoring them, we should insist 
upon their reasonable control and supervision by the 
people through their governmental representatives. If 
these Giants are necessary and useful, they can be better 
ruled by love and justice than by nagging and pin-pricking. 
No doubt it is this very nagging that is producing 



more and more a spirit of bitterness in the Giants— a 
feeling that they are not appreciated by some, a feeling 
that they must teach the people a lesson. 

CONDITIONS AS THEY ARE 

We are not especially finding fault with anybody. We 
are merely pointing out conditions as they are, and showing 
how these are shaping themselves and preparing for 
a great struggle between the Giants and the people— a 
struggle in which the people will suffer more than will 
the Giants. The fault is not with humanity at all. The 
fault is with the sin, the selfishness, the meanness, which 
for centuries has had a firm foothold in humanity— rich 
and poor. All are selfish. Each according to his opportunity 
seems disposed to take advantage. The Giant corporations, 
we believe, are much more lenient than they 
would be if they were in the hands of naturally smaller 
men of lower class. 

These Giants are realizing that they have opponents 
on every hand. They have long contended with the labor 
unions, and more or less have been compelled to submit. 
Now, in addition to the unions, they are obliged to contend 
with the people in governmental legislation, and 
with new ideas in respect to corporation rights and liberties. 
These Giants are saying to themselves, The people 
do not realize how much good we have done, nor what 
important factors in their welfare we are. 

R5458 : page 148 

Few of the people realize that the managers and the 
presidents of our great railroads and large business enterprises 
are men of powerful mind, any of them well qualified 
for the highest stations of life, and many of them are 
earning salaries as great as that of the President of the 
United States, and solving problems as difficult as those 
which the President must handle. Few people realize 
that next to the farming element in importance come 
the railroads, as respects numbers of employees. And the 
latter are an increasing army, while the farmers are a 
decreasing army, because of labor-saving machinery. 

Whoever supposes that these long-headed business men 
intend to sit down and quietly submit to every kind of 
legislation is deluding himself. The Giants know their 
own strength. They prefer to hide it rather than to boast 
of it; but when it comes to a life-and-death struggle they 
will use it, and terrible will be the effects. The very fact 
that the people are seeking to bind them arouses them to 
a more arbitrary exercise of their power. If legislation, 
for instance, affects to hinder railroads from monopolizing 
the anthracite and other coal interests, the coal-owning 
railroads with a snarl of defiance raise the price of 
coal, and thus give a hint to the consumers that they 
will need to be thankful if permitted to purchase at all 
and to keep from freezing. 



A SHOW OF GIANT STRENGTH 

A more or less preconcerted action has begun on the 
part of the great railroads and affiliated interests. They 
have determined that unless they are granted permission 
to raise their freight rates they will make the restrainers 
of their liberties pay dearly for it by bringing upon the 
country financial disaster, reaching losses a thousand 
times greater than the five per cent, which they demand. 
It would surely in many respects be wise to placate these 
Giants with the increase they ask, merely requiring them 
to render more prompt and efficient service in return. 

But will this course of wisdom prevail? Possibly not. 
If not, we have before us already an illustration and 
prophecy of what may be expected. Already the railroads 
have laid off thousands of workmen who have been employed 
in road construction and repairs. Already they 
have canceled orders for rails and equipment, which in 
turn has rendered idle many of the large mills, throwing 
other thousands out of employment. Already they are 
cutting down their office forces. All this is done with a 
certain amount of justification in the fact that they have 
not been making as much money as formerly. For instance, 
a great steel corporation's recent report showed 
a "sad" falling off of revenue and profit, "leaving only 
$18,000,000 of profit for the quarter;" whereas they had 
for some time been accustomed to more. In accord with 
this policy, there has for some time been a gradual curtailing 
of train service, which is really a safe and sane 
policy. 

We are not complaining, we are not finding fault even; 
we are merely recording facts, in supporting our contention 
that these great institutions are really Giants which, 
if they ever become angry and malicious, may accomplish 
incalculable injury. Their power and dissatisfaction have 
already been hinted to the government, which is more or 
less fearful of the industrial suspension threatened. 

On the other hand we have trades unionism, which is 
only beginning to realize its great power at the polls, and 
also its physical power through strikes. The threat of 
the railroad managers partially to suspend business until 
their demands are met may any day be duplicated by the 
Giants of labor with their threat of suspension of labor, 
stoppage of fuel supply, walk-outs, etc. It may be said 
that these Giants of labor are blind and unwise; but 
nevertheless it is manifest that they, like the blind Samson 
of old, are feeling for the pillars which support our 
present social structure; and that they have in view its 
wreck and ruin, even though this means also the destruction 
of their own interests. 

THE DEATH STRUGGLE NEAR 

How soon these great Giants will enter upon their 
death struggle, each confident of victory, yet both doomed 



to destruction, no one can tell. Sure we may be, however, 
that in the battle of these Giants the masses of 
mankind will suffer with them in the ordeal. 

Looking from the Bible viewpoint, we perceive that 
these Giants have reached their present size and strength 
through the light and blessings of the Millennial Morning. 
Had the veil of gross darkness been lifted a thousand 
years sooner, these Giants would have developed that 
much sooner; and their death struggle would have come 
that much sooner, with its resultant overthrow of present 
institutions in anarchy. But God would not permit this. 
It is no part of His Plan to allow human passion utterly 
to desolate the earth. Hence, He withheld the Morning 
Light until the Morning time, so that the struggle and its 
disastrous effects upon human institutions will occur just 
in advance of the time for the establishment of Messiah's 
Kingdom, for the control of the world by its spiritual, 
invisible, but all-powerful King, who is so soon to take 
unto Himself His great power and reign.— Rev. 11:17. 

How soon this great catastrophe will engulf the world 
none is wise enough to say, yet the trouble is discerned 
and feared by all persons of intelligence, but more particularly 
by those whose intelligence is guided by the Word 
of God. The catastrophe may be put off for months or 
years, but it is sure to come. And we can see how it 
might be suddenly precipitated. Even as we write, the 
newspapers are echoing the mutterings and threats of 
the labor Giants, while the capitalistic Giants are admittedly 
feeling sour, and are half inclined to give the 
public a pinch as a mere suggestion of what they could 
do. It is these hints, suggestions and threats which are 
likely to lead from bad to worse, producing anger, malice, 
hatred, strife, and various works of the flesh and of the 
Devil, as St. Paul intimated. 

"SEEK PEACE AND PURSUE IT" 

Whether this great trouble be very near or further 
afield, the proper course of God's consecrated people is 
the same— "Seek peace and pursue it." And not only so, 
but we are to be peace-makers and not strife-breeders. 
When all around men's souls give way, a special opportunity 
comes to the people of God for pointing their 
distressed fellow-creatures to the grand blessing which 
God has provided for the near future, and for re-establishing 
faith in the Creator and in the future life, and 
for pointing out that it is to be attained only by those 
who learn the true lesson of life and who come to love 
righteousness and to hate iniquity. 

We would be inclined to expect this great trouble to 
break out very soon were it not that the Scriptures apparently 
indicate that it will be preceded by a very powerful 

R5459 : page 148 

Church Federation, which will flourish outwardly in 



unrighteousness and be the first to succumb. 



page 148 

"I can see His coming judgments, as they circle all the 

earth, 
The signs and groanings promised, to precede a second 

birth; 
I read His righteous sentence in the crumbling thrones of 

earth: 
Our King is marching on." 



R5459 : page 149 

TRIALS ESSENTIAL TO CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT 

"My brethren, count it all joy when ye 
fall into divers temptations."— James 1:2. 

ALL those who have been called of the Lord 

during this Gospel Age are called with what 

the Apostle Paul styles the High Calling 

(Philippians 3:14), the Heavenly Calling 

(Hebrews 3:1), which is a call to share 

with Jesus in His glory, honor and immortality. 

But the call is not the decision in 

the matter; it is merely an invitation with 

certain definite conditions. We are called, 

not only to righteousness, but to walk in the 

Master's footsteps of suffering and self-sacrifice. These 

are the only terms on which any are received as disciples 

of Christ. We understand the Scriptures to teach that 

during the Millennial Age there will be other terms of 

acceptance with God, offered the world. But there are 

no conditions offered now other than those of becoming 

followers and disciples of Jesus, to walk as He walked. 

The Apostle James intimates that temptations may 
overtake these followers of Christ, into which they will 
fall as into a snare. As for an army, traps are set by the 
enemy, so the great Adversary sets traps and snares for 
us. He endeavors to misguide our minds and to lead us 
away from proper conceptions of truth and righteousness. 
We should be very careful to avoid his snares. 
Nevertheless, in spite of diligence, we may fall into a trap. 

The Apostle says we are to rejoice when we fall into 
various temptations— not that we are to rejoice if we fall 
into sin when tempted, but that we may rejoice if we 
find ourselves suddenly precipitated into temptation. 
Temptation is not sin. If we could but keep in mind the 
fact that every temptation, every trial, every persecution, 
every difficulty in life, permitted to come upon us who 
have made the covenant of sacrifice with the Lord, is intended 



to prove us, to test our love, to see whether or 
not our characters are fixed, rooted and grounded in 
righteousness and being built up in love, it would put all 
these trials, difficulties and temptations in a new light before 
us, and greatly assist us in fighting a good fight and 
overcoming. When we find ourselves suddenly in temptation, 
trial, we should say, If by these temptations, or 
trials, the Lord is proving my love and devotion to Him, 
then, however trifling they may be or however important, 
I will diligently use them as favorable opportunities to 
demonstrate to my Lord the fulness of my love and devotion 
to Him and His cause. I must fight a good fight 
against this thing— the world, the flesh or the Adversary 
—whatever it might be that had brought the snare. 

Thus viewed and thus met we can rejoice in every 
such experience; every trial and every difficulty will 
prove a blessing; for we shall, first of all, have an opportunity 
to show the Lord that we will endure, and not compromise 
His cause or our own position as His servants. 
We can rejoice also because we know that under such 
trials our characters will make advancement toward crystallization, 
if we overcome; and because we know that 
the Lord would not let us fall into any temptation which 
He would not cause to work out for us a blessing if we 
are wholly loyal. Let us dwell often upon the words of 
the Apostles: "Beloved, count it all joy when ye fall into 
divers temptations." "Greatly rejoice, though now for a 
season ye are in manifold temptation, that the trial of 
your faith, being more precious than of gold that perisheth, 
though it be tried by fire, might be found unto 
praise and honor and glory at the appearing of Jesus 
Christ." "Blessed is the man that endureth [faithfully 
under] temptation; for after his trials he will receive the 
crown of life which the Lord hath promised to them that 
love Him." "These light afflictions, which are but for a 
moment, work out for us a far more exceeding and eternal 
weight of glory"— if rightly utilized; if we are rightly 
exercised by them.— 1 Peter 1:7; James 1:2,12. 

"HE THAT ENDURETH" 

We are assured that those who love the Lord, and 
who because of this will receive the Kingdom, will be 
those whose love will have been tested by trials and 
temptations on the way. Those who do not love the Lord 
with all their hearts— in whom self or some other idol 
has first place— will be seduced by the world, the flesh or 
the Adversary, into some form of rebellion against the 
Divine Word or Divine providences. They will have 
schemes and theories which they will prefer to the Lord's 
Plan. These when analyzed will usually be found to be 
based either upon selfishness or upon ambition or an evil 
spirit of envy, hatred, etc. The Lord's leading and the 
Lord's words lose their attraction to such, and they lose 
their interest correspondingly. Like those who turned 
away from the Lord at the First Advent, declaring, "This 



is a hard saying," they walk no more with Him. 

As there are some substances which are short and 
brittle, so are there some which have fibre, strength, endurance. 
The Lord chooses for Himself such characters 
as have the strong, enduring qualities— fortitude, patience, 
long-suffering, etc. Some there are who walk 
close to the Lord, who will not be driven from Him by 
any of the arts and wiles of the Adversary. They are 
such as are at heart fully the Lord's— not their own; 
they follow wherever the Lord may lead, because they 
have no will except the will of God. These will follow 
the Lord in the narrow way of trial, discipline and testings 
during the present life, and by and by, as He has 
declared, "They shall walk with Me in white; for they 
are worthy."— Revelation 3:4. 

He who escapes all trials and temptations and difficulties 
has every reason to doubt that he is really in relationship 
to God as a son. If he were a son, the Lord 
would surely find it necessary to give him trials and difficulties. 
If he does not have these he should go to the 
Father and make sure that there is no impediment on his 
part— make sure that he has put himself in the proper 
place where he can be prepared for the Kingdom. "Whom 
the Lord loveth He chasteneth, and scourgeth every son 
whom He receiveth."— Hebrews 12:6. 

FAILURES AS "STEPPING-STONES" 

All will rejoice when the testings are over and we are 
accepted as overcomers, to share with the Lord in His 
Throne. But patience, trust and love must first do a refining 
work in our hearts, making us mellow, submissive 
and obedient to God. Let the good work go on! Let us 
rejoice if our trials have made us stronger in character, 
more humble and Christlike, more aware of our blemishes 
and imperfections, more watchful and earnest in our endeavors 
to correct them so far as possible. 

Even the conflicts in which we have had only partial 
victory may have resulted in blessings to us. Even in 
those experiences where we have suffered absolute failure, 
there may be, through the humiliation and the pain 
of defeat, a strengthening of our character, a firm determination 
for greater watchfulness in that direction, 
and a more fervent prayer for the Lord's sustaining 
grace, the need of which has been more deeply impressed 
upon our hearts. Thus even failures may become "stepping-stones" 
by which we rise toward God and Heaven. 
Only through much tribulation shall we enter the Kingdom 
of Heaven at all. If, therefore, the Lord's people 

R5459 : page 150 

find themselves involved in temptations, tribulations, instead 
of feeling downcast they are to rejoice and say, 
These are evidences that the Lord is preparing me for a 
place in the Kingdom. This should give one courage to 



fight the good fight against the world, the flesh and the 
Adversary. The flesh is suffering; but the new mind, 
the new will, has this joy; and the New Creature can 
rejoice, knowing that these trials are not for his harm, 
but for his good.— 1 Peter 4:13. 

A WAY OF ESCAPE PROVIDED 

The Heavenly Father will with every temptation provide 
a way of escape. Hence when we find ourselves in 
difficulty we are to say, The Heavenly Father is permitting 
this trial— the Lord Jesus will help me, and so I 
will rejoice in the fact that the Lord will not allow me to 
be overthrown; for He has promised that all things shall 
work out for my good. 

As our text expressly says: We are to count it all 
joy when we fall into temptations— not when we walk 
into them. We are not to seek temptation. In our own 
fallen condition and that of those around us, with the 
Adversary alert to harm us, we know that there will be 
plenty of temptations without our walking into them. But 
if we fall into temptation we are to say, I have been 
striving against this thing, but the Lord has permitted 
it; and there must, therefore, come some blessing out of 
it for me. Even temptations that come through negligence 
are not to be disesteemed. Some of our greatest 
lessons in carefulness have resulted from the effect of 
our own carelessness. 

R5460 : page 150 

Our joy is largely dependent upon our study of the 
Word and our knowledge of the precious promises contained 
therein for those who overcome. The Lord wants 
those who will endure a great fight of afflictions, who will 
endure patiently, though the temptations continue long 
and the tribulations become more and more severe. But 
if they should lose faith, all their previous good resolutions 
and standing for what is right would not make them 
overcomers. 

These trials are intended to develop in us patience— 
that this quality may be deeply ingrained. We are building 
character for all eternity; and patience could not be 
thus developed and maintained except by repeated difficulties, 
tests— by our resolving again and again to be 
stronger and firmer in building the character-likeness of 
our Heavenly Father and our Lord Jesus Christ. 

A WORD OF WARNING 

To those who are of this anointed company and who 
are striving to attain the glory promised to the faithful 
followers of Christ, the Apostle Peter issues a word of 
warning. In the first chapter of his second Epistle, he 
urges the Church to add quality after quality of character-preparation, 
that thus they may be fitted for the glorious 



things that God has promised to the faithful. He 
specifies faith as the primary qualification. To this he 
says that we are to add fortitude, knowledge, patience, 
self-control, godliness, brotherly kindness and a broad, 
generous love for all mankind. The reason why the 
Scriptures declare that our judgment will be according 
to our faith is that while in the flesh we shall never be 
able to perform works such as God could approve. 

What God approves is the New Creature. By exercising 
faith and by demonstrating loyalty these New 
Creatures will be able to please Him, and to work out 
the proper character as enjoined in His Word, developing 
the fruits and graces of the Holy Spirit. "If ye do 
these things," says the Apostle, "ye shall never fall; for 
so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly 
into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior, 
Jesus Christ." 

Faith is necessary all along the line. Without faith 
we could not have courage to go on. If we did not have 
faith what would be our source of encouragement? The 
fall mentioned in the text above quoted (2 Peter 1:10), 
is evidently a fall from the position to which we have 
been invited and to which invitation we respond. We 
were called to be joint-heirs with our Lord. If we are 
obedient to the Word of the Lord and are properly exercised 
by the experiences which are given us in the School 
of Christ, we shall gain His approval; for "Faithful is 
He that hath called us." If there is a fall in our case, 
it will be due to failure to do our part. If we fail to cultivate 
character, we shall fail to gain the Kingdom. 

CAUSES INDUCING A FALL 

Among those who fall some will fall more seriously 
than others. Those who fail to go on will receive certain 
tests which will determine whether they will turn back to 
the world or will continue in the narrow way. Some will 
fail in that they will not manifest sufficient zeal. These 
will come through great tribulations. If by these experiences 
they are brought to a full loyalty to the Lord, they 
will be granted everlasting life, but not on so high a 
plane as if they had not failed in their manifestation of 
zeal for the Lord, and of faith, energy and perseverance 
in doing the Lord's will. 

Again, from lack of zeal in the Lord's service or from 
cultivating a spirit of bitterness, one may deteriorate until 
he becomes an enemy of the Lord, loving sin rather 
than righteousness. As an opponent of God such a one 
would suffer a complete fall. But those who have a temporary 
fall, but who afterwards overcome in the trials 
which the Lord will allow to come upon them, thus showing 
their loyalty to Him, will be fully recovered. Those 
who fall utterly can never be recovered. Such will lose 
everything. They had sacrificed their human hopes before 
they could be accepted at first; therefore their falling 
away from this condition of a New Creature will be 



a hopeless fall. 

The fall of such will be far worse than the fall of 
Adam, whose fall resulted from having only limited 
knowledge and from lack of experience in the results of 
evil, for these have come to a clear knowledge of the 
Truth and have experienced a share in the redemption. 
The falling away of such would mean a fearful looking 
for of judgment and fiery indignation— of destruction 
as enemies of God. Adam had only a small knowledge 
of the grace of God, and therefore is to be redeemed 
and ultimately restored, if he shall come into harmony 
with God. 

Dear brethren, let us take heed to our ways. Let us 
earnestly cultivate the fruits of the Spirit, that we may 
indeed be presented "faultless before the presence of His 
glory with exceeding joy." 



'"From glory unto glory' that ever lies before, 
Still wondering, adoring, rejoicing more and more; 
Still following where He leadeth, from shining field to 

field, 
Himself the goal of glory, Revealer and revealed! 

"Then let our hearts be surely fixed where truest joys are 

found, 
And let our burning, loving praise yet more and more 

abound; 
And gazing on the 'things not seen' eternal in the skies, 
'From glory unto glory,' O Savior, let us rise!" 



R5460 :page 151 

"THE ISRAEL OF GOD" 

"Ye are a chosen generation, a Royal Priesthood, an holy nation, 
a peculiar people; that ye should show forth the praises of 
Him who hath called you out of darkness 
into His marvelous light."— 1 PET. 2:9. 

IN OUR text the Apostle Peter is pointing out 
the fact that the Church of Christ is separate 
and distinct from all other people. For 
many centuries before our Lord came, the 
Jews had understood that they were God's 
people. He had made a special Covenant 
with them through Moses, which constituted 
them His people. He had also made certain 
promises to them dependent on their keeping 
of the Law. Thus they were His chosen- 
heirs of certain special promises that were conditioned 
upon their obedience, and of certain other promises that 
were stated without specified conditions. God had also 



promised to make a New Covenant with them, to give them 
a new heart, to take away their stoniness of heart, etc. 
But after the First Advent a different arrangement began. 

The Apostle is directing attention to the new feature 
of God's Plan— that during the Gospel Age He is calling 
out a special people. There will be no competition between 
the two classes— the new nation and the nation of 
Israel— for the promises given to Israel after the flesh 
were earthly, and the promises given to Israel after the 
spirit are spiritual. The Jews were a "peculiar people" 
(Deut. 14:2), a special people whom God had separated 
from the world; they were a chosen generation, or race. 
They were the generation, or race, of Abraham through 
Isaac and Jacob. This special generation was recognized 
of God as His people, Jews, Israelites, through the Law 
Covenant, as well as through the preceding promises God 
had made to Abraham. 

But since Pentecost God has started this other work 
in the world— another generation— peculiar, separate, 
selected for a particular purpose. And this generation 
will all be holy— there will be none but holy ones in it! 
The other nation had a priesthood, but this new people is 
a whole nation of priests. We see how this description 
applies to the Church. The Apostle Paul points out that 
while Aaron and his sons were typical in some respects, 
yet they did not typify all the features of God's Plan. 
They typified how Jesus would die— as a Sacrifice— how 
all His associates would be sacrificers. But Aaron and 
his sons did not typify the still higher priesthood which 
God had in mind when He established the Levitical priesthood. 
This higher Order of Priests was typified by Melchizedek, 
the king-priest— Hebrews 6:20. 

CHURCH'S FUTURE TWO-FOLD OFFICE 

Jesus is this great antitypical Royal, or Kingly, Priest, 
and His Church is the Body of this antitypical Melchizedek. 
Before the new Order can reign as kings, and 
before they can serve as Priests, they must go through a 
certain process. The members of this Body of Christ 
must be first generated. It is a new race— all are begotten 
of the Holy Spirit. As Jesus was begotten of the 
Holy Spirit at the time of His consecration, and there 
became a New Creature, spirit-begotten, so also the 
Church, those who are to walk in His steps, must first 
make a full consecration before this new generative power 
will begin to operate in them. 

This power began to operate in Jesus at His begetting, 
and completed its work in His resurrection. And so with 
us: This power will complete its work in us when we 
have proven our loyalty even unto death. When this 

R5461 :page 151 

work has been accomplished in all of the Priesthood class, 
then they will be of the Royal Priesthood indeed, on the 



Heavenly plane. This power of the Holy Spirit is not 
only a generating, or begetting, power, but an anointing 
power. And the anointing is not only to a priestly office, 
but also to a kingly office. This New Creation are a holy 
nation in the sense that they are representatives of a 
special Government, a Divine Government. 

THE HOLY NATION-TYPE AND ANTITYPE 

Israel purposed to be a holy nation, and in a typical 
way they were a holy nation. But in a broad sense, the 
Church constitutes the holy nation— separate and distinct 
from humanity. We are a separate nation in every sense 
of the word— living in the midst of people of the world. 
We keep our laws and also their laws. We are obedient 
to the "powers that be," realizing that the Lord has permitted 
these and wishes us to be subject to them, 
wherever our consciences will not be sacrificed. The 
Lord tells us that as representatives of His Kingdom we 
are to make known His Message. He tells us that the 
world is in a rebellious condition because they have become 
blinded by the Adversary. 

And so He sends us as His ambassadors to tell men of 
His goodness, His Plan, which He purposes to work out, 
that the hearts of those who have an ear to hear His 
Message may turn to the Lord. He tells us not to expect 
many to hear this Message; for they will be so deaf and 
blind that they cannot understand. But He assures us 
that by and by their blindness will be taken away, and 
they will be ready for what He has for them. 

The world does not understand us— they do not know 
that we belong to a different Kingdom; but we understand 
them. As the Apostle points out, "He that is spiritual 
judgeth all things." But they cannot understand, because 
no man can understand beyond his mental status, so to 
speak. We who have been begotten of the Holy Spirit 
still understand the natural things, but the natural man 
does not understand the spiritual things— "neither can he 
know them, because they are spiritually discerned"; "they 
are foolishness unto him." So we dwell in the midst of a 
perverse race, or generation, fallen into sin for six thousand 
years. As our Lord declared, "Ye are not of the 
world, even as I am not of the world. " —John 17:16. 

OUR PRESENT GLORIOUS PRIVILEGE 

And we are a peculiar people in the sight of the Lord. 
This word peculiar signifies a separate people— implying 
that God had done something special for us. The Lord 
Jesus has purchased us. His merit— the purchase-price— 
has been applied on our behalf. The only ones for whom 
this purchase-price has as yet been applied are the spirit-begotten 
ones. The Apostle's Message is to these. What 
object had God in selecting this peculiar people? It was 
that we might "show forth the praises of Him who hath 
called us out of darkness into His marvelous light." Is 



God proud, or vain, that He wishes His praises to be 
shown forth? Oh, no! God wishes His praises to be 
known because His praises will show to His creatures the 
great blessings He has provided for them. 

If we go out and tell men that "God so loved the world 
that He gave His Only Begotten Son, that whosoever 
believeth on Him should not perish, but have everlasting 
life," we are showing forth His praises. We are not 
making God happy by so doing— He was already happy. 
But we are in this doing a great favor to the people who 
hear: we are telling them that God will bring them back 
again into His favor; that He will remove the curse. So, 
then, it is a great privilege now to tell forth the praises 
of God! But alas! not very many have the ear to hear; 
yet by our zeal in showing forth the Master's praises, we 
are doing all that we can to help men back to God. 

R5461 :page 152 

The greater work by and by will be the work of the 
Kingdom in ruling mankind, in overthrowing sin, in instructing 
and healing the people, bringing them into 
harmony with their Creator. And this will require a 
thousand years for its accomplishment. This glorious 
work will be ours! How wonderful it will be to be heirs 
of God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord— to be 
higher than angels! We shall be next to Jesus, as He 
will be next to the Father— "far above angels, principalities 
and powers and every name that is named." 

"BE THOU FAITHFUL UNTO DEATH" 

But it is not only the honor that we should seek, but 
also the privilege of service God is pleased to give this 
class; the privilege of opening all the deaf ears, of 
awakening the whole world, to see, to know, to understand 
our God, to realize that the knowledge of the Lord 
is to fill the whole world— "for the earth shall be full of 
the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea" 
—ocean deep! (Isa. 1 1:9.) That glorious work of the 
future shall be done only by those who have proved themselves 
wholly loyal to God. If we are careless or indifferent 
about telling forth the good Message and showing 
forth His praises, we shall show that we are not 
worthy of the Kingdom. Those who prove loyal and 
faithful to the end will be the ones whom the Lord will 
exalt by and by. 

And in doing this, God has been merely carrying out 
a course which men have imitated. God laid His plans 
long before men were born; nevertheless, wise men instinctively 
follow certain great principles. Napoleon is 
said to have directed that the various men who were faithful 
to him be made princes in the countries he conquered. 
Our Lord says, "Be thou faithful unto death, and I will 
give thee a crown of life." (Rev. 2:10.) So we have 
from every standpoint the greatest encouragement to 



"show forth the praises of Him who hath called us out of 
darkness into His marvelous light." This Scripture implies 
that we realize we were once in darkness, and that 
we know we are now in the light. 

Comparatively few have had this experience. Those 
who have been raised out of ignorance and sin into a 
heart appreciation of God's Plan are the ones referred to 
here. They could not get this light, except by being begotten 
of the Holy Spirit and becoming members of this 
holy nation, this peculiar people. And we cannot do the 
world greater good than by telling them of God's great 
favor, and thus helping them also out of darkness into the 
light. The light is given us that we may let it shine. 
May we be enabled to sing from our hearts: 

"All for Jesus, all for Jesus- 
All my being's ransomed powers; 

All my thoughts and words and doings, 
All my days and all my hours!" 

WE ARE NOT OUR OWN 

In Titus 2:14, St. Paul sets forth a similar thought: 
"A peculiar people, zealous of good works." The people 
here referred to by him are the saints of God, those who 
are waiting for the fulfilment of God's promises— for 
those things which were to be brought to them at the coming 
(during the parousia— presence) of the Lord and 
Savior Jesus Christ. These are the people who realize 
that they have been purchased with the precious blood. 
Some translators render 1 Pet. 2:9 "A purchased people, 
zealous of good works." The Lord's people are a people 
who have been redeemed, purchased. Whatever they 
were through the fall, they have been redeemed from that 
condition. St. Paul, in recounting certain sins, said, "And 
such were some of you; but ye are washed, but ye are 
sanctified, but ye are justified."— 1 Cor. 6:9-11. 

The thought in Titus 2:14 is much the same as in the 
other. Ye are a peculiar people, a people bought back 
from Sin and Death, and all such are "peculiar," different 
from the remainder of mankind. Amongst mankind, 
in Christendom, we find some that are vicious, and 
even amongst the heathen we find noble people. But 
these peculiar people of whom St. Paul wrote, are different 
from all others— they are New Creatures in Christ. 

To these, "old things have passed away, and all things 
have become new." They have new hopes and new aims. 
They are hoping to attain the highest position offered to 
any in the Universe; namely, to be made associates in the 
Government of Messiah. These are very wonderful 
hopes. And the possession of these hopes by faith constitutes 
them different and peculiar, separate and distinct 
from all other people. 

CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PECULIAR PEOPLE 

While others seek the emoluments and distinctions of 



the present time, these count all the things of this world as 

loss and dross, in view of the wonderful things that God 

has set before their minds. They have seen the "pearl 

of great price," and have given their all to purchase it. 

They see that the Kingdom of God is the most valuable 

thing that is obtainable now or ever will be attainable. 

They have recognized the terms upon which this Kingdom-Pearl 

may be obtained and are seeking to make good 

the purchase. The terms are self-sacrifice, faithfulness to 

God at any cost, and patient endurance under adverse 

conditions, even unto the end. 

These peculiar people are seeking to accomplish this 
work in themselves, because they see that these are the 
most gracious characteristics and qualities that can be 
imagined. Hence they are doubly solicitous; they are 
zealous of good works. They love to see others good and 
happy, and they love to spread the knowledge of God. 
They love the things that God delights in, because they 
have the Spirit of Christ. They are interested in reforms 

R5462 : page 152 

—social reform, temperance reform, every kind of reform; 
but this does not mean that they will engage in 
these reforms. The same man cannot be a great preacher, 
a successful farmer, a successful lawyer, etc. If he be a 
great farmer, he must give up the other things to a large 
extent. Or if he be a great preacher, he will have to give 
up, for the most part, other things. Yet he may have 
pleasure in them all. 

And so with these peculiar people: they have one particular 
work given them of the Father. They recognize 
that this work is most important to be done, hence they 
cannot give their attention to political reform, social reform, 
or other reform, outside of their own work. For 
this reason they are called theorists instead of practical 
people. Nevertheless they have the most practical plan of 
all; for God's Plan is of all plans the most practical. 
These people, in becoming co-workers, are taking the 
wisest course. But they do not find fault with others. 
They see that the only ones who can grasp these things 
are those who have the eyes to see and the ears to hear; 
they know that others cannot go beyond what they see. 
The peculiarities of these "peculiar people" extend to all 
the affairs of life. 

WHAT CONSTITUTE GOOD WORKS 

This class of people are wise enough to know that 
all the Truth even should not be mentioned at once. The 
Master said to those who had been His close followers 
for three and a half years, "I have yet many things to 
say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now." (John 16:12.) 
The Lord's people are eager to do good, but in 
the way that will be the most effective, and in the way 



R5462 : page 153 

that will not stumble others. The good works, then, that 
this peculiar people are zealous of are the works of God. 
As Jesus said, "I must work the works of Him that sent 
Me."-John9:4. 

The world cannot appreciate this, not having the Spirit 
of God, but more the spirit of the Adversary. The world 
are walking in the way of slander and hypocrisy, more or 
less. Jesus said, when speaking to the Pharisees, "Ye are 
of your father, the Devil." (John 8:44.) And when 
Jesus walked in the way of God, His course was a condemnation 
to them. Therefore Jesus declared, "The darkness 
hateth the light," and He forewarned us that it 
would be the same all the way down through the Age. 
He warned His followers that they would suffer the same 
persecution He had suffered. But the Master urged that 
they be zealous for the Truth— solicitous for it. 

Since God has called us to good works, we are to 
show great zeal, even though it bring upon us the envy 
and hatred and opposition of others. We are to rejoice, 
even if we are called to suffer persecution for His sake. 
And though the world does not appreciate these good 
works now, they will see and understand by and by, in 
their day of visitation. (1 Peter 2:12.) They will see 
that God's Plan was the best plan. The Church glorified 
will be the channel for blessing the world in general. 

Only this peculiar people can now understand these 
things. Jesus said unto His disciples, "It is given unto 
you to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, 
but to them [the multitudes who went to hear Him] it is 
not given. ...Therefore speak I to them in parables; 
because they seeing, see not; and hearing, they hear not, 
neither do they understand." (Matt. 13:11,13.) Only 
those who have come into this special relationship can 
understand. "The secret of the Lord is with them that 
reverence Him, and He will show them His Covenant."— 
Psa. 25:14. 

We find a great many who gladly accept the Truth, 
and then seem to forget that the only way they can make 
progress in the Truth is to consecrate themselves to God. 
If they fail to make consecration, they must fail to make 
progress. We should be sure that we give people the 
right thought along this line. Only those who thus become 
God's "peculiar people, zealous of good works," can 
inherit the Kingdom. 



R5462 : page 153 

EXPIATION OF SIN-AD AMIC AND PARTIALLY WILFUL 

THE expiation of sin may be viewed from two 
different standpoints. A satisfaction to Divine 
Justice for Adamic sin is, first of all, 



necessary. The decree of the great Supreme 

Judge of the Universe— that the human race 

must die— went forth because of the disobedience 

of Adam; and no one can be released 

from death until that decree shall 

have been revoked because of its requirements 

being complied with. The annulling 

of that decree of Justice, however, will not make the individual 

at once a perfect man. 

If a man had been put into prison for some offense, 
and after ten years someone should make satisfaction, 
should pay up his account and comply with the requirements 
of the law, the prisoner would be released— justice 
would be satisfied. But freedom from the restraint of 
prison life would not give back to the prisoner his clear 
vision, his teeth, his hair, his health, or anything that he 
might have lost or that had been impaired during his 
term of imprisonment. And likewise, whatever satisfaction 
of Justice is made for mankind, they will not, at the 
time they are awakened from the tomb, be free from the 
marks that Sin has placed upon them. 

There will be no Divine disfavor holding over upon 
the world at that time, because the price for man's release 
will have been paid. But mankind at the beginning 
of the Millennial Age will still have the blemishes 
resulting from the fall. It will be the work of that Age 
to restore the human race, to lift them up out of imperfection 
and weakness. Man will be helped up from his 
fallen condition, because Justice will have been satisfied. 

The world will be in the hands of Christ, who purchased 
them by the sacrifice of His own life. We are to 
bear in mind that the satisfaction of Justice does not 
bring about the restitution of humanity from imperfection, 
but this judicial satisfaction is merely the turning 
away of the disfavor of God, the annulling of the death 
penalty. This gives the opportunity for man to be restored 
to favor with God— to be brought into a condition 
worthy of Divine acceptance at the close of the Millennium. 

As for this satisfaction of Divine Justice which must 
take place before the New Covenant can be inaugurated, 
it includes not only a satisfaction for Adamic sin, but it 
embraces also stripes for partially wilful sins, and satisfaction 
for certain gross injustices which mankind have 
committed when they had a knowledge of a better course 
and were in a measure responsible for their unjust words 
and actions. To an extent they were in ignorance, but 
often they were wilfully so, and in proportion to the measure 
of responsibility will Justice require a recompense. 

JEWISH AGE RECKONING 

At the close of the Jewish Age God had a reckoning 
with the nation of Israel, which was one of the most terrific 
times of trouble the world has ever known. The 
declaration of Jesus was, that of that Age— that generation 
then living— God would require expiation for all the 



righteous blood that had been shed from the time of Abel 
to the time in which He was speaking.— Matt. 23:34-36. 

And these partially wilful sins of the world are not 
fully covered by the Sin-offerings. In so far as they have 
been wilful they must be expiated by punishment. These 
sins and trespasses are shown as placed upon the scapegoat 
class— the Great Company. In the great Antitype 
shortly to be enacted, these will be allowed to suffer for 
some of the partly wilful sins of the world— especially 
the sins of Babylon. All the blood of God's holy ones, 
from the beginning of this Gospel Age, will be required 
of the present generation, in the "great Time of Trouble, 
such as never was." 

The martyrs of the past, "the souls under the altar," 
are represented symbolically as crying out for the vindication 
of Justice, saying, "How long, O Lord, holy and 
true, dost Thou not judge and avenge our blood upon 
them that dwell on the earth!" They were bidden to wait 
until others of their brethren should be similarly killed, 
when the guilt of all will be avenged.— Rev. 6:9-11. 

RECKONING OF THE GOSPEL AGE 

From the above we see that at the close of this Gospel 
Age there will be another squaring of accounts. A 
time of trouble such as never was since there was a nation, 
and never will be afterwards, is to come shortly. 
(Matt. 24:21,22.) This is shown forcefully in many 
prophecies of Scripture. Our Lord is now again present, 
as the great Judge, and the storm clouds are rapidly gathering 
in this Day of His kingly presence. 

Why require the full payment for all the wrongs of 

R5463 : page 154 

the two Ages— the Gospel Age and the one preceding, 
extending from the time the blood of righteous Abel was 
shed to the present time— at the closing of these Ages, 
is it asked? We answer, Because the chief light of 
each Age comes at its close, and because those who sin 
against such light are worthy of more severe judgment 
than similar evildoers preceding them, who had less light. 
The Scriptural argument is that to endorse the wrongs 
of the past in the light of the present is to multiply the 
responsibility and to deserve the plagues of the whole. 

We have not far to look if we would see these iniquities, 
or inequities, of the world today, especially of 
Christendom. There is considerable light now shining 
upon the whole world, and more particularly upon its 
civilized portion. The principles of righteousness set 
forth in the Jewish Law, and subsequently amplified by 
the Lord and the Apostles, have enlightened the minds of 
the public in general in respect to justice and injustice, 
right and wrong, good and evil, so that there never was 
so responsible a generation as the one now living. 

Notwithstanding this increase of knowledge, and notwithstanding 



that there are gross iniquities prevailing 
throughout the world, we find comparatively few willing 
to do anything toward a readjustment and equalization 
of the world's affairs, financial, social and religious. 
Rather, it seems that the majority of those possessing 
advantages are quite willing to hold to them, even though 
recognizing that they are inequitable, iniquitous. 

We perceive also that much of the evil done against 
the Lord's holy ones of the past has thus far failed of 
the punishment due. Great systems which in the name 
of Christ persecuted the true Church have practised and 
prospered, but have not yet received their just recompense 
of reward. In the terrible trouble of the near future 
great Babylon will go down as a mighty millstone 
into the sea, when every man's hand will be against his 
neighbor in anarchy, when "there will be no peace to him 
that goeth out, nor to him that cometh in." 

LEGAL EXPIATION BY SCAPEGOAT CLASS 

But it seems that the legal expiation of these sins 
must be accomplished by the scapegoat class, as shown 
in the type. (Lev. 16:20-22.) Israel here represents the 
world. In this scapegoat type, the Lord pictures the sending 
into the wilderness of isolation and persecution the 
Great Company who, after consecration, were unwilling 
to go voluntarily "outside the camp, bearing the reproaches" 
of Christ. They shared not in the Sin- Atonement, 
but will be permitted, yea, forced, to bear the 
weight of some of the world's wilful sins, and thus to 
become dead to the world, that their spiritual being may 
be saved in the Day of the Lord Jesus. 

This class, particularly large in the present day, will 
be delivered over to the Adversary, to suffer in this great 
time of trouble. Such of them as respond to these tribulations, 
faithfully and loyally, will be counted as overcomers 
and be granted palms of victory, as shown in 
Revelation 7, and will be privileged to share in the Marriage 
Supper of the Lamb and to be honorable servants 
of the Bride of Christ. If they fail to respond, and to 
wash their spotted robes in the blood of the Lamb, they 
will go into the Second Death. 

It is this great trouble-time which the Little Flock, 
the Lord's goat class of faithful sacrificers, will escape, 
and which the Great Company will not escape, but will 
share. They will come up out of this trouble with 
washed robes, made white in the blood of the Lamb. 
Their sufferings will not wash their robes, but in their 
sufferings they will learn to appreciate as never before 
their relationship to the Lamb of God and to His atoning 
merit, and will by faith be permitted to apply the 
same to their own cleansing. As we consider the experiences 
of these children of God, so soon to come, let us 
all the more manifest our love for the Lord, and all the 
more seek to lay down our lives faithfully in the service 
of our King, and in behalf of the Household of Faith. 



JESUS ALONE THE RANSOMER 

It would not be correct to say that the scapegoat class 
atone for sin and thus make it possible for a certain part 
of humanity to be brought forth from the tomb. The 
tomb represents the penalty upon Adam for his transgression, 
and this penalty has been inherited by all of 
Adam's children. The Apostle says that "by one man 
sin [disobedience] entered into the world, and death by 
[as the result of] sin; and so death passed upon all men." 
—Romans 5:12. 

The death of Jesus alone can cancel the sin of Adam. 
He only was the Redeemer, the Ransomer. He gave His 
life for Father Adam's life, and thus as a satisfaction 
for the sins of the whole world. Those for whom Jesus 
advocates as the members of His Body become associated 
with Him and identified with Him in His work, not by 
virtue of their own merit, but because "accepted in the 
Beloved." These are Scrip turally shown as having something 
to do with the cancelation of "the sin of the world," 
because of their association with the Head. The Great 
Company have nothing whatever to do with the cancelation 
of THE sin of the world. 

RESPONSIBILITY FOR SINS AGAINST LIGHT 

"THE sin of the world" (John 1:29) was the sin of 
Adam; but there are other sins aside from Adamic sin, 
which was brought on the race by the fall. We may suppose 
that in every Age there have been sins committed 
against a measure of light. But the sinners were not begotten 
of the Holy Spirit, and therefore their sins against 
light would not involve them in the Second Death. 

Nevertheless, in whatever proportion they had light 
and knowledge, they had also responsibility. And while 
Jesus died in order that all might have an opportunity of 
coming back from the tomb, and to perfect life, yet He 
did not die on account of any individual sin committed 
against light. For such sins the individual is himself responsible. 

In the case of the Church class, wilful evil-doers will 
be cut off from life. The Apostle Paul says that some 
were delivered over to Satan for the destruction of the 
flesh, that their spirit might be saved. Every wilful sin, 
no matter by whom committed, or when committed, must 
be answered for by stripes or by the death of the sinner. 

SINS NOT COVERED BY CHRIST'S SACRIFICE 

Nothing is to be atoned for by Christ's death but the 
sin of Adam. But other sins of direct responsibility, sins 
against light, must also be settled for. In olden times 
there were bitter persecutions of God's people, and those 
persecuted were obliged to dwell in caves and dens of the 
earth. (Hebrews 11:32-40.) The transgressions against 
these, in proportion as they were committed with a degree 



of light, were to be settled for by the transgressors. 

God's providence squared off the account against the 
Jewish people in the end of the Jewish Age. There came 
upon that people wrath to the uttermost. The squaring 
of accounts for that nation, we understand, was completed 
A.D. 70. As for other nations, we must assume 
that God has dealt with them along similar lines— though 
not just the same; because they were not in covenant relationship 
with Him as were the Israelites. 

Coming down to the Gospel Age, many sins have been 
committed which could in no way be covered by Christ's 
sacrifice— sins against a measure of light and knowledge. 

R5463 : page 155 

The chiefest of all these sins have been, according to the 
Master's words, against His people. He said that whoever 
would harm one of the "little ones" who believed in 
Him should have punishment; and that whoever would 
give even so much as "a cup of cold water" to one of 
these should have a reward.— Matthew 18:6; 10:42. 

We read of terrible atrocities committed against the 
saints during the Dark Ages. They were covered with tar 
and burned; they were fed to wild beasts, their poor bodies 
being torn to pieces. They were tortured in innumerable 
ways. We are reasonably sure that some punishment is 
due to those who committed these atrocities. But the 
Lord has told us that we are not to judge before the 
time. In due time we shall be made judges of the world. 
Now we are to look to the Lord and wait for His judgment. 

THE ANTITYPICAL SCAPEGOAT 

The Scriptures indicate that as there was a settling 
time, culminating in A.D. 70, with the Jews, so there 
will be a settling time with those claiming to be Christian 
nations. To whatever extent they have lent themselves 
to injustice, to whatever extent they have sinned against 
light, they are responsible. We do not know the extent 
of their responsibility— God knows ! But in this Time of 
Trouble He will square all these matters, in order that 
the New Dispensation may be free from all accounts— 
that there may be nothing of this kind charged up to 
humanity. The sins committed nationally will be expiated 
nationally. And of course, as individuals suffered 
from the wrong-doing, so individuals will suffer in the 
expiation. 

And how will God reckon with the injustice which He 
wishes to cancel, so that the world may come forth with 
a clean slate? We answer, the Great Company class will 
have a share in that trouble. And since they do not really 
deserve a share in the trouble, in the sense of having merited 
Divine wrath, what they will suffer will be in a 
measure a suffering the merit of which will go to others. 
It is not a punishment to get into the Great Company 
class. The Great Company will be a very blessed class. 



They will not be seated in the Throne, but will serve 
before the Throne; neither will they obtain the Divine 
nature. The Little Flock class will get the great prize 
of being associated with the Master, joint-heirs with 
Him in the Kingdom. The other class will get a reward 
on a lower spiritual plane— a spiritual plane, because they 
also were begotten of the Spirit. 

So far as the Great Company are concerned, God's 
permitting them to share in the trouble at the end of 
this Age will be for their own development. Their 
Covenant was unto death; and unless they lose their lives 
in obedience to the Lord, unless they prove faithful unto 
death, they will not be worthy of any position of life on 

R5464 : page 155 

any plane. Hence it will be to their own personal advantage 
that they suffer in that time. They are said to 
suffer for the iniquities, the sins and transgressions of 
the people of the world as the antitypical scapegoat. 
(Leviticus 16:21,22. See TABERNACLE SHADOWS, pp. 
68-72.) Instead of allowing that merit of the Great Company 
to go for nothing, the Lord makes a credit of it, as 
it were, to balance the world's account for wilful sins. 



R5464 : page 155 

THE FRIEND OF SINNERS 

-JUNE 14.-LUKE 18:9-14; 19:1-10.- 

"I came not to call the righteous but sinners."— Mark 2:17. 

IN OUR Lord's parables He dealt chiefly with 

the Pharisees and the publicans; for the 

Sadducees were Jews in name only, not believing 

the Scriptures nor expecting a future 

life. The Pharisees were orthodox, reverenced 

the Law and taught it to the people. 

Outwardly, they were very correct; but 

Jesus in various parables pointed out that 

with many of them religion was a ceremony 

and the keeping of the Law an outward 

obedience, which did not extend to the heart. The publicans 

did not profess holiness, but rather confessed estrangement 

from God and lack of harmony with His Law. 

The Pharisees treated the publicans as though they 
were Gentiles— refused their company and would not even 
eat with them. The Pharisees recognized Jesus as being 
exemplary, and His teachings as in full accord with the 
highest principles. They wondered, therefore, that He 
did not join with them, and wondered still more that He 
would have fellowship with publicans— confessed sinners. 

The secret of the matter is that Jesus looked not upon 



the outward appearance, but upon the heart. He did not love 
the publicans because they were sinners, nor disapprove 
of the Pharisees because they outwardly kept the Law. 
We remember the case of the young Pharisee who came to 
Jesus and who, when questioned about the Law, said, 
"All these things have I kept from my youth up." We 
read, "Jesus beholding him loved him." He was a sincere 
Pharisee. 

The parable of our lesson illustrates this matter. It 
shows us the heart-attitude of some of the Pharisees and 
of some of the despised publicans: Both men went up 
to the Temple to pray. The one said in his heart, How 
thankful I am that I am not a sinner, like the majority 
of men and like this poor publican! I thank God that I 
am a Pharisee— that I am righteous! But the publican 
felt differently. The weight of sin was upon him. He 
could not look up to Heaven. Striking his hand on his 
bosom, he exclaimed, "God be merciful to me, a sinner!" 

From God's standpoint, both men were sinners— both 
needed forgiveness of sins. But the one trusted in his 
own imperfect works, and asked no forgiveness; the other 
realized his blemishes, and prayed for mercy. We are 
not to get the impression from this that God is more 
pleased with people who live in sin than with those who 
strive to live to the best of their ability in harmony with 
His Law. The lesson is to the contrary. We must all 
realize that we come short of perfection, and that we need 
Divine mercy. The sinner who recognizes this is more 
pleasing to God and nearer to forgiveness than the more 
moral person who fails to see his blemishes. 

At another time, Jesus referred to this same error of 
the Pharisees, saying, "The whole need not a physician," 
and, "I came not to call the righteous, but sinners, to 
repentance." By these words He sought to call attention 
to the fact that although the Pharisees claimed to be 
righteous, they were not so. They were sin-sick, imperfect, 
needing a Savior. But they were not in a condition 
to appreciate their need and to come to the Lord 
for forgiveness— not until they should learn their need- 
that they and all other members of the fallen race are sin-sick 
and need the remedy which only Jesus can give. 

Not realizing their need, the Pharisees did not come 
to Jesus, did not become His disciples; and thereby they 
missed a great blessing. On the contrary, the majority 
of Jesus' followers was made up of publicans and sinners 
—people who had not been living proper lives, but 
who were earnest, who acknowledged their faults, turned 

R5464 : page 156 

from them and accepted the forgiveness and healing of 
the Good Physician. 

PHARISEES IN OUR DAY 

Both classes are still represented in the world, amongst 



Christians. Some are trusting in their church membership, 
their benevolences and general morality, for salvation, 
and ignoring the fact that all are sinners, and that 
forgiveness of sin is obtainable only through faith in the 
Crucified One. Others today, not so conspicuous in 
religious circles, are all the more ready to discern their 
own weaknesses, to confess them and to accept forgiveness 
of sins and everlasting life as unmerited gifts of 
God based upon the Sacrifice at Calvary. These latter, 
we may be sure, will have much advantage every way 
over the others as respects Divine acceptance to joint-heirship 
with Christ in His Kingdom. 

The general lesson to us all is expressed by the 
Apostles James and Peter: "God resisteth the proud, but 
showeth His favor to the humble"— the penitent. "Humble 
yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that 
He may exalt you in due time." Confess your sins, strive 
manfully against them, and trust for deliverance, ultimate 
victory and life everlasting through the merit of the 
Crucified One, in whose footsteps you seek to follow. 

A LITTLE MAN-A BIG HEART 

The latter part of our lesson relates to Jesus' journey 
from Jericho to Jerusalem, just prior to His crucifixion. 
Multitudes were journeying in the same direction, going 
up to the feast of the Passover. As always, Jesus was 
the center of attraction; all wanted to see and hear Him 
of whom we read, "Never man spake like this man." 

Zacchaeus, a rich man of that vicinity, was one of 
those whose curiosity was aroused to see Jesus, of whom 
he had heard much. He was not a Pharisee; he did not 
profess holiness of life. He was one of those condemned 
and ostracised by the Pharisees. He had accepted a 
minor office under the Roman government; he was a tax 
collector for the Romans— a publican. On this account 
he was despised, and declared to be disloyal to Judaism. 

Small of stature, Zacchaeus was unable to see Jesus 
because of the crowd. He therefore ran ahead and 
climbed a sycamore tree, that he might have a good view 
of Jesus as He passed by that way. Little did he realize 
that the Master knew him and had read his heart and 
perceived in it honesty, and that therefore he was to be 
greatly honored. When Jesus came where Zacchaeus 
was, He looked up at the publican, called him by name 
and told him to come down at once, for He was to be 
his guest. The summons was gladly received by Zacchaeus. 
And we may be sure that the whole circumstance 
was greatly to the disgust of the Pharisees. They 
murmured at Jesus' being the guest of one not orthodox. 

Evidently the murmuring reached the ears of Zacchaeus, 
too; for forthwith he addressed the Lord in self-defense 
—as though urging that these charges against him 
should not hinder the Master from coming to be his 
guest, and as intimating his desire of heart to be all that 
he ought to be and could be. He said: "Lord, behold, I 



give one-half of all my goods to the poor; and if I have 
wrongly exacted money from anybody, I restore him 
four-fold." Thus did Zacchaeus intimate his devotion to 
God and to righteousness, and his acceptance of Jesus as 
his Lord, his Teacher. 

How did Jesus receive all this? He replied to Zacchaeus, 
"This day is salvation come to this house; for 
as much as he also is a son of Abraham." From the 
Lord's standpoint, all the sons of Abraham were eligible 
to discipleship. The thing required was an honest confession 
of imperfection, a turning from sin, a hearty acceptance 
of Christ and an endeavor to walk in His steps. 

Unquestionably this same principle still applies, regardless 
of what men may think or say to the contrary. 
The Lord is willing to receive the repentant. No longer 
is it necessary to be of the natural seed of Abraham in 
order to be acceptable as disciples of Jesus. The middle 
wall of partition between Jew and Gentile has been broken 
down, as St. Paul explains. All who have the faith of 
Abraham may be counted in as children of Abraham by 
becoming related to the Divine Plan as disciples of Jesus. 

Our lesson closes with our Lord's words, "For the Son 
of Man came to seek and to save that which was lost." 
Some who deny that Adam was created perfect, who deny 
his fall from Divine favor and who deny that redemption 
by Jesus was necessary, have sought to sustain their position 
by saying that Jesus never referred to the fall, although 
the account in Genesis tells of it, and St. Paul and 
other Apostles particularly mention it. But in this text 
we have Jesus' own statement as to why He came into the 
world at all. He did not come into the world to help 
along the Adversary's schemes; but, as He says, He came 
into the world to be man's Redeemer— to seek and to 
recover, restore, that which was lost. 

Everlasting life was lost, Eden was lost, human perfection 
was lost, the image of the Divine character was 
lost. These could not be recovered by humanity, all of 
whom were under death sentence— the curse. God's 
compassion arranged a Plan, by which Jesus came into the 

R5465 : page 156 

world and gave Himself a Ransom for all. 

The very fact that the Master speaks of His work as a 
ransoming one (Matthew 20:28) corroborates the declaration 
that man was under a sentence of death and needed 
to be ransomed from it. Without the Ransom there 
could be no resurrection of the dead, no future life. The 
Bible is beautifully consistent and harmonious when we 
allow it to speak for itself. It demonstrates that it is the 
Word of God, written under Divine direction. 

TWO SALVATIONS-ONE SAVIOR 

Although the race was one and although all shared 
the same sentence of death, nevertheless it has pleased 



God to provide two different salvations from this curse 
of death. Both salvations are based upon the great sacrifice 
which Jesus accomplished at Calvary. The first of 
these salvations is for the Church class, called out of the 
world during this Gospel Age, called to a change of nature 
—from human to spiritual nature. Even this first salvation 
is not yet complete, and will not be until the whole 
company of the Church shall have been selected from the 
world, and by the First Resurrection shall have been glorified 
with Christ. These will be joint-heirs with Christ in 
His Kingdom; and that Kingdom will begin its work on 
behalf of the remainder of the world. 

The second salvation belongs to the Millennial Age, 
during which Messiah's Kingdom will control the affairs 
of earth, and Satan will be bound. Then the knowledge 
of the Lord shall fill the whole earth. Then all the blind 
eyes shall be opened and all the deaf ears be unstopped; 
and at that time the second salvation will be effective 
to all mankind. That will not be a spiritual salvation— to 
the new nature, like unto the angels. It will be a salvation 
to human perfection, and uplift out of sin and death to the 
image of God, as at first experienced by Father Adam. 

Both salvations will be grand, glorious, though that of 
the Church will be the more glorious. This salvation 
alone is open now; and the pathway to it is by the low 
gate and narrow way of consecration and self-sacrifice, 
walking in the footsteps of Jesus. 



R5465 : page 157 

DIFFICULTIES OF THE RICH 

-JUNE 21. -MARK 10:17-31.- 

"Ye cannot serve God and mammon."— Luke 16:13. 

IT MUST have been an enthusing sight for 
the disciples of Jesus to see a rich young 
ruler run after the Master and, on overtaking 
Him, fall down on his knees at 
Jesus' feet, saying, "Good Master, what 
shall I do that I may inherit eternal life?" 
—a very hopeful subject, we all agree. The 
Good Teacher did not answer the question 
directly; but for the benefit of the young 
man, and of others who have since read the 
narrative, He inquired why the title "good" was applied to 
Him. He would have the young man notice, and would 
wish all to notice, that everything that is really good must 
in some way be of God and in accordance with God. 
There were only two ways in which Jesus could be 
viewed. Either He was, as He claimed, the Son of God 
come into the world on a special mission in the interest of 
humanity, and therefore a servant of God; or, on the 



other hand, if He was not, He was a deceiver, misrepresenting 
Himself and deceiving the people, and was bad, 
very bad. Jesus wished the young man to consider the 
force of his own expression and to decide at once this 
important question, upon which so much would hinge. 

Not waiting for a reply, Jesus proceeded: "Thou 
knowest the commandments, Do not kill, Do not commit 
adultery, Do not steal, Do not bear false witness, Do not 
defraud, Honor thy father and thy mother." The young 
man replied: "Master, all these things have I observed 
from my youth." And Jesus, beholding him, loved him 
and said unto him: "One thing thou lackest; go thy way, 
sell whatsoever thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou 
shalt have treasure in Heaven; and come, take up thy 
cross and follow Me." 

WHAT DID JESUS MEAN? 

What did Jesus mean by telling the young man that 
the way to everlasting life was the keeping of the commandments? 
We would not so tell him now. On the 
contrary, we would tell him that he could not keep the 
commandments perfectly, and that his only hope for 
everlasting life would be through the exercising of faith 
in Christ and His sacrifice for sins. 

Why did Jesus point to the Law? We reply that the 
Law Covenant was still in force in Israel, as it had been 
for more than sixteen centuries. God's promise to the 
Jews was respecting the Law. "He that doeth these 
things shall live by the doing of them." Righteousness 
was to be the condition of everlasting life. All the Jews 
understood this; and this young ruler confessed that he 
so understood, and that he had been striving to live 
according to this rule. Yet he realized that he was dying, 
like the remainder of the race. Therefore his query. 
Jesus' answer signifies, "You should not strive only to 
keep the Law, and no more; you must be a sacrificer, 
and take up your cross and follow My example." 

We are not hastily to suppose that Jesus meant that 
the riches should be given away recklessly or indiscriminately. 
Had the young man agreed to the terms and 
asked the Lord how he could best distribute his wealth, 
we doubt not that the Lord would have said to him, 
"Give it all to God; and then, as His steward, distribute 
it according to the wisdom which God will give you 
and according to His providential leadings." Even this 
full surrender of earthly possessions would not be sufficient 
for one who would gain a place in the Kingdom 
class. He must do more; he must become active in the 
Lord's service, take up his cross, practicing self-denial, 
and follow on patiently in the narrow way of self-sacrifice, 
in the footsteps of the Redeemer, even unto death. 

After the close of the Jewish Age, Jesus would not 
have suggested the possibility of everlasting life through 
keeping the Law, but rather would plainly have stated the 
impossibility of any imperfect person's keeping the Divine 



Law perfectly and the necessity of having the imputation 
of Christ's merit to cover his imperfections. Only thus 
can the righteousness of the Law be "fulfilled in us who 
are walking not after the flesh, but after the Spirit." 

SORROWFUL! FOR VERY RICH 

The young Jewish ruler was anxious to do God's will, 
but not sufficiently anxious to be accounted worthy of 
membership in the Little Flock. He was willing to do 
right, to do justly, but unwilling to sacrifice. Jesus and 
all of His followers, on the contrary, engaged to sacrifice 
their lives, even unto death. "Present your bodies 
a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God." 

The riches of the young ruler were not of themselves 
harmful. God is very rich; Abraham of old was very 
rich. The difficulty was that the young man had set his 
heart upon the riches, so that when the testing time came 
as to whether he loved riches or God more, he demonstrated 
that he loved God and the Divine will less than 
he loved his earthly property. He forsook the opportunity 
to do the greatest good, and thus turned his back 
upon a membership in the Kingdom class. We are not, 
however, to understand that there is no hope for that 
young man, who had such a noble character that Jesus 
loved him. In due time he will be getting necessary lessons. 
Even while missing the Kingdom opportunities, 
he may be one of the multitude who will be blessed by 
the Kingdom. 

Jesus points out this test, saying: "Ye cannot serve 
God and mammon." The call of this Gospel Age is to 
be servants of God at any sacrifice, with the assurance 
that "all who will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer 
persecution," and find the path to glory, honor and immortality 
in the footsteps of Jesus a very rugged one. God 
has purposely put the matter so that we cannot be servants 
of wealth and servants of God at the same time. 
He wishes to bring us to the testing point. With all of 
this class now being called out of the world to be sons 
of God and joint-heirs with Christ, the test is "God 
first." We should have no idols— either wealth or fame 
or selfish ease— which might attract our devotion away 
from God and tempt us to ignore the rich blessings which 
He is now offering to the faithful. 

FEW RICH IN THE KINGDOM 

The rich young man's failure to become a disciple on 
Jesus' terms furnished a text for Jesus. He said to His 
disciples: "How hardly shall they that have riches enter 
into the Kingdom of God!" How difficult it will be for 
any rich man to get into the Kingdom class ! 

The disciples were amazed at this; for, of the great 
bulk of those who were claiming to be the holiness people 
of their day, very few were Jesus' disciples. The richer 
Jews were chiefly associated with the Pharisees. How, 



then, could it be that few rich would enter into the Kingdom? 
Was it not a mistake? Could Jesus mean it? 

But Jesus emphasized His teaching, saying: "How 
hard it is for them that trust in riches to enter into the 
Kingdom! It is easier for a camel to go through the 
Needle's Eye than for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom 
of God. "--Matthew 19:23,24. 

A CAMEL THROUGH A NEEDLE'S EYE 

The illustration regarding "the eye of a needle" used 
by our Lord was unintentionally spoiled by our translators. 

R5466 : page 158 

How many have looked at an ordinary cambric 
needle, and have noticed the smallness of the eye and the 
impossibility of a camel's going through it, and then have 
felt perplexed! 

The Needle's Eye referred to by Jesus was the name 
given to a small gate or opening in a large gate in the 
city wall. The gates of Jerusalem were closed at night 
for protection against robbers, and watchmen were on 
duty. The gates were not allowed to be opened until 
morning, lest a considerable number of armed men might 
enter and pillage the city. An arrangement was made, 
however, for travelers who failed to reach the gate 
before it was closed. The smaller gate, the Needle's 
Eye, was just large enough to permit a camel to go 
through after it had been unburdened— its load removed. 
Thus understood, Jesus taught that as a camel could go 
through the Needle's Eye, or smaller gate, only by having 
its load removed, so a rich man could enter the 
Kingdom of God only by renouncing his burdens, giving 
up all to the Lord. 

All this placing of the rich, the favored class, apparently 
at a disadvantage as compared with the poor, or 
disfavored class, caused amazement to Jesus' disciples. 
They inquired, "Who, then, can be saved?" The rich 
seemingly had all the opportunities of time, influence 
and money to enable them to give more and better service 
to the Lord than could others; and if they would have 
such difficulty in getting into the Kingdom, how would 
it be with others, less favored apparently? Jesus 
answered that "all things are possible with God." That 
is to say, if the rich man's heart be pleasing to the Lord 
—if he be honest-hearted and humble, and his riches 
alone stand in the way— the Lord would know how to 
show him His will in respect to their use; or if this did 
not avail, the Lord would know how to strip him of 
his wealth, even as the master of the camel would 
unload his beast to permit him to pass through the 
Needle's Eye. 

Many have had this very experience. They have been 
rich in honors of men, in social standing or in a financial 
sense; and God, in love and mercy, has stripped 



them of all these, giving them the necessary lessons, 
fitting and preparing them for a share in the Kingdom. 
With God this is possible. He knows how to overrule 
all things for good to those who love Him with all their 
heart, mind, soul and strength. 

"WE HAVE LEFT ALL" 

St. Peter seemed to get the thought that join t-heirship 
with the Master in the Kingdom would mean a full 
surrender to God— a leaving of all and a yielding up of 
all— in order to a close approach to God and full acceptance 
by Him. St. Peter said: "Lo, we have left all, and 
have followed Thee." 

Jesus did not fully endorse St. Peter's statement. He 
knew about Judas, who had not nearly left all. He knew 
about St. Peter himself— that some self-will still remained, 
and that self-preservation would lead him to deny his 
Master. But the answer that Jesus gave fully covered 
the question, not only for the Apostles, but for all who 
have become followers of Jesus from that day until now. 
He said: 

"Verily I say unto you, There is no man that hath 
left houses, or brethren, or sisters, or mother, or father, 
or children, or lands, for My sake and the Gospel's, but 
he shall receive a hundredfold now in this time— houses, 
and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and 
lands— with persecutions; and in the world [age] to 
come, eternal life." 

What a broad promise, and how abundantly fulfilled 
in its earthly respects to many! The persecutions they 
are sure to get; but everything sacrificed for the Lord's 
cause is compensated a hundredfold in the present life. 
How gracious the Divine arrangements; and then beyond, 
the everlasting life and, if faithful, a share with the 
Master in the Kingdom ! 

"But many that are first shall be last; and the last 
first." In other words, many possessing great privilege 
and opportunity for Divine favor and exaltation to the 
Kingdom will fail to embrace the opportunity, while 
others, naturally less favored, will gain the great prize 
of glory, honor and immortality. Again, we might say 
that those who first had the opportunity of becoming 
disciples of Jesus at His First Advent will not on that 
account (except the Apostles) have any pre-eminence 
or advantage over others of the Lord's followers in the 
future, nor did they have here. 



R5466 : page 158 

AN INTERESTING QUESTION 
GOD'S SUPERVISION OF THE NATIONS 



"THE MOST HIGH ruleth in the Kingdom of 
men, and giveth it to whomsoever He will, 
and setteth up over it the basest of men."— 
Daniel 4:17. 

"Let every soul be subject unto the 
higher powers. For there is no power but 
of God; the powers that be are ordained of 
God. Whosoever therefore resisteth the 
power, resisteth the ordinance of God."— 
Romans 13:1,2. 

Question.— Should we understand from the above 
Scriptures that God guides the affairs of nations, and 
chooses their rulers? 

Answer.— These Scriptures are in harmony with other 
statements of Scripture. In the case of Nebuchadnezzar, 
for instance, after he had been seven years insane, lying 
amongst the beasts of the field, his reason returned to him 
and he extolled the God of Heaven, acknowledging that 
God setteth up those whom He will and putteth down 
those whom He will. We understand that God's dealing 
with King Nebuchadnezzar was prophetic. 

In the case of Israel God had very particular oversight 
of their affairs, and dealt with their rulers. David 
was anointed when he was a youth, to be king in due 
time instead of Saul. So with several others of their 
kings— the Lord had them anointed in advance. It might 
be said of Israel, that whoever sat upon the throne was 
there as the Lord's representative. We remember also 
that on one occasion the Prophet of God was sent to 
anoint one of the kings of Syria and to give him a 
prophecy respecting himself, that he should take the 
throne. 

Looking back, we see that in the case of Pharaoh, the 
perverse king of Egypt, God declared, "For this very purpose 
I raised thee up, that I might show forth My Power 
in thee." God did not approve of Pharaoh, but used him 
to show forth His own glory. God also used King Cyrus 
of Persia as a servant to perform His bidding. 

GOD'S SUPERVISION OF CURRENT EVENTS 

All of these recorded instances show a vital interest on 
God's part as to who shall come forward and who shall 
be retarded when these matters would affect His own 
Plan. We are not to understand that these different 
kings represented God's choice as respects their loyalty 
to Him, but that these were the ones through whom the 

R5466 : page 159 

Divine Plan in operation could be signally manifested and 
outworked. And so it is today. The Lord knew which 
of the men running for the office of President of the 
United States in the fall of 1912 would be the most suitable 
—the one who would most fully co-operate in the 
carrying out of the very conditions which He is pleased 



to permit to come to pass at this time. 

The Lord guides in the affairs of nations now, only in 
so far as such oversight will promote the fulfilment of 
His own purposes. When the monarchs of various countries 
declare themselves "King by the grace of God," we 
do not agree to the thought they have in mind in making 
such claim. They are expressing the thought which has 
prevailed throughout Christendom for centuries— that 
they reign as representatives of the Kingdom of God, and 
by His special favor. And likewise the Catholic Church: 
When the pope claims that he is the head of the Church 
of Christ, claims that he is Christ's Vice-gerent, he thus 
claims that Christ has set up His Kingdom, and that the 
pope reigns in His stead. 

OVERRULE TO OUTWORKING OF GOD'S PLAN 

After the Papal power waned in Europe, and the 
Protestants came into power, the Protestant rulers claimed 
the same right that the Catholics had claimed— to rule as 
the Lord's special representatives. And it is from this 
standpoint that kings maintain that they reign "by the 
grace of God," that the Kingdom of God is set up, and 
that they are reigning in God's Kingdoms. We do not 
understand this to be the right thought, but that in God's 
providence He permits these to occupy the thrones of the 
world for the time being. We understand that God does 
exercise a supervisory oversight in respect to them— not 
that He has authorized them to represent Him, or that 
He is responsible for their deeds and acts, but that He is 
so controlling matters as to cause them to outwork His 
own arrangements. 

God will not convert a king in order to do this; He 
will not make him a saint. But He can allow or hinder 
events without interfering with the free will of any individual, 
and without becoming responsible for his 
government. 

We may assume that this supervision of Divine 
Power is for the ultimate interest of mankind. We remember 
that there is a Prince of Darkness, who is seeking 
to do violence to humanity. Our thought is that the 
Divine Power hinders or restrains, so that the worst 

R5467 : page 159 

things cannot come to pass until His due time, and He 
overrules to bring those into power who will have the 
disposition to do what He purposes to permit when His 
due time has arrived. However, since the Lord does not 
explain to us just how He does this, it would be wise for 
us not to be too emphatic in our statements. 



R5467 : page 159 



SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
SOUNDS A NOTE OF WARNING 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

A peculiar circumstance occurred here in the Ecclesia on 
Sunday, March 15th, which I think should be brought to your 
attention. Just what it portends or just how far the several 
versions are to be relied upon, I cannot say; but as it appears 
to be in line with numerous warnings issued through THE 
WATCH TOWER for years past, I will state the facts upon 
which there appears to be unanimity: 

It is the custom of the parents in this Ecclesia to allow 
the children to play during meeting hours in the ante-rooms 
adjoining our main hall. On this particular afternoon after 
the Berean Lesson had been in progress for some little time 
a commotion was heard in the children's room, mingled with 
screams of fright. One of the sisters was just entering the 
building when the matter started, and rushing into the room 
found several of the children hysterical, others cowering in 
abject fear with heads covered, and all greatly alarmed. 
When pressed for an explanation they stated that they had 
seen "a ghost." The older ones, better informed, declared 
they had seen a demon materialized, and that several arms 
had appeared protruding from the bare walls of the room. 
They declared that when they began to cry and shout, the 
apparition disappeared in the air. 

It required some little persuasion to quiet them and to 
furnish solace in the suggestion that the Lord would not permit 
harm to come to the children of consecrated parents. 

Besides this circumstance, two of the brothers in the class 
have had particularly heavy trials through semi-materializations 
of the demons within the last few weeks. Another 
brother who, I understand, has been clandestinely attending 
"Tongues of Fire" meetings on different occasions, suddenly 
became insane a few weeks ago and was sent to the asylum. 
His sad case gives many evidences of obsession. 

Too many of the dear friends only half-heartedly accept the 
plain Scriptural teachings respecting the actual existence of 
these evil personalities and their pernicious activities. Some 
of these are in danger of severe testings from this source. 
Would it not be well to sound a warning? Can this sudden 
increase of activity on the part of these evil spirits, reports 
of which are coming from many sources, be premonitory of 
the "loosing of the winds" in the very near future? God 
help us all to have on the "whole armor and to stand in 
the evil day." 

The Vow is still as valuable a factor in this "wrestling 
against principalities," etc., in exalted positions, as it was the 
day I made it my own. 

With Christian love, your servant, WM. A. BAKER. 

A SOFT ANSWER 

Below is a copy of a letter sent by one Brother to another 
in the endeavor to effect a reconciliation. We commend it: 



DEAR BROTHER:- 

Grace, mercy and peace from God our Father and from 
Jesus Christ our Lord be unto you! 

What is it, dear Brother, that has caused this difference 
between us? As brethren of the Lord we should not devour 
one another; for that is the spirit of the world, and as the 
Apostle says in Galatians 5:15, there is a likelihood of our 
being consumed one of another: "Take heed that ye be not 
consumed one of another," urges the Apostle. 

What if, in our appreciation of the liberty that is ours, 
and of which we know through the Gospel, we should reach 
the point where we would be so contentious for our liberties, 
great and small, that we would consume some brethren for 
whom Christ died! What if in injuring another, the spirit 
of strife should so react upon us as to poison our own 
spiritual lives, and we also should be consumed, lost, as respects 
the gracious things to which the Lord has invited us 
and for which we have been running in the race! 

Now, dear Brother, let the Apostle's words RING in our 
hearts, "Lest ye be consumed one of another." 

With this thought before our minds, let us more and more 
put on the armor of God to fight AGAINST our own fleshly 
weaknesses and to fight FOR our dear brethren, assisting them 
by example and by precept to war a good warfare also against 
the world, the flesh and the Adversary. Nearly all these 
contentions come through some misunderstanding. Neither 
you nor I have a desire to injure each other, but we earnestly 
desire each other's good. 

For what I have done in any way to hurt your feelings 
in the past, I heartily ask your forgiveness; and believe me, 
I do the same with you, remembering Matthew 7:1,2 and 
6:14-16. 

If our views are correct, dear Brother (I really believe 
they are), with regard to 1914, we have no time to lose; and 
as the Apostle says, "There should be no SCHISM in the Body; 
but the members should have the same care one for another." 
Now let me conclude with love, and Jude 24,25. 

Yours by His grace, J. HODSON. 



I.B.S.A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 
FOR MONTH OF JUNE 
Questions from Manual on Series Second of 
"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 
STUDIES III. and IV., VOL. II. 

Week of June 7 Q. 15 to 20 Week of June 21 Q. 8 to 15 

Week of June 14 Q. 1 to 7 Week of June 28 Q. 16 to 23 

Question Manuals on Vol. II., STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 5c. each, 
or 50c. per dozen, postpaid. 



page 161 

VOL. XXXV JUNE 1 No. 11 
A. D. 1914-A. M. 6042 



CONTENTS 

Views From The Watch Tower 163 

Dr. Abbott's Outlook 163 

Comments on Dr. Abbott's Outlook 163 

Germany Deserting the Church 165 

Loosing the "Four Winds" 165 

Symptoms of the Coming Trouble 165 

Justified or Condemned by Words 166 

World Full of Evil Speaking 167 

Well-Meaning, But Hinderers 168 

"Called of God, as Was Aaron" 169 

Saving Him From Death 170 

Laborers in the Vineyard 171 

The Glorious Character of Our God 172 

Freedom of the Will 173 

Divine Paradoxes 173 

Almost Home (Poem) 174 

1914-GeneralConventions-1914 174 

Some Interesting Letters 174 

Episcopal Minister and the Truth 174 

A Baptist Minister's Appreciation 175 

Great Grandfather's Motto 175 

page 162 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:-All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 



SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



R5471 :page 162 

DOES THIS APPLY TO YOU? 

We fear that some of the dear Colporteurs are being attracted 
away from the colporteur division of the Harvest 
work. We urge all who have any measure of success as 
colporteurs that they should consider it one of the very best 
parts of the Harvest field, yielding more fruitage to individual 
effort than does any other. 

The DRAMA, so far from hindering the colporteur work, 
should greatly increase it wherever the DRAMA is produced. 
Wherever it is heard of, the attention of the people is drawn 
to the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. 

This is the favorable time of the year for colporteuring. 
Therefore, we would like to say something to re-encourage 
the noble band of faithful reapers who are laying down their 
time, their strength and their lives in this service. "He that 
reapeth receiveth wages, and gathereth fruit unto life 
everlasting." 

There never has been a time when so many people have 
been manifesting an ear to hear the Truth. Superstition is 
dying. Ignorance is giving way before the better knowledge 
of God and of His Word. The DRAMA is helping all this. 
Nevertheless, those who merely see and hear the DRAMA have 
only gotten a start in the right direction. They need to read 
the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES with their Bibles, that they 
may be thoroughly furnished and may put on the whole armor 
of God, and thus be prepared for the impending trials of the 
near future. 

R5472 : page 162 

The field is large. If you have time to invest in this 
precious service, write to us for hints, or methods, and for 
prospectus, and for assignment of territory— indicating what 
territory you prefer, giving first, second and third choice of 
locality. This proposition applies to all the unincumbered 
possessed of any talent and address. The greater your talent, 
and the better your education, etc., the greater your ability 
for serving the Lord in this part of the Harvest field. Many 
housewives can spare one or two hours daily for this grand 
work. When the privilege reaches us it becomes an opportunity 
for demonstrating to the Lord our zeal for Him, for 
His Truth and for the Household of Faith. Many teachers 
will have vacations shortly. What better way could be found 
for spending it than in the service of the King of kings? 
Moreover, it is healthful employment. Those who cannot 
colporteur should remember that the opportunity still remains 
for volunteering, and that our new Volunteer matter is ready 



and going out rapidly. 



page 162 

POEMS OF DAWN 

This book of 286 pages contains nearly three hundred 
beautiful poems of consecration and encouragement for 
Christians. It makes an excellent gift for any friend or 
relative not in the Truth, although most appreciated by the 
saintly. It is topically arranged, but you could not open at 
random and read without being refreshed, comforted, drawn 
nearer to God. The Karatol-bound edition is exhausted, but 
we still have a good supply on hand of the cloth-bound 
edition, 25c, and the India paper, leather bound, 50c. 



CREDIT AND FREE SUBSCRIPTIONS 

With the May 15th issue of THE WATCH TOWER the free 
subscriptions to the "Lord's Poor" ended, with the exception 
of those entered within the last six months. If your TOWER 
stops coming, this will explain the reason. You are as welcome 
to it as ever, upon your own request. If you desire its 
visits continued, please advise us AT ONCE. A post-card request 
will be sufficient. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR JULY 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
July follow: (1) 94; (2) 259; (3) 14; (4) 47; (5) 12; (6) 46; (7) 
305; (8) 220; (9) 18; (10) 108; (11) 262; (12) 216; (13) 299; (14) 
224; (15) 221; (16) 326; (17) 155; (18) 23; (19) 144; (20) 254; 
(21) 212; (22) 307; (23) 324; (24) 192; (25) 313; (26) 113; (27) 
204; (28) 87; (29) 263; (30) 219; (31) 82. 



R5467 : page 163 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
DR. ABBOTT'S OUTLOOK 



"A minister asks a question which I may summarize 
thus: How can one who has accepted the newer thinking 
in theology so present it as to satisfy the desires of those 



who are longing for the old religion? It is a question 
which a great many ministers and some laymen are asking. 
The answer involves a consideration of the use and 
value of sermons and church services. 



"One reason why many naturally devout persons have 
discontinued church attendance is because the church service 
for them no longer promotes the religious life. It 
seems to them unreal. They still wish to do justly, to 
love mercy, and to walk reverently, but the church service 
does not help them to do so. They have abandoned the 
Church, but they have not abandoned religion. To bring 
them back to the Church the Church must somehow put 
new life into its services. It must make its expression of 
the religious feeling more effective in promoting the religious 
life. 



"When astronomy compelled a new theory of the Universe, 
and modern biology and anthropology a new theory 
of the origin of man and of sin, and modern criticism a 
new theory of the Bible, and modern sociology a new theory 
of redemption, the Puritan churches began of necessity 
to construct a new theology. The ministers who were 
familiar with modern discovery and the modern mind began 
to teach a new philosophy of religion. 



"We no longer express penitence, thanksgiving, and 
consecration by offering sacrifices. But penitence and 
thanksgiving and consecration are essentially the same experiences 
that they were in the days of Ezra. Theology 
has changed. We no longer believe that man was created 
perfect six thousand years ago, and that sin came into 
the world as the result of the fact that a woman was persuaded 
by a serpent to eat a forbidden fruit. But doing 
justly, loving mercy, and walking humbly with God are 
essentially what they were in the days of Abraham. 

"In our time there are a number of self-sacrificing and 
devoted philanthropists and teachers who have discarded 
both worship and theology and are endeavoring to promote 
the higher life by ethical instruction, illustrated and 
enforced by moral example. But while they endeavor to 
promote doing justly and loving mercy, they make no effort 
to promote reverent comradeship with God. They 
substitute the religion of humanity for the humanity of 
religion. Some of them are preaching ethical sermons in 
Christian pulpits. Some of them have come out from the 
Church altogether and are devoting themselves to various 
forms of social service. They are doing unselfish work 
for their fellow-men, and in the lives of many of them 
Christian ministers might well find both example and 



inspiration. 

"But I do not believe that ethical culture can take the 
place of spiritual life. If all that humanity wants is well-regulated 
conduct, ethical culture might possibly furnish 
it— though that is doubtful. But that is not all that humanity 
wants. It wants character. What men think is 
important; what they feel is more important; but what 
they are is most important of all. For out of what they 

R5468 : page 163 

are will come naturally and spontaneously their thinking, 
their feeling, and their conduct. 



"The minister who would satisfy the need of his people 
must realize that their need is not a form of worship 
nor a philosophy of religion, but a life. If he uses a 
prayer-book, it must serve him as an expression of his 
own penitence, thanksgiving, consecration. If he does 
not use a prayer-book, his prayers must be real communion 
with God, not an address to his congregation. Whether 
he believes that man has been six or sixty thousand years 
upon the earth, that sin is the consequence of a fall from 
perfection six thousand years ago or the consequence of 
the animalism in us from which we have not yet fully 
emerged, that Jesus Christ saves us by having paid once 
for all the penalty of our sins in a sacrifice suffered long 
ago or by living with us and giving life to us in a perpetual 
sacrifice, is not unimportant. BUT IT IS INSIGNIFICANT 
BESIDE THE QUESTION WHETHER PENITENCE FOR HIS 
OWN SINS AND JOY IN HIS LIVING SAVIOR ARE REAL EXPERIENCES 
OR ONLY BOOK-LEARNED THEORIES. If they are real 
experiences and he can communicate them to his hearers, 
he will satisfy their real needs. If he communicates them 
through the old theology, some of his hearers will think 
him old-fashioned in his thinking; if he communicates 
them through the new theology, some of his hearers will 
fear he is not quite sound. But if he succeeds in giving 
to them that life the fruit of which is doing justly, loving 
mercy, and walking humbly with God, they will accept 
the gift with thankfulness, whatever may be the philosophy 
which he employs in imparting the gift."— Lyman 
Abbott. 

COMMENTS ON DR. ABBOTT'S OUTLOOK 

We have wondered how such noble men of good thinking 
capacity as Doctor Abbott regard the future and their 
own change of religious sentiment. We have above, Doctor 
Abbott's own words on the subject. His expression 
probably represents fairly, generously, the sentiments of 
the large class of scholarly men among whom he is a 
leader. They have abandoned the old landmarks altogether. 
The personal God who takes personal interest in 



the affairs of man is unknown to this class. Some of 
them recognize a force operating in nature, and give this 
blind force the name of god— Nature god. Others, admitting 
that they have no real ground for their contention, 
hold that there is a personal God who is so great that He 

R5468 : page 164 

takes no more account of man and his interests than men 
take account of ants, insects, microbes. 

Yet still there is in the human heart a yearning for the 
sympathy of a Divine Friend, which causes some of these 
bewildered leaders of human thought to ignore their own 
theories and to crave and worship a personal God of Love 
whom they know not, and who has made, they think, no 
revelation of Himself or of His plans, respecting which 
they make liberal guesses, frequently altered, mended, 
amended, contradicted. St. Paul seemed to have some 
such philosophers in mind when he wrote, "without God, 
and having no hope in the world." Jesus seems to have 
had some such persons in mind when He spoke of "blind 
leaders of the blind" falling into the ditch. 

A DEPLORABLE CONDITION OF UNBELIEF 

With many of these good people the trouble begins 
with their loss of confidence in the Bible as the inspired 
Revelation of God for the instruction and guidance of 
His people. As soon as any assume this attitude toward 
the Bible, they are like the mariner on the high seas who 
has lost his charts and compass and has become befogged. 
Occasionally a little rift in the fog gives him a view of 
some bright star; and for a moment he rejoices in the 
thought that he at least knows by the stars which way 
to steer his craft. But as the fogs shift, he is pitiably 
bewildered. He dare not even confess to the trusting 
passengers under his care the real status of affairs. He 
must be brave; he must secrete his fears and doubts and 
ignorance. 

This appears to be the deplorable condition of the 
Higher Critics and Evolutionists. If we misjudge them, 
we shall be glad to have them set us straight. We shall 
be glad to be informed by what process of reasoning they 
have any knowledge whatever respecting a future life of 
any kind in any place. We shall be glad to be informed 
respecting any process of reasoning along the lines of 
their presentation that would go to demonstrate that they 
have, or could have, any expectation of a future life, except 
representatively through their children, who in some 
future time, thousands of years ahead, might be evolved 
to such perfection of mind and body and to such a mastery 
of conditions of nature as would permit them successfully 
to combat germs, microbes and hereditary weaknesses, 
and to live forever. 

But how poor a prospect is this in comparison with the 
hope set before us in the Gospel— the hope of a personal 



future life by resurrection from the dead, a hope which 
Evolutionists and Higher Critics deride as chimerical! 
We can only return the compliment by declaring that the 
Christian's hope, founded upon the Bible, "the hope of the 
resurrection of the dead," seems to us far less chimerical, 
far less unreasonable, and much more advantageous to us 
in every way, than the hope of the Higher Critic and 
Evolutionist that though they perish, some of their great, 
great grandchildren may achieve everlasting life. 

While we have no sympathy with Higher Criticism and 
Evolution, we have every sympathy for the many noble 
minds that have accepted these theories, to the destruction 
of their own joy, peace, and faith. Our experience gives 
us this sympathy. Once we had very much their position. 
We thank God for our deliverance from it into the brighter 
light from Heaven which shines in the face of Jesus 
Christ our Lord, shines through His words, shines through 
the writings and prophecies of the past, as explained by 
the appointed and especially inspired Apostles of Jesus. 
Quite probably the majority of those whose views we are 
criticising came to their present views as did the writer. 

A GREAT LESSON TO BE LEARNED 

For three centuries the darkness of superstition has 
been gradually breaking; and although the Bible has come 
back to the people, it has been interpreted through creedal 
spectacles of various hues, but all of them dark. We have 
been unwittingly trusting the creeds and not the Bible. 
But more and more the absurdities of those creeds have 
become manifest in the advancing light of the Millennial 
Morning. We have now come to the place where practically 
no intelligent people any longer believe the creeds 
of the past. But in repudiating those creeds, all have 
been in danger through the error of the supposition that 
those creeds represent the Bible teachings. Hence, to 
nearly all of us, the repudiation of the creeds has meant 
the repudiation of the Bible, however much we have desired 
to hold to the Bible as the Divine Light in a dark place. 

The great lesson for us all now to learn is that while 
we have been right in repudiating the creeds, and while 
every one of them should be publicly as well as privately 
repudiated, we should return to the Bible and give it a 
fresh examination, totally untrammeled by the theories of 
the darker past. We should go to the Bible, expecting to 
find it in opposition to these creeds— expecting to find that 
the pure Message of Divine Truth, as given out by Jesus 
and His authorized Apostles, was corrupted during the 
Dark Ages— during the time when the Bible was ignored 
in favor of creeds formulated by bishops who mistakenly 
thought themselves Apostolic bishops, and who under 
Satan's misguidance led Christendom into atrocious errors 
and "doctrines of devils."— 1 Timothy 4:1. 

Only by such radical change of attitude toward the 
Bible— only by such confidence in God, confidence in the 
Bible as the Revelation to man of a God of all Grace, the 



Father of Mercies, are we prepared to view the Old Book 
from the proper angle, to see its real meaning, and to be 
convinced that it is the Message of Hope for the world, 
and of glory, honor and immortality for the Church, and 
indeed true and worthy of all acceptation. 

A NEW STIMULUS TO BIBLE STUDY 

One of the chief aims of the PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION 

is to re-establish faith in the Bible as the inspired 
Word of God. It is our conviction that many of God's 
consecrated people are trembling on the brink of infidelity. 
The teachings of Higher Criticism and Evolution, which 
have gone forth from the colleges and intellectual leaders 
of Christendom for the past forty years, have permeated, 
leavened, the thought, the sentiment of the whole world. 

God's consecrated people need the helping hand which 
He through this DRAMA is, we believe, extending to 
them. It is wonderful to note how some of these are 
being reached by it, and how quickly some of them respond. 
A young man who witnessed the DRAMA in the 
New York Temple (W. 63d St., near Broadway), inquired 
whether or not there was something more that he 
could read along the lines pursued in the DRAMA. He 
was told of the six volumes of THE STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. 
He purchased them at once and read them. Returning, 
he said, "I had $700 saved up to put me through 
a theological course. I have concluded that in these volumes 
I have the theological course that I need." 

The fairness of the DRAMA, its faithfulness to the 
Bible, and the gentleness with which it treats opposition, 
commend it to sober-thinking, honest-hearted people; and 
while all classes are welcomed, this special class is particularly 
desired and appreciated by the promoters of the 
DRAMA. Only those who have been rescued from the 
darkness, obscurity and "mentally lost" condition of Higher 
Criticism and Evolution, can fully appreciate what it 
means to be saved from all that darkness, doubt, fog— 
what it means to have a firm foundation for faith in a 

R5469 : page 165 

God of Justice, Wisdom, Love and Power— what it means 
to know God and to have an intelligent appreciation of 
His great and wonderful Plan of the Ages, in which the 
Church has first place, but in which the whole world of 
mankind is yet to receive a blessing and a glorious opportunity 
for everlasting life. 



GERMANY DESERTING THE CHURCH 

Church attendance in Protestant Germany is shrinking 
in what The Christian World's Berlin correspondent, 
quoted in The Christian Work (New York), calls an 



alarming way. According to a census made on a recent 
Sunday only 1 1,252 persons were attending the 68 State 
Protestant places of worship in Berlin. In the town of 
Chemnitz, in Saxony, with 300,000 Protestants, "the 
church attendance on this particular Sunday was 2,248." 
Or, taking the communion statistics as a test, "in Berlin, 
last year, only 14.81 per cent, of the Protestant population 
partook of the communion." 

Of course, says our informant, the numbers are more 
satisfactory in country districts, but "in the towns, and 
in numerous country districts as well, not only is the number 
of communicants sinking, but it is rapidly sinking, and 
has been rapidly sinking for several years past." And 
we read on: 

"In Berlin it is an established fact that the number of 
those who make a practise of going to church is rapidly 
decreasing. A serious journal here has been investigating 
the causes for this, and as a result of its inquiries among 
the working classes, it has obtained the following six 
reasons for the falling off: 

"(1) The influence of the anti-religious press. 

"(2) Social Democratic agitation against Church. 

"(3) The influence of evil-disposed neighbors and 
fellow-workmen on those who would otherwise attend. 

"(4) The notorious unbelief of the educated classes. 

"(5) The widely spread suspicion and dislike expended 
on the clergy, especially the belief that they do 
not themselves believe what they teach, and that their 
piety and truth are merely hypocrisy. 

"(6) Finally, the fact that all public places of amusement 
are open on Sunday, and that it is exactly on Sunday 
that the proprietors of these places use the greatest 
efforts to fill them. Another reason given for the increasing 
absence of young people from Divine service is 
the recent institution of associations such as scouts, wanderers, 
and boys' and girls' brigades, all of which have 
their gatherings on Sundays. The great horse-races are 
held on Sunday, also the chief athletic events. It is stated 
that all these things help to deplete the churches. 

"Another journal in examining the causes at work in 
emptying the churches does not hesitate to remark that 
the antiquated methods employed by the clergy in addressing 
their flocks and in conducting their services are 
becoming 'repulsive' to churchgoers. Modern men in 
modern life will not tolerate a man in a pulpit calling 
them 'beloved hearers.' They hate the sanctimony and 
unctuousness inseparable from so many pastors. It irritates 
them to hear, 'firstly, my beloved,' and 'secondly, 
my dear brethren,' and 'thirdly and lastly.' 

"Then there is a strong impression that much might 
be done to modernize the service of song. The Germans 
are the most musical people in the world and possess some 
of the most magnificent church music ever written. But 
they are beginning to lose all patience with those slowly 
droned-forth chorales in which there is neither force nor 
fire. With a sigh they think of the bright services of song 



in English and American churches."— Literary Digest. 



R5469 : page 165 

LOOSING THE "FOUR WINDS" 

"And there shall be a time of trouble, such as 
never was since there was a nation."— Daniel 12:1. 

THERE is something peculiarly forceful about 

this statement. We have known some to lay 

stress upon the word such in this verse of 

Daniel's prophecy and to suggest that this 

might mean, not that the trouble will be 

greater, but that it will be of a different 

character than any previous trouble. We 

do not share that view. Our thought is that 

it will be the most intense, as well as the 

most widely diffused trouble, the most general 

trouble ever known. We see a great many things 

which corroborate this thought. We can readily see that 

anarchy at this time would affect mankind more than at 

any previous time of the world's history. 

In the past the cities were supported by a large farming 
element; and each farmer was accustomed to keeping 
his stock on hand, selling more directly to the consumer. 
Today the cities are large, more massed together than ever 
before. Food is shipped to these cities in large quantities. 
Additionally, the people have become extravagant; we 
probably eat much more food as a people, and of a 
daintier kind, than ever before. We would feel ourselves 
starved by what people ate in former times. 

Our Lord fed the five thousand with bread and small 
fishes. Now the people would not be satisfied, as they 
were then, to sit down on the grass, with a piece of bread 
in one hand and a piece of fish in the other. Now they 
would want five dishes, at least— and knives and forks, 
etc. They would think that they were starved if they had 
only a piece of fish and a piece of dry bread. And now, 
instead of gathering up the fragments, they would feel like 
throwing the fragments away. 

SYMPTOMS OF THE COMING TROUBLE 

We are reminded of the strike of last year in some of 
the large cities of England. In Liverpool, it was only by 
having Government troops on guard that food could be 
distributed to keep the people from starving. So we can 
see how soon whole cities could be put into confusion and 
everybody go hungry to bed; and they would soon starve, 
if supplies were cut off. 

We have reason to believe that this trouble in some 
respects will be accompanied by a ferocity never seen in 
the past. True, there have been atrocities committed in 



every age of the world's history. And it is true that we 
now have a veneer that goes by the name of Christianity; 
but there is no Christianity about it. We see more and 
more clearly how easy it would be to scratch off this 
veneer and get to the savage nature below it. This being 
so, we can see how the rendering of assistance of one 
part of the world to another part would be at an end. 
We also see how the evil spirits will be stirred up. We 
have every reason for believing our Lord's words to be 
literally true— that the severity of the coming trouble 
will be such as never before has been known. 

Then again, we understand that the trouble at the end 
of the Jewish Dispensation was a type, or foreshadowing, 
a parallel, of the great trouble coming at the end of this 
Dispensation. The trouble that then came upon the 
Jewish nation was reckoned as having been the most 
severe in the world's history. The trouble at the close 

R5469 : page 166 

of this Age will be on a vastly larger scale— world-wide. 

CHRIST'S KINGDOM THE ONLY HOPE 

As to the Socialistic movement, it is our thought that 
the Socialists will fail entirely in their attempt to carry 
out their ideas. Some of the ideas are good; some of 
them are medium; and some of them are bad. But they 
can never carry out the best of their ideas, because those 
who are controlling capital and managing the world's 
affairs will never give them the opportunity. Whether it 
will be the socialistic, the anarchistic or the capitalistic 
element that will bring about the anarchy, will depend 
upon which obstacle will be the most difficult to move. 

All parties are very earnest, very intense, very obstinate. 
The capitalists fear that the whole country and 
every other country would "go to the dogs" if Socialism 
were in power. Therefore they would be ready to put it 
into the ditch rather than give it a trial. And so we do 
not expect that the Socialists will get sufficient power 
to take the reins of government. We think the attempt 
would result in anarchy, until Divine Power shall set up 
the Kingdom which has been promised. 

And by this we are not accusing any party in particular. 
We believe that under stress of failure either side 
would be ready to see the streets run with blood rather 
than see the other side win— they would be ready to 
go to any length to maintain their purpose and ideas. 
Each party is sure that it knows what it is doing. There 
can be no possible settlement. All parties are sure that 
they are right and are sure that they will succeed. When 
the crisis is reached, which seems nearing, the great whirlwind 
will come, which will sweep all civilization before it. 
Thank God, that the Kingdom of God's dear Son will end 
it when men shall have learned their own impotency! 



THE FOUR GREAT WINDS 

In Rev. 7:1, St. John mentions this whirlwind: "And 
after these things I saw four angels, standing on the four 
corners of the earth, holding the four winds of the 
earth, that the winds should not blow on the earth, nor 
on the sea, nor on any tree." The winds of the earth 
referred to here are, of course, symbolic. The thought is 

R5470 : page 166 

that the winds from the four quarters— North, East, 
South and West— are being held back, and that when the 
restraint is withdrawn they will rush together, and the 
result will be a whirlwind. Certain Scriptures tell of a 
whirlwind that will be raised up from the coasts of the 
earth. See Jer. 23:19; 25:32,33; 30:23,24. We do not 
understand that this will be a physical whirlwind, but this 
symbolic expression is used to convey the thought of a 
severe strife of the powers of the air. 

These "powers of the air," or "winds," are not powers 
of natural air, but are the powers referred to by St. Paul 
when he speaks of Satan as "the Prince of the power of 
the air." (Eph. 2:2.) Those spirits who have been under 
the control of Satan— the fallen angels— were to be restrained 
in chains of darkness until the Judgment of the 
Great Day. (2 Peter 2:4.) The letting loose of these 
winds, or air powers, would seem to show that God has 
let go His hand of restraint; that He will have to do with 
the permission of the terrible trouble that will come upon 
the world as a great cataclysm, which will result in the 
complete overthrow of the social order in anarchy. 

We find that in spite of the many advantages of our 
day and the blessings showered upon the world, people 
are unthankful and ungrateful. Discontent is growing; 
and the result will be a great strife, and the complete fall 
of present institutions. Our text seems to imply that this 
outside influence will exercise a baneful effect upon men, 
when finally granted the liberty. These fallen spirits have 
been under restraint for these many centuries, but they 
have exercised their influence to whatever extent they 
have had permission. If they had had unlimited power 
they would have wrecked the world long ago; but they 
have been restrained in chains of darkness. 

FALLEN ANGELS SOON TO BE LOOSED 

Apparently God will soon cease to restrain the fallen 
angels, and they will then proceed to vent their fury upon 
humanity, so that the whole earth will be full of violence, 
the same as in the days of Noah. "As it was in the days 
of Noah, so shall it be also in the days of the Son of 
Man. "-Luke 17:26. 

It is true that the Savior gave the thought that at His 
Second Advent He would be present, unknown to the 
world, doing a work of gathering the Church— of making 



up His "jewels"— and that the world would not know of 
His presence until the Time of Trouble was upon them. 
He said that they would be eating and drinking, buying 
and selling, planting and building. (Luke 17:27-30.) And 
this is true. The world is going into large contracts, etc., 
quite unaware of how near we are to the new arrangement, 
the incoming Kingdom. But we believe that the 
very near future will be a time of great crime and angry 
passions. 

We read of the time that God beheld the thoughts of 
men, that man's heart was evil and only evil continually— 
a very desperate condition. Our thought is that the 
loosing of these "four winds" is still future. The power 
manifested by the demons when loosed, will, we believe, 
be with a view to the injury of mankind. We do not 
know but that many of our readers will have a share in 
that injury. We have every reason to suppose that, if 
these fallen angels shall get loose, they will vent their 
first anger upon the Lord's people. We are not to fear 
this, however, but to take whatever the Lord's providence 
permits to come, knowing that everything shall work for 
our good. "Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof," 
the difficulty thereof. Let us leave the whole matter in 
the Lord's hands and trust in Him. 



R5470 : page 166 

JUSTIFIED OR CONDEMNED BY WORDS 

"By thy words thou shalt be justified, and by thy words 
thou shalt be condemned. "-MATTHEW 12:37. 

THE word justified here used by our Lord is 

not the justification referred to generally in 

the New Testament. The "justification by 

faith" of which St. Paul writes is the clearing 

before God of those who have from the 

heart accepted Jesus as their Savior. "Being 

justified by faith, we have peace with God, 

through our Lord Jesus Christ." Our justification 

is on the basis of our faith in God; 

we cannot come into His family without 

faith. The Apostle James declares that a living faith 

shows itself by works. And in God's arrangement He 

has made it necessary that we manifest our faith by 

such good works as we are able to perform. So faith and 

works together are bringing us into the character-likeness 

of Christ, thus to be sharers in His resurrection. If we 

have only faith and not works, we shall never reach the 

goal; if we have all works and no faith, we shall likewise 

fail. 

But "by thy words thou shalt be justified, and by thy 
words condemned": here our Lord is not addressing the 
Church at all. None were accepted to full justification 



R5470 : page 167 

and begetting of the Holy Spirit until Pentecost, which 
was some time after this statement was uttered. These 
words were spoken to the Pharisees, who were being reproved. 
The word justified is used here in a limited 
sense. For instance, we might speak of some transaction 
we have made, and say, I felt justified in taking that 
course. Jesus was here using this word in a similar manner. 
He was addressing those who professed to have a 
special relationship with God under the Law Covenant, 
and to be especially holy. The Jews were not justified to 
life, but merely to fellowship with God. And now they 
were in their trial time: would they prove worthy? 

DAY OF THEIR VISITATION UNRECOGNIZED 

We read that they did not realize that they were in a 
testing time— that they had come under a certain judgment 
of God as to whether or not they as a people might 
continue as His servants. "They knew not the time of 
their visitation." Our Lord said, when riding into 
Jerusalem, "Behold, your House is left unto you desolate!" 
They as the House of Servants were not worthy of a continuance 
of special favor at that time. For three and a 
half years there had been a certain kind of favor shown 
to them; the Gospel was preached in their midst. But 
the Gospel did not appeal to the nation; only to the 
"Israelites indeed" from among them, the faithful remnant. 
After the three and a half years which ended the 
"seventieth week," the Lord's favor to the Jews terminated, 
and from that time the door was thrown open to 
the Gentiles. And ever since then the Jews have had no 
preeminence over others. 

The Pharisees professed entire consecration to God 
and great holiness. Jesus told them that they made broad 
their phylacteries, and enlarged the borders of their garments; 
that they took the chief seats in the synagogues, 
and for a pretense made long prayers; and that they paid 
tithes even of the smallest seeds, mint and anise and cummin, 
but omitted the weightier matters of the Law, and 
that theirs was merely an outward, perfunctory observance 
of that Law. (Matthew 23:5,6,14,23-25.) He 
declared that the Law commanded that they should love 
their neighbor as themselves. And He charged that they 
"devoured widows' houses"; they were ready to take 
advantage of the fact that these had no natural protectors. 
He told them that it would be foolish to think 
that by offering prayers on the street corners, etc., they 
were keeping the Law. 

WORDS AN INDEX OF THE HEART 

"By thy words thou shalt be condemned"; that is to 
say, they should lose God's special favor. By their words 



they proved themselves dishonest. They perceived the 
good works of Jesus, but through jealousy and spite they 
said all manner of evil against Him and crucified Him. 
Everything they said against Him showed their real 
heart-condition. They were demonstrating themselves as 
unworthy of God's favor. We are not to think, however, 
that the Jews came under God's everlasting disfavor. 
During this Gospel Age they have been under special 
chastisements: they have had much persecution; but their 
faith in God has brought them this persecution. 

God's wrath came upon them "to the uttermost" during 
those forty years ending the Jewish Age. At the close of 
the year A.D. 70 the nation went to pieces. But the 
people have remained very much alive! And they are 
now soon to return fully to God's favor: "they are still 
beloved for the fathers' sakes." They have still a share 
in the arrangement made from the beginning, so their 
condemnation was not an everlasting condemnation. But 
they have lost the chief blessing. 

Had they said, We are not yet able to see that this is 
the Messiah, but we are convinced that there is some 
wonderful power operating in Him— had they used such 
words, they would have demonstrated themselves as desirous 
of knowing the right way, which God would have 
shown them just as some others were shown— especially 
after Pentecost. In such a case by their words and their 
conduct they might have been justified. They did not 
speak those words, however, because they did not have 
the right condition of heart. "Out of the abundance of 
the heart the mouth speaketh." Their heart-attitude was 
shown in their words; favor to their nation terminated. 

WHAT CONSTITUTES EVIL-SPEAKING 

The Apostle Paul says, "Speak evil of no man"; he 
does not say, Speak evil of no creed. Some of the creeds 
should be very evilly spoken of! It would do the people 
good who are bound by them. He does not say that we 

R5471 :page 167 

are not to speak evil of an evil principle, but brings the 
matter down to personality. The Bible speaks of mankind 
as evil-thinking, evil-speaking, evil-doing; they are 
all under the ban in this sense. And to say that the whole 
world are sinners, is not speaking evil; for all recognize 
the fact. It is true, and every person ought to know that 
all men are sinners: sin prevails. 

But when we come down to personalities, we are getting 
on dangerous ground. Jesus said that the Pharisees 
were hypocrites and whited sepulchres. He did not thus 
address an individual, but He spoke evil of the system, 
and of a class. So if we call attention to pickpockets, we 
are not necessarily casting reproach on any one in our 
neighborhood. But when we single out an individual and 
speak evil of him, we are on wrong ground, according to 



the Scriptures, except as a matter of necessity. If you 
know of a pickpocket, the proper course is to have him 
arrested. If you know that at one time a certain person 
was a pickpocket, it does not necessarily follow that he is 
one now; he might have reformed. 

Therefore, when giving advice respecting pickpockets, 
it would not be right to single out this person or that one, 
unless we have positive knowledge. There are some behind 
prison bars who are today serving Truth and righteousness. 
And so it is with some who have come out from 
behind prison bars. To keep up a reproach and brand one 
because of certain misconduct earlier in life is not right. 
It is not right to hold a reproach against any one, and 
hinder him from an honest course in the future. We 
would better say, Now you are a free man, and I believe 
you are determined to do right. The effect of this would 
be good— to let him see that some one who knew about 
the past was willing to help him. But if he gave no assurance 
of doing right, then we would feel free to put 
others on guard against him. If he were willing to do 
right, we should co-operate with him in any way possible. 

THE WORLD FULL OF EVIL-SPEAKING 

There is no doubt that there is much evil-speaking: 
the world is full of it. A man in business will often say 
of another, I would trust that man about as far as you 
could throw an elephant by the tail— a graphic way of saying 
how much confidence he has in him. Another expression 
is, I would not trust him with even a cellar full of 
cold water! The world has not come into the School of 
Christ; it is the Church, therefore, that is especially instructed 
to speak evil of no man. Of course, it is natural 
for our fallen flesh to "dodge" nearly everything, and to 
try to think out some way by which we could justify ourselves 
in saying something unfavorable of another; and 
it seems that even the Lord's people have often "edged 

R5471 :page 168 

around" to see what excuse they could find for speaking 
evil and yet not feel condemned. 

THE HUMAN HEART VERY DECEITFUL 

It is to be assumed and presumed that every child of 
God has a heart that is desirous of doing the Lord's will, 
and that, therefore, none of them would desire to do that 
which is contrary to the Lord's will. But there is something 
in the fallen human heart which is very deceitful- 
determined to do the thing it used to do in the world. We 
have known people of the world who think nothing whatever 
of telling anything and everything about people. 
They will often say it in a whisper, knowing that the person 
to whom they tell it will whisper it to somebody else 
in five minutes. Even if they are not sure that it is true, 



it is too "good" to keep ! They want others to share such 
a fine thing ! They roll it as a sweet morsel under their 
tongue for awhile, and then hasten to spit it out to others, 
that they may help to carry it on! Evil burns to get out. 

Well, it would not be wrong to tell the truth about a 
person, says one. Yes, it would be wrong! But, if I do 
not tell John Smith that Mary Jones owes me a bill, he 
may trust her. I must tell it to others because she may 
get in debt to them. I will not say very much: I will 
just shrug my shoulder and nod my head and say, You 
would better look out, or you will get bitten! And so if 
it were only a dime the person owes, she would be done 
a thousand dollars worth of injury. 

Do we know something that we could tell, and is it 
"aching" to get out? If so, let us go before the Lord in 
prayer, and earnestly strive to follow out the injunction 
of the Apostle Paul: "Let all bitterness, and wrath, and 
anger, and clamor, and evil-speaking, be put away from 
you, with all malice: and be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted, 
forgiving one another, even as God for 
Christ's sake hath forgiven you."— Ephesians 4:31,32. 

IMPORTANT TO THE LORD'S PEOPLE 

We believe that this matter of evil-speaking, dear 
brethren, is one of the difficulties of Christians— to know 
how and when and where to hold our peace in respect to 
the reputation of others. We know of a brother who had 
been in prison, and was released. He told us that he was 
glad to get out. We asked, Have you been telling any 
one about your having been in prison? Yes, he answered. 
Well, do not tell it again. Very few of the Lord's people 
would trust you if they knew. We will go to these that 
you have told, and tell them not to mention it, at all. It is 
a trait of our fallen nature to speak of these things. 

EVIL-SPEAKING DEFINED 

Of course there are people who are foolish; they 
would tell unfavorable things about themselves as well as 
about others. But most people would not be willing to tell 
anything disparaging about themselves, and we should 
stop and think, Shall I say anything detrimental about 
anybody? If the circumstances were changed, if I were 
in his place and he were in my place, would I like him to 
tell this about me? 

But how would it be if we saw a man picking another 
man's pocket? Then we would feel fully justified in taking 
all the steps necessary for his arrest, because we 
would think that it would be the very best thing for that 
man as well as for others. We would think it right to 
shout, Pick-pocket! Pick -pocket! and have him arrested. 

So far as we can determine, evil-speaking means the 
saying of anything that would be injurious to another, in 
a way or under circumstances that, if it applied to ourself, 
we would think unkind and injurious. In certain instances 



we have known of one who had been doing 
wrong, and we have sent him word that if he pursued 
such a course, we would believe it our duty to take some 
action in the matter; but that if he assured us he would 
abandon his course, we would do nothing. In this way, in 
several cases, the person has been kept from doing harm 
to others; and we were saved from openly making reference 
to the matter about which we knew, and which, 
perhaps, no other person in the world knew. 

We need the wisdom from on High. And we believe 
that this attitude represents a necessary development of 
Christian character. If we really desire the good of our 
neighbor, and our own good, if we desire to honor him 
as we would wish him to honor us, then we must follow 
the Golden Rule, "Do unto others as you would that they 
should do unto you." 

Much evil-speaking would be avoided by remembering 
the following bright little jingle clipped from a secular 
Journal. The sentiment is wholesome and Scriptural: 

"Do all the good you can, 

By all the means you can, 

In all the ways you can, 

In all the places you can, 

At all the times you can, 

To all the people you can, 

As long as ever you can." 
St. Paul gives the same thought briefly, in the words, 
"As we have opportunity, let us do good unto all men."— 
Galatians 6:10. 



R5474 : page 168 

WELL-MEANING, BUT HINDERERS 

WE FEEL sure that all of the Lord's people 

have only the best of motives. How could 

they have other than good motives and yet 

be recognized by the Lord? Selfishness may 

creep in and assert itself to some extent 

without being detected by the New Creature; 

but being detected, it is to be restrained, demeaned, 

put to death. The entire course of 

the Lord's followers is one of experience in 

respect to personal imperfections of mind 

and body, and in respect to properly understanding the 

words and conduct of others. 

We have two items which we desire to bring to the 
attention of such brethren as have to do with public 
speaking, introductions, funeral services, etc. Our suggestions 
and criticisms should be understood as intended 
to be helpful to the brethren themselves and to the Cause 
we all love to serve. 

(1) We are informed that, when serving at funerals, 
some of the brethren, anxious to tell the Good Tidings 



respecting death and the wages of sin upon our race, and 
the redemption and the resurrection as the release from 
the penalty, are in danger of going to extremes. Sometimes 
they preach too long— attempting to tell more than 
is proper on such an occasion. At other times they are 
so intent upon presenting the Gospel Message and Bible 
explanation respecting death, that they forget to speak a 
word of comfort to the bereaved members of the family 
of the deceased, or to make some reference to the deceased, 
his character, his zeal for God, his devotion to the 
Bible— or some other truthful eulogy comforting to the 
bereaved family. 

We are not wishing to intimate in any sense that 
ordinary funeral sermons, which are wholly eulogistic 
and give no attention to the Bible teaching respecting 
death, are right. We merely wish to suggest that a 

R5475 : page 169 

course of moderation is a wise one, bringing in an explanation 
of some of the Divine Plan, and making some 
reference to the deceased and his family, etc. 

(2) Great care should be exercised in the selection 
of a brother to do the introducing of a public speaker. 
Far better is it that there be no introduction at all, than 
that a wrong one be made. The person who thinks the 
occasion a suitable one for showing off himself, his eloquence, 
his knowledge of the Bible, etc., should not be 
entrusted with any work of introduction. The person 
who thinks it an opportunity to tell all he knows of the 
Divine Plan and to inform the audience in advance what 
the speaker intends to tell them, is just as much out of 
place as is the person who, being invited to offer an opening 
prayer, stretches it out into a discourse, wastes valuable 
time and disgusts everybody with his lack of propriety. 
More harm can be done in two minutes by the 
person who introduces the speaker than the latter could 
undo in two hours. 

Humility, modesty and brevity are grand qualities 
everywhere, but are especially appropriate in those who 
would introduce a speaker, whether at a Class Extension 
Meeting, Pilgrim Meeting or any other. 

On such an occasion the one leading in prayer should 
make it merely an invocation. The audience has not come 
together to hear him pray, but to hear the address. His 
invocation should thank God for the privileges of the 
hour, for the liberty granted in our day, for the desire 
of heart to know the Truth and for an open Bible. Requests 
should be made of the Lord for a Divine blessing 
upon the meeting— upon the audience and upon the 
speaker, that the Lord's name may be glorified, that the 
Truth be advanced and all who love righteousness be 
blessed. 

The introduction should be brief also. It should not 
say, "The speaker will tell you what we believe," as 
though making a distinction between the audience and 



the small group in the audience who profess to be teachers. 
With greater humility, it should be something like 
this: "It is my privilege and honor to introduce the 
speaker of the afternoon. He comes to us under the 
auspices of the International Bible Students Association, 
bringing, we believe, a Message from God's Word. We 
trust that it will be convincing, encouraging, helpful. Let 
us hear candidly, remembering the Master's words that 
we are to be sanctified through the Truth, and that His 
Word is the Truth. Let us therefore rejoice in proportion 
as the Word of the Lord is heard with the ears of 

our hearts. I now introduce to you , whose topic 

for the occasion is ." 



R5472 : page 169 

"CALLED OF GOD, AS WAS AARON" 

--JUNE 28.-HEBREWS 4:14-5:10.- 

"The Son of Man came to seek and to 
save that which was lost."— LUKE 19:10. 

TODAY'S LESSON deals with the Priesthood 

of Jesus and, incidentally, with the 

priesthood of His Church. He is the High 

Priest, or Chief Priest, of our profession, 

or order, writes the Apostle. The Jews 

found it difficult to understand how Jesus 

could in any sense of the word be associated 

with the priesthood. The Lord God 

had confined the priestly office to the family 

of Aaron, of the tribe of Levi. Jesus 

did not belong to that tribe, nor did His disciples. How 

could He fill or have to do with the priestly office? 

The necessity for discussing the question arose from 
the fact that, as St. Peter had pointed out, the Church is 
a Royal Priesthood. So St. Paul shows that as the antitypical 
Priest, Jesus had offered up Himself as the antitypical 
Bullock for sin atonement; and that after so doing 
He had ascended up on High and thus entered the 
antitypical Holy of Holies, appearing there on our behalf 
—on behalf of His Church, the antitypical Levites, 
the antitypical under-priests. 

St. Paul argues that because we can by faith recognize 
Jesus as our great High Priest in Heaven and know 
that He has sympathy for our imperfections, therefore we 
may come to Him with great courage, when overtaken by 
a fault, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help 
in every time of need. But all these blessed assurances 
will be without force unless we can realize that Jesus is 
our High Priest in Heaven. Hence the Apostle's argument 
in this lesson is a demonstration of this fact. 



AARONIC PRIESTS WERE TYPICAL 

The Apostle reasons (5:1) that all the Jewish priests 
were taken from amongst their fellows and especially ordained, 
or set apart, for their work, to represent their 
people before God, offering for them both their gifts and 
their sacrifices for sins. In this arrangement the priests 
were able to sympathize with the people, because they 
were subject to the same weaknesses, and also had need 
of the forgiveness of their own sins. But even amongst 
these imperfect, blemished, sinful priests, who needed to 
make offerings for their own sins, none was allowed to 
take this office of himself. God must call him to the office. 
Thus it was with Aaron. God called him to be the 
head priest. 

So, the Apostle points out, it must be with the antitypical 
priests on a higher plane. Christ, the High Priest 
spiritual, and His elect Church, the Royal Priesthood on 
the spirit plan, must also be called of God. They could 
not assume the office otherwise. "Christ did not glorify 
Himself to make Himself a High Priest." God honored 
Him in this way, however, saying to Him in the prophecy 
of the Psalms, "Thou art My Son; this day have I begotten 
Thee"; and again, "Thou art a Priest forever after 
the Order of Melchizedek. "--Psalms 2:7; 110:4. 

MELCHIZEDEK A ROYAL PRIEST 

On this broad foundation of the Divine call the Apostle 
declares that Christ is not a priest after the order of 
Aaron— a Jewish priest, an earthly priest; but, although 
typified by Aaron in respect to an earthly sacrifice, He is 
really a glorified Priest, not after the Order of Aaron, 
who was never glorified, never a king, but after the Order 
of Melchizedek, who was a king and a priest at the same 
time— not a sacrificing priest, but a reigning priest. 

So Christ in glory is not a man, not an earthly being, 
not the sacrificing One, as before. He is the glorified 
Kingly Priest, in power and great glory now as the King 
of saints, able and willing to succor them in all their trials 
and difficulties. And by and by, after He shall have accepted 
all of His under-priests— after He shall have 
changed them to His own glorious likeness in the First 
Resurrection, beyond the veil— then He will become the 
King and Priest in glory to the world, and for a thousand 
years will reign to bless and to uplift all the willing and 
obedient who, under the enlightenment then afforded, will 
draw nigh unto God. 

"IN THE DAYS OF HIS FLESH" 

Coming back to his argument, the Apostle shows us 
the connection between the glorified Kingly Priest beyond 

R5472 : page 170 



the veil and the suffering Jesus in the flesh. (5:7.) 
When the Apostle writes, "Who in the days of His 
flesh," we are to understand that the days of His flesh 
are past, ended. As the Apostle Peter elsewhere explains, 
"He was put to death in flesh, but quickened in spirit"— 
in His resurrection. But in the days of His flesh Jesus 
offered up strong cryings and tears. The Apostle seeks 
to give us, as the followers of Jesus, confidence in His 
ability to sympathize with us in all of our troubles. 
Therefore he reminds us that Jesus "in the days of His 
flesh, when He had offered up prayers and supplications 
with strong crying and tears unto Him that was able to 
save Him out of death, was heard in respect to that thing 
which He feared." 

Our minds instinctively go back to the Master's experiences 
in Gethsemane— his prayers to God, His tears, 
His agony, and according to one account, His bloody 
sweat. The Apostle's thought, his suggestion, is that the 
Master who had Himself passed through such trying and 
bitter experiences, and who is now in Heavenly glory and 
power, will surely sympathize with and succor all of His 
true followers, even though He may allow them to have 
Gethsemane experiences and buffetings of the Adversary. 

AS A SON-NOT AS A SINNER 

The sufferings of Jesus, the Apostle points out, came 
not to Him because He was a sinner, but because He was 
a Son and because as a Son the Heavenly Father would 
prove, test, His loyalty unto death, even the death of 
the cross. Only by such a test of loyalty could He be 
deemed worthy of the high exaltation designed for Him 
and promised— glory, honor and immortality, Divine nature. 
The things which He suffered, the things which He 
endured, not only were to constitute a sacrifice for human 
sin and to make possible human restitution through 
the Messianic Kingdom, but those same trials, difficulties 
and experiences were necessary to the Master Himself. 
As the Apostle proceeds to say, He was made perfect 
through sufferings. 

Jesus was not imperfect at any time in the sense of 
being sinful. He was perfect, undefiled, in His glorious 
condition as the Logos, before He left the glory which 
He had with the Father and was made flesh. When born 
of Mary, the assurance given us is that He was still 
"holy, harmless, undefiled and separate from sinners." 
His sufferings, therefore, did not make Him perfect in 
the sense of making Him sinless. The perfecting was of 
another kind. 

Our Lord had entered into a Covenant of Sacrifice- 
to prove Himself loyal to the Father's will, even unto 
death. He had the promise of perfection on the highest 
plane— the promise of the Divine nature— as a reward, 
if He would fulfil His Covenant of Sacrifice faithfully, 
loyally. The beginning of that new nature was granted 
to Him at the time of His baptism, when He was begotten 



of the Holy Spirit. But the new nature begotten there 
needed development, or perfecting; and it was for this 
purpose that the trials, difficulties and buffetings were 
permitted to come to Him. He was made perfect as a 
New Creature of the Divine order, or nature, by the 
things which He suffered. 

SAVING HIM FROM DEATH 

In the Master's case, after He had entered into a 
Covenant of Sacrifice, it was a matter of either life or 
death. His obedience to the Covenant of Sacrifice would 
bring Him the life immortal, Divine. But any failure 
would cost Him His all; for His all was staked in that 
Covenant of Sacrifice. Hence in the Garden of Gethsemane 
His strong crying and tears were not caused by 
timidity in respect to the impending crucifixion, or by 
anything that man might do unto Him. They were not 
caused by doubt respecting the Divine power or the Divine 
faithfulness. The Master's fear was of death— lest 
He should have failed to comply fully with all of the 
Divine requirements, and should thus lose all in death, 
and not be accounted worthy of a resurrection. 

The Apostle says, "He was heard in respect to the 
thing which He feared." He was delivered from the fear 
of death. From that moment onward the Master was 
the calmest of the calm, in all the trials and stress of that 
night and the following day. We cannot doubt that the 

R5473 : page 170 

Father assured Him that all was well— that thus far He 
had proven Himself faithful. 

LEADER AND HIGH PRIEST 

On the basis of His own victory and exaltation Jesus 
is now "the Author of eternal salvation unto all that obey 
Him," says the Apostle.— 5:9. 

The first salvation which this antitypical Priest after 
the Order of Melchizedek effects is the salvation of His 
Church, a Little Flock, a Royal Priesthood, a Holy Nation. 
These are to be saved to the same glorious station 
which He Himself has attained. Nor can they reach that 
station by any other road than that which He traveled. 
Hence His invitation to them is that they take up their 
cross and follow Him; that they walk in His footsteps 
through evil report, through good report, faithful unto 
death, as He was. 

Not that it is possible for any of His followers to 
overcome in the same absolute sense that He did; for He 
was perfect in the flesh, and His followers are all imperfect 
through the fall. What is required of His followers 
is that they demonstrate the same heart loyalty that He 
manifested— the same willingness to do the Father's will 
and to sacrifice every other interest. For these the great 



High Priest appropriates the merit of His sacrifice, imputing 

it to His followers as a covering for all their unintentional 

blemishes and shortcomings. Thus they are 

assured that they may stand complete in Him in the 

Father's sight, and by and by in the glorious First Resurrection 

be made actually perfect by that glorious consummation 

—"changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an 

eye"; for "flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom." 

But in order to attain this position, all of the followers 
of Jesus must obey Him, must follow His directions. 
Then He will succor them and guide them to the Heavenly 
Kingdom. "Be thou faithful unto death, and I will 
give thee a crown of life." 

Additionally, He will be the Author of salvation to as 
many of mankind as will obey Him when He takes over 
the Kingdom, the dominion of the world, during the thousand 
years of His Messianic Reign. All who then refuse 
to obey Him will be destroyed in the Second Death; but 
all the willing and obedient will ultimately be perfected 
as human beings, earthly beings— restored to the perfection 
in which God created Father Adam, plus valuable experience 
in connection with sin and recovery from it. 



"Tell the whole world these blessed tidings; 

Speak of the time of rest that nears; 
Tell the oppressed of every nation, 

Jubilee lasts a thousand years. 

"What if the clouds do for a moment 

Hide the blue sky where morn appears? 

Soon the glad sun of promise given 
Rises to shine a thousand years. 

"Haste ye along, ages of glory; 

Haste the glad time when Christ appears. 
O! that I may be one found worthy 

To reign with him a thousand years!" 



R5473 :page 171 

LABORERS IN THE VINEYARD 

-JULY 5.-MATTHEW 20:1-16.- 

"He maketh His sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and 
sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust."— MATTHEW 5:45. 

THIS parable is difficult of interpretation so 
as to make all of its facts find fulfilment. 
The Great Teacher gave it as a parable of 
the Kingdom; hence we know that it applies 
to the experiences of the Church during 



this Gospel Age. If we were to apply 
the different intervals mentioned to different 
epochs in this Age, we would have difficulty; 
for the Apostles and others, called 
early in the Age, did not live and labor 
throughout the entire period. Again, in so applying it, 
we would face the proposition that only those at the beginning 
of the Age had definite promise as respects a reward- 
that all others got merely the assurance that they 
would receive what would be right. 

Another difficulty which we would encounter in interpreting 
the parable is how to apply the murmuring of 
those who were first called and last rewarded. Other 
Scriptures show us that the Apostles and others first 
called in the Gospel Age will experience their resurrection 
change before those who will be living at the 
Second Coming of Christ. St. Paul declares that the 
dead in Christ shall rise first, and that then those of us 
who are alive shall be changed. Furthermore, it would 
be unthinkable that the Apostles and others of the early 
Church would murmur at the reward to be given them. 

All of these difficulties must be borne in mind when 
we attempt to find a solution of this parable that would 
fit the experiences of the Church as a whole during the 
Gospel Age. 

If we attempt to apply the parable to the individual 
experiences of God's people, we have trouble also. Applying 
it thus, we might say that those who begin a Christian 
life early, and are found faithful in the Lord's service 
at the evening-time of life, would be the ones first 
called and promised a reward. Others coming in later, 
and serving the Lord's cause with only a portion of their 
time, strength and talent, would correspond to those who 
heard the later call— some even at the eleventh hour. If 
we interpret the parable as meaning that all these will 
get a similar reward regardless of the time spent in the 
Master's service, we would still have difficulty with the 
fact that those called earliest murmured, complained, were 
dissatisfied. 

On the contrary, we are surely convinced that any 
who would murmur against the Lord's will and His just 
and loving arrangements for His people, will never obtain 
the Kingdom reward beyond the veil. We may feel 
assured that any who receive the Master's "Well done" 
and the resurrection change will be far from murmuring. 
They will rejoice and be glad, and feel more than rewarded 
for every little service and sacrifice. How then 
can we apply this parable consistently, in harmony with 
the teachings of other Scriptures respecting the reward 
of the Kingdom class? We can think of only one way, 
and that is to apply the parable entirely to present-life 
experiences of the Kingdom class, especially of those who 
will be living at the close of this Gospel Age. 

PARTLY APPLICABLE TO THE JEWS 



For sixteen hundred years and more the Jews waited 
for the First Coming of Messiah and the blessed opportunities 
which then would come. When Jesus began His 
ministry, He preached, "The Kingdom of Heaven is at 
hand," and gave the Jews the privilege of entering into 
it. That privilege was a "penny," or a reward for their 
faithful endeavor to keep the Law all their lives. But 
when the offer of the Kingdom was promulgated, some 
publicans and sinners were attracted— some who had previously 
neglected God's service and labors in the vineyard. 
These new laborers were received by the Lord 
Jesus and given an opportunity to become His disciples. 

The privilege of discipleship was the penny, or reward. 
The Scribes and the Pharisees, who had been faithful 
to the Lord God all their lives, considered that they 
should have had some pre-eminence or preference over 
the publicans and sinners; and they murmured at any 
arrangement as unfair which would not give them the 
first opportunities of the Kingdom. If publicans and sinners 
were to obtain the blessed privilege of discipleship 
with Messiah, then surely, they thought, some still higher 
favor should come to them. They murmured that Jesus 
received publicans and sinners and ate with them. 

One of the Master's parables was intended as a special 
reproof to the Pharisees along this line. The prodigal 
son represented a class of Jews not living up to their 
privileges, while the elder brother represented those who 
had continuously sought to be earnestly and actively engaged 
in the Father's business. When some of this 
prodigal class received the Message of God's Love from 
the lips of Jesus and His disciples, and returned to the 
Father's House and were treated graciously and given 
the same privilege of sonship as those who had not gone 
astray, but who had labored faithfully, the elder-brother 
class was offended. They murmured, and refused to participate 
in the feast. Thus there were some who were 
first in opportunity, but who were last so far as the blessing 
was concerned, and others who were last and least 
found opportunity for receiving the Divine blessing 
sooner and more effectively. 

APPLICABLE ALSO TO CHRISTIANS 

The general lesson of the parable would seem to be 
that we should appreciate the fact that whatever God has 
to offer is a gift. We should enter His service with loving 
loyalty to principle, to righteousness. If we have 
served many years, that privilege of service should be 
esteemed; and our interest in the Lord's cause should 
make us happy. From such a standpoint of appreciation 
of the privilege of service, we should be glad to see the 
Lord's work carried on, glad to see others enter the service 
and glad to see them get the same reward that we 
hope for ourselves. Only those who have such a broad 
spirit, such an appreciation of the privileges of the vineyard, 



R5474:page 171 

such a sympathy for "as many as the Lord our God 

shall call"— only these will be fit for the Kingdom proper 

and in readiness to receive the special privileges of knowledge 

and opportunity when the Kingdom is ready to be 

announced. 

As the typical kingdom was offered to the Jews in 
Jesus' day, and as those who were newest in Divine service 
received the same opportunities for a share in the 
Kingdom with those who had been long engaged, so apparently 
it is to be in the end, or Harvest time, of this 
Gospel Age. Those who have all their lives been seeking 
to be faithful to the Lord and to serve His cause 
should remember that they have had that much more of 
privilege and blessing. If some shall enter the Divine 
service later, they should be rejoiced with as fellow-servants. 

Indeed, all who are servants, according to the Word 
of the Lord, should be praying the Master to send other 
laborers into the vineyard, instead of feeling jealous of 
any others who might come. And as greater knowledge 
of Present Truth is now coming as a reward to all who 
labor at all in the vineyard of the Lord, let us not be surprised 

R5474 : page 172 

if this shall be equally distributed to those who 

have come in recently and to those who have been a long 

time in the Master's service. 

Let us rather rejoice in the Lord's ways. Let not our 
hearts be angry because of His graciousness to those who 
have come into the service even during the eleventh hour. 
Are they not brethren? Under the terms of the Golden 
Rule should we not wish them to have the same blessings 
that we enjoy? Any aloofness on the part of those who 
have been longer in the Lord's service— any feeling on 
the part of such that they must have more manifestation 
of the Lord's favor now— is evidently wrong. The Lord 
would have us more like unto Himself. And this is the 
suggestion of those who have selected the Golden Text 
for this lesson. Be ye like unto your Father; for He is 
kind to the unthankful. "He maketh His sun to rise on 
the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just 
and on the unjust."— Matthew 5:45. 

LESSONS OF THE GOLDEN TEXT 

More and more we are learning that in a very large 
and important sense our forefathers during the Dark 
Ages lost the proper conception of God's character and 
of His Plan for human salvation. Instead of picturing 
Him in the creeds as loving and gracious, they portrayed 
Him in very different colors. The creeds of the Dark 
Ages, which have been handed down to us, have given 
us colored and distorted views of the teachings of the 
Bible. Only in recent years are Bible students beginning 



to discern this fact. Nearly all people of intelligence have 
now cast away the creeds as irrational in the general 
trend of their teaching— in their representation that God 
from the beginning purposed a Hell of fire and everlasting 
torture for nearly all His human creatures, numbering 
thousands of millions, and a Paradise of bliss for only 
a saintly handful, an elect few. 

But alas, while we have been realizing the errancy of 
our creeds, and have been discarding them, many of us 
have failed to notice how different their teachings are 
from the teachings of the Bible! But the Bible is being 
sought after again. The colored creed-spectacles 
which distorted our view are being broken to pieces. We 
are learning to read the Bible in its own clear light, and 
a blessing proportionately is coming to us. 

Notice, for instance, this text: "That ye may be the 
children of your Father which is in Heaven." Brother 
Calvin, Bloody Mary, and thousands of others during the 
Dark Ages, committed horrible atrocities in the name of 
religion, in the name of Jesus, in the name of the Father, 
thinking that they were copying God, being like their 
Father in Heaven. But alas, they knew Him not aright! 
They had been following demon-drawn pictures which 
represented the almighty, gracious God, the Father of 
Mercies, as most devilish in His plans and arrangements 
for His human creatures. Now we are seeing what Jesus 
really meant when He said, "That ye may be the children 
of your Father which is in Heaven." Now we are including 
the remainder of His statement: "for He is kind to 
the unthankful"; and "He maketh His sun to rise on the 
evil and the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the 
unjust." 

Two of the very noblest of Jesus' disciples caught the 
wrong thought, even though they were for awhile personally 
present with the Master. How much more should 
we excuse those who, during a long period of energetic 
creed-making and of neglect of Bible study, lost all proper 
conception of the Divine character! 

The two disciples referred to were James and John, 
the sons of Zebedee. When the Lord and His disciples 
had run short of food, James and John went to a city of 
Samaria to purchase bread. The Samaritans inquired 
why Jesus did not come to their city to heal the Samaritan 
sick, as well as the Jews. When they learned that His 
mission for the time was exclusively for the Jews, they 
were offended and said: Buy your bread from Jews, then; 
we will sell you nothing. Then it was that James and 
John, indignant that their Master, the Heir of all things, 
should be thus dishonored, asked permission of Jesus to 
call down fire upon the Samaritans, to consume their city. 
These disciples thought that they had the spirit of God. 
But Jesus said, "Ye know not what manner of spirit ye 
are of; for the Son of Man came not to destroy men's 
lives, but to save them." 

And if these two dear disciples needed to be corrected 
—needed to be shown that they had a wrong spirit in 



wishing to destroy the Samaritans— how much more 
would Jesus' reproof be appropriate to those who in the 
name of God would consign all opponents to an eternity 
of torture! 

But such were some of us, in our ignorance, in our 
superstition, in our creed-intoxication— as a result of 
drinking the wine of false doctrine. (Revelation 17:1-5; 
18:3.) Thank God for the deliverance! Praise His 
name for the saner views coming to His people! The 
dawning of the Morning of a New Dispensation is giving 
enlightenment. The Sun of Righteousness is rising; 
the hobgoblins of the past are fleeing before its illuminating 
rays. "Tell the whole world these blessed tidings." 

THE GLORIOUS CHARACTER OF OUR GOD 

Now when we read our Golden Text we see that it 
tells us that as our God is gracious, loving, merciful, 
kind, even to the unthankful, even to the unjust, even to 
sinners, so we should be kind, generous, loving, should 
do good unto all men as we have opportunity, and especially 
to the Household of Faith. This view of God appeals 
to our hearts; and the more we study this God of 
Love, the more we realize that He is the only loving and 
true God, and that all of our previous misconceptions 
were unreal, unloving, untrue— gods of our own manufacture 
—and the more do we see that civilized lands have 
made creed idols with pen, type, ink and paper, more 
horrible than any which the heathen ever made of iron, 
stone, brass or clay. 

"As a man thinketh in his heart, so is he." If the 
ideal of his heart, the God that he worships, is cruel, 
vengeful, hateful, devilish, it would be a miracle if that 
man or woman worshiping such a false deity would not 
become more or less contaminated and be led into more 
or less of wrong thinking and wrong doing. But when 
we get before the mind's eye the loving and true God as 
our ideal, we are more and more changed and transformed 
day by day as we discern our Maker's gracious 
character. Unconsciously we copy this high ideal, and 
more and more become transformed through the renewing 
of our minds, and more and more prove the good and 
acceptable and perfect will of God in our daily lives. 

Let us hold fast that which is good— the sure Word 
of God. Let us discard the human theories of the Dark 
Ages, which greatly misrepresented to us the Divine Message. 
Thus we shall be giving heed to the Master's 
words: "Ye shall know the Truth, and the Truth shall 
make you free." 



"Who trusts in that Word has the sweet hope of life, 
An end of confusion and error and strife. 
Its grace it imparts to the truth-seeking soul, 
Who humbly submits to its righteous control." 



R5475 : page 173 

THE FREEDOM OF THE WILL 

THE Freedom of the Will is an expression evidently 

brought forward in contradiction of 

the thought that humanity are mere machines, 

acted upon by certain influences; for 

instance, that God would act upon a person 

so as to oblige him to do or to will or to 

think in a certain way, or that Satan could 

control the will of any one for evil, against 

his desire. 

The Bible gives us to understand that 
when God created man, He made him in His own mental 
image; that is to say, with freedom of will to choose his 
own course of action— ability and liberty to reach a mental 
decision for himself. The Bible indicates that God 
similarly created all the intelligences of the spirit world 
—angels, cherubim, seraphim, etc., all of whom are said 
to be in God's image, possessing full liberty of will. 

As God can choose that course or this one, so can we. 
We can be obedient to God or disobedient to Him, just as 
we will. But by reason of the fall and its curse, or penalty 
of death, and the blighting of human powers by the 
dying processes, the human will often finds itself in difficulty. 
The Apostle Paul says, "To will is present with 
me, but to perform" is not always possible. (Rom. 7:18.) 
We should will to do perfectly, although none is able to 
do perfectly. On the other hand, one might will to do 
wrong, but might be more or less hindered in executing 
his will. In either case, the will is free. 

There is such a thing as a dominated will. By yielding 
their wills to occult influences, some persons are mastered 
by evil spirits. Such practically lose their wills, and 
we call them deranged, insane. It is said that more than 
half of all the inmates of insane asylums are there, not 
because of any functional derangement of the brain, but 
because of being possessed by evil spirits. 

INDIVIDUALITY TO BE PRESERVED 

God's people are given to understand that the only 
way in which they come into relationship to God is by full 
submission of the will to Him. Such a submission of the 
will would be unwise except to the Lord; or, in the case 
of minor children, to their parents, or teachers. 

A child might properly reason, I have a will of my 
own, but I will ignore it and do the will of my parents. 
This is the proper attitude for a child in the hands of 
good and intelligent parents. The child should be taught 
to realize that its will is uneducated, and that it should, 
therefore, submit itself fully to its parents and look to 



them for guidance and direction. But every parent, while 
recognizing his responsibility as the supervisor of the 
child, should treat the child from the standpoint of its 
free will, and seek to show it the reason why a matter 
should be thus and so, controlling it as far as possible 
by the intelligent exercise of its own will. 

And so with those who are in the family of God. It 
is a primary requisite that they first submit themselves to 
God— give up their own wills. They are first to recognize 
that they are unholy, born in sin; that they have imperfect, 
fallen tendencies, which if pursued, would be injurious. 
Therefore they should seek to make the will of 
the Lord their will. They should give themselves fully 
up to His guidance; His will concerning them is only for 
their good. The Lord teaches His followers that they 
are to reason for themselves; they should read between 
the lines in their study of the Bible, to gain the instruction 
which He there furnishes. They will thus be better 
enabled to know His will, and will come more and more 
to see how much better God's will is than their own, and 
thus will come more fully into heart-harmony with Him, 
and with the Lord Jesus. 

The freedom of the will is contrasted with the bondage 
of the flesh. We may will to go to the uttermost 
parts of the earth; but we may be sick, or lame, or may 
lack the money or the means of conveyance. While the 
will may be there, there is not always the power to put 
it into operation. So also in respect to sin and righteousness, 
and the will to do one or the other. Each one is 
hampered more or less by his own imperfections and by 
the imperfections of others who are under the dominion 
of Satan, the prince of this world. But when the will is 
fully yielded to God, He gives us more and more of the 
spirit of a sound mind— we become more conformed, 
from day to day, to His likeness. 



R5475 : page 173 

DIVINE PARADOXES 

"Because Thy loving kindness [favor] is better than 
life, my lips shall praise Thee."— Psalm 63:3. 

THERE are two ways in which this text may 
be viewed, both of which are very proper. 
One way is to consider it merely from the 
viewpoint of the Psalmist and what he 
meant. The other is to consider it from the 
standpoint of prophecy. We understand the 
Prophet David to mean that to have God's 
favor is more desirable than life; that is to 
say, he would rather die than to live without 
Divine favor. The other way, of viewing it 
prophetically, is to suppose that here, as in many other 



places, the Psalmist represented The Christ, Jesus the 
Head and the Church His members. 

Our consecration is unto death. God has invited us 
to present our bodies living sacrifices, holy and acceptable 
unto Him, and He has given us exceeding great and 
precious promises for the life to come. Therefore, because 
of our love for Him and for the principles of righteousness 
for which He stands, we are not merely willing 
to lay down our lives, but glad to lay them down. We 
are glad to lay down our human lives in doing the things 
that are pleasing to God. 

Another of David's Psalms gives us the thought that 
in God's favor is everlasting life. (Psalm 30:5.) These 
paradoxical statements are in harmony with the other 

R5476 : page 173 

Divine paradox, that "he that loseth his life shall find it." 
He that surrenders his earthly life shall gain glory, honor, 
immortality, the Divine nature. We are glad that we 
can appreciate these glorious things represented in the 
Divine favor extended to the Church; and we gladly 
lay down our lives. We have chosen the better part. 

"Therefore my lips shall praise Thee." The Scriptures 
declare "that with the heart man believeth unto righteousness, 
but with the mouth confession is made unto salvation." 
(Romans 10:10.) We may say that to live righteously 
is one of the best ways of proving our obedience 
to the Lord. Yet there are some who try hard to live 
pleasing to the Lord, who might be restrained from making 
a confession of Him. There are reasons for the 
blessing which we receive by confession. One reason is 
that it is a witness to the world— showing forth the 
praises of Him who called us out of darkness; and a second 
reason is that this witnessing has a good effect on 
ourselves. We enlist our natural forces to support this 
witness, and thus bring into unison all the powers of our 
nature. 

The preaching of the Gospel brings opposition. If 
our Lord had gone about casting out demons, healing the 
sick, etc., and had not told anything about the Divine 
Plan, He would probably have been looked upon as a fine 

R5476 : page 174 

character— as a man going about doing good. But because 
He preached differently from the Scribes and Pharisees, 
and His preaching of the Truth infringed upon the 
teachings of those about Him, it roused their ire. 

So it is today. All the persecution comes about from 
the making known of the Truth. In no time that we 
know has this not been true. In the Dark Ages and 
throughout the Gospel Age, the preaching of the 
Truth has brought upon those telling the Good Tidings 
persecutions from those whose minds have been benighted 
by the Prince of Darkness. In proportion as we open our 



lips and tell of the Gospel of the Lord, we are opposed by 
Satan and those who are blinded by him. With the lips 
one might praise God, and with the lips he might injure 
men. The lips of this class consecrated to God— those 
who are laying down their present life in His service- 
should be devoted to His praise, to showing forth the 
glorious character and lovingkindness of our God, to 
telling forth the wonders of the Divine Plan, which is 
marvelous in our eyes. 



R5477 : page 174 

ALMOST HOME 

My frail barque rudely tosses on the sea, 

In terror, Lord, I feebly cry to Thee, 

"My faith increase, as darker grows the night, 

Oh, make me strong in Thee and in Thy might!" 

He hears my prayer, He answers, with a smile, 

"We're almost home, have faith a little while!" 

Nor sun, nor moon, nor any star is seen, 
Not e'en the faintest rift of blue between; 
The chilling waters deeper, darker flow, 
The storm-clouds lower, the winds more wildly blow- 
Yet hark! Above the strife His voice, so mild, 
"Be brave, be strong, we're almost home, My child!" 



Do eager hands lie folded on thy breast, 
And hath the Lord of Harvest bid thee rest? 
Dost see the happy laborers go by, 
Nor canst refrain a tear or longing sigh? 
Be calm, poor heart, and sink into His will— 
"We're almost home, dear child, lean harder still!" 
April 19, 1914. GERTRUDE W. SEIBERT. 



R5476 : page 174 

1914-GENERAL CONVENTIONS-1914 
COLUMBUS, OHIO, JUNE 26-JULY 7 

All sessions of the Columbus Convention will be held 
in Memorial Hall, on E. Broad St. The Photo-Drama 
will be presented each evening: Part 1, June 26th; Part 
2, June 27th; Part 3, the next evening, then Part 4, etc., 
thus allowing for three full presentations of the four 
parts. 

Twenty-four public speakers will be on the program. 
Brother Russell expects to speak on July 3d, 4th and 5th. 



Opportunity for symbolic immersion will be given on June 
30th and July 3d. 

Lodging can be secured through the local Committee 
at from fifty cents per day (two in a room) upward. No 
one should calculate on a less expense than $1.25 per day. 
All expecting to attend should give prompt notice by addressing 
the I.B.S.A. Convention Committee, care of F. 
D. White, 147 Winner Ave., Columbus, Ohio. Give full 
name of each person and indicate which prefer to room 
together and at what rate. 

DO NOT send this information to Brooklyn. Send NO 
money for rooms. 

CLINTON, IOWA, JUNE 28-JULY 5 

The Coliseum, located in the heart of the city on a 
quiet corner, facing Riverfront Park, will be used for all 
the sessions of the CLINTON CONVENTION. The Photo-Drama 
will be presented each evening: Part 1, June 28th; 
Part 2, June 29th; Part 3, June 30th; Part 4, the next 
evening; beginning again with Part 1 on July 2d, etc., to 
the end of the Convention. 

A full program of speakers has been provided. 
Brother Russell expects to speak June 28th, 29th and 
30th. Opportunity for symbolic immersion will be provided 
on Monday, June 29th. 

The Committee on Arrangements requests that all expecting 
to attend notify them at once, stating price expected 
to pay, color, sex, number in party and how many 
days. Prices for lodging will range from 50 cents per 
day upward. 

Address all communications to I.B.S.A. Convention 
Committee, care of Frank T. Horth, 418 Second Ave., 
Clinton, Iowa. DO NOT address Brooklyn. DO NOT send 
money for rooms. 

Railroads advise that the two-cent per mile rate applies 
practically everywhere and that, therefore, no Convention 
rates will be granted this year. 

Parties traveling in companies of ten or more and desiring 
to arrange for special coaches, or in some cases 
special trains to accommodate the friends who enjoy 
traveling together in numbers, should apply to their local 
ticket agents for special rates. 

The Kansas City friends advise that arrangements 
have been made for a Special Convention Train to the 
Clinton Convention. The train will leave Kansas City via 
the Chicago, Rock Island and Pacific Railway June 27th, 
at 7 p.m. Fare for the round trip— Kansas City to Clinton 
and return— $14.12. For reservation in sleeper and other 
information address I.B.S.A. Convention Committee, 
c/o Minnie E. Donaldson, 2621 Agnes Ave., Kansas City, 
Missouri. 



R5476 : page 174 



SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
EPISCOPAL MINISTER AND THE TRUTH 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Ever since, about two years ago, I was led back to the Word 
of God and found the Glorious Truth, through the reading of 
the volumes of SCRIPTURE STUDIES, I have been wanting to 
write and let you know how I love you, and how grateful I 
am to the Heavenly Father that I am one of those permitted 
to see the Plan as revealed to the Household of 
Faith through "that faithful servant." I have been deterred 
from writing only by the knowledge that you are very busy 
in the Master's service, so that I have felt it almost an imposition 
to write you even of these things. 

For about six years I was an Episcopal minister, and was 
reasonably "successful." I was supposed to have the gift of 
speech, and having been favored with a good education, I was 
able to put this gift to work so as to bring some glory to 
myself as a pulpit orator. But that was all empty honor, as 
I felt even then. In the course of time, and as my study advanced 
and I began to think for myself (a crime for a minister 
of a denomination), some of the doctrines of the church 
(for instance, those of the Trinity and the Incarnation as 
held by that denomination), became to me unreasonable and 
impossible of belief. "He descended into Hell," of the Apostle's 
Creed, so-called, also became a very serious stumbling 
block. 

After much fighting against my conscience and strenuous 
endeavor to keep down reason and avoid thoughts antagonistic 
to the creed and to those doctrines I was supposed to 
believe; and after trying vainly to take the advice of my 
Bishop that I should confine my preaching to those things I 
could talk about conscientiously, with the suggestion that I 
might still repeat the Creed with mental reservations, etc. 
(you know the arguments), I found that my natural contempt 
of hypocrisy and an innate honesty of thought compelled rebellion. 
And so, in the course of time, I gave notice of withdrawal 
from that ministry. 

R5476 : page 175 

Eventually I withdrew altogether from that denomination, 
and, being blinded by the very thing I had taught to others, 
namely, that the Bible set forth those absurdities, I forsook 
the Bible also. Then, these foundations being removed, I 
became intensely worldly and came very near wrecking not 
only my own life and prospects, but also the life of my dear 
wife. Perhaps my experience in this regard was not very 
different from that of others in like case. 

From early childhood I had been a dreamer and somewhat 
of a thinker. My earnest, compelling desire grew into 
a necessity to learn the Truth, the meaning of human life 
and death, the solution of the probability of, and the nature 
of a future life. And so I searched in every field— the philosophies, 



the oriental religions— in fact everywhere in what 

seemed to offer help. None came. It was all unreasonable, 

it was all "vanity." Finally came a settling down to the conclusion 

that while there must be ultimate Truth, it was impossible 

for man to know it. That is a despairing, hopeless 

condition to arrive at, and I knew it. For ten years, almost, 

I had not prayed. I knew not what to pray for nor to whom 

to offer prayers. Simply, I concluded, that one must only 

await the end, and then one would find the solution if there 

R5477 : page 175 

were one. And so I waited and bothered no more to find the 
Truth that I decided could not be found. 

Then, about two years ago a friend sent me the first two 
volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. Years before that I 
had received the first volume, entitled then MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. But I disliked the title— thought it was in line with 
the other fulminations of sectarian writers, and had not read. 
Indeed, the book was lost or destroyed. But somehow I was 
led to read the last two sent. At first I was not impressed— 
the first volume did not make any impression on me. But 
when I had read the second, and saw the wonderful correspondencies 
between the chronology and the Time features, 
and saw how all of those laws and prophecies harmonized, 
the conviction was forced upon me that only the Spirit of the 
One God could have done this, and that the Bible that I had 
rejected, was indeed the revelation of Jehovah. And I rejoiced! 
O, how I rejoiced! Since then I have read and reread 
them all. I have studied the Scriptures, and the Book 
has become my dearest possession; the Truth has become so 
real to me! Later, my wife, who at first opposed the Truth, 
was "acknowledged by God." Recently she symbolized her 
consecration. And so, dear Brother, I thank God first, and 
then I thank you. God bless you! 

Now I want to ask your advice in regard to a matter that 
is puzzling my wife and me. It is in regard to my twelve-year-old 
boy. He has recently taken a decided interest in 
the study of the Scriptures, and he loves the Lord very dearly. 
He unhesitatingly accepts every word of the Bible. He understands 
the significance of the Ransom and knows about Restitution. 
We believe that he takes in a little of the thought of 
the High Calling of the Church. Should we urge him to 
make his consecration? He is a restless boy, loving play and 
entering into it with all his mind, as he does into everything 
in which he is interested. How much knowledge ought we to 
see in him before it were well for him to make the "covenant 
by sacrifice"? Is it your thought that his consecration would 
not be apt to place him in any more dangerous position than 
it would one of maturer years and judgment? 

Brother, we pray for you every day, and several times a day, 
that the Lord's strength will be with you in all your great 
trials, to sustain and keep you; and that His Spirit will always 
dwell in you richly and His love uphold you. 

Your brother in the Lord, FREDERICK ROEHL. 



IN REPLY 

DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

Your welcome letter reached me while enjourney at Chicago 
homeward bound. I am now answering it. 

I greatly rejoice with you and your wife and your little 
son that the Lord's grace has been extended toward you. It 
constitutes a further confirmation of the conviction which has 
been for some time growing upon me; viz., that the only thing 
in us commendable in the Lord's sight is honesty— sincerity. 
Because of this sincerity the Lord has led you and is willing 
to continue to lead all of us who are of this character to the 
end of the journey. His grace is sufficient for us. 

I trust, dear brother, that the Lord is granting you opportunities 
for service. "He that reapeth receiveth wages and 
gathereth fruit." "Pray ye, therefore, the Lord of the Harvest 
that He will send forth laborers into His Harvest." 

In respect to your little son: If I were you, I would not 
press consecration upon him, but I would hold it up before 
his mind as the only proper course for all intelligent people 
who have come to a knowledge of God and His gracious purposes 
—"your reasonable service"— everybody's reasonable service. 
Nothing else is reasonable when once we see the Truth. 
The whole world will be given the opportunity of consecration 
eventually. Without consecration none will ever gain everlasting 
life on any plane. 

Your son cannot be injured by consecration, but may be 
greatly helped. If the Lord sees him incompetent in any sense 
or manner for the High Calling He will not accept him to 
that, but to the earthly favor in due time. But who shall say 
that a child of ten may not very fully and completely come 
to an appreciation of full consecration in thought and word 
and act? Looking back I can see that my whole consecration 
was first made at a little advance— beyond twelve years of age. 
With Christian love, 

Your brother in the Lord. 



A BAPTIST MINISTER'S APPRECIATION 

GENTLEMEN:- 

I beg to state that I purchased one volume of "Bible Keys" 
recently, entitled, THE DAY OF VENGEANCE (now entitled, 
BATTLE OF ARMAGEDDON), of Mr. O. Magnuson, Middletown, 
Conn. I have read and reread carefully, and cannot express in 
words the deep interest I feel in the spread of these great and 
vital truths. I must have the other volumes at an early date. 

Never before has such a flood of light been thrown upon 
the sacred pages for me. I am a Baptist minister, in my 
fortieth year. In earlier life, I served quite awhile in the 
Colporteur work of my church. I write to ask for information 
regarding this work by your Society. 

An early reply, with advices in full, will oblige. 

Yours for the Truth, J. H. ROBERTS, D.D.-Va. 



IN REPLY 

DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

We have yours of the 25th inst, and are glad to learn 
from it that the Lord has found you with the Truth, and 
that you are rejoicing in as much of it as you have read. 
Since you have appreciated the first volume, we feel sure that 
you will appreciate the other five in an increased measure. 
Being a clergyman, we think you will specially enjoy Volume 
V., which discusses THE ATONEMENT in detail with all its incidental 
questions. 

We shall be pleased to hear from you from time to time 
and to know of your progress in the Narrow Way; and will 
be glad to render any assistance or suggestions which may 
be in our power. Praying for your Divine guidance and wisdom, 
we remain, 

Your Brethren in the Master's Service. 



GREAT GRANDFATHER'S MOTTO 

OUR DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Greetings in His name! The attached was my Great 
Grandfather's motto. Truly the Lord has blessed the fourth 
generation of his descendants, whereof we are glad. 

We pray the Lord's continued blessing on your labors of 
love, and ever remember you at the Throne of Grace. 

With much love from all the members of our family 
(mother and three sons). 

Your brother by His Grace, JAMES GREENLEES. 

THE HAPPY MAN. 

THE HAPPY MAN was born in the city of Regeneration, in 
the Parish of Repentance unto Life: he was educated at the 
school of Obedience, and now lives in Perseverance: he 
works at the Trade of Diligence, notwithstanding he has a 
large estate in the country of Christian Contentment, and 
many a time does jobs of Self-Denial: he wears the plain 
garment of Humility, and has a better suit to put on when 
he goes to court, called the Robe of Christ's Righteousness: 
he often walks in the valley of Self- Abasement, and sometimes 
climbs to the mountains of Heavenly-Mindedness: he 
breakfasts every morning on Spiritual Prayer, and sups every 
evening on the same: he has Meat to eat which the world 
knows not of, and his Drink is the Milk of the Word of 
God. Thus happy he lives and happy he dies. 

Happy is he who has Gospel Submission in his Will, Due 
Order in his Affections, Sound Peace in his Conscience, 
Sanctifying Grace in his Soul, Real Divinity in his Breast, 
the Redeemer's Yoke on his Neck, a Vain World under his 
Feet, and a Crown of Glory over his Head. Happy is the 
life of such a man; to obtain which, believe firmly, pray 
fervently, wait patiently, work abundantly, live holily, die daily, 
watch your hearts, guide your senses, redeem your time, love 



CHRIST, and long for GLORY! 



page 177 

VOL. XXXV JUNE 15 No. 12 
A. D. 1914-A. M. 6042 



CONTENTS 

19 14-General Conventions- 19 14 178 

The Voice From Heaven 179 

Babylon Cast into the Sea 179 

Knowledge Brings Responsibility 179 

Fervent in Spirit— Watching Thereunto 182 

Lessons Learned by the Lord's Delay 182 

Our "Solitary Way" 183 

Fashioning Ourselves as Obedient Children 184 

How to Fashion Our Minds 184 

The Fashioning a Gradual Process 185 

Greatness the Reward of Service 186 

"Are Ye Able?"-"My Cup, My Baptism" 187 

"We Are Able"-"Ye Shall Indeed" 187 

What Blind Bartimaeus Saw 188 

The Worst of Blindness 188 

Only the Few Yet See 189 

Mind and Will 190 

Some Interesting Letters 190 

A Maturing Obligation 190 

What the Photo-Drama Did for Him 191 

page 178 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:-All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 



and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



1914-GENERAL CONVENTIONS- 19 14 



ASBURY PARK, N.J., JUNE 26 TO JULY 7 
COLUMBUS, OHIO, JUNE 26 TO JULY 7 
CLINTON, IOWA, JUNE 28 TO JULY 5 

The City Council of Asbury Park has extended a cordial 
invitation to the I.B.S.A. to hold a Convention in their city 
from June 26 to July 7, placing their Auditorium, seating 
2,000, at the disposal of the Association. The invitation has 
been accepted. 

Asbury Park is one of the most attractive and healthful resorts 
on the Atlantic Coast, and it is quiet and restful. Great 
trees shade the streets almost to the ocean's edge, and within 
a few minutes' walk from the sandy beach one is in the midst 
of typical rural scenery. 

The PHOTO-DRAMA will be presented each evening: PART 
I., June 26th; PART II., June 27; PART III., the following evening; 
then PART IV., etc., thus giving opportunity for three full 
presentations of the four parts. A splendid program, with 
more than twenty-four speakers, has been arranged. Brother 
Russell expects to speak on June 28th and 29th. Opportunity 
for symbolic immersion will be given July 6th. 

For particulars as to the Columbus, O., Convention (June 
26th to July 7th) and Clinton, la. (June 28th to July 5th) see 
June 1st WATCH TOWER, page 174. Owing to the Asbury Park 
Convention being held on the same dates as Columbus and 
Clinton, Brother Russell's dates at Columbus will be June 
30th, July 1st and 2d; Clinton, July 3d, 4th and 5th. 

The I.B.S.A. Convention Committees at Columbus, Clinton 
and Asbury Park have a complete list of all the good and 
available lodging places. You will assist all concerned by 
promptly advising the Committee at the place where you 
expect to attend a Convention, and for which days. 

It will be of further advantage, both to you and to all, if 
the Committees have the engagement of your rooms. This 
will avoid trouble and confusion at the eleventh hour and taking, 
at higher prices, rooms secured for others. 

Address at once at the city you expect to attend Convention, 
Int'l Bible Students Assn., Convention Committee, care 
General Delivery. 



When sending remittances to the Society, please remember 



to make them payable in all cases to the WATCH TOWER 
BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, No. 17 Hicks Street, Brooklyn, 

N.Y. 



R5478 : page 179 

THE VOICE FROM HEAVEN 

"Come out of her, My people, that ye be not 
partakers of her sins, and that ye receive 
not of her plagues."— Revelation 18:4. 

THE context of the above Scripture shows that 

our text refers to Babylon— not the literal 

city of Babylon, but to the symbolic city, 

described in the Book of Revelation. The 

term Babylon seems to signify a concentration 

of the various errors in apostate 

church systems, personified in Revelation 

as mother and daughters. "Babylon the 

Great, the Mother of Harlots," is the name 

given by the Lord to the original System, 

thus intimating that the whole brood is illegitimate in 

every sense of the word. She neglected the Heavenly 

Bridegroom, and mingled in her "cup" a stupefying potion 

that has intoxicated the world; even the Lord's saints were 

bewildered.— Revelation 17:1-6. 

After the Apostles "fell asleep," the people of God 
gradually drifted into error of doctrine and practise, which 
culminated in the Dark Ages. A great System developed, 
and led into confusion and darkness. We need not suppose 
that in all these centuries every one connected with 
this System was hypocritical. As the people of Natural 
Israel were led captive into literal Babylon, so the people 
of Spiritual Israel, among whom were some of the Lord's 
true saints, were led captive into Mystic Babylon. Some 
of these would have liked to get free, yet did not know 
what to do. 

When we come down to the Reformation, we see that 
instead of getting entirely free from Babylon and her 
errors, the various systems then formed partook to a considerable 
extent of the spirit of the Mother System from 
which they had separated. The same spirit of persecution 
that was manifested in the "Mother" has also been 
manifested more or less in the "daughters." The enslaving 
power extended from medieval times to the Reformation; 
so that, looking out upon the so-called Christian 
world today, we see that there could not be a better word 
used to picture existing conditions than the word 
confusion. 

Yet there are true people of God still in this Babylonian 
System. But the time of separation is here: those 
yet remaining in Babylon must hasten! The fact that 
some of God's children have been in Babylon all through 



the Age shows us why God has had any respect at all for 
Babylon; His saints have been more or less enslaved 
there for centuries. This is the reason why God has 
dealt with Babylon in any sense or degree. 

BABYLON CAST INTO THE SEA 

Our text with its context is a prophecy that in the end 
of the present Age a time would come when God would 
wholly reject Babylon. In the picture given us in Revelation 
of this time, the Lord's rejection of the apostate systems 
is declared in the words, "Babylon is fallen, is 
fallen!" She has been spewed out of His mouth, and the 
Almighty now calls upon His true people to "come out of 
her." The faithful ones are delivering themselves out of 
Babylon during this Harvest time; the separating work 
is almost completed. Soon, as pictured in Scripture, the 
"sea" of anarchy will swallow up the false systems. 
Babylon is to be "cast as a great millstone into the sea." 
(Psalm 46:2; Jeremiah 51:62-64; Revelation 18:21.) We 
believe these prophecies are to be fulfilled in the very 
near future. 

The nominal Church no longer stands in a peculiar 
position— above the world. Some of her ministers declare 
that they do not believe in Jesus as the Savior of 
the world— man is his own savior, they say. They believe 
in the social uplift of humanity, which, according 
to their view, is to come by putting the right men into 
the right places, by giving woman the franchise, and by 
other methods of social reform. What a sorry hope! 

Some may ask: How may we recognize God's Voice 
calling His people to come out of the churches now? In 
what manner shall we hear His Voice? We answer that 
God bids His people to separate themselves from all sin 
and sinful conditions. Our forefathers did not hear this 
Voice, did not see this condition of sin. The Voice had 
not then spoken. Even in the time of the Reformation 
these entanglements of error were not clearly discerned. 
But now, in this Harvest time, we can see very clearly 
that the teachings of the nominal churches have been 
grossly in error— have grossly misrepresented the Divine 
Purpose and the Divine Character. We now perceive 
that Babylon is full of error and corruption of doctrine, 
and filled with the spirit of the world. 

KNOWLEDGE BRINGS RESPONSIBILITY 

Furthermore, the times and seasons of God's Plan are 
now made plain. We are shown that we are now living in 
the time foretold, when these systems of error are to be 
rejected by the Lord. Should we not leave these systems 
when we see all this? This is God's Voice to "come out 
of her." We hear this Voice now speaking; we see that 
this prophecy of Revelation is now being fulfilled. If 

R5478 : page 180 



any remonstrate: But, Lord, we have many precious 
friends in Babylon, and we are loth to leave them. We 
have tried to show them what Babylon is, but they will 
not heed. It will be a great loss to us to leave them all 
and take a stand against them. Must we come out? Our 
friends will think us crazy! The Lord replies: "Come 
out of her," or "receive of her plagues." 

You are not sharers of her sins until the time you see 
this. You were born in Babylon. The Lord is not holding 
you responsible for what you did not understand. 
But the better you understand, the more responsibility 
you have. If, when you see what the Truth is and what 
the untruth is, you still remain in Babylon and support 
her with your influence and dollars, you will be very 
culpable. If you fail to come out of her when you hear 
the Lord's Voice, it will imply that you are not thoroughly 
loyal to Him. You may be His children, but if you fail 
to obey the Lord through fear of earthly loss, it will 
prove that these things are more precious to you than 
His favor, and He will treat you as He treats the hypocrites: 
you will have a share in their experiences. 

If you are approving of the sins of the spewed-out 
systems by upholding them and giving them your influence, 
you will surely be partakers of Babylon's plagues. 
This is a fair warning. We understand that it is the duty 
of every Christian to break every tender tie, if necessary, 
and to be loyal to God, to stand free from the error and 
sins of Babylon. The time of her judgment has come. 

The plagues coming upon Babylon are sore troubles, 
which will result in the complete overthrow of the present 
order of things— political, social, financial and religious. 
This order of things in its various phases, is one Cause, 
under different uniforms; these interests are all united in 
one great policy. The princes and kings of the earth and 
their supporters are Babylon's great army, and pitted 
against it is another vast army, composed of the masses 
of the people. The conflict between these two great 
armies will ere long precipitate the present order of things 
of the world into anarchy. 

THE VOICE OF PRESENT TRUTH 

It becomes an important question then: Have all 
God's people heard this Voice? We answer that we do 
not think all have yet heard; hence there must be some 
Christians still in Babylon, partakers of her sins, but confused 
because of ignorance, because of lack of knowledge. 
The question might be asked: Shall we go forth making 
this call a special message? We answer: This is not our 
thought. Our thought is that where this is made a special 
message the result is usually different from what is 
intended: it makes many angry. They say: By what 
authority do you call us Babylon, and by what authority 
do you tell us to "come out"? 

Our thought is that it is the Lord who calls His people 



out of Babylon; the call is to be recognized especially as 
a Voice from Heaven. What is this Voice from Heaven? 
Apparently, the Voice is Present Truth— a presentation 
of the doctrines of the Scriptures, with their times and 
seasons— a showing that while there has been confusion 
and error all the way down through the Age, we are now 
in the Harvest time, when Truth is clearer than ever 
before. This Voice of Truth tells us whether or not we 
should support a system that is full of error, full of 
confusion. 

In what way should we give God's Message to come 
out of Babylon? We should show them the Light, the 
Truth; we should place before them the opportunity for 
investigation, and encourage them to prove these things 
for themselves. As they come to see the Truth and the 
bondage in which they have been, they will be glad to 
stand free in Christ by breaking off these shackles. This 
will be the Voice, then, that will show all the Lord's 
people who are in the right attitude of heart that they 
should stand free, that they should come out of Sectarianism, 
that they should not misrepresent the Lord by claiming 
that they are of Babylon when they are not, but that 
they take their stand for God. 

LOYALTY TO TRUTH THE TEST 

This stand will mean the holding forth of the Divine 
Plan of the Ages, the Truth. If, after one has seen the 
real character of Babylon and has gotten his bearings in 
a general way, he then remains, it can be only by compromising 
the Truth. By being worldly wise he might 
remain and continue for a time to have popularity, to 
have honor of men. But if after seeing the Truth, after 

R5479 : page 180 

understanding the Truth, one were to continue in 
Babylon, he would of course be a greater sinner than one 
who had not been so enlightened. 

It is not our thought that we should avoid doing our 
duty in the proclamation of the Truth, but that we should 
avoid arousing unnecessary antagonism; for people in 
error are in no condition to have the error lightly spoken 
of. They must be in the right condition before one can 
even whisper to them, "Come out of her." Even if they 
make inquiry of us, we should not speak too positively; 
but we should say: Now, my dear brother [or sister], if 
you have heard the Voice of God, if you realize that the 
various denominations are in error, then you will, apparently, 
see your duty. You once said you were of 
them; if now you see that you are not of them, you 
should tell them so. But when you shall see, and when 
you shall hear, is not for another to say. If, when you 
have heard and believe the Truth, you remain in Babylon, 
you will be a partaker of her sins, and more guilty than 
the average one among them. When you are able to hear 



this Voice yourself— this Voice which will show you the 
right and the wrong, the Truth and the error— no doubt 
you will have the fortitude to "come out." 

BABYLON'S ATTITUDE TOWARD THE TRUTH 

But those who hear the Voice of Present Truth, and 
who obey the call to come out of Babylon, are usually 
subjected to persecution. In our Lord's day, when the 
believers were from among the Jews, some were put 
out of the synagogues. We remember a particular instance 
during our Lord's ministry. A man who was born 
blind was asked how he had his sight restored; and when 
he confessed Jesus, the rulers put him out of the synagogue. 
(John 9:22,34.) That same spirit, that same 
condition, seemed to follow with the Apostles. 

All through the Dark Ages those who were faithful 
to the Light were kept out of the churches. The church 
creeds and practises were conscience-barriers to keep 
Light-bearers out; those faithful to the Truth were excommunicated 
or put to death as heretics. This condition 
continued to some extent even after the time of the 
Reformation. Servetus, a brother Christian, whose horrible 
death by burning at the stake was caused by Calvin, 
is a case in point. Jesus said, "They shall put you out of 
the synagogues; yea, the time cometh that whosoever 
killeth you will think that he doeth God service." The 
execution of Servetus was an instance of the literal fulfilment 
of our Lord's words. 

Those who have ruled the synagogues have not always 
been bad people, but mistaken people. Thus it was with 
Saul of Tarsus, when he haled Christians to prison and 

R5479 :page 181 

approved the death of St. Stephen. And so with the 
churches of our day when any become enlightened and 
let their light shine. The same thing is true that has 
always been true; namely, "The darkness hateth the 
light." They say: If you stay with us you shall not 
present these matters. So those who are loyal to God are 
in this way forced out of the synagogues; indeed, the 
loyal ones are now called to "come out." 

"YOUR BRETHREN THAT HATED YOU" 

But our day has a peculiarity that other days have not 
had. The Divine Plan is now so beautiful that we can 
see that others are in darkness, and this impelling Voice 
of the Truth is the Voice of God, the Voice of conscience, 
the Voice of enlightenment, calling us out of Babylon, 
which is misrepresenting God, His character, His Plan 
and His Word. We do not know but that they may go 
to the extreme in our day— to kill socially, to kill ecclesiastically, 
perhaps to kill physically. Nearly all the persecutions 
that have come to God's people have come from 



professed Christians, fellow-believers. "Your brethren 
that hated you, that cast you out for My Name's sake, 
said, Let the Lord be glorified; but He shall appear to 
your joy, and they shall be ashamed."— Isaiah 66:5. 

We are glad that these shall one day, not far off, we 
believe, see their mistake. Instead of feeling like bringing 
vengeance upon our enemies, we should feel quite a 
sympathy— not with them, but for them. We should 
realize that it is with them very much as it was with the 
Jews in our Lord's day: those Jews and their rulers knew 
not what they did, or they would have been ashamed. 
And they will be ashamed when they come forth and 
realize what they did— just as Saul of Tarsus was 
ashamed when he realized what he had done. And so 
with these blinded ones of today: "Some shall come forth 
to shame and lasting contempt." This contempt will last 
until there has been a proper repentance for their share 
in the persecutions of the Lord and His faithful ones. 

AMOUNT OF KNOWLEDGE NECESSARY 

We surely appreciate very highly the value of knowledge, 
but we also remember the truthfulness of St. Paul's 
statement that "knowledge (alone) puffs up, but love 
builds up." Yet knowledge is necessary to growth in 
grace. Only as we perceive the beauty of the Divine character 
can we appreciate our God. Therefore, we rejoice 
that He is lifting the veil and revealing Himself more and 
more to our eyes of understanding. 

We can see that mental capacity is not the same in all. 
Some can receive a large measure of the Truth, while 
others can assimilate only a little. No one needs more 
knowledge than he is capable of receiving. God is judging 
His people according to their character-likeness to 
His Son, our Lord, not according to what they know. 
While knowledge is very important, very necessary, still 
no one has a monopoly of understanding— no one has perfect 
knowledge in the present life; and if our eternal 
destiny depended upon knowledge, each of us would come 
short. Nevertheless, we believe that all who are the 
Lord's will be brought into touch with Present Truth, and 
will be judged by it. Those who obtain the knowledge 
and then show a disposition to shirk the responsibility 
connected with it or to deny the Truth or to live ungodly 
after seeing the Light, thus demonstrate their 
unworthiness. 

The Apostle, speaking to the faithful ones in Christ, 
says, "Ye, brethren, are not in darkness, that that Day 
should overtake you as a thief. Ye are children of the 
light." He seems to imply that the Lord's true people 
will come to a knowledge of the Truth. This does not 
necessarily mean all the Truth, but enough to sanctify. 
One with large intellectual power would require and 
could assimilate a large amount of knowledge; one with 
small mental capacity would need less. 

There are certain basic principles that the Lord's 



people have at all times grasped; for instance, the fact 
that there is but one God. Even those who hold to the 
doctrine of the "Trinity" declare that there is one God. 
Thus they have a measure of the Truth, although they 
contradict themselves. It is the same in regard to the 
penalty for sin. Our forefathers desired to be right 
when they thought eternal torment the punishment for 
sin; and they called it a just penalty, in their endeavor to 
be right. But with these basic principles is mixed a large 
proportion of error. The whole world of mankind has 
been under delusions; and we who are now waking up 
are really surprised to see how little we actually knew— 
how ignorant we were in regard to some of the precious 
messages which our God has given us. 

"WEEPING AND GNASHING OF TEETH" 

But as we were children of God before we received 
full knowledge, so we believe that it is possible for others 
to be children of God without having full knowledge. We 
are living in the Harvest of the Gospel Age, when God is 
causing the knowledge of the Truth to encircle the earth. 
At the same time the Adversary is doing all that he can 
to hinder people from studying the Divine Message- 
raising a dust of calumny to blind the eyes of the unwary. 

It is because we believe that there are children of God 
attempting to live on the husks and skimmed milk of 
human tradition— brethren in Christ starving for the pure 
food offered in the Word of God— that we are trying to 
reach and help them. Otherwise we would abandon all 
special efforts at propaganda; for we know that as soon 
as the Messianic Kingdom shall have been set up, conditions 
will be favorable to all to come to a knowledge of 
the Truth as it is contained in the Bible. 

The days that are almost upon us will surely bring 
"weeping and gnashing of teeth" to many of the Lord's 
people; for whoever stands for error will be in opposition 
to God. They are about to go into a great Time of 
Trouble, and it will be their own fault. Some of us heard 
God's Voice early in the Harvest, and therefore we had 
the responsibility earlier; some heard later. Some are 
hearing now about the sins of Babylon— that these sins 
are about to be punished, and that they should come out 
and be on God's side, if they would have Divine favor. 
It is the desire to further sound out this present Message 
that has led us to the production of the PHOTO-DRAMA OF 
CREATION— that those who would not read might see. To 
whatever extent it helps each of God's children, still 
bound, to recognize his own responsibility, it represents 
the Voice of God, telling them their present duty as 
Christians. 



"When ye hear I am come, then can ye arise, 
The joy of your heart springing up in your eyes? 



Can ye come out to meet Me, whate'er the cost be, 
Though ye come on the waves of a storm-crested sea? 

"When I call, can ye turn and in gladness 'come out' 
From the home of your childhood, the friends of your heart? 
With naught but My promise on which to rely, 
Afar from their love— can ye lie down and die?" 

"Yea, we'll take up the Cross and in faith follow Thee, 
And bear Thy reproach, Thy disciples to be. 
Blest Savior, for courage to Thee we will fly; 
Of grace Thou hast promised abundant supply." 



R5480 : page 182 

FERVENT IN PRAYER-WATCHING THEREUNTO 

"Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the spirit, 
and watching thereunto with all perseverance, and supplication 
for all saints."— Ephesians 6:18. 

PRAYER is a wonderful privilege. It is a very 
great favor to be permitted to approach the 
Supreme Ruler of the Universe with our 
petitions. We should come, therefore, in 
the spirit of deep appreciation, of earnestness 
and humility and reverence. The 
greater our earnestness, the more acceptable 
will be our prayers, and the more abundant 
blessings shall we receive. 

There is a great deal of formal prayer. 
The Scriptures speak of this as drawing near unto God 
with the lips, while the heart is far from Him. (Isaiah 29: 13; 
Matthew 15:7-9.) It would be better not to approach 
the Lord at all than to do so in an improper manner. 
The man who merely utters words with His lips is 
not praying. A Christian should not say prayers, but 
should pray. We should not think of saying even one word 
that we do not mean and have not thought out. Many 
people have done themselves injury by praying in a formalistic 
manner. 

When we come to the Father, let us draw nigh in 
spirit— with the heart, the understanding, the mind— 
whether the prayer be long or short. Let us come with 
true and earnest devotion, with supplication, that He may 
see our intense desire in the matter. As our Lord said, 
the Father seeketh such to worship Him as worship Him 
in spirit and in truth. Without the spirit of prayer our 
petitions amount to nothing. 

No one may offer prayer to the Father except those 
who have accepted His terms, and have come into relationship 
with Him as sons, through the great Advocate. 
Others are aliens and strangers. There is a difference 
between worship, or thanksgiving, and prayer. Any one 



may offer worship— adoration, homage. Any one may 
bow the knee and express thanks and appreciation. But 
the privilege of making requests of God is directly limited 
to those who have been accepted in Christ. 

There is a difference, too, between prayer and supplication. 
The term prayer applies to any petition, great or 
small; whereas the term supplication means a special, 
agonizing desire for a thing— entreaty with intense yearning. 
But whether it is prayer in the ordinary sense, or 
intense prayer— supplication— we should always come in 
the spirit, with an appreciation of the fact that we are 
entering into the presence of the great Creator and that 
in thus doing we are enjoying a great privilege. 

"WATCHING THEREUNTO" 

St. Paul adds, "and watching thereunto." Watching 
seems to be an attitude of mental alertness. If we really 
believe that the Lord has indicated that we should pray 
for the things we need, and that He will give us these 
things, then we should be on the alert to recognize when 
we receive them. We should take heed as to the things 
for which we ask, and be sure that we ask for the things 
promised, the things for which we are entitled to ask. 

We should also watch for the Lord's providential leadings. 
The person who, after having prayed, forgets what 
he prayed for, and who cannot tell whether or not he has 
received an answer to his petition, has certainly missed a 
great blessing which it is designed that he should have. 

Prayer is not to be offered to be heard of man, but of 
God. It is intended to be a stimulation to our hearts and 
to quicken us to an expectancy of certain things; and it 
should be our earnest endeavor to keep our lives in harmony 
with our requests. When Jesus told His disciples 
to pray the Lord of the Harvest that He would send more 
laborers into His Harvest, He did not mean that they 
were to tell the Heavenly Father His business; but that 
they should be solicitous that others come into the work, 
that God would send forth laborers into His Harvest 
field; and that the disciples themselves should watch for 
opportunities of service, in harmony with their prayers. 

The Lord frequently called attention to the fact that 
we should be persevering in prayer. Perseverance is an 
essential quality in the sight of God. It includes patience, 
carefulness and interest. In short, it is related to every 
fruit of the Spirit which the Lord's people are to cultivate. 
Patience is good, but it needs perseverance. Love 
is good, but it needs perseverance. 

Perseverance does not make the will. The will is already 
there. It is the will that God recognizes in the beginning. 
But by various experiences, trials, difficulties, 
tests of endurance, the Lord would prove us and develop 
us. He would have us become very positive characters 
in all these qualities which have His approval. So our 
praying should all be in the spirit, from the heart. We 
should watch thereunto with perseverance day by day, 



until the Lord shall see that we have attained the character 
which He can honor with a share in the Kingdom. 

LESSONS LEARNED BY THE LORD'S DELAY 

Perhaps one reason why our Lord does not answer 
our petitions quickly is that He desires us to learn to 
watch for the answer and thereby get the lesson of appreciation 
and gratitude to Him, as we realize that He 
has given us our request. We should therefore pray with 
all perseverance, watching for the answer until it come 
—not watching merely for a few minutes, or for a day or 
a week. The Lord might see best to further defer the 
answer to our petition, either to test our faith or to increase 
our earnestness and get us into a better condition 
to receive the blessing. It requires time to become emptied 
of self and prepared to receive the mind of Christ; and 
with some, more time is required than with others. 

We are sure that the Lord will pursue that course 
which is best for us, just as a teacher with his pupils, 
and a parent with his children. The parent exercises 
judgment as to what is best for the child. So our Heavenly 
Father wishes to give us the good things. Sometimes 
He sees best that we wait a long time before getting 
the answer to our petitions; at other times He may 
give us a speedy answer to our prayer. Nevertheless, as 
the Apostle Paul declares, we know that all things are 
working together for our good, because we love God and 
have been called according to His purpose. And we must 
ever bear in mind the conditions which our Lord imposes: 
"If ye abide in Me, and My words abide in you, ye may ask 
what ye will, and it shall be done unto you."— John 15:7. 

We must search the Scriptures to know what is the 
mind of the Lord, what He has promised and what He 
has not promised. The fully consecrated will not want 
anything which is not in fullest harmony with the will 
of Him we so love and adore, and who is so worthy of 
our love and loyalty. We must remember, too, that while 
we are praying with persistence and faith, the Lord is 
preparing for us, not only the blessing and opportunity of 
service which we desire, but He is also preparing the circumstances 
and conditions which will bring this blessing 
or opportunity in the best form. This will require our 
waiting on the Lord, which should be in perfect trust and 
patience for His good time to grant the desire of our 
hearts. "The supplication of a righteous man availeth 
much in its working."— James 5:16.— R.V. 

R5480 : page 183 

Family prayer is also very desirable in the homes of 
the Lord's saints, wherever possible; and prayer amongst 
the children of God when they assemble together is eminently 
proper. Our Lord sanctioned this by praying with 
and for His disciples; and it was also commended by the 
Apostles. We are to pray, not for ourselves only, but for 



all of the saints and for the interests of the Lord's Cause. 
The Scriptures commend both public and private prayer 
amongst the children of God. But secret prayer is absolutely 
essential to the life of a Christian. 

PRAYERFUL ATTITUDE ALONE NOT SUFFICIENT 

We have been surprised occasionally to hear some 
professed follower of Christ urging the impropriety of a 
form of prayer in words, and of assuming any particular 
posture in prayer, or of praying at any stated time, asserting 
that kneeling in prayer is unnecessary— that all of 
life should be a prayer. Such a proposition is astounding 
to us— the logic of it is incomprehensible. True, we are 
to pray always, to be always in the spirit of prayer, to 
be so devoted to the Lord that we shall ever manifest in 
our lives the beauty of holiness, that we shall be shining 
lights in the world. But we hold that no Christian can 
maintain this heart attitude, or glorify God in his life, 
without going to the Lord in a particular and formal 
manner, and preferably upon his knees, and if possible in 
solitude at certain times. "Enter into thy closet, and 
when thou hast shut thy door, pray to Thy Father which 
is in secret."— Matthew 6:6. 

Our dear Master's constant attitude of prayer did not 
hinder His more particular devotions when He turned 
aside from the busy affairs of His life to converse with 
the Father in secret— sometimes briefly and sometimes 
spending the entire night in prayer in the mountain solitude. 
The very isolation of the Lord from all human 
help drew Him the nearer and the oftener to the Father 
in prayer and communion. So it is, or should be, with all 
the true followers of the Master. As we grow in His 
character-likeness we will, like Him, pray without ceasing, 
in everything giving thanks, singing and making melody 
in our hearts to the Lord, recognizing Him as the 
center of all our hopes and our joys. 

OUR "SOLITARY WAY" 

We all realize at times the inability of even our dearest 
ones to enter fully into and appreciate our sorrows 
and our needs. They are unable to sympathize 
with us fully in our struggles and our trials. 
This realization should send us, as it did our 
dear Lord, the more frequently to the Throne of Grace, 
where we are always sure of having the ear of 
One who understands us perfectly and can make all needful 
allowance for our frailty; who knows the limit of our 
ability to do and to be, in our imperfect flesh; and who 
can give us the perfect sympathy which none other can 
give. He never fails to hear and to heed the cry of His 
children, even though He may for a wise purpose in love 
defer for a time a visible answer to their pleas. 

JACOB AN EXAMPLE 



The prayer of Jacob at the time he was anticipating 
a meeting with Esau on his return from Padan-Aram 
may be considered one of the most excellent examples of 
earnest, persevering prayer to be found in the Lord's 
Word. It is full of confidence and trust in God. It recounts 
God's Promise to his grandfather Abraham and 
his father Isaac and the renewal of this promise to himself. 
He mentions to the Lord His promise also to bring 
him again to his home land. His humility is shown in 
his words: "I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies 
and of all the truth which Thou hast shown unto Thy 
servant; for with my staff [only] I passed over this Jordan 
[when fleeing from home], and now I have become 
two bands [great companies]."— Genesis 32:10. 

He tells the Lord of his fear of Esau, yet shows that 
his fear is offset by his confidence in the Almighty. It 
was at this time, and doubtless in answer to this prayer, 
that the angel of the Lord appeared to Jacob, and so full 
of faith was he in the Power of God and in His Promise 
to protect him and make of him a great nation, that he 
laid physical hold upon the angel, declaring: "I will not 
let thee go, except thou bless me!" The angel here appeared 
as a man; but Jacob had recognized him as the 
representative of the Lord, sent to meet him. 

We cannot suppose that the angel was not sufficiently 
powerful to release himself from the grasp of Jacob, but 
rather that God was pleased to bless him, and that these 
circumstances were designed for the very purpose of 
drawing out Jacob's longing desire for this blessing of 
the Lord, to demonstrate the depth and intensity of his 
desire. When this was proven, when he had manifested 
his deep appreciation of the blessing which God alone 
could give, and this great longing to be in harmony with 
Him, then the blessing came— Jacob's victory. God was 
pleased to reward such faith and energy and zeal. 

LESSONS TO SPIRITUAL ISRAEL 

Jacob was only a natural man, yet his prayer has in 
it a lesson that may be of much profit to New Creatures 
in Christ; not that we should wrestle with God as did 
Jacob, for we are sons of God, and sons have a much 
closer relationship than servants, and have no need to 
wrestle with God to gain His favor. The late Bishop 
Phillips Brooks expressed the true thought very beautifully 
and succinctly when he said, "Prayer is not conquering 
God's reluctance; it is laying hold upon God's 
willingness." We have His favor now; and He has promised 
us His choicest blessings. But Jacob's earnest zeal 
and faith and humility and his perseverance of mind are 
well worthy of our emulation and imitation. We should 
always pray and not faint, as our Lord reminded us. God 
wishes us to be persistent, and to have unwavering faith 
in His willingness to give us His best gifts. 

If the blessing in answer to our prayer does not come 



in the moment of asking, we are to continue "instant in 
prayer," patiently waiting for the Lord's due time, in an 
attitude of entire, sweet submission to His will, assured 
that if the answer be delayed it is because our Father 
in His wisdom sees a reason for it and has our highest 
welfare at heart. He is never indifferent to His children 
nor unheeding of their needs and of their cry for help 
and for fellowship with Him. But let us see to it that 
God's glory is our chiefest desire. 

Alas, how many spiritual Israelites seem to have a 
much less keen appreciation of propriety in prayer than 
had Jacob! He asked for God's blessing, in whatever 
manner He might be pleased to give it. Jacob did not 
specify even the earthly good things which God had 
promised him. He desired the Lord's glory in the fulfilling 
to him and his posterity of His great Covenant. Many 
of God's children ask and receive not, because they ask 
amiss, that the answer may minister to the desires of 
their flesh. The Lord has promised to care for the temporal 
necessities of His children and will surely give 
them what is best, whether this be little or much. 

How few seem to remember that as New Creatures 
our desires and requests should be especially for the 
things that pertain to our spiritual interests; that it is 
this class of blessings that the Father desires us to have, 

R5481 :page 184 

and has promised to give us! He assures us that as 
earthly parents are pleased to give good gifts to their 
children, so our Father delights to give us His Holy Spirit 
—His very best gift— the gift which comprises all blessing 
and glory, which will insure to us everything which 
is desirable, in the very highest sense. If the Lord's people 
who have consecrated their all to Him, could be 
brought to the point where their one aim in life, the burden 
of all their prayers, would be that they might have a 
larger measure of the Spirit of the Lord, the Spirit of 
holiness, the Spirit of Christ, the Spirit of a sound mind, 
what an unspeakable blessing it would mean! 

ISRAEL -MIGHTY WITH GOD 

Jacob got the blessing and with it a change of name. 
Thenceforth he was called Israel, which signifies, Mighty 
with God, or "A Prince with God." This new name 
therefore was always a source of encouragement to him, 
an incentive to fresh zeal and to trust in the Lord. All 
of Jacob's posterity adopted this name. We have in antitype 
Christ Jesus, our Lord, the true Israel, the One who 
through faith and obedience to the Father has prevailed, 
who has overcome the world, the flesh and the Adversary, 
and has received the highest blessing of God as the result 
of His great struggle. He is now supremely exalted, and 
is declared to be the Prince of the kings of the earth. He 
has sat down with the Father in His Throne. 



We also, the followers of Jesus, bear the name of 
Israel. We, like Him, if faithful as was He, shall be exalted 
by the Father. We shall share with our Lord and 
Head His Throne. We shall be made higher than angels, 
principalities and powers, as our Master has been. How 
glorious this thought! How wonderful! Should not this 
great hope inspire us to the utmost diligence and carefulness 
that we may make our calling and election sure? 

If we prove faithful unto death, the name Victor, or 
"Mighty with God," will be our name. It will apply to 
every one of the Lord's faithful ones as it applied to our 
Head. But only those who manifest His Spirit, only 
those who so love God that they will hold on to His 
promise and who will not let Him go without the blessing, 
will receive the fulfilment of the promise and will reign 
with Christ in glory and share His Throne. 

Jacob had a method of marking the special manifestations 
of Divine providence— as when he called the place 
in which he wrestled with the angel Peniel— "the face of 
God." This was a reminder to him that there he had 
been privileged to receive from the Lord a particular 
blessing, a marked answer to prayer. Similarly it is profitable 
to Spiritual Israel that we should make note in some 
special manner of the Lord's mercies and providences to 
us. Many feel poor as respects the favor and blessing of 
the Lord, simply because they have failed to let these 
blessings make a proper impression upon their hearts at 
the time they were received. We are all leaky vessels, 
and unless special notation of these favors of the Lord 
are made upon the tablets of memory, or in some other 
way, their lesson and the encouragement and strength 
which they bring are largely lost to us. 

Doubtless we should all have more "Bethels" and more 
"Peniels" did we but follow the course of setting up some 
kind of monuments of our Father's faithfulness in His 
answers to our prayers, and there entering into some 
covenant or vow with the Lord in return for these His 
mercies. As each watches for fresh evidence daily of the 
love and special watch-care of our God over us, we shall 
find that we have far more cause for encouragement and 
thanksgiving than we would be aware of without such 
notation and watchfulness. Let each of us, then, daily, 
weekly and yearly raise to God our "Ebenezers," if we 
would increase our faith and joy and love. 



R5481 :page 184 

FASHIONING OURSELVES AS OBEDIENT CHILDREN 

"As obedient children, not fashioning yourselves according to 
the former lusts in your ignorance; but as He which hath called 
you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner 
of conversation."— 1 Peter 1:14,15. 



THE APOSTLE is not addressing the world, 
but those who have become children of God 
—those who have passed out from their 
position of condemnation with the world, 
and have been justified by faith in the precious 
blood, who have been accepted of the 
great Advocate Jesus, and have been begotten 
of the Holy Spirit. But it is not sufficient 
that we become children of God; for 

R5482:page 184 

these newly begotten children are only 

started in the Narrow Way, they are in an imperfect, 

undeveloped condition. They have this standing as children 

because they have put themselves into the hands of 

God and desire to do His will, loving righteousness and 

hating iniquity. 

On the basis of this stand that we took— of enlisting 
under the banner of Jesus, to fight against sin and self and 
Satan— God purposes to prove how thoroughly in earnest 
we were when we espoused His cause. He wishes us to 
attain to that development of character which will fit us 
to be associates with Jesus in His great Kingdom, which 
is to bless the world. 

If we are obedient children, everything will work well. 
We shall get the proper tests, the proper chiseling and 
polishing, everything that will make us "meet for the 
inheritance of the saints in light." But if we do not 
prove obedient, this will hinder us from ever getting into 
the Elect company, although we may have a place in that 
company of children who have had to be chastised and 
finally brought to proper obedience. 

By this we are not implying that any of God's children 
are exempt from discipline; for we are told that 
every son receiveth chastisement. (Heb. 12:6-11.) Those 
chastisements that came to our Lord Jesus were not deserved, 
but were experiences by which He proved His 
thorough loyalty and worthiness of exaltation. And so 
the chastisements that come to His followers are to fit 
them for future service and to demonstrate their worthiness 
of being counted in as members of His Body. 

The chastisements which are in the nature of punishments 
for sin should bring about a thoroughly loyal condition 
of heart in reasonable time, or the one chastised 
will lose his place in the Body. If he prove ultimately 
disobedient, he will be counted unworthy of any of God's 
favors, and will die the Second Death. The exhortation 
of our text, therefore, is to the highest attainment and 
the utmost loyalty to the Father. 

HOW TO FASHION OUR MINDS 

There is a fashioning of our minds in progress. It is 
not the fashioning of our will. The will is given up to 
begin with. But the will has to do with regulating the 



mind as well as the body— the will has to do with this 
fashioning. We will that our minds shall be educated 
along the lines of obedience, that we may be properly exercised 
by all the trials which God has purposed for us. 

R5482 : page 185 

We as New Creatures should learn to think as God 
would have us think, to develop habits of thought which 
upbuild the New Creature. We should eat and drink according 
to His will, and our clothing should be regulated 
according to His will. We are to seek His guidance in 
our life in all things— because of the weaknesses of the 
flesh, the promptings of the Adversary, and our environment. 
The Lord has made provision, and has given us 
definite instructions in the Scriptures, by which we may 
regulate our lives in harmony with His Word; and we 
should seek more and more to know the will of God and 
to profit by His providences in our lives, and to apply the 
knowledge gained, so that whether we eat, or drink, or 
sleep, or labor, we shall do all to the glory of God. 

Our organism of flesh we receive by heredity. These 
bodies of ours have various weaknesses and inconsistencies 
—some in one direction, and some in another. But 
they are all, more or less, perversions of the true ideal 
which God originally gave. Centuries of sin have left 
their mark upon us, upon our minds and bodies; and this 
mark is seen in the theories which have come into our 
minds. These errors in the past had control of us. 

Before we saw the Lord's way, we thought it was 
right to follow after earthly pleasures and pursuits and 
to put self first. We naturally said, This is the proper 
course for us to take. We see that the prominent and 
the great are following this course, seeking first the affairs 
of this present life— praise of men, how finely they 
can be clothed and housed, how fine a carriage or automobile 
they can have. They seek— and are in large measure 
able to secure— the gratification of the taste for 
earthly things, whether it be for the satisfaction of the 
mind, as various kinds of literature, or for the body, as 
for certain kinds of foods or drinks, etc. 

But when we become children of God, we ask, What 
is God's will in respect to what we shall eat or drink or 
wear, as to the use of tobacco, as to the cut of our clothes, 
etc.? It is not for us to decide now whether we shall 
go to the theater or play cards or dance. All these matters 
should have been decided before we consecrated ourselves. 
Now, in harmony with the Covenant we have entered 
into with Christ, we are to know strictly the 
Father's will. As we learn to see things from God's 
standpoint, we change our ideas as to what we shall eat, 
and what we shall drink, etc. And this change going on 
in our minds is the "fashioning." 

THE FASHIONING A GRADUAL PROCESS 



Although we discover some things very quickly, we do 
not learn all things at once. Some things are less conspicuous 
before our minds than are others, and represent 
the finer shadings of what would be proper for a New 
Creature. We gradually come to note these things more 
and more; and we ask, Which things shall we continue 
to choose? The knowledge of God's will is a matter of 
education. We come to see that this is right and that is 
wrong. (The world sets such a style for evening dress, 
such a style for morning dress.) When we become 
Christians we have new standards, and it takes some time 
to get everything harmoniously adjusted therewith. 

In line with this thought, the Apostle says, "Be ye 
transformed, by the renewing of your minds"— not by the 
renewing of the new will. We already possess the new 
will. But we see that the body is regulated by the mind. 
Therefore the new will says, I must begin with the mind 
I must get my mind to see things correctly, according to 
God's will. I will use the Bible and all the providential 
indications that will give me a knowledge of God's mind, 
and I will begin to conform my mind thereto. Thus our 
minds become gradually fashioned— transformed into the 
mind of the Lord. As we come to see more and more 
what is the will of God, our minds decide to do His will. 
Our reason plays an important part. 

God wishes to appeal to our reason, because we are 
thus better developed than in any other way. We are all 
in the School of Christ— under the tutelage of our Lord. 
In this School we are learning to do His will. We have 
the teachings of our Lord Jesus and the writings of the 
Apostles; and our Lord declared that whatsoever the 
Apostles should bind on earth would be considered bound 
in Heaven; and whatsoever they should loose on earth 
would be so considered in Heaven. Our education progresses, 
until, at the end of this life, those who have 
thoroughly learned the lessons of this School will be 
those who have been obedient children. These will have 
been transformed by the renewing of their minds, that 
they might prove what is that good, and acceptable, and 
perfect will of God."— Romans 12:2. 

OUR STANDARD-JEHOVAH'S RIGHTEOUSNESS 

The new will is, in substance, a will to be like our 
Father in Heaven. The Apostle Peter exhorts, "As He 
who hath called you is holy, so be ye holy." Holiness is 
the standard of perfection. Our will must be holy when 
we first make our Covenant with God. Nothing less than 
a holy will is acceptable to Him. If we had had an unholy 
will, a will not submissive to God, we would not have 
been accepted. So if our will be holy, we shall, as far as 
we are able, do His will. 

As He who has called us is holy, so we, as far as our 
will is concerned, will be holy. And we will so direct our 
mind, as to be holy in life so far as is possible. We will 
apply the principles of God's holiness to every affair of 



life. We will observe the Golden Rule, that we should 
do to others as we would that others should do to us. 
Whoever neglects to apply these principles of holiness to 
his own life is not growing in the new life, not being 
transformed. We should seek to have our minds fully in 
accord with God's mind, and our conduct as far as possible 
also in alignment. 

If our mind is not running in the proper groove, we 
must see to it that we turn it into the proper groove. We 
want to render obedience to our highest conception of 
what is the Lord's will, as far as we are able. Our will 
will be determined by God as loyal in proportion as it 
has been on the alert to watch the mind and the body, 
the tongue and everything pertaining to our conduct. 

The Apostle enjoins upon us that we shall be "holy 
in all manner of conversation." (1 Pet. 1:15.) The word 
conversation here has its broad meaning. It relates to 
our intercourse with others— all of our conduct with respect 
to others— our manner of life. We are to be holy 
in everything that pertains to our lives— in our thoughts, 
words and deeds. This is a very high standard; and no 
wonder that the Lord has set a high standard! It is for 
us to learn what this standard is, and to help others to 
know what it is. 

This is why we spend a few years this side of the veil 
after we have given our hearts to Jesus. We say that we 
have taken up our cross to follow Jesus, and the Lord 
wishes to demonstrate whether this is true. He is watching 
our course, and the foreordained number will be 
found for the Bride class. Others will be given another 
position not so good; and those who manifest that they 
have not the true spirit of obedience will die the Second 
Death. 



R5483 : page 186 

GREATNESS THE REWARD OF SERVICE 

-JULY 12.-MARK 10:32-45.- 

"The Son of Man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, 
and to give His life a Ransom for many."— Verse 45. 

IT WAS at the close of Jesus' ministry. For 
more than three years the Master had been 
calling His disciples and instructing them. 
They had come to recognize Him as the 
Messiah, the Heir of all God's promises, the 
One through whom the Messianic Kingdom 
would be set up, which would bless all the 
world of mankind— the dead as well as the 
living. 

The Master had particularly assured 
them that if faithful they should sit with Him in His 



Throne. However, He had not told them that His Kingdom 
would be a spiritual one, and that they would need 
the change of the First Resurrection before they could be 
sharers of it. He had not yet made clear to them the 
fact that a whole Age would intervene before they would 
be sharers in the Kingdom, and the Kingdom itself be 
established amongst men. But he had hinted all this. He 
had said, "I have many things to tell you, but ye cannot 
bear them now. Howbeit when the Spirit of Truth is 
come, it will bring My words to your remembrance and 
show you respecting future things." 

Jesus did, however, begin to break to the disciples a 
part of the news necessary for them to know and appreciate, 
lest they should be entirely overwhelmed and discouraged. 
He told them that He was going up to Jerusalem, 
and that the result would be that He would be 
delivered to the Gentiles to be crucified. St. Peter, always 
courageous, this time brought upon himself a severe 
rebuke. He undertook to correct the Master, saying, 
"You are not telling us truth; these things shall not happen 
to You, and Your saying them to us will only discourage 
us. You are, as I have confessed, the great Messiah. 
You are to reign; You are not to be crucified at 
all. Give up that thought, dear Master; and let us continue 
to think about the glorious things of the Kingdom 
into which You will soon be ushered and in which we, as 
your faithful disciples, will soon have a share. 

But Jesus rebuked St. Peter, saying, "Get thee behind 
Me, adversary; for thou savorest not the things that be of 
God, but those that be of men." 

And now in this lesson Jesus, in the same journey, 
again brought up the matter of the shame, ill-treatment 
and death which was to come upon Him. This time He 
included the thought of His resurrection from the dead on 
the third day. However, the matter was incomprehensible 
to the disciples; and they merely said to themselves, This 
is another of those dark sayings of the Master which seem 
so mysterious. Remember how He said to us on one 
occasion, "Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man, 
and drink His blood, ye have no life in you." That was 
a dark saying, and we could not understand it. But we 
hung on, although we did not then, neither do we now, 
understand the meaning of these words. Here we have 
another similar statement: the Master is representing 
Himself as receiving the treatment due to the vilest of 
criminals— crucifixion. 

They could not comprehend the meaning of the Master's 
words; these thoughts seemed so different from what 
they had been expecting! How could they receive them? 
Not until after Pentecost did they get the full grasp of 
the situation and of what Jesus had told them. There 
the Holy Spirit began to make plain the Divine arrangement 
—that the sufferings of all the Church must come 
first before the glories of the Kingdom would be revealed 
and the blessing to the world begin. 



ON RIGHT HAND AND LEFT 

Another of the Gospels tells us that the mother of 
James and John came with them and voiced their plea 
for them. They believed that the time for distributing 
the honors of the Kingdom was very near at hand. They 
wanted to speak for prominent places. We need not 
assume that these two dear disciples sought the positions 
closest to the Master merely for ambition's sake. Rather, 
let us suppose that they loved the Lord very dearly, and 
therefore thought that they could appreciate a nearness to 
Him more than could some of the others. Indeed, they 
evidently appreciated being near to the Master in His 
hours of suffering and deepest experiences; and they were 
permitted to come nearer than the majority of The 
Twelve. On several special occasions the Lord took with 
Him the same James and John, and Peter. They were 
with Him in the holy mount, and at the awakening of 
Jairus' daughter, and in Gethsemane's Garden. They 
were glorious characters, whom the Lord greatly loved. 

Let us mark carefully the words of Jesus. He did not 
say, My dear disciples, there will be no Throne to sit 
upon, but on the contrary He declared that while there 
would be a Throne, and while there would be places of 
preference in that Throne, they would not be distributed 
by Himself, but by the Father. 

The Father stands as the Representative of absolute 
Justice, while Jesus stands as the Representative of mercy, 
compassion, forgiveness. Places in the Millennial Kingdom 
are not to be given on the score of mercy or 
favoritism, but absolutely on the score of quality. The 
Lord Jesus Himself will have the highest place, because 
He is worthy. "Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to 
receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and 
honor, and glory, and blessing." The Father will give 
these to Him, as He has promised. Indeed, He has given 
our Lord honor and great glory, even though this Kingdom 
glory still waits until the Church, the Body of 
Christ, shall have been completed by the change of the 
First Resurrection. 

WHAT KINGDOM IS MEANT 

For many centuries confusion has prevailed amongst 
Christian people respecting the Kingdom of Messiah, so 
frequently mentioned by Jesus and the Apostles, and the 
basis of this lesson. There was no confusion at first, 
nor for nearly two hundred years after Jesus' day. 
The early Church understood very well the promise that 
Messiah would come a second time, would receive the 
Church to glory with Himself and establish the Kingdom 
of Divine Power for the rule of the world and the subjugation 
of all things to the will of God; and that this 
Messianic Kingdom would require a thousand years to 
fulfil its mission. But by and by a theory sprang up to 
the effect that the Church was to be organized as 



Messiah's Kingdom and was to conquer the world before 
Jesus' Second Advent. 

This unscriptural view changed the whole course of 
church history. Instead of longer preaching the Gospel 
merely with a view to calling out and perfecting the 
saintly few who would have a hearing ear and an appreciative 
heart, to make these ready for Kingdom honor 
and glory, the course changed. Thereafter the endeavor 
was to grasp civil power. Intrigues were begun, false 
claims were asserted, and the endeavor was made to obtain 
control of kings and nations along the lines of superstition. 
Additionally, persecutions were used; and as 
much as possible civil rulers were cajoled, threatened, induced, 

R5483 : page 187 

to become the tools of ecclesiasticism, for the purpose 
of establishing a world-wide dominion of the church. 

For a time— through inquisitions, etc., etc.— these 
things flourished; but ever since 1799 all thought of 
ecclesiastical dominion of the earth has given way. In 
their confusion many have lost all faith in the Messianic 
Kingdom, and few are looking for it at Christ's Second 
Coming. Many in perplexity discuss a spiritual kingdom 
in the hearts of believers. Others believe that Christ's 
Kingdom is now represented in the great governments of 
the world, and yet are abashed and confused when asked 
whether certain portions of Messiah's Kingdom are 
building dreadnaughts to destroy other portions of the 
same Kingdom. 

By the majority of Christian people, the teaching of 
the Bible seems to be regarded as not consistent nor 
logical; otherwise, they would see that St. James, St. John 
and the other Apostles could not sit upon twelve thrones 
without there being a ruling Kingdom. They would also 
see that the Kingdom must be future, in harmony with 
the Lord's prayer, "Thy Kingdom come; Thy will be done 
on earth, as in Heaven." What we need is to cease handling 
the Word of God deceitfully. We must learn to 
read our Bible reverently and to understand it by comparing 
Scripture with Scripture. Bible students who do so 
are receiving great blessings, and are perceiving that 
Messiah's Kingdom is not only future, but apparently 
nigh— even at the door. 

"ARE YE ABLE?"-"MY CUP, MY BAPTISM?" 

To the two dear disciples who requested places of 
special nearness to the Master in the Kingdom, Jesus 
made known the fact that any position whatever in the 
Kingdom would require the fulfilment of certain conditions. 
It was not enough that they had been called to 
discipleship. It was not enough that they had surrendered 
all to follow the Lord; that they had been with Him, had 
heard His teachings and had assented to them so far as 
they could understand them. There must be something 



more; else they might not get into the Kingdom at all. 

These conditions the Master declared, saying, "Are ye 
able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of, and to be 
baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?" What 
did He mean? Did He mean, Would they be able or 
willing to eat the Passover supper, and there partake of 
the unleavened bread and drink of the memorial cup 
which He would institute? They had already been baptizing 
many. Did Jesus mean that they should be baptized 
again in water? What was the purport of the words, 
My cup, My baptism? 

We reply that Jesus' "cup" was the one to which He 

R5484 : page 187 

elsewhere referred, saying, "The cup which My Father 
hath poured for Me, shall I not drink it?" In the Divine 
Plan God had already marked out that whoever will be of 
the great Messiah, and entrusted with the Messianic Kingdom 
glory, honor and power for the blessing of the world, 
must demonstrate worthiness of that honor and glory. 
In the case of Jesus Himself the cup meant all those 
experiences of ignominy and shame, including crucifixion, 
which He experienced during the three and one-half years 
of His earthly ministry and which he fully accomplished 
at Calvary when he cried, "It is finished." 

Of that cup the Master said to His disciples, "Drink 
ye all of it." In other words, whoever will be successful 
as a disciple of Christ in attaining to joint-heirship with 
the Master in His Kingdom glory, honor and power, must 
first of all demonstrate a loyalty and faithfulness in respect 
to suffering with the Master, must prove his love, 
loyalty and faithfulness unto death— walking in the footsteps 
of Jesus. 

The Master made no reference to water baptism, but 
to His baptism into death, of which He spoke a few 
days later, saying, "I have a baptism to be baptized with; 
and how am I straitened till it be accomplished!" The 
Master's baptism in the beginning of His ministry was 
merely a symbol, or picture, of the real baptism. His 
going down into the water, His burial in it and rising up 
from it symbolically represented His going down into 
death and His resurrection therefrom. His real baptism 
into death progressed for three and a half years, from 
Jordan to Calvary; and when He cried on the cross, "It is 
finished," He meant that His baptism into death was completed. 
He was raised up out of that death-baptism on 
the third day by the Father's Power, to the Father's right 
hand, which position He will always occupy. 

This was the Master's baptism. It meant the full 
renunciation of all earthly rights. And now He asked 
those dear disciples whether or not they were ready, able 
or willing to follow Him to this extent— to be sharers of 
His cup of ignominy and His baptism into death. Only 
by faithfully following Him thus might they hope for any 
share in His Kingdom. The same principle must apply to 



all the followers of Jesus. It is for each of us to decide 
whether we will drink of His cup or not; whether we will 
share in His baptism into death or not. Only the lowly, 
self-sacrificing, will be able or willing to endure such an 
experience. 

Let us now apply these thoughts to the incorrect views 
of the Kingdom so frequently held. How could these 
sentiments be applied to any Kingdom of God in the heart, 
or how could they apply to the various kingdoms of earth? 
Is it necessary for the kings of the earth to partake of 
Christ's ignominy and sacrifice unto death, by consecration, 
before they can reign? Or, applying the matter to 
the church systems at the present time, as some do, is it 
through great difficulty that any attain membership in the 
earthly institutions called the Church of Christ? Does 
it require self-denial to get into these? Are all who are 
in them buried with Christ in baptism— into His death? 
Do they all partake of the cup of His sufferings? Surely 
not! Only a right view of the Kingdom dovetails into 
these various statements. We must see that the Kingdom 
is the Pearl of great price, to obtain which all else must 
be sacrificed.— Matthew 13:46. 

"WE ARE ABLE"-"YE SHALL INDEED" 

In the other account of this incident the disciples answered 
that they were able, that is, willing, to undertake 
to share the Master's cup and His baptism. Of course 
they did not know clearly what all this meant; but they 
were able, or willing, ready, to do anything that the Master 
would command. So it must be with all who, like 
those faithful Apostles, shall come off conquerors and 
share with the Redeemer in the glory, honor and immortality 
promised to His Kingdom class, the Bride class. 

In that account, Jesus is represented as replying, "Ye 
shall indeed drink of My cup, and be baptized with 
My baptism." That is to say, willingness on the part of 
all is as much as the Lord could reasonably require of 
His disciples. We have not the power that He possessed: 
we are sinners by nature. He was "holy, harmless, undefiled 
and separate from sinners." We can merely, 
therefore, will to do right; and the Lord must needs take 
us under His care and into His School of affliction and 
experience, giving us the lessons necessary to prove our 
loyalty and faithfulness even unto death. How gracious, 
how Godlike, that because of our weakness as members 

R5484 : page 188 

of the fallen race we could not do all ourselves, 
God has provided for us in the Savior whom He has 
appointed! Our imperfections are accounted as imputed 
to the Redeemer, while His perfections are accounted as 
imputed to us. Thus through Him only may we hope to 
gain the Kingdom and glory and honor and immortality. 



CHIEF SERVANT-MOST HONORED 

The other Apostles were indignant that St. James and 
St. John should have made such a request. However, 
the incident afforded Jesus opportunity for laying down 
the rules which must govern in respect to greatness in the 
Messianic Kingdom. Whichever one will serve the others 
most will thereby be demonstrating to God a greater fitness 
for a higher place. This is different, as Jesus says, 
from the ordinary course of affairs, where a lordship is 
exercised according to some arbitrary rule. 

The rule of the Kingdom will be that the one who 
serves most will have the highest honor. Thus Jesus 
Himself is pre-eminently servant of all. His position is 
the highest in the Kingdom by Divine appointment, and 
others will range next to Him in proportion as they have 
His spirit of love, service, obedience and loyalty. 



R5484 : page 188 

WHAT BLIND BARTIMAEUS SAW 

-JULY 19.-MARK 10:46-52.- 

"Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of 
the deaf shall be unstopped. Then shall the lame man leap as 
an hart, and the tongue of the dumb sing."— Isaiah 35:5,6. 

IT WAS the Passover season, and many were 
journeying in the same direction with Jesus 
—toward Jerusalem. Bartimaeus, a blind 
beggar, sat by the wayside, hoping to receive 
charity from the passersby. An unusual 
commotion was created as Jesus 
passed, and Bartimaeus inquired the cause. 
The answer was that Jesus the Nazarene 
had just passed by. 

Bartimaeus had heard that Jesus was the 
reputed Messiah who, according to the Scriptures, 
would eventually bless the whole world and do 
away with sin, sorrow and pain. He had heard 
that already Jesus was performing cures, healing 
the sick, casting out demons and opening the eyes of the 
blind. Oh, he thought, Why did not some one tell me 
while He was passing! He has healed others, might I 
not be one of the favored ones? 

His faith and hope flamed up; and he shouted, "Jesus, 
thou Son of David, have mercy on me!" Be quiet! Make 
less noise! Do not interrupt the Great Teacher; He is 
talking with others, said the passersby. But Bartimaeus 
felt that it was now or never with him; he lifted his voice 
above that of the multitude, and shouted more loudly than 
ever, "Jesus, thou Son of David, have mercy on me!" 

Jesus heard the voice, and ever ready to be gracious 



to those who call for mercy, He bade the blind man come 
to Him. It would show his faith: it would thus be a 
more important lesson to the multitude. Helped by others, 
Bartimaeus finally found himself in the presence of Jesus; 
and the Master said, "What wilt thou that I should do unto 
thee?" Promptly the answer came, "O Lord, that I might 
receive my sight!" Jesus said unto him, "Go thy way; 
thy faith hath made thee whole." And immediately he 
received his sight, and became one of the followers in 
the concourse, praising the Divine power and acknowledging 
Jesus as the Messiah. 

"JESUS, THOU SON OF DAVID" 

The blind man's words, "Jesus, thou Son of David," 
had special significance to him and to the Jews of his day, 
which is lost so far as the multitudes of today are concerned. 
The Jews knew that Messiah as the great High 
Priest was in a measure prefigured by Aaron; and as the 
great Lawgiver, was prefigured, or typified, by Moses; 
and as the great King was prefigured, or typified, by 
Solomon, David's wise, rich, influential son, his successor 
in the kingdom. The uniting of all these lines of prophecy 
is found pictorially represented in Melchizedek, who was a 
priest upon his throne; that is to say, he was a priest of 
God at the same time that he was a prince or ruler— he 
had a double office. 

St. Paul calls our attention to this fact that Jesus is 
not ultimately to be a priest after the Order of Aaron— 
merely a sacrificing priest, without any reigning power; 
but that He is to be a Priest after the Order of 
Melchizedek. St. Paul cites the Divine declaration to 
this effect in the Psalms of David: "I have sworn and 
will not repent, Thou art a Priest forever, after the Order 
of Melchizedek." (Psalm 110:4.) St. Paul bases highly 
important arguments upon this prophetic statement. He 
shows the Divine foreintention in respect to Jesus and the 

R5485 : page 188 

Messianic Kingdom, and the character of the same. 

The committee arranging the order of these International 
Bible Studies evidently had in mind the fact that 
the miracles of Jesus at His First Advent were the merest 
fore-shadows of the greater miracles and works which He 
will accomplish at His Second Advent. In line with this 
thought, they have given us as the Golden Text for today's 
lesson Isaiah's prophecy respecting Messiah's Kingdom. 
This agrees with the general trend of the Apostolic 
teaching to the effect that all the miracles which Jesus 
performed were foreshadows, or illustrations, of the 
greater work which is to be accomplished by the establishment 
of His Millennial Kingdom, in due time. We 
read, "These things did Jesus and manifested forth His 
glory"; that is, showed in advance His Kingdom glory 
and power. 



We are not for a moment to think that Jesus and 
His disciples attempted to heal all the sick of Palestine. 
On the contrary, while many were healed, they were the 
exceptions amongst the multitudes that were sick— such 
as manifested special faith. In the present instance, 
Bartimaeus was only one of many blind beggars by the 
wayside, we may be sure; for Palestine, Syria and Egypt 
are the lands of blind beggars. The Lord had already 
passed Bartimaeus by, not heeding him, not offering to 
heal him. He had his eyesight restored because of his 
faith, because he cried out, because he would not listen to 
those who sought to still his voice and turn aside his faith. 

THE WORST OF BLINDNESS 

A similar case, we remember, was at the Pool of 
Bethesda. Multitudes were lying there, waiting for the 
movement of the waters, in order to step into the pool 
for healing. Jesus addressed Himself to only one of 
these, saying, "Take up thy bed and walk." It is when we 
come to understand that the miracles of Jesus pictured 
forth coming blessings during His Messianic Kingdom 
that we get the proper view of matters, and may rejoice 
accordingly that a good, glad Day is coming for all the 
blind, all the lame, all the deaf, as indicated by Isaiah's 
prophecy.— Isaiah 35:5,6. 

"Eyes have they, but they see not; ears, but they hear 

R5485 : page 189 

not." The whole world is referred to in the Bible as 
being blind and deaf to the things that are most interesting, 
most profitable. Only an occasional one here and 
there, like Bartimaeus of old, grasps the possibility of 
relief from his blindness and deafness, and takes the 
proper steps to secure relief. St. Paul tells us of this 
blind condition, saying, "The god of this world [Satan] 
hath blinded the minds of them that believe not."— 
2 Corinthians 4:4. 

Six thousand years ago, Satan started this work of 
blinding human understanding to the goodness of God 
and to those things which would make for their highest 
welfare. He still continues it. He began by contradicting 
the Almighty when he told Mother Eve that the penalty 
for sin, "Dying, thou shalt die," was a deception on God's 
part. Satan declared, "Ye shall not surely die"; and he 
persuaded her that this threat was merely an attempt on 
God's part to keep her from great blessings of knowledge, 
and that the true welfare of herself and her husband 
would be promoted by disobedience. 

The question naturally arises, What motive did Satan 
have in misrepresenting matters to our first parents? Why 
should he be interested in their disobedience and alienation 
from God? The answer is that thus only could he 
make them effectually his own slaves of sin. So long as 
they recognized God as their wise, loving Parent and had 



confidence in Him, they would remain loyal to Him, and 
correspondingly would not be the servants of sin. 

Satan has continued this work of misrepresenting 
God's Divine character and Plan for now six thousand 
years. St. Paul says that he puts light for darkness, and 
darkness for light, and that "we are not ignorant of his 
devices." After telling us that the god of this world has 
blinded the minds of all unbelievers, St. Paul adds the explanation 
that this is done lest the light of the knowledge 
of the glory of God should shine into their hearts— lest 
they should see the real goodness of God. He explains 
that this light of God's goodness is reflected, to those who 
see it, from the face of Jesus Christ our Lord. 

In this beautiful, poetic form the Apostle presents a 
wonderful truth which Bible students are more and more 
coming to appreciate. God is Love; and all the stories 
that we have heard to the contrary are intended to blind 
our minds and prejudice us against our best Friend. 
Hence it is that Satan has persistently propagated, not 
only amongst the heathen, but also amongst Christians, 
various doctrines which are the reverse of the Truth. St. 
Paul styles these "doctrines of demons."— 1 Timothy 4:1. 

During the Dark Ages the Adversary worked these 
into our Christian creeds, had them painted upon the 
walls of Christian churches, and had them acted out in 
theatricals of a darker day. These all picture God as the 
worst imaginable devil. They all represent Him as knowing 
what He was doing when He created our race and 
purposed from the beginning that nearly every member 
of the race should suffer an eternity of torture. No wonder 
that during the Dark Ages the world was not drawn 
to God by these horrible misrepresentations! No wonder 
that even when the Bible came back to the reverence of 
the people, these doctrines of devils adhered to it, and 
have since hindered the world from loving it! 

Now we are learning that we were all more or less 
blinded by the Adversary; and as we get free from his 
blinding influence, our hearts rejoice in the favor of Him 
who has brought us out of darkness into marvelous light. 

ONLY THE FEW YET SEE 

Writing to the Church of Ephesus, the Apostle intimates 
that while they had seen something, there was still 
much more for them to see. We quote: "Making mention 
of you in my prayers, that... the eyes of your understanding 
being enlightened, ye may know what is the 
hope of His calling, and what the riches of the glory of 
His inheritance in the saints." And again: "I bow my 
knees unto the Father... that ye may be able to comprehend 
with all saints what is the breadth, and length, 
and depth, and height; and to know the love of Christ, 
which passeth knowledge." We still need to offer this 
prayer on behalf of ourselves and of all the Church. 

As for the world, it still lies in darkness, in the 
Wicked One, as the Apostle declares, under the bondage 



of the superstitions which Satan has prospered. Only the 
few now get their eyes open, as did Bartimaeus. They are 
people of special character, who see special opportunities 
and who so greatly long for the light of the knowledge 
of God that they are willing to ignore the general sentiment 
of those who bid them be quiet and continue in ignorance 
—blindness. It is those who hunger and thirst 
after righteousness that have the promise of being filled, 
and those who are longing for sight that may hope to 
have it, in the present time. 

But, thank God, a glorious change is promised! Satan, 
the Prince of Darkness, is to give place to the glorious 
Prince of Light, the same One who healed Bartimaeus 
in a typical way more than eighteen centuries ago. He is 
to take the Kingdom. Divine Power is back of the Program 
by which Satan is to be bound for a thousand years 
and all his works of darkness to be undone. Instead of 
misrepresentation of God's true character and loving 
plans, the reverse will be given to mankind. The light of 
the knowledge of the glory of God will fill the whole earth 
as the waters cover the great deep— until no one shall 
need to say to his neighbor, Know thou the Lord; for all 
shall know Him, from the least to the greatest.— Isaiah 1 1:9; 
Jeremiah 31:34. 

"ALL THE BLIND EYES SHALL BE OPENED" 

Whoever in reading this prophecy thinks merely of 
the natural sight, and of the fact that all natural blindness 
will be done away in Messiah's Kingdom, sees only a 
small portion of the glorious work to be accomplished. 
The blindness of ignorance and superstition with which 
Satan has afflicted the race is far worse than the physical 
blindness. And the assurance is given us by the Lord 
that all the blind eyes shall be opened and all the deaf 
ears shall be unstopped. The Scriptural declaration, 
"Every eye shall see Him, and they also that pierced 
Him," has undoubtedly special reference to the eyes of 
understanding. Jesus declared to His disciples, "Yet a 
little while, and the world seeth Me no more; but ye shall 
see Me." Yea, the Apostle John says, "We shall be like 
Him; for we shall see Him as He is." 

By the miraculous change of the First Resurrection 
the Church class shall be made spirit beings like unto the 
angels, and will then see the Master face to face, because 
spirit beings like Him. But the world will never see Him 
in this manner. They will see Him with the eyes of their 
understanding opened, just as believers now see the 
Father and see Jesus by the eyes of faith and the eyes 
of understanding; just as we see the things which "eye 
hath not seen, neither have entered into the heart of 
man"— the things which God has in reservation for them 
that love Him, the things which God has revealed unto us 
by His Spirit, the things which we see with our spiritual 
vision. 

Similarly, during the Millennial period, all blinded eyes 



will be opened to the goodness, the greatness, the love, the 
power, of God. Thus the world will come to know God, 

R5486 : page 190 

being helped to that knowledge through the Messianic 
Kingdom; and all who avail themselves of the privileges 
then extended may attain to that glorious degree of knowledge 
mentioned by Jesus when He said: "This is life eternal, 
that they might know Thee, the only true God, and 
Jesus Christ, whom Thou hast sent." 

HELPERS, NOT HINDERERS 

In the type, the people first of all bade Bartimaeus keep 
quiet; but when Jesus called him, they joined in giving 
words of encouragement and in helping the blind man to 
the Savior. The latter action should represent the course 
of all who are the Lord's people. They should encourage 
the blind, the superstitious— all who are out of the way— 
to come to the Savior, to realize that He is indeed gracious 
and willing to save them from their blindness. 

We might extend these observations to various affairs 
of life, and say that many are blind as respects the beauties 
of the Bible, and that all who have gotten their eyes 
of understanding opened to see the beauties of its real 
teachings should be on the alert to assist others to the 
same blessing. We might extend the lesson to the use 
of the natural sight. Some are so deeply engrossed in 
business or in pleasure-seeking that they never lift their 
eyes to the glorious beauties of nature. The shining stars 
are telling of a Divine Wisdom and of an omnipotent Creator, 
yet the blinded ones fail to get a blessing from the 
message, because they fail to see. "Eyes have they, but 
they see not." 

All nature is speaking of a great, eternal God, and 
telling us that humanity is His chief earthly handiwork, 
and that our highest aim should be to seek to know Him 
and to serve Him. But how many are born blind and 
deaf to the lessons of the stars, of which the Prophet declares, 
"Day unto day uttereth speech, and night unto 
night showeth knowledge. There is no speech nor language 
where their voice is not heard" ! There are some 
so blind mentally that they see not that the unhappiness 
which they feel is largely the result of their own selfishness. 
They see not that their homes might be more beautiful, 
might be places of comfort and happiness, instead 
of places of selfish grasping, upbraidings, discontent. 

All who realize these conditions to be prevailing in 
themselves or others should be crying out, "O Lord, that 
I might receive my sight!" and should be rejoicing also 
to the extent that they are learning that the time is coming, 
yea, is near at hand, when Messiah's Kingdom will 
grant the blessing of the opening of the eyes of understanding 
to all of Adam's race. 



R5486 : page 190 

MIND AND WILL 

IN THE WATCH TOWER for April 15th there 

occurs a statement which seems to call for 

an explanation. On Page 1 17, lines 1 1 and 

12, we read: "The will of the body was 

reckoned entirely dead before the individual 

could be counted a New Creature." 

While it is true that the words mind and 

will are often used interchangeably, nevertheless, 

it has been our custom to differentiate 

between these; but in the above sentence 

this was neglected. 

The will of the flesh dies actually; and we receive a 
new will, a holy will, the will of God, instead of our own 
will. If that will should ever cease to be holy, and turn 
again to be a fleshly will, that would be what the Apostle 
terms, "drawing back unto perdition." St. Peter says that 
such a change of will would correspond to a sow returning 
to her wallowing in the mire, after she had been 
washed. Those who turn wilfully and deliberately back 
to the will of the flesh are described as "twice dead and 
plucked up by the roots." In other words: This would 
mean that, the fleshly will having revived, the spirit-begotten 
new will had died. 

But with the mind it is different. The mind is a part 
of the body. The body has its fleshly appetites, preferences, 
propensities, and is continually clamoring for the 
earthly rights against the decision of the new will. The 
fleshly mind, therefore, is not dead; else it could not 
clamor and war against the spirit of the new will, the 
New Creature in Christ Jesus.— Galatians 5:17. 

Such clear-cut distinctions are to be found only in 
the Bible, and probably will not be appreciated by any but 
close Bible students. What we would better, therefore, 
have said is, "The mind of the flesh is reckoned dead, 
before the individual can be counted a new Creature." 

This is in line with the Apostle's statement, "Reckon 
ye yourselves dead indeed to sin, but alive unto God." 
Again we read, "Mortify [deaden] your members which 
are on the earth"— your fleshly mind. This mortifying, 
or deadening, of the fleshly mind means a continuous 
struggle on the part of the new will against the old creature 
reckoned dead, but not actually dead. 



R5486 : page 190 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
A MATURING OBLIGATION 



DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

Accept love and greetings from one who has been greatly 
blessed by your faithful service. For several years I have 
recognized THE WATCH TOWER publications as the means of 
grace provided for the "Feet-members" of The Christ— the 
Anointed. 

The information herein desired I feel sure has already been 
given, had I a mind sufficient to have grasped and retained it. 
But I hope you will bear with my feebleness and, if you think 
proper, serve me a morsel of advice. 

I have a wife and three children for whom I am able to 
earn but a bare living. As a Colporteur I have been able to 
provide as well for my family as by other employment. For 
some months I have suffered from a peculiar physical weakness, 
causing a nervous strain which, in turn, affected my 
mind. My salvation has been in concentrating my attention 
upon the study of God's great Plan, so that, by His grace, 
what seemed about to wreck me was turned into a great blessing. 
I have found, in secret prayer and study, peace of mind 
which enabled me to bear my disordered condition, although I 
grew physically weaker. 

Having taken up the Colporteur work I find joy and peace 
in keeping actively engaged in the service, but I can barely 
make expenses. I am owing a note at bank which will be due 
October 1st. I have a life-policy for $1,000, and I have an 
undimmed faith in the correctness of our chronology. In 
spite of the deadly attacks of Satan I have hope that I shall, 
through much tribulation, enter the Kingdom. 

My question is, Shall I be accounted faithful if I go on in 
the Colporteur work and leave it to the Lord's providence to 
provide the $100 to pay the note on October 1st? I have 
given instructions that in case of my death the note be paid 
from the policy, as it now appears that the insurance companies 
may hold up longer than the Church Militant. 

I wish to express my deep appreciation of the "meat in due 
season" provided by our Lord through you, as a "chosen vessel," 
and that to me, also, the article, "The Peace of God," in 
the August 1st TOWER was a master-piece and one of the 
weapons of resisting Satan's attacks upon me. I have 
learned that there is life in activity, mentally, physically and 
spiritually. 

Pardon my obtruding upon your valuable time. Please do 
as you see fit in this matter, but I shall be glad to be remembered 
in your prayers— that I may be given strength to serve 

R5486 :page 191 

acceptably. It is a delight to remember you and all the dear 
ones at Brooklyn Bethel and everywhere. 
Your brother in love, service and hope, . 



[We advise that you pay the interest in full, immediately, 
apologizing for delay, stating your excuse and promising 



to be punctual as possible in the future. Thus the matter 
may stand for some time, until you can conveniently pay 
the debt according to the evident original intent of the lender. 
But if, any time, payment be demanded, you should cash 
your insurance to pay, or borrow on it.— EDITOR.] 



GRATEFUL FOR THE TRUTH 

MY DEAR PASTOR:- 

It is nearly twelve months since I wrote, thanking you 
for the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. In that letter I said 
that if nothing happened apparently to fulfil our expectations, 
that 1914 marks the end of Gentile favor and the setting up 
of Christ's Kingdom, I should be as prepared as ever to 
accept with gratitude and joy your explanations of the 
Scriptures. 

Oh, what blessings I have received from THE STUDIES IN 
THE SCRIPTURES, THE WATCH TOWER, the tracts, TABERNACLE 
SHADOWS, etc.; I have feasted royally on "Present Truth." I 
grow hungrier after each meal! I feel I must thank you, and 
tell you also what a blessing the Vow has been to me. 

I came into the Truth in a remarkable way. Having been 
a professing Christian for thirty years, and taking part in all 
kinds of religious work, yet I was most unhappy, with a 
hungering for something I never received. One day I said, 
I will read nothing but the Bible; I will know, if possible, 
what is God's will and do it with His help. 

After this for weeks I was seeking books to throw light 
on the Bible. A man brought some Swedenborgian literature 
to the village, and loaned me one of their books. One night 
I took this up, as I thought, and found I had THE DIVINE 

R5487 :page 191 

PLAN OF THE AGES. The verse on the front page caught my 
attention at once: "To make all see what is the fellowship of 
the mystery," etc. 

I felt, This is something I want. I started to read and 
never rested till I had read it through; looking up all the 
references, with growing joy and wonder over every chapter. 
Oh, how precious it was at once! I said to my neighbor, I 
would not give away the knowledge this book has given me 
for a thousand pounds. In six weeks I had all the STUDIES, 
and soon I had all of your literature that I could get. 

THE DIVINE PLAN OF THE AGES had been in the house for 
four years and I had not seen it. That day it was lying where 
I had put the Swedenborg book; I do not know how it got 
there. It seems it had been sent to my father four years 
previous. But the most remarkable thing I have not yet told 
you: A few days previous to finding your book I had gone 
to my room and on my knees told my Heavenly Father that 
I was unsatisfied. I was not being "persecuted for righteousness 
sake"; most people appeared to love me. I told Him I 
wanted, like Paul, a share in Christ's suffering: I was ready 



to die, if only I might attain. I wanted nothing less than 
the best. In a few days I found THE DIVINE PLAN OF THE 
AGES, as I have told you. Then I was short of time to read, 
and I fell and sprained my ankle very severely, and so had 
plenty of time to read. 

Oh, how thankful I am for my Heavenly Father's mercy 
and loving kindness and condescension in allowing me to have 
a place in His Little Flock! My heart is full of Christ, and 
"longs its glorious matter to declare"; but so few will hear- 
especially because I have come out of the Wesleyan church 
and all the offices I had there. My old friends fight shy of 
me; some have told me they would rather not hear if it 
would convince them they must come out. 

I am only a woman keeping house for my dear old father, 
and now that I have no offices in any church, I feel I am feeding 
and not passing the food on to others. I do not wish to 
be like the servant who buried his talent. I speak to all as I 
have opportunity, and some listen with great interest; but I 
do not know that I have succeeded in bringing any into the 
Truth. Two persons have bought full sets of THE STUDIES IN 
THE SCRIPTURES, but are not reading them. 

I have never looked back and feel I never shall. I feel 
consumed day by day to know my God, and do His will. 
Though a Wesleyan I was baptised (immersed) eleven years 
ago into Christ's death, understandingly, though not so fully 
as I understand today. Do you think I need to be baptised 
again? Please excuse me for taking your valuable time. 

Yours very gratefully and lovingly in His service, 
GRACE E. ROWSE.-Eng. 

page 191 

WHAT THE PHOTO-DRAMA DID FOR HIM 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have intended before now to write, especially to tell you 
what the PHOTO-DRAMA has done for me. It is a wonderful 
presentation of the Gospel, of man's degeneracy under the 
blinding influence of "the god of this world" (Satan) and of 
the saving and reclaiming power of Christ. 

I thought I knew my Redeemer, but oh, how much better 
I now know Him who bore for me the shame of death on 
the cross! My heart went out to Him, and I indeed suffered 
with Him. 

The pictures, while portraying man's degeneracy, show, 
throughout, our Father's Wisdom, Justice, Love and Power; 
they have established me more firmly in the promises of His 
Word. 

The people are asking questions of the nominal ministry, 
and being unable to answer the questions, they lower themselves 
to personal abuse and vilification of you. You, doubtless, 
know of the attack of the Y.M.C.A. upon you, brought 
on by questions asked after viewing the pictures. 

I was especially impressed with the fact, in mingling with 
the audience after each exhibition, that the thing that appeared 
to attract them most was the Thousand Years of 



Blessing. 

The pictures have made me more zealous to spread the 
Truth, and have increased my love for the Heavenly Father 
and our dear Elder Brother Jesus. I daily pray God's richest 
blessing upon the PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION and all engaged 
in its presentation, and upon you, dear Brother, its 
author. 

I am your servant in Him, F. W. KNOCHE.— Iowa. 



R5487 :page 191 

A WORD TO THE WISE 

DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

While the closing hymn was being sung at THE TEMPLE 
recently, I noticed that rather more than a few of the 
ladies were apparently more interested in getting together 
their loose articles of attire and assuming their wraps than 
giving their respectful, if not devout, attention to the solemn 
and beautiful words that closed the day of praise and worship. 
The same people were in no particular haste to leave 
the building, as evinced by the greetings and adieux to their 
friends. 

Perhaps you might consider it would help in realizing our 
duties as the Lord's people, to wait quietly and orderly until 
the final words of the service are uttered, followed by a few 
moments of quiet thought and prayer before plunging into the 
cares of our daily life. A few words from you in THE 
WATCH TOWER, and occasionally an admonition, might remind 
the whole Church of the great privileges which we enjoy, and 
for which we should be grateful. 

Yours in the service of the Lord, ROBERT E. BRAY. 



RE PROMPTNESS AT MEETINGS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

It seems to me that a word of encouragement to some 
of the dear friends in respect to greater promptness at meeting 
hours would be helpful. Apparently some do not realize 
the necessity for reverence in this respect. If we do not 
preserve order in regard to our meetings we are not observing 
Heaven's first Law. We must lack reverence for our 
Heavenly Father and for our Master, if we are less prompt in 
the Lord's affairs than we are in our own. 

Some of the dear friends come to the meetings as much 
as from thirty to forty-five minutes late. The same dear 
friends are very prompt in observing other appointments. 
How can we expect the Lord to be pleased with us if we 
give Him the inferior things? How can we expect to receive 
the chief promises if we do not put forth as much effort for 
our everlasting welfare as we do for the temporal? 

If we set a certain time for meeting and very seldom get 



there on time, we are not to be depended upon; our word is 
broken. How can we expect the Lord's approval in such a 
condition as that? He was so prompt and precise, doing the 
Father's will to the dot. 

These same dear friends are very noble in other respects; 
and how they can be so indifferent about coming into the 
meetings on time I cannot understand, except it be that they 
have gotten into this bad habit and do not know how to get 
out of it. I am sure I would like to lend them a helping hand 
in this direction. 

Yours in the one hope of all saints, FRED OTTI. 



page 192 

International Bible Students Association Classes 

STUDIES AND LECTURES UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



I. B. S. A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 
FOR MONTH OF JULY 
Questions from Manual on Series Second of 
"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 
STUDY IV., VOL. II. 

Week of July 5 Q. 24 to 30 Week of July 19 Q. 38 to 45 

Week of July 12 Q. 31 to 37 Week of July 26 Q. 46 to 51 

Question Manuals on Vol. II., STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 5c. each, 
or 50c. per dozen, postpaid. 



page 193 

VOL. XXXV JULY 1 No. 13 
A. D. 1914-A. M. 6042 



CONTENTS 

Necessity of Self-Control 195 

Sad Perversion of Sound Judgment 195 

How to Attain Strength of Character 196 

We Must Fight to the End 196 

Our Responsibility Concerning Present 
Truth 197 

Are We Fulfilling Our Commission? 198 

The Great Shepherd and His Sheep 198 

The Tender Shepherd's Care 199 

Mankind the Straying Sheep 199 

Importance of Example 200 

"Let Your Light Shine" 200 

Living Epistles, Known and Read 200 

"He That Is Begotten of God Does Not 
Practise Sin" 201 

Seeming Contradictions Harmonized 201 

Faithfulness to Opportunities 202 

"Be Thou Faithful Unto Death" 203 

Christ's Triumphal Entry 204 

Prepared Hearts (Poem) 206 

Some Interesting Letters 207 

page 194 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:-All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 



SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



VOLUNTEER EXTENSION WORK 

The Volunteers are doing nobly and we have splendid 
ammunition. No doubt the results will be great. However, 
we must not hope to know the details until we reach the 
Kingdom. Meantime it is ours to do faithfully what our 
hands find to do— what our Lord privileges us to do. We 
are His ambassadors, His witnesses. 

We suggest that Class Extension work find parallel in 
Volunteer Extension work. After you have served your place 
of residence, seek the Lord's blessing in an endeavor to extend 
the distribution of free literature to other towns and cities 
within a reasonable radius. The Society is pleased to supply 
the ammunition free of all charges. It merely wishes, with 
the order, the names of the places to be served and the assurance 
that the work undertaken will (D.V.) be promptly 
done— that the literature will not be permitted to lie by unused. 
Remember that census population includes infants and 
that a proper estimate of one paper to the family would be 
one to five of the population. That is to say, a town of 5,000 
would require 1,000 copies of the Volunteer matter. In cases 
where the population is found to be foreign, remember we 
have free literature in nearly all languages. 



RE DEFECTIVE BOOKS 

Colporteurs and others who may receive books from us 
that are seriously defective will confer a favor by reporting 
the fact at once. Give particulars re time received. We want 
all our books to be right. 



RECEIPTS FOR WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTIONS 

Regular subscribers for THE WATCH TOWER receive a receipt 
on the wrapper— showing how far their subscription is 
paid. Thus, if you had been paid up to January, 1913, and 
sent in a dollar, renewing until January, 1914, we would 
merely add the figure 4. Such a figure 4, under such circumstances, 
would stand for the year 1914. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR AUGUST 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 



the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
August follow: (1) 240; (2) 78; (3) 208; (4) 82; (5) 119; (6) 
277; (7) 272; (8) 168; (9) 14; (10) 305; (11) 325; (12) 155; (13) 
197; (14) Vow; (15) 256; (16) 259; (17) 5; (18) 12; (19) 6; (20) 
106; (21) 60; (22) 4; (23) 7; (24) 46; (25) 125; (26) 29; (27) 
300; (28) 240; (29) 263; (30) 25; (31) 235. 



R5487 : page 195 

NECESSITY OF SELF-CONTROL 

"He that hath no rule over his own spirit is like a city 
that is broken down and without walls."— Proverbs 25:28. 

IN OLDEN times cities were particularly 

places of refuge, where the inhabitants of 

the country congregated for protection. 

When the earth was less populous and the 

necessity for government was less appreciated 

than now, any marauding band was 

likely to take possession of whatever was 

open to their attack. So the cities of ancient 

times had strong walls. This was true, 

we remember, of Jerusalem and Jericho. It 

was true of ancient Troy, and also true of cities in 

Europe. In Vienna, the old wall of the city still stands; 

and so with other walled cities. 

But as improved forms of government were adopted, 
cities no longer needed protecting walls. The police 
nowadays constitute a wall of protection. Our text is 
referring to a wall such as was formerly used, and to a 
city which had become dilapidated and the wall broken 
down. King Solomon gives this as a picture of a human 
being who has no rule over his own spirit. He is unable 
to protect himself against evil influences from within or 
without, as a result of having suffered his will to be 
broken down. 

All mankind are born with more or less of determination. 
Some have this in a very marked degree; others in 
a lesser degree; no one, we believe, is wholly without this 
quality of will, purpose. But we find that whether our 
wills are strong or weak they need direction. Lessons in 
the directing of our wills come from various quarters; 
for instance, we have the laws of the city, laws of the 
state, laws of the country, which direct the individual as 
to what he may do and may not do— particularly what 
he may not do. As one looks into the source and history 
of these laws, he finds that they represent the accumulated 
will of a long period. Mankind now have very good laws. 
We have often thought it strange that fallen men have 
been able to produce such just laws as we find on the 
statute books today. 

But although very good laws may be made, yet people 
may ignore the law. A jury may set aside all law. A 



judge may pervert the law. Thus things that are unlawful 
may become a practise of an individual or a town or 
a city. To cultivate in one's self a lawless disposition is 
to cultivate the spirit of anarchy— a spirit of indifference 
to the rights and interests of others. There are some 
who manifest reasonable respect for the laws of man 
because necessity or public opinion makes it impossible 
or inadvisable to do otherwise, who may at heart be 
anarchists as regards the Law of God, the great Law-giver 
of the Universe. 

SAD PERVERSION OF SOUND JUDGMENT 

To yield ourselves to passion, to allow it to sweep over 
us and master us, is disastrous, whether we are weak-minded 
or strong-minded. The weak-minded have their 
limitations; the strong-minded have the excess of power, 
and are more potent for evil. We hear a great many say, 
when they have lost control of their temper, or have been 
petulant or morose or ill-natured or discourteous, Well, 
that's my way; I do not mean any harm. They acknowledge 
the matter, and seek to justify themselves by saying 
that it is natural to them. But no human being should live 
according to what is natural to his or her fallen nature. 
A being created in the image of God, and still retaining 
some traces of his original Godlikeness, should live above 
the plane of the lower animals, which follow merely their 
natural instincts and passions. 

R5488 : page 195 

Some seem to glory in what they are pleased to term 
their high spirit, which will always stand up for their 
"rights." They are not so weak and childish as to let 
anybody run over them ! If they do not like what others 
do or say, they will tell just what they think of the 
others. They have some force of character! Oh, how 
the great Adversary and his hosts, together with the perverse 
fallen nature, can deceive and mislead and blind 
the judgment that is not guided and instructed by the 
only true Guide— the Word of God! How they can make 
that which is noble, and truly strong and Godlike appear 
weak and puerile— and make that which is weak, base, 
selfish and animal appear strong and manly! 

ALL NEED REGULATION BY SOME STANDARD 

All should recognize that the inclinations, the impulses 
and the preferences of the fallen nature of man 
are often contrary to that which is right, noble, truly 
desirable. All should be regulated by some standard, 
either the civil standard by which the world is governed, 
or the standard of God. But one might live up to the 
letter of a law and yet be violating its spirit. The Law 
of God is the very highest standard of law. And the 
spirit of God's Law is embodied in the Golden Rule. 



This standard the whole world recognizes as right; and 
surely the Lord's people should measure all their conduct 
and their words, yea, their very thoughts, by this standard. 
Thus they will be rulers over their own spirit. 
The word spirit in the text under consideration represents 

R5488 : page 196 

the mind, the impulses of one's nature. We are to 
rule our mind, our natural impulses. This means that if 
a thought present itself to the mind, or if we feel a certain 
impulse, we should be quick to perceive the nature 
of the thought or impulse; and if it is not in harmony 
with the principles of righteousness or with our covenant 
as children of God, we should at once resist it. If we 
are unable to do this successfully of ourselves, as is often 
the case, the heart should be promptly lifted to the Lord 
for His promised grace to help in time of need. If we 
feel an impulse toward a certain action or course, we 
should carefully weigh the matter, and decide as to its 
righteousness or propriety in the circumstances, looking 
to our unfailing Source of help for guidance. 

The world would say that this is too exacting— that 
they would have more pleasure in doing their own will. 
But we know that in doing their own will they frequently 
get into difficulty. A Christian has covenanted not to 
follow his own will; he has given up his own will, and 
has taken the will of God instead. The more advanced 
the Christian, the more should we expect that he would 
be able to rule his spirit— "casting down imaginations 
and every high thing that exalteth itself against the 
knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every 
thought" to the will of God in Christ. And if we rule 
our mind, our thoughts, we shall rule our tongue. If the 
thought were not in the mind, the tongue would not 
utter it. 

There is a grave danger of saying things, or of doing 
things, under a momentary impulse, that our heart, our 
consecrated judgment, would not approve; hence the 
necessity of bringing our thoughts and impulses into subjection. 
We are to consider, What would be the effect 
of my words or my action upon another? Would it 
bring harm? Would it be an injury, or cause needless 
pain, for me to say or do this thing, or would it do good? 
By thus scrutinizing himself, by thus taking himself in 
hand, and ruling his spirit, the child of God is showing 
his earnest desire of heart to be pleasing to the Lord 
and true to his covenant. And those who learn to rule 
their own spirit according to the will of the Father are 
the ones whom He will be pleased to make joint-heirs 
with His Son in His Kingdom. 

HOW TO ATTAIN STRENGTH OF CHARACTER 

In what way can a Christian cultivate this control of 
his own spirit? At first the individual has not the power 



to control himself in everything; but as he learns to exercise 
self-control in the little things, more and more doing 
what he can in this direction, in thought and word and 
deed, he will gain in strength of character. We should 
remember the story of the man who wished to develop 
his muscles, and who for this reason began to practise 
each day in lifting a calf. He commenced when the calf 
was very young, and he lifted it day by day for weeks 
and months. In due time the calf had become an ox, and 
he was then able to lift the ox. His daily practise had 
gradually strengthened his muscles; they increased in 
strength with the increase in the weight of the animal, 
until he was strong enough to lift the full-grown ox. 

And so with the Christian in his character-development: 
If we daily practise self-control, we shall gradually 
attain a strong character along this line, which will 
be of inestimable advantage to us in our Christian warfare. 
The cultivation of self-control should properly 
begin in one before birth, yea, at the time of conception. 
The mother should practise self-control, that this disposition 
might be impressed upon the mind of her unborn 
child, that thus it might enter the world in a much 
more favorable condition in this direction. And this 
spirit of self-control will grow in the child after birth, 
under the proper training of the parent, so that the child, 
approaching manhood's estate, will be able to exercise 
more natural self-control. Such a one, if he become a 
child of God, will make a very noble Christian indeed; 
he will be strong in the Lord and be helpful to others. 
But all have not had this natural advantage, and must 
battle the more determinedly for this reason. 

MORAL STRENGTH MORE DESIRABLE THAN PHYSICAL 

There is no place where the proof of our ability to 
rule our spirit is better shown than in our own home. 
With husband and wife, with parent and child, with 
brother and sister, this is an important matter. The 
battle with self is the greatest battle we have to fight; 
and the Word of God declares that "he that ruleth his 
own spirit is greater than he that taketh a city." He is 
greater because he has learned to exercise the will, the 
determination, of a true character in the right direction, 
in the direction of control of self. 

Moral strength is infinitely nobler and more to be 
desired than the greatest degree of physical strength or 
the keenest strategy. And it is only after we have conquered 
ourselves, only after we have become master of 
our own flesh, only after we have cast out the beam from 
our own eyes, have subdued anger, malice, hatred and 
strife in our own hearts, that we are able, by means of 
these severe battles with our own weaknesses, to assist 
the brethren, to assist our neighbors, to aid them— by our 
example— in overcoming their besetments and infirmities. 

WE MUST FIGHT TO THE END 



To rule one's own spirit, mind, disposition, implies a 
conflict similar in some respects to that of taking a city; 
for no matter where we begin, we find entrenched within 
us many armed and opposing powers. They have possession 
by heredity— they are there as the result of the 
fall. And if we have passed the days of youth they are 
the more strongly entrenched, and it requires the greater 
skill and generalship to rout them. But whether one has 
begun early or late, he that would succeed in ruling his 
own spirit must "war a good warfare." He must "fight 
the good fight of faith," down to the very end of the 
present existence. 

If the child of God would be the victor in this fight, he 
must not only storm all the fortresses of inherited evils, 
which seem to be a part of his very nature, but having 
gained possession and taken his seat upon the throne of 
this symbolic city (his will), he must thereafter be continually 
on the defensive; for the old enemies are constantly 
on the alert, and ever and anon seek to regain 
possession, so that he who continues to rule his own 
spirit is one who has not only routed the enemy, Sin, 
from the throne of his being, but is continuing to keep 
him at bay. 

This ruling of one's spirit is by no means an easy 
task; and, as in the illustration, it cannot be done single-handed 
and alone. Consequently, the wise "general" will 
invoke all the assistance at His command, remembering 
the words of the Apostle— "We wrestle not against flesh 
and blood, but against principalities and powers, against 
the rulers of the darkness of this world, against wicked 
spirits in high places." (Ephesians 6:12.) These powers 
of the world, the flesh and the Devil are closely allied, 
and therefore he who plans for conquest and an established 
reign thereafter, must seek alliance with another 
and a stronger Power. This Power is tendered to all who 
earnestly undertake this great work. It is none other 
than the Almighty Arm of our God, who says to those 

R5488 : page 197 

who accept His strength, greater is He that is with you— 
that is for you— than all they that be against you; gird 
yourselves like men, be strong, fear not.— See 1 John 4:4; 
Isaiah 35:4. 

The ruling of this symbolic city— one's own spirit- 
will never be accomplished until first the "commanding 
general," the Will, has positively decided to change his 
allegiance from Sin to God, and to rout the rebels who 
resist the change. But, in the words of a trite saying, 
"Where there's a will, there's a way"— for good or for 
evil. God will assist, through various agencies, toward 
good; Satan, through various agencies, toward evil. If 
the Will says, "It must be done," it calls in the needed, 
available help; and forthwith it sets all the other faculties 
of the mind at work, first to subjugate, and then to rule 



and regulate the entire being. Conscience is commanded 
to keep a vigilant watch over all the mental operations. 
Judgment, under the influence of Conscience, must decide 
as to the righteousness or the unrighteousness of any 
matter, and report to the Will, which is under the same 
moral influence. 

THREE DEPARTMENTS OF MENTAL GOVERNMENT 

Thus we have three departments of government established 
—the legislative, which should always be the Conscience; 
the judicial, the Judgment; and the executive, 
the Will. In every well-regulated and righteously-ruled 
mind, all the other faculties must make their appeal to 

R5489 : page 197 

this Congress and, as the Will insists, in due and proper 
order. Their appeal to the Will to execute their desires 
before submitting them first to Conscience, and then to 
Judgment, should never be tolerated; but when approved 
there, they may freely urge their claims upon the executive 
power, the Will. The Will governs; and if the Will 
be weak, the government is slack, and the appetites, passions 
and unholy ambitions take advantage of the situation. 
They seek to overbalance Judgment and to silence 
Conscience, and loudly clamor to the Will to have their 
own wild way. 

If the Will be weak, but strive to keep itself under the 
influence of Conscience and sound Judgment, it will be 
fitful and irregular in its rulings; and the government 
will be unstable and ultimately wholly at the mercy of 
the fallen appetites, passions and ambitions. The condition 
of such a soul is one of anarchy which, unless its 
wild course be speedily arrested, will hurriedly sweep the 
whole being toward destruction. It is all-important, 
therefore, that the Will be entirely consecrated to God 
and righteousness; and that it strengthen itself in the 
Lord, and in His name and strength rule with a firm 
hand, cultivating as its assistants Conscience and Judgment, 
in determining the good and acceptable and perfect 
will of God, as expressed in His Word.— Romans 12:2. 

The Will has the most difficult office to fill; and the 
Lord's commendation will be to the man of resolute Will, 
instructed by an enlightened Conscience and Judgment. 
Blessed is the Christian who sets his house in order, and 
who maintains that order to the end of his days. The 
thorns and thistles of his old nature have been exterminated; 
the beautiful flowers of peace, righteousness and 
love have been cultivated; and now they flourish and 
adorn his character. The warring elements of his old 
nature have been brought into subjection to his New Will. 
As the poet Whittier has beautifully expressed it: 

"All the jarring notes of life 
Seem blending in a psalm; 



And all the angles of the strife 
Now rounding into calm." 



R5489 : page 197 

OUR RESPONSIBILITY CONCERNING PRESENT TRUTH 

"His Word was in my heart as a burning fire 

shut up in my bones, and I was weary with forbearing; 

and I could not stay."— Jeremiah 20:9. 

THE Prophet Jeremiah is here using a very 
forceful comparison. He had a burning zeal 
in his heart, a consuming sense of the importance 
of the message given him to deliver. 
His previous declaration of the Word 
of God concerning Israel had been so despised 
and rejected that he had become disheartened. 
He himself declared, "The Word 
of the Lord was made a reproach unto me, 
and a derision, daily. Then I said: I will 
not make mention of Him, nor speak any more in His 
name. But His Word was in my heart as a burning fire 
shut up in my bones, and I was weary of forbearing, and 
I could not stay!" His message had to be spoken. The 
Lord had instructed him to tell Israel that they were 
about to be given over into the hands of their enemies. 
This Word of the Lord to the Prophet Jeremiah was 
given prior to the seventy years' captivity of the Jews. 
There were false prophets among them who declared that 
the King of Judah was to gain a victory over their enemies. 
The people were glad to hear this assurance; and 
they despised the true Prophet of the Lord, who gave 
them the real Message from God. Jeremiah told them that 
they had failed to keep their Covenant with the Lord; 
that they had failed in their responsibilities to Jehovah, 
whose people they professed to be, and whom they had 
promised to serve faithfully; that it was not too late even 
then for any to be delivered, who would repent; but that 
the nation was surely to be delivered to their enemies and 
carried away into captivity. 

JEREMIAH'S CRUCIAL TEST 

Jeremiah knew that the false prophets would encourage 
the king, and that he himself would bring the king's 
wrath upon his own head by reiterating the message 
which Jehovah had commissioned him to deliver. He 
shrank from the infamy, the reproach and the persecution 
which by experience he knew would result from loyalty 
to the Lord. But he overcame the temptation to 
hold his peace. He would speak as God commanded him, 
let the cost be what it would. He would tell Israel again 
the words which had been given him. He would give 



them a further warning. 

If Jeremiah had allowed his fears to overwhelm him, 
and had withheld the message, undoubtedly he would have 
been set aside as the mouthpiece of God, and another 
would have been commissioned to deliver the message. 
The burning within the heart of the Prophet would have 
grown feebler and would ultimately have died out. When 
a fire is kept shut off from a draft for some length of 
time, it will become extinguished. This is as true in the 
realm of moral and spiritual forces as in that of physical 
nature. This is why the Apostle Paul urged: "Quench 
not the Spirit." We might let the Holy Spirit of God die 
out in our hearts by a failure to do our duty, a failure 
to keep our covenant faithfully. The light within us, the 
holy fire, would smolder for a time, and finally become 
extinct. The Prophet Jeremiah could not withhold that 
which God had commanded him to speak; he could not 
quench the fire within his soul without losing his relationship 
with Jehovah. 

R5489 : page 198 

GOD'S MESSAGE GIVEN US TODAY 

Thus it is with us today. God has let us into the secret 
of His counsels. He has granted us a wonderful 
spiritual illumination. He has given us a Message of the 
utmost importance to deliver to His professed people. We 
have been informed by the Lord that a great change is 
impending— that the lease of power to the Gentile nations 
is about to expire. We are instructed that the present religious 
systems of Christendom are to go down, that the 
rule of the present order is about to end, and that the dominion 
is about to be given "to Him whose right it is" to 
reign. The kingdoms of this world are about to "become 
the Kingdom of our Lord and of His Christ, and He shall 
reign forever and ever." 

This Message is not to be stated in a rude manner. 
But it is to be stated, nevertheless. The great King whom 
God hath appointed is about to come in. In Jeremiah's 
time, the message was that the Kingdom of God, His 
typical kingdom, was about to be overthrown. The lease 
of power to the Gentiles, under the domination of the 
Prince of this world, was about to be inaugurated. This 
order of things was to be permitted to run for an appointed 
time. That time is now about to run out. The 
King's Son is soon to receive His long-promised inheritance. 
(Psalm 2:7-9.) We are glad that our Message is 
not now the overthrow of God's Kingdom, but the very 
opposite of this— the overthrow of the kingdom of darkness 
and the establishment of the Kingdom of God. 

So we are to tell forth this glorious Message. We 
are to tell it in our actions, in our words, by the printed 
page, by pictorial presentations to the eye, and in every 
way that the Lord shall give us the opportunity. If 
through fear of persecution, of losing prestige in the eyes 



of men, for love of ease, or for any reason whatever, 

we should fail to give forth the Message of God, it will 

be taken from us and given to one who is worthy. The 

Lord is seeking those who are valiant for Him, for righteousness, 

for truth. If we prove ourselves weak, we are 

not fit for the Kingdom. 

ARE WE FULFILLING OUR COMMISSION? 

Is this wonderful Message, this Message the like of 
which was never before granted to men or angels to tell, 
burning within us? And are we speaking it forth, that 
its inspiration may cause other hearts to take fire? Can 
we sing with the poet: 
"I love to tell the Story, 

It did so much for me! 
And that is just the reason 
I tell it now to thee"? 

If we refrain from telling the Glad Tidings, the result 
will be that the fire of God's Holy Spirit will become extinguished 
within us. And if the light that is within us 
become darkness, how great will be that darkness! The 
possession of the Truth— God's Message— brings with it 
great responsibility. Shall we prove faithful to it? Shall 
we show to our God our deep appreciation of His loving 
kindness in granting us the knowledge of His wonderful 
Message of Salvation, His glorious Plan, with its 
times and seasons? 

There is a difference between the operation of the 
Lord's Spirit in His children now and its operation in 
the days of the Prophet Jeremiah, and the other holy 
Prophets. During the Jewish Age the Holy Spirit acted 
upon the servants and mouthpieces of God in a mechanical 
manner. Now the people of the Lord have both His 
Message in His written Word and the begetting of the 
Spirit, which gives us a spiritual understanding impossible 
to His people of past Ages. The mysteries of God are 
now opened up to His faithful children, the watchers; 
and we are granted a clear understanding of "the deep 
things of God," some features of which were never revealed 
until the present time, even to the most faithful of 
the Lord's saints.— 1 Thessalonians 5:1-6. 

R5490 : page 198 

"THE DAY IS AT HAND!" 

We are also told by the Apostle Paul that the things 
which were written of the servants of the Lord in past 
dispensations were written for our admonition and instruction 
and comfort, "upon whom the ends of the Ages 
are come." (1 Corinthians 10:11.) Seeing all these 
things, dearly beloved, "What manner of persons ought 
we to be, in all holy conversation and godliness?" How 
earnestly, with what painstaking care, should we give 
heed to the Word spoken unto us! Let us be faithful in 



proclaiming the Message of our Lord, now due. Let us 
tell forth the words which He has put into our mouths, 
whether others hear or whether they forbear— whether 
our faithfulness bring us the favor or the disfavor of the 
world and of nominal Spiritual Israel. But let us speak 
His Word in meekness and love, leaving the results with 
our great Chief Reaper. "The Day is at hand" ! 

"He cometh to His own— our glorious King! 

Can human tongue or pen show forth such glory? 
Through earth and sky let our glad praises ring ! 

O Saints of God, tell forth the wondrous Story! 

"He cometh now to reign. What wealth of joy 

To all the world! Thy matchless name confessing, 

O Son of God, we sound Thy glory forth 

O'er land and sea— Thy promised Reign of Blessing!' 



R5490 : page 198 

THE GREAT SHEPHERD AND HIS SHEEP 

"The Lord is my Shepherd."— Psalm 23:1 

THROUGHOUT the Old Testament the word 

rendered Lord is in the Hebrew Jehovah, 

and therefore applies to the Heavenly 

Father and not to the Heavenly Son. The 

thought presented in our text— as in other 

Scriptures— is that the great Over-Shepherd 

appointed His Son to be the Under-Shepherd 

of the Sheep, even as the Son has appointed 

under-shepherds in the Church subject 

to Him. The work of shepherding 

is not exercised toward the world. The great Under-Shepherd 

does not shepherd goats or wolves. The only 

ones who are shepherded are the sheep; and special care 

is taken of the Flock of God. The great Over-Shepherd 

looks out for the interests of His sheep, provides for 

them, leads them into green pastures, as the Psalmist tells 

us. He also protects them from wolves and other ravenous 

beasts. 

If we would inquire, Who are these sheep? we find 
that the Scriptures give us good evidence that originally 
the Jewish nation constituted this flock, and that King 
David recognized himself as one of the sheep. Israel 
was not chosen by the Lord because they were better than 
the rest of mankind; but God made an exception of that 
people on account of Father Abraham, for whose sake He 
became the "Shepherd of Israel." Because of Abraham's 
great faith in God and his implicit obedience under the 
most crucial tests, the Lord promised to make of his seed 
a peculiar people above all the peoples of the earth. He 
promised to bless them, to assume a particular care over 



their affairs, and eventually to use them in blessing all 

other nations. So God made the Hebrews His chosen 

people. In proportion as they were obedient to His commands, 

He blessed them; and whenever they went astray, 

He chastised them and brought them back again under 

His care. 

R5490 : page 199 

But Abraham was to have another Seed, a spiritual 
Seed, who were to reign over the natural seed, and to 
bless all nations and kindreds through the natural seed. 
The special application of this text, then, we understand 
to be to Spiritual Israel, just as all the chiefest of God's 
promises are to Spiritual Israel. Natural Israel were the 
children of Abraham according to the flesh; but the spiritual 
children of Abraham are those begotten of the Holy 
Spirit to a new nature— the spiritual nature. So while 
the Lord had a care over the affairs of Natural Israel, 
and still has a care, He has a still more particular care 
over the affairs of Spiritual Israel. 

Hence, we understand that the speaker of this text, 
viewed from the prophetic standpoint, is primarily the 
Lord Jesus; and that all His consecrated followers 
throughout this Gospel Age, all the members of His Body, 
are also represented in the speaker. All these are likewise 
privileged to use these words: "Jehovah is my Shepherd; 
I shall not want. He maketh me to lie down in 
green pastures; He leadeth me beside the still waters. He 
restoreth my soul; He leadeth me in the paths of righteousness 
for His Name's sake." 

BEWARE OF WOLVES 

In this 23d Psalm there is a distinction implied between 
sheep and wolves. The world likes to be considered 
strong and well able to defend themselves and their 
rights. On their escutcheons we never see a sheep portrayed. 
We see lions; we see the eagle, with its outspread 
wings and its sharp claws and beak; we see dragons 
and bears and serpents— everything to indicate 
ferocity, rapacity, cunning, desire for conquest. The Lord 
passes by all these strong, fierce nations— the lion, the 
eagle, the bear, etc., and has called out a new nation, altogether 
distinct from any of these. 

God has chosen for the members of this nation those 
—few in number— who are sheeplike in disposition and 
who desire to come into His Fold. For these He has provided 
a particular way in which to enter this Fold. He 
does not have bears in His Fold, nor tigers nor wolves 
nor birds of prey. God does not recognize such; they 
are not to be fed and cared for as He cares for His sheep. 
He is the Shepherd only of the sheep. 

If, therefore, we would claim the promise of this beautiful 
Psalm, we must make sure that we are of sheeplike 
disposition and desirous of being led of the True Shepherd. 



We are to be careful to note that there is only one 

Shepherd who is able to care for our interests and who 

can be safely entrusted with them. A strange shepherd 

would lead the sheep astray, would lead them into difficulties, 

dangers and disaster. For this reason we do not 

trust everybody who wears the garb of a shepherd. There 

is but one Shepherd that we can trust. 

THE TENDER SHEPHERD'S CARE 

The great Over-Shepherd is willing to receive all the 
straying sheep that long to come back to the Fold. He 
has appointed as the Under-Shepherd the One who died 
for us, that He might fully deliver all the sheep from the 
Evil One— the roaring lion who walketh about seeking 
whom he may devour. Our gracious Savior left the 
Courts of Glory and came down to earth, and for thirty-three 
years He traversed with weary feet this vale of 
tears. He mingled with the poor and lowly; He wept 
with the sorrowing and the sinful; He had no place to 
lay His head. He bore the griefs and sicknesses of those 
about Him. He suffered and sorrowed; He bore shame 
and ignominy— and all this even unto death! And why? 
It was that He might save the "lost sheep." His blessed 
fellowship with the shining hosts of Heaven was all relinquished 
during these years of earthly pilgrimage, that 
the wandering sheep might be found and brought back to 
the Fold of God. 

"There were ninety and nine that safely lay 

In the shelter of the Fold; 
But one was out on the hills away, 

Far off in the dark and cold— 
Away on the mountains wild and bare, 
Away from the tender Shepherd's care. 



"But none of the ransomed ever knew 

How deep were the waters crossed; 
Nor how dark was the night that the Lord passed through, 

Ere He found His sheep that was lost. 
Out in the desert He heard its cry- 
Sick and helpless, and ready to die. 



"Then all through the mountains, thunder-riven, 

And up from the rocky steep, 
There arose a glad cry to the gates of Heaven, 

'Rejoice! I have found My sheep!' 
And the angels echoed around the Throne, 
'Rejoice, for the Lord brings back His own!'" 



How grateful we should be for such a Shepherd! How 
can we sufficiently show forth His praise! Truly we 
can never know this side the veil, "how dark was the 
night that the Lord passed through," that He might redeem 
us to God. And from the time we become His sheep 
He tenderly cares for all our interests, shielding us from 
every foe and the dangerous pitfalls that lie in our path. 

MANKIND THE STRAYING SHEEP 

All of the race of Adam are this "lost sheep." Soon 
the great Heavenly Shepherd will have gathered His 
sheep of the present Age into the Fold beyond the veil, 
and then He will have another flock— the world in general. 
"Other sheep I have, which are not of this fold; 
them also I must bring," said the Master. Ultimately, all 
who become godly indeed will be glad to be counted 
among the Lord's sheep. They will understand God's 
great Plan for the salvation of men, and will appreciate 
the marvelous blessing conferred upon the world by the 
great Over-Shepherd, in sending His Son to die for all 
mankind, that they through Him might live. 

All who will accept the gracious arrangements and 
obey the rules and regulations of the Lord's Kingdom, 
doing their best, will be brought into the sheep-fold. In 
proportion as they are obedient they will be raised out of 

R5491 :page 199 

degradation up to perfection. Thus all who become sheep 
in the next Age will be cared for— nothing shall offend 
or injure them. The Lord will not permit anything to 
harm them. They shall feed in green pastures and drink 
of the pure, refreshing waters of Truth. They shall have 
a goodly heritage. 

But the sheep of the present Age, who are to be exalted, 
and are to do a shepherding work for these sheep 
of the incoming Age, are given a distinct and peculiar 
training, to fit them for their future great work. From 
the time they are accepted to this higher plane, they are 
dealt with accordingly. This means that they must have 
certain trials and afflictions, according to the flesh. And 
if these sheep recognize that these difficult experiences 
of the way are necessary, they can well rejoice. If they 
have full confidence in the Shepherd, they know that He 
will permit them to have no needless experiences, and 
none which will be to their injury; but that He will over-rule 
all their affairs, and will cause all things to work 
together for their good, because they love Him, because 
they are the called according to God's Purpose. 

R5491 : page 200 

These are the Little Flock, sheep of the highest order. 
They represent only a small portion of mankind— those 
who have the special qualities of earnestness, humility 



and love of righteousness. Having come into this Fold 
of God, we have every reason for confidence in the great 
Shepherd, and should recognize His constant care over 
us, His supreme interest in our spiritual welfare. Let us 
be good sheep! Let us not stray from the Fold, to the 
right hand or to the left, nor be attracted away from the 
green pastures and pure waters to go browsing on the 
thistles and poisonous weeds of some by-path, or to drink 
of the muddy, polluted waters of human speculation and 
delusive theories of men. 

THE SHEEP CHARACTERISTICS 

"My sheep hear My Voice and follow Me," said the 
Master. If we are the Lord's true sheep, we shall know 
His Voice. We shall not make a mistake. A stranger 
will we not follow, but will flee from him; for we know 
not the voice of strangers. (John 10:27,5.) In designating 
His people "The sheep of My pasture" (Jeremiah 23:1), 
the Heavenly Father chose a very significant and 
fitting emblem of the kind of characters He is now seeking 
The special characteristics of the sheep are meekness, 
docility, lack of self-confidence, and obedience to 
the shepherd in whom they fully trust. The true sheep 
will listen intently for the faintest sound of the shepherd's 
voice. It will respond quickly to his call; it will 
watch for his guidance. Let us manifest all these most 
desirable traits of character, and ever keep close to our 
Heavenly Shepherd and Guide, dwelling under His loving 
care and watchful eye. Those who thus abide in 
Christ are safe. 

"Trusting Him, they cannot stray; 
They can never, never lose their way." 



R5493 : page 200 

THE IMPORTANCE OF EXAMPLE 

"Let no man despise thy youth; but be thou an example of the 
believers, in word, in conversation, in charity [love], in spirit, 
in faith, in purity."— 1 Timothy 4:12. 

WE REMEMBER that Timothy was an Elder 
in the Church, though young in years. 
Therefore, it was appropriate that St. Paul 
should impress upon his mind that He 
should be an example of the believers, an 
example to all the Church; and such instruction 
is implied in other parts of the Epistle. 
But note that the Apostle, in our text, does 
not say: Be thou an example to the 
believers, but, "Be thou an example of the 
believers." How different! 



Being an example of believers means that one should 
show forth not only to his fellow-workers in the Gospel, 
but especially to the world, what believers stand for— what 
they believe, what they teach, how they live. We should 
see to it that we are setting such an example in word, as 
the Apostle enjoins, in the character of our language when 
declaring the Message of Truth. We are not to be merely 
smooth-tongued and unctuous; we are not merely to use 
kind words; but the kindness and interest manifested 
should be genuine— from the heart. All of the Lord's 
people are thus to be examples, striving to show forth the 
praises of our Master. 

St. Paul further urges: "Be thou an example in conversation." 
This word conversation does not refer merely 
to language, as it is now used: the original meaning of this 
word is conduct. Our conduct relates to our manner, to 
the way we walk, to the way we act, to our general deportment, 
and not to our words alone. We are to be an example 
in our gentleness of demeanor. We should not slam 
doors, nor be boisterous, nor uncouth, nor thoughtless of 
others. In every way we are to be gentle and kind and 
considerate, and not rude. 

"LET YOUR LIGHT SHINE" 

Those who are begotten to the new nature should strive 
to be examples to everybody of what Christians ought to 
be. The kind of work we are engaged in should be honest. 
It may be secular work, yet it should be done as unto the 
Lord, carefully, faithfully, not merely as men-pleasers, but 
in singleness of heart, as servants of God; "for we serve 
the Lord Christ." The walk of the Christian should be in 
charity— love— in sympathy, in benevolence, in kindness of 
word and conduct. A generally sympathetic spirit should 
pervade his words and deeds, his entire behavior. The 
Heavenly Father loved mankind; while they were yet 
sinners He so loved the race that He gave the choicest 
Treasure of His heart for man's recovery. And He still 
loves the world, and is fitting the Church to be the blessers 
of the world in the future. So any begotten of the Lord's 
Spirit should have a transforming influence at work in his 
life— an influence that will manifest itself even to those 
who are out of the way, those who have not yet been 
blessed with the Light of God. 

Our text also reads: "Be thou an example in spirit." 
This phrase, "in spirit," is not found in the original, but 
the thought seems proper enough: we are to show kindness 
of spirit, of disposition, to all. The spirit that animates us 
at all times should be the spirit, the mind of the Lord. 

We are exhorted to be examples "in faith." The 
Apostle's exhortation applies to us all. The Christian's 
faith is also manifested to others in his conduct, his words, 
his course in life. If he is full of faith, he will not be 
murmuring against the experiences of life as they come, 
against the providences of the Lord. The Almighty has 
accepted us as His children; we should have continual and 



implicit confidence in Him, and whoever has true faith has 
this confidence. If any of us lack faith in God we shall 
not manifest faith to others, nor inspire faith in them. 

We are to be examples "in purity." There is a purity 
that goes with all that pertains to God and to His Word— 
a loftiness of standard, which is not to be found elsewhere. 
There are people in heathen lands who live more or less 
chaste lives, but there is nowhere so high a standard as in 
the Christian religion. Everything impure is contrary to 
God. Purity is one of the component elements of Christian 
character. As the Apostle said on another occasion, 
we are to be "first pure, then peaceable, gentle." 

LIVING EPISTLES, KNOWN AND READ 

In all these ways each of God's people should be living 
lessons, living epistles, wherever they go; they should be 
examples to the world. Whether the world believe what 
we preach or not, we should manifest these qualities which 
they cannot but approve and respect. This example will 
bear fruitage in due time, if not now. Every Elder, like 
Timothy, should be especially careful of his conduct, his 
words, his example. The Church has declared by choosing 
such a one Elder that they believe him to be an 
example of the fruitage of the grace of God in the heart. 

The Apostle's counsel to Timothy: "Let no man 
despise thy youth," should be looked upon as advice not 
only to Timothy, but to all Elders of the Church who are 
young in years, that they so conduct themselves as to be 

R5494: page 201 

examples of the Flock, that their deportment and ability 
to "rightly divide the Word of Truth" be such that none 
will have cause to slight the Message they bring, or to 
think of them as immature and unfit to lead the Flock 
of God. 

Let every child of God, the younger as well as the 
older, strive to be an example worthy of imitation— an 
example of earnest, faithful endeavor to copy the Master 
in his daily life, a pattern of active zeal in the service of 
our God. We shall not be able while in the flesh to be 
examples in the full sense of the ultimate glory and beauty 
of holiness which will be ours beyond the veil: we cannot 
expect this in the present life. Our Lord alone was such 
a Pattern. 

The Apostle Paul urged, "Be ye followers of me, even 
as I also am of Christ." (1 Corinthians 11:1.) St. Paul 
was a noble example of earnest endeavor to attain the perfect 
likeness of Christ, and his love, his zeal, his intense 
earnestness in striving to copy the Master and to accomplish 
His will should be an inspiration to us all. Let each 
of the Lord's children, individually, realize his or her personal 
responsibility. We are as "a city set upon a hill." 
Let each ask himself the question: Am I "an example of 
the believers"? 



R5491 : page 201 

"HE THAT IS BEGOTTEN OF GOD DOES NOT PRACTISE SIN" 

"My little children, these things write I unto you that 
ye sin not. And if any man sin, we have an Advocate 
with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous."— 1 John 2:1. 

ACCORDING to history the Apostle John at 

the time of writing this Epistle was quite an 

aged man. He was the last of the Apostles 

to die, according to tradition. In his ripe 

age he had naturally a tender, fatherly feeling 

toward all the Church; he had become 

very mellow in character through his experiences. 

According to the original, our 

text would more properly read: "My 

darlings, these things write I unto you." 

The translators have taken the liberty of saying "little 

children" instead. A little child is always considered a 

darling. 

St. John was especially spoken of as "the disciple 
whom Jesus loved"; this is the Apostle's own testimony. 
He seemed to be of a peculiarly loving disposition, combined 
with great force of character. And now as his 
pilgrimage neared its close, his heart went out in loving 
solicitude toward God's "little children." He had, in the 
chapter preceding our text, been pointing out that sin is 
a trait or quality of perversity which affects all. The 
Apostle declared that if any man say that he has no sin, 
he deceives himself— he is a liar, and makes God a liar. 
We are all sinners, as facts and Scripture testify. St. 
John thus impresses upon us that if we say we have no 
sin, we are displeasing to God, who is pleased to have us 
acknowledge our sins and apply for cleansing, seeking to 
put away sin so far as possible. 

The Apostle says: "These things I write unto you 
that ye sin not." He does not say: Yes, we are all sinners 
—we cannot help it— and must continue in sin. No! 
But he says: Realizing that you commit trespasses which 
are contrary to the desire of your heart, remember that 
there is a place to go, a Mercy Seat, where you may confess 
your sins and obtain forgiveness. Remember that 
"we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the 
Righteous." Remember that He gave Himself a Ransom-price 
for all, and that the merit of this price was applied 
by imputation on our behalf. Remember that all the sins 
of the flesh are forgivable through faith in His blood. 
Bear this in mind, too, that He knows that with our imperfect 
flesh we cannot as New Creatures do perfectly, 
and it is because of this that God has constituted Him 
our Advocate and Head over all things. 



OUR HIGH PRIEST GRANTS ABSOLUTION 

Our Father knows that we all come short on account 
of the weaknesses of the flesh. Jesus laid down His life 
to absolve us from sin and to restore us to the Father, and 
He has appeared in the presence of God as the Advocate 
for all those who, during this Gospel Age, turn away from 
sin and consecrate their lives to His service. Thus we see 
that the righteousness of Christ, through the great offering 
for sin which He made (His own body of flesh), is the 
basis for the forgiveness of our sins. And the blessing 
and privilege of going to the Throne of Grace for mercy 
and pardon for daily shortcomings is ours because we are 
the children of God, because we have come into the relationship 
of sons. We have a standing with the Father 
through the imputed merit of Jesus. Jesus does not advocate 
for others than the people of God. It is not the 
Father's purpose that He shall advocate for the world; 
God's dealing with the world will be quite different. 

The One who is now our Advocate will soon take the 
Church class to Himself. As the great Priest after the 
Order of Melchizedek, He will then reign over the world 
for a thousand years— not as Advocate, but as Mediator 
between God and fallen man. He will do a work of restitution 
for the world during this reign of a thousand years, 
and will bring up to perfection all who will avail themselves 
of the privileges and blessings granted during that 
period. At the close of the Millennium, when mankind 
are perfected, Messiah will turn them over to the Father: 
they will not need a Mediator after they have become perfect. 
So we see the difference between the Advocacy of 
Christ for the Church and His future work as Mediator 
for the world of mankind. 

SEEMING CONTRADICTIONS HARMONIZED 

The Apostle John in this same Epistle says: "He that 
is begotten of God sinneth not." How can this be true? 
Is the Apostle contradicting himself? Does he here say 
that "he that is begotten of God sinneth not," and does he 
say in our text that there is danger of our sinning? And 
again, that we would be lying if we denied that we have 
sin? What does he mean by the statement, "He that is 
begotten of God sinneth not"? 

We reply that that which is begotten of God is the 
New Creature— the holy will, the new soul. But this New 
Creature has only the mortal body in which to operate; 
God promises to give a new body to the New Creature in 
the resurrection. In the meantime, however, he is required 
to live under the present imperfections of the 
human body, and by his good fight against the weaknesses 
and sins which are entrenched in his flesh he will show 
either his loyalty to God and to the principles of righteousness 
or his disloyalty. If he be overtaken in a fault, either 
through ignorance or through temptation which he cannot 
control, it will not be sin on the part of the New Creature, 



but an infirmity of the flesh. Nevertheless, he must go to 
God for forgiveness for these trespasses. 

But the New Creature sinneth not— he "does not practise 
sin"— as the Emphatic Diaglott translates this passage. 
He who loves sin will sin; he who does not love sin will 

R5491 : page 202 

not sin wilfully. He might be entrapped through his weak 
flesh, or fall into a snare of the Adversary, but this would 
be unintentional on his part. And Jesus, our Advocate, 
will intercede for such sins, but not for deliberate sin. 
Jesus did not die for wilful sins of the New Creature, but 
for sins due to the fall— Adamic sin. So if any sin wilfully 
as a New Creature, he perishes thereby. Our first life 
was in Adam; our first death was the Adamic death. 
When we accepted Christ and the New Creature was begotten, 
our second life was begun. Now if such a one 
should be guilty of wilful sin, he would no longer have any 
standing whatever before God; he would again come under 
the sentence of death— the Second Death. 

SLACKNESS IN THE NEW CREATURE 

We might remark here, incidentally, that sometimes 
there is a kind of mixed condition; the New Creature has 
been slack in guarding against temptation, and has yielded 
with some degree of culpability. To the extent that the 
New Creature has been derelict, negligent, the face of the 
Lord will be darkened to him. If the flesh start to do 

R5492 : page 202 

wrong, the new will is not to consent to, or allow the 
wrong. The New Creature is to mortify, put to death, the 
flesh. To whatever extent he is slack in this matter, to 
that extent it is sin. A full sin would be a full consent of 
the new will, a full turning away from God. 

But the flesh might have certain desires and temptations, 
and there might occur a partially wilful sin. In 
such a case stripes would be administered in proportion to 
the wilfulness. Such an individual might get into a place 
where he would be spiritually sick, so that the Lord would 
entirely shut him off from the light of His countenance. 
The Apostle James points out that the only proper action 
then would be for the individual to apply to the Elders of 
the Church, the seniors of the Church, the spiritually 
minded ones, that they go with him to the Throne of 
Grace in order that he might obtain mercy and be 
reinstated. 

Seniors, spiritually minded ones not Elders, might do 
this service for the one who is sick, but preferably it 
should be the chosen Elders of the Congregation. This 
course would be a very humiliating one for the sin-sick 
brother, but such action might save that soul from death 
by a proper humbling of self "under the mighty hand of 



God." Thus such a one might be recovered and become 
again a true child of God. 

CHRISTIAN, WALK CAREFULLY! 

If we realize that through lack of proper watchfulness, 
or through some infirmity of the flesh, we have taken a 
wrong step, contrary to the Lord's will and to our interests 
as New Creatures in Christ, let us lose no time in retracing 
the step and in calling upon the Father for forgiveness. 
"We have an altar whereof they have no right to partake 
who serve the [typical] tabernacle"; an altar not sanctified 
by the blood of bulls and goats, but by the precious blood 
of Christ; and we are urged to "come boldly [with holy 
courage and confident faith] to the Throne of Grace, that 
we may obtain mercy and find grace to help in time of 
need." (Hebrews 13:10; 4:16.) How blessed this Throne 
of Grace, this Mercy Seat, provided by our Father's love! 
How undone we should be without it! Yet, beloved, let 
us walk with great carefulness— let us never presume upon 
the mercy of our God by being careless of our steps. Let 
us, instead, with earnest prayer and watchfulness, "work 
out our own salvation with fear and trembling," while our 
Father "worketh in us both to will and to do His good 
pleasure. " — Philippians 2:12,13. 

"Christian, walk carefully! oft wilt thou fall, 
If thou forget on thy Savior to call. 
Safe shalt thou walk through each trial and snare, 
If thou art clad in the armor of prayer!" 



R5492 : page 202 

FAITHFULNESS TO OPPORTUNITIES 

-JULY 26.-LUKE 19:11-27.- 

"Well done, thou good and faithful servant: thou hast been 
faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many 
things: enter thou into the joy of thy Lord."— Matthew 25:21. 

WE ARE NOT to confound the Parable of the 
Pounds with the Parable of the Talents. 
They teach totally different lessons. In the 
case of the talents, the amount given to each 
of the servants differed. In the case of the 
pounds, it was the same— each servant received 
one pound— approximately sixteen 
dollars. This parable, therefore, deals with 
something that is common to all of the class 
to which reference is made. 

The object in the giving of the parable is stated in the 
lesson. The Lord and His disciples were approaching 
Jerusalem, where shortly He was to be crucified. The 



disciples had supposed, on the contrary, that the Messianic 
Kingdom would immediately be established in power and 
great honor. This parable was intended to inform them 
that a considerable period of time would elapse before the 
Kingdom would be established. 

The disciples knew that the kings of Palestine were 
appointed by the Roman Emperor, and they had recently 
had an experience along this line, when one of the Herods 
went to Rome, seeking an appointment to a kingdom. 
Some who hated him sent a message to Rome, discrediting 
him and declaring their preference for another king. 
Jesus seized this circumstance as an illustration in His 
own case. He was the Appointee for the Messianic Kingdom 
of the world; but He would go to Heaven itself and 
there appear in the presence of the Heavenly Father, the 
great Overlord or Emperor of the Universe. He would 
be invested by the Father with the ruling authority, and 
later return to earth and exercise His dominion. 

This is exactly the presentation of the matter given us 
prophetically. (Psalm 2:8.) The Divine regulation is 
that Messiah, after finishing His work, shall in Heaven 
itself make application for a Kingdom which Divine providence 
has already arranged for and which Divine 
prophecy has already foretold. "Ask of Me, and I will 
give Thee the heathen for Thine inheritance, and the 
uttermost parts of the earth for Thy possession." 

"OCCUPY TILL I COME" 

During the interim of the Master's absence— in 
Heaven, waiting for Divine investiture with the government 
of earth— He has committed to His disciples, His 
servants, otherwise styled His brethren, one pound each. 
He has left them with full liberty to use their best judgment 
and to show their love and their zeal in His service. 
At His return, all these servants will be reckoned with, 
and the degree of their zeal and efficiency as servants will 
be manifested by the results; and the rewards given them 
will be proportionate. 

The parable distinguishes between these consecrated 
servants of God and the masses of the people. It shows 
that nothing is committed to the masses of the people; 
and that no judgment, reward, is made in their case at 

R5492 : page 203 

the return of the Master as King. Only to His servants 

did He give the pounds— only His servants had the responsibility 

of those pounds, and only those servants will be 

reckoned with or held responsible, either for reward or 

for punishment in respect to the matter. 

In considering what is signified, or symbolized, by the 
pound, we must keep in memory the fact that as the same 
amount was given to each, the fulfilment must show some 
blessing or responsibility given in each case alike to all 
of God's consecrated people— all who are His servants. 



There is but one thing that we can think of that is given 
to all of the Lord's people in exactly the same measure. 
They have not talents and opportunities alike, but, on the 
contrary, very unlike. Some have more and some less 
wealth; some more and some less mental capacity; some 
more and some less of favorable or unfavorable environment. 
None of these varied talents belong to this Parable 
of the Pounds. 

The pound is the same to all; it represents justification. 
The one thing which the Redeemer does for all who become 
His followers is to justify them freely from all 
things. This leaves them all on exactly an even footing; 
for justification makes up to each individual in proportion 
as he is deficient— in proportion as he by nature is short 
of perfection, the Divine standard. 

"BE THOU FAITHFUL UNTO DEATH" 

All who in the present time become children of God, 
servants of God, followers of Christ, must receive from 
the Lord, as a basis for this relationship, the pound— the 
free forgiveness of sins— justification. On this basis he 
has a standing with God, and whatever he may do or 
endeavor to do will be to his credit. Because all are alike 
qualified by justification, the results will show the degree 
of loving zeal controlling each servant. Those who love 
much will serve much. Those who love little will neglect 
to use their opportunities. As one in the parable gained 
ten pounds, so such noble characters as St. Peter, St. Paul, 
St. John and others, sacrificed themselves over and over 
again in the Divine service. In their zeal they counted all 
earthly things but as loss and dross, that they might be 
pleasing to their Master, the coming King. 

These, and such as these, who have gladly spent themselves 
zealously in the service of the Lord, are to have the 
highest rewards, as represented by the Lord's words, "Well 
done, thou good and faithful servant! Because thou wast 
faithful in a very little have thou authority over ten 
cities." In the parable another came, reporting a gain of 
five pounds. He had not done so well as did the first, but 
he had done well. He received the same commendation: 
he had been faithful, although less faithful than the first. 
He received his master's "Well done," however; but the 
reward was less— dominion over five cities. This will 
mean a less influential place in the Messianic Kingdom. 

Then came a servant saying, "Lord, here is the pound 
that you gave me; I have kept it carefully laid up in a 
napkin." This represents a class that say, "I endeavored 
to maintain my justification. I endeavored to live justly 
and honorably, but I did not sacrifice myself. I am glad 
to be able to say that I have lost nothing. I was really 
afraid to use my opportunity, to use my privilege; for I 
realized that You would be expecting considerable return 

R5493 : page 203 



from the amount which You gave me." 

The master in the parable addresses this one still as a 
servant, but a wicked servant, who knew his master's will, 
who had undertaken his service, but who had been found 
unfaithful in respect to it. Had he not professed to be a 
servant, he would have received no pound and would have 
had no responsibility for it. He should have made use of 
his privilege and opportunity. He should have lived for 
his master. If not so actively and so directly as did the 
others, he should have made at least some use of the 
pound entrusted to him, so that he would have had some 
results to show. 

We may assume that this one represents a considerable 
class of those who have entered into a covenant with the 
Lord to be His servants, and who have received justification 
at His hands, but who have neglected to comply with 
their engagements for self-sacrifice in His service. This 
neglect indicates their lack of loving zeal; and all this 
means that they will not be fit for a share in the Kingdom. 
This class is referred to on several occasions by the Lord: 
for instance, they are represented in the foolish virgins, 
who failed to enter in to the wedding; and so these will 
fail to become members of the Bride, the Lamb's Wife. 

"SAVED SO AS BY FIRE" 

The same class seems to be pictured by St. Paul when, 
speaking of the same testing of the Church in the end of 
this Age, he declares, "The fire of that Day shall try 
every man's work of what sort it is." He proceeds to say 
that those who build with gold, silver and precious stones 
will suffer no loss, but will receive a full reward; while 
others building upon the same Rock, Christ Jesus— the 
same justification by faith— will suffer the loss of all their 
time and opportunity. He adds, however, that they themselves 
shall be saved, yet so as by fire. 

This we understand to mean that this class of servants 
who maintain their justification, seeking to live harmless, 
honest lives, but who fail to sacrifice as they have 
covenanted to do, will not be lost, in the worst sense of 
that word. They will indeed lose the great prize— the 
highest blessing— the Kingdom; but because they still 
remain servants and have a love for righteousness they 
will be saved so as by fire; that is, through tribulations. 
They will ultimately gain everlasting life on the spirit 
plane, but will be quite inferior to the Bride class. They 
seem to be represented in the Scriptures as the virgins, 
the Bride's companions, who follow her.— Psalm 45:14. 

These seem again to be pictured in Revelation, Chapters 14 
and 7. Here the elect Church are referred to as 
144,000, who will stand on Mount Zion, because they followed 
the Lamb whithersoever He went. Then a great 
multitude is pictured as coming through great tribulation, 
washing their robes and attaining a place before the 
Throne, instead of on the Throne. To these are given 
palm branches, instead of crowns. They are victors, but 



not "more than conquerors." In this respect they are not 
wholly copies of God's dear Son, and are not esteemed 
worthy of being members of His Bride class, who are to 
share with Him the honors and glories and services in 
His Kingdom, as set forth in this parable. 

The fear expressed by this servant, saying, "For I 
feared thee," reminds us of the Apostle's words respecting 
this same class. He declares that Christ at His Second 
Coming will deliver those who all their lifetime were subject 
to bondage through fear of death. The consecration 
of the Lord's servants is unto death, and those who fear 
death are fearful of performing their covenant vow. They 
will not be worthy of the Lord's approval as faithful 
servants. Nevertheless, there are many vessels in the 
house of the King— some to more honor and some to 
less honor.— 2 Timothy 2:20,21. 

"THOSE MINE ENEMIES" 

Not until first He shall have finished dealing with His 
own servants at His Second Coming will the glorious 
Messiah begin to deal with the world, and especially with 
His enemies. This is the statement of the parable, and it 
is borne out by numerous Scriptures. When Jesus prayed 

R5493 : page 204 

on the night before His crucifixion, He said: "I pray not 
for the world, but for them which Thou hast given Me; 
word." (John 17:9,20.) Thus we see the work of the 
Gospel Age outlined by our Lord. It is merely for the 
selection of His servants, and the testing and proving of 
these. It is with a view to determining which of them 
will be found worthy of association with Himself in the 
great Millennial Kingdom which God has decreed, and 
whose work will be for the blessing and uplifting of the 
whole world of mankind. 

So the Second Psalm points out that the Redeemer will 
not pray for, ask for, the world until, at His Second Advent, 
He is ready to establish His Kingdom, His Church 
having first been gathered to glory. Then He will ask 
for the heathen. By the term heathen, or Gentile, is 
signified all out of fellowship with God, "enemies through 
wicked works." The Psalm proceeds to say that Messiah 
will deal rudely with the heathen. "He will dash them in 
pieces as a potter's vessel," etc. This, interpreted by other 
Scriptures, means that the inauguration of Messiah's 
Kingdom will bring a great Time of Trouble, symbolically 
styled fire, or fiery judgments. "He shall be revealed in 
flaming fire, taking vengeance." Everything appertaining 
to present institutions contrary to the Divine standards of 
justice will be rudely shaken and eventually destroyed. 

However, the Lord wounds that He may heal. The 
lessons of the Time of Trouble will be salutary; as we 
read, "When the judgments of the Lord are abroad in the 
earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness." 



These judgments will not in any sense continue 

upon all throughout the thousand years of Messiah's Kingdom, 

but will be inflicted only upon those deserving them. 

Hence the judgments will be especially severe at the beginning. 

All who learn righteousness will thereby deliver 

themselves; and as they come into harmony with the King 

of kings and Lord of lords, blessings will be their portion, 

uplifting them gradually to human perfection. 

"SLAY THEM BEFORE ME" 

At first thought, we might gather that these words signify 
that the King of Glory will be implacable, ferocious, 
unsympathetic, with His enemies. We might wonder how 
this shows sympathy! He admonishes us to love our enemies 
and to do good to them that despitefully use us. 
Gradually we come to see that this will indeed be the policy 
which the great King will pursue. He will be doing 
the greatest good for His enemies in bringing upon them 
punishments for their wrong course— shame, publicity, 
contempt. These things will be necessary to arouse them 
to an appreciation of their true condition and show them 
their privileges. 

We are not to forget that during this Age the Lord's 
dealings with His faithful servants has been in permitting 
fiery trials to try them and to instruct them. It should not 
be a wonder to us therefore that fiery judgments upon the 
world are the Master's design, not for the world's injury, 
but for its blessing. We read that as a result of St. 
Peter's preaching at Pentecost the truths struck home to 
the hearts of his hearers— "They were cut to the heart." 
But we realize that this was a great blessing, in that it 
prepared them for the Message of Divine Mercy. So 
here we read of the Lord's slaying His enemies; they will 
be cut to the heart. A picture of this slaughter is given 
us in Revelation, where the Lord is represented in glorious 
majesty, with a sword proceeding out of His mouth, 
that with it He should smite the nations. (Revelation 19:15.) 
Blessed smiting! The sooner it begins, the better 
for the world, we might say; and yet we remember that 
God's time is best for everything. 

Another similar picture of the progress of Messiah's 
Kingdom is given us in figurative language, as follows: 
"Gird Thy sword upon Thy thigh, O Thou Most Mighty, 
with Thy glory and Thy majesty. Thy right hand shall 
teach Thee terrible things. Thine arrows shall be sharp 
in the hearts of the King's enemies; whereby the people 
shall fall under Thee."— Psalm 45:3-5. 

Here the establishment of Messiah's Kingdom with 
power, great glory and majesty, is presented in pictorial 
imagery; and the sharp arrows of Divine Truth are represented 
as slaughtering the hosts of error. This terrible 
carnage will mean a great blessing; for the Lord smites 
to heal, and when His Word cuts to the heart the effect 
is to destroy the enemy. Unless the enemies of the Lord 
be thus brought into subjection to Him, nothing will remain 



for them but the final extinction mentioned by St. 
Peter: "It shall come to pass that the soul that will not 
hear that Prophet shall be destroyed from amongst the 
people."— Acts 3:23. 



R5494 : page 204 

CHRIST'S TRIUMPHAL ENTRY 

-AUGUST 2.-MARK 11:1-11.- 

"Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion; shout, O daughter of 
Jerusalem: behold, thy King cometh unto thee."— ZECHARIAH 9:9. 

THE MESSAGE of John the Baptist was, "The 

Kingdom of Heaven is at hand." This same 

message Jesus bade His disciples carry from 

village to village throughout Palestine. This 

same message was the burden of His preaching 

and the theme of His parables. Finally, 

at the close of His ministry, the Kingdom 

came to the Jewish nation in the sense that 

it was offered to them— it was theirs for the 

accepting. Today's lesson tells of the formal 

offer of the Kingdom by Jesus and of the neglect of the 

Jews as a people to accept it. Thus "He came unto His 

own, and His own received Him not"— except a few. 

His own nation rejected Him, and five days later crucified 

Him. A little later, at Pentecost, a few who received Him 

were begotten of the Holy Spirit and became the nucleus 

of Spiritual Israel, in preparation for the glorious Kingdom 

and the work which is to be accomplished at His 

Second Advent. 

On the evening preceding the story of this lesson, Jesus 
and His disciples were at Bethany, the guests of Lazarus, 
Martha and Mary, who had prepared a special feast for 
Jesus, whom they loved so dearly. This was the Lazarus 
whom He had awakened from the sleep of death but a 
short time before. The feast took place at the close of 
the Jewish Sabbath day. The next morning corresponded 
to our Sunday, the first day of the week. 

THE CRISIS OF ISRAEL'S EXPERIENCE 

In preparation for presenting Himself as King, Jesus 
sent two of His disciples for an ass's colt, telling them 
where they would find it, and instructing them to say that 
it would be returned after the Master had used it. By 
the time the colt arrived, a considerable multitude had 
gathered— people of the village of Bethany and others 
who had come out from Jerusalem, about two miles distant, 
to see Jesus and to see Lazarus, upon whom the 
notable miracle had been wrought. It had long been the 
custom of the kings of Israel to ride to their coronation 



R5494 : page 205 

upon an ass; and the multitude seemed to enter into the 
spirit of this occasion and to realize what it meant that 
Jesus was about to ride into Jerusalem on this colt. It 
signified that finally He was ready to assume the office 
of King. 

For some time the disciples had recognized Him as the 
Messiah, the glories of whose Reign they were to share; 
and the multitude in general had learned to so regard 
Him, saying, "When Messiah cometh, will He do greater 
works than this man?"— could we expect anything more 
of Messiah than we see being accomplished by this man 
Jesus? But this was the first time Jesus had formally put 
Himself forward. On previous occasions, when they had 
sought to take Him by force to make Him a king, He had 
withdrawn Himself, realizing that the time was not yet 
come. Now, so far from withdrawing, He was taking the 
active part, sending for the colt, preparing for the 
triumphal ride to the capital of the nation as its King. 

We may be sure that the hearts of the Apostles thrilled 
with excitement as they thought of the nearness of their 
Master's glory and of their own share in it; for as yet 
they did not realize the full import of His words to the 
effect that He must be crucified and must depart to a "far 
country," even Heaven itself, and be invested with authority, 
and later return to establish the Kingdom which 
would bless the world. 

Jesus, however, was fully aware that the presentation 
of Himself as King was a formal matter, fulfilling the 
prophecy and leaving the nation of Israel without excuse. 

R5495 : page 205 

If, when He entered the city, the people should rise en 
masse, acknowledge Him and acclaim Him, then indeed 
they would be in line with the Divine requirements which 
would bring them the greatest of all blessings. But Jesus 
knew that prophecy had already declared that He would 
be despised and rejected, and that His own people would 
hide their faces from Him in shame. (Isaiah 53:3.) 
The journey and the preparation for it, therefore, meant 
something very different to Jesus from what it signified to 
the disciples and the multitudes. 

"THE STONES WOULD CRY OUT" 

When the ass arrived, some of the people put their 
garments upon it in lieu of a saddle; Jesus mounted, and 
the procession began. Some went before Him, and some 
followed after. The people were familiar with the 
prophecy relating to Messiah's coming, which declared, 
"Shout, O daughter of Jerusalem! behold, thy King 
cometh unto thee; He is just, and having salvation; lowly, 
and riding upon an ass." They were familiar also with the 



"shout" the prophets had foretold and the responses— one 
party crying, "Hosanna to the Son of David! Blessed is 
the King of Israel, that cometh in the name of the Lord!" 
Again came the cry, "Blessed be the Kingdom of our 
father David, that cometh in the name of the Lord!" 
Then the response, "Hosanna in the highest!" These different 
expressions are recorded by the different 
evangelists. 

But not all were enthusiastic acclaimers of Jesus; a 
discordant note was heard. Some of those who had come 
from the city through curiosity criticised the shouting, and 
wondered why Jesus did not rebuke the people for ascribing 
so great honor to Him. They sent word to this effect 
to Jesus through His disciples. Jesus made answer that 
a great prophecy was being fulfilled. The Prophet 
Zechariah had by inspiration said, "Shout, O daughter of 
Jerusalem" ! and such a shout must be made. Jesus declared 
that if the multitudes had failed to shout, the 
prophecy would still have been fulfilled— the very stones 
would have cried out. 

THE FIRST PALM SUNDAY 

It is customary with some Christians in various parts 
of the world to commemorate especially that Sunday of 
the triumphal entry of Jesus into Jerusalem. The record 
tells that on the journey many of the people strewed their 
garments in the way, as a mark of respect and honor, 
waiting until the little animal had passed over them, and 
then running on before and placing them again. Others 
brought ferns, flowers and grasses, and strewed them in 
the way. Still others, St. John's Gospel tells us, brought 
branches of palm trees. 

It was a jubilant procession, fulfilling the prophecy of 
Zechariah. Yet to Jesus it had the sad feature, as indicated 
by the account. When they had reached the turn 
of the Mount of Olives, which brought Jerusalem into 
view, the Master halted the procession while He looked 
over the city and wept, saying, "O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, 
that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are sent 
unto thee; how often would I have gathered thy children 
together, as a hen gathereth her brood under her wings, 
and ye would not! Behold, your House is left unto you 
desolate; and verily I say unto you, Ye shall see Me no 
more, until that Day [nearly nineteen centuries later] 
when ye shall say, Blessed is He that cometh in the name 
of Jehovah!" 

Jesus realized that that day was a turning point with 
the Jewish nation— that their rejection of Him meant their 
rejection by the Heavenly Father for a long time. It 
meant that they would be cast off from Divine favor, except 
a few who would become His disciples. It meant that 
during those long centuries the highly favored people of 
Abraham's natural seed would be in distress. It meant 
that the favor of God, which had been with them for centuries, 
would instead be extended to the Gentiles, to gather 



out of the Gentiles a company of faithful, saintly ones to 
be associates and joint-heirs with Jesus and the faithful 
ones of the Jews in the Heavenly Kingdom. It meant that 
not until this elect, Heavenly, spiritual Kingdom class 
should be received to glory would the Jewish people be 
again received into fellowship with God. 

St. Paul markedly calls our attention to this fact that 
the rejection of Israel is not permanent, but only for a 
time— only until the complete number of faithful saints 
be gathered out from amongst the Gentiles. Then God's 
favor will return to Natural Israel, and subsequently extend 
to all the families of earth.— Romans 1 1:25-32. 

JESUS, THE PRINCE OF PEACE 

How different was this entry of Jesus, the Prince of 
Peace, from the triumphal marches of earthly conquerors 
and kings! In the excitement of human passion and the 
prejudice of human minds a special halo of glory has 
surrounded the world's conquerors. Heroic deeds, valiant 
conquests, as pictured by historians have a charm. The 
rising generation reads with thrilling interest of the 
prowess of Alexander the Great, of the Spartans of 
Greece, of the Caesars of Rome, and in more modern times 
of Robert Bruce, of Napoleon and Wellington, of Generals 
Grant and Lee, Sherman and Johnson, Sheridan and 
Stewart. The home-comings of all of these were 
triumphal marches, in many cases rendering honor to 
whom honor was due. 

Nevertheless, in every instance the mind's eye necessarily 
closes against scenes which led up to such triumphs. 
We try to forget the millions of slain and wounded, and 
other millions of mourning widows and orphans. We try 
to forget the smoking ruins of homes behind those victorious 
armies. However necessary war at times may 
seem to be for the maintenance of justice, nevertheless 

R5495 : page 206 

all must concede that the blessings purchased by the sword 
are procured at a terrible cost. 

From this viewpoint Jesus, the Prince of Peace, followed 
by an army of saints who are walking in His footsteps, 
presents a beautiful picture— even to the worldly. 
These victors— Leader and followers— conquer by dying. 
Thus Jesus said to His followers, "Whosoever will save 
his life shall lose it; and whosoever shall lose his life for 
My sake and the Gospel's shall find it." Thus viewed, all 
the followers of the Lamb are self-sacrificers, as the Bible 
declares: "I beseech you, brethren, by the mercies of 
God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy 
and acceptable to God— your reasonable service." (Romans 12:1.) 
Such a victory— victory through death— is difficult 
for the majority of people to understand! What is 
the philosophy of it? Where is the victory? 



VICTOR-KINGS THROUGH DYING 

Well may it be asked, Wherein is the victory of Christ 
and His followers in laying down their lives for the 
brethren and in support of truth and righteousness? Only 
the Bible answers the question, and only those who exercise 
faith can understand the Bible answer. The Bible 
declares that the real victory of Christ and the Church is 
over self. Their crowning day is future— their triumph 
will be then. 

The triumphal entry of Jesus on the ass was only 
typical. The antitype will be glorious— beyond the veil. 
As Jesus after His resurrection was "received up into 
glory," so also He has promised His Church that their 
resurrection shall change them from imperfect human 
beings to perfect spirit beings, joint-heirs with their Master, 
their Redeemer, in the glorious Millennial Kingdom 
which is to bless the world. 

After Jesus had risen from the dead, He explained to 
His perplexed disciples what His death signified, saying, 
"Ought not Christ to have suffered these things [death] 
and to enter into His glory?" (Luke 24:26.) So St. 
Paul has declared in respect to all who will be Jesus' associates 
in the Kingdom— they must suffer with Him if 
they would reign with Him; they must be dead with Him 
if they would live with Him. (2 Timothy 2:12.) Christ 
and His Church die to human hopes and interests, present 
and everlasting— laying down their lives, suffering for 
righteousness' sake. Their reward is two-fold: (1) 
Their own personal exaltation to a Heavenly, spirit glory, 
like unto the angels, and yet more glorious— "far above 
angels, principalities and powers and every name that is 
named." (2) The Kingdom glory— the joy of being the 
Divine agents for human restoration. 

From this, the Bible viewpoint, the Christian warfare 
is different from every other warfare known to the world. 
It is a fight against sin, a fight against self-will, a full 
submission to the Divine will, a victory through death. 
"Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown 
of life." (Revelation 2:10.) "To him that overcometh 
will I grant to sit with Me in My Throne, even as I also 
overcame, and am set down with My Father in His 
Throne." (Revelation 3:21.) No wonder that a proposition 
of this kind is but imperfectly understood by the 
world! "The world knoweth us not, even as it knew 
Him not." And this is one of the requirements of the 
Gospel, that Jesus and His followers shall submit themselves 
to be misunderstood by the world. We are counted 
fools for Christ's sake.— 1 Corinthians 4:10. 

It requires some stamina to be a loyal follower in the 
footsteps of Jesus, misunderstood as He was misunderstood 
by those of His day, reviled as He was reviled. 
"They shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for 
My sake." It is only when we understand through God's 
promises that in these trying experiences of Christ and 
His followers there is a glorious purpose, that we are able 



to endure them with any measure of rejoicing. Only 
these are granted of the Lord the eye of faith which can 
clearly discern things beyond the veil— the glory, honor 
and immortality, and the Kingdom which the Lord has 
promised to His faithful followers. 

"THE WRATH OF THE LAMB" 

Since Jesus is the Prince of Peace, how shall we 
understand various passages of Scripture which refer to 
Him as a mighty Conqueror in blood-stained garments, 
taking vengeance on His foes? But especially, how shall 

R5496 : page 206 

we understand the declaration that, at His coming in the 
clouds of heaven, all the tribes of the earth shall wail 
because of Him? 

Of this Prince of Peace it may be said that He will 
wound to heal, that whatever disasters He may bring or 
permit to come upon the world will be so overruled as to 
make of them blessings in disguise. Undoubtedly much 
that is said respecting our Lord is highly symbolic. For 
instance, He is to smite the nations with the Sword that 
proceedeth out of His mouth— the Word, or Message, of 
Truth. Such a smiting is in full conformity with the 
declaration that when St. Peter preached the Gospel at 
Pentecost, some of his hearers were "cut to the heart"— 
not with St. Peter's literal sword, but with "the Sword of 
the Spirit, which is the Word of God." Eventually, that 
Sword will smite all opponents of righteousness for their 
good. Only the wilfully wicked will eventually be destroyed 
in the Second Death. 

We are not to forget, however, that the inauguration 
of the Messianic Kingdom is to be in the midst of the 
Time of Trouble, and that Christ will have to do with the 
bringing, or at least the permitting, of that Trouble. 
Apparently mankind will be permitted to bring the great 
trouble at the end of this Age upon themselves. There 
are forces of evil, Satan and his angels, ready to do us 
harm and, through human forces, sin-forces entrenched in 
human nature, ready to do harm to the social fabric. The 
Bible represents that Divine Power holds these in check 
—the four angels holding the four winds— that they shall 
not blow upon the earth to its injury until the appointed 
time, until all of God's elect Church shall have been sealed 
in their foreheads— their intellect— with the Truth. 

At the appropriate time those "winds" of strife will be 
let loose, and great will be the trouble, until in due time 
the King of kings and Lord of lords shall intervene to 
rescue the race from itself and from the Adversary. Then 
Satan shall be bound for a thousand years, and Messiah's 
Kingdom shall be established for the blessing of all the 
families of the earth. 

R5506 : page 206 



PREPARED HEARTS 

FRANCES DARDEN. 

Prepare our hearts to know Thee, Lord, 
And seek for wisdom in Thy Word, 
So, as our days, our strength may be, 
To spread Thy Truth, o'er land and sea. 
O'er all the earth this light must shine, 
Restoring faith to all mankind. 

Run swiftly, oh! ye angel "feet," 

Upon the mountains; tidings sweet 

Send forth! Proclaim the Word, 

So men shall know their reigning Lord. 

Earnest watch, on Zion's wall, 

Lift high His banner over all; 

Loud sound the Seventh Trumpet call! 



R5496 : page 207 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
QUERIES OF A COLPORTEUR 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

How shall we do respecting the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
after October, 1914? Will the Society continue to publish 
them? Will the Colporteurs and others continue to circulate 
them? Is it right to circulate them now, since you have some 
doubt respecting the full accomplishment of all expected by 
or before October, 1914? With Christian love, 

Your brother, M. F. C. 

IN REPLY 

MY DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

Yours of May 20th has reached me. Thanks! I think 
that you are not taking a right view of the matter treated in 
STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, Vol. II. It is our thought that 
these books will be on sale and read for years in the future, 
provided the Gospel Age and its work continue. 

So far as the features are concerned, we have merely set 
forth the Scriptures and our view respecting their application 
and significance. We have not attempted to say that these 
views are infallible, but have stated the processes of reasoning 
and figuring, leaving to each reader the duty and privilege of 
reading, thinking and figuring for himself. That will be an 
interesting matter a hundred years from now; and if he can 
figure or reason better, he will still be interested in what we 
have presented. In any event, we think that the consummation 
cannot be long deferred. 

To cease to print and circulate the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 



because everything suggested therein has not been, apparently, 
fulfilled, would be like rejecting our Common Version 
of the Bible because the chronology given in the margin 
throughout is known to be incorrect to the extent of a number 
of years. Usher's chronology is used in our Common Version, 
and shows the birth of Christ in the year 4004. Scholars are 
agreed that the event varied at least two years from 
that date-some say four years. And STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
show from the Bible that the date was actually 4128. 
Nobody thinks of throwing away his Bible on this account. 
No more need any one think of throwing away his STUDIES IN 
THE SCRIPTURES or failing to circulate them on account of the 
fact that October, 1914, may not witness all that we had expected 
and in the manner expected. With much Christian love, 
Your brother and servant in the Lord. 

page 207 

AN OCCASION FOR REJOICING 

DEARLY BELOVED BROTHER:- 

You have had my continuous love and prayers for a good 
many years, but I have not written you personally for quite 
awhile, knowing of the pressure of the Harvest work upon your 
time. But knowing that you would be much pleased to hear 
of the wonderful demonstration of the Truth that I have just 
witnessed, I write you this brief account: 

Brother Petran, wife and I have just returned from Osseo, 
Wis., where Brother J. M. Kidd's whole family, sons, daughters, 
son-in-law and daughter-in-law, numbering thirteen, 
have consecrated and been baptized, except one, who was unable 
to symbolize on account of sickness, but is coming to 
Appleton before long, D.V., to symbolize. 

Dear Brother, I never saw a more happy family and a more 
loving and sincere demonstration of an appreciation of the 
Truth and of the brethren as they embraced each other and 
wept for joy and gladness. They are all in deep earnest and 
thoroughly understand the steps they have taken. All have 
taken the Vow also. They also organized a class with regularly 
appointed officers and set the time of their Berean, 
praise and testimony meetings, etc. 

A Brother Davis, Brother Kidd and his sister, Sister Blakeley, 
have been witnessing hereabout for the Truth for a great 
many years without much apparent result, until after Sister 
Blakeley's death, just a few weeks ago. Brother Petran, of 
the Appleton class, accompanied me and assisted in the funeral 
service, after which three of the friends consecrated themselves 
to the Lord on the train on their way home. When they 
arrived there the influence of the Holy Spirit spread among 
their friends and relatives and the result is we have already 
immersed twenty-three. 

At the last talk at Osseo, the evening before we left, about 
sixteen of the neighbors were present at our meeting, at the 
close of which we asked if they would be willing, for the 
sake of the Truth, to give their attention, their time, their 
reputation, their friends, their money, and life itself, as the 



service might require of them? At each of these questions 

a number of them gave their assent, which, if fully understood, 

means a complete consecration to Christ. And so we 

are expecting to be called upon in the near future to perform 

another baptismal service. In fact, six more have expressed 

the desire to be baptized at the first opportunity. 

I might add that the brethren have had quite a struggle 
with tobacco, but they have conquered and cast it out. 

We rejoice with you in the Harvest work and pray God's 
blessing to continue with you until your work is done. Sister 
Deming joins me in sending much Christian love. 

Your Brother in Christ, H. W. DEMING.-Wis. 

R5496 : page 207 

A SIGNIFICANT MESSAGE 

DEAR FRIEND :- 

As one who believes in "the Present Truth" as presented 
in STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, I venture to write to you for 
a word of advice and comfort. I am in deep distress and 
have suffered intense mental agony during the last few 
months through being careless of the privileges connected 
with Present Truth. 

I came, through God's favor, into touch with the Truth ten 
years ago, and had great rejoicing in it. My fatal mistake 
was a lack of decisiveness and a consequent failure to act 
according to my conscience. I became timid and avoided my 
fellowmen because of my failure to speak out. Added to this 
I stumbled, time and again, through weakness of the flesh, 
and gradually settled down to the thought that success in the 
"narrow way" was not for me. 

At the end of last year my interest in Volume One was revived 
and I argued that if it is true why should I fear to come 
out of Babylon? Acting upon this I sent for withdrawal 
letters. I had a talk with our minister here, but at the critical 
moment I gave way to fear. This plunged me into a blackness 
which I cannot describe; I imagined all sorts of things, chief 
amongst which was that I had committed the sin unto death. 
The thought of this made me worse, and I gave way to careless 
living. 

Dear friend, I would give anything for a word of comfort! 
I have striven hard to find peace of mind. I would not trouble 
you, as I know you are fully occupied; but somehow my unhappiness 
compels me to write you, as I know you are in close 
fellowship with the Lord. I hope that you can help me. My 
soul is sadly diseased. I cannot express the gratitude I shall 
feel. God bless you! Yours sincerely, 

T. H. HUGHES.--N. Wales. 

OUR REPLY 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

Yours of the 28th ult. has come duly to hand and contents 
are noted. Frequently, "earth-born clouds arise" to obscure 
the Lord's face from us when we neglect to do those things 



which He indicates would be pleasing to Him. Faithfulness 
to the Lord will restore a sense of His favor. My suggestion, 
therefore, is that you start anew, doing faithfully everything 
which you find to be His will for you. 

The very fact that you are penitent and feel the separation 
is a good sign. Those who have sinned the sin unto death are 
not usually penitent. A rereading of the Six Volumes, laying 
hold upon the promises quoted therein, should be of help to 
you. May the Lord's guidance and blessing be with you as 
you seek to return to a condition of favor with Him. With 
much Christian love, we remain, 

Yours in the Master's service. 

THE CORRESPONDENCY SEEMS CLEAR 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Have often thought of writing you as to how far the type 
and antitype extend in the Harvest of the Jewish and 
Gospel Ages; particularly as to whether the time that the 
Roman army under Titus besieged Jerusalem and the length 
of the siege are types of the trouble coming on the world? 

To my understanding the Harvest of the Jewish Age commenced 
in the fall of 29 A.D., and, being a period of forty 
years, ended in the fall of 69 A.D. In the spring of 70 A.D., at 
the time of the Passover, the Roman army besieged Jerusalem. 
The siege lasted about six months and ended in the fall of 
70 A.D. Thus the great calamity that our Lord foretold to 
Jerusalem did not reach its worst until six months after the 
end of the Jewish Harvest, and continued about six months 
thereafter, or one whole year after the end of the Jewish 
Harvest. This same period in antitype, if antitype it is, would 
seem to be from April, 1915, to October, 1915. If there is any 
significance in this it would seem that the burning of the 
"tares" in the Time of Trouble will not take place until the 
Harvest is entirely ended. 

This may be reaching after types where none are intended. 
Will be thankful for any suggestion along this line. 

Yours in the one hope, S. W. PENNOCK. 



page 209 

VOL. XXXV JULY 15 No. 14 
A.D. 1914-A. M. 6042 



CONTENTS 

Our Hope— An Anchor to the Soul 211 

Inward Faith— Outward Confession 21 1 

Danger of Withholding the Light 21 1 

How and Where Shall I Serve? 212 

Brethren in Penal Institutions 213 

Anointed— Established— Sealed 213 



The Purpose of Our Trials 214 

"The Lord Thy God Is a Faithful God" 216 

His Saints Shall Never Be Moved 216 

The Drama in Europe 217 

Three Grand Conventions 217 

Christian Liberty Based on Principle 218 

Conscience to Be Respected 218 

Barren Fig Tree— Defiled Temple 219 

Significance of Zionism 219 

Wicked Vine-Dressers 221 

"Behold Oppression— Behold a Cry" 222 

Interesting Letters 223 

Colporteuring Helped by Drama 223 

A Baptist and Present Truth 223 

page 210 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:-All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



PLEASE REMEMBER THESE THINGS 

Give your full address at the top of each letter you write, 
and please print it if you cannot write plainly. Please address 
your communications to the WATCH TOWER SOCIETY, whether 
in Brooklyn or London or Melbourne. Only very personal 
matters should be addressed to the Editor— Pastor C. T. 
RUSSELL. Our work here is different in the various departments; 
for instance, the Pilgrim Department, the Colporteur 
Department, the Volunteer Department, etc. In case the 



subject matter of your letter makes it specially appropriate 
to one or another of these Departments, please add the same 
to the address, but always make the main address the WATCH 
TOWER SOCIETY. 



LITERATURE FOR THE BLIND 

Requests for Bible literature for the Blind should be sent 
direct to Gould Free Library for the Blind, South Boston, 
Mass. It has for loaning the six volumes of STUDIES in 
English Braille; also Vols. I. and II. in New York Point, and 
Vol. I. in American Braille. Besides this, there are translated 
and ready to loan, many of the booklets issued by our Society, 
as well as special sermons. 

When returning books or pamphlets for the Blind, please 
return them direct to the Gould Library. The Post-Office will 
handle them without postage if the package is plainly marked, 
"Literature for the Blind, Postage Free." 



I.B.S.A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 

FOR THE MONTH OF AUGUST 

Questions from Manual on Series Second of 

"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 

STUDY IV., V. 

Week of August 2 Q. 52 to 57 Week of August 16 Q. 64 to 68 

Week of August 9 Q. 58 to 63 Week of August 23 Q. 1 to 6 

Week of August 30 Q. 7 to 12. 

Question Manuals on Vol. II., STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 5c. each, 
or 50c. per dozen, postpaid. 



R5497 : page 211 

OUR HOPE-"AN ANCHOR TO THE SOUL" 

"Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering 
for He is faithful that promised."— Hebrews 10:23. 

NEARLY ALL that God has given us as New 

Creatures is by faith or hope. When we 

become followers of Jesus and take up our 

cross to follow Him, a sacrifice is involved, 

if the step be taken intelligently— along the 

lines of Divine instruction and invitation. 

No one would voluntarily undertake to sacrifice 

unless he had a hope or a conviction 

of some blessing that would result or of 

some reward that would come to him as the 

outcome of that sacrifice. In every proper action there 



must be a motive or object. The fact that the Church 
has been invited to follow Jesus indicates that there was 
something in His course which brought the blessing and 
favor of God— some special reward; and that if we will 
follow Him, we shall share that same blessing and reward 
—glory, honor and immortality. 

So when we take up our cross to walk in our Master's 
footsteps, it implies that we are inspired with the 
hope of thus sharing in the glory and honor conferred 
upon Him. The character of our God assures us that 
any offer coming to us from Him, with rigid conditions 
attached, must be infinitely worthy of our acceptance; 
and the "exceeding great and precious promises" accompanying 
this offer assure us of His assistance and sustaining 
power. So by availing ourselves of His strength 
and of His aid, we shall be able to meet all the conditions 
and to attain the glorious reward set before us. Hence 
our faith has a strong and sure foundation upon which 
to rest; "faith can surely trust Him, come what may." 

INWARD FAITH-OUTWARD CONFESSION 

We exercise faith in the heart before we make an 
outward profession— before we confess the Lord with 
our mouth. And we have no right to confess Him with 
our mouth until we have believed "unto righteousness"; 
for "with the heart man believeth unto righteousness, and 
with the mouth confession is made unto salvation." (Romans 10:10.) 
So we have the declaration of the Lord 
that He will not consider that we have a proper faith or 
hope unless we confess it. He has declared that if we 
refuse or fail to confess Him before men, He will account 
us unworthy to be confessed before the Father and 
the holy angels. There is, then, no salvation without a 
confession of the Lord; the two are inseparable. 

It is in vain that any entertain a hope of being accepted 
of the Lord and of winning His final approval 
who hides his light under a bushel and shrinks from the 
reproach of the Cross. "No cross, no crown," is the 
Lord's inflexible decision. All who have received the 
Truth in the love of it will be glad to let their light shine 
to the glory of God and the blessing of others. If the 
glorious Message of the Lord has filled our own hearts 
and blessed our lives, we shall rejoice to carry the living 
water to other thirsty souls. If the good seed has 
found our hearts fruitful soil, it will surely germinate 
and bring forth fruitage to the glory of our God. 

In harmony with the terms of our consecration, we 
confess to men that we have a faith that reaches beyond 
the present life, a hope that "entereth into that within 
the veil," whither Christ, our Forerunner, has entered 
for us. We confess our hope that we shall have a part 
in His resurrection; that "we shall be changed in a moment, 
in the twinkling of an eye," and like Him be spirit 
beings, see Him as He is and share His glory on the 
Divine plane. We confess that we hope with Him to be 



instruments in the Father's hands, bringing life and joy 
and blessing to all the world of mankind, the living and 
the dead; that we hope to uplift them from death, to 
raise them from all the sin and blight and sorrow and 
tears that have oppressed them for these six thousand 
years. Truly ours is a wonderful hope! Who would not 
rejoice to tell it! 

If, then, we have this faith, this hope, and are properly 
confessing it before men, let us "hold fast." Tests 
of our loyalty will continually come. The flesh will be 
inclined to rebel strongly at times. The questions will 
present themselves: Are you willing to confess Christ? 
Are you ashamed to own His name before the world, or 
do you esteem this your chiefest honor? There will be 
temptations to become discouraged. Our weaknesses will 
rise up before us, and the Adversary will take advantage 
of these circumstances to further dishearten us. And not 
only will there come these temptations along the line of 
our faith and hope, but there will come certain reproaches 
and persecutions, permitted for the purpose of 
proving our loyalty. Ours is a marvelous calling, and 
only heroic souls are wanted to fill the places in this elect 
class— only those who have the Spirit of the Master. 

DANGER OF WITHHOLDING THE LIGHT 

If any are disloyal or weak, and fail to take a firm 
stand for the Lord and the Truth, for fear that they will 
be disesteemed amongst their fellow-men, or for any 
other reason, it will prove that they are not worthy to 
share with Christ the glories of His Throne as members 
of His Body. All who hope to be of this number have 
professed His Name; and they must be steadfast, must 

R5497 : page 212 

hold fast their confidence and profession of their 
faith even unto the end. 

The flesh needs to be dealt with rigorously, and be 
brought into subjection and held there. According to the 
inclinations of the flesh, the Lord's children would wish 
to refrain from what would bring contumely and adverse 
criticism. The flesh would prefer to keep quiet, where 
the speaking forth of the Truth might bring reproach or 
persecution or ostracism. But the New Creature would 
feel "a burning fire shut up in his bones" if he were to 
withhold the Message of Truth when a suitable opportunity 
was granted, and he would find that he must be 
faithful and let his light shine. Otherwise, the light 
would grow feeble and would finally die out altogether, 
and he would be in utter darkness. And "if the light 
that is in thee become darkness, how great is that 
darkness!" 

Let us not grieve the Holy Spirit of God which is 
within us. The Lord gives us a solid basis for our hope, 
for our faith. It is a hope which He has Himself inspired. 



This hope is backed by all His sure promises and 

by His Oath; and He reminds us that "He is faithful 

that promised." (Hebrews 10:23.) It is as yet a promise 

only; it is all of faith. We have now but the begetting 

of the Holy Spirit to this new nature, and the sealing of 

the same Spirit, "the earnest of our inheritance." (Ephesians 1:13,14.) 

But we have learned to know our God 

and to trust His faithful Word. We have proven His 

gracious promises in many a time of stress and danger, 

and we know that He will not fail us. And "he that hath 

this hope in him purifieth himself, even as He is pure." 

OUR ANCHOR SURE AND STEADFAST 

If we were to let go this hope, this anchor to our 
souls, we should be adrift upon a shoreless sea, whose 
mighty billows would sweep us down to eternal death. A 
great Time of Trouble is now about to break upon the 
whole world, and any of the Lord's people whose faith 
and hope are not firmly anchored to the Rock of Ages, 
any who are fearful to trust His promises, will be overwhelmed 
in the storm. Shall this be our experience? 

"The Time of Trouble nears, 'it hasteth greatly,' 

E'en now its ripples span the world-wide sea; 
Oh, when its waves are swoll'n to mountains stately, 

Will the resistless billows sweep o'er me?" 

Some of the Lord's real children will have their part 
in the great trouble-time; yet none who are faithful, 
who are obedient, will suffer thus. These will be kept 
in perfect safety to the end of their course, and will, we 
believe, be gathered "within the veil" before the great 
storm breaks in its fury. Because of our faith in the 
Master, because of our strong confidence in Him, our 
knowledge that He has been an overcomer, and that the 
Father has rewarded Him and that He is now our Advocate, 
our great High Priest, who "ever liveth to make 
intercession for us," therefore our hearts have good courage. 
We know that He will shortly "stand up" in power 
and great authority to establish His Kingdom and to exalt 
all His faithful to reign with Him in that Kingdom; 
therefore our hope is firm; it is indeed an anchor to our 
souls. We are "strong in the Lord, and in the power of 
His might."— Ephesians 6:10. 

We shall never lose our courage if we keep our eyes 
continually fixed on Him, and our hand closely clasped in 
His. God's eternal promises are the foundation upon 
which all that we hope, either of character, or of coming 
glory, is built. And what a strong foundation! Let 
us be faithful to Him who hath called us. Let us hold 
the glorious Truth not only in the letter, but also in the 
spirit. Let us hold it in the love of it, because it is the 
Truth, as well as because of its matchless beauty and 
grandeur. 

Let us ever remember the importance of patient endurance, 



constancy, that we may develop the fruits of 
the Holy Spirit, that we may take joyfully every trial, 
every persecution, every difficulty, which our God in His 
infinite Wisdom and Love may permit to come upon us 
for our testing and the ripening of that character which 
is of paramount importance, and without which we can 
never hope to see our Father's face, nor partake of the 
glory to which we have been called with Christ. Let us 
indeed "hold fast the profession of our faith without 
wavering; for He is faithful who hath promised." Let 
us "hold fast the confidence and the rejoicing of the 
hope, firm unto the end." Yea, "we desire that every one 
of you do show the same diligence to the full assurance 
of hope" unto death.— Hebrews 3:6; 10:23; 6:11. 

R5498 : page 212 

"Will your anchor hold in the storms of life, 
When the clouds unfurl their wings of strife? 
When the strong tides lift, and the cables strain, 
Will your anchor drift, or firm remain?" 

Surely by the grace of God our anchor will hold; for 

"We have an anchor that keeps the soul 
Steadfast and sure while the billows roll; 
Fastened to the Rock which cannot move, 
Grounded firm and deep in the Savior's love!" 



R5498 : page 212 

HOW AND WHERE SHALL I SERVE? 

"Brethren, let every man, wherein he is called, 
therein abide with God."— 1 Corinthians 7:24. 

IN THE CONTEXT, the Apostle has been 

discussing marriage and its responsibilities. 

He has also been discussing slaves and their 

state. He asks, "Art thou called being a 

slave? Then seek not to be free." Nevertheless, 

he added that if freedom were to 

come to the slave, he should be glad to avail 

himself of the opportunity of having a 

wider field of service as a free man. But 

the slave should not say to His master: I 

have become a child of God, and therefore your regulations 

are nothing to me; you cannot longer hold me as a 

slave. 

The Apostle gives the thought that the Lord's people 
are not to want an immediate change from the condition 
in which they were called. His thought is, You are not 
necessarily to think that you are to leave what you are 
now doing. Your business may be that of a servant, or 



a slave; therein abide— in the sense of having your mind 
at rest. If the Lord opens the door, then you are to look 
about. If your condition is one of great severity, it is 
right to ask the Lord that in His own due time He will 
make it less so, if it please Him. He has promised us 
that with every temptation He will provide a way of 
escape or direct the issue, that we may be able to bear 
it. (1 Corinthians 10:13.) This would apply to our business 
relationships— to everything. 

If one were single, he should consider very carefully 
the matter of taking on added responsibilities. He should 
think: "I was called when single. Does the Lord wish 
me to marry?" And if he comes to the conclusion that 
the Lord so desires, he should remember the Apostle's 
injunction, "Only in the Lord." If he were married 
when called, he should not say, "I wish I were not married. 
I could do so much more, so much better, if not 
married." He was married when called, and therefore 

R5498 : page 213 

there is a mortgage upon his time. He has this mortgage 
or contract to consider. 

ENTER OPEN DOORS, BUT DO NOT FORCE THEM 

Nevertheless, the Apostle, in previous verses of this 
same chapter points out that if the unbelieving husband 
or wife should depart, let them do so. Do not seek to 
oppose their going if they desire to go. The Lord is able 
to provide for your affairs. And if that is the Lord's 
providence for you, so accept it. As for the thought of 
our leaving our business to go into the Colporteur work, 
or the Pilgrim work, or the Class Extension work, or 
whatever it might be, the proper thing for us to consider 
would be, Is this an opening of the Lord? If we find 
that a better opportunity for service comes to us in this 
way, a wider opportunity for work in the Harvest Field, 
and that there is an open door, then we should rejoice 
and should enter the door. 

But if we find that there is no open door and we 
would have to force one open, to violate some right principle 
to enter such work, that would alter the case. We 
must stand for principle. We shall never have to oppose 
any right principle to engage in the Lord's service; there 
is always some way to serve. The Apostle is here addressing 
brethren, and his words could not refer to any 
who were then engaged in a dishonorable avocation. 

NO BROTHER IN DISREPUTABLE BUSINESS 

But suppose that a man, before receiving the Truth, 
had been the keeper of a gambling house, or were in 
some other disreputable business. Suppose he had been 
a saloon-keeper (several brethren have come from this 
business). After he had accepted the Truth, he would 



say, Here! What am I doing? Am I dispensing to human 
beings that which is to their injury? I must quit 
this. And so he would have to get out of the saloon 
business before he could become a child of God at all; he 
would have to get out of the unprincipled condition of 
mind before he could become a child of God. The Apostle's 
words were addressed to the brethren: "Brethren, 
let every man so abide." He would not be a brother in 
Christ while in a business repugnant to his conscience 
and injurious to his fellow-creatures. 

The whole matter was, of course, forceful to servants 
in the Apostle's day. In that time and in every time the 
humble classes, the servant classes, the slave classes, 
seem to have been ready to receive the Message. Our 
Lord said unto the rich, as a class, "Woe unto you rich!" 
And to the poor He said, "Come unto Me, all ye that 
labor and are heavy-laden." And we see that not many 
wise, not many rich, not many noble, come into the 
Light. 

BRETHREN IN PENAL INSTITUTIONS 

A prisoner in a penal institution would do well to say 
to himself, "Well, in God's providence this Message has 
reached me here in prison. Perhaps I should never have 
had it if I had not been here." If we were such a person, 
instead of hastening to try to pry open the doors by sending 
a paper to petition release, we would consider well 
before we started such a paper. We would think, "Perhaps 
I may have opportunities for serving the Lord 
amongst these fellow-prisoners. Perhaps I may have an 
opportunity of preaching to them." Or if there were an 
application made for release, and if the application resulted 
in refusal, we should bow to that refusal as being 
the Lord's word in the matter. We would try to be 
thoroughly content and thoroughly happy, and would 
say, "I will strive to show forth the praises of God, who 
has called me out of darkness into His marvelous light." 
We could not know but that a man would have just as 
good opportunity for service there as anywhere else. 
The Lord will give what is best to all His faithful ones. 



R5498 : page 213 

ANOINTED-ESTABLISHED-SEALED 

"Now He which stablisheth us with you in Christ, and hath anointed 
us, is God, who hath also sealed us."— 2 Cor. 1:21,22. 

THE APOSTLE is here addressing the Church 
at Corinth, recognizing that this congregation 
are co-laborers with him— accepted of 
God as members of Christ, the Anointed. 
Christ is the great One foretold prophetically 



as the antitypical Prophet, the antitypical 

Priest, the antitypical King, who is 

to bless the world by His work of healing, 

instructing, helping, uplifting. The Apostle 

says that the One who has brought us into 

the Body of the Anointed, and has set, or established us, is 

God. This implies that God does the calling of those who 

come to Him. It implies that there was a previous invitation 

—the Apostle says that no man taketh this honor to 

himself. Even Jesus could not have taken to Himself the 

honor of being a Priest and King; He could not say, I will 

be a Priest— I will be a King ! 

As God called Jesus to be the great Head over this 
Ecclesia, or Body, so through Jesus He has invited us to 
become its members. And as we conform to the terms 
and are made acceptable through our great Advocate, we 
are then set in the Body— anointed. It is not a happen-so, 
but we are set. And we shall continue in this position 
unless, because of some unfaithfulness, we shall be blotted 
out and the crown appropriated to us be taken away. 

He who sets us, establishes us, and has anointed us of 
the Holy Spirit, and thus made us members of this holy 
company, is God, the Heavenly Father. It is not the 
province of even our Redeemer to set us and anoint us. 
As the Apostle says, "God hath set every member in the 
Body as it hath pleased Him." All things are of the 
Father, and all things are by the Son; hence this anointing 
that we receive comes from the Father. Nevertheless, the 
Channel is the Lord Jesus. This Holy Spirit which the 
Father has given to Jesus, He has shed forth upon us. 
The Father authorizes it, the Son sheds it forth. 

SEALED IN THE MASTER'S LIKENESS 

And God "hath also sealed us." It is not only important 
that we be begotten of the Holy Spirit, and set in the 
Body, but it is another precious thought that we are to be 
sealed, or impressed; we are to receive a stamp. As we 
would set a seal into wax to mould the wax into its 
likeness, so with us who are desirous of knowing and 
doing God's will; we are impressed by His Holy Spirit 
into the image of our dear Master; and the channel 
through which we are sealed is the Truth. 

So those who are sealed by the Holy Spirit have a considerable 
measure of appreciation of the Truth. All the 
promises come through God's Word; it is a power that is 
now at work, so that all of God's people in all parts of the 
world are being impressed through the promises of God. 
God works in us to will and to do His good pleasure. This 
sealing is of the Father, because it is through His promises; 

R5499 : page 213 

it is under the direction and care of the Head of the 
Church, our Lord Jesus, that He may in due time present 
us blameless and unreprovable before the Father. 



"If I in Thy likeness, O Lord, may awake, 
And shine a pure image of Thee, 

Then I shall be satisfied when I can break 
The fetters of flesh and be free." 



R5499 : page 214 

THE PURPOSE OF OUR TRIALS 

"Blessed is the man that endureth temptation; for when he is 
tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord hath 
promised to them that love Him."— James 1:12. 

THE WORD blessed in this text may be understood 

to signify the condition of one in the 

favor of God. The state of such will be a 

happy one, a desirable one. The word 

blessed does not, of course, always suggest 

a happy condition as relates to the feelings, 

or emotions, but rather as relates to the outcome. 

It is used here in connection with the 

results of trial to the Christian. The child 

of God who wins the crown of life will be 

very highly favored or blessed of God; then whatever 

conduces to this end is a very great blessing, even though 

it cause much pain to the flesh. 

Who will gain this crown of life? Of what character 
will he be? The Scriptures declare that it will be that 
man or that woman who endures temptation, trial. What 
is signified by enduring temptation? Evidently the 
thought is not the enduring of one temptation for one 
time or for many times. Even the world must endure 
trials. The reference is to the retaining permanently of 
the attitude of patient endurance and faithfulness when 
tempted, of remaining true to God under temptation and 
stress. Temptations come from a variety of sources. 
They may come from friends, who may tempt us to live a 
life of more or less self-indulgence, to relax in a measure 
our fidelity to the Lord. The enticements of wealth or 
worldly society, a natural love of ease and disinclination 
of the flesh to endure hardness— any or all of these may 
prove strong and subtle temptations to the Christian. 

But if we love the Lord supremely, that love will become 
the chief impulse of our lives. Our one aim will be 
that we may glorify God in our spirit and in our body. 
We know that there are things which are displeasing to 
God, and if we love Him we will seek to keep His commandments. 
The child of God might fail once, or he 
might fail repeatedly along the same line, until in deep 
humiliation and anguish of soul because of his continued 
manifestation of the same weakness, he would be led to 
cry out with strong crying and tears to the Lord; and his 
pain and distress of heart might so impress upon him his 



need of greater watchfulness along that line that he 
would become strengthened for further attacks of the 
same nature, and thus be enabled to gain the victory over 
his besetment, his special weakness. 

THE CROWN OF RIGHTEOUSNESS 

While we shall never reach the point of perfection in 
the flesh, nevertheless this power to endure temptation 
should become more marked day by day, as the New 
Creature remains loyal, still resisting and striving still 
harder to resist and be true to the Lord in thought and 
word and deed. Blessed is the man who shall endure— 
time after time, day after day— thus proving his faithfulness 
and obedience to God. For when that man is tried, 
when the trial time is over, when God has seen that he 
has demonstrated fully his loyalty, then, when God's "due 
time" has come, that tried and proven one shall receive 
the crown of life. 

The expression, "the crown of life," is another way of 
saying the reward of life; and this life is on the highest 
plane. The Apostle Paul speaks of this same crown as 
the "crown of righteousness." The Apostle Peter calls it 
the "crown of glory." It is the crown of righteousness 
because it is the reward that comes as the result of 
righteousness, of obedience to God and the principles of 
His Government, of faithfulness to our covenant. It is 
the crown of glory because it is the reward which brings 
glory, honor, immortality. 

In the Grecian games certain rewards were given to 
those who endured successfully the trial of their skill, of 
their prowess and of their physical endurance. The reward 
given was usually a crown or wreath of laurel. 
That crown was valuable, not so much in itself, but especially 
as an outward token of appreciation of superior 
merit. The fact that it was evergreen would suggest to 
the Christian that our reward as "overcomers" will be a 
lasting reward, an eternal reward. 

The Lord is to give us life in fullest measure. The 
penalty that came upon our race because of sin was death; 
but now there is an opportunity to regain life— life in 
perfection, untainted, unending. This life is in the Son 
of God. At the present time life can be gained only by 
being begotten to the spirit nature. The crown of life, 
to be given to the "more than conquerors," is a very 
special kind of life— immortality, the highest form of life 
possible, the crown, or pinnacle, of all life. This is to be 
the reward of the class called in Scripture the Bride of 
Christ, when they shall have demonstrated their faithfulness, 
when they shall have been proven worthy to be 
members of that exalted class. 

There will be a crown of life in the next Age— perfect 
human life— as the result of obedience to the tests and 
trials of that time. These tests will differ in many respects 
from the trials and difficulties of the Church at the 
present time. They will be much less crucial; for then 



temptations to sin from without will be removed, and 
bodily and mental uplifting and assistance granted, which 
will make their trial a more favorable one. Righteousness, 
too, will immediately be rewarded in that Day, and 
sin and disobedience of every kind will be promptly punished. 
But now righteousness often brings suffering, 
reproach, pain and loss, from the human standpoint; 
while sin often brings present advantage, popularity and 
pleasure to the flesh. 

THE PROPER VIEW OF OUR TRIALS 

There is a special love required by God of the Gospel 
Church— this peculiar class now called of Him. They are 
to have a love that is so unselfish that it will be willing, 
yea, glad, to lay down the earthly life in the service of 
God, that they may bring blessings to others. To these 
God has promised the special crown of life— immortality, 
His own nature. These are to be the blessers of their 
brethren, those of the nature formerly their own. As 
Isaac was the blesser of Ishmael and of the sons of 
Keturah, and as the first-born of Israel were the blessers 
of their brethren, so these will bless all the peoples of 
the earth, from among whom they were chosen. How 
thankful we should be for an honor so great! 

If these favored children of the Heavenly King could 
always keep in mind the fact that every trial and testing, 
every persecution and difficulty, permitted to come upon 
those who have made the Covenant of Sacrifice with the 
Lord, is designed to develop them, to prove and test their 
love, to demonstrate whether or not their characters are 
fixed, rooted and grounded in righteousness, it would set 
all their painful experiences and temptations in a new 
light, and would be a great assistance to them in fighting 
the good fight of faith successfully. For if by these trials 
and tribulations the Lord is proving our love and devotion 
to Him, then whatever they may be, whether great or 
small, we should diligently use them as opportunities to 
demonstrate to our God the fulness of our love for Him 
and His cause, and as means by which we may rise day 
by day to greater heights of spiritual attainment, being 
changed into the likeness of our Master. 

R5499 : page 215 

Thus viewed and thus met, every trial and affliction 
would prove a blessing, a Heavenly messenger, bearing 
us on wings of faith "Nearer, our God, to Thee, nearer to 
Thee." Then, beloved, "count it all joy when ye fall into 
divers temptations [trials, testings], knowing this, that 
the trial of your faith worketh patience [patient endurance]. 
But let patience perfect her work, that ye may be 
perfect and entire, wanting nothing." Herein we "greatly 
rejoice— though now for a season, if need be, ye are in 
heaviness through manifold temptations [testings, provings], 
that the trial of your faith, being much more 



precious than of gold, which perisheth, might be found 
unto praise and honor and glory at the appearing of 
Jesus Christ, whom having not seen, ye love; in whom, 
though now ye see Him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with 
joy unspeakable and full of glory, receiving the end of 
your faith, even the salvation of your souls!"— James 1:2-4; 
1 Peter 1:6-8. 

Truly, "these light afflictions, which are but for a 
moment, work out for us a far more exceeding and eternal 
weight of glory, while we look not at the things which 
are seen, but at the things which are not seen; for the 
things that are seen [the things of the present order] are 
temporal, but the things which are not seen [the glories 
to come] are eternal."— 2 Corinthians 4:17,18. 

"WILL YE ALSO GO AWAY?" 

Thus we are assured in the infallible Word of God 
that those who love the Lord, and who are to receive the 
Kingdom, will have their love tested by trials and temptations 
on the way to that Kingdom. Those who do not 

R5500 : page 215 

love the Lord with all their hearts, in whom self or some 
other idol has first place, will be seduced by the world, the 
flesh or the Devil into some form of rebellion against the 
Divine Word or the Divine providences. They will have 
schemes and theories which they will prefer to the Lord's 
Plan and the Lord's way; and their schemes when 
analyzed will usually be found to be based either upon 
selfishness or ambition or upon an evil spirit of envy, 
hatred, jealousy, etc. 

The Lord's leading and the Lord's words lose their 
attraction to such, and they lose their interest correspondingly; 
and like those who turned away from the Master 
at His First Advent, and said, "This is a hard saying," so 
these also go away and "walk no more with Him." But 
some will continue to walk with the Lord; some will not 
be driven away nor decoyed from Him by the arts and 
wiles of the Evil One and his hosts. These are such as 
are at heart fully the Lord's, not their own; they will 
follow the Lamb of God, whithersoever He may lead, 
because they have no will except His will. They will 
follow Him through all the Narrow Way of discipline and 
trial in this life; and by and by, as He has assured them, 
"They shall walk with Me in white; for they are worthy." 
—Revelation 3:4. 

OUR UNFAILING SHELTER 

Nor will this choice company lack in number by reason 
of the falling away of some. It will be of the predestinated 
number which God arranged to constitute the Bride, the 
Lamb's Wife. The Father's foreknowledge made full 
allowance for all who would turn back, and He knew that 



the requisite number would follow on, to make their calling 
and election sure. These have learned that the call 
of the world, the promptings of the flesh, and the arts of 
the Adversary, are all snares and traps and pitfalls to 
drag them down to death. They have learned the sound 
of the true Shepherd's voice, and cannot be enticed by the 
voice of strangers. 

Precious children of the Lord, blessed are ye! 
Sheltered in the "secret place of the Most High" no evil 
shall befall thee, neither shall any plague come nigh thy 
dwelling. "He shall give His angels charge concerning 
thee; they shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash 
thy foot against a stone." How safe and secure are these! 
Though a thousand fall at their side, and ten thousand 
at their right hand, yet the plague shall not come nigh 
them. They have "made the Most High their Habitation," 
and He will keep them from all harm. 

"Under His Wings I am safely abiding, 

Though the night deepens and tempests are wild; 

Still I can trust Him, I know He will keep me; 
He has redeemed me, and I am His child. 

"Under His Wings! What a refuge in sorrow! 

How the heart yearningly turns to His rest! 
Often when earth has no balm for my healing, 

Here I find comfort, and here I am blest. 

"Under His Wings! Oh, what precious enfolding! 

Here will I hide till life's trials are o'er; 
Sheltered, protected, no evil can harm me, 

Resting in Jesus, I'm safe evermore!" 

As the faithful disciples of the Master in the first 
Harvest realized a meaning in His teachings which others 
of the professed children of God could not appreciate, so 
now, at the Second Advent of the Lord, His words have 
a precious significance to those who are in heart-harmony 
with Him which none others can realize. And we see 
now, as at the First Advent, that some are stumbling and 
going back, while others are being drawn more closely to 
the Lord than ever, by means of the knowledge of His 
Plan which He is supplying. 

FEASTING IN THE BANQUET HALL 

As we draw nearer to the close of the Harvest, we 
shall not be surprised if the way become still narrower, 
still more difficult, and if the temptations to stumble and 
to fall become still more frequent. Let us then, dear 
brethren, be more and more on our guard against the 
wiles of the great Enemy of our souls, and against the 
deceptions of our own fallen nature. Let the perfect love 
of God rule in your hearts, driving out self-love and 
world-love, with their pride, ambition and folly. Let 
entire devotion to God bring into your hearts the promised 



fulness of joy and rest and peace. Be fruitful branches in 
the Vine, abiding ever in Him, responding to all the 
prunings of the great Husbandman with more abundant 
fruitage. 

If beguilements come to us, let us say with the 
Apostles of old: "Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou hast 
the words of eternal life." There is life nowhere else, 
and we wish to go nowhere else. We are feasting in the 
banquet hall of our Father's House, "and His banner over 
us is love!" We have an abundant supply: our table is 
richly laden. So we eat and go on our way rejoicing. 
We are nearing Home. We shall soon reach the last 
mile-stone in our journey! Then, with a song on our 
lips, let us press on! 

"Tempted and tried, whatever betide, 
In His secret pavilion His children shall hide. 
'Neath the shadowing wing of eternity's King, 
His children may trust, yea, His children may sing. 

"Tempted and tried, yet the Lord will abide 
Thy faithful Redeemer and Keeper and Guide, 
Thy shield and thy sword, thine exceeding reward; 
Then enough for the servant to be as his Lord. 

"Tempted and tried, the Savior who died 

Hath called thee to suffer— then reign by His side. 

If His cross thou wilt bear, His crown thou shalt wear, 

And forever and ever His glory shalt share." 



R5500 : page 216 

"THE LORD THY GOD IS A FAITHFUL GOD" 

"O bless our God, ye people, and make the voice of His praise 
to be heard; which holdeth our soul in life, and suffereth not 
our feet to be moved."— Psalm 66:8,9. 

IN THIS Psalm the Prophet David calls upon 

all the world to praise the Lord. In prophetic 

language he exclaims: "All the earth 

shall worship Thee; they shall sing to Thy 

name!" Then he recounts the wonderful 

manifestation of the Power of God in His 

dealings with Israel; he calls upon the people 

to bless the Lord and sound His praises 

abroad. Taking a retrospective view of the 

dealings of Jehovah with His people, he 

continues: "For Thou, O God, hast proved us, Thou hast 

tried us as silver is tried. Thou broughtest us into the 

net; Thou laidst affliction upon our loins. Thou hast 

caused men to ride over our heads; we went through fire 

and through water; but Thou broughtest us out into a 

wealthy place!"— vs. 10-12. 



The Psalmist then declared that he would enter into 
the house of the Lord, and would pay unto the Lord the 
vows which he had made in the time of his trouble. He 
recounts the goodness of God to himself. He tells that 
he had cried unto the Lord and extolled His praises, that 
his prayers had been answered, and that he had been 
lifted up and blessed and delivered. He calls upon Israel 
to remember all the leadings of the Lord in their past 
history and all His goodness to them as a people, and 
exhorts them to sound forth the praises of His great 
name. God had brought the people of Israel up out of 
bondage to Egypt; He had protected them through all 
their wilderness journeyings and ever since. 

King David reminds them that they had been kept 
alive, that God had not permitted them to be exterminated 
—He had "suffered not their feet to be moved." They 
were not vanquished by their enemies, so long as they 
had trusted and obeyed. Subsequently, because of their 
disobedience and perversity, God caused them to be carried 
away into captivity in Babylon. But this was for 
their good, that He might prove them, and afterwards 
bring them— all worthy ones— back into their own land. 

LET SPIRITUAL ISRAEL SOUND HIS PRAISES! 

But although this Psalm has a primary significance 
as relates to Natural Israel, our thought is, in harmony 
with the applications made by our Lord and the Apostles, 
that these words are even more appropriate in their application 
to Spiritual Israel. The Lord has brought us 
up out of the world. He has delivered us from the great 
taskmaster, Satan. He has guided us through the wilderness 
journey; He has fed us with the Manna from 
Heaven; He has brought us forth the Water of Life 
from the great Rock of Ages smitten for us, that we 
might drink and live. He has washed our feet from the 
dust of our wilderness way. He has faithfully disciplined 
and chastened us as His sons; He has gone before 
us through all the toilsome march, and has been our 
Rearward as well, to protect us from all danger and 
harm. If Natural Israel had great cause for thankfulness 
and praise, what should be our attitude, for all the 
marvelous manifestations of His love and care for us, 
His Spiritual Israel! Truly, as no other people on earth, 

R5501 : page 216 

past or present, can we praise our God! With the poet 
we can say: 

"He was better to me than all my hopes, 

He was better than all my fears; 
He made a bridge of my broken works, 

And a rainbow of my tears! 
The billows that guarded my sea-girt path 

Carried my Lord on their crest; 



When I dwell on the days of my wilderness march, 
I can lean on His love for the rest. 

"He emptied my hands of their treasured store, 

And His covenant love revealed; 
There was not a wound in my aching heart, 

But the balm of His breath has healed. 
Oh, tender and true was the chastening sore 

In wisdom that taught and tried, 
Till the soul He loved was trusting in Him, 

And in nothing on earth beside! 

"He guided my steps where I could not see, 

By ways that I had not known; 
The crooked was straight and the rough made plain, 

As I followed the Lord alone. 
I praise Him still for the pleasant palms, 

For the water-springs by the way; 
For the glowing pillar of flame by night, 

And the guiding cloud by day. 

"There is never a watch in the dreariest halt 

But some promise of love endears; 
I read from the past that the future shall be 

Far better than all my fears. 
Like the golden pot of the wilderness bread, 

Laid up with the blossoming rod, 
All safe in the Ark with the Law of the Lord, 

In the Covenant care of my God!" 

SOME FAITHFUL THROUGHOUT THE DARK AGES 

Our God never fails His children: His name is Faithfulness! 
He has never permitted His Church to be exterminated, 
notwithstanding all the assaults of error and 
of the powers of darkness. There are still true people of 
God in the world, and ever have been. Throughout the 
Dark Ages, the great fact of our Redeemer's sacrifice for 
sin was still held by some of the true saints of the Lord. 
This precious truth was never completely lost during 
those years of darkness and obscurity, and in God's due 
time His Church emerged from the wilderness, "leaning 
upon the arm of her Beloved." The light has since grown 
brighter and brighter to the faithful, watching ones. And 
what a flood of glory now shines upon the path of the 
saints ! 

"Looking back, we praise the way 
God has led us day by day!" 

The saints of God during the past centuries did not 
need these additional blessings which are supplied to the 
faithful of today, but their every need was supplied. We 
are living in the days of the "cleansed Sanctuary." More 
Truth is now due than at any time in the history of the 
Church. Truly, our Lord has "brought us into His banqueting 
House, and His banner over us is Love!" (Cant. 2:4.) 
Truly, "He holdeth our soul in life, and suffereth 



not our feet to be moved," despite all the thousand 
snares laid for our feet by the great Adversary and his 
servants— many of them unwittingly serving him. We 
can see that long ago we might have been overcome by 
the Adversary's attacks had not our God been a Wall of 
Protection round about us. 

HIS SAINTS SHALL NEVER BE MOVED 

"Our lines have fallen unto us in pleasant places!" 
(Psalm 16:6.) But it is only the faithful who are thus 
kept. We are not to understand that the Lord keeps 
any who do not themselves make the proper effort to 
know the will of God that they may do it; it is those 
who are following in the footsteps of Jesus, doing all in 
their power to please the Lord as they are able to discern 
the way wherein He would have them walk. These 
are today causing the voice of His praise to be heard, 
and grace sufficient is their portion. If the trials of faith, 
submission and trust shall be greater in the near future 
than they have yet been, these faithful ones will not fall. 
Their feet shall not be moved, even though a host encamp 
against them, and thousands fall at their side. 

R5501 : page 217 

"Here is the patience and the faith of the saints." These 
will be strong in the Lord and in the power of His might, 
even though they be required for a time to follow where 
they cannot see. 

Let us therefore go forward with good courage, 
knowing that He who hath led us thus far will continue 
to lead. He who favored us first will favor us last; and 
"He that is on our side is greater than all they that be 
against us." Thanks be to God that His grace has preserved 
us, that He has kept us from falling, that so many 
of us are still of one heart and one mind to go forward 
unflinchingly, whatever the coming days may bring ! If 
they shall bring hardship and persecution, pain and trial, 
His grace will uphold us still. If they shall bring us 
tests of faith and endurance, His promises will not fail. 
Let our entire trust be centered in God. Let us continue 
to rejoice in Him. "Let Him that glorieth, glory in this, 
that he understandeth and knoweth Me, that I am the 
Lord, which exerciseth loving kindness, judgment and 
righteousness in the earth; for in these things do I delight, 
saith the Lord." (Jeremiah 9:24.) Testings will 
be permitted to come upon the people of God for the very 
purpose of sifting out all who are not truly His. Then 
let us stand fast, knowing that He is faithful. 



R5502 : page 217 

THE DRAMA IN EUROPE 



IN furtherance of plans for introducing the 

PHOTO-DRAMA in Europe, the Editor, accompanied 

by three trained operators, left 

New York on the S.S. Lusitania, May 19th, 

several friends joining the party. Our arrival 

in London was in good season for the 

London Convention at Whitsuntide. The 

three days at the Convention proved very 

interesting and profitable. All the sessions 

were held in the London Opera House, the 

largest attendance being two thousand. The various features 

of God's great Plan were set forth by seventeen 

speakers. The Convention adjourned with a Love Feast, 

in which nearly two thousand participated. This was freely 

declared to be the most enjoyable Convention ever held 

in Europe. The Lord was with His people, blessing, refreshing, 

strengthening us. One hundred and twenty-four 

witnessed by water immersion their full consecration 

to the Lord even unto death. 

Meantime, preparations for the DRAMA were in progress. 
A school was started for giving finishing instructions 
to Brethren who had already gained a considerable 
knowledge of cinematograph operation— to acquaint 
them with the special features appertaining to the PHOTO-DRAMA 
OF CREATION. A Scottish class and two English 
classes were promptly started, totaling fifteen fine young 
men consecrated and eager for service. A lesson or two 
demonstrated that they will speedily be very efficient. 
Meantime another class of five will be trained as soon 
as the work shall seem to call for their services. Delegations 
from France, Switzerland, Germany, Denmark, 
Sweden and Finland came to London to arrange for the 
DRAMA in their several home lands and to gain information 
respecting its operation and the necessary steps of 
preparation. It is our hope that July will witness the 
presentation of the DRAMA in all those countries. The 
friends seem very keen and the prospects favorable. 

A favorable start with the DRAMA was made at the 
Princess Theatre, London, on Sunday, June 14th, on 
which day about twenty-two hundred were in attendance. 
The DRAMA is to continue every afternoon and evening 
for a month. Further showings in London are probable, 
but what they will be depends considerably upon the 
Lord's providence and the zeal of the local friends. All 
seemed greatly pleased with the two parts of the DRAMA 
exhibited prior to our departure, June 20th. We believe 
that in Europe, as in the United States, the public will be 
greatly interested and profited by this, the latest method 
of writing the Divine measurement, or plan, upon tables 
—the Gospel being pictured at the same time that it is 
explained by our very wonderful talking machine arrangements 
and our free Scenario. 

R5503 : page 217 



Arrangements for various cities in Great Britain were 
in progress when we left. In Glasgow the DRAMA was 
to open on the very next day, June 21st, in St. Andrew's 
Hall, the largest Auditorium of that city. We have no 
doubt that the Lord's blessing upon the energy of the 
Brethren there will make the presentation a success- 
profitable to many. 

Leaving the operators to install the DRAMA in Great 
Britain, Scandinavia, Germany, France and Switzerland, 
in co-operation with the Society's Branches in those countries, 
we began our homeward journey June 20th, on the 
S.S. Aquitania. A remarkably quiet and pleasant journey 
brought us to the home land in good season for the 
Conventions at Asbury Park, N.J.; Columbus, Ohio, and 
Clinton, Iowa. 

The Editor was both encouraged and continually inspired 
and refreshed by his contact with the Brethren in 
and from the various parts of the world. It is helpful to 
note the spirit of loyalty to the Lord and His Word— the 
spirit of devotion continuing for months and years. The 
Spirit manifested is the same everywhere— the spirit of 
love and zeal— the Holy Spirit. The reason for this manifestation 
is explained by the Apostle's words, "We are 
all baptized by the one Spirit into one Body"— Christ. 



R5502 : page 217 

THREE GRAND CONVENTIONS 

THIS year's arrangement of having our Conventions 

early and in three central locations 

at the same time seems to have had the 

Lord's blessing. The Asbury Park, N.J., 

Convention was a convenient one for the 

friends residing in the East. Columbus, 

Ohio, was best of all as respects auditorium; 

but Clinton, Iowa, excelled in several 

respects. In each case our Association 

were the guests of the city by invitation of 

the local government. In each case the PHOTO-DRAMA OF 

CREATION was shown to appreciative thousands. In each 

case the attendance aggregated two thousand, some coming 

at the beginning of the Convention and remaining a 

few days, and others coming toward the close, and some 

remaining the entire time. 

We had many evidences of the Lord's favor and blessing. 
The total number attending was thus six thousand; 
the total number of baptisms three hundred and fifty-six; 
the total number of States represented thirty-six, besides 
four Canadian Provinces and one from Fiji Islands, and 
British representatives. Best of all, the Lord was with us 
by His Holy Spirit, which was manifested in the faces, 
the words, the conduct— not only of the Convention, but 
also of the audience. It was good to be there. As usual, 



the dear friends at the various Conventions declared these 
the very best ever. 
No doubt personal growth in grace and in knowledge 

R5502: page 218 

and the Spirit of the Lord has much to do with this 
greater appreciation of our opportunities as they are coming 
to us year by year and day by day. To the impure 
nothing is pure. To the discontented nothing is happifying. 
To those who have come into personal relationship 
with the Lord and who are resting in His promises there 
is a blessing, a refreshment, a strength, an encouragement, 
every time the precious things are touched, handled, 
mentioned. We thank God as we notice the various 
manifestations of growth in grace amongst His People. 
"What manner of persons ought we to be," in view of 
our glorious relationship, our grand hopes, our precious 
fellowship with the Lord and with His brethren! 

Only one thing did the Editor fear in respect to the 
influences mentioned and the able addresses of the speakers. 
He fears that the dear friends in several instances 
were over-stimulated by too positive assurance that the 
present year will witness the "change" of the Church, 
establishment of the Kingdom, etc. With all due respect 
for the opinions of the brethren, we believe that the present 
is a time for great soberness of mind, avoidance of 
speculation and waiting for whatever the Lord may be 
pleased to bring to pass. We greatly fear that some of 
the dear friends will experience sharp disappointments, 
if some of the confident statements made on the Convention 
platform miscarry. At no time has the Editor ever 
spoken or written as positively as some of these dear 
brethren are speaking now. In the books, "STUDIES IN 
THE SCRIPTURES," as well as in THE WATCH TOWER, we 
have set forth the chronology, not as infallible, but nevertheless 
declared our confidence in it. However, we have 
always encouraged the friends to examine for themselves, 
to use their own judgment. To assist them in this we 
have given in detail the references, etc. In recent numbers 
of THE WATCH TOWER we have plainly stated that 
fulfilments of the prophecies, although marked and manifest, 
are not as far developed for the time as we had expected. 

The Editor at all three of these Conventions took occasion 
to reiterate the views already presented in THE 
WATCH TOWER: 

(1) That the chronology and prophecies interwoven 
with it still seem as strong as ever— still seem to teach 
that Gentile Times will end next October. 

(2) He pointed out, however, that the ending of the 
Gentile Times might not usher in the great Time of Trouble 
so quickly as has been expected. He pointed out that 

the lease expiring might not mean an instantaneous dispossession, 
but, possibly, might mean a gradual dispossession, 
or perhaps a sharp notice to quit, followed by 
eviction a little later on. 



(3) He reminded the Conventioners of his utterance 

in a recent number of THE WATCH TOWER, to the effect 
that it is possible that the Gentile Times might close without 
world-wide trouble immediately, and that the Church 
might be completed with some of the members this side 
the veil participating for a little season in the "judgments 
written." 

(4) He especially sought to impress upon all that our 
consecration was unto death, and that if the Lord permits 
us to continue here awhile longer than we expected, our 
love and loyalty should be manifest in our joyful submission 
to His arrangements; and furthermore, that if the 
privileges and blessings of the present year be continued, 
our cup of joy will run over every way. 

A beautiful spirit seemed to pervade the Conventions, 
reminding us of the Scripture which declares, "By one 
Spirit we were all baptized into one Body." That one 
Spirit is the Holy Spirit of God— the spirit of love and 
loyalty to Him, to His Word, to our brethren— the spirit 
of sympathy, love, helpfulness, which would do good unto 
all men as we have opportunity, especially unto the 
Household of Faith. Invitations for a September Convention 
were received from Los Angeles, San Francisco, 
Mountain Lake Park, Md., and Saratoga Springs, N.Y., 
but nothing has yet been determined in respect to any of 
them. 



R5501 : page 218 

CHRISTIAN LIBERTY BASED ON PRINCIPLE 

WE MUST never forget that our authorization 

to meet as brethren is the Master's Word: 

"Where two or three are gathered together 

in My name, there am I in the midst of 

them." (Matt. 18:20.) As this is our charter-right 

for meeting as the Lord's people, 

we must concede an equal right under it to 

all of God's people who may choose to meet 

in His name at any place and at any time. 

We should remember the Bible illustration 

of this principle: On one occasion the twelve disciples 

had returned from a preaching tour, and St. John said to 

Jesus, "Master, we saw one casting out devils in Thy 

name; and we forbade him, because he followeth not with 

us. And Jesus said unto him, Forbid him not; for he 

that is not against us is for us." (Luke 9:49,50.) This 

one forbidden by John would correspond well with some 

now holding meetings other than those which we attend. 

What did Jesus say? "Forbid him not; for there is no 

man which shall do a miracle in My name that can lightly 

speak evil of Me. "-Mark 9:38-40. 

Here is a general principle which will serve to guide, 
to instruct God's people of today respecting His will in 



similar matters. We, of course, think our arrangements 
most pleasing to the Lord, or we would not have them so. 
If others think differently, the responsibility is with them 
and with the Lord. It is not for us to forbid them, but 
it is for the Lord to bless them or not to bless them, according 
to His wisdom in the management of His work. 

Some one may suggest, Would not this thought, acted 
upon, break up the meetings of the Lord's people into 
very small classes? We reply that this must depend upon 
the brethren themselves. They have the right to meet in 
twos and threes or in larger numbers. If they can find it 
to their advantage to meet in larger groups, no doubt they 
will be glad to do so. This means a great deal of liberty 
in the Church within the lines of the word and spirit of 
Jesus' teaching, directly and through His Apostles. 

Brethren meeting as a class should understand that in 
so doing they properly waive, or make void, some of their 
personal liberties and privileges. Individual preferences 
are to be more or less subjected to class preferences. Even 
the majority of the class should be considerate of the 
wishes of the minority, and if possible, should moderate 
the arrangements, so that all can be accommodated and 
pleased in respect to speakers, and in respect to place and 
character of meetings. No one should selfishly consider 
merely his own preferences and welfare. The spirit of 
co-operation, the Golden Rule, the spirit of love, should 
prevail. And as this is true, all those filled with the Spirit 
of the Master and living close to Him will find fellowship 
one with another in yielding personal preferences in the 
interest of the whole number. 

CONSCIENCE TO BE RESPECTED 

The only things that may not be yielded to the will of 
the majority are matters of conscience. No one is to do 

R5502 : page 219 

what he believes to be sin, injustice, wrong, even though 
all the remainder of the brethren think it right. And no 
one is to leave undone what his conscience dictates, even 
though so directed by all the remainder of the brethren 
of the class. 

Conscience is always to be respected— never to be 
throttled or violated. Nor is any one who stands faithful to 
his conscience to be disesteemed therefor by his brethren, 
even if their consciences view the matter differently. On 
the contrary, his courage in standing by his convictions is 
to be considered estimable. 

On these principles liberty may be maintained in the 
Body of Christ; and we shall find blessing in proportion 
as those of one mind can fellowship with each other. 
Where fellowship is not maintained, the assembling 
is neither desirable nor in harmony with the Divine 
arrangement. But where the brethren find it advantageous 
to meet in different classes, it will usually be 



found, we believe, that originally too great restraint of 
personal liberty was exercised, and that the majority were 
too careless of the sentiments of the brethren constituting 
the minority. 

But even where it may be found necessary or desirable 
to have more than one gathering of the Lord's 
people in one city, it certainly still is true that they 
should have one heart and one mind, and be of one 
brotherhood under the Anointed Head. They should consider 
each other's interests, and do all in their power "to 
provoke one another to love and to good works."— 
Hebrews 10:24. 



R5503 : page 219 

BARREN FIG TREE-DEFILED TEMPLE 

-AUGUST 9.-MARK 11:12-25.- 

"By their fruits ye shall know them. "-MATTHEW 7:20. 

THE triumphal entry of Jesus into Jerusalem 

was a past incident. After spending a portion 

of the day in the Holy City, Jesus returned 

to Bethany, which is merely a suburb. 

The next morning, going again to the city, 

Jesus noted a fig tree by the wayside, bearing 

plenty of leaves. He approached it, 

seeking figs, but found none. The good 

show of leaves was deceptive. Then Jesus 

put a ban, a curse, a blight, upon the tree, 

declaring that it should not bear fruit forever, or to a 

completion. What did this mean? Surely it was not an 

intimation that the followers of Jesus should place a curse 

upon every unfruitful tree or unfruitful field! There 

must have been some deeper lesson in it, not apparent on 

the surface. 

Bible students believe that they now see the deeper 
significance of this carefully noted incident. They believe 
that that fig tree was used as a type, or picture, of 
the Jewish nation; and that that blight upon the tree 
because of its unfruitfulness corresponded exactly to the 
blight pronounced the day before upon the Jewish nation 
because of its unfruitfulness. 

On the day previous Jesus had said to the Jewish 
nation, "Ye shall see Me no more until that Day." So He 
declared of this tree that it should be blighted to the end 
of the aion, or Age. Again, when speaking to His disciples 
respecting the end of this Age, Jesus declared, 
"When ye shall see the fig tree putting forth leaves, then 
know that summer is nigh"— that the winter time, the 
blight time of the nation of Israel and of the world, is at 
an end. In other words, one of the signs of a New 
Dispensation would be the sprouting, or indications of 



life, hope, promise, amongst the Jews. 
SIGNIFICANCE OF ZIONISM 

These same Bible students are now pointing to the 
revival of hope amongst the Jewish people, as especially 
manifested by Zionism. It is being pointed out that this 
return of hope and faith to the Jews respecting their land 
and the Divine promises of the past is opportune— exactly 
in line with prophecy. They point to Isaiah 40th chapter 
as now in process of fulfilment: "Comfort ye, comfort ye 
My people, saith your God. Speak ye comfortably to 
Jerusalem, and cry unto her that her warfare is accomplished, 
that her iniquity is pardoned; for she hath received 
of the Lord's hand double for all her sins." 

These Bible students are telling that Ezekiel's prophecy 
of the valley of dry bones which came together, were 
clothed with flesh and finally received the breath of life, 
is an allegory respecting the Jews. They hold that it 
does not refer to a literal resurrection, but to the revival 
of Israel's hopes in the Divine promises. This is in 
harmony with the Prophet's declaration, "These bones are 
the whole House of Israel; behold, they say, Our bones 
are dried, and our hope is lost; we are cut off from our 
parts."— Ezekiel 37:11. 

The same Bible students declare that St. Paul teaches 
that the Jewish nation was typically represented by 
Ishmael, the son of Hagar. (Galatians 4:22-31.) As 
Hagar and her son were outcast for a time only, so the 
Law Covenant and the Jews have been cut off from 
Divine favor only for a time. Ishmael had almost fainted 
for thirst in the wilderness, and then was revived by the 
angel of the Lord, who pointed out a spring of water. 
This also is typical. Jewish hopes of God's favor had 
almost died. Zionism is the well-spring which is reviving 
them— rescuing them from death as a people. Under 
Messiah's Kingdom, soon to be established on the spirit 
plane, the Jews will receive a great blessing— on the 
earthly plane. 

We know of no other interpretation which seems to 
fit the facts of this lesson or to show a reason why Jesus 
should manifest displeasure against an inanimate object, 
which had no personal responsibility or accountability. 

CLEANSING OF THE TEMPLE 

After the fig tree incident, Jesus and His disciples 
proceeded to Jerusalem and went directly to the Temple. 
There, contrary to anything that He had previously done, 
Jesus assumed authority, and began to cast out the traders 
without ceremony, overturning the tables of the 
money-changers and the stalls where doves were sold to 
people who desired to offer them in sacrifice at the 
Temple. Another account of the same incident tells us 
that in this cleansing of the Temple Jesus used a scourge 
of small cords, and drove forth the traders. Today's 



lesson tells us that He would not permit even the carrying 
of vessels through the Temple. All this is of double 
significance: 

(1) Primarily, it had to do with that time; 

(2) Secondarily, it was typical of a cleansing of the 
antitypical Temple due, we believe, in this our day. 

According to the legal usages of our day, it would be 
quite improper for any one to enter any church edifice or 
temple in order to interfere with any of the rights of 
conscience or the procedure sanctioned by the congregation 
owning the edifice. If wrong were being done and 
he wished to rectify it, it would be his duty either to go 
and swear out a warrant before a magistrate or to call a 
policeman and have him take note of the infraction of 
the law and correct matters. But under the Jewish Law 

R5503 : page 220 

it was different. Every Jew was privileged to enforce 
the Divine Law in respect to blasphemy or any sacrilege. 
Parents were even required by the Law to stone their 
own children to death for blasphemy. 

Jesus therefore did only what any Jew would have a 
right to do, in upsetting the trading apparatus of those 
who were defiling the Temple of the Lord, doing violence 
to its sanctity. It will be noticed that as much as their 
Scribes and Pharisees desired to find some occasion 
against Jesus, they made no objection to the high-handed 
procedure here described. Jesus was within His rights, 
He was championing the cause, the honor, of God and 
His Temple, as He had a perfect right to do. 

"MADE IT A DEN OF THIEVES" 

In the declaration, "Ye have made it a den of thieves," 
Jesus intimated that responsibility for the prevailing condition 
of things rested upon those in authority— the 
Scribes and the Pharisees. For graft and other considerations 
they had permitted the especially consecrated 
House of God to become a place of merchandise. Moreover, 
it is claimed by some that the Temple was frequently 
used as a place for barter on a larger scale. Here money-sharks 
found opportunity for meeting people in distress, 
who came to the Temple for prayer. Such were referred 
to by Jesus as those who robbed widows, while for pretense 
they made long prayers. In other words, Jesus 
judged that some in His day made a cloak, or pretense, 
of their religion in order to take advantage and to reap 
pecuniary benefit. Hence the Temple had become "a den 
of thieves." 

In olden times, as with many at present, there was a 
literalness attached to the word theft which only partly 
covered its meaning. The loan-sharks infested the 
Temple, pretended sympathy for those in trouble, and 
loaned money on exacting terms which finally devoured 
the property of the widow and the orphan in a legal 



manner. We fear that the same is true today— that 
religion is still used as a cloak to cover selfishness. People 
who do not think of literally committing theft, robbery, 
often succumb to the arguments of warped consciences. 
The Master, who was especially indignant at such misuse 
of the House of God of old, holds the same sentiments 
today. It is in vain that any claim to be His followers, 
His disciples, His friends, members of the true Church of 
Christ, who at the same time use religion hypocritically. 

"THE HOUSE OF PRAYER" 

While Jesus often went into the mountain to pray, 
or prayed in the Garden of Gethsemane, while Pharisees 
sometimes prayed on the street corners, and while St. 
Peter went to the housetop to pray, nevertheless the 
Temple was recognized by all the Jews as especially a 
House of prayer. Thus we read that St. Peter and St. John 
went up to the Temple to pray. (Acts 3:1.) It was the 
one place of all others in the world where the soul might 
feel that it could draw especially near to God. In the 

R5504 : page 220 

Most Holy was the Mercy Seat, upon which rested the 
Shekinah light, representing Divine Presence. 

The nearer to that Most Holy any one was able to 
draw, the more was he understood to be in communion 
with God. Thus the priests alone might enter the Holy 
and the Most Holy. The others of the nation of Israel 
were not permitted to come nearer than the Court. Of 
these courts there were three— first, the one for the Jews; 
second, the one for Jewish women; and third, an outer 
Court, where believing Gentiles might worship the true 
God, but separated by "a middle wall of partition," as 
St. Paul declares. (Ephesians 2:14.) These Courts 
represented differing degrees of approach to God's favor. 
In the antitype, which is not yet complete, Christ and His 
Church will be the Temple proper; and all mankind desiring 
to approach God will approach through The Christ, 
the Temple of God. And the nearer they come, the 
greater will be their blessing. 

St. Peter and St. Paul both tell us of this antitypical 
Temple: "Know ye not that your body is the Temple of 
the Holy Spirit?" (1 Corinthians 6:19.) "The Temple 
of God is holy, which Temple ye are." (1 Corinthians 3:17.) 
The Church, making increase for years in the 
fruits and graces of the Holy Spirit, "groweth unto a holy 
Temple of the Lord." (Ephesians 2:21.) "Ye also as 
living stones are built up a spiritual House." (1 Peter 2:5.) 
"Ye also are builded together for an habitation of 
God through the Holy Spirit"— "built upon the foundation 
of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ Himself being 
the Chief Corner Stone."— Ephesians 2:20-22. 

This antitypical Temple may be viewed from four 
different standpoints. In harmony with the last text 



quoted, it is still under construction. The living stones 
are being quarried out of the world, and being shaped 
and polished for places in the glorious Temple of which 
Christ is the Head. That Temple will be spiritual, unseen 
of men, each member like unto the glorified Jesus, far 
above angels. 

In that Temple God by His Holy Spirit will dwell in 
fullest measure. Through it all mankind, during the 
Millennium, will be privileged to draw near to God and 
to receive Divine favors and uplift out of sin and death, 
back to the original image and likeness of God lost in 
Eden, redeemed for all at Calvary, and to be offered to 
all during Messiah's Kingdom Reign of a thousand years. 
Then in the largest sense of the word it will be God's 
Holy Place. Nothing defiling shall be brought into it. 
All merchandising and money-sharking will be far from 
it. It will be the House of Prayer, the Channel of Prayer, 
the way of approach of mankind to draw near to God for 
forgiveness of sins and for the reception of all the blessings 
and mercies which God has provided in Christ for 
whosoever will. 

It was because the Temple at Jerusalem was a type of 
that glorious Temple of perfection that all business of 
every kind done in it was profanation— was spoiling the 
beautiful perfection of the type— was misrepresenting the 
future, the reality— God's intention in giving it. 

"YOUR BODY IS THE TEMPLE" 

But now let us take a still different view of the 
subject— not contradictory to the foregoing, but confirmatory. 
As in the future the Church will be the Temple of 
God, perfect on the Heavenly plane, so each individual 
member of the Church of Christ, who has been begotten 
of the Holy Spirit as a New Creature, has to that extent 
God dwelling in his mortal body. The world in general 
are not temples of the Holy Spirit, however good or moral 
or kind or generous. 

No one becomes a temple of the Holy Spirit until begotten 
of the Holy Spirit. That spirit-begetting constitutes 
him a New Creature, a son of God, even though only 
the will, the mind, is begotten again— even though the 
body is still an imperfect body of flesh. The new mind, 
dwelling in the old body and using it, constitutes that old 
body thenceforth a temple of God, and gives to that body 
a holiness or sanctity which it did not have before. 

Now, as the New Creature dwells in this mortal body, 
it is styled a tabernacle rather than a temple, because 
through sin and degradation it is impaired, and not 
glorious. Besides, the word tabernacle signifies that 
which is temporary, not permanent, not eternal. Our 
Heavenly house, our spiritual body, will be the Temple, 
but none can enter that perfect Temple condition except 

R5504: page 221 



by a share in the First Resurrection, as Jesus said: 

"Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the First Resurrection; 

on such the Second Death hath no power, but 

they shall be priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign 

with Him a thousand years."— Revelation 20:6. 

None can know the character of the heart, whether it 
be a new heart or merely that of the natural man or 
woman who has learned politeness, morality, etc. The 
only way in which we are permitted to judge each other 
is by the outward fruitage. If the Spirit of the Lord 
dwell within, the fruitage must be good, helpful to others. 
That human being must be a blessing in his home, in his 
community, even as Jesus was, whether his character, his 
goodness, be acknowledged by others in general or not. 
The fruits of these people of God are the fruits of holiness, 
meekness, gentleness, longsuffering, brotherly-kindness, 
self-sacrifice in the interest of others and especially 
in the service of God and His Truth. 



R5504 : page 221 

WICKED VINE-DRESSERS 

-AUGUST 16. -MATTHEW 21:33-46.- 

"The Stone that the builders rejected, the same 

is become the Head of the corner."— Matthew 21:42. 

NOT only did the Redeemer teach chiefly by 
parables, but additionally nearly all of those 
parables related directly or indirectly to the 
Kingdom. The reason for this is plain. 
The Divine Plan calls for the setting up of 
the Kingdom of Righteousness by Divine 
Power for the overcoming of the Prince of 
Darkness and his reign, which for six 
thousand years has been a Reign of Sin 
and Death. While not directly telling of 
the Kingdom, the lesson of today points to it indirectly. 
While the whole world was lying in darkness and sin 
and under Divine sentence of unworthiness of life, God 
planted in the world a root of promise, a hope. This 
Promise, made to Abraham, foretold that his see, or 
posterity, would eventually become very great and powerful, 
and would cause the blessing of God to fill the 
earth, instead of the curse, which it would roll away. 
In due time this Promise came to the nation of Israel, 
as the natural posterity of Abraham and the heirs of the 
Promise. Thus God planted a vineyard in the world, 
the Jewish nation, a special and peculiar people bound to 
Him, and He to them, by the Law Covenant negotiated 
through Moses. God set a hedge about this nation and 
gave them special provisions of Divine favor "every 
way." (Romans 3:1,2.) The Divine hedge was the 



Divine promise that as long as the Israelites would be 
faithful and loyal to God, they would be thoroughly protected 
against their enemies. 

The vineyard had a watch tower, as was common in 
those days, that from this tower watchmen might guard 
against robbers. So the Lord declared Himself to be 
Israel's High Tower. He placed watchmen, even the 
Prophets, who cried aloud and warned the people from 
time to time in respect to any and every breaking down 
of the wall, or partition; for this protection could be 
broken down only by disloyalty, carelessness, sin, on the 
part of Israel. The statement that the Lord, after having 
made this arrangement with Abraham's seed, went into a 
far country implies that the arrangement was intended 
to stand for a long time. 

THE ORIGINAL VINE-DRESSERS 

While in this parable the entire nation of Israel is 
represented by the vineyard, the husbandmen, or caretakers 
of the vineyard, were the religious leaders, of 
whom Jesus said, "The Scribes and the Pharisees sit in 
Moses' seat: all therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, 
that observe and do." (Matthew 23:2,3.) These 
vine-dressers became conceited, got to feel a proprietary 
right in the vineyard, acted as though they were the real 
owners, and not merely the Owner's servants. Even in 
their speech they became accustomed to refer to the 
masses of Israel as the laity and to themselves as the 
clergy. They referred to the people as "our people," "my 
people," etc. In other words, they failed to glorify God 
properly, and therefore in thus taking honor to themselves 
felt themselves more than the servants of God, 
honored in being permitted to be vine-dressers in His 
vineyard. 

As centuries rolled on, it was only proper to expect 
that the operation of the Law Covenant would produce 
good fruitage amongst the people— that through their inability 
to keep the Law they would become stronger in 
character; that these united experiences would make 
them more reverential, more loyal to God, more earnestly 
desirous that the typical kingdom should give place to 
the antitypical one, when the Owner would be present, 
either directly or through some especially appointed representative. 
In due course of time, the Owner, Jehovah, 
sent His servants, the Prophets, to Israel, sometimes 
with one message, sometimes with another. These servants 
and their messages became tests as respected the 
love, devotion and loyalty of the vine-dressers, and tests 
also relative to the character-development of the people 
of Israel. 

But alas! the very ones who should have been glad to 
welcome the Owner's representatives, and glad to have 

R5505 : page 221 



manifested to them the fruits of holiness amongst the 
people, showed their own disloyalty by mistreating the 
servants. They reasoned that to acknowledge those servants 
and the reproofs which they gave would mean an 
acknowledgment that they themselves were merely vine-dressers, 
and not in any sense of the word owners of 
the vineyard or an especially preferred class not held 
responsible under the general Law governing all. Therein 
their pride and their desire to show off before the people 
prompted the mistreatment of the Owner's special representatives, 
the Prophets. As the parable shows, some 
of these were beaten, others killed, others stoned. 

"IT BROUGHT FORTH WILD GRAPES" 

Finally the Owner of the vineyard sent His Son, saying, 
Surely they should reverence My Son. As a matter 
of fact, the Bible informs us that God knew that the 
rulers of Israel would not reverence His Son, but would 
crucify Him; and that He sent His Son with this foreknowledge 
of their intention. 

But the parable is stating the matter from a different 
standpoint— as though the Owner had said, as He might 
well have said, "They will reverence My Son." Surely 
the rulers of the Jews should have reverenced the Perfect 
One— "holy, harmless, undefiled and separate from 
sinners." Surely they should have recognized this One, 
of whom the people declared, "Never man spake like this 
Man." Surely they should have hearkened to His Message, 
should have repented of their sins, should have 
come back through Him into harmony with the Father, 

R5505 : page 222 

and thus have obtained forgiveness and a blessing. Whatever 

reasons there might have seemed to be for their 

thinking that Isaiah, Jeremiah, Habakkuk, Malachi and 

others of the Prophets were deceivers, none of those arguments 

would hold against the Owner's Son, whose credentials 

were manifest in His holiness, in His miracles 

and mighty works, and in His mightier words of life. 

However, the spirit of selfishness and self-conceit is 
powerful, and often leads those who possess it to monstrous 
acts which afterward appal even themselves. The 
Jewish Doctors, the clergy of that time, perceived that 
Jesus, the Son of God, the Representative of the Owner 
of the vineyard, by His words and deeds was exerting a 
mighty influence over the people. His claim to be the 
Owner's Son was backed by numerous signs which the 
people were disposed to recognize. We read that He departed 
into a mountain alone, when the people would take 
Him by force to make him a King. The clerical class 
reasoned that to whatever extent His cause should prevail, 
their power over the people, their influence, their 
titles, their honors of men, would diminish in importance. 



"BEHOLD OPPRESSION-BEHOLD A CRY" 

The rulers of the vineyard, shown by Jesus' description 
to be the Pharisees and the Sadducees, had become 
very unbelieving as respects the declaration of the 
Prophets that the King would eventually send Messiah 
with great blessings and power for the glorification of 
that vineyard and the widening of its influence in the 
whole world. The Sadducees, including many of the 
Scribes, as a class were agnostics— disbelievers in the inspiration 
of the promises and the prophecies. The same 
spirit affected the Pharisees to a considerable extent. All 
were self-seeking. Jesus styled them "money-lovers," 
and declared that they sought chiefly the honor of men 
rather than that honor which cometh alone from God. 

In their exasperation against Jesus, in their realization 
that His victory meant their defeat and the defeat 
of all the institutions which represented their wisdom 
and teachings, they determined that it was necessary for 
Him to die. By this they meant that His death was necessary 
for the success of their theories and plans, because 
His theories, His teachings, were so different from 
theirs. They could not endure the thought that the great 
institutions which they had so laboriously constructed out 
of human traditions which made void the Word of God 
should all fade away. To them it seemed that to 
surrender their plans to Jesus and for Him to carry 
out the plans which He preached would mean the ruin of 
the vineyard, the nation. They did not realize that the 
course which they were taking was the very one which 
would lead to the destruction of that typical kingdom of 
God, that typical vineyard. 

Jesus carried the parable up to His own time and 
foretold His own violent death at the hands of those 
wicked vine-dressers who treated the Lord's heritage as 
though it were their own. Then, in conclusion, Jesus 
asked His hearers what they would expect the Owner of 
that vineyard to do with those wicked husbandmen when 
He should come to take possession and to redress the 
wrongs. The answer was that He would miserably destroy 
those wicked vine-dressers, and would let out His 
vineyard to other husbandmen who would render Him 
the proper fruits at the proper time. 

Jesus did not Himself give the answer, but His silence 
was confirmatory of the answer of the people. And 
so the parable was fulfilled. God's judgments came upon 
the Jewish nation, with the result that it was entirely 
overthrown in the year 70 A.D. Speaking of this, St. 
Paul says, "Wrath is come upon this people to the uttermost" 
(1 Thessalonians 2:16), that all things written in 
the Law and the Prophets concerning them should be fulfilled. 
Their nationality was utterly overthrown and has 
never since been restored— nor will it be until the time 
foretold by the Prophets, when Messiah in glory shall establish 
His Reign of Righteousness and when under His 
Kingdom those faithful servants, the Prophets, who were 



slain, stoned to death, etc., will be made associates and 
given authority and power as Messiah's representatives 
in the earth.— Psalm 45:16. 

THE NEW VINE-DRESSERS 

The Lord said that those originally appointed were 
wicked vine-dressers. He appointed new ones; namely, 
the twelve Apostles, St. Paul taking the place of Judas. 
Moreover, He started a new vineyard, putting into it 
only the true Vine, inspired with faith and loyalty toward 
God. Those faithful servants, although they long ago 
fell asleep, continue through their words, their teachings, 
to influence, to guard, to keep, the true Vine of the Lord 
—the Church, the Body of Christ. Of this vineyard our 
Lord declares, "I am the true Vine; ye are the branches." 
Century after century these true branches of the true 
Vine have been planted by baptism into death with their 
Master and have been bringing forth the peaceable fruits 
of righteousness. Ere long, we believe, this fruitage will 
all be gathered and, by the resurrection "change," be 
transplanted to the Heavenly condition. 

Meantime, however, the same spirit which was manifested 
by the vine-dressers of the Jewish Age has manifested 
itself again. Other vineyards have been started. 
In numbers, wealth and influence these quite outrank and 
outshine the Lord's vineyard, which alone bears the precious 
fruit which He desires. The two vines are spoken 
of in the Bible. The one is said to be "the Vine of My 
Father's right hand planting." The other is styled "the 
vine of the earth." The fruitage of the one is manifested 
in the character-likeness of Christ, faithfulness 
unto death. The fruitage of the other is manifested in 
boastfulness, pride, show— a form of godliness without 
the power thereof. 

There is to be a gathering of the fruitage of the vine 
of the earth at the Second Coming of the Master. We 
read that it is to be dealt with in the winepress of the 
wrath of God in the great Time of Trouble with which 
this Age will pass away, giving place to the thousand 
years of Messiah's Kingdom for the world's uplift. 

THE CHIEF CORNER-STONE 

The Scriptures give us the thought that the Church 
of Christ is represented by a pyramid, which has five 
corner-stones, the chief one being the top-stone— a 
perfect pyramid in itself, the lines of which control 
the entire structure. Jesus, rejected by the Jews, crucified, 
is the Chief Corner-Stone of this great Temple of 
God which is the Church. Already He is glorified. During 
this Age His footstep followers, shaped in harmony 
with His character-likeness, are being prepared to be 
united with Him in Heavenly glory. 

Thus, as our Lord declared, the Kingdom of God was 
taken from Israel— the natural seed of Abraham— to be 



given to Spiritual Israel. God is thus developing or creating 
the new nation, a holy nation, a peculiar people, 
separate and distinct from all others, gathered out from 
Jews and Gentiles, bond and free, from every nation and 
denomination. 

Christ Jesus, the Top-stone, is indeed "a stone of 
stumbling" to many. By stumbling over Him they injure 
themselves; but if He should fall on them, in the 
sense of condemning them, it would signify their utter 

R5505 : page 223 

destruction; their cutting off in the Second Death. 

The chief priests and the Pharisees heard the Master's 
parables, and perceived that He spoke of them as 
the wicked vine-dressers. They sought to lay hold of 
Him and destroy Him forthwith; but they feared the 
multitude, who, although they did not recognize Him as 
the Son of God, did esteem Him the great Prophet, or 
Teacher. 



page 223 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
COLPORTEURING HELPED BY DRAMA 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Greetings in the name of our Lord and Master, the Chief 
Reaper. We are glad that the privilege is still ours of sharing 
in the Colporteur service, and we have thought to write 

you a few lines concerning the work here in C , as it is 

our first experience in canvassing where the PHOTO-DRAMA 
OF CREATION has been shown. 

We are pleased to note what a wonderful impression for 
good the pictures have left in this city, and we feel assured 
that this witness to the world is also being used to gather 
in many who give evidence of being jewels of the Lord's 
own choosing. We know of quite a number of earnest Bible 
students who are now associated with the Class here as a 
result of the Photo-Drama work. 

All classes of Christians are being aroused through the 
pictures. We have sold the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES to 
some Catholic people when they learned that the books are 
from the Bible Society which shows the PHOTO-DRAMA OF 
CREATION. 

It seems truly wonderful when we consider what is being 
accomplished now, in these closing days of the Harvest! 
The Truth is permeating every nook and corner, accomplishing 
the great work for which it is sent, being a "savor of 
life unto life" to one class and "a savor of death unto death" 
to another. 

We are reminded of the words of the Revelator, "Great 
and marvelous are Thy works, Lord God Almighty; just 



and true are Thy ways, Thou King of saints!" As we go 
from door to door, meeting with various experiences, we 
can say with the Apostle Paul, "Thanks be unto God, who 
causeth us always to triumph in Christ, and maketh manifest 
the savor of His knowledge by us in every place." 

Pray for us that by the Lord's grace we may be living 
epistles, as we seek to work out our salvation from day to 
day, and to spread the light to the best of our ability. That 
the Lord may continue to bless you, dear Brother, and cause 
His face to shine upon you, even unto the end of the earthly 
journey, and then crown you with life more abundant, is 
our earnest prayer. Warmest Christian love to you and 
the Bethel family, in which my companions join. 

Your sister in the Lord, EMMA L. BRICKER. 



R5506 : page 223 

A BAPTIST AND PRESENT TRUTH 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Thinking that my experience in coming into the Truth 
might be of interest to you, I am sending to you the following: 

In 1886 my father saw your advertisement in the Christian 
Herald, that Volume I, MILLENNIAL DAWN, was in preparation. 
As soon as he saw the announcement that it was ready, 
he sent his $1 and got its teachings, accepting it as rapidly as 
he saw that it harmonized the Scriptures. 

At that time I had joined the Baptist church. After making 
sure that the book contained nothing but the Truth, my 
father endeavored to give the same Truth to me. He spoke 
to me about the unscripturalness of the doctrine of Eternal 
Torment, the immediate going to Heaven or Hell at death 
and the doctrine of the natural immortality of man. I was 
fearful of doctrines which were so different from my Baptist 
belief; but as he quoted Scriptures, I did not feel that I should 
oppose them. It seemed to me that there were other Scriptures 
which taught the opposite; and I felt sure that he must 
be mistaken, though I did not say so. I quietly determined to 
read the Bible through, noting all the passages I could which 
bore on these subjects, so that I would be sure of what the 
teaching of the whole Scripture is. I felt sure that if I prayed 
to the Lord for guidance that I might know the Truth, He 
would not let me go astray. I realized that there was no use 
in quoting a text here and there. When I spoke to my father, 
I would give him quotations from every portion of the Bible, 
and thus show him that the general teachings of the Bible 
were opposed to his newly found ideas. 

Reading during my spare time, it took me six months to 
read the Bible, marking down the texts I noticed. At the end 
I had some 725 Scriptures cited: 

(a) The first column contained texts which seemed very 
clearly to teach the old doctrine of Eternal Torment, the immediate 
reward after death, and the immortality of the soul. 
This collection contained about twenty-five texts. 



(b) The second column contained texts which clearly supported 
my father's side. In this column I had about one hundred 

and twenty-five texts. This somewhat disturbed me. 

(c) The third column contained texts which did not exactly 
favor my belief, but which, while they seemed to favor 

my father's side, I did not feel like conceding to him until I 
had further examined them. 

I then went over these texts and found that those in 
column two all remained in that column; and the texts in 
column three also went into column two. With this new fund 
of Bible knowledge, I went over column one, and found that 
over one half of my texts had to go into column two also, 
leaving me only about twelve or fifteen Scriptures, nearly all of 
which were in figurative language. I then saw clearly that the 
doctrines I had been taught from the creeds are wrong; and 
I at once accepted the Truth. In the last twenty-six years, 
through the Lord's grace, I have never had occasion to doubt 
the truth on these matters. 

While I was reading the Scriptures, my father frequently 
tried to persuade me to read THE WATCH TOWER publications; 
but I felt that I was seeking in the right place for Truth, and 
that if I were to read something of which I was already fearful, 
I might be taking my case out of the Lord's hands, and 
thus go into darkness. He grieved considerably that I would 
not talk with him or read anything he offered to me. I 
did not tell him that I was studying the matter all the time. 
He was greatly surprised when six months later, I showed him 
the results of my study. 

I now see how much labor and time I might have saved 
had I gone prayerfully at once to THE DIVINE PLAN OF THE 
AGES. That book today seems more wonderful and satisfying 
and Scriptural than when I first read it. It has proven itself 
more impregnable to assaults from all parties than Gibraltar. 
I praise the Lord for the whole series of STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES, and have never heard any Bible expositions 
worthy of comparison with them. With much Christian love, 

Your Brother in Christ, A. I. RITCHIE. 

page 223 

THE WONDERFUL SONG 

DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL: - 

For a long time I have had it in my heart to write and 
thank you for the part your work has played in bringing me 
to the Throne of Heavenly Grace. It is because we love those 
whom the blessed Lord uses as His chosen ones to carry the 
Message of Love to us, that I desire that you share the song 
in my heart all along the way. What a wonderful song 
it is! It carries us beyond the trivial cares of this evil world 
and seats us in Heavenly places with our Lord Jesus. 

Dear Pastor, it is impossible for me to tell you just how 
thankful I am for the Light which the STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES have shed on the blessed pages of the inspired 
Word of God; but if through these lines you can catch some 
of the joy I feel, it will cause you to say, "Praise the Lord!" 



I wish to say also that I have taken the Vow. I realize 
that we who are striving to enter in with Jesus now, to be 
members of His Body, the Lamb's Bride, cannot show to Him 
or to others that we are in too deep earnest about the matter. 

I must also take this opportunity to say a word about our 
class here. How we see the spirit of love developing in the 
members! We see the great transforming work of the Holy 
Spirit going on, and especially of late— the Love of God showing 
in the faces. This cannot be hid any more than a rose 
can hide its own beauty when it opens to the sun. "We love 
Him because He first loved us." We meet Tuesday, Wednesday, 
Friday and Sunday evenings and Sunday afternoons. 
The Truth grows dearer every day. 

We ask an interest in your prayers, that we may stand 
true to our Lord unto death. We remember you in our 
prayers. May God bless you! 

Yours in the Redeemer, WM. BOUTILIER.-MONTREAL. 



page 225 

VOL. XXXV AUGUST 1 No. 15 
A. D. 1914-A. M. 6042 



CONTENTS 

The Way, the Truth, the Life 227 

The Channel of All Our Blessings 228 

The Reward of True Discipleship 229 

"The Entrance of Thy Words Giveth 

Light" 229 

Our Great Burden-Bearer 230 

Importance of Little Things 230 

Spiritual Israel's Enemies 231 

True Courage Vs. the Spirit of Bravado 232 

Instructions for God's Workmen 232 

True Cause of Much Failure 232 

The Wedding Feast 233 

Gentiles Called to the Wedding 234 

The Outer Darkness 234 

A Day of Questions 235 

Render Unto God His Due 235 

Photo-Drama Trials and Blessings 236 

The Eureka Drama Outfits 238 

Pacific Coast Convention 238 

Interesting Letters 239 

page 226 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:-All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



FOR SCANDINAVIAN FRIENDS 

It will be interesting to Swedish friends residing in the 
East to learn that the Svenska Veckobladet has contracted 
with the Newspaper Syndicate for the regular publication of 
a full report of the PASTOR RUSSELL SERMONS. This should 
prove a means of interesting some of your friends in Present 
Truth. A six-months subscription may do it. The price is 
one dollar a year. Send your subscriptions to us. 



VOLUNTEERING SHOULD PROGRESS 

About six million copies of this year's VOLUNTEER I.B.S.M. 
have gone forth; but why not as many more? Order all you 
can use, free. It is excellent for this year. It especially 
answers those who falsely claim that we are preaching "the 
end of the world in 1914." 

While giving the Drama- Volunteer matter the precedence, 
because of the Drama date, the regular Volunteering is as 
important as ever. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR SEPTEMBER 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
September follow: (1) 311; (2) 14; (3) 158; (4) 104; (5) 133; (6) 
8; (7) 87; (8) 188; (9) 197; (10) 281; (11) 26; (12) 43; (13) 222; 
(14) 25; (15) 173; (16) 108; (17) 4; (18) 286; (19) 193; (20) 34; 
(21) 78; (22) 279; (23) 105; (24) 213; (25) 145; (26) 181; (27) 
144; (28) 179; (29) 314; (30) 47. 



R5506 : page 227 

THE WAY, THE TRUTH, THE LIFE 

"If ye continue in My Word, then are ye My disciples indeed; 
and ye shall know the Truth, and the Truth shall make you 
free. "-John 8:31,32.) 

AT HIS FIRST Advent our Lord came to the 
Jewish nation, which was a House of Servants 
in covenant relationship with God. To 
these was to be granted the first privilege 
of becoming sons of God, and their blessing 



would be in proportion as they were 

faithful to the light that would come to 

them. Before they could become sons of 

God, however, it was necessary that Jesus 

should be their Redeemer, should make reconciliation 

for iniquity, and thus open up the way. This 

He had come to do, but He had not done it as yet. Whoever 

would come to understand the Divine purposes and 

arrangements, and act in harmony with them, should be 

made free, should be liberated from the condemnation 

resting upon them as Jews, from the results of the weaknesses 

of their flesh, and would be brought into full accord 

with God. 

We can see that this great privilege also meant something 
more than all this. It meant something still higher 
—even join t-heirship with Messiah. But all these things 
were a hidden mystery as yet. They were known up to 
that time only by our Lord Himself; they were made 
clear to Him because He had been begotten of the Holy 
Spirit. There were many things hard to be understood. 
Jesus spoke in parables, in dark sayings, for the very purpose 
of making the Way of Life then opened up a "narrow 
way." And so we read in the Scriptures that some 
said of the Master's words: "This is a hard saying! Who 
can hear it?" Who could believe it? 

The particularly hard saying referred to was that His 
"flesh was meat indeed, and His blood was drink indeed," 
and that by eating and drinking of these they 
might gain eternal life. And so we read that after this 
many forsook Him and abandoned the thought of being 
His disciples, so blinded were they to their own interests. 
Instead of following on patiently, they said, This is all 
foolishness! We do not understand it! 

Jesus was anticipating this condition of things when 
He spoke these words to them. He would put them on 
their guard. It was as though He would say, You have 
declared that "never man spake like this man!" Already 
you have heard words very different from the words of 
the Scribes and Pharisees. Now continue; hold on for a 
little while. If you will do this, you will grasp the situation 
in due time. Exercise faith— exercise patience. 
You have begun to have interest in these things, and as 
you fully become My disciples you will be granted a 
knowledge of the Truth. And this Truth will make you 
free; it will give you all the blessings and privileges that 
come to the children of God. Greatly blessed were the 
few who took heed to the Master's counsel! 

BLESSINGS BEGUN AT PENTECOST 

These words of Jesus were not addressed especially 
to the twelve Apostles, but to the Jews in general who 
were sympathetically drawn. Nicodemus may have been 
one of these; he was inclined to stumble over the spiritual 
things; he could not see how one could be born again. 
The Holy Spirit was not yet given, we read, "because 



Jesus was not yet glorified." St. Paul tells us that "the 
natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of 
God, for they are foolishness unto him; neither can he 
know them, because they are spiritually discerned."— 
1 Corinthians 2:14. 

But some saw enough in Jesus to attract them to Him. 
These, in honesty of heart, said, Surely His words are 
true, and His criticisms of our nation are true. We do 

R5507 : page 227 

not see how He is going to fulfil these prophecies; but 
He says to us, Hold on and you will understand later. 
And some did hold on— "above five hundred brethren." 
As Jesus had promised, these were given the privilege of 
becoming disciples indeed. 

When Pentecost came, the Heavenly Father received 
all who had continued in Jesus' Word, and they were begotten 
of the Holy Spirit into the Lord's family. Then 
they began to see spiritual things— they were illuminated. 
All the light did not come at once, but they progressed as 
the days and years went by. They were indeed Christ's 
true disciples— such followers of Jesus as the Father was 
pleased to recognize. They were not only made free from 
the condemnation of the Law Covenant, but made free 
from sin and death. They received a new will, a new 
mind, and the Holy Spirit showed "the deep things of 
God" unto them. 

In His prayer to the Father, our Lord said, "Sanctify 
them through Thy Truth; Thy Word is Truth." By the 
word Truth Jesus was here referring to the Father's revealment 
of His Divine Plan through the Holy Spirit; 
and the sanctifying influence would come through the 
knowledge of that Truth, received into an honest heart. 
This sanctification, or setting apart, strictly speaking, began 
with the Pentecostal blessing, and still continues to 
operate. And this sanctification progresses as long as 
the individual allows the Truth to have its designed influence 
in his life. We see a difference between our text 
and the one just quoted. In the latter case it is the Word 

R5507 : page 228 

of Jehovah, and in the former it is the Word of Jesus. 
Jesus says, If you continue in My Word, you will become 
more and more acquainted with the Heavenly Father, and 
will know His will, His way, His method; thus you will 
know His Word. All things are working out His will— 
the will of the Father— and seeing and doing the will of 
the Father, the sanctifying process will follow. Jesus 
says to all, "I am the Way; I am the Truth; I am the 
Life." I am the only One through whom you can come 
to the Father and become His sons; and abiding in Me 
will bring you the grand consummation. 

THE CHANNEL OF ALL OUR BLESSINGS 



We perceive, then, that Christ is the sufficiency which 
God has provided for us in all respects. "He of God is 
made unto us Wisdom, and Righteousness [Justification], 
and Sanctification, and Redemption [Deliverance]." (1 Corinthians 1:30.) 
We first receive, through learning 

of His sacrificial work on our behalf, necessary wisdom, 
instruction and guidance, by which we may through His 
merit come to the Father. And He is our Wisdom all 
along the way. The Heavenly Father had a glorious Plan 
before the foundation of the world; this was hinted in 
Eden, just after the fall. In due time He gave a further 
intimation of that Plan through Enoch and through Abraham, 
and still later through Moses and the Prophets. But 
how the world was to benefit from it was all hidden, all 
kept secret. 

Not until Jesus came was the way of life opened up, 
made manifest. "He [Christ] hath brought life and immortality 
to light through the Gospel." The essence of 
the Gospel was never even declared, much less known, 
before Jesus came. The Apostle Paul says that this salvation 
"at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and 
was confirmed unto us by them that heard Him." (Hebrews 2:3.) 
Our Lord began to speak it; but the secret 
of the Gospel, its Mystery, was not fully revealed until 
after Pentecost. It was not until after Jesus was begotten 
of the Holy Spirit that He Himself began to comprehend 
it clearly— not until then did He begin to set before 
us the way of life and immortality. And even then His 
words were parabolic, and it was not until His followers 
were begotten of the Holy Spirit that they were able 
to enter into "the deep things of God." 

JESUS OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS 

In addition to His being our Wisdom, Jesus becomes 
our Righteousness. He covers our sins. He imputes to 
us His own righteousness, the merit of His own sacrifice. 
And this imputation brings us to a condition of complete 
righteousness— not actual, but reckoned, which God 
is pleased to recognize in the way He has arranged. 

Our Lord does not become the Righteousness of 
everybody— not even of those who give some heed to 
His Words— but to those alone who come to the point 
of full submission to the Father's will. And there is a 
good reason for this; for only those who offer themselves 
to become members of His Body during this Gospel 
Age, only the spirit-begotten, would be profited by a 
justification by faith. Others would be condemned to 
death by it now. In the next Age, others will come to 
Him. But only those who come to Him now, to walk in 
His steps, have a faith-justification. 

JESUS OUR SANCTIFICATION 

The step of consecration on the part of those who become 



Jesus' disciples is in the Scriptures called sanctification. 

But it is not the same sanctification which comes 

to us through Him. God says, "Sanctify yourselves, and 

I will sanctify you"— that is, Set yourselves apart, and 

then I will set you apart; I will put you into this place 

where you desire to come. So, to all of us who come to 

the Father through Him, Jesus not only becomes our Justification, 

but through Him we also have Sanctification— 

the complete setting apart. We are accepted in Him, and 

His grace and Advocacy enable us to attain complete and 

final sanctification. 

God sets us apart by begetting us of the Holy Spirit 
to the new nature and making us prospective members of 
the Royal Priesthood— prospective members of the Body 
of the Anointed One. This is Scripturally called a foretaste, 
or "earnest," of our inheritance, which will be experienced 
to the full when we are changed from the human 
to the spirit nature— "changed in a moment, in the 
twinkling of an eye." But this "earnest of our inheritance" 
is given us with the intention of our growing in 
the process of sanctification already begun in us until 
its completion. We attain this through Christ. 

JESUS OUR DELIVERANCE 

Those who make satisfactory progress will have in the 
resurrection full deliverance from sin, from all imperfections 
of the flesh, and from the flesh itself— full deliverance 
through the power of the First Resurrection. Christ 
thus becomes our Deliverance. We shall then attain the 
full completeness of sons of God on the Divine plane. 

In all these things Christ is the Center; through Him 
alone can we obtain these blessings. While the Father 
gives them, they are given through His Son, who is the 
Father's Representative. Jesus received the Spirit of the 
Father and has shed it forth upon us. This is pictured 
in the type, in the anointing of the high priest. The holy 
anointing-oil was poured upon his head, and it ran down 
over his body. So we are anointed through our Head as 
members of the great High Priest. 

"He who raised up Jesus from the dead will raise us 
up also by Jesus"; that is to say, Jesus will be the active 
agent. But there are certain features of the Divine Plan 
which Jesus will accomplish in His own name; for instance, 
the world's blessing and uplifting. While the Father 
is the Author of the entire Plan, yet this blessing 
comes to the world exclusively through the sacrifice of 
the Son. Christ will do the work of the Millennial Age, 
and will then deliver mankind up to the Father. 

But His work for the Church is different: "The God 
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, according to His 
abundant mercy, hath begotten us." (1 Peter 1:3.) It 
is not the Son who has begotten us, though it is through 
the Son that we receive this Divine favor. The price, or 
cost, of obtaining this special Divine favor is the sacrifice 
of our lives. The particular thing which the Church receives 



more directly from the Son is justification. Yet 
this justification is of the Father, and it is not an actual 
justification, but an imputed justification. It is a special 
arrangement on the Father's part for us that we may 
come into His favor now in advance of the world— the 
First-fruits unto God and the Lamb. 

Ours is a wonderful God, and His great Plan of the 
Ages is marvelous beyond expression! Our hearts rejoice 
that our eyes have been anointed to see these glorious 
things hidden to the many during this Gospel Age, 
knowing that all the blind eyes shall yet be opened, and 
all the deaf ears be made to hear! 

"THEY TURN THEIR EARS FROM THE TRUTH" 

The Lord's preaching always produced two opposite 
effects upon the promiscuous multitudes that heard Him: 
He attracted one class and repelled the other. Those 
who were full of pride and conceit, and who preferred 
darkness to light because their deeds were evil and because 
they realized that if they admitted the light of 
Truth they must of necessity conform their characters to 
it— all such were repelled by the teachings of Christ. And 

R5507 : page 229 

if the Lord had undertaken the work of the ministry according 
to the methods pursued today, depending for support 
on the good will and contribution of the people, that 
support would often have been very meager, or at least, 
very fluctuating. 

On some occasions multitudes received His testimony, 
but later deserted Him, walking no more with Him as He 
continued to enforce the lessons of Divine Truth. (Luke 4:14-29.) 
Sometimes the multitudes hung upon His 
teachings, "wondering at the gracious words that proceeded 
out of His mouth"; yet again and again they forsook 
Him, only the merest handful remaining.— 
John 6:60-69. 

What consternation would follow in the various 
churches of today, if the professed ministers of the Gospel 
should follow the Master's example in similarly declaring 
the whole counsel of God! How quickly they 
would become unpopular and be charged with breaking up 
the churches! The congregations of the great temples of 
fashion ostensibly dedicated to the service of God and the 
teachings of Christ would not stand it. They go there to 

R5508 : page 229 

be entertained with pleasing and eloquent discourses from 
titled gentlemen who presumably know the tastes and 
ideas of the congregation, and will preach to please them. 
They are quite willing to pay their money for what they 
want, but they do not want the Truth. 
Those who followed the Lord only for a little season 



and then forsook Him, of course then ceased to be His 
disciples and were no longer so recognized; nor did they 
presume longer to claim to be His disciples. A disciple 
is a pupil, a learner; and when a man ceases to be a student 
and pupil of Christ, the great Teacher, he is no 
longer His disciple. This was very manifest when the 
Lord was present, and when His name was one of reproach 
among men; but later, when His presence was 
withdrawn, and when His doctrines were unscrupulously 
mixed with human philosophies to such an extent as to 
divest them of reproach, and to make them really void, 
then men began to claim to be His disciples. This was 
long after His doctrines had been utterly repudiated. 

THE REWARD OF TRUE DISCIPLESHIP 

The Lord's expression, "Then are ye My disciples indeed," 
implies a distinction between real and merely nominal 
disciples. And since we desire to continue to be 
Jesus' sincere disciples, let us mark the expressed condition: 
"If ye continue in My Word, then are ye My disciples 
indeed." The hypocrisy of merely nominal discipleship 
is an abomination to the Lord. 

It is a blessed thing to take the first step in the Christian 
life— that of acceptance of Christ as our Redeemer 
and Lord and yielding ourselves fully to the Father 
through Him. But the reward of this step depends entirely 
upon our continuance in His Word, in the attitude 
of true disciples. The disposition of human pride is to 
wander away from the simplicity of Divine Truth and to 
seek out new theories and philosophies of our own, or to 
pry into those of others who desire to be considered wise 
and great according to this world's estimate. 

The reward of continued discipleship is, "Ye shall 
know the Truth"— not, Ye shall be "ever learning and 
never able to come to the knowledge of the Truth." (2 Timothy 3:7.) 
Here is the mistake many make; failing 
to continue in the Word of the Lord, they delve into various 
human philosophies, which ignore or pervert the 
Word of the Lord and set up opposing theories. To 
those who seek for Truth among these human theories, 
there is no promise that they shall ever find it, and they 
never do. 

Divine Truth is found only in the Divinely appointed 
channel— our Lord, the Apostles and the Prophets. To 
continue in the doctrines set forth in the inspired writings 
of the Prophets and the Apostles, to study and meditate 
upon them, to trust implicitly in them, and to faithfully 
conform our characters to them, is what is implied in 
"continuing in the Word" of the Lord. And this is entirely 
compatible with the heeding of all the helps which 
the Lord raises up from among our brethren in the Body 
of Christ, as enumerated by the Apostle Paul. (Ephesians 4:1 1-15; 
1 Corinthians 12:12-14.) The Lord always has 
raised up, and will to the end raise up, such helps for 
the edification of the Body of Christ; but it is the duty 



of every member carefully to prove their teaching by the 
infallible Word. 

If we thus continue in the Word of the Lord as 
earnest and sincere disciples, we shall indeed "know the 
Truth," be "established in the Present Truth" [the Truth 
due], and "be rooted and grounded in the Truth"; we shall 
be "firm in the faith," and "able to give a reason for the 
hope that is in us"; to "earnestly contend for the Faith 
once delivered to the saints"; to "war a good warfare"; 
to "witness a good confession" and to firmly "endure 
hardship as good soldiers of Jesus Christ," even unto the 
end of our conflict. 

We do not come into the knowledge of the Truth at 
a single bound; but gradually, step by step, we are led 
into the Truth. Every step is one of sure and certain 
progress leading to a higher vantage ground for further 
attainments both in knowledge and in established 
character. 

The Truth thus acquired, step by step, becomes a sanctifying 
power, bringing forth in our lives its blessed 
fruits of righteousness, peace, joy in the Holy Spirit, love, 
meekness, faith, patience and every virtue and every 
grace, which time and cultivation ripen to a glorious 
maturity. 

Not only shall the true disciple thus know the Truth 
and be sanctified by it, but the Lord also said, "The Truth 
shall make you free." Those who have received the 
Truth know by blessed experience something of its liberating 
power. As soon as any measure of it is received 
into a good and honest heart, it begins to strike off the 
fetters of sin, of ignorance, superstition and fear. Its 
health-restoring beams penetrate the darkest recesses of 
our hearts and minds, and thus invigorate the whole being; 
it quickens our mortal bodies. 

"THE ENTRANCE OF THY WORDS GIVETH LIGHT" 

Sin cannot endure the light of Truth; and those who 
continue to live in sin when a sufficiency of light has been 
received to manifest its deformity must inevitably lose the 
Light, because they are unworthy of it. Ignorance and 
superstition must vanish before this Light. And what a 
blessed realization it is to be thus liberated! Millions, 
however, are still under the blinding influence of error. 
Under its delusions they fear and reverence some of the 
basest tools of Satan for their oppression and degradation, 
because they hypocritically claim Divine appointment; 
and they have been made to fear God as a vengeful 
Tyrant, consigning the vast majority of His creatures 
to an eternity of torment. Thank God! We who have received 
the Truth have awakened from that horrible nightmare, 
and the bondage of Satan over us is broken. The 
Light has scattered our darkness. 

We are made free, too, from the fear that we now 
see coming upon the whole world as the great civil and 
ecclesiastical systems that have so long ruled the world 



are being terribly shaken. All thinking people are in 
dread of the possible outcome of anarchy and terror; the 
alarm of all is increasing as we near the awful crisis toward 

R5508 : page 230 

which we are rapidly hastening, and as the danger 
becomes more and more apparent. Yet, in the midst of it 
all, and with the fullest assurance of the infallible Word 
of God as to the terrors of the conflict through which the 
world will soon have to pass, the true disciples of Christ 
who abide in His Word are not afraid, but rejoice; for 
they know that God's object in permitting this mighty 
storm is to clear the moral atmosphere of the world, and 
that after the storm, there shall come, by His providence, 
an abiding peace. Instructed in the Truth, they realize 
the necessities of the situation, and have confidence in the 
Divine providence that can make even the wrath of man 
to praise Him, make all things work together for good. 
Blessed promise!— "If ye continue in My Word, then 
are ye My disciples indeed, and ye shall know the Truth, 
and the Truth shall make you free." Dearly beloved, 
having received this wondrous favor from the Lord, shall 
we not continue in it, giving no heed to seducing doctrines 
but bringing forth its blessed fruitage in our lives? 
And shall we not be faithful to it under all circumstances, 
defending it against every assault, and bearing its 
reproach? Let us prove our appreciation of the glorious 
Light by our loyalty and faithfulness, working out our 
salvation with fear and trembling. 



R5508 : page 230 

OUR GREAT BURDEN-BEARER 

"Casting all your care upon Him; for 
He careth for you."— 1 Peter 5:7. 

THESE COMFORTING words of the Apostle 
Peter are addressed to the Church of 
Christ; and all who are of the Lord's people 
surely realize that there are cares and 
difficulties of life which are our portion 
and which are perplexing. These cares of 
life come also to those who are of the 
world— to some more and to some less. But 
they surely come to all who are the Lord's 
children. 

The word care is used in two different ways. Thinking 
of the word in the sense of exercising proper thought 
and giving proper attention to that which is entrusted to 
us, or concerning which we are responsible, we might be 
in danger of misunderstanding our text. The word 
care, however, very often has in it the thought of worry, 



trouble of mind; and this is its use by the Apostle in this 
place. The Apostle Paul also says, "Be careful for nothing" 
—be worried about nothing, have anxiety about 
nothing. So we might render the words of St. Peter, 
"Casting all your anxiety upon Him; for He is taking 
thought for you." 

IMPORTANCE OF LITTLE THINGS 

The Apostle's advice is not that we shall throw off all 
sense of responsibility, and cease to exercise care in what 
we do and in respect to our duties and obligations. Surely 
we all agree that the man or the woman without care 
for anything, in this proper sense, would be totally unfit 
for any position in life. We often notice evidences of 
some one's not having been sufficiently careful. Perhaps 
the wall paper has been carelessly marred or the furniture 
scratched; doors are slammed or left swinging when 
they should be closed for warmth, etc. Some might say, 
Oh, these are very small matters! But one who is careless, 
thoughtless, and inattentive to these matters is very 
likely to be untrustworthy in larger matters. 

Personally, it is painful to us to see these things; and 
undoubtedly it is so to all who exercise proper care. The 
children of God, His representatives before men, should 
not go blundering along through the world or needlessly 
annoying others, whether it be the brethren or people of 
the world. Our influence for good may be greatly marred 

R5509 : page 230 

by inattention to what might be called little things, but 
what in reality are not so. There is a trite saying which 
is full of meaning: "Trifles make perfection; and perfection 
is no trifle." The Lord's people should be the most 
careful people in the world. 

Our Lord said, "He that is faithful in that which is 
least is faithful also in much"; and the reverse of the 
statement would be equally true— that he that is unfaithful 
in that which is least is unfaithful also in much. 
(Luke 16:10.) These little things of every-day life may 
prove to be more crucial tests of real character than will 
seemingly larger matters. Little courtesies, little acts of 
thoughtful consideration for others, how much they 
mean! How greatly they often affect the happiness of 
those around us and our own influence as ambassadors of 
Christ! So we need to exercise much care and thoughtfulness 
in regard to our words, our actions and everything 
with which we have to do. This is not the care 
that we are to cast upon the Lord for Him to bear. This 
we are properly to bear ourselves. 

OUR EXPERIENCES SUPERVISED BY THE LORD 

God is the most careful Being in the Universe, we 
may be sure. He is not careful, in the sense in which 



the word is used in our text— in the sense of worry and 
unrest of mind— but He is care-full in the right and 
proper sense. There are cares that come to the Lord's 
people because they are harassed by the Adversary. These 
experiences the Lord permits for the very purpose of 
leading His people to cast their care upon Him, of bringing 
them closer to Himself, of teaching them patient endurance, 
of showing them more fully their need of Him, 
their utter helplessness and wretchedness without Him. 
But worries and frettings— anxieties that would hinder 
us in the Lord's service, that would rob us of our 
peace in the Lord— should be dropped, not carelessly, however, 
but intelligently, with the thought that Jesus, our 
great Burden-bearer, has invited us, yea, urged us, to cast 
all our care— all that would disturb our peace— upon 
Him. He will make our burden light and ease our tribulations. 
This is a rest of faith, and cannot be attained 
otherwise than through faith in His love, faith in His 
promises. 

OUR FATHER'S CARE FOR HIS CHILDREN 

Each day that a Christian lives he should be more reliant 
upon the Lord. He should realize more fully than 
before that our Heavenly Father, who has provided for 
the grass of the field and for the birds of the air, cares 
far more for His children than for the flowers or for 
many sparrows, and that He has a Plan also for the 
world— an arrangement for their blessing, in due time. 
But we have already entered into the blessing of the 
Lord; we have already become His children, and are His 
especial care. And "like as a father pitieth his children, 
so the Lord pitieth them that fear Him"— those that reverence 
Him. 

We cannot be faithful children of God is we are full 
of worry. Worry is one thing, but proper carefulness is 
another. We should be more careful every day, and thus 
be able to fulfil our obligations to the world in general, 
to our families, to ourselves, to the brethren, and to the 
Lord— to render our God more effective service. 

We are not to be troubled and anxious as to where we 
are to get our next suit of clothes. We have a suit of 
clothing for the present, such as the Lord has seen fit to 
give; and we are to do our best to provide the things 

R5509 : page 231 

needful. If the Lord should never give us apparel as 

good as many others have, or as rich or dainty food, we 

should not worry, but be content with whatever His providence 

arranges for us, and accept it thankfully. He will 

give what is best— what is for our good as New Creatures. 

We should not doubt, nor fear that He will not 

provide for our needs. He knows all about our affairs, 

and is not unmindful of our welfare. "Humble yourselves 

therefore under the mighty hand of God, that He may 



exalt you in due time, casting all your care upon Him; 
for He careth for you." 

How needful this humility before God, and how consoling 
and precious this loving assurance! As we go on 
in this blessed way marked out by our Lord, let us learn 
more and more fully that we are not to ask anything according 
to our wills, but only that His will may be done 
in us and for us. His Wisdom is unerring. Let us tell 
the Lord all about our burdens, great and small, and let 
us appropriate to ourselves His love and sympathy, applying 
to our hearts the balm of His Word, of the precious 
promises which are the heritage of His own, trusting 
Him that He is both able and willing to supply our every 
need— yea, that He delights thus to bless us, if we abide 
in His Love. 

"How strong and sweet my Father's care! 
The words like music in the air, 
Come answering to my whispered prayer— 
'He cares for thee!' 

"Then naught can hurt me, shade or shine, 
Nor evil thing touch me or mine, 
Since Thou with tenderness Divine 
Dost care for me!" 



R5509 : page 231 

SPIRITUAL ISRAEL'S ENEMIES 

"Be thou strong and very 
courageous."— Joshua 1:7. 

THESE WORDS of Jehovah to Joshua upon 

his succession of Moses, as the leader of 

Israel, were used on the occasion of the 

entrance of the children of Israel upon their 

new life after they, as the people of God, 

had crossed the Jordan. They would still 

have battles, more now than before, and 

perhaps more than they realized, they 

needed strength— they needed courage. The 

basis for their strength and courage was the 

promise of God. God had declared to Abraham that He 

would bring his seed into the land of Canaan, and would 

give it to them for a possession. Those who believed this 

promise would need a large measure of strength and 

courage. 

God had sent Moses His servant to deliver them from 
Egypt, and to bring them as His people to the land which 
He sware unto their fathers should be theirs. It required 
a good deal of courage to come up out of the land of 
Egypt; and God had manifested His favor to them in the 
wilderness, by the blessings which came to them when they 



were faithful and obedient, and by chastisements when 
they failed and were disobedient and rebellious. Now 
they were entering upon the realization of the promises 
whose fulfilment had been anticipated. "Be strong, be 
courageous," they were admonished by Jehovah through 
Joshua. They had come into the Promised Land, and 
now they must war a good warfare against their enemies. 
God had not promised to give them amicable possession; 
they were to fight and conquer their foes. 

As Israel was a typical people, so theirs was a typical 
warfare. It would have been terrible if they had thought 
that all those people whom they were commanded to 
destroy were thus to drop into a Hell of torture unending! 
If the Israelites were told to be strong and of good 
courage in sending their enemies into such a hell, it 
would be a horrible thought! But when we perceive that 
the penalty of sin is death and not eternal torment and 
that "hell" is the condition of death, we view the matter 
in a different light. Whether men die by the sword or by 
pestilence or by consumption or by accident, it is merely 
the fulfilment of the Divine sentence upon the whole race, 
which will continue to be fulfilled in God's own time and 
way. This gives a different aspect to the whole matter. 

HOPE FOR THE AMALEKITES, HITTITES, ETC. 

The wickedness of the Amalekites, Hittites, Amorites, 
Perizzites, Jebusites, etc., had come to the full. They had 
had some opportunities, some light, and the sinful course 
they had pursued should now come to an end. They, 
and all others that have gone down to the grave in 
ignorance and sin will, when Messiah takes His Kingdom, 
come forth to resurrection possibilities and better, 
more favorable conditions. And as they in the past have 
had an experience with sin, they will in the future have 
an experience with good, and an opportunity to decide 
then between right and wrong, good and evil. We hope 
that there will be some of those peoples who will have 
profited by their experiences in the past, and will choose 
the good when the contrast is before them and the blinding 
influences removed. 

ISRAEL'S ENEMIES TYPICAL 

The children of Israel represented Spiritual Israel. 
The enemies which they destroyed represents the enemies 
of the Church. In the case of the Church, we have come 
from a state of sin and degradation into harmony with 
God. With some this may have been a very prolonged 
journey, and with others it may have been shorter, because 
of greater faith and obedience. We reached the 
place of special blessing when we made a full consecration 
to God— we there entered into rest. "We who have 
believed do enter into rest," says the Apostle Paul. And 
this rest which we enter seems to have been typified by 
this "Promised Land" of Canaan. 



But when we enter into this rest of Faith we find certain 
powerful enemies that must be conquered. These 
enemies we find entrenched in our own bodies. In the 
typical peoples who were the enemies of Israel, those who 
were entrenched in strong fastnesses the Israelites found 
it very difficult to dislodge and destroy; it was much 

R5510 : page 231 

easier to destroy others. So far as we know, the Israelites 
were long, long years— centuries perhaps— in thoroughly 
conquering the land and their enemies. It was 
not until the time of King David that these enemies were 
thoroughly subjugated. And so it is with the enemies 
in our flesh— we should war a good warfare against 
them. We must make no concessions to the flesh; all these 
enemies are to be exterminated— fought to the death. 
The result of this warfare is death; either the death 
of the New Creature, or the death of the old 
creature. If the New Creature fail to overcome, he will 
be exterminated— he will die the Second Death. Jehovah, 
in using the words of our text, is speaking more to 
us— the Spiritual Israelites— than to Joshua and the Natural 
Israelites; that is to say, we may make a still deeper 
application of His words than could fleshly Israel. But 
we cannot conquer in this fight alone. The Apostle 
Paul exclaims, "When I am weak, then am I strong," 
meaning, When I realize my own weakness and cannot 

R5510 : page 232 

successfully battle alone against the flesh and its infirmities, 

then am I strong in the Lord. I could not fight 

a good fight of mine own self. He realized the fulfilment 

of the promise of the Lord: "My grace is sufficient 

for thee; for My strength is made perfect in [thy] 

weakness." 

Surely this is the experience of all of God's "little 
ones." And the realization of this leads us to look to 
the exceeding great and precious promises of the Lord, 
in order to strengthen our heart and to renew our endeavors, 
that we may be strong and of a good courage, 
and that finally by God's grace we may come off conquerors, 
and more than conquerors, through Him who 
loved us and bought us with His own precious blood. 

TRUE COURAGE VS. SPIRIT OF BRAVADO 

Let us be of a good courage! There are various kinds 
of courage: One kind is born of egotism and self-reliance, 
another kind results from a spirit of recklessness, 
which fails to take a proper estimate of the difficulties 
to be encountered. But true courage, the courage which 
the Lord's Word enjoins upon His people, and which all 
Spiritual Israelites are to seek to possess, is a courage 
which, while carefully noting and realizing the trials 



and difficulties before them, and recognizing their own 
insufficiency, looks to the Lord in faith for the needed 
assistance, trusting in His precious promises. This enables 
them to be strong and courageous in the presence 
of difficulties, dangers and obstacles which would appal 
those who are trusting merely in their own strength. 
It will be noted that our Motto-text for this year— 
1914— is along this same line, and is a part of verse 9 of 
the chapter from which the text at the head of this article 
is taken. This will be a momentous year— a glorious 
year! Then let us all "be strong and very courageous" 
—strong in the Lord and in the power of His might! 
Greater is He who is on our part than all they that be 
against us ! Let us put on the whole armor of God that 
we may be able to stand in this evil day. 



R5511 : page 232 

INSTRUCTIONS FOR GOD'S WORKMEN 

"Study to show thyself approved unto God, a workman that needeth 
not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth."— 
2 Timothy 2:15. 

GOD'S approval should be the highest aim of 

every one who professes to believe in Him 

as the Creator, and especially of those who 

accept Him as their Father and who claim 

to hold the precious relationship to Him of 

children. His will should be their highest 

law, and it should be a part of their daily 

and hourly pleasure, as it is their privilege, 

to seek to know His will and to do it. This 

implies study, consideration— not a mere 

formality of thoughtless reading, or perfunctory worship, 

but the diligent use of every available means to learn 

what is His will. 

The Apostle Paul gives Timothy the advice contained 
in our text, and urges him to be "a workman that needeth 
not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth." 
And the intimation is that the ability rightly to divide 
the Word of God is to be gained by the study of His 
Word. The truth of astronomy might give us some 
knowledge; yet we see that some who have devoted their 
entire lives to astronomy have lost sight of God, and have 
become atheists. Guided by the Word of God, any study 
may be helpful. But it must be viewed, considered, 
received, from the standpoint of the Revelation of God. 

The word workman suggests the thought of being engaged 
in service. This injunction of the Apostle applies 
to all who belong to the Church of Christ. We are God's 
servants. A great work is going on; this work is the 
calling out of the Church class from the world. The 
Church that is called out is said to be the Temple 



of God, whose "living stones" are being chiseled and 
polished and made ready for their places in the building. 

R5512: page 232 

We are the workmen. We are seeking to prepare ourselves 
for God's presence, for God's Kingdom. This 
preparation is our first duty; we are to prepare ourselves 
and to help to prepare others. 

TRUE CAUSE OF MUCH FAILURE 

The fashioning of these "living stones" is the development 
of their character. Each one thus engaged is working 
out his own salvation. We are God's laborers in 
doing this work in ourselves. But if we would have 
Divine approval, we must have the Divine wisdom— 
"which cometh down from Above," and which we learn 
from the Word of God.— James 3:17. 

Apparently a great many professing Christians, after 
they have given much time to the cultivation of their brain 
—spending years in seminaries— will eventually find that 
they have failed both to have the Lord's ideal accomplished 
in themselves and to do much good to others. This 
seems to be the result of a failure rightly to divide the 
Word of Truth. In that Day many shall say, Lord, Lord, 
we have prayed and taught and done many marvelous 
things in Thy name! Some of these the Lord says He 
will not recognize as His Elect. He may have a place in 
which He will use some of them, some day, yet for this 
special place He wishes those who are anxious to know 
and to do His will rather than to know how they may 
please men, or how they may receive large emoluments 
or honor of men. Those who are anxious to know His 
will are most sure to have His will done in them. 

MISAPPLICATION OF SCRIPTURES 

The expression, "rightly dividing the Word of Truth," 
implies that the Word of Truth may be studied, may be 
handled. We see many ways of handling, or dividing, 
the Scriptures. Many Scriptures applicable long ago are 
quoted as appropriately due now, and vice versa; and 
those which belong to the future are quoted as applicable 
now, or in the past. There is a general liability to error 
in not discerning how to divide them aright. 

Rightly to divide the Word of Truth, then, is to make 
such a prayerful study of it as will enable us to place 
things where they belong. For instance, if we fail to 
distinguish between the begetting of the Holy Spirit, and 
the quickening of the Holy Spirit, and our spirit birth, 
and get these all confused, we shall do harm. It is not 
merely the seeking to show a variety of doctrines, but the 
seeking to make clear what we give to others, that is the 
part of wisdom. The Apostle was showing Timothy that, 
as an Elder of the Church of Christ, he might present the 



different features of the Truth in such a way as to confuse 
his hearers, who then would not know what they 
believed. Thus they would be in just the condition to 
accept whatever teaching any one brought them, especially 
if that one should happen to ridicule their belief. 

This seems to be the condition of many today. Evidently 
there are many who have been serving or attempting 
to serve God, who have not been giving out "meat in 
due season," but who have been giving out truths in a very 
confused way. It is for us, then, to be on guard and 
seek carefully to follow the instruction of the Apostle, 

R5512: page 233 

"Study to show thyself approved unto God." Do not 
mind so much what men may say or think, but seek the 
approval of God first. 

It is proper for us to seek the approval of the holy, of 
the saintly; but God's approval should have the precedence. 
We must be workmen, not idlers and drones; for 
these will not have any place in the Kingdom. God is 
calling to service now those who are willing to serve 
under disadvantageous conditions. We are, therefore, to 
remember that we are to be servants; and that unless we 
find the proper service, we cannot have a place in this 
company which God is training. If we wish His approval, 
as expressed in His Word, we are to see that the conditions 
as there outlined are fulfilled in our case. "If any 
man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him." 
We are told to "love not the world, neither the things that 
are in the world." (1 John 2:15.) We are not to set 
our hearts upon these things. Our hearts are to be set 
upon the doing of the Lord's will. 

The Lord intimates that those who will be faithful to 
Him will have the opposition of the world. "If they have 
persecuted Me, they will also persecute you." Therefore, 
if we have no opposition, we lack this evidence of acceptability 
with Him. We are to rightly divide the Word of 
Truth, and to see that our lives are in harmony with it. 
At the same time we are to seek to present God's Word 
to others, that they may enjoy the same privileges and 
blessings. 



R5510 : page 233 

THE WEDDING FEAST 

--AUGUST 23. -MATTHEW 22:1-14.- 

"O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the Prophets, and stonest 
them that are sent unto thee; how often would I have gathered 
thy children together, as a hen gathereth her brood 
under her wings, and ye would not!"— Luke 13:34. 



HERE WE have another parable of the Kingdom. 

Today's lesson shows that the promises 

of God and His providences toward 

Israel under the Law Covenant were all 

designed to fit and prepare the Israelites to 

be God's holy nation, and especially to provide 

at the coming of Christ a sufficient 

number to constitute the elect Church, Messiah's 

joint-heirs in the Kingdom— His 

Bride. The parable shows that only a few 

were "Israelites indeed," in whom was no guile— not 

enough to constitute the Kingdom class; hence the call 

of this Gospel Age, selecting from the Gentiles a sufficient 

number of saintly characters to be joint-heirs with the 

Jewish remnant in the Messianic Kingdom. 

The Kingdom of Heaven, otherwise styled the Kingdom 
of God, is not to be an earthly Kingdom, but a 
Heavenly one, whose Ruler, the glorified Christ, will not 
be an earthly king, but a Heavenly Being of the highest 
rank— of the Divine nature. This Kingdom, representing 
God and the Heavenly rule, or dominion, is to be established 
amongst men for the eradication of sin. Its 
first work will be the binding of Satan, the "Prince of 
this world." Afterward all the works of darkness will 
be overthrown. The overthrow will at first cause a great 
Time of Trouble, following which, as the Reign of Righteousness 
progresses, the curse in its every form will give 
way before the blessings of Messiah's Kingdom— until 
there shall be no more curse, no more sighing, no more 
crying, no more dying. 

But before this Heavenly Kingdom can be established, 
it is a part of the Divine decree and arrangement that 
there shall be a Bride class selected from amongst men. 
These are begotten of the Holy Spirit and are God's 
workmanship, in whom He works by the exceeding great 
and precious promises of the Scriptures and by the providences 
of life. Thus they are being transformed in mind 
and made ready for the glorious birth-resurrection by 
which they will be "changed in a moment, in the twinkling 
of an eye," from earthly nature to Heavenly nature. 
Thus they will enter into the joys of their Lord by becoming 
His Bride class, His joint-heirs in His Kingdom. 

APPLICATION OF THE PARABLE 

For the development of this Kingdom class the world 
has now been waiting since the days of Jesus, when by 
His death He opened up a new Way of Life and became 
the Advocate before the Father for all those desirous of 
being His disciples, His joint-heirs, His Bride. 

Today's lesson takes up the Kingdom project at the 
time of our Lord's earthly ministry. "He came unto His 
own, and His own received Him not. But as many as 
received Him, to them gave He power [liberty or privilege] 
to become sons of God."— John 1:12. 

Jehovah Himself is the King who made a marriage 



for His Son— arranging before the foundation of the 
world that there should be certain joint-heirs with Christ 
in His Kingdom. This marriage, of course, could not 
take place until the King's Son had come into the world 
and had made the way for His followers and for the 
Kingdom of which He is to be King. 

At the appropriate time God sent His servants to call 
them that were bidden to the wedding; but they would 
not come. John the Baptist and his disciples did this 
work of calling to the attention of the Jewish people the 
fact that the King's Son was in their midst. He said, 
"There standeth One among you whom ye know not." 
(John 1:26.) Again he said, "He that hath the Bride is 
the Bridegroom; but the friend of the Bridegroom, who 
standeth and heareth Him, rejoiceth greatly because of 
the Bridegroom's voice; this my joy therefore is fulfilled." 
(John 3:29.) John rejoiced to hear the voice of 
the Bridegroom. Prophetically he foretold that the calling 
of the Bride class had come, although he himself 
could not be a member of it. 

MADE LIGHT OF THE MESSAGE 

Again other servants were sent forth. Jesus sent His 
disciples to the Jews, saying, "Tell them that are bidden, 
Behold, I have prepared My dinner; My oxen and My 
fadings are killed, and all things are ready; come unto 
the marriage" feast. 

But was the Message of Jesus and His disciples received? 
Nay! The people, under the guidance of the 
Scribes and the Pharisees, the theologians of that time, 
made light of the Message and went their way— one to 
his farm, another to his merchandise, saying, We do not 
believe this Message respecting the Kingdom. Some did 
even worse than this. They entreated these servants 
shamefully, spitefully, and slew them. Not only was Jesus 
slain by the unbelieving ones who had been invited to the 
feast, but His faithful disciples also were evilly treated 
and slain. 

Then, as seen in another parable, Jehovah was wroth 
with that people Israel, and sent forth His armies, destroyed 
those murderers and burned up their city. The 
fact that it was the Roman army under Titus which destroyed 
Jerusalem in A.D. 70 did not make it any less 
the army of Jehovah, for He is able to make the wrath 

R5510 : page 234 

of man praise Him and able to use whom He may please 
as His messengers, or servants. 

GENTILES CALLED TO THE WEDDING 

Meantime God said to His servants, the Apostles, and 
to others through them, The wedding is provided, but 
the Jewish nation, which was especially invited, have not 



been found worthy of the honor. Go ye therefore into 
the highways, and as many as ye shall find, bid to the 
marriage feast. So those servants went into the highways 
and gathered together as many as they found, and 
brought them in. Thus the wedding was provided with 
guests. 

Highways represent public concourse, the world over. 
The Lord's ambassadors were no longer to restrict themselves 
to Jews, but were to make known to every people, 
kindred and tongue, the fact that God is now calling out 
of the world a little company, lovers of righteousness, to 
be followers of the Lamb and eventually to become joint-heirs 
with the Redeemer in His Kingdom. Be it noted 

R5511 : page 234 

that these ambassadors were not to intercept all the people 
in the highways, but merely to urge upon all those 
whom they met in the concourse, the great privilege of 
the open door to the Wedding Feast. 

These were not all saintly, good; some of them, on 
the contrary, were bad. The Apostles explain this, saying 
that not many great, not many rich, not many noble, 
but chiefly the poor, the mean things of this world, hath 
God chosen. The Apostles speak, along the lines of our 
lesson, of the class that God is selecting from the world. 
No matter how mean, no matter how degraded, no matter 
how ignoble by nature— all who are willing to receive 
the grace of God may be made suitable for the 
wedding by the covering of the wedding garment, the 
Righteousness of Christ. 

Indeed, however noble or worthy many are naturally, 
they are still not fit for the presence of the King. All 
who attend this wedding must have on the wedding garment 
—must be covered with the merit of Christ's Righteousness. 
The wedding is thus furnished with guests- 
all that the King had intended— every place filled. Thus 
and otherwise does the Lord indicate that the number 
of the Elect is a definitely fixed one; and that as soon 
as the special number has been found, the call will cease. 

INSPECTING THE GUESTS 

The custom of the Jews, arranged by Divine providence 
doubtless, was that at every wedding feast each 
guest was to put on a white wedding garment, covering 
his own garments. Thus all at the wedding were on an 
equal footing as respects dignity, because they were the 
guests of the host. So all who come to God's great Feast 
provided through Christ must come, not through any 
worthiness of their own in the flesh, but acknowledging 
that they have an insufficiency of merit to be acceptable 
to God, and must accept the merit of Christ as making 
them worthy of the honor to which they aspire in responding 
to this invitation. 

Each guest entering the house was supplied with the 



robe, and was expected to put it on immediately. For 
any one to appear without that wedding garment would 
be a mark of disrespect to the host who had provided it. 
Indeed, for any one to appear at the wedding without 
the robe would imply that he had taken it off; for no 
one was admitted without the robe. This is the picture 
given us in the parable. A guest was found there who 
had not on the wedding garment— one, therefore, who in 
disregard of his host had removed his wedding garment, 
the wearing of which was the condition of his admission. 

The words, "When the king came in," signify an inspection 
just prior to the feast. Since the King of the 
parable is Jehovah Himself, this would seem to mean 
that God takes note through the exhibition of Divine 
Justice in some manner of any one professing loyalty, 
yet disregarding the merit of Christ's death. Or, Christ 
might properly be understood to be referred to as the 
King in this instance; for at His coming He is to be 
invested with Kingly authority and power by the Heavenly 
Father, as our Lord Himself indicates in the parables 
of the Pounds and the Talents. At His Second Advent, 
therefore, He tells us, He will Himself inspect all 
those who pose as being His faithful servants— all those 
who are desirous of enjoying the Wedding Festival. 

The man found without a wedding garment in the 
presence of the king we should understand to represent 
a class, and not merely one individual. So we might find 
just such a class today, professing to be followers of 
Christ, professing to be waiting for the marriage of the 
Lamb, professing to hope to enter into the joys of their 
Lord, yet telling us that they are no longer trusting in 
the merit of Christ's Sacrifice for their standing with 
the Father. These have rejected Jesus as their Savior, 
their Redeemer, the Atoner for their sins. They merely 
retain Him as their Teacher, and then, apparently, accept 
only a part of His teachings. 

These are manifestly unfit to be members of the Bride 
of Christ. Only the loyal, only the faithful, are to be of 
that class. The parable shows that all those who reject 
the merit of Christ's Sacrifice will be rejected from the 
Kingdom class. They are unable to say how they came 
in without a "wedding garment"; for they did not come 
in without it. No one was ever admitted into the fellowship 
of the Spirit in the Church which is the Bride of 
Christ without first having on the wedding garment of 
Christ's merit, covering his imperfection. Those admitting 
thus that they have taken off the wedding garment 
are cast out summarily. The king said to the servants, 
"Bind him hand and foot, and cast him into outer darkness. 
There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth." 

THE OUTER DARKNESS 

When our minds were filled with hallucinations of the 
Dark Ages, we read into this and into other Scriptures 
what they do not contain. We assumed that the class 



represented by the man without the wedding garment 

would be cast into eternal torment, and there suffer to 

all eternity. But now, examining the Scriptures more 

carefully, we have perceived that as all of these guests 

at the wedding came into the light of the wedding chamber 

from the darkness of the outside world, so the casting 

of one of them out of the light into the outer darkness 

would merely mean the taking from such a one the 

knowledge and the joys represented by the wedding-chamber 

light. 

As for the outside world, we know that the Apostle 
John declares that the whole world lieth in darkness, "in 
the Wicked One." We know also that as soon as the 
Bride class shall have been completed, a great Time of 
Trouble will prepare the world for the blessings of Messiah's 
Kingdom later on. During that trouble all those 
who are in the darkness will have weeping and gnashing 
of teeth— discontent, anguish, disappointment, etc., connected 
with the overthrow of many of their wrongly based 
human hopes and expectations. 

Our Lord concluded the parable with the statement, 
"For many are called, but few are chosen." This does 
not mean, as we once supposed, that only an Elect few 
will get any favor from God in the future, and that all 
the remainder of mankind will be eternally tortured. We 
must read it in harmony with the context. The Jewish 

R5511 : page 235 

nation was called, or invited, to the wedding— and failed, 
except the few "Israelites indeed." For eighteen hundred 
years the Message has gone out into the highways, to one 
nation after another of the Gentiles, until many have 
more or less heard the call of the Gospel Age. Yet only 
a few have accepted and have therefore come into the 
elect condition. And of those who come into this elect 
condition there will still be a class not properly appreciative 
which will be cast away, or rejected. 

Again the Master drew attention to the matter, saying, 
"Fear not, little flock; it is your Father's good pleasure 
to give you the Kingdom." The Little Flock, composed 
of both Jews and Gentiles, will through their faithfulness 
become God's chosen people, His elect Church, 
the Bride of Christ. Then, later on, they with their 
Lord will be the Heavenly Father's Agency for blessing 
all the non-elect with the glorious opportunities of Restitution 
to all the earthly blessings and good things lost 
through Father Adam's disobedience and fall. "If ye 
be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's Seed and heirs." 



R5512: page 235 

A DAY OF QUESTIONS 



--AUGUST 30.-MATTHEW 22:15-22.- 

"Render therefore unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, 
and to God the things that are God's."— Verse 21. 

TODAY'S Study shows us that the wicked 

vine-dressers, the unready guests, were so 

enamored of their own methods and theories 

as to make them really blind to the 

beauty of the Divine Plan as expressed by 

Jesus. We are not speculating about this. 

St. Peter, explaining to the Pentecostal inquirers, 

said, "I wot that in ignorance ye 

did it [crucified Christ], as did also your 

rulers." (Acts 3:17.) St. Paul declared, 

"For had they known, they would not have crucified the 

Lord of Glory." (1 Corinthians 2:8.) Error, fostered by 

self-will and by plans and schemes not of God, always 

has a blinding effect, so much so that the Apostle declares 

that "the god of this world hath blinded the minds 

of them that believe not" the true Message of God when 

it reaches them. 

Even Christians, in proportion as they are influenced 
by error or selfishness and not filled with the Holy Spirit, 
are blinded. Some see more, and some less, of the 
length, the breadth, the height and the depth of the Love 
of God, which passeth all understanding. No wonder St. 
Paul prayed for us the opening of the eyes of our understanding 
wider and wider!— Ephesians 1:18. 

Perceiving that the teachings of Jesus were influencing 
the masses, the worldly-wise (and spirit-blind) 
Scribes and Pharisees, who knew the inconsistencies of 
their own teachings, thought that they could show up as 
inconsistent the teachings of Jesus. To this end they 
sent amongst the multitude some of their followers, to 
ask questions and to seek to entrap Jesus, to show the 
inconsistency of the hopes which He was inspiring in 
the people, and thus to discredit Him with the multitude. 
The first of these was to seek to entrap Him into saying 
something that would prove His disloyalty to the government 
and thus lead to His arrest as a seditious person, 
teaching contrary to Caesar's law of taxation. On 
the other hand, if He advocated Caesar's law, they thought 
that thus He would antagonize the public sentiment. 

Jesus had a wisdom from Above. In answer to their 
query, "Is it lawful to give tribute unto Caesar or not?" 
He replied, "Why do ye tempt Me, ye hypocrites? Show 
Me the tribute money. And they brought unto Him a 
penny. And He saith unto them, Whose is this image 
and superscription? They say, Caesar's. Then saith He 
unto them, Render therefore unto Caesar the things that 
are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are God's." 
No wonder they marveled at such an answer, and left 
Him! Truly, "Never man spake like this man!" 

THE THINGS THAT ARE CAESAR'S 



Nor can we say that the Master merely dodged the 
question shrewdly. Some very rascally men are able to 
dodge questions and to have a laugh at the questioner's 
expense. But in this case the answer was complete— the 
truth, and the whole truth, in every sense of the word 
fully in harmony with all the teachings of the Master. 
His followers were instructed not to be seditious, not 
to be quarrelsome, faultfinding, but to be thankful, holy, 
happy, subject to "the powers that be." They were to 
recognize that the powers that be of the kingdoms of the 
present time are ordained of God, and not merely of men. 

True, indeed, earthly kingdoms are not God's kingdoms, 
as they sometimes claim. True, indeed, they frequently 
are usurped empires and powers. True, indeed, 
they sometimes foster sin, iniquity, unrighteousness, and 
are largely, from outward appearances, the result of human 
scheming and wickedness. Nevertheless, the people 
of God are to recognize that Jehovah is the great Over-Lord; 
and that although it is a part of His program for 
the present to permit a reign of Sin and Death at the 
hands of sinful men, nevertheless He still exercises such 
a supervision— of hindering one or advancing the cause 
of another ruler— as justifies the statement that He ordains, 
authorizes or permits these kingdoms. Whatever, 
therefore, the Heavenly Father has authorized or permitted, 
not one of His obedient children should for a moment 
think of resisting or overturning. 

The Scriptures declare that God raiseth up and God 
casteth down; that He has at His disposal myriads who, 
filled with the spirit of anger, hatred, malice, strife, are 
ready, whenever an opportune moment comes, to exercise 
their power and to advance their own selfish interests. 
Whenever, therefore, the Lord wishes to make a 
change in earth's rulership and arrangements, He needs 
only to remove the restraining hand of His providence, 

R5513 : page 235 

and forthwith evil influences will work the change. As 

for the people of God, they are all exhorted to be peacemakers, 

promoters of righteousness, living peaceably with 

all men, fully subject to "the powers that be," and recognizing 

them as of Divine ordination, permission. 

In the case of the Roman Empire, of which Caesar 
was head, we note that God had prophetically foretold, 
centuries before, through the prophecy of Daniel, its rise 
to universal dominion. It was not, therefore, for Jesus 
or for any of His disciples to speak against representatives 
of that Roman power. If Rome ruled, Rome needed 
to be supported; and the method of support was, properly 
enough, through taxation. How just, then, were the 
words of Jesus, "Render therefore unto Caesar the things 
that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are 
God's" ! We remember that the Master Himself paid tribute, 
instructing St. Peter, when they had no money, to 



catch a fish, from whose mouth he obtained the coin 
necessary for his taxation and that of Jesus. 

RENDER UNTO GOD HIS DUE 

Had the questioners been intent upon rendering to 
God their obligations due to Him, they would have been 
in so different a frame of mind that, instead of seeking 
to entrap Jesus in His words, they would have been glad 
to be His disciples. What things, then, are God's? What 

R5513 : page 236 

do we owe to Him? We answer that as His creatures 
we are His. Every talent and power we possess ought 
by right of justice to be used in the service of our Creator 
and for His praise. 

Additionally, we who recognize the fact that we were 
sinners by nature, and that God's mercy has provided a 
redemption through Christ, should gladly present our 
bodies a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God, our 
reasonable service. This reasonable service is accentuated 
when we realize the goodness of God; namely, that 
He purposes to bless the whole world with the privilege 
of restitution to all that was lost by Adam and redeemed 
at Calvary. When we learn that the Call of this Gospel 
Age is with a view to permitting the followers of Jesus 
to be associated with Him in His Messianic Kingdom, 
we should be filled with reverence, as well as with astonishment. 
Realizing the possibilities of such a high calling, 
such a change of nature and attainment of glory, 
honor and immortality, we should render to God our little 
all, and realize that it is unworthy of Divine acceptance, 
except as being worthy through the merit of Jesus' Sacrifice. 
We are accepted only in the Beloved One. 

RESISTING UNTO BLOOD 

In full accord with all that has been said foregoing 
is the thought that we must not render unto Caesar the 
things of God. Here lies the snare for many of God's 
people. They perceive that the friendship of the world 
can be bought only at the price of the sacrifice of Truth. 
Increasingly they are convinced of the truth of the 
words of Scripture, "Marvel not if the world hate you"; 
"The darkness hateth the light"; etc. Even though they 
render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's and to 
every man his due— "honor to whom honor is due," etc. 
—nevertheless their standard is so different from that of 
the world, and their viewpoint of everything so different, 
that it breeds an antagonism, a conflict of interests. 

So Jesus said, "If the world hate you, ye know that 
it hated Me before it hated you. If ye were of the 
world, the world would love its own; but because ye are 
not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, 
therefore the world hateth you." (John 15:18,19.) Increasingly 



they have impressed upon them the force of 

the Apostle John's words, "Love not the world, neither 

the things that are in the world. If any man love the 

world, the love of the Father is not in him."— 

1 John 2:15. 

All this signifies that the world's standards, customs, 
ambitions, views, etc., are so different from those inculcated 
by the Spirit of the Truth that it is impossible for 
these to fully harmonize the one with the other. "No man 
can serve two masters." Hence to serve the Lord with 
all our mind, soul and strength, to render Him His dues, 
means to put ourselves crosswise with the views and sentiments 
of the world. This is the real test of Christian 
character. Only such as stand this test of "God first," 
loyalty to the principles which He inculcates, can hope 
to be members of the Kingdom class which is now being 
selected. 

In other words, rendering to God the things that are 
God's will eventually cost us every earthly interest and 
prospect. But to the loyal, the faithful, God provides 
compensation. Instead of the world's smile which they 
lose, they receive the smile of the Heavenly Father and 
the favor of their Redeemer. They have also the Master's 
promise of a hundredfold more in this present life 
in compensation for everything which they sacrifice for 
His Cause, the Cause of God, the Cause of Truth Divine! 
And with this abundant compensation in the present 
life comes the assurance of everlasting life in the 
coming Age, under its favorable conditions. 



R5513 : page 236 

PHOTO-DRAMA TRIALS AND BLESSINGS 

THE DRAMA is sweeping over the country at 

a wonderful rate, being shown every day in 

approximately sixty cities. The audiences 

vary from one hundred to three thousand 

and more— usually, perhaps, averaging five 

hundred. Surely a great witness in defense 

of the Bible is going forth! We are having 

some excellent responses from the 

public. Many are being turned back from 

coldness, indifference, infidelity, atheism, to 

a faith in God and in His Word superior to anything ever 

before enjoyed. 

The opening of the DRAMA in seven new places each 
day necessitates our using the telegraph freely. We 
notify the friends at each place as to what days are available, 
and inquire whether or not the local friends are able 
and willing to present the DRAMA to the public in their 
city free. A noble response is met with everywhere. 
Those who cannot participate express regrets. 

Thus will be seen the importance of having a DRAMA 



Committee in each Class and of knowing just what the 
Class is financially able and desirous of doing toward the 
presentation of the DRAMA. Then, when an offer of dates 
is received from the I.B.S.A. DRAMA Office the Committee, 
having already looked into the matter of public 
auditoriums, is ready to make inquiry, and, if possible, to 
obtain the use free for the DRAMA as a public benefit, 
worth more than a year in college to each citizen. Not 
more than the cost of the light should be charged for any 
publicly-owned auditorium. 

Theatre people properly approached see that the 
DRAMA will give their theatre wider publicity than anything 
else. It will draw a new audience of people of the 
better class, such as rarely attend the theatre. To secure 
this publicity, theatres will be glad, regardless of their 
regular rates, to give a very low price for a number of 
days, especially in the dull season, when there is no expense 
except for electric current and janitorage. Having 
determined your course, advise the I.B.S.A. DRAMA, 
Brooklyn, as quickly as possible, just what you wish to do. 

We are no longer able to proffer assistance beyond the 
lectures, music, picture operator, superintendent, posters, 
window cards, publicity aids and free scenario. The immense 
expense the Association is under may be imagined 
when we say that forty thousand dollars worth of blank 
paper has already been used for the printing of the free 
Scenario; and the printing, folding, bundling and freighting 
has cost still more! Otherwise, how glad we would 
be to meet all the expenses ! 

USE THE SPIRIT OF A SOUND MIND 

However, we are learning that God's way is the wiser 
way— that God's people are more blessed by the DRAMA 
when the cost for its local presentation falls on them, and 
when they serve it as ushers and phonograph operators. 
The self-sacrifice incidental to all this brings a rich blessing. 
So we have nothing of which to complain. 

Our enemies endeavor to hinder the work by falsely 
reporting that the Association is very rich— thus hindering 
charitably disposed people from proffering aid. The 
fact that we never solicit money seems so strange, even 
to our friends, that some have gotten the same impression. 
One dear sister when ushering was asked by a visitor to 
the DRAMA how he could best give some money to the 
I.B.S.A. for the forwarding of this great work. The 

R5513 : page 237 

usher answered him that there was no way, and that the 
money was not needed. If our friends are thus foolish or 
misinformed, how can we blame our enemies for saying 
the same things, which they would like to have others 
believe to be true, so that, all gifts being cut off, our work 
would stop? However, we are leaving the matter in the 
Lord's hands. If the funds cease, the work must cease 



proportionately. Realizing Divine supervision, we shall 
be thoroughly content to have it so. 

While the DRAMA brings great blessings and privileges 
in conjunction with opportunities for service and self-denial, 
it also brings severe trials to the dear brethren. 
All are so anxious to serve, and all so independent in their 
feelings, that it sometimes means as many different plans 
and arrangements as there are members in the Class. 
Meekness, patience, brotherly kindness, forbearance, love, 
are qualities which seem to be greatly needed, and many 
opportunities for their cultivation may be found. So far 
as we know, friends are passing through these little 
ordeals with a blessing— an enlargement of the heart and 
a broadening of their sympathies. It is a time for putting 

R5514: page 237 

into operation the Apostle's words, "Yea, all of you 
be subject one to another."— 1 Peter 5:5. 

GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS 

Before the opening of the DRAMA the Superintendent 
must expect to look out for the newspaper publicity, to 
see that the Class has gotten out in good localities the 
posters sent them, that the DRAMA volunteer matter has 
arrived, that they have distributed it early in the week 
preceding the opening, and that the window cards are put 
out freely in every part of the city— all of the Class participating 
in this work. He will also see the ushers 
selected by the Class, and if any of them are too old or 
too young or are unsuitable, he may make some kind suggestions 
as to what to do. The very best, wisest, most 
intelligent members of the Class should be the Ushering 
Committee. The Class will also look out, amongst their 
number, for a suitable Floor Manager, or Chief Usher, 
and suggest one or two names, either brother or sister, 
for this service, according to circumstances. Frequently 
brethren are unobtainable on account of business 
requirements. 

The duty of the Chief Usher, or Floor Manager, will 
be to see that the other ushers are well placed and understand 
their duties, that perfect order is kept, and that the 
public is being, not only kindly, but graciously met. They 
are for the moment your guests. In the Superintendent's 
absence the Moving Picture operator will be his and our 
representative in your city, having charge of the DRAMA 
to see that it is put on exactly as arranged for, with not a 
single alteration or deviation. Any inefficiency or anything 
you think unwise may be called to the attention of 
these brethren and reported to us. But meantime trust 
them as the Society's representatives, and co-operate. 
They, in turn, are directed to show every consideration to 
the wishes of the Class in anything that will not conflict 
with the positive rules governing the DRAMA. 

In advance of the DRAMA expect a sister, whose stay 



will be only about one day. She will come to give instructions 
on the phonograph. Two, and only two, volunteer 
phonographers may learn; and they should be bright— not 
too nervous. The sister will remain long enough to show 
one performance and to see her pupils operate at one exhibition. 
This will be plenty of time, yet none too much. 
So have the pupils ready, and give them every opportunity 
to learn their work thoroughly. 

So far as possible the ushering sisters will wear white 
dresses, to help distinguish them from the audience. Additionally 
they should make a little head-piece of uniform 
style. One neat design consists of two connecting rosettes 
of white satin ribbon. 

The ushers should, if possible, have little prayer meetings 
frequently, requesting Divine blessings on their 
efforts to show forth, in their words, in their actions, in 
their looks, the praises of Him who called us out of 
darkness into His marvelous light. They should co-operate 
thoroughly with the Chief Usher and with the 
whole spirit of the DRAMA. 

Children under twelve years old should not be admitted, 
except when accompanied by parents, teachers or 
guardians. Even then they should be seated at the rear 
under surveillance of the ushers. Adults should have the 
preference always. Children can get out for matinees; 
but some adults have evenings only. Babes in arms should 
never be admitted. If an exception to this rule were ever 
made, the mother should be asked to sit near the door and 
should be made to promise to take the child out immediately 
if it cries. Do everything to preserve quiet and 
order. Avoid frequent and excited calls for order. If 
any one is seen to be rude or boisterous, approach the 
person kindly and whisper a loving word in season respecting 
the Golden Rule and the rights of others. 

RE THE FINALE 

Following the FOURTH PART of the DRAMA comes the 
Finale Sermon. On that occasion the speaker will call 
attention to the regular meetings of the I.B.S.A. in your 
city, giving the address; or, if you think worth while, 
cards bearing that address might be distributed to the 
people at the close of the service. It is not wise to discuss 
local meetings during the showing of the DRAMA. 

No books are to be hawked, or sold, in the ordinary 
sense of the term. With the opening of each DRAMA a set 
of books is to be sent, merely for use as samples until 
the close of the DRAMA, when they may be sold and the 
money turned over to the chosen representative of the 
Class, to whom they have been charged. Orders received 
meantime should be sent in promptly, directly to THE 
WATCH TOWER Office, through the representative of the 
Class. 

We avoid special effort to sell the STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES lest any should get the impression that the 
sale of the books is the object of the DRAMA. 



At the last, or Finale Meeting, the speaker will ask for 
addresses. Afterward he will take charge of those addresses, 
distributing them amongst those whom he deems 
best qualified for the calls. The matter is left entirely in 
his hands, but give him the best advice you can of the 
capability of those who desire to participate. The good 
of the Lord's Cause alone is sought. Let us all sink any 
personal feeling. The Editor would be glad if his own 
personality did not come so much into the DRAMA, but it 
has seemed absolutely necessary for two reasons: 

(1) The public would take comparatively little interest 
in anything gotten out by a religious society which 
they did not know— they would esteem it something 
"cheap" and not "worth while." 

(2) If the personality were not made prominent, we 
would be charged with hypocrisy— deceiving the people. 
We want the people to see the DRAMA unprejudiced, that 
they may judge for themselves where the hypocrisy and 
misrepresentation come from. 

The Class will please introduce to the Superintendent, 
the person whom they nominate to be the Floor Manager, 
or Head Usher, and two sisters to learn phonograph 
operating to relieve each other if necessary. 

PHOTO-DRAMA CLASS EXTENSION 

We are not yet ready to give full particulars, but we 
are planning how the brethren who have been engaged in 

R5514: page 238 

Class Extension work can prosecute the same in conjunction 
with the PHOTO-DRAMA. In our next issue we hope 
to be able to outline this work fully. To operate a DRAMA 
properly there should be at least three brethren with each 
of the THREE PARTS-nine for the DRAMA complete-one 
to operate the stereopticon; one to operate the phonographic 
lectures, oratorios, hymns, etc.; one to serve as 
usher and general order-keeper. More could be used, but 
three will do. 

PART I. would be presented in a town on Sunday, either 
in the morning, afternoon or evening; or, if the interest 
and the population justified, it could be presented all three 
of these times. But after it has been shown, it should go 
to the next town, and then to another and another— keeping 
on continuously from town to town, village to village, 
schoolhouse to schoolhouse, court house to court house, 
public hall to public hall. Following it the next day or the 
next Sunday or the next session, as the case might be, 
PART II. would be going on and on. Following this 
would be PART III. As soon as the three presentations 
have been made, another set of brethren should be ready 
to take up a series of Chart Talks on the Bible, and, later 
on, to invite the interested to regular Dawn Circles. 

These DRAMAS for the smaller villages and country 
places will not have the finest pictures now shown in the 



regular presentation of the DRAMA; but those used will 
be elegant, nevertheless. The Story will be just the same, 
and the value to each individual, we doubt not, just as 
great. We may be sure that country folk will attend the 
DRAMA, and talk about it and read about it, as much or 
more than do their city cousins. 

We are preparing a special stereopticon, which can be 
used by attachment of a cord to an ordinary electric light 
fixture, and can be, if necessary, transformed quickly so as 
to use acetylene gas— obtainable from the reservoir of an 
automobile. 

We are giving all these particulars now so that you 
can think the matter over. Classes that have been carrying 
on Class Extension work and believe they are able to 
carry on this new work, financing the expenses connected 
with the small halls, schoolhouses, etc., will please discuss 
the matter, decide upon it and advise us at once. If 
not sure that you will be able to manage the matter, better 
wait awhile and make sure. Let those be served first who 
are sure that they are ready, willing, anxious to assist in 
this great work. 

THE "EUREKA DRAMA" OUTFITS 

Having perfected our arrangements, we stopped the 
printing in order to add the following: 

"EUREKA DRAMA" OUTFIT NO. X 

Any of our readers desiring to purchase for his own 
use the full set of 96 DRAMA lectures (three 
PARTS, two hours each) with nine choice introductory, 
intermission and closing hymns and a portable 
phonograph, with a carrying case, can have the 
entire outfit for $38.50 

"EUREKA DRAMA" OUTFIT NO. Y 

This outfit is the one especially intended for the DRAMA 
EXTENSION described foregoing. Its three PARTS require 
only the same number of lecture and music records as 
foregoing; but, because of public use, each PART must have 
its own Phonograph, each PART its own Stereopticon, etc. 
We therefore show each PART complete in itself, as follows: 

PART I. includes one Primo Stereopticon for electric 
current— Oneida Lens (three for varying distances); 
special price $20.00 

R5515 : page 238 

Variable Rheostat (five amp., ten amp., or fifteen 
amp.) may be effective for house current or for 

heavy current arc lights 6.00 

Attachment for Acetylene Gas or Presto Light (useful 
in places where there is no electric current, but 



where gas can be taken from an automobile tank) 4.00 

DRAMA stereopticon slides, beautifully tinted, with special 

carrying box and carrying case 38.00 

One portable Phonograph, one Operator's Book, Lecture 
and Hymn Records for PART I., and carrying case 19.50 

Total cost of PART I., "EUREKA DRAMA" No. Y $87.50 

Additional would be the expressage from Brooklyn. 
The Society would furnish posters, window-cards and free 
scenario, and would supply the bound scenario for sale in any 
quantity at one-half retail prices. 
PARTS II. and III. would cost exactly the same as the 
above, the entire three PARTS amounting to $262.50 

Needless to say, all the prices here quoted are extremely 
low. Nevertheless it runs into a great deal of money to 
provide these "EUREKA DRAMAS" in quantities. For instance, 
we are preparing for orders from at least one 
hundred Classes, which would run the cost into $26,250, 
aside from packing, shipping, clerical work, free scenario, 
free PHOTO-DRAMA announcements, posters, etc. It 
would afford us great pleasure to announce this all free 
on demand, but expenses already depleting the treasury 
forbid such a course. 

Those who desire to purchase the DRAMA outright may 
do so. Others may have the PARTS on loan (subject to 
return to the Society on demand if not being used) if 
they will deposit $30 for each PART, $90 for the complete 
set of "EUREKA DRAMA" No. Y. On the return of 
the DRAMA this payment will be refunded, less a proper 
charge for broken slides, repairs, expressage, etc. 

In writing to us on this subject of DRAMA EXTENSION, 
please address, I.B.S.A., "EUREKA DRAMA," 124 
Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, N.Y. 



page 238 

PACIFIC COAST CONVENTION 

TRUTH friends on the Pacific Coast have been 

urging a General Convention. Few of them 

were able to attend the Central and Eastern 

Conventions in the Summer, but they hope 

that considerable numbers from the East 

will come to the Pacific Coast Convention. 

There is some little competition between 

San Francisco, Los Angeles, Santa Cruz 

and San Diego, but, so far as we are able 

to judge, there was unanimous agreement 

that Santa Cruz is the most centrally located of the four 

and an ideal place for a seaside Convention. Besides, we 

understand that there are special excursion rates to Santa 

Cruz from various parts of the Pacific Coast which would 

convenience the Truth friends of that vicinity. 



The dates are Aug. 30 to Sept. 6, inclusive— eight days. 

We have no doubt that it will be a very enjoyable and 
profitable Convention; for we have the assurance of the 
Lord in advance that where even two or three of His 
people are gathered, His presence and His blessing will 
be with them. Nevertheless, according to our usual custom, 
we urge nobody to attend the Convention. We 
merely make mention of it, and recommend that each one 
contemplating attendance shall consider the matter carefully, 
prayerfully, counting the cost. "Let nothing be 
done through strife or vain-glory," but with singleness 
of heart let each seek to know and to do what he believes 
to be most pleasing to the Lord. 

Those not so circumstanced as to be able to attend in 
person may, nevertheless, sing and make melody in their 
hearts, and unite their prayers with those of the Conventioners, 
and thus insure a share of the blessing. 

Accommodations have been arranged for at $1.25 per 
day up, and for lodging at 50c. single, and 75c. double, 

page 239 

meals at cafeteria. Address Convention Committee, care 
H. S. Holway, Chairman, Santa Cruz, Cal. 

Railway rates can be arranged through local agents. 
Special excursions from San Francisco, Los Angeles, etc. 



R5515 : page 239 

INTERESTING LETTERS 
RE PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I want to thank you; oh, I want to thank you so much, for 
the privilege of seeing the PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION! I had 
never thought to live to see the everlasting Gospel preached to 
those who dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, 
and tongue, and people! 

Yet so it is. Our Boston audience is cosmopolitan. Some 
are not able to understand English; some cannot read; yet all 
are reached. All have the Gospel preached unto them. Words 
cannot tell you how my heart rejoices! How near, how 
blessed, how real, these things are to me! 

Last Sunday as I was making my way to a box, an usher said 
to me, "We have strict orders to allow no one in the boxes." 
I said, "Oh dear! what shall I do? I cannot take a seat while 
strangers are being turned away!" She said, "But you cannot 
see the pictures there." I answered, "I can see fairly well, and 
I can hear splendidly, and best of all I can see that great audience 
having the everlasting Gospel preached to them." 

Surely they are being prepared for the manifestation of the 
sons of God and the blessing of all the families of the earth! 
The DRAMA is put so wisely, so kindly, that no one can take 



offense. When some great truth is brought out, then always 
the view from the other side is taken, as some pleasing picture 
is thrown across the screen. Thus much wisdom, much love 
is shown. 

Our ushers must find their work quite a physical strain, 
but all, I am sure, wish to show the politeness that comes 
from a heart fully consecrated to follow in the Master's steps- 
laying down life for the world. I love to think that we are 
dealing with our children of the next Age! What privileges, 
what joys, are ours! 

I love to think of that audience as one day catching up the 
mighty song begun in Heaven, and extending to every creature 
on the earth, praising Him who is worthy of every adoration! 
And so, dear Brother, we thank God most heartily, and are 
glad to co-operate even in the smallest way. 

Your Sister in the most blessed Faith, F. E. RILEY. 

TOWER A PARTICULAR MEANS OF GRACE 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

For some time I have been thinking of writing to tell you 
how much I have been helped and stimulated by THE WATCH 
TOWER, but have refrained from doing so, partly because I did 
not want to take up your time. Like the two disciples of 
old, however, my heart so burns within me that I feel I must 
express my deep gratitude for the "meat in due season" that 
is so bountifully served to the Lord's people by you. 

Many of the articles seem to have been like a message 
direct from the Lord Himself to me; and, in consequence, my 
heart goes out to Him in loving gratitude, and to you also, 
as His faithful messenger. 

Often, the Lord has, in response to prayer for guidance in 
various matters connected with the "daily round," shown me, 
through one of your articles in a current TOWER, quite clearly 
and definitely the course He would have me pursue. This has 
been so marked that I am convinced that the Lord, knowing 
the needs of His people, has made THE WATCH TOWER a very 
particular means of grace and help. 

This thought has been confirmed to me in another way: 
Some time ago, under an extra pressure of work— Harvest 
work— I allowed my regular morning reading of the VOLUMES 
and TOWERS to lapse, and I soon found, to my cost, that my 
rest of heart and trust in the Lord were being very easily 
disturbed, and for a little time I wondered why this should be. 
But a remark of yours to the effect that the first and most 
important work that every one of the Lord's people should 
engage in, is the making of his own calling and election sure, 
enabled me to view the matter of work for the Lord as He 
would have me see it. Since that time the regular, daily 
reading has brought me an ever-increasing peace and rest in 
the Lord and an ever-increasing joy, and, consequently, 
strength in His service. 

Your untiring labor of love for the Lord and the brethren 
is a constant encouragement to me to serve in like manner; 
and I thank God upon every remembrance of you, and particularly 
as I remember you daily at the Throne of Grace. 



With much love, I am 

Your brother by His grace, GEO. T. R. SWAIN.-Eng. 

SURELY, USE EVERY OPPORTUNITY 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I thought I would write you for information and advice. 
We had the pleasure of spending three days with our dear 

Brother T in our old haunts— Lima and Van Wert. There 

we met some of our old friends and they were surprised to 
see us. They all thought that I had long filled a drunkard's 
grave. But thanks be to our Lord for His Mercy toward me! 

While in Lima I called on a friend who is now one of the 
leading business men in that city. He had done all in his 
power to get me on the sober path, but he did no good. So 
we told him and his friends of our experience and how we had 
found the Truth and how it had made me free from Satan's 
bondage. 

Oh, how happy he was! Then he urged me to give a public 
talk to let them all know, in Mendon, Ohio, where we once 
lived. So this is what I would like to have some advice on. 
We thought that it would be good to use for our subject, 
"How I Became a Sober Man," telling all our experience, how 
we came to learn the Truth, bringing in God's great Plan of 
the Ages, and after the meeting pass the literature. 

This Lima man would go with us, also a former saloon 
keeper who is about to symbolize his consecration. 

May the Lord bless and keep you ! Pray for me. 

In the service of our King, C. B. H. 

page 239 

REJOICING IN THE WONDERFUL LIGHT 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I gladly improve this opportunity of expressing my deep 
appreciation of your progressive work along the lines of Present 
Truth. The STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES and all other 
helps which the Lord has provided through you are a great 
blessing to me, and I am constantly rejoicing in the wonderful 
light now shining. Pray for me, dear Brother, that I may be 
found faithful, even as I remember you every day at the 
Throne of Grace. 

Please accept the enclosed sum to be placed in the Good 
Hopes fund. May the dear Lord richly bless you, is my 
daily prayer. 

Your Sister in the Lord, BARBARA JONES. 

R5515 : page 239 

CREDULITY FEEDS UPON LITTLE 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Since reading Brother Baker's letter in a recent WATCH 
TOWER, "I feel it borne in upon me," as our Quaker friends 
say, to write you. Had the brother stopped to think he might, 



like many of us, have recalled how he had seen a crowd of 
children frightened at the suggestion that the "school-killer" 
or some other goblin, terrible to the childish imagination, was 
coming. The children of believers do not hear about the 
"bogey-man" perhaps, but they hear and read about demons, 
and their imaginations are as susceptible as those of less 
favored little people, and it does not require more than a 
shadow to start a wave of hysteria. But were it proven that 
demons did appear, what would they have to do? Can they 
touch the "Lord's anointed"? 

Regarding the case of the brother mentioned, who knows 
that he was not already insane when he went to the meetings 
of the society named? It is a point that has come under my 
observation, that often persons "change their religion," as 
well as become over-zealous in attendance upon church services, 
before their relatives or acquaintances discover their 
mental impairment; so they say "they have gone insane over 
religion." The source may be that in themselves they feel a 
loss, a sense of insufficiency, and in searching for help turn to 
any or all forms of faith. I am sure we do not wish to give 
the demons more glory, credit and notoriety than we can help ! 
Only a week ago a bright, attractive woman was brought to 
the hospital, and to my usual question: "What do you think 
is the cause?" put to two of the family separately, the prompt 
reply from each was, "Russellism." (They were shown that she 
had been insane seven years before she attended a meeting.) 

This is the third case in which this cause was given without 
any hesitation, and in each case the fallacy of the reasoning 
was made apparent to the relatives. Credulity is such a 
common weed! and it flourishes because it requires so 
little to feed upon. But "O, the blest morning already is here!" 

Your sister in the glorious hope, 

MARY CHRISTIANCY (M.D.) 
Of State Hospital for Insane. 



page 241 

VOL. XXXV AUGUST 15 No. 16 
A. D. 1914-A. M. 6042 



CONTENTS 

Four General Conventions 242 

View From the Tower 243 

Nations Hurrying to Armageddon 243 

The War Cloud's Silver Lining 243 

"The Desire of All Nations" 244 

Control of the Tongue a Necessity 245 

Our Lord's Estimate of Slander 245 

How Character is Built 247 

The Importance of Daily Self-Scrutiny 247 

Loyalty Proved by Prompt Obedience 248 



Saying, "Give Us of Your Oil" 249 

The Great Commandments 250 

"God Looketh on the Heart" 251 

The Ten Virgins 251 

Parousia and Epiphania 252 

Eureka Drama— Class Extension 253 

Some Interesting Letters 254 

First South African Convention 254 

A Voice from Korea 254 

"Times and Seasons" 255 

page 242 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:-All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



FOUR GENERAL CONVENTIONS 



SANTA CRUZ, CALIFORNIA, AUGUST 30-SEPTEMBER 6 

For particulars of this Convention see our August 1st 
issue. The Convention is to be held at Santa Cruz, on the 
Pacific Coast. The arrangements made are very economical. 
About fifteen speakers will participate— amongst them Brother 
Russell. Arrangements are being made for showing the 
"PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION" during four of the evenings of 
the Convention. 

There is great enthusiasm amongst the Brethren of the 



Pacific Coast. We learn that Los Angeles alone will send 
five carloads to the Convention. For reservations, etc., address 
Comfort Committee, care Mr. H. S. Holway, Santa 
Cruz, Calif. 

FORT WORTH, TEXAS, SEPTEMBER 18, 19, 20 
EXCURSION RATES-FARE AND ONE-THIRD ON SALE, 17th 
AND 18th. 

A three-day Convention has been arranged for, to be held 
in the Chamber of Commerce Auditorium, which has a seating 
capacity of twenty-five hundred. 

The Committee on arrangements has been appointed 
locally. Everything possible will be done to make this Convention 
very interesting for all attending. It will be convenient 
for a considerable number. Brother Russell hopes to 
be present on the evening of the 18th and a part of the 19th. 
Several Pilgrim Brethren are scheduled for this Convention. 
All contemplating attendance at the Convention are requested 
to send applications for accommodations, stating what they 
desire. Favorable terms have been arranged. The Comfort 
Committee can be addressed care of Mr. M. J. Adams, 1120 
Seventh Avenue, Fort Worth, Texas. 

The Photo-Drama of Creation will be exhibited evenings 
only, September 17, 18, 19, 20. 

ATLANTA, GEORGIA, SEPTEMBER 24,25,26,27 

A Convention especially convenient for many of the 
Southern friends has been arranged for Atlanta, Ga. All 
sessions of the Convention are scheduled for Convention Hall, 
Kimball House, centrally located. Some able speakers will be 
present. A profitable season is expected. Brother Russell 
expects to be at this Convention on the 25th. Desirable and 
economical arrangements have been made for the accommodation 
of the friends. All who desire accommodations should 
write in good season, addressing the Comfort Committee, care 
of Mr. W. S. Stevens, 328-1/2 E. Georgia Avenue, Atlanta, Ga. 

SARATOGA SPRINGS, NEW YORK, SEPTEMBER 27-OCTOBER 4 
EXCURSION RATES-2c. PER MILE, ON SALE 25th to 27th. 

We have accepted a very cordial invitation from Saratoga 
Springs, with use of large, fine Convention Hall. This location 
will be favorable for the Eastern friends. Able speakers 
will be on the program. Brother Russell expects to be 
at this Convention September 27th and 28th. A refreshing 
season of fellowship in the Lord with many of like precious 
faith is anticipated. No one should count on less than $1.25 
per day expense, board and lodging. Higher rates are, of 
course, obtainable. Address I.B.S.A. Comfort Committee, 
Convention Hall, Saratoga Springs, N.Y. 

The Photo-Drama of Creation each evening. 



We do not urge attendance at these Conventions; we leave 
that for yourself to decide. Those who attend, we believe, 
will have a special spiritual refreshment. But it may not be 
convenient for all, financially or otherwise. We must seek 
to use the best judgment we possess, asking wisdom from 
Above. If you should attend, be sure it is with a heart overflowing 
with gratitude to God and prayerful for blessing to 
yourself and others in attendance. If you cannot attend, you 
can surely remember the Conventioners and ask for them 
rich blessings from on High, and thus share the blessing. 



I.B.S.A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 
FOR THE MONTH OF SEPTEMBER 

Questions from Manual on Series Second of 
"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 
STUDY V. 

Week of September 6..Q. 13 to 18 Week of September 20. Q. 25 to 30 
Week of September 13. Q. 19 to 24 Week of September 27. .Q. 3 1 to 36 

Question Manuals on Vol. II., STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 5c. each, 
or 50c. per dozen, postpaid. 



R5516 : page 243 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER 

THE long expected shaking of the social earth 

is, we believe, already in progress. The 

great war for which Europe has been drilling 

its troops, preparing its treasuries and 

armaments, is shaking every nation of the 

world, financially, socially, politically. 

Strong as the nations feel themselves to be, 

all tremble in dread at the results of the 

conflict now in progress. Only the Bible 

can or does speak authoritatively respecting 

results. In the same breath it tells of disaster and of 

blessings— disaster to the nations, but ultimate blessings 

to the people through the new Government of Messiah's 

Kingdom. 

St. Paul, referring to our day and to present conditions, 
declares the Lord's Message, "Yet once more will 
I shake, not the earth only, but also the heavens." By 
inspiration the Apostle informs us that this will be the 
last great shaking which the world will ever have, because 
in this troubled time in the early dawn of the Millennium, 
everything shakable will be shaken and destroyed 
so thoroughly that nothing will remain except 
that which is unshakable— that which will fully have the 
Divine approval. The Apostle says that the only thing 
remaining unshakable will be the Kingdom of God in the 



hands of The Christ— Head and Body.— Hebrews 12:18-27. 

We should not get the thought that the shaking of the 
nations is just beginning, but rather that the shaking that 
has been in progress for some time is now reaching its 
violent stage. For years Europe has been trembling with 
occasional violent revolutionary shocks; but now it is preparing 
for the great shock, the great "earthquake," as the 
Bible symbolically styles it.— Revelation 16:18. 

Knowledge is power. For the past fifty years in particular 
knowledge has been preparing the masses of 

humanity, and their power has been growing apace. Proportionately 
the errors, superstitions and serfdoms of the 
past have been obliged to yield. A social revolution has 
proportionately progressed, different in its kind from anything 
of the past. Socialism is a revolution based upon 
increase of knowledge, even though, as we shall seek to 
demonstrate, much of its reasoning is fallacious, and much 
of its work likely, in the future, to be terribly injurious; 
in fact, if not eventually overruled by Christ's Kingdom, 
nothing would escape its misguided destructiveness. 

NATIONS HURRYING TO ARMAGEDDON 

Europe is honeycombed with Socialism, which, like 
yeast, is fermenting the entire social fabric. Kings and 
emperors dare not oppose it too openly, and all of their 
secret intrigues have failed to hinder its development. The 
general war now begun has inspiration from different 
quarters. Politics have to do with it— a desire to enlarge 
national boundaries. Religion has something to do with 
it— the Greek and the Roman Catholic Churches being opponents, 
the sympathies and prejudices of the people are 
directed accordingly. 

But Socialism is, we believe, the main factor in the 
war now raging and which will be earth's greatest and 
most terrible war— and probably the last. Socialism is 
related to the war by the fact that kings and emperors 
hope that patriotism and self-defense will cement the interests 
and sympathies of their peoples, now tending to 
disintegrate under the influence of Socialism. They would 
rather risk a general war than face a social revolution. 

Already press reports tell us that in Russia patriotic 
enthusiasm is healing dissension. They tell us further 
that the differences between the Nationalists and the 
Ulsterites of Ireland are being forgotten in the presence 
of the war crisis, which has involved Great Britain. 
Doubtless the same is true in Germany to a considerable 
extent. The various political factions are ignoring 
their differences in the presence of a national danger. 
Austria-Hungary, four distinct peoples with varying interests 
and centrifugal tendencies, will doubtless be welded 
together in self-defense. Similarly, the discontented of 
France and Italy are having their attention diverted temporarily. 
For a time, at least, the peace propaganda and 
the determination of the internationals to oppose the war 
is drowned by public sentiment. 



THE WAR CLOUD'S SILVER LINING 

But after the shock of battle— What? Such a war as 
is now progressing will surely bring no great victory to 
any single nation or to any combination of nations. The 
winners in the war will surely pay a high price for every 
victory. Civilization, falsely styled Christendom (Christ's 
Kingdom), drenched with blood and terribly impoverished 
at the end of the war, will have been only partially 
shaken. The great Armageddon battle of the Scriptures 
will have been only partially fought. The remnants of 
armies, returning to their homes sour and discouraged 
with defeat or costly victory, will be war-sick and mad 
against their rulers who led to the carnage. Then the 
great Armageddon of the Bible may be expected. Every 
man's hand will be against his neighbor. Various factions 
and parties will proclaim panaceas, and will endeavor to 
force them upon the public. As a result, foretold in 
prophecy, "there shall be a Time of Trouble, such as 
never was since there was a nation."— Daniel 12:1. 

R5516 : page 244 

The shaking process will continue, the Apostle tells 
us, until Messiah's unshakable Kingdom shall assert itself 
and take control of the world's affairs. The Lord through 
the Prophet Haggai tells us this, saying, "I will shake 
all nations, and the desire of all nations shall come." 
(Chapter 2:7.) All people really desire peace, joy, happiness, 
blessing, such as God purposes to provide through 
Messiah's Kingdom. The world really wants what God 
purposes to give them; but they do not comprehend their 
needs, and are seriously misled as to the methods by which 
they might be obtained. 

We as Bible students are coming more and more to 
appreciate the fact that the Divine Plan presented in the 
Bible is wonderful in its simplicity and its comprehensiveness. 
More and more we are coming to see that our error 
in the past has been that we studied not the Bible, but the 
creeds— and correspondingly had darkness instead of light. 

SYMBOLIC SHAKING AND BURNING 

Note again St. Paul's quotation of the Lord's words, 
"Yet once more I shake not the earth only, but also 
heaven." (Hebrews 12:26.) We have seen what the 
shaking of earth signifies as respects society, governments, 
social order. In the same symbolic language of 
prophecy the heavens represent the ecclesiastical systems, 
as the earth represents the social. The meaning of the 
Lord's words is, therefore, clear; the coming trouble is 
not to be merely one upon the world of mankind, but in a 
very special sense it is to signify a shaking of the Church 
—the ecclesiastical, or spiritual, or heavenly powers. 

There are doubtless saints in every church, in every 



sect, in every party. And these alone constitute the true 
Church, the saints of God— "the Church of the Firstborns, 
whose names are written in Heaven." (Hebrews 12:23.) 
The masses of Christians of all denominations, 
according to this prophecy, will be shaken— shaken in 
faith, shaken from their self-conceit, superstitions and 
bigotries. Only the true Church, only those who are in 
vital union with Christ, only the saints, will remain unshaken 
in the strenuous storm described by the Apostle. 

While Socialism has been shaking the political earth 
for the past thirty years, other forces have been shaking 
with great severity the ecclesiastical heavens. Inquire 
where we may, we find that not only ignorance and superstition 
have been letting go their hold upon all Christians, 
but additionally many of God's professed people have 
been shaken loose from faith in a Divine Revelation- 
many even shaken loose from faith in a personal God. 
Indeed, it is the habit of Christian ministers to boast 
amongst themselves that they have lost faith in the Bible 
—under the influence of what is known as Higher Criticism, 
formerly styled Infidelity. 

Probably not more than one in ten of all the Protestant 
ministers of the world would today acknowledge that he 
still holds fast his faith and confidence in the Bible as 
God's inspired Message. The other nine-tenths, if cross-questioned, 

R5517 : page 244 

would privately admit that they had lost their 
hold, or been shaken loose, and perhaps would boast of it 
even in public. Others, through fear of loss of prestige 
or salary, would seek to dodge the question and give 
evasive answers. 

The shaking has proceeded from the clergy and the 
college-bred, through the professors and the text-books, 
down to the high schools, and, to some extent, the grammar 
departments of the public schools. Everything that 
can shake the faith of the people in respect to the inspiration 
of the Bible seems to be at work, and extremely few 
anywhere are found lifting up their voices and their pens 
in defense of the Divine Revelation and a personal God. 

Let no one think that the shaking of the ecclesiastical 
heavens is ended. The Bible pictures the culmination as 
a sudden catastrophe which will awaken and set free all 
in Babylon who are the Lord's people— "Israelites indeed," 
without guile.— John 1:47. 

"THE DESIRE OF ALL NATIONS" 

The shaking of the heavens and the earth mentioned 
by St. Paul, corresponding with the shaking mentioned by 
the Prophet Haggai (2:7), is referred to under a different 
figure in St. Peter's writings. Following the style 
of some writers of today, who tell us of a general European 
conflagration, St. Peter describes the end of the 
nominal Church systems of our day under the figure of a 



fire. The heavens being on fire shall pass away with a 
great noise— great disputation, confusion, etc.; "the earth 
also and the works that are therein shall be burned up," 
writes St. Peter. "The fire of that Day shall try every 
man's work of what kind it is," writes St. Paul.— 2 Peter 3:10; 
1 Corinthians 3:13. 

Those who have built with gold, silver and precious 
stones supplied by the Divine Message and its promises, 
will survive the conflagration, because their faith and hope 
and relationship to God are indestructible. But all those 
who have built with wood, hay and stubble of human 
tradition and churchianity will find their work utterly 
destroyed in the fire of that Day. All their hopes, all 
their anticipations, will be utterly gone. "Yet themselves 
shall be saved, so as by fire." (1 Corinthians 3:11-15.) 
Then he explains that God will save this class because 
they have been truly consecrated Christians, who have 
built their false hopes and wrong expectations upon the 
sure foundation— Christ and His redeeming work. 

The passing away of the present symbolic heavens, or 
ecclesiastical powers, will leave the place of spiritual control 
to the "new heavens"— the Church of Glory. The 
passing away of the present social earth will give place to 
the new order of things styled "the new earth, wherein 
dwelleth righteousness." (2 Peter 3:13.) The new earth 
will be this same planet, but under new conditions, new 
social arrangements, provided by the Messianic Kingdom. 
At that time the prophecy of Haggai will begin to be fulfilled 
—the portion which declares "the desire of all nations 
shall come." That new earth condition is pictured by St. 
Peter most beautifully, saying: 

"Times of refreshing shall come from the presence of 
the Lord; and He shall send Jesus Christ, as before was 
preached unto you, whom the heavens must receive [retain] 
until the TIMES OF RESTITUTION of all things spoken 
by the mouth of all the Holy Prophets since the world 
began. "-Acts 3:19-23. 



"SOON shall restitution glory 
Bring to earth a blessed rest; 

And the poor, and faint, and weary 
Shall be lifted up and blest. 

"Just beyond the coming trouble 
See the reigning Prince of Peace! 

Lo! God's Kingdom now is coming, 
And oppression soon must cease. 

"Tell how Eden's bloom and beauty 
Once again shall be restored, 

Making all man's wide dominion 
As the Garden of the Lord. 

"He's now gath'ring out His jewels, 



Those who with Him soon shall reign; 
And earth's weeping and sad farewells 
Soon shall change to joyous strain." 



R5517 : page 245 

CONTROL OF THE TONGUE A NECESSITY 

"I say unto you, that every idle [unprofitable or pernicious] word 
that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the 
Day of Judgment."— Matthew 12:36. 

OUR LORD was addressing some of the 

Scribes and Pharisees who were trying to 

"catch Him in His words"— to take advantage 

of technicalities of language. In 

their endeavor to oppose Him, those Scribes 

and Pharisees were doing everything they 

could to discomfit or vanquish Him in His 

reasoning, even going to the extent of 

using arguments which they did not really 

believe. This is a very dangerous procedure. 

No matter how just we think our cause to be as 

a whole, we are not to resort to any misuse of language 

to uphold what we believe to be the Truth. 

Possibly those Pharisees might have said amongst 
themselves, "We must use strong arguments to keep ahead 
of that Nazarene. He uses strong language Himself. We 
must hold up our end of the controversy, and not show the 
white feather." But this position did not justify their 
conduct. Since Justice is the foundation of the Throne of 
God, any attempt to take advantage of another in any 
manner whatever will surely bring its own punishment. 

From our Lord's comments at various times on the subject 
of the tongue we realize that in His day there must 
have been some seriously wrong condition prevailing 
amongst those with whom He came in contact. The 
Scribes and Pharisees attributed evil power to Him, and 
declared that He was the tool of Satan— that Satan was 
speaking through Him, etc. At first our Lord told them 
in a general way that they deceived themselves. Later, He 
reproved them severely and showed the fallacy of their 
arguments. In connection with our text He declared that 
by their words they should be condemned— be dealt with, 
corrected in righteousness and brought to true reformation, 
or else perish in the Second Death. 

THE POWER OF THE TONGUE 

Human beings are the only earthly creatures that can 
talk— whether orally or in writing or otherwise. More 
and more the people of God realize the wisdom of the 
Apostle James' statement that although the tongue is a 
little member, yet it is the most dangerous of all, because 



it has the widest influence. If a man sin not with his 
tongue, he is a perfect man. (James 3:2.) We cannot 
estimate the possible results of our words. This influence 
may reach even to the ends of the earth. Therefore we 
are to consider carefully what we may say, in order to 
determine whether our words will glorify God or whether 
they will dishonor Him— whether they will stir up good 
thoughts and impulses in the minds of others or whether 
they will stir up that which is evil. 

In His Wisdom God has seen fit so to create us that 
our conduct of today has much to do with our character 
of tomorrow. Thus we are either making or breaking 
character continually. It is well that all should know this 
fact. Not only worldly people, but Christians also, should 
understand this principle; for Christians are now on trial 
for glory, honor and immortality. Therefore by neglecting 
to weigh carefully their words they might lose the 
great prize for which they are striving. 

THE DAY OF JUDGMENT 

By way of emphasis our Lord declared that every idle 
word— every unprofitable utterance— must be accounted 
for in a day of reckoning. With the Church, we understand 
the Scriptures to teach that this day of reckoning is 
this Gospel Age. Daily are we to go to our Heavenly 
Father and say, "Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive 
those that trespass against us." Not only must we render 
up our account daily, but at the end of our course there 
will be a general summing up. By this we do not understand 
that at the end of our race course we shall be lined 
up and questioned about every word of our experience, 
but that each one who comes into contact with the Truth 
is either building up character or else breaking it down, 
and that his character at the end of his probation will 
determine his reward. As a pupil daily learns his lessons 
and prepares himself for the final examinations at the end 
of the year, when there is a general testing of his knowledge, 
so with the pupils in the School of Christ. Day by 
day our Master deals with us; but at the end of our 
course there is to be a summing up. 

Doubtless there are in every one of us some things 
that are disapproved of the Lord; for we all have the 
treasure of the New Mind in earthen vessels and therefore 
cannot do as we would. But we have pledged ourselves 
to serve the Lord and to be loyal in doing His will. 
Therefore He is dealing with us now. In so doing, He 
warns us that the tongue is a very important member of 
our body, and that we are to be careful how we use it; 
for it will have a bearing upon the final decision in the 
end of this Gospel Age, when the returns are brought in. 
Then it will be determined whether we are worthy of the 
highest honor— join t-heirship with our Savior— or 
whether we shall be servants to that class or whether we 

R5518 : page 245 



shall be unworthy of life upon any plane of existence. 
OUR LORD'S ESTIMATE OF SLANDER 

But there is also a reckoning with us now. Our Lord 
declares that the tongue is so important a member that it 
represents our hearts more accurately than does anything 
else. The hand might do a good deed, yet the heart might 
be very different from the hand. In fact, the hand might 
not express the real sentiment of the heart at all. But 
the tongue is sure to give utterance to what is really in 
the heart. Therefore by our words we are daily either 
building up or tearing down character. 

There is a spirit which shoots out bitter words. From 
the standpoint of the Lord, this is MURDER. Thus at the 
end of the Jewish Age the Scribes and Pharisees criticised 
and slandered our Lord. Although from their 
knowledge of the Law they knew that they would be accountable 
for their actions, yet they did not appreciate the 
fact that they would be judged by their words. 

So will it be in the world's Judgment Day— the Millennium. 
Mankind will be held responsible for the work 
of their tongues. But they will have a more favorable 
opportunity then than if judged now; forces will then be 
at work which will give them a more prompt judgment; 
and therefore they will learn their lessons quickly. They 
will have a responsibility for their words. Those that 
"knew not will be beaten with few stripes"; but those who 
"knew and did not" act according to their knowledge, "will 
be beaten with many stripes." 

SPECIAL BRIDLES FOR THE TONGUE 

Under stress of sudden temptation the Lord's people, 
who are now on judgment, might impulsively say that 
which is not pleasing to the Master. But we must learn 
not to speak thoughtlessly; we must learn to weigh our 
utterances. Since we are servants of God, we should 
ever take heed to our ways, in order to render the best 
possible service. We are not merely to have a good will 
to do that which is right; we are to seek to bridle our 
tongues. Whatever vows or resolutions or restraints we 
may seek to put upon our tongues may be considered as 
bridles, by which we are determined to bring ourselves 
into full subjection to the will of God. 

R5518 : page 246 

So long as Satan and his demon host are at large, the 
Lord's people will do well to take heed to their ways, that 
they sin not with their tongue. Satan and his angels are 
seeking to subvert those who have given themselves to the 
Lord and to catch them in their words. So while we are 
in their presence we must be especially on guard, that they 
may not entrap us. As the Psalmist says, "I will keep my 



mouth with a bridle while the wicked [One] is before me." 
AN IMPORTANT LESSON FOR ALL 

Although our Lord declared that men should give account 
for every pernicious word, yet He referred to the 
thoughts behind the words. It was the attitude of heart 
that distressed Him. He knew the attitude of heart displayed 
by the Scribes and the Pharisees would bring injury 
upon them. 

Amongst the Lord's people there is nothing more important 
than that they should learn to be very just. While 
it is right to be loving, kind, generous, yet justice is the 
very foundation of character. All love and kindness not 
based upon justice are neither satisfactory nor pleasing 
to the Lord. In dealing with others, a child of God will 
not think, What will my fellow-men let me take from 
them? but, What are the rights of others, and what would 
my Heavenly Father have me do? 

It is very natural for one to recognize his own rights 
in any matter, but the fallen nature does not so quickly 
perceive the rights of others. Therefore one of the most 
important lessons for the Lord's people to learn is to do 
unto others as they would have others do unto them— 
simple justice. 

We fear that many of the Lord's dear people have not 
fully realized that obedience to the rules which govern the 
New Nature means absolutely the "Golden Rule" on their 
part toward all others. They must not do to others what 
they would not have others do to them. It is the duty of 
the New Creature to bring the body into such subjection 
that justice shall rule in every act and word, and so far 
as possible in every thought. One must be just in his 
thoughts before he can properly be just in his dealings. 
Whoever thinks unjustly will act unjustly in spite of endeavors 
to the contrary. 

THE TREASURE STORED IN OUR HEARTS 

As we reflect that the Church is standing before the 
Bar of Divine Judgment, under the personal inspection of 
our Lord, and that in His estimation our words are a 
criterion of judgment, we cannot weigh too carefully the 
underlying principles upon which His decision will be 
made. Our Lord's words, as recorded in Matthew 12:34-36, 
indicate that both the heart and the mouth are under 
special scrutiny. How necessary therefore is a right condition 
of heart, in order that the words of our mouth may 
be acceptable to our Lord and Redeemer! 

In our Lord's statement, the heart is representative of 
the character, and the mouth is the index of that character. 
The word heart is sometimes used in Scripture 
with the force of the word mind. Out of the abundance 
of the mind the mouth speaks. A good man brings forth 
good things out of the treasure of his mind. But all mankind 
are by nature sinners; therefore all are by nature 



evil to some extent. God does not approve of any who 
are under the sentence of death. Nevertheless there are 
those of the condemned race of Adam who are relatively 
good— those who, despite the imperfections under which 
they were born, the blemishes of their fallen nature, are 
desirous of being in harmony with the One who is 
all-good. 

We find nothing in Scripture to support the doctrine 
of total depravity— to imply that there is nothing whatever 
of good in humanity. Even though no one is perfect, 
nevertheless, there are some who have at least a good 
will, good intentions. Such superior characters of past 
Ages were represented in the Ancient Worthies— Abel, 
Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, the Prophets 
of Israel, etc., who fully demonstrated their obedience to 
God and their loyalty to the principles of righteousness. 

THE CLASS APPROVED OF GOD 

During this Gospel Age also there are some who are 
good. Amongst the heathen, as well as in Christian lands, 
there are those who are well-meaning, well-intentioned, 
those who are not malicious, not striving to do wrong, but 
endeavoring to do right. In order to have the Divine 
approval in this Age, however, one must be of those who 
come unto the Father through Jesus; for none others are 
accepted of God. The Father will not receive any one 
whose heart is not sincere, who does not have good intentions, 
who does not manifest loyalty to Him and to the 
principles of righteousness. 

Therefore any whom we have reason to believe are 
accepted of God, begotten of the Holy Spirit, are no 
longer to be counted as "children of wrath, even as 
others," but as of the Household of Faith. Despite the 
frailties of their flesh, they are good at heart; else God 
would not accept them. With these there is a constant 
conflict between the New Will and the desires of the flesh. 

When we come to consider those who are good at 
heart, we find that all of them have imperfect bodies- 
some more so than others. Shall we give up the struggle 
for the prize because we cannot do perfectly? No! The 
Lord assures us that He looks at the heart, not at the 
flesh; that He has made a very gracious arrangement 
through our Lord Jesus by which the imperfections are 
cleansed away. "The blood of Jesus Christ His Son 
cleanseth us from all sin." Therefore all His children 
may come with courage to the Throne of Heavenly Grace, 
there to obtain mercy and help in every time of need. 

CHIPS OR APPLES-WHICH? 

The good things brought forth from the treasure of a 
good man's heart will be those things which he has stored 
up from time to time. As the Psalmist says of the godly 
man, "His delight is in the Law of the Lord; and in His 
Law doth he meditate day and night." And of himself 



he declares, "Mine eyes prevent [anticipate] the night 
watches, that I may meditate in Thy Word," Law, precepts 
—the spirit, the purpose of that Law, not merely the 
outward form. So should we meditate upon the spirit of 
the Law of God. The sentiment of our heart should be 
the desire to get the Divine Mind as nearly as possible 
on every subject. All who are eager to be in harmony 
with God and to attain His character-likeness will think 
upon things that are good, pure, holy.— Psalm 1:2; 
119:148; Philippians 4:8. 

As one thinks upon things that are good, the mind becomes 
stored with good. Wherever there is a mouth disposed 
to speak upon things that are evil, there is an evil 
disposition— a mind in which evil has been stored. Whatever 
one has stored up in the mind will be topmost and 
sure to be spoken. An evil treasure will show itself, despite 
all endeavors to hide it; and likewise a good treasure 
will manifest itself; for the mind can hold only a certain 
amount.— Luke 6:45. 

A father saw his son reading a novel. He knew that 
his son was in the habit of reading along this line. Calling 
the boy, he said, "John, I wish you to empty the 
apples out of that basket, and then take the basket to the 
woodshed and fill it with chips." The son did as he was 
directed. When he returned the father said, "Now put in 

R5519 : page 247 

the apples." The son replied that he could not do this, 
because there was not room enough in the basket for both 
chips and apples. Then the father said, "That is just 
what you are about to do with your mind. You have been 
filling your mind with chips; and when you try to put in 
apples, there will be no room." Thus it is with all of us. 
If we fill our minds with jokes, foolish sayings, etc., we 
shall not be able to fill them with the things of the Holy 
Spirit— Ephesians 5:1-7. 

Many of the Lord's people find that, while their hearts 
are good, there is in their flesh a tendency for certain 
things that are not good. Thus there is a continual 
struggle between the flesh and the spirit as to whether the 
treasure stored up shall be chips or apples, so to speak. 
It is for each New Creature to decide which shall fill his 
mind— what kind of society he will choose, where he 
will go, what he will read, what kind of influences he will 
come under, what kind he will resist, etc. If in the past 
he has to any extent treasured up evil things, he should 
now try to rid himself of them. If his mind has been 
filled with jokes and levity, things not proper to the child 
of God, he should seek to put these away. 

HOW CHARACTER IS BUILT 

Finally, there is a relationship between this laying up 
of a good treasure in our minds and that of which our 
Lord spoke when He said, "Lay up for yourselves treasure 



in Heaven." In laying up treasure in our minds and 
hearts, we are building character. Whoever goes into a 
man's house and sees what he has gathered in the way of 
treasures can easily perceive the direction in which that 
man's mind is bent. His preferences demonstrate his 
character. Thus it is with us all; the things which we 
cultivate are an index to our character. 

When we come to render up our account as New 
Creatures, character will decide whether we shall be 
esteemed worthy to be of the Lord's elect Little Flock. 
Only those who have laid up the treasure of a character 
like that of the Lord Jesus Christ, our Pattern, will be 
fit for an inheritance in the Kingdom of Heaven. Our 
eternal destiny therefore will be decided by the way in 
which we now use our minds and the thoughts which we 
now accumulate. Whoever cultivates good thoughts will 
receive a blessing, not only in the present life, but throughout 
the future. 

Our first concern, then, must be for the heart— that its 
affections and dispositions may be wholly under the control 
of Grace Divine; that every principle of truth and 
righteousness may be enthroned there; that justice, mercy, 
benevolence, meekness, self-control, faith, brotherly-kindness, 
love, supreme reverence for God and for Christ, and 
a fervent love for all the beauties of holiness, may be 
firmly fixed as the governing principles of life. If these 
principles are established in the heart, we shall have no 
difficulty in controlling our tongue; for out of the good 
treasure of our heart the mouth will speak forth words of 
truth, soberness, wisdom and grace. 



R5519 : page 247 

THE IMPORTANCE OF DAILY SELF-SCRUTINY 

"If we would judge ourselves, we should not be judged; but 
when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we should 
not be condemned with the world."— 1 Corinthians 11:31,32. 

IN THESE words the Apostle seems to be 

saying that if we as Christians should properly 

criticize ourselves, examine ourselves, 

correct ourselves, the Lord would not find 

it necessary to take us in hand and give us 

judgments, or criticism. But if we fail to 

do this judging, or criticizing, of ourselves, 

then it will be necessary for the Lord to do 

it; for He has taken us into His family, He 

has made us sons, and we are in the School 

of His Son, our great Elder Brother, to be trained and 

instructed. This is our Judgment Day. 

The object of this chastening on the part of the Lord 
is not to vent His displeasure upon us by causing us pain; 
but it is as the Apostle states, "that we may not be condemned 



with the world." We judge ourselves when we 
criticize our own conduct, our own words— our own 
thoughts, even— and try them by the principles laid down 
in the Word of God— justice, kindness, mercy, love. As 
our Master admonishes us, if we find that we have done 
wrong, we should leave our gift before the altar— we 
should first go and make apologies to the one whom we 
have injured or wounded by any word or act of unkindness 
or rudeness. Then we may come and offer our gift. 

Such a course would be forcing one's self, obliging 
one's self to do the right thing. It is not 
enough that one should say, "I know that I was 
wrong; I should not have done as I did; but, then, 
I am imperfect; I cannot do just what is right in everything." 
This course would not be in harmony with 
the spirit of our text. Our text shows that if we do 
wrong we have a solemn duty to make it right, to the best 
of our ability. If we have had an uncharitable thought 
against another it is not necessary that we go to the person 
and tell him this; for we might make the matter worse 
by so doing. But we should judge ourselves in the matter 
and give ourselves a thorough setting-down. We ought 
to give ourselves a good lesson, a lasting one. Thus we 
would be right in heart, in intention, approved of the Lord. 

THE PROPER COURSE TOWARD OTHERS 

We understand that it is the Lord's will respecting us 
that we should carefully scrutinize our thoughts, words 
and actions. If we find that we have injured another 
with our tongue or in any manner, we should go to that 
person, and to any to whom we have spoken, and make it 
right, make proper apologies, putting a penalty upon ourselves 
—a penalty that we shall not forget. If the penalty 
requires considerable humility, so much the better. If we 
neglect to punish ourselves, this would show that we are 
not in the proper condition; and the best thing the Lord 
could do for us would be to give us a severe chastisement. 
This might not come in the same day or week or month. 
But we may be sure that if we do not do right in the 
matter, we shall come to the place where the Lord will 
take us in hand. If He does so, He will give us some 
trying experiences. It may be that some one will do 
something unkind to us or say something evil about us, 
and the Lord may permit this. Or He may allow us to 
get into a position that would bring upon us some kind of 
punishment. 

The world will be on judgment, or trial, in the next 
Age. If we were of the world our special judgment 
would come then, instead of now. We would be making 
marks upon our character that would require stripes in 
the next Dispensation. But so surely as we belong to 
the Church class, we must receive our judgments and 
punishments in the present Age. If we fail to give them 
to ourselves, our Master will give them to us. 

There is another Scripture which says that we are to 



"judge nothing before the time." (1 Corinthians 4:5.) 
This does not refer to our judging ourselves. We cannot 
judge ourselves in the sense of passing sentence in our 
own case; but we should carefully watch our conduct, 
our words and our thoughts, and deal with ourselves in 
regard to our own derelictions and our offenses against 
others. Jesus said, "By their fruits ye shall know them." 

R5519 : page 248 

This means that we are to notice this fruitage of life 
which we see both in our own case and also in that of 
others— in our brethren, in our neighbors. In our own 
minds we are to judge and disapprove of evil actions and 
words. We should say, Is this right or is it wrong? We 
should be judging such matters all the time. 

NOT OUR PROVINCE TO PASS SENTENCE 

Every day we see a great many things in life that are 
displeasing to the Lord. We hear others use vile language 
or improper language. We see acts of cruelty or 
injustice. So we can be judging these things as we go 
through life and getting lessons out of them. This does 
not mean that we should judge the people who do these 
things and decide what punishment they should receive. 
We are neither authorized nor competent so to do. We 
are not to sit in judgment as to the condition of the heart, 
except along lines where the Word of God plainly states 
that we are to judge. Appearances are very often deceptive, 
and things are not always what they seem to be. 

The Lord tells us that the time will come when we 
shall be appointed judges of the world, but that this time 
is not now, and we are not to anticipate our work of the 
future either in our minds or in our words. Nor should 
we repeat to others what we may see or hear that would 
lower another in their eyes, save in a case when to do so 
would be a matter of duty. If we were to form judgments 
of others and go around telling what we think of 
this one or that one, we would have a hard time of it and 
would do an immense amount of harm. Thus we would 
come under the just condemnation of the Lord and surely 
bring upon ourselves His rebuke. 

While we appreciate the truth of the Lord's words that 
a good tree will bring forth good fruit, and while we can 
see many times that there is something wrong in the conduct 
of certain ones, yet we are not able to judge 
of what would be the proper punishment for such conduct. 
We may know that the daily fruitage of a life indicates 
the condition of the heart, but we are not to pass sentence 
upon any. The Lord will make this decision. In the 
Master's words, "By their fruits ye shall know them," He 
gives us the thought that it is only in regard to that of 
which we have positive knowledge that we should render 
a decision in our own minds. We can know that the 
fruitage of a certain life proves that such a one is out of 



harmony with God. Yet we would have no right even 
then to pass sentence in the case. We cannot know what 
may have led to that unfavorable condition. 

"I JUDGE NOT MINE OWN SELF" 

In regard to judging in our own case, no one should 
be so well able as ourselves to know our heart. But St. 
Paul shows us that we should use a certain amount of 
leniency in judging even ourselves. He says, "Yea, I 
judge not mine own self;. ..but He that judgeth me 
is the Lord." This is not a contradiction of the words 

R5520 : page 248 

of our text, but his thought seems to be that when we 
come to realize how high is God's standard, we might be 
inclined to judge ourselves too severely, not taking into 
account that we were shapen in iniquity. We might 
better think somewhat along this line: I realize that I 
have failed again today to live fully up to what I had 
hoped. I feel condemned before the bar of my own judgment 
because of it. But I hope the Lord will be able to 
make some allowance for me in this matter. I trust He 
can make some excuse for me that I do not see for 
myself. I am not sure how much allowance should be 
made; I am not able to judge myself accurately. 

We should then go to our Father in earnest prayer, 
telling Him of our sorrow that we have not succeeded 
better in glorifying His name. We should plead the 
merits of the blood of our dear Redeemer, promising the 
Lord that we will strive to do better, if possible, by His 
assisting grace. 

There are some of the Lord's children who possess 
only a small amount of self-esteem and who therefore 
would be inclined to be too severe in their judgments of 
themselves, and hold themselves to the strictest account 
for every imperfection. Such should try to judge themselves 
justly. All judgment should be just, even when 
we ourselves are the culprits. Justice is the foundation of 
the Lord's Throne. We should never lose sight of the 
fact that we have the covering of the robe of our Savior's 
righteousness and the Mercy-Seat, to which we should 
go every day for cleansing from every defilement. But 
it is not only proper, but indeed a duty that we daily 
scrutinize ourselves, and see that we keep the body in subjection 
to our new mind. Thus doing, and thus applying 
daily, nightly, for the application of our Redeemer's 
merit to cover our unwitting mistakes and faults, we shall 
be kept in our Father's love and approval, and shall not 
need so much chastening from the Lord. 

This daily taking stock of ourselves, the discernment 
of our gains and losses as New Creatures in Christ, and 
of how and where these came to us in our constant warfare 
with all our spiritual foes within and without, will 
surely prove profitable to each child of God who takes 



such account of himself in the fear of the Lord, desiring 
only to be pleasing to his Father in Heaven, to become 
all that God would have him to be— a saint indeed. 



R5520 : page 248 

LOYALTY PROVED BY PROMPT OBEDIENCE 

"He that hath My commandments, and keepeth them, he it is 
that loveth Me; and he that loveth Me shall be loved of My 
Father, and I will love him, and will 
manifest Myself unto him."— John 14:21. 

THE WORDS of our text are a part of our 

Lord's last discourse to The Twelve before 

His crucifixion. The words, "He that hath 

My commandments," signify, He that hath 

received My commandments, and is willing 

to become My disciple. The mere hearing 

of the command, or the mere understanding 

of the command, is not the receiving it. 

People misunderstand this point. Many 

hear the command, and yield a partial obedience 

to it, but they do not receive it in the true sense 

of the word. This matter of a definite contract with the 

Lord is a very important one. Those who do not make 

it are not truly His disciples, have not really put themselves 

into His hands, and are in danger of shipwreck. 

We may know about a certain blessing, but in dealing 
with the Lord we need to finish our contract. One who 
merely says, "I will try not to do anything contrary to 
the Lord's will; I will do whatever He forces upon me," 
is not in the right attitude to enter the School of Christ. 
There are certain steps by which we become Christ's disciples. 
A person may be a visitor at a school, but he has 
not become a member of the school unless he has met the 
terms— has accepted the rules and regulations under 
which the school is operated. 

OUR LORD'S LAW OF LOVE 

The Apostle Paul says, "Ye are not under the Law, 
but under grace," and yet the Lord speaks of our keeping 

R5520 : page 249 

His commandments. How shall we harmonize these two 
thoughts? We are to recognize a distinction between the 
Law, the commands which Christ gives, and the Law 
Covenant, to which the Apostle refers. We are not under 
the Law Covenant, which required that those who 
would have its blessings must keep its every requirement 
perfectly or suffer the curse, death. The arrangement 
under our Lord Jesus is that if His disciples, those already 



under His Robe of righteousness, seek to do His 
commandments, strive with their whole heart to do His 
will, they shall have eternal life through Him. The mediator 
of the Law Covenant was not competent to make 
any allowance for imperfections. 

Our Lord here speaks of "commandments"— plural. 
We should, therefore, not understand these words to 
mean the same as when He said, "A new commandment I 
give unto you"; neither should we understand Him to 
mean the epitomized statement of the Law of the Ten 
Commandments— "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with 
all thy heart, with all thy soul, with all thy mind, and 
thy neighbor as thyself." We understand our Lord to 
mean, Whoever receives My teachings, whoever will follow 
Me, will thus be demonstrating that he has love for 
Me; and such I will love. These "commandments" would 
seem to be the general teachings of the Lord as they bear 
on all the affairs of life. We do not understand them to 
be some set, particular statements, as in the 5th chapter of Matthew. 
He there designates a number of qualities 
that are necessary— meekness, righteousness, etc.; these 
are not commanded. 

LOVE DELIGHTS TO SERVE 

Our Lord's commands are not put in the form of compulsion, 
but whoever loves Him will serve Him. Speaking 
through the Apostolic Epistles, and in the Book of 
Revelation, Jesus has given us various expressions of 
what righteousness is, what love is. Whoever, therefore, 
desires to be with Him, to reign with Him, should 
wish to obey every hint coming from Him. There is 
nothing put in the nature of an arbitrary command- 
merely the statement of principles. But these become to 
us commands. To know His will is a law to such as love 
Him— they wish to serve Him. This seems to be the Divine 
arrangement for this Age— that we should be left 
without a "thou shalt" or "thou shalt not," so as to prove 
the degree of our interest and loyalty. 

Some of our friends say to us sometimes, Do you think 
the Lord will reject me if I do not leave the nominal 
church, or if I do not perform the symbol of water baptism? 
And we have to tell them they have misunderstood 
the whole matter. The Lord is merely showing us 
the line of duty and of privilege, and whoever does not 
take delight in doing the Lord's will would better not do 
it at all. The Lord seeks such to worship Him as worship 
Him in spirit and in truth. In the Millennial Age 
He will deal with the world through stripes and blessings; 
and obedience will be compelled. But now He says, 
Here is My will; you can read between the lines, if you 
desire. I do not put you under a Law Covenant, but I 
place before you a great opportunity. If you appreciate 
the privilege, become My disciple. You will not need to 
make any boast, but show your obedience, your appreciation 
—take a prompt and positive stand. I will not insist 



on anything, then, but will give you the opportunity. 

The Lord will take note of those who appreciate His 
great offer, and when He comes to claim His Bride these 
are the ones who shall reign with Him. 



R5520 : page 249 

SAYING, "GIVE US OF YOUR OIL" 

MILLIONS of people have had their attention 
drawn to the teachings of THE WATCH 
TOWER and the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
respecting our thought that the Time of 
Trouble such as never was since there was 
a nation is due some time about October, 
1914. Eight million volumes of the STUDIES 
IN THE SCRIPTURES are in the hands of the 
public. Some who scoffed, railed, laughed 
and talked about the impossibility of our 
expectations are startled by the suddenness with which 
the great European war has started. All admit that there 
never has been such a war before, and that there never 
again can be such a war. Ignoring the Bible, all admit 
that the consequences of this war will be so terrible, the 
impoverishment of the nations so great, that wiser counsels 
must prevail in the future. We see from the Bible 
viewpoint that the result of this war will lead up to the 
wrecking of our present civilization in a period of 
anarchy. Whatever way the war may eventuate, it will 
surely be unsatisfactory. Discontent will more than ever 
prevail amongst the masses. A reign of terror throughout 
the civilized world is to be expected as a result. 

All these things we have presented in our publications, 
sermons, etc., also in the PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION, 
which already has been shown to audiences totaling more 
than four millions. This war is riveting conviction upon 
the minds of many respecting the correctness of our expectations. 
Their question is, "What next?" And they 
will not think of looking for an answer in the direction of 
the ministers of the nominal Churches, who they now 
know have been keeping them in the dark and trying to 
prevent their obtaining the true light from God's Word, 
as it is now shining amongst the Bible Students. 

R5521 : page 249 

A WORD OF CAUTION 

Now is the time for our moderation of thought, speech 
and manner. When our dear relatives, friends, neighbors 
and the public begin to inquire of us respecting the 
horoscope of God's Word, we should be very meek, gentle, 
patient in our replies. Any haughty manner, any spirit 
of "I told you so," would be a rebuff to those who are now 



inclined to look to us for assistance, guidance, instruction 
in the teachings of God's Word. Sympathetically we 
should put ourselves in their places and treat them most 
kindly, telling them that this war is probably connected 
with the great anarchy which is to follow; that it will 
probably weaken the nations as nothing else would have 
done, and thus give the discontented element of society, 
not only an excuse, but an opportunity, for overthrowing 
all governments and precipitating the world into the most 
terrible calamity ever known. 

We recommend that the distresses of the Time of 
Trouble be not so much discussed as the grand outcome, 
the MESSIANIC KINGDOM, to follow. We should help our 
friends and neighbors to look beyond the dark cloud to 
the silver lining, assuring them that God's Word implies 
that this Time of Trouble is necessary as a preparation 
for Messiah's Kingdom. The plowshare of trouble must 
first prepare human hearts for the sowing of the good 
seed of the next Dispensation. As we read, "When Thy 
judgments are abroad in the earth, the inhabitants of the 
world will learn righteousness."— Isaiah 26:9. 

Let us always remember our ordination, or commission, 
or authority, to preach— as we read, "To bind up 

R5521 : page 250 

the broken-hearted, to declare the deliverance of the 

captives." Let the world, the flesh and the Devil break 

men's hearts, if they will. Let the great Time of Trouble 

break them, if it will. Our commission is not to break 

hearts, but to heal them, to bind them up, to pour in the 

gracious promises of God's Word, sympathetically. The 

promises are represented symbolically as the oil. Thus 

shall we best show forth the praises of Him who hath 

called us out of darkness into His marvelous light. (1 Peter 2:9.) 

Thus shall we best assist those who sadly 

need our assistance. We must remember that we were 

equally in the dark but a short time ago, and that our 

neighbors and friends are no more responsible for being 

in the dark than we were. It should, therefore, be ours to 

excuse rather than to berate or faultfind. 

THE FOOLISH VIRGIN CLASS 

It is not for us to determine who will be of the foolish 
virgin class and fail to get into the Marriage, and thus 
as a result pass into the great tribulation and get a lesser 
reward. Nevertheless, we must feel some interest and 
curiosity in respect to our Master's parabolic prophecy. 
While it has been true that Christian brethren charged 
with the cares of this life and therefore not filled with the 
Spirit, the oil, and lacking the light of the Lamp, have 
repeatedly said to us, "I wish that I could see that as 
you do," or, "Show me that in a few words," nevertheless 
they have been unwilling to take the time necessary for 
proper investigation and the filling of the Spirit. All 



this is, we believe, still more abundantly true now. 

Many of this overcharged class, neglecters of 
their Covenant of Sacrifice, will be stimulated by the 
outward signs of our time. Doubtless many of them will 
study and come clearly into the light and to a fulness of 
consecration to the Lord's service. Some of these may 
come in with such fervent zeal that they may be accounted 
of the Lord worthy of a place in the Bride Class. Others 
may come along so slowly that they will be of the Great 
Company Class, the foolish virgins of the parable. 

The conclusion of the parable shows us that by the 
time the foolish virgin class shall have become thoroughly 
awake, thoroughly convinced of the Divine Plan, etc., and 
fully awake to the privileges of their consecration vows— 
by that time the Little Flock Class will have passed into 
the wedding, and the door to that glorious privilege and 
opportunity will be forever shut. The Master is to have 
but one Bride Class. The others, therefore, will be rejected 
and must pass through great tribulation, eventually 
to come to a glorious place on the spirit plane as the 
antitypes of the Levites, while the faithful Little Flock 
will be glorified as the Royal Priesthood, in association 
with their Master. 

The point we would particularly impress is that we 
should all be praying and striving for an abundance of 
the fruits of the Holy Spirit— manifestations of patience, 
gentleness, long-suffering, brotherly-kindness, love— that 
thus we may be enabled to render any assistance to those 
who now will be inquiring. It is a special privilege for us 
to be the representatives of the Lord and His Divine 
Plan. But instead of making us haughty, proud, disdainful, 
it should make us very humble, gentle and loving, remembering 
that such honors are not deserved by any of 
us, but are of the Lord's grace. 



R5521 : page 250 

THE GREAT COMMANDMENTS 

-SEPTEMBER 6.-MARK 12:28-44.- 

"Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with 
all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind; 
and thy neighbor as thyself."— Luke 10:27. 

ON THE question day when the Doctors of 
Divinity sought to entrap our Lord many 
questions were asked. A week ago we considered 
one. The final question constitutes 
today's Study. A Scribe, a man of more 
than average education, had heard the various 
questions propounded and had perceived 
how well our Lord had answered them. 
Then he essayed a question— quite probably 



in all sincerity, and not with a view to entrap 
Jesus. He asked, "What is the chief commandment 
of all?"— doubtless referring to the Decalogue. Jesus replied 
that the first, the chief, of all the commandments is, 
"Hear, O Israel: The Lord our God is One Lord; and 
thou shalt love Jehovah thy God with all thy heart, and 
with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy 
strength; this is the chief commandment." 

Our Lord here made a quotation from the Old Testament. 
(Deuteronomy 6:4,5.) How wonderfully comprehensive 
the statement! Who today, hundreds of years 
afterwards, could more completely epitomize the great 
truth of this text? Heavenly Wisdom was manifested in 
its first statement. The same Heavenly Wisdom was 
manifested in our Lord's reference to it. He added 
nothing, because nothing could be added. 

Moreover, we are daily seeing more clearly the force 
of this expression— Love. Love is the principal thing! 
Many in times gone by, according to the creeds professed, 
might have changed this statement to read that we should 
dread, fear, tremble; for the Almighty God of the Universe, 
we were told, had a great hell of torture prepared 
from before man's creation, in which He purposed that 
the great majority of humanity should be eternally tormented. 
But that was in the creeds. The Bible stands 
out distinctly separate from all human creeds and superstitions, 
and tells us that God is Love, that He is the 
Father of Light and Mercy, from whom cometh down 
every good and perfect gift. 

The Bible, too, tells us of the Divine forgiveness, 
Divinely arranged for through the precious blood of Christ 
from before the foundation of the world. It tells us also 
that this forgiveness of sins is not merely for the Church, 
the Elect, the little handful now being called out from 
the world; but that eventually the Love of God will be 
manifested to all of His creatures, to the intent that, coming 
to a knowledge of that love in due time, they may 
renounce sin and accept the Divine provision— receiving 
in return under Messiah's Kingdom the great blessing of 
Restitution of mental, moral and physical perfection, lost 
through Father Adam's disobedience. 

THE SECOND COMMANDMENT 

Jesus proceeded beyond the question, and declared that 
the Second Commandment stands related to the First; 
namely, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself." Again 
we stand all astonished with wonder at how much is 
stated in very few words. Many a volume is written that 
contains far less. No other religion than that of the 
Bible reveals such a God of mercy and compassion, as 
manifested by His loving provision for the welfare of His 
creatures. No other religion even hints at love in return. 
No other religion suggests so high a standard of dealing 
with our fellow men. 

This Law of God, now nearly four thousand years old, 



was probably more or less made known through the Jews 
to other nations and peoples (Deuteronomy 4:6-8); but 
none of them grasped its true import. The closest approach 

R5521 : page 251 

to this sentiment is probably found in the writings 
of Confucius, to the effect that one should not do to 
others what he would not have others do to him. But oh, 
what a contrast! One is merely a negative statement; the 
other is a positive one— "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as 
thyself." 

Truly, there is something about the Law of God which 
stamps it as Divine. How beautiful the world would be, 
with all its thorns, thistles and difficulties, if men were 
only able and willing to live up to these two grand Laws 
—each man loving the Heavenly Father supremely, serving 
Him with every power and talent, and loving his 
neighbor as himself, seeking to serve that neighbor as he 
might have opportunity! That would be Paradise. Thank 
God, this is just what we are assured the world will 
yet be, when the Messianic Kingdom is established. 

R5522: page 251 

The Divine arrangement which provided the death of 
Christ as an offset for Adam's sin has also provided the 
Reign of Christ as the offset of the reign of Sin and 
Death. And the Divine promise assures us that ultimately 
all who love and desire righteousness and truth shall be 
blessed and perfected, and shall have everlasting life. It 
assures us also that the earth, God's footstool, will be made 
glorious, during the thousand years of Messiah's Reign; 
and that eventually all lovers of sin, refusing to make 
progress in righteousness, will be destroyed from amongst 
the people in the Second Death. Thus will the happy Day 
be ushered in for which we have so long prayed: "Thy 
Kingdom come; Thy will be done on earth, even as it is 
done in Heaven." Then will be fulfilled the promise that 
every knee shall bow and every tongue confess, and the 
whole earth be filled with the glory of God. 

"NOT FAR FROM THE KINGDOM" 

The Scribe was impressed, and conceded the truth of 
Jesus' answer. He said, "Master, Thou hast said the truth; 
for there is one God; and there is none other but Him; 
and to love Him with all the heart, and with all the understanding 
and with all the soul, and with all the strength, 
and to love one's neighbor as himself, is much more than 
all whole burnt offerings and sacrifices." 

"And when Jesus saw that he answered discreetly, 
He said unto him, Thou are not far from the Kingdom 
of God!" By this the Master meant that the Scribe was 
very near to the point where he might become one of 
His disciples— one of those waiting for the Kingdom, 



hoping for it, striving for it, preparing for it. It was 
such "Israelites indeed," in whom was no guile, that Jesus 
especially sought to gather from amongst the Jewish 
people, preparatory to throwing open to the Gentiles the 
door to Kingdom privileges. The Jews understood that 
at His coming Messiah would select a Kingdom class, to 
which would be granted Divine power. This is just what 
Jesus was doing. His words, His teachings, were drawing 
some and repelling others. 

All the sincere, all the honest-hearted, are like this 
young Scribe— not far from the Kingdom. If their 
honesty, their sincerity, lead them to zeal to know and 
to do the will of the Father, then they will be blessed; 
for "the secret of the Lord is with them that reverence 
Him, and He will show them His Covenant." 

"GOD LOOKETH ON THE HEART" 

The Temple at Jerusalem was still new, and money was 
needed for its maintenance, etc. The people were privileged 
to contribute, and apparently did so with willing 
hearts. However much misled by the traditions of the 
elders— otherwise the teachings of their forefathers— however 
confused they were by the misleadings of their 
blinded Doctors of Divinity, they had a desire to serve 
God and to worship Him. This was manifested by their 
readiness to bring their money and to cast it into the 
treasure boxes of the Temple, which stood near its 
doorway. 

Jesus was sitting opposite these treasure boxes, and 
took note how all classes contributed— the rich of their 
abundance, the poor of their penury. There came along a 
widow who put into the treasure box two mites— the 
smallest copper coins in circulation— each one worth about 
one-eighth of a cent. We need not assume that the poor 
widow put this in in an ostentatious manner; for the coins 
were too small to boast about. We shall assume that 
Jesus, by Divine power, knew the woman, her circumstances 
and the amount of her gift. He made it a text 
for a little sermon to the Apostles. He declared that 
yonder poor woman had made a larger contribution in 
the sight of God than had anybody else who had contributed. 
To their wonderment He explained that she had 
practically cast in all that she had— her living— while the 
others had merely contributed certain portions from their 
abundance— portions the loss of which they perhaps would 
not seriously feel. 

This little incident shows us the Lord's appreciation of 
sacrifices and services. It is not the great things that 
any of us do, or attempt to do, that the Lord highly 
esteems. The very small affairs of our lives, the very 
small sacrifices, the very small self-denials, that in the 
world's sight would be nothing, in the Master's sight will 
be great, if they denote love, devotion and self-sacrifice 
to the Lord and His Cause. 

Moreover, the Lord knew that the woman was giving 



money to an institution which was repudiating Him and 

which shortly would be destroyed because of being unworthy 

to continue. But whatever might be the condition 

of others, the Lord looked at the heart of this contributor 

and the motive for the gift— "She hath done what 

she could." For aught we know she became ultimately a 

disciple. It is of just such self-sacrificing material that 

the Lord makes disciples. 



R5522: page 251 

THE TEN VIRGINS 

-SEPTEMBER 13. -MATTHEW 25:1-13.- 

"Watch, therefore; for ye know not 
the day nor the hour."— Verse 13. 

THE PARABLE of today's Study is supposed 
to have been uttered by our Lord about three 
days before His crucifixion, as part of His 
response to the question, "What shall be the 
sign of Thy Coming and of the end of the 
Age?" In the preceding chapter the Master 
traces various experiences of His people 
down to the time of His Second Coming— 
the time of the consummation of this Gospel 
Age and of the inauguration of the Messianic 
Age, the Age immediately ahead of us. 

In considering this parable, it is proper to notice, first 
of all, that it has not been applicable at all times and under 
all conditions. This is shown by the first word, "Then"— 
at that time— "the Kingdom of Heaven shall be likened 
unto ten virgins." Furthermore, it should be noted that 
the parable does not describe the world in general, but 
merely the "virgin" class— the Church class— the pure ones 
who have left the world, who have come to God through 
Christ, who have been justified by faith in His blood, and 
who have thus been made prospective members of the 
Kingdom class, the Bride class. This parable shows, then, 
that in the end of this Age a separation, or division, will 
take place in the true Church of Christ, regardless of 

R5522 : page 252 

what may be the attitude of the world or of the nominal 
Church. 

With the Jews, betrothal took place between the 
bride and the bridegroom usually a year before they came 
together at the marriage feast. During that year the 
obligations of marriage applied, and any unfaithfulness 
to the bridegroom vitiated or annulled the contract, which 
was usually made, not by the bridegroom himself with 
the bride, but through others, intermediaries. So, during 



this Gospel Age, a Church is being betrothed to Christ, 
and covenant obligations are being entered into in behalf 
of the Bridegroom, Christ, who is "afar off" and who is 
now entering into a covenant with those who would be 
members of His Bride class. These covenants and agreements 
are made through brethren, ministers, servants, of 
the Lord and of the Church. 

The Scriptures represent that during the long period 
between the time when our Lord went away and the time 
of His return there has been a serious unfaithfulness on 
the part of many professing to be of the Church of Christ. 
In the Revelation these are charged with harlotry. We 
are assured that they will not be recognized, but will be 
fully repudiated, rejected, at His Second Coming. But 
although the mass of those professing to have entered into 
a covenant with the Lord were foreseen to be unfaithful, 
nevertheless the Lord just as distinctly declares that at 
His Coming there will be a faithful "virgin" class— pure 
ones, separate from the world, uncontaminated. It is this 
class which the parable describes. It shows incidentally 
that not even all of the virgins will be accepted as members 
of the Bride; but that, in addition to purity, a certain 
watchfulness and zeal will be considered essential. 

PAROUSIA AND EPIPHANIA 

Many Bible students hold that this parable began to 
have its fulfilment in the Millerite Movement, which in 
1844 culminated in a disappointment. For some fourteen 
years prior to that time a cry had gone forth throughout 
the Church that the time of the Second Coming of Christ 
was at hand. History tells us that many noble characters 
of all denominations believed the Message and, in the 
strength of their faith, went forth to meet the Bridegroom. 
But they were disappointed, in that the Bridegroom 
tarried. 

Then all of the "virgins," both wise and foolish, 
slumbered and slept. A general stupor, uncertainty and 
drowsiness came over all. Some of them dreamed of 
strange knockings during that time, too. Later, at midnight, 
the Bridegroom came apparently, and announcements 
were made to that effect— "Behold the Bridegroom! 
Go ye forth to meet Him ! " 

An increasing number of Bible students believe that 
this latter cry sounded forth just thirty years after the 
disappointment of the followers of William Miller; 
namely, in 1874. They do not claim that Jesus came in 
the flesh then; but, on the contrary, they hold that He is 
never to come in the flesh— that He is flesh no longer, 
that He has "ascended up where He was before"— to the 
spirit plane— far above angels. 

These Bible students call our attention to the fact that 
the Bible distinctly differentiates between the Parousia 
of Christ and His Epiphania, at His Second Coming. The 
word Parousia signifies presence, without in any sense of 



R5523 : page 252 

the word indicating that the presence is visible. The 
word Epiphania signifies the revealing of one who is already 
present. These Bible students claim that in the 
end of this Gospel Age Christ will be present, invisible 
to men, during a period of forty years, doing a work 
especially in His Church— rewarding the faithful, as shown 
in the parables of the Pounds and the Talents, and receiving 
the "wise virgins," as in the parable of our lesson. 

With the conclusion of this work of separating the 
wise virgins, and after they shall have entered into the 
joys of their Lord by the glorious change of the First 
Resurrection, then will come Immanuel's Epiphania, revealing, 
showing forth. "When He shall appear, ye also 
shall appear with Him in glory." "He shall be revealed 
in flaming fire, taking vengeance." In other words, the 
revelation of Christ to the world will be subsequent to 
His revealment of Himself to the "wise virgin" class. 
The world will know that He has taken His great power 
and begun His Reign of Righteousness, not by seeing 
Jesus in the flesh, but by seeing the great Time of Trouble 
which then will break upon the world— "a Time of 
Trouble such as never was since there was a nation."— 
Daniel 12:1; Matthew 24:21. 

THE LAMPS AND THE OIL 

The views of these Bible students are interesting to 
us. Whether all of their conclusions may be accepted or 
not, they are at least worthy of consideration, inasmuch 
as they furnish a new interpretation of some Scriptures 
not previously understood. Whether they have the times 
and seasons properly divided is another matter, upon 
which each individual Christian should use his own judgment. 
Let us follow the parable from this standpoint; for 
we know of no other to which the terms and conditions of 
the parable could be applied. 

Let us note that all the "virgins" are to hear this 
Message, "Behold the Bridegroom!"— the expected One 
has come. It does not follow that they will all hear at 
once— rather the contrary. During the period of the 
"cry," whether it be forty years or more or less, as long 
as the cry goes forth there will be opportunity to hear it. 
And all of the virgin class must hear it. 

The "oil" of the parable evidently represents the Holy 
Spirit, while the "lamps" represent the Bible. All of 
these virgins had the Bible and some light therefrom; but 
only those possessing the Spirit of the Truth in their 
hearts in good supply would be able to hold out. To 
the others the Lamp would cease to burn. They 
would cease to be able to appreciate and apply the 
Scriptural prophecies relative to Christ's Second Coming. 

ONLY ONE WAY TO GET THE HOLY SPIRIT 



The "wise virgins" trimmed their lamps in response 
to the Message— they examined the Scriptures. Like the 
Bereans of old, they "searched the Scriptures daily to see 
whether these things be so." Thus they had light in 
their lamps, as well as "oil," the Holy Spirit, in their 
hearts. Then it was that the "foolish virgins" said, "Give 
us of your oil." We wish that we could be as earnest at 
Bible study as you are, but these things are no longer interesting 
to us. Do give us some of your oil (spirit)! 

However, there is but the one way to get the Holy 
Spirit, and that is from the Lord Himself and upon His 
own terms. In order to receive a fresh supply of Oil we 
need to look well to our covenant with the Lord and to 
our zeal for Him and the Truth, to our loyalty to the principles 
of righteousness. This costs something of time and 
study. It costs something, perhaps, of neglect of the 
things of this life. It means to forego strife for wealth 
and fame. It means to live close to God. 

This is the cost of the precious Oil which is to give 
Light to those who will have it. Hence the wise virgins 
declared, in no ungenerous spirit, that they had none too 
much of the oil of the Holy Spirit for themselves. Then 
they advised their brethren who were deficient to go to 
God, who giveth liberally and upbraideth not, and to seek 
the Oil by obedience to His Word, by the searching of 
the Scriptures and by close following of the Master's 
leading in the Narrow Way. 

R5523 : page 253 

THE SHUTTING OF THE DOOR 

Meantime, the "wise virgins" were going in, one after 
another— passing beyond the veil— until finally the last 
of the foreordained number had gone in and no more 
could enter. "Then the door was shut." 

Once in our misunderstanding we thought that this 
shutting of the "door" after the wise virgin class had 
gone in represented that all the foolish virgins and all 
the remainder of mankind were shut out of God's favor- 
banished to eternal torment. Now, however, we notice 
that the "door" merely shuts in the Kingdom class, the 
Little Flock, to whom it is the Father's good pleasure to 
give the Kingdom. While others will never be able to 
enter into that Kingdom, God has other blessings for 
them, all of which will come through the Kingdom class 
—Christ and His Bride. 

The parable shows that later on the foolish virgin class 
get the Oil, the Holy Spirit, in proper measure and are 
able to get light from their lamps; that they recognize 
that the end of the Age has come, and earnestly desire, 
and in prayer "knock," that the door of the Kingdom 
may be opened to them. But the Lord's answer to them 
is, "I cannot recognize you. There is only one Bride 
class, and they have already come in to Me." 

In view of this, all of the Lord's consecrated people 



should be earnestly on the watch, filled with the Spirit 

and having their Lamps "trimmed and burning." None 

might know the day and the hour when the Bridegroom 

would come, in the sense of His Parousia; nevertheless, 

all of the virgins were to be aware of His presence after 

He had come. Any one who did not know of it would, to 

that extent, lack the evidence that he belonged to the 

Bride class; even the foolish virgins knew of the Bridegroom's 

presence. 

In the parable the Lord does not tell what may happen 
to the foolish virgins; but other Scriptures show that they 
pass through a portion, at least, of the great Time of 
Trouble coming upon the world; and that when finally 
they are received of the Lord, it will not be as His joint-heirs 
in the Throne, but as honored servants of the Bride. 
They are elsewhere spoken of as "the virgins, the Bride's 
companions, who follow her" and who will ultimately be 
brought into the presence of the King and have an inferior 
share in the work of the Kingdom. (Psalm 45:15,16.) 
Next in order will come the blessing of Natural 
Israel and of all the families of the earth for a thousand 
years, for their uplifting from sin and death to righteousness 
and life eternal— or failing in this, the destruction of 
the incorrigible in the Second Death, from which there 
will be no recovery. 



R5523 : page 253 

EUREKA DRAMA-CLASS EXTENSION 

READ over several times our explanation of 

this proposition in August 1 WATCH TOWER. 

We have stated matters there carefully and 

as clearly as we know how. With each outfit 

goes an Instructor's Book and a letter 

giving general explanations of how the 

DRAMA should be presented. But we would 

not recommend any to undertake the operation 

of a stereopticon who has not already 

some conception of how it should be operated. 

No fewer than two could operate the DRAMA— one 

taking care of the phonograph, the other operating the 

stereopticon. A third person would be desirable as a general 

overseer, usher, helper, literature-distributer, etc. 

This EUREKA DRAMA preaching gives the Sisters an exceptional 

opportunity. The Y Eureka might be a little 

too heavy for them to carry, but any could manage the 

X Eureka. 

We regret the necessity for emphasizing the fact that 
the full amount stipulated must accompany your order. 
Only by purchasing for cash can we secure the prices 
named. 

We describe One Part as follows:— 

A box of tinted stereopticon slides, encased in a fibre 



carrying case with handle, 26 inches long, 7 inches wide, 
7 inches high, weight, 35 lbs. 

One carrying case, with handle, for phonograph and 
its records and two operator's books, 26 inches long, 9 
inches wide, 13 inches high, weight, 40 lbs. 

One metal carrying case, with handle, containing 
stereopticon, 18 inches long, 7 inches wide, 12 inches high, 
weight, 22 lbs. 

One fibre case, with handle, containing rheostat, 
10 inches long, 9 inches wide, 7 inches high, weight, 
12 lbs. 

The screen on which the pictures would be shown 
you can prepare as cheaply as we. For a small room and 
small pictures a good, large bed-sheet will do. But it 
would be well to provide at the start a screen about 13-1/2 
feet by 15 feet. This will mean 10 yards of wide sheeting 
and would require only one seam lengthwise through 
the center and a hem at each end. We can supply these 
with the outfit for $3.50 extra. 

Rarely would there be need for taking more than one 
section of the DRAMA (the above four cases) at one 
time. But if for any reason you desired to take two, it 
would mean twice the above. Or if you took the entire 
three sections, the packages would be three times as 
many. 

When you send in your order with the Express or 
Post Office money order, there will be no mistake as to 
whether you wish the outfit on the loan plan or on the 
purchase plan. At the same time specify, please, the State 
in which you will be working, and the County whose 
small towns and villages you propose to thoroughly work. 

R5524 : page 253 

Some inform us that they have stereopticons that will 
serve their purposes, and wish merely to purchase the 
remainder of the outfit. Such should indicate this in their 
order and deduct accordingly from the amount. See 
itemized statement in last issue. 

You have never seen or heard our new portable Phonograph. 
It is very small and light, but powerful. Our 
records will fill large Court Rooms. Some write us that 
they have suitable phonographs. We advise, however, 
that our portable phonograph is so cheap ($8.00) that 
you would best have it and leave the other for the family 
or sell it. 

EUREKA DRAMAS sent out on the loan plan must go 
just as we are preparing them, so as to have uniformity. 
This means a phonograph and a stereopticon with each 
Part and implies the promise that the Three Parts will 
be kept busy. 

Those who purchase outright may, if they choose, 
take only one stereopticon and only one phonograph, deducting 
$8.00 each for the phonographs and $20.00 each 
for the stereopticons and $6.00 each for the rheostats and 
$4.00 each for the Acetylene burners not desired. 



Some write us desiring the DRAMA records and musical 
records only. We are pleased to supply these at the 
prices mentioned in our last issue with the phonograph, 
or at $8.00 less if the phonograph is not desired. Any 

R5524 : page 254 

preferring can order their discs direct from the Columbia 
Graphophone Co. 

You will have the privilege of giving away the free 
scenario, or of selling the paper-bound and cloth-bound 
scenario at regular prices— purchasing from us at half 
price, plus postage or freight. You may handle STUDIES 
IN THE SCRIPTURES similarly. 

Nothing that we have written on this subject should 
be understood as intimating that this DRAMA EXTENSION 
would be a profitable business— nor that anybody should 
engage in it to the neglect of his or her family duties; nor 
would it be necessary for those engaging in this work to 
give it their entire time. Some might be able to give 
their Sundays, others some week nights, and some both. 
Of course, some may be so situated that they can give 
this work their entire time. 

We are not recommending this DRAMA EXTENSION 
work to successful colporteurs. We believe that they 
already have and are using one of the best methods we 
know of for serving the Truth, and feeding the hungry 
sheep. 

Brethren not heretofore engaged in Class Extension, 
here have a chance. Also their wives or natural sisters. 
If unmarried Sisters engage at all extreme care should be 
exercised that strict decorum and proper Christian dignity 
be always observed. Preferably only persons professing 
full consecration to God, and who have taken the Vow, 
should participate in any way. 

We have not proposed furnishing moving pictures for 
five reasons: (1) Our films are too costly. (2) Only 
experienced persons can operate them. (3) We are arranging 
to have full DRAMA shown in the smallest places 
having Motion Picture Theatres. (4) The Class Extension 
DRAMAS will be kept busy serving villages of under 
1000 population. (5) These usually have School Houses 
or Union Church Houses obtainable free. 

We hope to have reports from all these EUREKA 
DRAMAS weekly. Please make them out Mondays. 
Address I.B.S.A., EUREKA DRAMA, 17 Hicks Street, 
Brooklyn, N.Y. 

"EUREKA DRAMA" OUTFIT NO. X 

Any of our readers desiring to purchase for his own 
use the full set of 96 DRAMA lectures (three 
PARTS, two hours each) with nine choice introductory, 
intermission and closing hymns and a portable 
phonograph, with a carrying case, can have the 
entire outfit for $38.50 



"EUREKA DRAMA" OUTFIT NO. Y 

This outfit is the one especially intended for the DRAMA 
EXTENSION described foregoing. Its three PARTS require 
only the same number of lecture and music records as 
foregoing; but, because of public use, each PART must have 
its own Phonograph, each PART its own Stereopticon, etc. 
We therefore show each PART complete in itself, as follows: 

PART I. includes one Primo Stereopticon for electric 
current— Oneida Lens (three for varying distances); 

special price $20.00 

Variable Rheostat (five amp., ten amp., or fifteen 
amp.) may be effective for house current or for 

heavy current arc lights 6.00 

Attachment for Acetylene Gas or Presto Light (useful 
in places where there is no electric current, but 

where gas can be taken from an automobile tank) 4.00 

DRAMA stereopticon slides, beautifully tinted, with special 

carrying box and carrying case 38.00 

One portable Phonograph, one Operator's Book, Lecture 
and Hymn Records for PART I., and carrying case 19.50 

Total cost of PART I., "EUREKA DRAMA," No. Y $87.50 

Additional would be the expressage from Brooklyn. 

The Society would furnish posters, window-cards and free 

scenario, and would supply the bound scenario for sale in any 

quantity at one-half retail prices. 

PARTS II. and III. would cost exactly the same as the 

above, the entire THREE PARTS amounting to $262.50 

With only one Stereopticon, one Rheostat, one Acetylene 

burner and one Phonograph, $185.00. Expressage from Brooklyn 

extra. 



R5524 : page 254 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
FIRST SOUTH AFRICAN CONVENTION 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

The first South African Convention of the International 
Bible Students Association has now gone down into history, 
leaving with those who were privileged to attend a glorious 
memory that will serve as a stimulus and an inspiration until 
we get to the greatest of all Conventions, beyond the veil. 

On Friday, April 10, the brethren gathered from all parts 
of the sub-Continent (one dear sister traveling nearly a thousand 
miles) to enjoy four whole days of blessed fellowship 
with the Lord and with one another. We were a very "little 
flock," indeed. Our largest attendance was 34; but whether 
in His providence He will ultimately bestow upon us the Kingdom 
or not, the Lord did certainly on this occasion give us 



abundant manifestation of the sweetness of His presence and 
the fulness of His Love. For four days, from the "Welcome" 
to the "Farewell," we were on the mountain top with the 
Lord, and we enjoyed the experience so much that we, too, 
would fain have built tabernacles to dwell there! 

Amid such a plethora of blessings it is difficult to single out 
any for special mention, but the baptismal service on Friday 
afternoon was especially helpful. Although we were a small 
company, I think we made a record on this occasion; for we 
immersed almost half of the entire Convention. Eight sisters 
and eight brothers symbolized their consecration in the Lord's 
appointed manner. The hearts of all present went out to them, 
and our prayers ascended for them, that He who has begun 
the good work in them, will enable them to finish their course. 

In the evening this service was followed by the Memorial, 
when 32 symbolically appropriated the merit of the Lord's 
broken body, and, thoroughly furnished thereby, symbolically 
drank with Him the cup which the Father had poured. Our 
hearts grew solemn as we realized that possibly this might 
be our last Memorial on this side the veil. We called to mind 
our Lord's words on a similar occasion: "With desire I have 
desired to eat THIS Passover with you." We remembered that 
the special sufferings followed hard upon "this" Passover, and 
sought grace to endure a similar experience, if it be His will. 

Next morning we had a helpful Question meeting, when 
many interesting queries were satisfactorily answered. Saturday 
afternoon a Praise and Testimony meeting furnished a 
general opportunity for witness-bearing to the Lord's goodness, 
of which the brethren were not slow to avail themselves. 
The day closed with an excellent address on "The Triumph 
of Love" by dear Brother Stubbs, of Durban. 

Sunday morning we had a modern Berean Study in Volume 
I., Chapter 5, when the value of this method of Scripture 
study was amply demonstrated. The lesson was much enjoyed 
by all. In the afternoon seven Brothers participated in a 
symposium on "The Graces of the Spirit." This stimulated 
us all, and we feel the need for greater diligence in seeking 
to "put on the Lord Jesus Christ, making no provision for 
the flesh." Sunday evening was given over to the public, but 
owing to a heavy rainstorm, only about fifty turned out to 
hear a lecture on "The Resurrection of the Dead, its Nature 
and Purpose," although at previous lectures the audiences 
numbered as many as five hundred. 

Monday morning we talked about the Harvest Work, and 
considered how best it might be advanced in South Africa. 
This was followed in the afternoon by a splendid exposition 
of "The Benefits of Christian Fellowship," by dear Brother 
Howat, of Johannesburg. In the evening was the Farewell 
meeting of the Convention. On this occasion, following St. 
Paul's argument in Ephesians 6:10-19, we were exhorted to 
put on the whole armor of God and to fight the good fight of 
faith, that we might lay hold upon eternal life. Our hearts 
and our eyes both were full as we filed past brethren representing 
various Classes, to the strains of that old, familiar 
hymn of hallowed memory, "God be with you till we meet 
again," bidding each other farewell, and hoping to meet again 



in the Kingdom, if not before. 

What shall we render unto the Lord for all His benefits 
toward us? By His assisting grace we shall grasp more 
firmly the cup of salvation and, calling upon the name of the 
Lord, drink it to the dregs. 

All the brethren at the Convention were filled with a deep 
sense of gratitude to God for you, dear Brother, and in this I 
know that we represented the sentiment of all the brethren in 

R5525 : page 255 

Africa. They desired me to convey to you their hearty appreciation 
of your faithful ministry, and your noble example of 
fortitude and devotion to the Lord's Cause. They wished me 
to assure you of their loving sympathy with you in the many 
besetments that necessarily fall to your lot in your exalted 
position in the Harvest-field, and of their constant prayers 
that He who has brought you thus far will sustain you to the 
very end of the way and secure for you an abundant entrance 
into the Kingdom. Our loving message finds happy expression 
in the following Scriptures, which I was instructed to forward 
to you: Philemon 7; Hebrews 6:10; 2 Thessalonians 1:11,12. 

The first South African Convention shall long remain a 
hallowed memory, by which all will be stimulated to more 
fervent zeal for God and to greater activity in the Harvest 
service. 

With Christian love to yourself and to all the dear ones of 
the Tabernacle, I am, dear Brother, 

Your brother in His grace and service, 

WM. W. JOHNSTON. 



A VOICE FROM KOREA 

BELOVED PASTOR AND BROTHER:- 

I am a stranger to you in one sense; but I came to a 
knowledge of Present Truth through your writings just twenty-two 
months ago. For some time I have been anxious to 
write and tell you of my special appreciation of the Truth, but 
circumstances did not permit until now. 

You will be interested in knowing that I am a Korean. 
When the first missionaries landed here (in 1885) Korea was 
a hermit kingdom. Since then some Koreans became identified 
with Christianity to avoid severe punishment by officials 
who came under the influence of missionaries who were accustomed 
to using the rod. 

In time some of our people began to read books from 
abroad that spoke of liberty, civilization, revolution, etc. The 
missionaries taught that in order to secure civilization and 
liberty the Koreans would have to become their friends and 
call themselves Christians. 

Many did this; but during the past few years great changes 
have been taking place. The people have been learning that 
they cannot be punished unless guilty of wrong, and the 
sticks of the missionaries lost their power correspondingly. 



About five years ago missionaries boasted of 500,000 Koreans 
who were Christians, but now the number is put down 
at 1 10,000. It is said that these are the cream. 

For about eight years I drifted through the dangerous 
currents of what I now see was Spiritism— Satanic teaching. 
Now I thank God that He sent our beloved Brother R. R. 
Hollister here with the Glad Tidings and saved me out of 
these currents which were leading me to an unknown place. 
My senses were almost lost; it took about six months to have 
the eyes and ears of my understanding opened. Since then 
I have consecrated myself to the Lord and continue to praise 
Him. 

I felt quite at home up to March of this year— while 
Brother and Sister W. J. Hollister were with us; but now I 
am very lonesome, as there are but two of us, one assistant 
and myself. The snarling "wolves" are about and show their 
teeth, so to speak. Thank God that He accepts such weak 
ones as His workers in the Harvest field! I pray you will 
be so good as to remember us at the Throne of Heavenly 
Grace! 

I want to see you— as well as dearly beloved Brothers R. 
R. and W. J. Hollister and wife— and other brothers and sisters 
in the Truth on this side the veil. 

Ever praying the rich blessing of our Lord upon you, and 
that the end of the way may be crowned with an abundant 
entrance into His everlasting Kingdom, I am 

Yours by His Grace, P. S. KANG. -Korea. 



SOME GOOD SUGGESTIONS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I want to express to you my continued love, and to assure 
you how much I myself and our Class appreciate the PHOTO-DRAMA. 
We are very thankful to the dear Lord for this 

added privilege of service. There were over 40,000 free admissions 
here. The DRAMA is certainly wonderful, especially 
the record Lectures; and the book form of Scenario does seem 
about the next best and most direct way imaginable of opening 
blind eyes. Praise the Lord! 

For about a year it has seemed to me very strange that 
some of the friends are so inclined to question the accuracy 
of the chronology if certain events do not transpire by or 
about October of this year. It has seemed to me that the 
chronology should not be too closely associated with events; 
that the present Savior did not startle the world with the 
bright-shining of His presence suddenly in 1874, though He 
came at that date; that even the Jew was not aware of His 
favor in 1878, but it BEGAN; that Babylon did not feel its rejection, 
nor topple over in 1881, but was "spewed out" and is 
no longer recognized, just the same, while even yet, after 33 
years, the world is not startled by the evidence, nor does 
Babylon believe it. Hence I feel that should the present 
order of things roll on for some time yet, we should not then 
doubt October, 1914, any more than we doubt 1874, 1878 or 



1881. But we should be watchful, prayerful, and "keep our 
garments," awake to the fact that the chronology may be accurate, 
while our ideas of how the Lord will order events 
may be wrong. The Lord may permit SEEMING inaccuracies 
to test whether our consecration is to Chronology or to Him, 
and He may be as apt to wind up matters very suddenly as to 
seem to prolong them. Therefore let us have faith, but await 
His enlightenment as to events. 
Affectionately in Him, S. H. HUSTON.-Texas. 



"A GREAT WASTER" 

DEAR FRIENDS :- 

A recent experience has caused me to write you in order 
that a word of caution may be given those distributing Volunteer 
literature. 

I have just returned from the post-office, one mile distant, 
and am deeply grieved at finding this year's Volunteer literature 
scattered in the street, gutters, on the trolley track, run 
over by every kind of vehicle and soiled and torn. It was 
evidently thrown from an automobile without being properly 
folded. 

(1) I had previously covered the town with the same 
literature myself. (2) The local by-law against scattering 
literature on the street was broken. (3) The Truth was 
cheapened and its cause apparently injured. 

I suppose the distributer thought he was serving the Lord 
and the Truth; but it seems to me that one should have a 
higher respect for the Truth than to allow it to be trampled 
in the dust through his carelessness. I gathered the literature 
up as I came home, feeling very much grieved. What would 
people think of us, and what would the Lord think of us, if 
we should throw Bibles in the streets in order to instruct 
the people in righteousness? Our literature represents God's 
Word. Let us honor it! 

Would it not be well for brethren using automobiles and 
distributing literature to properly fold the tracts and throw 
them well into the yard, as near to the house as possible? 
It would also be well to ascertain whether the towns they 
visit have not been already volunteered and thus avoid duplicating 
the work and wasting the literature which was made 
possible by the sacrifice of others. 

Your Brother in the Lord, GEO. E. BLAKE, JR. -Mass. 



"NOT SLOTHFUL IN BUSINESS" 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I believe many of us would work with greater zeal if we 
could better realize the opportunities for presenting the Truth 
among those we know. We are apt to think that many have 
no ear for the Message. 

Recently I resolved to be more diligent in searching for 



those who might be hungry for the Truth. Accordingly I 
carried in my produce wagon a supply of BIBLE STUDENTS 
MONTHLY, No. 61, displayed more conspicuously than usual, so 
as to attract attention. 

One thanked me very kindly for a copy. I had known 
him to be somewhat friendly to the Truth. Another came to 
the wagon with Bible in hand, and when asked whether a 
Baptist or a Methodist replied Presbyterian, but had lately 
begun to read Pastor Russell's SCRIPTURE STUDIES and was 
greatly interested in them; adding, "I have gone to my Pastor 
with some Bible questions that he has so far failed to answer." 
Another asked my purpose of displaying the papers, and said 
he had two little books which were very interesting that he 
wanted me to read. They were TABERNACLE SHADOWS and 
the HELL booklet. He asked me to bring him Vol. I on the 
next trip. 

In our daily petitions we remember you and the Harvest 
work. Pray for me that I may never look back. 

Yours by His grace, F. M. MORRIS. --Florida. 



page 257 

VOL. XXXV SEPTEMBER 1 No. 17 
A. D. 1914-A. M. 6042 



CONTENTS 

The Present Crisis 259 

Fruit of the Vine of the Earth 259 

Proper Attitude for God's People 260 

Final Outlook 260 

Man Proposes— God Disposes 261 

Emperor William's Ambition 261 

The Tried and Proven People 262 

Is God's Knowledge Limited? 263 

What Is Evil Speaking? 264 

A Concluding Word of Exhortation 266 

Judgment of the Nations 266 

Law of Retribution Operative 267 

"Let No One Take Thy Crown" 268 

The Number of the Elect 269 

No Cross, No Crown (Poem) 269 

God's Much Diversified Wisdom 270 

First Fruit and After Fruit 270 

Interesting Letters 271 

Light in Darkest Africa 271 

The Strengthening Cord 271 

page 258 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:-All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



AT SARATOGA SPRINGS, NY. 

The Convention proper will last four days— viz., Sept. 27 to 
30, with the Creation Drama every evening. Then Oct. 1 to 
4 the Convention feature will yield to the Drama entirely. 
Saratoga Springs is noted for the salubriousness of its climate 
and is a delightful rest-haven for a few days. Opportunity 
for symbolic immersion will be given Monday, 
Sept. 28. 

Using Hudson River boats to Albany and Troy, thence 
electric trains to Saratoga Springs, the following combined 
Round Trip rates have been secured from New York City: 

People's Line via Albany (night trip), 10 persons or more, each $4.20. 

Citizen's Line via Troy (night trip), 10 persons or more, each $3.20. 

Staterooms for two on night boats $1 and up, extra. These boats 
leave New York City, Pier 32 N.R. (foot Canal St.), 6 p.m. daily, and 
West 132d St., 6:30 p.m. 

I.B.S.A. EXCURSION, via HUDSON RIVER DAY LINE. 
[Going Sat, Sept. 26th— Returning Thurs., Oct. 1.] 

1 person, regular fare $4.70 

25 persons or more, each 4.35 

50 " " " " 4.20 

100 " " " " 4.00 

200 3.85 

The I.B.S.A. excursion starts Saturday, Sept. 26th, from 
New York (foot Desbrosses St.) 8.40 a.m., stopping 
West 42d St., 9 a.m., and West 129th St., 9.20 a.m.; returning 
Thursday, Oct. 1st, arriving New York City at 6 p.m. 

Those desiring to get the benefit of this Day Line excursion 
should so advise the I.B.S.A. Convention Committee, 124 Columbia 
Heights, Brooklyn, N.Y., at once. As quickly as we can 
approximate the number going we will notify you what amount 
to send for your ticket. Similarly, those preferring to take 
one of the Night Lines should advise us promptly what date 
they will go, and what price stateroom desired. 

ATLANTA, GEORGIA, SEPTEMBER 24-27 

Railroads in the Southeast have granted a special rate of 
one fare and one-half for the Round Trip on the Certificate 
Plan. Tickets will be on sale September 21 to 26, inclusive. 
Be sure to ask for a Certificate Receipt when paying the full 
one-fare rate on the going trip. This Certificate Receipt will 
enable you to secure your return ticket at one-half rate plus 
50 cents. For further information address Comfort Committee, 
care Mr. W. S. Stevens, 328-1/2 East Georgia Ave., 
Atlanta, Ga. 



R5526 : page 259 



THE PRESENT CRISIS 

"Ye shall hear of wars and rumors of wars; see that ye be not 
troubled, for all these things must come to pass, but the end is 
not yet. "--Matthew 24:6. 

THE Scriptures speak of a great Time of 

Trouble in the conclusion of this Gospel 

Age. Our Lord in the prophecy recorded 

in Matthew 24 mentions this great Time of 

Trouble. Under a figure of the distress of 

earth and the shaking of the Heavens, etc., 

He tells of the momentous events of our 

day. In connection with it He says, 

"When ye see these things begin to come to 

pass, then lift up your heads and rejoice; 

for your redemption draweth nigh"— linking this great 

climax to the deliverance of the Church, their change 

from earthly nature to Heavenly nature. 

It is in this connection that our Lord says, "Ye shall 
hear of wars and rumors of wars; all these things must 
come to pass, but the end is not yet." These continued 
all through the Age. We are not to think of wars as 
being the particular thing that the Master had in mind 
when He referred to the great trouble with which this 
Age will close. That trouble is pictured in Daniel's 
prophecy as "a Time of Trouble such as was not since 
there was a nation."— Daniel 12:1. 

Our Lord speaks of this same Time of Trouble and 
says that Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles 
until the Times of the Gentiles be fulfilled. (Luke 21:24.) 
These "Times of the Gentiles" represent a period during 
which the world was to be ruled by Gentile nations. The 
Gentiles were to show their skill in giving the world a 
government. This giving of the world into the hand of 
Gentile governments followed the taking away of the 
typical kingdom from typical Israel. With Zedekiah's 
fall and the taking away of the crown from him, the Lord 
declared an overturning of His government until the establishment 
of Messiah's Kingdom.— Ezekiel 21:25. 

Simultaneously, King Nebuchadnezzar had a dream, 
which portrayed the Gentile rule of earth during the interregnum 
of God's Kingdom. Daniel showed the king the 
dream, which the monarch had forgotten, and gave him the 
interpretation. The king had dreamed of a great image, 
the head of which represented the Babylonian kingdom; 
the breast of silver, the Medo-Persian kingdom; the belly 
and thighs of brass, the Grecian kingdom; the legs of 
iron, the Roman Empire. The "Holy" Roman Empire was 
represented in the feet, part of clay and part of iron. A 
stone was to smite the image upon the feet, which were 
iron and clay, and break them to pieces. This crushing 
of the feet of the image was to come in the end of the 
Age, and would be the preparatory step to the establishment 
of Messiah's Kingdom.— Daniel 2:31-45. 



So long as these governments would be here, they and 
Messiah's Kingdom could not cooperate. The Gentile 
governments are based on selfishness and coercion; 
Christ's Kingdom will be based on justice, love, mercy, 
under the Prince of Peace. The two could not rule at 
the same time. Hence it was foretold that Messiah at 
His Second Coming will first bind the "strong man" of 
Gentile supremacy, and on the ruins of earthly dominions 
establish a righteous Government. 

The present terrible war is not the great Time of 
Trouble in the fullest sense of the word, but merely its 
forerunner. The great Time of Trouble of the Scriptures 
will be brought on by anarchy— the general uprising of 
the people; as the Prophet says, "every man's hand 
against his neighbor, no peace to him that goeth out or to 
him that cometh in."— Zechariah 8: 10. 

FRUIT OF THE VINE OF THE EARTH 

The Lord declares that He has a hand in these matters 
that are a natural outcome of human selfishness, aggressiveness 
and greed. The Lord has to do with all this, in 
that at the appropriate time He granted to the world the 
knowledge which is stirring them up. In other words, men 
with sin and selfishness in their hearts are not in a position 
to use knowledge wisely, rightly. Without reflecting upon 
any person or class we can see that if the knowledge that 
is in the world should continue to increase, a certain few, 
by that increase of knowledge, would get far ahead of the 
others— until finally the wealth would be massed in the 
hands of the very few, and the whole world would become 
the serfs of these few. The money in the hands of the 
wealthy increases rapidly. On the other hand the population 
doubles in a century. Who cannot see that under 
present conditions there would eventually be nothing but 
slavery for the masses, governed by an autocracy? 

As long as governments are strong, their overthrow 
will be impossible. Our thought, often presented in these 
columns, is that a great war will weaken the nations, preparatory 
to the period of anarchy. Such a great war, 
crippling the world financially and discrediting the rulers 
in the eyes of their peoples, will open the way for the 
anarchy. The people of former times looked upon their 
rulers as demi-gods. This veneration for authority still 
obtains to some extent, especially in Russia, where the 
people almost worship the Czar— except those who are 
anarchists. The present war is the one we have expected. 
It will drain the world of blood and treasure. Then the 
nations, sick, weak, faint, will fall a prey to Socialism, 
which will become anarchy. Thus in accord with the 
Bible predictions earth will be prepared to welcome Messiah's 

R5526 : page 260 

Kingdom as "the desire of all peoples."— Hag. 2:7. 



THE PROPER ATTITUDE FOR GOD'S PEOPLE 

"Wait ye upon Me, saith the Lord, until that Day when 
I rise up to the prey; for My determination is to gather 
the nations, that I may bring the nations together to pour 
upon them Mine indignation, even all My fierce anger; for 
the whole [social] earth shall be devoured by the fire of 
Mine anger. And then will I turn unto the people a pure 
Message."— Zephaniah 3:8,9. 

What did Jehovah mean by "wait ye"? He meant that 
we are to wait for His time. He told us of the general 
leveling of the things of this world; He declared that all 
the kingdoms will be submerged in general anarchy. 
There will be a fervency of heat, discussion, tumult, 
strife, and at this time the nations of the world will "melt" 
—go down quickly. We believe this. We are not thinking 
of Christians as contending with the sword; for those 
who take the sword are to perish by it, our Lord said. 
God's people are to stand aloof, recognizing that "the 
powers that be are ordained of God," in that He permits 
them, while He has full power to make changes. If He 
permits them, it is not for us to seek to overthrow them. 

This symbolic burning of the world is sometimes referred 
to by secular writers. In the newspapers we frequently 
read about "the great conflagration"— speaking of 
this fire of trouble, strife, confusion. The elements that 
will "melt with fervent heat" will be the labor element, 
the artisan element, the capitalistic element, the religious 
element, etc. The Lord has been gathering the nations, 
as He said He would in this "Day"— within the last forty 
years. This gathering means the drawing of the nations 
together. All the nations of Europe— and even China- 
are nearer to us today than Chicago was seventy years 
ago. The Nations are drawn closely together by the Atlantic 
and Pacific cables, so that China and Japan are 
within a few hours' communication with us, and a financial 
panic affects the whole world within twenty-four hours. 

While the Lord has been doing this work, we are not 
to think that He is pitting these nations against each other. 
He has permitted them to work out their selfish propensities, 
and the result is strife. Knowledge is doing this— 
bringing on the restless social condition. 

THE FINAL OUTLOOK 

We see that this war has been brought on by very 
peculiar circumstances. Russia and Austria have each 
long been anxious to have an opening to the Mediterranean; 
but they have been fearful that a great war would 
result from any attempt to secure it. They have more or 
less "egged on" the smaller states— the Balkan States. 
They have done everything that they could to weaken 
each other's influence in these states— the "Buffer States," 
as they are called. Paid agents have been sent into that region 
by one nation to create antagonism against the other. 

Austria thought that she had a good excuse for war 



against Servia on account of the assassination of the heir 
to the Austrian throne by a Servian. She hoped that this 
excuse would seem to be sufficient. She hoped that Russia 
would say nothing; or that, otherwise, Germany's shaken 
fist would deter her. But this time it did not work. 
Russia determined to support the Servians, who are her 
kinsfolk; and this has brought in the other nations. 

Apparently the great European kings and emperors 
realize that their own thrones are tottering, and also that 
this war may unify their people. The willingness of the 
people is an important factor in connection with any war. 
A war with another nation is preferable to the civil strife 
of a social upheaval. Their judgment is approved by 
facts. A Socialist in Paris the other day said something 
against the war, and he was assassinated immediately. 

Our thought is that this war will so weaken all the 
nations, so impoverish them, as to make them ready for 
the anarchy which the Bible portrays. The disbanding of 
the troops and the returning of them to their homes, disappointed, 
dissatisfied and angry with the kings, rulers, 

R5527 : page 260 

nobles, will result in the anarchy which will doubtless prevail 
throughout Europe— and extend to every nation, as 
the Bible predicts. We understand that Christ's Kingdom 
is associated with this in the sense that Christ is about to 
take to Himself His great power and reign. The Lord 
speaks of the anarchists as "His great army" in a figurative 
way, just as He speaks of the caterpillars, which are 
used figuratively to represent His army. The saints will 
not be in that army at all. The Lord has used even the 
Devil as His agent, and "the wrath of man to praise Him." 
Anarchists may be part of the Lord's great army in that 
He will supervise their campaign. 

Eventually, the United States will become involved, and 
so fall with the other nations; not necessarily because the 
United States will engage in this war, however. To do so 
would be very foolish indeed. Our government is strong 
because the people govern themselves; they have their 
own government and their own liberties, and can change 
their own laws. We believe that they are doing this more 
and more, and are preparing to do so still further, so that 
finally our Government will come down to a socialistic 
basis. But before this shall happen, the wealthy, seeking 
to protect themselves, will doubtless bring things to pass 
in violation of the laws, and will thus precipitate trouble, 
believing that they are resisting injustice. Wise would it 
be for all to accept as gracefully as possible the inevitable 
leveling; but will they be wise? 

It is human nature to make the streets run with blood 
rather than to suffer defeat and surrender "vested rights." 
The people are being led on by hatred, and an appeal to 
unreason. While certain truths are presented, the presentation 
is not truthful. But many are being inoculated, 
and are preparing, as they think, for Socialism— we 



would say, for anarchism, here as easily as in Europe. 
ARMAGEDDON STILL FUTURE 

While it is possible that Armageddon may begin next 
Spring, yet it is purely speculation to attempt to say just 
when. We see, however, that there are parallels between 
the close of the Jewish Age and this Gospel Age. These 
parallels seem to point to the year just before us— particularly 
the early months. 

The Scriptures indicate that the Gentile governments 
will receive from their own peoples their first notice that 
their lease of power has expired. The people will take 
note of the sign of the Son of Man in the heavens. The 
judgments of the Lord will begin to be manifest in the 
world, and will run counter to many of their interests. 
This manifestation of His presence is Scripturally called 
the Epiphania, the shining forth, the revealment, of the 
King of Glory. "He shall be revealed in flaming fire, taking 
vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey 
not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ." (2 Thessalonians 1:7-10.) 
As a result, the nations of earth will 
be broken to pieces like a potter's vessel.— Psalm 2:8,9. 

The prophetic forecast tells us that the trouble will 
begin in the ecclesiastical heavens, and later will proceed 
to the social element. The picture given of the end of 
Gentile Times is that of a stone striking the image of 
Gentile supremacy in its feet. (Daniel 2:34,35.) The 
impact will be so sharp and so thorough as to leave 
nothing of them. Having had their day, they will cease 
to be— "become like the chaff of the summer threshing 
floor." The next event in order will be the Messianic 
Kingdom, of which it is written, "The desire of all peoples 
shall come." 



R5527 : page 261 

"MAN PROPOSES-GOD DISPOSES" 

[REPRINT FROM OUR ISSUE OF OCTOBER 15, 1898.] 

"The world by wisdom knows not God." "Going about to 
establish a righteousness of their own they have not submitted 
themselves to the righteousness 
of God."-l Cor. 1:21; Rom. 10:3. 

MEN of energy and ambition are, more frequently 

than others, used of the Lord; because 

they are instruments ready for service. 

If the energy and ambition be 

thoroughly subjected to the Lord— controlled 

by high spirituality, humility and 

veneration toward the Creator, and with 

large individuality and independence of 



character and firmness toward men— it will 

lead to reverent and careful study of the 

Divine will and to persistence and assiduity in its prosecution. 

Such characters God is pleased to use for the 

great things of His service. Next to our Lord Jesus, the 

Apostle Paul is an ideal illustration of such a character: 

God was pleased to use him largely as a mouth-piece and 

as a servant of the Truth— in proportion to his humility, 

loyalty and energy. 

And likewise, but in an opposite direction, God has 
been pleased to use the energetic and ambitious among 
the worldly— whose motive power was not love, loyalty 
and humility, but to the contrary— selfish pride, vainglory. 
God often uses such characters in another kind of 
service— causing their ambitious energies ("wrath") to 
praise Him, and the remainder (beyond what suits His 
purposes) He restrains. Illustrations of this stamp of 
character are seen in Satan, in Judas, and in persons in 
less prominent positions in the Church— even today. 
These are active in planting "roots of bitterness, by which 
many are defiled" and sifted out, stumbled— leaving the 
remainder stronger and purer. See the inspired Word 
on this subject— "I hear that there be divisions among 
you; and as to a certain part I believe it; and there must 
needs be also partyism among you [permitted of the 
Lord], that they that are approved may be made manifest 
among you." "Brethren, mark them which cause divisions 
and offenses, in violation of the doctrine which ye have 
learned [the royal law of Love]; and avoid them." "They 
went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they 
had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with 
us; but they went out that they might be made manifest 
that they were not all of us." (1 Cor. 11:18; Rom. 16:17; 
1 John 2:19.) It is doubtless as necessary that the 
Church be sifted, purged, tested, as that it be "built up"; 
and for either work God uses the ready and willing. 

But our thoughts run specially in the channel of God's 
supervision of earthly affairs and His use of worldly ambitions 
in world-affairs. In this direction Pharaoh, 
Nebuchadnezzar, Cyrus, Alexander and Napoleon I. are 
notable examples of the past— men of destiny, over whose 
affairs Providence had a supervision. God utilized the 
energies and ambitions of these men in the forwarding 
of His plans and in the fulfilment of His predictions— and 
their further ambitious efforts He restrained by His 
superior power, as it pleased Him. Our thoughts pursue 
this course, because we perceive such a worldly ambition 
to do something notable, to achieve a world-wide fame, 
possessing a man of opportunity today— the German Emperor; 
and we regard him as likely to be to some extent 
another "man of destiny." 

EMPEROR WILLIAM'S AMBITION 

As Lord Herschel was guided by his science to search 
for a new planet and thus discovered one, some students 



of the greatest of all sciences— the Divine Revelation, the 

Bible— are guided thereby to search for its promised 

"things to come" (John 16:13), and, as was promised, 

they find them and thus are permitted to anticipate history. 

For instance, the "Watchers" know, from the unfolding 

of the Scriptures which God has provided them, 

that astounding changes, social, religious, and political, are 

just before us— to be accomplished within the next sixteen 

years: we note the Scripture testimony that just prior 

to the great collapse in anarchy there is to be a revival of 

Papal influence in the world; and that Protestantism, 

considerably unified or federated, will be in practical sympathy 

and co-operation with Papacy; and that in fact 

(though not in theory) Catholicism and Protestantism will 

for a short time jointly rule the civilized world (through 

the civil powers) and appear to have begun a human 

Millennium. But while the cries of Peace! Peace!! are 

still heard, will come the great cataclysm of social revolution 

which shall demolish all present institutions and 

demonstrate the futility of all selfish human schemes, and 

by heart-breaking discouragements prepare mankind for 

the great blessing which God has in store. 

Naturally, the "Watchers" are on the lookout for every 
sign of the times seeming to harmonize with the known 
coming events. Indeed, our interest in the "news of the 
day" is chiefly with the fragments, which seem to have a 
connection with or a bearing upon the fulfilments of 
prophecy. And knowing that God generally uses "a man 
of opportunity" for His work, we are struck with the 
fact that the German Emperor, who evidently is seeking 
a notable destiny, has lately been giving expression to 
ambitions that seem closely related to Scriptural predictions. 
And his determination and pride will impel him 
so far as possible to make good his boasts; added to 
which he freely and repeatedly declares that he feels 
himself led and impelled in this direction by an unseen 
power, or "voice," which spurs him on to success. And 
a success on one point or issue would surely lead such a 
man to larger schemes in the same direction. God "raised 
him up" to the throne of the German Empire (in probably 
the same way that He raised Pharaoh up to the throne 
of Egypt at the time of Israel's deliverance) by taking 
out of the way, by death, his father— a man of very different 
temperament and ambitions. What would be more 
reasonable than to suppose of William II. that (as it is 
written of one brought miraculously to the throne of 
old) God brought him "to the throne, for such a time as 
this," and for the work he is ambitious to accomplish? 

The Emperor's ambition is to restore to "religion" 
some of its former power by which it co-operated with 
the civil rulers in the control of the world. Not that he 
would desire to reproduce "the dark ages" of priestcraft 
and superstition, and of inquisition, the stake and the 
rack; but that he considers those evils, not in the light of 
the Scriptures, but in the light of today's world-wisdom, 
attributing those evils to the ignorance of the times and 



not to the false teachings of Anti-Christ. 

He reasons that Romanism is rejuvenating and adapting 
itself to twentieth century conditions and can be 
trusted as much as Protestantism, so far as the maintenance 
of present governments is concerned; and that, 
after all, is to him the all-important matter. Indeed, he 
seems to feel that the revival of Papal influence is a 
necessity anyway on the ground that of two evils the less 
should be chosen to avert the greater. 

From the Emperor's own statement of his ambitious 
designs (published in the public prints) as related to 
General Hoffmann Scholz, and doubtless designed 

R5527 : page 262 

for publication, we furnish the following extract: 

"At the present day two great evils threaten humanity. 
They are Socialism and Atheism. Against each of these 
the pope is a bulwark. In fighting infidelity no aid should 
be neglected. Socialism is infidelity to the monarch or the 
State, and Atheism is infidelity to God. 

"The Pope is the spiritual ruler of the largest communion 
on earth, and he is by far the most powerful and 
authoritative of spiritual rulers. His word is promptly 
and willingly obeyed by hundreds of millions of people 
spread throughout the globe. He can order and direct 
the consciences of these multitudes. He can say: These 
are your religious tenets; those must be your social sentiments; 
and suddenly he is obeyed. His power therefore 
for good is immeasurable. 

"Kings and emperors are the Divinely ordained 
guardians of social order and directors of social well-being, 
just as the leaders of religious bodies are the 
Divinely ordained moderators of conscience. But just as 
kings and emperors can have their beneficent influence 
in the religious order, so can spiritual guides help and 
promote the social weal. 

"The pope's range of power is the vastest of all, and 
consequently the possibilities of the good he may do are 
the most far-reaching. I think it imperative therefore 
that he be put in a position to freely accomplish all the 
good of which he is capable. He must be liberated from 
his self-imposed imprisonment in the Vatican. All the 
trammels that surround and harass him in his daily life 
must be removed, so that he will then be at liberty to fight 
the common enemies, Socialism and irreligion. And he 
will be in a position to make his voice heard in the interests 
of peace, when nations go to war without just motive, 
and in the interest of humanity, when acts of cruelty or 
injustice are being anywhere committed. 

"I have meditated long and deeply on this subject. 
The fact that it preoccupies me so much convinces me 
that I am inspired to take action in the matter. It is like 
one of the voices that Socrates had about with him which 
whispers in my ear that this also is my mission to remedy 
the pope's position and open up the field for his range of 



well-doing. It daily urges me to act. Whether I shall 
succeed or not is beyond my power to foretell. Judging 
from the circumstances there is every evidence that success 
should not be outside the bounds of possibility. I am 
going to do my utmost, and more than this no man can do. 

"I feel for the moment that I have no other concrete 
and practical mission before me. To succeed in such an 
undertaking would be a climax and a crowning worthy of 
any man's life. As I say, I will energetically attempt it. 
The small preternatural voice unmistakably spurs me on, 
and I think than this no better augury of success could be 
desired. 

"For this moment I can say no more, and it does not 
behoove me to be too explicit about my plans. They are 
already laid, and my immediate actions will be a development 
of them. Their result will be their justification, and 
it will also be the justification of many acts in the past, 
which may have seemed strange and unaccountable to my 
good Protestant subjects, but which had their motive and 
their origin in a desire to accomplish great and enduring 
events.... 

"I shall not die until my ends in this regard are attained. 
Death otherwise would find a void in my existence; 
and I feel within me that I have not been born 
in vain." 



R5527 : page 262 

THE TRIED AND PROVEN PEOPLE 

"The Lord your God proveth you, to know whether ye love the 
Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul."— 
Deut. 13:3. 

GOD HAD entered into a Covenant with the 

Children of Israel, in harmony with His 

promise made to Abraham their father. 

Four hundred and thirty years after His 

Covenant with Abraham, the Lord had 

called Israel out of Egypt, out of the house 

of bondage, and had made them a nation in 

the wilderness. He had proposed to them 

that if they would keep His Law and His 

statutes He would make of them a great 

people, above all other peoples of the earth. They had 

entered into this Covenant with the Lord, and had declared 

that they were very glad to accept this Divine 

arrangement and to have the opportunity of carrying 

God's blessing eventually to all mankind. But now Israel 

was about to cross over Jordan and enter the land of 

Promise. Before parting from them, Moses explained to 

them that it was not enough that they had accepted the 

conditions of the Covenant and become the Lord's people: 

God would test them, would prove them. 



Why should God prove them? As a people they had 
left Egypt under the leadership of the chosen servant of 
God. They had crossed the Red Sea, and sung their 
praises for deliverance. They had journeyed forty years 
in the wilderness. They had been refreshed with the 
water from the smitten rock. They had been fed with 
the bread from Heaven. God knew all about them when 
He took them for His people. What more could He wish? 

Ah! but their fathers had rebelled against God, and 
had fallen in the wilderness because of sin, because they 
had murmured against Him whom they had covenanted 
to serve. And now Moses explained that God wished to 
prove to what extent the Covenant would be kept by these 
their children. He said: You have entered into this 
agreement which God made with your fathers. You have 
made a consecration to be the servants of the Lord. Now, 
are you ready to perform the terms of your agreement? 
"The Lord your God doth prove you, to see whether you 
love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all 
your soul."— Deuteronomy 13:3. 

GOD'S WONDERFUL CARE OVER ISRAEL 

Do you appreciate God? was the query. Do you realize 
the value of His kindness? Do you truly love Him with 
all your being— with all your powers, your strength? Are 
you fully surrendered to the Lord? For "thou shalt remember 
all the way which the Lord thy God hath led thee 
these forty years in the wilderness— to humble thee, and 
to prove thee, to know what was in thine heart, whether 
thou wouldest keep His commandments or no. He 
humbled thee, and suffered thee to hunger, and fed thee 
with manna, which thou knewest not, neither did thy 
fathers know, that He might make thee to know that man 
doth not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth 
out of the mouth of the Lord doth man live. Thy 
raiment waxed not old upon thee, neither did thy foot 
swell, these forty years. Thou shalt also consider in thine 
heart, that as a man chasteneth his son, so the Lord thy 
God chasteneth thee. Therefore thou shalt keep the commandments 
of the Lord thy God, to walk in His ways and 
to fear Him. 

R5527 : page 263 

"For the Lord thy God bringeth thee into a good land, 
a land of brooks of water, of fountains and depths that 
spring out of valleys and hills; a land of wheat, and 
barley, and vines, and fig trees, and pomegranates; a land 
of oil olive and honey; a land wherein thou shalt eat bread 
without scarceness; thou shalt not lack anything in it. 
...When thou hast eaten and art full, then thou shalt 
bless the Lord thy God for the good land which He hath 
given thee. Beware that thou forget not the Lord thy 
God, in not keeping His commandments and His judgments 
and His statutes, which I command thee this day." 



—Deuteronomy 8:2-11. 

SUPREME FAVORS TO SPIRITUAL ISRAEL 

What an exhortation! What an incentive to faithfulness! 
Who would not worship and serve such a God! 
And what a wonderful application can Spiritual Israel 
make of this Scripture! How marvelously has our God 
led us, His Covenant people, through the wilderness of 
this world, and provided for our needs day by day! How 
the chastenings of His loving hand have kept our feet 
from wandering; or if we have turned at any time to the 
right hand, or to the left, how has His love drawn us 
back! And has He not brought us into a good land, a 
land of brooks of water, a land of fountains and depths, 
a land of oil olive and honey, a land wherein we eat bread, 
the Bread of Heaven, without scarceness? Truly, we 
have not lacked anything in it. If Israel of old had reason 
to prove their gratitude and love to God, how much more 
reason have we, Spiritual Israel! 

MOSES' DYING MESSAGE 

After Moses had reminded Israel of all the loving kindnesses 
of the Lord on their behalf and of their solemn 
Covenant, he proclaimed to them the ordinances of the 
Lord by which they were to be governed, and then gave 
them most solemn warnings of the consequences of forgetting 
God and breaking their Covenant. This discourse, 

R5528 : page 263 

of which our text is a part, and which comprises the 
larger part of the Book of Deuteronomy, was delivered to 
Israel just before Moses' death in Mount Nebo— the 
highest point of the ridge of Pisgah— whence the Lord 
showed him all the land of Canaan, and where he was 
buried. God had told Moses that He should not go over 
Jordan, because of his disobedience at the waters of 
Meribah, when he smote the rock contrary to the command 
of God. This discourse was his last message to Israel, 
and is very touching and impressive. 

Moses finished his message with these words: "I call 
Heaven and earth to record this day against you, that I 
have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing. 
Therefore choose life, that thou and thy seed mayest live, 
that thou mayest love the Lord thy God, and that thou 
mayest cleave unto Him; for He is thy life, and the length 
of thy days, that thou mayest dwell in the land which the 
Lord sware unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and 
to Jacob, to give them." Such words were very forceful 
at such a time; for Moses had told them that he was about 
to die, and that God would give them a new leader to go 
with them over Jordan. 

ONLY "ISRAELITES INDEED" ARE SOUGHT 



As a matter of fact, we know that Israel did not live 
up to their engagement, as God had assured Moses would 
be the case. They were like unto their fathers who died 
in the wilderness. During the centuries of their dwelling 
in Canaan, however, there were quite a large number who 
individually proved worthy of the blessing and favor of 
the Lord. St. Paul refers to these in Hebrews 1 1 , and 
declares their loyalty to God. These are to have a "better 
resurrection" than their brethren or than mankind in general. 
The Apostle mentions such characters as Moses, 
Samuel, David, and many of the prophets and others who 
were not so honored and prominent as these in an earthly 
way, but who had the honor of having pleased God. 

Their serving the Lord with all their heart and soul 
could not justify them legally; for they were imperfect 
and blemished through the fall. But all the powers they 
had were devoted to the Lord. These became heirs of 
God— not heirs in the highest sense, because this opportunity 
was not open in their time. No one could gain this 
highest position until the Redeemer had come and opened 
the way. So all these worthy ones who lived prior to the 
Christian Era, died in faith, not having received the promise, 
i. e., its fulfilment. But "they looked for a City which 
hath foundations, whose Builder and Maker is God." And 
soon these faithful servants of the Lord will "stand up 
for their portion." 

But we, the Church, must all first be perfected. In this 
class our Lord Jesus holds the highest place, and by the 
sacrifice of Himself He opened the door of opportunity to 
His brethren of the elect class. "Israelites indeed" were 
honored with this invitation to become joint-heirs with 
Christ, sons of God. Only those who love God with all 
their heart and soul are "Israelites indeed." The average 
Israelite of our Lord's day was not fit to be of this select 
company; only "Israelites indeed" accepted the invitation. 
Throughout this Gospel Age these true Israelites have 
been entering into this wonderful favor with all their heart 
and with all their soul. 

It is not because we are more nearly perfect in the 
flesh that we have obtained this great favor, but because 
the Lord opened the way, and because we had a love for 
righteousness and an honesty of heart. Those who lived 
before our time, during the Law Covenant Dispensation 
and prior to it, needed justification also; and the same 
Redeemer who has purchased us has through His sacrifice 
provided justification for them, that they too may ultimately 
come into the blessed relationship of sons of God. 

IS GOD'S KNOWLEDGE LIMITED? 

The way in which this expression of our text is put 
might give the impression that God does not know the 
hearts of men. The Scriptures assure us that God can 
fully read the heart, "that all things are naked and open 
unto the eyes of Him with whom we have to do"— no 



thought or purpose of our heart is hidden from Him. 

But when we think of the Almighty— what He knows or 

what He does not know— we are at a loss to form an opinion. 

So far as our experience goes, there is no one who 

could know just what he himself would do under any 

given condition in the future. We may think what we 

would probably do, but we are not sure. And if we are 

not sure that we ourselves know what we would do, we 

cannot see how any one else could know what we would 

do. We cannot by any mental process understand how it 

would be possible for God to know what we might do tomorrow, 

unless He coerced our mind or hedged up our 

way, so that we could do only one certain thing. 

In the matter of the Gentile Times, God permitted 
various governments— Babylonia, Medo-Persia, Grecia 
and Rome— to rule the world successively. We can 
understand how He could say: "Thus far shalt thou go 
and no farther." The tendency of sin in the fallen race 
would lead people to go to any length, if not restrained. 
In such ways, we can understand how God would know 
in advance. He knows, too, when the Church will be 
selected, as He has a definite Plan concerning this selection. 
He knew that Satan would have the disposition to 
raise up an Anti-Christ System— a counterfeit of the true 

R5528 : page 264 

Church. He knew how many saints within a given time 
could be developed under those conditions, and how much 
time would thus be necessary to gather His predestinated 
number; for He purposed to permit Satan to operate within 
certain bounds for the testing of His professed people. 
It would not be wise for us to say that there are some 
things that God could not know, that He does not know— 
or that there is anything that God does not know— but we 
can say that we are not able to understand how God could 
know what we shall think tomorrow, or next week. God 
made man a free moral agent; and He always respects 
this free agency, and gives us the opportunity of exercising 
our own wills. He is not pleased to have people who 
would work automatically. He permits us to make our 
own decisions. He has given us His Word, He gives us 
all needed assistances, and He will help all who are seeking 
to walk in His way. But these questions, we trust, 
will all be solved for us ere long. We know that God 
proves His professed people and demonstrates their heart 
attitude just as if He did not know— perhaps only as a 
proof to angels and men. 

WHAT WILL THE ISSUE BE? 

God is proving the Church now. There are many of 
the professed Church of Christ who have never made a 
covenant with God at all. But He is testing all those who 
have made a covenant, as to whether or not it is a heart-consecration 
—whether it is self first or God first— whether 



it is success in life or the honor of God and the doing of 
His will. He is trying us because He wishes to find out 
who will be worthy of a place with His Son on the Throne, 
who will be worthy to reign with Him in the Kingdom, 
and who of the remainder will be worthy of a place in the 
company of antitypical Levites, and finally, who will be 
deserving of the Second Death. 

Ours, therefore, is not only the high honor of being 
sons of God during this Gospel Age, but also of being 
proved for the lasting rewards. The Jews that knowingly 
lived in violation of their Law lost merely their temporal 
life, but did not forfeit their opportunity for the eternal 
life. But if any of us do likewise, we shall forfeit the life 
eternal. Therefore, the dealing of God with us goes 
beyond His dealing with Natural Israel. Our responsibility, 
then, is so much the greater, and the issue is final. 

The Kingdom is designed only for those who by the 
grace of God shall in heart, in character, become like the 
Master, in that they will love the Lord with all their heart, 
with all their soul (all their present capacity), and be able 
to say: "Not My will, but Thine, O Lord, be done." No 
other heart condition than this of entire submission to 
God in Christ can make us acceptable for the Kingdom; 
for no other condition represents full loyalty and full love 
to God. Let us not forget that all the Heavenly glories 
and blessings, which "eye hath not seen nor ear heard, 
neither have entered into the heart of man," God has prepared 
only for them who love Him supremely— and who 
prove this love. But His grace will be sufficient for our 
every need. 

"Then let us bid each doubt remove— 

Those doubts that fain would rise— 
And view the Canaan that we love 

With unbeclouded eyes! 
Could we but climb where Moses stood, 

And view the landscape o'er, 
Not Jordan's stream, nor death's cold flood, 

Should fright us from the shore!" 



R5528 : page 264 

WHAT IS EVIL SPEAKING? 

"Speak evil of no man."— Titus 3:2. 

THE Apostle's injunction is very positive; we 
are to speak evil of none. The question 
then arises, What does St. Paul mean here? 
Does he mean that we should speak nothing 
of any man with an evil intention toward 
him? Or does he mean, Speak no evil, 
whatever the intention? We answer, we 
surely know that to speak evil with a wrong 



motive, a wrong intention, would be a 
heinous crime, especially in a child of God. 
But we think the Apostle meant, No matter what your 
motive, speak evil about nobody. If that be the Apostle's 
thought— and we believe it hardly controvertible— it places 
a very stringent requirement upon all of the Lord's people. 
If the motive for speaking evil were bad, all the worse; 
but good or bad, "Speak evil of no man." 

Now another question comes up, What is evil-speaking? 
We answer, This subject has various sides. To 
speak evil is to speak that which is injurious; therefore 
one should say nothing that would injure any man. It is 
very easy to perceive the justice and the reasonableness 
of this requirement if we apply the Golden Rule. Would 
we wish any one to do us evil? Would we wish any to 
speak slightingly of us, to comment on our faults, or on 
what the speaker considered faults, and thus lower us in 
the eyes of others? If the Lord's people would learn to 
apply the Golden Rule to every affair of life, it would 
surely be very helpful. 

Some of the most conscientious Christians have difficulty 
along this line. In considering this matter of evil-speaking, 
some think, Is my motive right? They forget 
that their motive in speaking derogatively of others has 
nothing to do with the Apostle's injunction. No matter 
what the motive, we are not to speak evil. The question 
is not, Did I have a good intention or a bad one? but, Am 
I speaking evil? Am I saying anything contrary to the 
Golden Rule— something that I would not wish to have 
said of me? We would that we could instil this thought 
into the hearts and minds of every reader of this journal. 

IS REPORTING VIOLATION OF RULES EVIL-SPEAKING? 

Now comes another question, How should we apply 
the injunction of our text in the case of the home, for 
instance, or the office? Suppose that we are connected 
with an office or a home where certain rules are laid down 
for the government of that office or home. Would it in 
such a case be evil-speaking on our part to report any 
violation of those rules? We do not consider this evil-speaking. 
If we were ourselves violating those rules, the 
person who would report us would be doing right— not 
doing us evil or wrong or injury. By not reporting the 
misdemeanor or violation of rules, the person would be 
encouraging in us a continuation of the wrong course. 

God's people are supposed always to have no other 
than good motives for any course pursued. To have any 
but a good motive in dealing with others would be to have 
a murderous motive. We are not, therefore, to take the 
motive into consideration. But a person who accepts a 
position in an office, a home or an institution accepts also 
the conditions and sundry rules connected with such a 
position. Doubtless nearly all rules and regulations in an 
office or home are made, not with the view of injuring any 
one, but for the general welfare of the business or the 



family or whatever it may be. Hence the observance of 

all these obligations should be considered a serious responsibility. 

R5529 : page 265 

One should not report an infraction of rules 
in an evil way, but merely as a fact. 

It is not necessary for the one who informs to judge 
the heart of the one reported. It is not a question of a 
bad heart. If one has a foolish brain, or is forgetful or 
inattentive and violates important rules, it is not judging 
the heart to report such a case— and especially where 
there is a rule that such cases be reported. It is merely a 
matter of duty— a thing that is required, and is both 
necessary and proper. We see this principle laid down in 
God's workmanship in our bodies. If something occurs 
in the body— for instance, if a finger is being pinched— 
the nerves immediately telegraph to the brain. If a foot 
is hurt, the fact is telegraphed to the brain at once. Suppose 
there were no means of communicating the injury of 
a member of the body to the brain. Suppose there were 
no nerves of sensation to convey the message. One 
might not know whether or not he had lost a finger or a 
toe. He would not know when he had lost a foot, until 
he stumbled and fell. 

SUBJECT NOT TO BE DISCUSSED WITH THE OFFENDER 

We should not be always looking to see if our own 
personal matters are being impinged. We know that we, 
as well as others, have imperfections. If others inadvertently 
tread upon our toes, we know that we are likely 
to sometimes tread on others' toes. But personal matters 
are different from those that belong to the family or to 
the office. It is not busybodying to report violations of 
the rules of the house or of the office. It is to the interest 
of every member of a family or an institution that the 
interests of the whole body be looked after, in a proper 
and reasonable way. 

It would not be proper for any one in an office to attempt 
to set straight every one else in the office. It is not 
for any one to go around and correct others; this is not 
his business. But if another is breaking rules, it is his 
business to report the facts— the facts, without any coloring 
whatever. If we would do otherwise, if each one who 
notes an infraction would go to the one who violated the 
rules, and thus attempt to settle all the affairs of the office 
or the family, there would be continual confusion. The 
one who broke the rule would be disposed to defend himself 
and to say, "My course was all right, and it is none 
of your affair whether that gate was left open or shut," 
etc. But if that gate is left open, it is your duty to report 
the matter to the proper authority, and thus you are 
relieved of the responsibility of the affair. This is not a 
personal matter, such as to be dealt with according to 
Matthew 18:15-18. It would not be our duty to tell Tom, 



Dick, Harry, Mary or Jane about the matter. There is 
just one person to whom we should tell it; and the report 
should be made with all kindly feeling. 

One would soon get himself into trouble if he were to 
try to run an entire house or office by going to various 
ones to endeavor to set them right. But if there were a 
new-comer, and he were unintentionally violating a rule, it 
might be well to say; It is a rule of the house to do thus 
and so. But it would not be proper to mention this fact 
to him more than once. A second violation should be reported, 
though in a loving spirit. 

MISCELLANEOUS CASES 

Applying the question to our proper course in the 
Church, in matters relating to ourselves personally, we 
see where our individual responsibility lies. "If thy 
brother trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault 
between thee and him alone." Our Lord does not refer 
to what he does against some one else, but against "thee." 
"Well," some one may object, "I think he was doing something 
against so-and-so." We have heard some one say: 
"I think Brother So-and-so does not treat his wife right." 
We reply, "That is his business and his wife's business; 
it is not your business. Your business is to look after 
your own wife or husband, your own parents, your own 
children, and let other people alone. We advise that you 
practise on yourself. Do your duty in respect to your own 
affairs, and refrain from comments on those of others." 

But suppose we saw something radically wrong, suppose 
we were going along the street and saw a man cruelly 
beating a horse, should we say nothing? In such a case, 
if we saw a policeman, we might say, "Will you take notice 
of how that man is abusing that horse?" Or it might be 
reported to the humane society, if there were one in the 
locality. If a parent were brutally beating a child, or 
something of that kind, it would be proper to report the 
matter to the authorities. But it is not the business of 
every one to go about attempting to straighten out matters 
in general. The world is full of evil, and will be until 
the Kingdom shall take control. 

We think that as far as the Church is concerned the 
number of difficulties we see in the world would better 
be let alone as a rule; for if we should start out to right 
everything that is wrong, we would not have any time left 
for serving the King of kings and Lord of lords. Our 
time is limited enough, at best. People already misjudge 
us; therefore we do well not to add unnecessarily to the 
opposition. If the time ever came when we were through 
with all our duties to the Church and to our families, 
then we might see to some of these outside matters. But 
we have very little time, and it leaves us very small opportunity 
to attend to any other matters except our necessary 
duties and our service for the Lord and the brethren. 
And for this we should be very thankful; for then if there 
is opposition against us, it will be only because we have 



been faithful to our Heavenly King. 

Our King has not given us authority as yet to set the 
matters of the world straight. But we are instructed that 
we should, as we have opportunity, make known the principles 
of righteousness, without getting into any dispute. 
When our King comes in and begins His Reign, and we 
are exalted with Him, we will show the world what a 
government should be! But, indeed, it seems surprising 
how good the laws are even now. We are simply amazed 
as we think of the good laws of the State of New York, 
for instance. It is wonderful how the State tries to take 
care of the interests of the majority, and how much is 
done for the people; we are glad that the poor world has 
been able to do so well. We admire what they have done 
under such adverse conditions. What a grand time it will 
be, and what a grand world it will be, when everything is 
under the Law of Righteousness! 

ANOTHER PHASE OF THE QUESTION 

But coming back to this matter of evil-speaking in the 
Church; suppose that a brother has been nominated for 
the position of Elder or Deacon, and suppose that in our 
judgment he is unfit for such an office, for certain reasons 
known to us, but not known to the rest of the Ecclesia. 
What should be our course in the matter? We are admonished 
to speak evil of no man. Should we then get 
up and say, "Brethren, I consider Brother A. wholly unfit 
to be an Elder; I know that he did thus-and-so; that he 
cheated a woman out of a sum of money"— or whatever 
the charge might be. Shall we say this? No, indeed! 
Is it our duty to speak evil in the interests of the Church, 
to do evil that good may come? Certainly not! But the 
old creature always wants a chance to speak evil; give 
him half a chance and he will soon tell all that he knows! 

R5530 : page 266 

Then what shall we do? Well, if we were ourself a 
member of that congregation, we think we would go over 
and speak to the brother thus nominated, and say, "Brother 
A., there are certain matters which I have learned about 
you which I do not wish to mention to anybody. I would 
not wish to speak evil of you at all, dear brother. But I 
believe that this feature of your life is wrong, and that 
it would not be right for this Congregation to elect you. 
I do not wish to tell them about this matter. I wish to 
ask you if you will refuse to serve. If you promise that 
you will decline to be elected, that is all that is necessary. 
Or if you think that my point is not well taken, just state 
the matter publicly to them. If you do not do this, and 
do not refuse to be elected, then I must state the matter 
publicly— I will have to tell what I know; for you know 
it is as I state it. I have come to you in kindness and 
have no desire to injure you." 

If the brother answers, "Well, Brother , I will 



decline the nomination; and as regards the matter you 
mention, I am trying to get the better of it"— then we 
would tell him we are very glad. We believe that we 
would in this way do that brother good. We would also 
be preserving the Class from what would be hurtful or 
contentious, and would be keeping the peace. If, on the 
other hand, the brother should be disputatious, we would 
say to him, "You may be sure that I will explain this 
matter to the Church, if you do not decline the nomination; 
for thereby you are saying that you approve your 
course in life and are standing by it." 

But if the matter were something that occurred in 
the brother's life long ago, he might be entirely changed 
by now— in the matter of a year, or two years, or five 
years, or whatever. We would be glad if he were changed 
from the old course. Then we might go to the brother 
and say, "Brother, I notice that you stood for election. Is 
your life entirely changed?" If he replied, "Yes, 
Brother; it is changed entirely," then we would be glad. 
But if he got angry and told us it was none of our business, 
we would say, "Now, Brother, I must make a report 
of this to the Church. You are indicating by your manner 
that you are advocating the same course that you took 
before. If I had done such a wrong, and continued to do 
wrong, I would wish to have my course checked. So I 
shall report this matter, that the Class may consider again 
whether they will have you for an Elder (or a Deacon)." 
But suppose that the Brother should not be nominated for 
office in the Church? Then we would consider that his 
past was none of our affair. 

A CONCLUDING WORD OF EXHORTATION 

Anything injurious to the real interests of another 
should never be spoken. We cannot be too careful of our 
words concerning others. There seems to be a tendency 
with some of the Lord's children to indulge in confidences 
with others of the brethren and to relate incidents that 
reflect upon another brother or sister, that show up certain 
manifestations of weakness in that one. The disposition 
that thus exposes the imperfections of the brethren is 
surely not the love that covers. (1 Peter 4:8.) We 
know some who have been long in the narrow way, who 
do not seem even yet to have overcome this disposition. 
Do they forget that they themselves have weaknesses perhaps 
as pronounced as the brother or sister whom they 
criticize? The very fact that they ignore the Master's 
injunction along the line of our text proves their own 
lack of development. Yet these would probably resent the 
implication that they are guilty of evil-speaking. 

The sooner every follower of Christ comes to see that 
all this is slander, that it is besmirching the good name of 
a brother or sister, that it is a direct violation of the repeated 
injunction of the Word of God, and that defamation 
is theft of another's reputation, the sooner they will 
see this subject as it really is, in all its hideousness— as it 



must appear in the sight of the Lord. Once seeing the 
matter from the Divine standpoint, the only true standpoint, 
the child of God must surely awaken to the greatest 
possible energy in overcoming such works of the flesh and 
of the Devil. Let each one who reads these words search 
his or her own heart and think over his or her own conduct, 
and then ask the question, "Is it I?" 

Let every one who hopes to be accounted worthy of a 
place in the Kingdom, so soon to come, purge out the old 
leaven of malice, envy, backbiting and strife, if any yet 
remain, that he or she may become indeed a copy of 
God's dear Son. The flesh is very seductive, and is inclined 
to make all manner of excuses for itself. Let each 
one make this a matter of personal heart-searching. There 
is, we believe, only a very little while remaining in which 
to perfect our characters. Let us pray more earnestly 
than ever, "Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth! 
Keep Thou the door of my lips!" 



R5530 : page 266 

JUDGMENT OF THE NATIONS 

--SEPTEMBER 20. -MATTHEW 25:31-46.- 

"Inasmuch as ye did it not unto one of the least 
of these, ye did it not unto Me."— Verse 45. 

HAVING given His disciples many parables 
illustrating the experiences of the Church, 
the Kingdom class, in their development and 
preparation for Kingdom honor, it was 
eminently proper that Jesus should give the 
parable of this lesson to illustrate the work 
of this Kingdom after its establishment— to 
show its purpose, and its effect upon the 
world of mankind. 

Many of us have in the past read the 
Bible too carelessly. Our minds were sluggish respecting 
spiritual things. For instance, today's lesson was at one 
time applied to the Church. We failed altogether to 
notice that it says not a word respecting the Church, but 
is entirely applied to the world, to the nations, the heathen. 
For centuries the Jews had been accustomed to think of 
themselves as God's nation, God's people. All others they 
styled heathen, Gentiles, the people, the nations; and in 
the prophecies God treated the matter from this standpoint. 
So when Spiritual Israel was received into Divine 
favor as the Royal Priesthood, the holy nation, the peculiar 
people, all the remainder of mankind were properly 
enough to be thought of and described as "the nations," 
"the Gentiles." 

In line with this, our Lord in this parable tells what 
is to befall after His Kingdom shall have been set up— 



after the selection of the true Church class to be the 
Bride, the Lamb's Wife and Joint-heir in His Kingdom, 
in His Throne. This, we notice, is very clearly stated by 
the Master, saying, "When the Son of Man shall come in 
His glory, and all the holy angels with Him, then shall 
He sit upon the Throne of His glory." Who, after 
proper consideration, will say that this is a matter of the 
past? Who will dispute that this is a description of 
Messiah's Kingdom following His Parousia and His 
Epiphania at His Second Advent? 

APPLICATION OF THIS PARABLE 

Then follows a description of the work of the Millennial 

R5530 : page 267 

Age. "Before Him shall be gathered all nations." 
This means all the people of the world outside of the 
Lord's holy nation, His peculiar people, the Church. 
Everybody except the Church will be before His great 
white Throne of Justice, Mercy and Love; that will be 
their judgment time. 

Six thousand years ago, Adam and his entire race 
were judged in Eden, and the sentence was death. None 
of the race are worthy of everlasting life. They are all 
sinners. In due time God sent His Son to die for Adam's 
sin, in order that, "as by a man came death [of the entire 
race], by a man [Jesus] also will come the resurrection 
of the dead" [the entire race]. "For as all in Adam die, 
even so all in Christ shall be made alive"— "every man in 
his own order."— 1 Corinthians 15:21,22. 

The first order to be made alive in Christ is the 
Church, called out of the world, separated, "begotten 
again" of the Holy Spirit. These pass their judgment, 
their trial, for life everlasting or death everlasting in the 
present time. Hence the worthy ones, with characters 
formed pleasing and acceptable to God, will be quite ready 
to be Messiah's Bride class, joint-heirs with Him in His 
Kingdom and in His work of judging the world. He has 
promised that all the faithful shall sit with Him in His 
Throne— the very Throne pictured in the words of our 
text— the Throne before which all the nations, all the 
people outside of the Church, will be gathered. 

The gathering of the world will be the result of knowledge. 
The Time of Trouble will lead on to great enlightenment, 
in which all the blind eyes will be opened, all 
the deaf ears will be unstopped, and the knowledge of the 
glory of God will fill the whole earth. Some there will 
be who, resisting this knowledge, will decline to accept 
Christ and will not come into this judgment; but after a 
hundred years of resistance these will be destroyed. 

Those in the parable are such as have accepted Christ's 
terms and desire to be on judgment, or on trial, for everlasting 
life. This will include all in their graves, who, the 



R5531 : page 267 

Master tells us, will come forth, not all at once, but gradually. 

Messiah's Kingdom will exercise its power and disseminate 

the knowledge of God and of righteousness, with 

a view to encouraging, helping and uplifting all the willing 

and obedient. All such may rise more and more out 

of sin and death conditions— out of imperfection of mind 

and body and out of immoral conduct to the full image 

of God, as possessed by Father Adam in the beginning. 

It will be the work of the entire Millennial Age to 
bring this about. Righteousness will reign then, as sin 
reigns now. That is to say, it will be in control, in the 
ascendency; and whosoever will sin then will suffer 
promptly. Hence all the nations will be avoiding sin. 
Then the world in general will be a grand place, where 
"nothing shall hurt or destroy"; where "the inhabitant 
shall not say, I am sick"; where the curse shall be gradually 
rolled away, and there shall be no more crying, no 
more sighing, no more dying; and where the blessing of 
God, bringing perfection, will prevail. "O happy Day!" 
we exclaim. And surely it will be such; for all who live 
through those thousand years will have a great blessing. 

THE LAW OF RETRIBUTION OPERATIVE 

But, some inquire, what about the sins of the world? 
Will there be no chastisements, no punishments, for these? 
We answer that it will be equally as just for God to forgive 
the sins of the world for Christ's sake as it has been 
just for Him to forgive the sins of the Church for Christ's 
sake. If the one is just, so will be the other; for God is 
no respecter of persons, and is equally as willing to forgive 
the sins of the world as the sins of the Church, when 
the world, repenting of sin, will turn from it, accepting 
Christ as their Redeemer. 

This does not mean, however, that justice is to be 
ignored. In the case of the Church, note how the sins 
of youth may leave their scar and sting to the end of life. 
And so we may reasonably assume that certain stripes, 
or punishments, will be permitted to follow the world in 
just the same manner. It will be from these weaknesses 
and frailties that they will be gradually raised up to perfection 
during those blessed thousand years of Christ's 
Kingdom, when Satan will be bound and not be permitted 
to deceive any during that period. 

But what about heart condition? If conformity to the 
Divine Law in an outward way will bring blessings to all, 
will there not still be a difference between the people- 
some coming heartily into accord with the Father, and 
others merely outwardly into harmony, because this outward 
harmony will be the way to restitution, perfection? 

Undoubtedly this is correct reasoning. It is along this 
line that the parable before us teaches; namely, that outwardly 
the "sheep" and the "goats" will have much the 
same appearance and demeanor, except to the Judge, the 



King, who will read the heart and ultimately will manifest 
to all that there has been a real heart-difference between 
the two classes, all of whom will have been on trial for a 
thousand years, receiving blessings from the Kingdom. 

THE BASIS OF JUDGMENT 

All the while each individual will be making character. 
This character will be fully appreciated by the Great 
Judge, and the individual will be rated either as a "sheep" 
or as a "goat." All the sheep-class will thus be received 
at the right hand of the great Jehovah; and all of the 
goat-class will be rated as out of favor with Him, even 
though all the while they will be receiving the blessings 
of the Millennial Kingdom and outwardly rendering 
obedience to its laws. 

Not until the conclusion of the Millennium will the 
decision of the Judge be manifested. Then great surprise 
will be shown at His decision— by both parties. To the 
"sheep" at His right hand He will say, "Come, ye blessed 
of My Father [the kind that My Father is pleased to 
bless and to grant everlasting life! Come,] inherit the 
kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the 
world." When God laid the foundation of the earth and 
planned its human habitation, it was His design to give it 
to you. Now the time has come for you to enter into 
this kingdom and to possess it. 

This is not the same kingdom as the Messianic Kingdom. 
On the contrary, it is the kingdom which God gave 
to Adam, which Adam lost through his disobedience and 
which Christ redeemed by the sacrifice of Himself. It 
will be given only to those who will have developed the 
God-like character— those who will have become the 
Lord's "sheep" during the Millennium. 

Then the other class, the goats of the parable, will be 
sentenced: "Depart, ye accursed ones [doomed ones], 
into everlasting punishment." Granted all the privileges, 
blessings and experiences of a thousand years of contact 
with righteousness, truth and the Spirit of God, you indeed 
render an outward obedience, but at heart you have 
not come into harmony with God. I cannot recognize you 
as My sheep. I cannot present you to the Father blameless 
and irreprovable. You must be destroyed; the 
punishment is the Second Death, "everlasting destruction." 
The penalty upon you is an everlasting one because 
there will be no further provision made for your 
redemption or for your resurrection from the Second 
Death. You will be as though you had never been. You 

R5531 : page 268 

have failed utterly to appreciate the goodness of God and 
to copy His character-likeness. Eternal life is only for 
those who have God's likeness and God's Spirit. "The 
Father seeketh such to worship Him as worship Him in 
spirit and in truth." 



Both classes, the "sheep" and the "goats," were surprised 
at what the King, the Judge, declared to be the basis 
of His judgment. To the sheep He said, "I was an hungered, 
and ye gave Me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave 
Me drink; I was a stranger, and ye took Me in; naked, 
and ye clothed Me; I was sick, and ye visited Me; I was 
in prison, and ye came unto Me." To the goat-class He 
said, "I was an hungered, and ye gave Me no meat; I was 
thirsty, and ye gave Me no drink; was a stranger, and 
ye took Me not in; naked, and ye clothed Me not; sick 
and in prison, and ye visited Me not." 

Both "sheep" and "goats" claimed that they had no 
knowledge of any such experiences. When did we minister 
unto Thee? When did we fail to minister unto 
Thee? The answer was, Inasmuch as ye did it unto one 
of the least of My brethren, or did it not unto him, ye 
did it, or did it not, unto Me. 

CHARACTERISTICS OF THE SHEEP CLASS 

Now, who are these respecting whom there will be a 
test upon the sheep-class and upon the goat-class? Will 
there be people sick, hungry and in prison during the 
Millennium? Does the Lord wish us to understand that 
there will be such? We have, on the contrary, always 
assumed that sickness, poverty, hunger and prisons will 
then be gone forever. What does it all mean? 

The meaning is plain. With the establishment of the 
Millennial Kingdom all who come into harmony with it 
will have the great privilege of doing something to help 
others. The world is blind and starved now, for lack of 
spiritual food and the anointing eye-salve of the Truth. 
While the Millennial blessings will be showered upon 
those who accept the Lord's terms, there will be others 
who will need assistance. Those who have the Spirit of 
God, the Spirit of Love, will be glad to carry the Heavenly 
Message of reconciliation to all humanity, glad to apply 
the eye-salve to the blind, glad to unstop the ears of the 
deaf, glad to help the sin-sick back into harmony with 
God— to the blessings of Messiah's Kingdom, to the way 
in which these may be obtained— helping them to cover 
their nakedness with the merit of Christ. 

All who will take pleasure in this work will thus be 
manifesting that they have God's Spirit and are co-laborers 
with Him. All these will be the Sheep. On the 
other hand, those who will be careless in respect to their 
Vow, and merely enjoy the Millennial blessings themselves, 
will be of the goat-class and will thus be marking 
themselves as "goats," and correspondingly will be out 
of favor with the great King of kings, their Judge, the 
Lord of Glory. 

THE WORLD'S RESURRECTION 

The prison referred to in the parable is undoubtedly 
the great prison-house of death, into which approximately 



twenty thousand millions already have gone. All these are 
to come forth. But the Scriptures declare that they will 
not all come forth at once, but "every man in his own 
order." Only the Church will be in the First 
Resurrection. 

During the Millennium the awakening from the sleep 
of death, the prison-house, will come about by Divine 
Power, of course, but we believe in answer to prayer. 
Each family circle, as it can prepare for another and another 
member, will be glad to do so, and will make request 
for his return. Thus the race will come out of the 
"prison-house" in reverse order to that in which they 
entered, and will be acquainted with, identified by, and 
prepared for by their friends, their relatives. 

While the blessing of the Lord will provide an 
abundance for all, nevertheless we may safely assume 
that the provision will be in the hands of their fellows. 
It will be the "sheep" that will be especially interested in, 
praying for and preparing for, those who are in the great 
prison-house of death. And by so engaging their time 
and energy these "sheep" will be manifesting a purpose, a 
will, in harmony with that of the Creator. God has willed 
that all who are in their graves shall come forth at the 
command of Jesus (John 5:28,29), and those in sympathy 
with God and Christ will be co-laborers with God in accomplishing 
the work for which Christ died. Any not interested 
in that work will be lacking in God's Spirit; and 
this is exactly what is charged against the goat-class. 

R5532 : page 268 

He who sits upon the Throne, having redeemed the 
world of mankind and having provided for the resurrection 
of all these redeemed ones, counts them as in a certain 
sense representing Himself— as He says in the 
parable: "I was an hungered, and ye fed Me; I was sick 
and in prison, and ye visited Me," ministered unto Me 
and helped Me. 

Likewise the reproof to the goat-class: to these He 
said, You were not interested in the things of God. Your 
interest was merely personal, a selfish one. You have 
enjoyed the blessings of these glorious thousand years, 
and that is all that God has provided for you. You are 
not of the kind to whom He is pleased to grant everlasting 
life. You will therefore, die. You have more or 
less of the selfish spirit, which is the spirit of Satan, and 
as God's provision for all who will not be in fellowship 
with Him in spirit is destruction, this is to be your portion 
—the Second Death. 

The eternal fire is the fire of God's jealousy or anger, 
which burns against and destroys everything antagonistic 
to His righteousness. (Zephaniah 1:18; 3:8.) It is, of 
course, merely a figurative expression representing complete 
destruction. 



R5532 : page 268 

"LET NO ONE TAKE THY CROWN" 

--SEPTEMBER 27.-QUARTERLY REVIEW. - 

"I come quickly. Hold fast that which thou hast, 
that no one take thy crown."— Revelation 3:11. 

THE TEXT of today's Study is a prophecy by 

Jesus Himself. Picturing the seven stages 

of His Church, the Master used these words 

in addressing one of them. There is, nevertheless, 

an appropriateness in all of the 

Lord's counsel at any time. So we now, as 

well as those who were particularly addressed, 

may find instruction in our text. 

It teaches, in harmony with the entire 
Bible, that there can be no remedy for the 
reign of Sin and Death, except that which God has provided, 
to be applied at the Second Coming of the Redeemer, 
when He will set up His Kingdom. Meantime, 
the delay in the fulfilment of our prayer, "Thy Kingdom 
come; Thy will be done on earth, as it is done in Heaven," 
does not indicate any carelessness on the part of the 
Father or of the Redeemer in respect to the world and its 
terrible reign of Sin and Death. It does, however, indicate 
great composure on God's part and on the part of 
the Master. It indicates that the Plan of God is working, 
and that it will ultimately bring a blessing to the whole 
world, the blessing which God has promised since the days 

R5532 : page 269 

of Abraham— the blessing of all the families of the earth. 

God has from the beginning foreseen how the six 
great Days of the reign of Sin and Death could be wisely 
permitted, in view of the power to be exercised by Messiah's 
Kingdom. Messiah will be quite competent, backed 
by Power Divine, to cope with sin, sorrow, pain, death— 
everything that is now troubling humanity. The time appointed 
of the Father, a thousand years, will be abundantly 
long. And when the Church shall have been selected from 
the world as the Bride, the Lamb's Wife and Joint-heir in 
His Kingdom, everything will be ready for the blessed 
work of restitution, restoration, resurrection, regeneration 
of mankind— to bring the willing and obedient back to the 
image and likeness of the Creator, lost through Adam's sin 
and gained through the willing obedience of Christ, even 
unto death— even the ignominious death of the cross. 

ENCOURAGEMENT FOR THE CHURCH 

Our text addresses not the world, not the nominal 
Church— but the true Church. The true Church, having 



turned away from sin, having accepted Christ, having 

given their hearts to God, through Christ having been accepted 

of the Father and begotten of the Holy Spirit, 

are children of God; and, as the Apostle says, "If children, 

then heirs; heirs of God and joint-heirs with 

Christ" our Lord. (Romans 8:17.) A crown of glory 

is set apart for each son thus received of the Father, and 

the name of each is recorded in the Lamb's Book of Life. 

So far as God is concerned, the whole matter is settled. 
But so far as the Church is concerned, it still remains for 
them to fulfil their Covenant. Having presented their 
bodies a living sacrifice to God, acceptable through Christ, 
they are to continue in that attitude— day by day gladly 
presenting their bodies, willing to endure, to suffer, to be 
anything and everything that God would be pleased to 
have them be. All who do this continue to grow in character-likeness 
to the Lord Jesus; and all such will thereby 
make their calling and election sure. 

But should any of these neglect this Covenant of 
Sacrifice, and through fear of death be subject to bondage 
either to sin or to sectarian errors, or in any other manner 
fail to be responsive and loyal to their Covenant, they 
will thereby fail to maintain their election and make it 
sure. After a time of testing they will be relegated to a 
secondary place; they will be no longer counted part of 
the Royal Priesthood, even though they might still maintain 
their standing as Levites, servants of the Priests. 

This is the thought of the text; namely, Be of good 
courage. It will not be long until I will come to receive 
you to Myself. Let the thought of the Kingdom and of 
the Divine blessing connected with it cheer, strengthen, 
comfort you, and make you strong to do God's will faithfully, 
nobly, courageously, loyally. "Hold fast that which 
thou hast." Do not let slip from you the blessed relationship 
which was entered into, which was established for 
you by Me, your Master, when I made you acceptable on 
the basis of your Covenant to be dead with Me, to suffer 
with Me, to give up all earthly ambitions and to strive 
daily for the great prize which I set before you— a joint-heirship 
in My Kingdom. 

The crown is yours now, by virtue of the arrangement 
which I have made with you as your Advocate, and by 
virtue of the Covenant of Sacrifice which you have made 
with Me. Hold fast your crown! Do not allow it to pass 
to another. If any one of you is unfaithful, God will not 
permit you to have a share in that Kingdom, but will enroll 
another name than yours, will apportion another name 
instead of yours as a new Covenanter. 

THE NUMBER OF THE ELECT 

This Scripture, with others, shows us definitely that 
the Church is to be composed of a definite, fixed number 
—not one more, not one less. This is also illustrated in 
the body of the Jewish high priest. The head of the 
priest represented Jesus; the body of the priest represented 



the Church. As the Apostle says, "Now are ye 

the Body of Christ, and members in particular." "For as 

the body is one, and hath many members, and all the members 

of that one body, being many, are one body; so also 

is Christ." "God hath set the members every one of them 

in the Body, as it hath pleased Him." "There are many 

members, but one Body."— 1 Corinthians 12:27,12,18,20. 

According to the Law, no one could serve in the office 
of high priest unless he had the full number of members 
—fingers, toes, etc. (Leviticus 21:17-21.) No one could 
serve who had a superfluous member— an extra finger, an 
extra toe. Thus the Lord indicated the completeness of 
the antitypical Priesthood, The Christ. 

In Revelation, Chapter 7, we have a picture of the 
Church, the antitypical Royal Priesthood. Then following 
that picture we have one of the antitype of the Levite 
class. The first shows a definite number, one hundred 
and forty-four thousand— twelve thousand for each of the 
tribes of Israel. Thus God indicates that He is following 
out a definite purpose. Israel was first invited to be this 
Royal Priesthood. (Exodus 19:5,6.) At Pentecost a 
few out of the different tribes responded, and became the 
nucleus, or earliest members, of the Church. Then the 
door of opportunity was opened to the Gentiles; and all 
coming in are assigned to places in the twelve tribes to 
fill up the vacancies. This the Apostle Paul pictures in 
Romans 1 1 —the wild olive branches being grafted into 
the olive tree to take the places of the branches broken off 
because of unbelief. 

Those loyal to the Lord, yet not sufficiently loyal to be 
of the Bride class, after having been tested as to their 
loyalty and proven worthy, will constitute a Great Company, 

R5533 : page 269 

an innumerable company, a company whose number 

no man knows— a company whose number is not foreordained. 

The discipline through which these will be put 

is pictorially stated. They will come through great tribulation, 

and wash their robes and make them white in the 

blood of the Lamb. They must in the end be faithful; 

else they will not have any part or lot with Christ in His 

work. 

But since this testing needed to come upon them as a 
judgment, because they did not voluntarily and full-souledly 
keep their Covenant of Sacrifice, therefore they 
cannot be of the elect Body of Christ. They will miss the 
Throne. They miss the glorious crown of the Divine 
nature— immortality. But they receive palm branches, 
signifying victory, and we have the assurance that they 
will be permitted to serve God in and through His Temple, 
the Church, which is the Body of Christ. 



R5532 : page 269 



NO CROSS, NO CROWN 

"THE purple grape must be crushed 

To make the sweet, red wine, 
And furnace fires must fiercely burn 

The drossy gold to refine; 
The wheel must cruelly grind, 

Else where the jewel's light? 
And the steel submit to the polishing, 

Or how would the sword grow bright? 

"How then, my soul, wilt thou 

The Spirit's fruits possess, 
Except thou lovingly yield thyself 

To the Hand that wounds to bless? 
Then patiently let the fire 

Consume all earthly dross— 
Thou canst not hope to wear the Crown, 

If thou refuse the Cross!" 



R5533 : page 270 

GOD'S MUCH DIVERSIFIED WISDOM AND MERCY 

"For if the casting away of them be the reconciling of the world, 
what shall the receiving of them be, but life from the dead? 
For if the first-fruit be holy, the lump is also holy; and if 
the root be holy, so are the branches."— Romans 11:15,16. 

THE JEWISH nation was reconciled to God 

in a typical way, and thus became His 

peculiar people. All His promises belonged 

to them— no such promises were made to 

the Gentiles. The relationship of the Jews 

to God was through their Covenant. But 

after eighteen hundred and forty-five years 

of special favor, their rejection of Messiah 

demonstrated their unworthiness of a continuance 

of their special privileges. In the 

time of testing they were found wanting, and were given 

over to blindness and disruption until their "double"— 

eighteen hundred and forty-five years of disfavor— should 

be accomplished. 

All, however, were not thus rejected from favor. A 
faithful remnant were gathered into the Gospel Fold, 
while the remainder were "scattered and peeled." This 
faithful remnant were the First-fruits class of the Church 
of Christ. God then sent His Message out to the whole 
world. Romans, Greeks, British, French, Germans, 
Swedes, Norwegians, Danes, etc.— all nations— have had 
the same opportunity. This does not mean that all individuals 
of all nations have been given this opportunity; 
but that the Lord has selected here and there one of 



suitable character, who gladly responded to the Message 
—those who, hungering and thirsting for righteousness, 
had the hearing ear. God gave to these the Message of 
reconciliation, and sent them forth to bear the Glad 
Tidings to others of the same class. 

All who believed that Message were reconciled to 
God through the death of His Son. They have been a 
company of sacrificers, gladly laying down their lives as 
followers in the Master's steps. The Message of this 
great salvation has gone forth through all the years of 
this present Age, and some from every nation have responded 
and come into the Body of Christ. This could 
not have been if the Jews had not proven unfaithful as 
a nation and been turned aside from favor. The Gentiles 
have known this. They saw that the favor of God, 
the blessing of God, turned to them at the same time that 
it was withdrawn from the Jews. 

"LIFE FROM THE DEAD" 

The Natural Israelites, even after their rejection from 
favor as a people, had still an opportunity as individuals 
of coming into Christ, but no special favor as a nation. 
Indeed, their rejection of Jesus as their Messiah, and 
their bitter prejudice and blindness have acted as a great 
gulf to separate them as a people from the Gospel Message; 
and but very few of them have ever accepted God's 
Message in Christ. As the Apostle here declares, their 
blindness as a nation is not to be removed until "the 
fulness of the Gentiles [to complete the Gospel Church] 
be come in." This time is now about here; the Gospel 
Church is about complete. 

Do we remember how the restoration of Natural 
Israel is to be accomplished? Yes. The Scriptures declare 
that it is to be brought about through the New 
Covenant— "This is My Covenant unto them, when I 
shall take away their sins." It will be at the establishment 
of Messiah's Kingdom; Messiah is then to inaugurate 
this Covenant. What will this mean to the 
Jews? It will mean that their "double" is fulfilled, that 
"their appointed time is accomplished, that their iniquity 
is pardoned." [See STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, Vol. 2, 
Study 7.] It will mean their resurrection from the dead 
—both nationally and individually, both symbolically and 
literally. "For if the casting away of them be the reconciling 
of the world [in the receiving of the Gentile 
'wild olive branches' into the 'olive tree,' from which the 
majority of the Jews were broken off], what shall the 
receiving [back] of them be, but life from the dead?" 
—Romans 11:15. 

Here we have another Scriptural teaching of the 
doctrine of the resurrection from the dead. The promises 
are to be fulfilled which were made to Abraham, Isaac, 
Jacob, David, the Prophets and others. Though God 
cast the nation off for a time, He will regather them, 
according to His promise, when their period of chastisement 



shall be ended— their "seven times." [See Vol. 2, 
Study 4.] Extending the thought, we see that the Promise 
of God to Abraham of the blessing of all the nations 
and kindreds and families of the earth through his Seed— 
the Heavenly and the earthly, "the stars of Heaven" class 
and "the sands upon the seashore" class— must yet be 
fulfilled. (Genesis 22:15-18.) The fulfilment of this 
Promise will necessitate the awakening of the entire 
human race from the tomb. Thus the munificence of 
God's wonderful provision for His human creatures is 
soon to be manifested to angels and men— to the living 
and the dead— to all the human family. 

FIRST-FRUIT AND AFTER-FRUIT-ALL HOLY 

In verse 16 the Apostle is showing that as the First-fruit 
of this great "olive tree" growing out of the root 
of the Abrahamic Covenant is holy, so is the entire fruitage. 
Although this Promise to Abraham was given directly 
to his earthly seed, nevertheless God, who knew 
the end from the beginning, knew that the First-fruit of 
this Promise would be Abraham's spiritual Seed— the 
Christ, Head and Body. And yet this breaking off of 
many of the natural branches, and the grafting in of 
"wild olive branches" to take their place, which has been 
going on during this Gospel Age, was not the limit of 
God's great Plan. It was His purpose to have a holy 
Seed. Abraham was first tested, and all who were to 
constitute this Seed were to be likewise tested; but these 
were to be used as agents in the hands of Jehovah for 
the carrying out of His Plan of Salvation. 

As this First-fruit class is holy, the Apostle declares, 
"the lump is also holy." The word lump here would better 
be translated mass, for he is speaking of people. The 
root is holy— the Covenant of Jehovah, confirmed by 
His oath to Abraham. So all who become joined to this 
root, and receive their life and their privileges and blessings 
from it, will also be holy. 

Abraham typically represented Jehovah God; Isaac 
represented the Son, our Lord Jesus; and Rebecca, the 
wife of Isaac, represented the Bride of Christ, the members 
of His Body. All these together— Father, Son and 
Bride— will bring forth a holy, earthly Israel. This will 
eventually include all mankind who shall come under the 
terms of the New Covenant. So Israel restored, and the 
entire world— all of the race of Adam who will return 
to harmony with God— will constitute the "holy lump," 
or mass— the after-fruit. 

Looking at the deep workings of God's Plan thus, 
in the light of what He tells us is future, as well as of 
what is past, how wonderful it is! Oh, the rich depths 
of God's wisdom and knowledge! How useless for us to 
try to discover His dealings except as He is pleased to 
reveal His plans to us. His doings are all mysteries to 
us except as we are enlightened by His Spirit. Who 
knew this gracious Plan, so much beyond human conception? 



Who helped the Lord to arrange such a Plan, 

think you? This is not human wisdom. God only could 

R5533 : page 271 

be its Author. A Jew would never have planned to 
graft in Gentiles to share the chief blessings of the Promise. 
A Gentile never would have arranged the original 
stock and branches Jewish and himself a favored graft. 
No, the Plan is clearly of God, and well illustrates both 
His goodness and His just severity. Of Him is all the 
Plan; through His power it is all brought to pass, and to 
Him be the glory forever. 



R5533 : page 271 

INTERESTING LETTERS 
LIGHT IN "DARKEST AFRICA" 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

The Harvest work is growing stronger than in past days. 
Our friends who were much against the Truth are now attending 
privately, and we are surely showing them the way 
of our Lord Jesus through His Holy Scriptures, and many 
are trusting in the Truth. I can say that they have some 
reason for believing the Truth now. 

Surely we are living in the Time of the End, according 
to the Scriptures. We are seeing the clergy-people turning the 
Word of God into fables. They think they can stop the 
Christian people from sinning— as they call it— by whipping 
and by putting them in prison and by making them pay so 

R5534: page 271 

much money. Can this stop the people sinning? No; not 
at all! If these were the Great Preacher's words and the 
words of our Heavenly Father, and His punishment against 
the wicked, they would surely stop the people from sinning. 

But we read in the Bible that the Deliverer shall come, 
and the Kingdom of God shall come, and all nations shall 
know the Way of our God; but the wicked will He destroy. 
Also we learn from our Master's lips the saying, "Learn of 
Me." People may remember that our Lord found the people 
of Israel doing wrong against the Word of God, and they 
were proud. But we never see a single line in the Bible saying 
that He took even one of the Jews to the Roman Governor, 
to be put in prison, etc. 

All these things make us to be strong in faith that the 
Harvest Message is true. "Though it tarry, it will come." 
We had not believed it for a certain time, but when we believed 
we consecrated ourselves unto death. 

I can only let you know how we are doing. We hold meetings 
twice a month, beginning on Friday and lasting over 



Sunday. Friday, Bible Study; Saturday, discussion; Sunday, 
public meeting. Another week, the meeting on Friday is 
Question meeting; praise and testimony meeting on Saturday, 
and public meeting on Sunday. The number in attendance 
on Sunday, when we have general meeting, is 1,040, 
385, 1,000, etc.; private meetings 36 to 40. But when we call 
all Churches to one place, hundreds of brethren are present! 

We thank God for His blessings which He has bestowed 
upon us. Furthermore, we thank Him for showing us His 
secret and that He gives us Wisdom to understand His Holy 
Scriptures. How glad we are to see these things being fulfilled 
before our eyes! In Nyassaland we see many things 
which have been preached in our Churches, and what we are 
learning in the Volumes and WATCH TOWER— all these things 
are now being fulfilled. How glad we are to see that God 
has given us wisdom in preaching! How glad we are to see 
that our Lord is in the midst of us, leading us into His 
marvelous light! How glad we are that we "which in past 
times were not a people, are now the people of God" ! And 
how glad we are to be dead to fleshly lusts, but to be alive to 
spiritual things! May God's blessing rest upon you! 

Your younger brother in the Service, 

H. LIMON ACHIRWA.-Africa. 



THE STRENGTHENING CORD 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Greetings in the Lord! I feel constrained to write you concerning 
my recent experiences in the Colporteur work, which 
are unusual. Several days ago I canvassed a lady who is a 
trance-medium. She did not order the books. Presently I 
called on another, who bought the Spiritualism book. Still 
another I called upon in the same block, not knowing in either 
case that they were Spiritualists. 

This one began by telling me she is preparing herself to be 
a writing and talking medium, and how, at times, "the forces" 
torment her day and night until she uses strong will-power 
to disperse them, saying, "Leave me now; I must have rest." 

Asking the Lord's assistance, I proceeded to point out from 
Scripture the origin of these evil spirits— the fallen angels. 
Strange to say, she accepted it all very readily and asked questions 
re the same so eagerly! At this juncture peculiar noises 
were heard about the room; rappings, cracklings and faint 
chucklings. She noticed my nervousness and said in an assuring 
tone, "There they are now! It's the spirits, because you 
are talking about them." No doubt they were much displeased 
because of fear that she would get her eyes opened. Another 
medium now entered the room and I left. 

How thankful to the Lord I am that He through you has 
provided the "strengthening cord"— the Vow! As the consummation 
draws nearer we realize how necessary was this 
provision. 

Much interest is now being aroused among the Natural 
Israelites in this city through distribution of Jewish Hopes 



and Restoration Prospects. Every family took one. They 
speak often of having read of Pastor Russell, of Brooklyn, 
in their Jewish papers. "He tells us of the restoration. Oh, 
we are so glad 'twill be soon!" 

A dear brother bearing your name (Russell), although but 
three weeks reading the "Helping Hands," is rejoicing in the 
truths therein. He gives evidence of having made a consecration 
and is already showing his faith by his works, by helping 
the Lord's people. He expects soon to see the PHOTO-DRAMA 
OF CREATION in Boston. The Photo-Drama Scenario is stimulating 
interest to read the SCRIPTURE STUDIES. This brother 
desired me to tell you of his appreciation of the Truth. 

Even where few books are placed it gives the Colporteurs 
great joy to be able to reach even one who is hungering for 
the Bread of Truth. 

I wish to testify to the blessings the Lord in His goodness 
is sending me— especially through THE WATCH TOWER articles. 
The March 15th— "Are Ye Able?"— was so strengthening for 
the "Feet-members"! 

Praying that the Lord's richest blessings rest upon you to 
the very end, 

Yours by His grace, B. HAYNES. 

page 271 

HIS LIGHT INCREASING 

DEARLY BELOVED PASTOR AND BROTHER:- 

During a visit to the Washington Ecclesia last March it 
was my privilege to conduct a Question meeting in which, 
among others, some questions on the date of the end of the 
Harvest, of the Times of the Gentiles and of the deliverance 
of the Church were propounded to me and answered. In my 
answers I expressed my conviction that these three events 
would occur this fall. On the point of the deliverance of the 
Church I now consider my answer wrong. 

It seems that notes were made on these answers and are 
being widely circulated among the brethren. I have not seen 
these notes, nor do I know how nearly they reproduce my 
answers. I am in receipt of many questions as to whether I 
still hold the thought that the Church leaves the world this 
fall. I have reason to believe that the Adversary is using this 
statement on the deliverance of the Church this fall, in these 
notes, to hold back some of the brethren from increasing 
light, which as "meat in due season," the Lord is pleased to 
give us through His appointed channel. 

I deeply regret having made the statement, and the influence 
it is having; and therefore I desire to counteract its 
mischief. While I have the full assurance of faith that this 
fall is the end of the Harvest and of the Times of the 

Gentiles, I am happy to say, on the basis of Psalm 46; Leviticus 16:20-24; 
Matthew 20:8-16; and, in view of Elijah's activities 
subsequent to his arrival at Mount Horeb until he left 
this earth, that I now have the assurance of faith the Church 
is to remain on earth for awhile after October, 1914. 

I shall be very thankful if you will, D. V., kindly publish 



this letter in THE TOWER in order to counteract as far as possible 
any mischief that Satan may attempt through the above 
mentioned statement in the notes in question. As a teacher 
in the Church I desire to subject all my utterances to "The 
good Word of God" as its increasing Light, as "meat in due 
season," dawns on my mind and heart; and by such increasing 
light modify previous imperfect understandings of things. 

Dear Brother, it gives me great pleasure indeed to see "the 
good Word of God," as due to the Household, eye to eye with 
you. Daily I thank our dear Father and Elder Brother for 
the privilege of being a co-laborer and co-sufferer with you in 
the best of bonds. The Lord's continued blessing rest upon 
you and His Israel everywhere, whom it is my heart's pleasure 
to help and bless, but not hinder and injure! With much 
Christian love, in which Sister Johnson joins, I remain 

Your brother and fellow-servant, PAUL S. L. JOHNSON. 



page 273 

VOL. XXXV SEPTEMBER 15 No. 18 
A. D. 1914-A. M. 6042 



CONTENTS 

"Thy Judgments Are a Mighty Deep" 275 

Why God Permits the Present Reign 
of Sin 275 

God's Glorious Character Revealed 277 

The Anointed Only Are Commissioned to 
Preach 277 

The "Body" of Christ No Part of the 

Ransom 277 

The Blessing of the "Cup of Salvation" 279 

Deeper Significance to Spiritual Israel 280 

The Christian's Tower of Strength 282 

"That Wicked One Toucheth Him Not" 282 

Mary's Sweet Perfume 283 

The Attitude of the Religious Teachers 283 

A Suggestion Worth Consideration 284 

Two Passover Memorials 284 

The Crisis in Judas' Life 285 

The Signification of the Memorial 285 

Interesting Letters 286 

A Reply by the Editor 286 

Berean Bible Studies, Vol. II 287 



page 274 



PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 



BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:-All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



"SHARPSHOOTING" WITH LEATHERETTE STUDIES 

We now have a good supply of red leatherette (karatol) 
STUDIES, in all volumes. These are compact, light and very 
attractive— edges burnished, round corners. From sixteen to 
twenty complete sets may be easily carried in an ordinary suitcase, 
the gross weight of each set being less than 2-1/2 lbs. 
With each full set goes a splendid De Luxe carton, of same 
material as the binding. We believe this to be a most opportune 
time for "sharpshooting," giving due prominence to 
the title of Volume IV., "The Battle of Armageddon," although 
urging a careful, systematic perusal of all in consecutive 
order. Sharpshooters and class secretaries may now have 
these leatherette volumes at colporteur rates, viz., 96c. per set 
of six books (express or freight collect), in quantities of five 
full sets or more, with no additional charge for the carton. 
Individual volumes, in lots of 20 or more, same rate. Make 
each order definite, accompanied by remittance, and always 
specify how the books are to be shipped. 



FREE LITERATURE IN THIRTY LANGUAGES 

We can supply literature on Present Truth in any of the 
following languages: English, German, French, Swedish, 
Danish, Norwegian, Finnish, Welsh, Polish, Hungarian, Hollandish, 
Spanish, Portuguese, Italian, Greek, Russian, Armenian, 
Arabic, Tamil, Malayalam, Zulu, Esperanto, Maori, 
Gujarati, Marathi, Telugu, Urdu, Chinese (Wenli and Mandarin), 
Korean, Japanese, Roumanian and Slovak. 



R5534 : page 275 

"THY JUDGMENTS ARE A MIGHTY DEEP!" 

"The foolishness of God is wiser than men; and the weakness 
of God is stronger than men."-l CORINTHIANS 1:25. 

THE Plan which God has adopted for dealing 

with sin and with sinners seems to the 

worldly mind, to worldly wisdom, to be a 

very foolish, a very unwise plan. The declarations 

of the Bible along this line do not 

appeal to such minds as reasonable. First 

of all, God created man perfect. Then He 

placed him under conditions where he was 

tempted and fell into sin. God then pronounced 

upon him a sentence of death, as 

He had forewarned him would be the result of disobedience. 

After thus sentencing man, Jehovah Himself provided 

for a release from that death penalty by furnishing 

a Redeemer for the sinner at great cost. When He wished 

to proclaim to the world His provision for their salvation 

from the curse, He sent forth preachers chosen from the 

race of sinners to tell the good tidings. 

For nearly two thousand years these preachers have 
used their best efforts. As some of them would die, 
others would take their places. But with all the preaching 
that has been done only a very few have believed the 
Message or given an attentive ear. Often have these imperfect 
messengers grown weary and faint. They have 
gone to the Lord with burdened hearts, telling Him of 
the meager results that attended their labors. But the 
Lord has answered, "Continue to give forth the words 
which I have delivered to you; this is My will; it is just 
what I wish you to do." So they have toiled on, leaving 
the results with God. 

But the world has shaken the unbelieving head. To 
them the proclaiming of such a Message has seemed foolish, 
a waste of valuable time, an evidence of unsoundness 
of mind. Few have believed that it is of God— even if 
a God of Love existed at all. Yet, as the Apostle tells 
us, "It pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to 
save them that believe." (1 Corinthians 1:21.) He chose 
this method, which men denominate foolishness, to select 
a special class for a very special purpose, in connection 
with His great Plan. Although from the human 
standpoint this appears a very small and weak beginning, 
as if God's work is almost a failure— if He purposes to 
save and uplift the world— yet when the Plan of God shall 
have been brought to its glorious consummation, it will 
be seen by all to have been most wise, powerful and effective. 
No more shall it be 

"The unbeliever's jest, the heathen's scorn." 



God is not now choosing the great ones of earth, but 
chiefly the mean things, the humble and obscure, "that 
no flesh shall glory in His presence." He is choosing 
these as instruments to bless the remainder of the world. 

LIFE A GREAT BOON EVEN NOW 

The question has been asked: How is the Love of 
God to be seen from the standpoint of a deliberate arrangement 
beforehand which, in its outworking, has involved 
so vast an amount of sin, suffering and death? In 
thinking of this question, one should first of all rid himself 
wholly of the erroneous thought that sin, suffering 
and dying are only preludes to an eternity of woe. Then 
we are to remember that God is not in any way our 
debtor. We are His debtors, even for our existence; He 
owes the race nothing. 

Suppose that we could disabuse all minds of the idea 
of eternal torture or of a purgatory of suffering after 
death, and should then say to them, Consider, now: 
Would you prefer to live on for a few years more, or 
would you rather die at once? Or, suppose we put it this 

R5535 : page 275 

way: Are you glad that you have an existence, or would 
you rather that you had never been born? We believe 
that the great majority would reply that they desire to 
live, that they prefer to live as long as possible. They do 
not wish to die, either today or tomorrow or next year; 
indeed they would never die if they could help it! 

Those who feel that they would be glad to die, or who 
wish that they had never been born, are those who have 
had more than ordinarily evil and unhappy experiences; 
or else they are unbalanced in mind. Many have not so 
much money as they would like, not so pleasant surroundings 
and conditions as some have and as they would wish 
to have. Still life is sweet; and they hold on to it with as 
firm a grip as possible. Love of life is inherent in man, 
and has survived even the sorrowful experiences consequent 
on the fall. 

WHY GOD PERMITS THE PRESENT REIGN OF SIN 

But why does God permit things to be as they are? 
This has ever been one of the perplexing problems to the 
minds of those who have still sufficient faith to believe in 
the existence of a Supreme Creator. We do not know 
that we can make the matter any clearer or state it any 
more plainly than we have stated it in STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES, Volume I., in the chapter on "Why Evil Was 
Permitted." Putting ourselves in God's place we are 
able to see that He must create man either without moral 
faculties, like the lower animals, or else with mental and 
moral faculties capable of appreciating the standards of 
right and wrong, of appreciating his Creator, with power 



to reason and to choose between good and evil— between 
obedience and disobedience to that Creator. 

Having previously brought into existence the brute 
creation, God wished to create a nobler order of beings, 
creatures in His own image and likeness, on the earthly 

R5535 : page 276 

plane of life. He purposed to have a race of beings who 
were perfect like the angels, able to appreciate the same 
moral standards, the same principles of righteousness. 
The question might be asked: How could God so create 
these beings that they would not be in danger of sometime 
falling into sin? Evidently it was not God's purpose so to 
create them. He desired that they should possess the 
quality of free moral agency, the power to exercise their 
own wills for either righteousness or unrighteousness. 

At the time of the creation of man, Lucifer, Son of the 
Morning, began to cherish ambitious designs, disloyal to 
his Maker. He realized that a race on a lower plane of 
existence than himself might be induced to choose a 
course at variance with the expressed will of God— their 
Creator. Before man's creation God had foreseen that 
Lucifer would deflect from the path of obedience, would 
become a rebel against His righteous Government, a great 
Adversary, and that as the result evil would break forth 
later in His Empire. He foresaw that through the influence 
of the rebellious Lucifer (thenceforth Satan- 
adversary, accuser, hater) man would become disobedient 
and fall from the condition of perfection in which he 
would be created. 

Knowing this, and doing man no injustice, but creating 
him with full ability to resist temptation, God so arranged 
and timed the creation of man that he would be 
an object of attack by Satan, who would take advantage 
of the inexperience of Father Adam and Mother Eve and 
seek to capture the entire race of man. In other words, 
God purposed to permit this test to come to man, and 
knowing that Adam would fail in the testing and thus 
incur the penalty of death, He designed to make the experience 
of the race an object lesson to all His created 
intelligences, and at the same time to so overrule the 
matter that the human family would themselves eventually 
be delivered from the evil results of the fall and be greatly 
blessed, if they would profit by the lessons learned in their 
bitter experiences with sin, and would come back into 
harmony with righteousness. 

TIME AN IMPORTANT FEATURE 

God's infinite Wisdom could not approve any as worthy 
of everlasting life who would not prove themselves to be 
in full accord with His Divine Law. The nature of sin is 
to propagate itself and to produce misery and degradation. 
With this knowledge God arranged in advance to 
let man have his own way. He foreknew that intelligent 



beings with liberty of choice and of will would eventually, 
if untaught and unrestricted, fall into sin, even though 
a penalty was attached to disobedience. He chose not to 
restrain Lucifer. 

The Plan of God is so comprehensive that it cannot 
be viewed and judged from the standpoint of a few years 
—not even of a thousand years or six thousand years. It 
must be viewed from the standpoint of eternity. It was 
arranged, not for the well-being of creatures who would 
live for a few years or a few centuries, but for those who 
would live throughout eternal ages. His Plan must, therefore, 
be laid so broadly as to include all time and all 
beings created in His likeness, for His glory and their 
own eternal good. 

We are not to suppose that Jehovah weeps in anguish 
because mankind are suffering and dying. He is a God 
of infinite love and sympathy; but from the beginning He 
knew that man would fall, and that He Himself could 
overrule the entire matter for the ultimate blessing and 
instruction of men and angels— all His created intelligences; 
and He purposed so to do. We ourselves know 
that sin and death with all their direful effects have prevailed 
in the world for six thousand years. We also 
know that our God is at the helm, and that all things will 
be made to work out good in the end. We think of the 
flood as a terrible overthrow, because so many lives were 
lost. Yet the calamity would have been far greater if 
one half had been left to mourn for the others. It is 
claimed that men do not suffer very much when drowning 
—that death by this means is comparatively easy. 

Six thousand years of sin, sorrow and death seem a 
long while for humanity to suffer. Yet the majority of 
the race have not lived beyond the age of twenty years. 
Perhaps one-half have not lived to the age of five. Very 
few have reached the age of one hundred years. We all 
have seasons of comparative comfort, blessing and enjoyment; 
even under present conditions, God has been very 
merciful. And from the viewpoint of the glorious future, 
with its marvelous opportunities of blessing, its hope of 
eternal life for man, and its great lessons learned for all 
eternity by all of God's intelligent creatures, the reign of 
Sin and Death presents an altogether different aspect from 
what could otherwise be had. 

In permitting the long reign of Sin and its train of 
evils, God has been showing forth the principles of His 
Government, that all may clearly discern in time what are 
the inevitable results of disobedience to their great 
Creator. We are sure that Adam and Eve were glad that 
God did not instantly carry out the sentence of death pronounced 
against them. We are sure that they were glad 
to be permitted to continue their existence for many 
years, even after they had been driven out of the Garden 
of Eden; and we believe that they had many experiences 
of more or less happiness, in spite of the tears, the pain 
and the sorrows that fell to their lot. 

So when we view the entire history of the race of 



Adam, and perceive that all the experiences with sin, 
suffering and death are to be caused to outwork God's 
glorious purposes for the world, and are designed to prove 
a lasting lesson to all His intelligent creatures who now 
exist or ever will exist, we can see why He has permitted 
the reign of evil which to man has seemed so long. When 
we see, too, that God is now choosing a very select class, 
of very humble and obedient ones, to be used as agencies 
under His Only Begotten Son to recover and uplift to 
perfection and life everlasting all the human race who 
will accept the gracious provisions, we can understand 
why He has been pleased to call this class through the 
"foolishness of preaching," by very imperfect instruments. 
Thus He has manifested the humble ones, who will 
receive His Message by any means which He is pleased 
to use, and who are glad to forsake sin and serve Him. 

A SAVIOR AND A GREAT ONE 

God might have said, I will lift My curse from mankind 
and let them have another trial for life— an individual 
trial. But even if this had been in harmony with 
God's Justice, it would not have sufficed alone. Mankind 
have long been floundering in the mire of sin. They 
were powerless to profit from any new trial granted 
them that would not include a Redeemer, a Savior, who 
was strong, not only to bring about the abrogation of the 
death sentence by a payment of their penalty, but also to 
deliver them from all the bonds of Sin and Death in their 
members. He must be a Savior having power to bind the 
great Adversary who has so long held the race of man in 
slavery and blindness. He must heal their wounds, open 
their blinded eyes and their deafened ears, and lift them 
up, up, into the light and liberty of the sons of God. 
Truly, man needs a mighty Savior; and such, praise 
God, has been provided in His beloved Son! 

As we trace the various steps of the marvelous Plan 
of the Ages, we perceive that to all who shall gain eternal 

R5535 : page 277 

life, on whatever plane of being, the path of humility is 

the path to glory. "He that exalteth himself shall be 

abased; but he that humbleth himself shall be exalted." 

None will be granted the inestimable blessing of life everlasting 

who are not thoroughly proven and found worthy 

under testing, who do not cheerfully humble themselves 

under the mighty hand of God. This principle applies to 

both human and spirit beings. Only those who gladly 

obey God, out of love for Him and for His righteous laws, 

will be permitted to live beyond the Harvest time of the 

Millennial Age. All others shall utterly perish. 

GOD'S GLORIOUS CHARACTER REVEALED 

Then the holy in every sphere of life, in every part of 



the mighty Universe of God, shall ascribe glory, honor 
and praise to the Almighty Creator and to His glorious 

R5536 : page 277 

Son throughout the ages of eternity. All will then see 
and acknowledge how marvelous was Jehovah's Plan of 
Redemption, how far beyond the power of fallen man to 
fathom. The majesty and glory of the Divine Character 
will stand revealed— His unswerving Justice combined 
with infinite compassion, His glorious Wisdom, His marvelous 
Love, His mighty Power. Then all will bow 
before Him and adore ! 

"When all Thy mercies, O my God, 

My rising soul surveys, 
Transported with the view, I'm lost 

In wonder, love and praise!" 



R5536 : page 277 

THE ANOINTED ONLY ARE COMMISSIONED TO PREACH 

"The Spirit of the Lord God is upon Me; because the Lord hath 

anointed Me to preach good tidings unto the meek: He hath 

sent Me to bind up the broken-hearted, to proclaim liberty 

to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that 

are bound; to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, 

and the Day of Vengeance of our God; to comfort 

all that mourn; to appoint unto them that mourn 

in Zion, to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil 

of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for 

the spirit of heaviness; that they might be 

called trees of righteousness, the planting 

of the Lord, that He might be glorified."— 

ISAIAH 61:1-3. 

WHEN the Prophet Isaiah uttered these words 

he spoke by the power of the Holy Spirit. 

As the Apostle Peter tells us, "Holy men of 

old spake as they were moved of the Holy 

Spirit." Further, he says, "Of which salvation 

the Prophets have inquired and 

searched diligently, who prophesied of the 

grace which should come unto you, searching 

what or what manner of time the Spirit 

of Christ which was in them did signify, 

when it testified beforehand of the sufferings of Christ, 

and the glory that should follow; unto whom it was revealed, 

That not unto themselves, but unto us they did 

minister the things which are now reported unto you by 

them that have preached the Gospel, with the Holy Spirit 

sent down from Heaven."— 2 Peter 1:21; 1 Peter 1:10-12. 

In our text the word anointed is used in the sense of 
ordination. The high priests of Israel were successively 



anointed, or ordained, of God, the anointing oil representing 

the Holy Spirit. Their kings were anointed to reign 

over the typical kingdom of God, the oil here also representing 

the Holy Spirit. And so Christ, the great High 

Priest and King, was ordained of God by the anointing 

of the Spirit. It was not an anointing of men or by men. 

In our Lord's case we know exactly when this prophecy 
was fulfilled. It was when He came to John at Jordan 
to be baptized, and there presented Himself in sacrifice to 
God. The Divine acceptance of this sacrifice was manifested 
by the impartation of the Holy Spirit. John the 
Baptist saw the Spirit as a dove descending upon the Lord, 
the sign given to John, but seen by no one else. Jesus 
recognized that He had received a special anointing and 
unction from the Father— and others from that time perceived 
it. We are not to suppose that Jesus performed 
miracles before He was anointed, but this does not signify 
that He did not speak kind words and do kind acts before 
that time; for as a perfect man He possessed the Spirit 
of God in the full measure that a man in the image of God 
would possess it. 

The fact that our Lord Jesus waited until He was thirty 
years of age before making His special consecration and 
receiving His ordination and commission to preach does 
not mean that His followers should wait until they are 
thirty before they begin to preach. It was necessary that 
Jesus should conform Himself to the requirements of the 
Law of Moses, given by God to the Jews; for Jesus as a 
man was a Jew, born under the Law and subject, therefore, 
to its every feature. Full manhood under the Law 
was not attained until the age of thirty. Our Lord came 
to give His life as a substitute for the forfeited life of 
Adam. Adam was a complete, perfect man, and our Lord 
must attain maturity as a perfect man before He could be 
a perfect substitute, a corresponding price. 

THE "BODY" OF CHRIST NO PART OF THE RANSOM 

With the disciples of the Lord Jesus during this Gospel 
Age, the matter is quite different. Consecration is appropriate 
to whoever has the maturity of mind to realize 
clearly what he is doing— to realize the merit of Jesus' 
death and the significance of becoming a joint-sacrificer 
with Him. The giving of the Ransom is not shared by the 
followers of Christ. That was His work alone. But His 
disciples are permitted of God, in the opulence of His 
favor, to be counted in with Jesus as a part of the Sin-Offering 
for the world, after His merit has been imputed 
to them and they have become members of His Body, 
which gives to their offering a virtue which it could not 
otherwise possess. His merit is all-sufficient, and it is His 
merit that purchases the world, through His Body, the 
Church. 

The anointing that was upon Christ Jesus continued 
with Him throughout His earthly ministry— the fulness, 
or completeness, of God's favor rested upon His every 



word and act. God was manifest in His flesh; for He 
was the perfect human representation of all the qualities 
of Jehovah's glorious character. This was demonstrated 
in His resurrection from the dead after His sacrifice had 
been finished. Otherwise His work of sacrifice would 
have been a failure and He would have remained in the 
congregation of the dead, and there would have been no 
benefit accruing to mankind from His death. Jesus was 
begotten of the Holy Spirit and anointed at His baptism, 
and was born a completed Spirit Being of the very highest 
rank at His resurrection. No other being had ever been 
created on this plane of life. Hitherto Jehovah alone had 
possessed Divine, incorruptible life. 

OUR TEXT APPLIES TO THE ENTIRE CHRIST 

We might have inferred without any direct statement 
that the words of the Prophet in our text apply to our 
Lord Jesus, but no doubt is left in our minds when we find 
that He Himself quoted these words in His sermon in the 
synagogue at Nazareth, where He was brought up. He 
there stood up and read a part of this prophecy aloud. 
Then closing the Book He said, "This day is this Scripture 
fulfilled in your ears." (Luke 4:16-21.) He pointed 

R5536 : page 278 

out that He was the one referred to by the Prophet. And 
we see the appropriateness of this application in every way. 

But while the prophecy was primarily fulfilled in 
Jesus, and applied especially to Him, we understand that 
it applies also to the members of Christ. These by becoming 
His Body, thus became a part of Himself. It is not 
because of any merit of their own. 

This anointing that is on the Church comes to us 
through Christ, flowing down from the Head over all the 
Body members, as shown in the type of the high priest of 
Israel, and as declared by the Psalmist. (Psalm 133:2.) 
The Lord Jesus is our great Advocate with the Father, 
and in Him alone have we any standing before God. We 
are thus received of the Father as spirit-begotten sons, 
even as was our Head. We are begotten of the Spirit, 
as was He. 

Our vital union with our Lord as members of His 
Body is also further shown by the Prophet Isaiah. Read 
carefully the 49th chapter, vs. 7-9, and their interpretation 
by the Apostle Paul in 2 Corinthians 6:1,2. This 
same Apostle further declares, "For as the body is one, 
and hath many members, and all the members of that one 
body, being many, are one body, so also is Christ." Again, 
"The cup for which we bless God, is it not the participation 
of the blood of Christ? The loaf which we break, is 
it not the participation of the Body of Christ? For we, 
the many, are one loaf and one Body." "Now ye are the 
Body of Christ, and members in particular."— 1 Corinthians 12:12; 
10:16,17; 12:27. 



Again, the Apostle Paul declares of the Church, 
"Whereunto He [God] called you by our Gospel to the 
obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ." How 
the deep sayings of the Savior become luminous in the 
light shed upon them by the Apostles after their anointing 
of the Spirit! How the Master fulfilled to them His 
promise made just before His crucifixion! He said, as 
we remember, "I have yet many things to say unto you, 
but ye cannot bear them now. Howbeit, when the Spirit 
of Truth is come, it shall guide you into all Truth, for it 
shall not speak of itself; but whatsoever it shall hear, that 
shall it speak, and it will show you things to come." 
(John 16:12,13.) These were the deep things of God, 
which only the spirit-begotten, spirit-taught children of 
God can understand. 

We are, if faithful, to be made like Him and share 
His exceeding glory. No wonder the Apostle exultingly 
declared, "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have 
entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath 
prepared for them that love Him; but God hath revealed 
them unto us by His Spirit; for the Spirit searcheth all 
things, yea, the deep things of God."— 1 Corinthians 2:10. 

APPLICATION OF OUR TEXT NOW 

The Apostle John says that "the anointing which we 
have received of Him abideth in us." Again, "Hereby we 
know that we dwell in Him [God] and He in us, because 
He hath given us of His Spirit." The Apostle Peter declares 
that Jesus "having received of the Father the promise 

R5537 : page 278 

of the Holy Spirit [for the Church], hath shed forth this." 
(1 John 2:27; 4:13; Acts 2:33.) It is from the Father 
and by the Son. This corroborates St. Paul's statement 
that all things are of the Father, and all things are by 
the Son. (1 Corinthians 8:6.) The Scriptures tell us 
that we were begotten and anointed of God. 

The anointing of the Church is for a work yet future. 
The work of Christ and the Church will not be accomplished 
in this present Age. But God gives to those whom 
He has accepted opportunity to use in His service in the 
present life talents which He has entrusted to them. They 
are, as far as they are able, to bind up broken hearts and 
give "the oil of joy for mourning," and thus to help to 
allay the sufferings of others, especially of the Lord's 
Household, though they are to assist any as they have 
suitable opportunity. But their special work in blessing 
and comforting the world will be in the kingdom. All 
mankind will be brought back from the tomb and will 
have all the blessed assistances of Messiah's Reign. 
Everything evil will be uprooted, and everything good 
will be fostered and blessed. 

While the anointed of God are on this side of the veil 
they are, as His ambassadors, to show forth His praises 



by telling others of the coming Kingdom and the blessings 

then to be showered upon all, when the favors of the 

Lord shall be poured out upon all men. They are to tell 

that these blessings are both for those now living and for 

those who have gone down into the grave. God's great 

Plan for the world is much broader and grander than once 

we thought. It is worthy of such a God as ours! Then let 

us tell to all who have an ear to hear, that the Lord is 

now pouring out His Spirit upon His servants and handmaidens, 

and soon will pour it upon all flesh— all mankind. 

We are instructed that this anointed class are to preach 
to "the meek." They are not to preach to the rebellious 
or the indifferent; these are to be dealt with by and by. 
The judgments of the Lord will forcibly break their 
hearts, and will effectively deal with all. The ambassadors 
of the Lord are to seek especially all those everywhere 
who manifest that they are feeling after the Lord, who 
are not satisfied with the things of the world, but who 
are longing for better, nobler things, who have and manifest 
a teachable disposition. 

WHO MAY SPEAK IN THE LORD'S NAME 

The text intimates that nobody is to speak in God's 
name except those who have been Divinely commissioned 
to do so. Others may tell the story so far as they have 
learned it, but they are not authorized to speak in the 
name of the Lord. We are inclined to think that such do 
more harm than good, mixing error with Truth; for 
those who do not understand the Message have not been 
commissioned of the Lord to be His ambassadors. With 
God, human ordination counts for nothing. In human 
ordination, each denomination qualifies its own ministers. 
But the ordained ministers of God are servants of God 
and not of error. They are servants of His Truth, not of 
the traditions of men. 

What we have said as to speaking in the Lord's name 
does not mean that we are to carry the matter so far as 
to say that no one but those who see the real Plan of 
God should even sing a hymn. In fact, the children of 
God are not to endeavor to hinder any from declaring the 
Truth. Jesus gave a good illustration of this principle 
when His disciples told Him that they had found some 
who were doing a work in His name and that they had 
forbidden them, because they did not follow Him. The 
Lord replied, "Forbid them not." And so with us. We 
are not to interfere with any who are preaching the 
Gospel, even through strife, for they may do some good. 
Neither are we to endeavor to stop any who preach what 
they believe to be the Gospel. This is not our present 
commission, or any part of it. We are not as yet judges 
of the world; but we are to recognize the difference between 
such and those who are the true ambassadors, or 
ministers, of God. 

God says of some who profess to be His mouthpieces, 
but whom He calls "wicked," "What hast thou to do to 



declare My statutes, or that thou shouldest take My 
Covenant into thy mouth, seeing thou hatest instruction, 
and castestMy words behind thee?" (Psalm 50:16,17.) 
Why should any undertake to give out the Message of 

R5537 : page 279 

God when He has not recognized them by granting them 
the anointing of His Holy Spirit, when they have not been 
taught of Him, and are not doing His will? Let all others 
do whatever they like in co-operation with the Truth, but 
only those who have been ordained of God in this one 
way should preach the Gospel. All who have received 
the Divine commission should rejoice in their wonderful 
privilege of proclaiming the Good Tidings. 

One of the features of our commission as ambassadors 
of the Lord is "to comfort all that mourn." The children 
of God, who have learned the true Source of comfort, 
are the only ones properly qualified to be real comforters, 
in the Scriptural sense. These have had their own hearts 
bound up and healed by the great Physician, and hence 
they know where to direct longing hearts who need the 
balm which only God can give. As the Apostle says: 
"Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, the Father of mercies, the God of all comfort, 
who comforteth us in all our tribulation, that we may be 
able to comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort 
wherewith we ourselves are comforted of God." (2 Corinthians 1:3,4.) 
So then, whether while still in the 

flesh or after we have come into our inheritance beyond 
the veil, we are to be comforters, to lift up those who 
are oppressed with sorrow and care, to bring to them "the 
oil of joy," the Message of grace. 

We are to be comforters at this particular time of 
"them that mourn in Zion." This is a work that the saints 
of today, who have been enlightened and blessed by the 
Message of Present Truth, are eminently qualified to do. 
Many of us were mourners in Zion before this refreshing 
Message came to us, mourning because of the confusion 
and worldliness and dearth that prevailed in the nominal 
systems wherein we were bound. But now we are free, 
and no more are "our harps hung upon the willows of 
Babylon." They are attuned to the harmonies of Heaven, 
and we can now sing with the spirit and with the understanding 
the glorious "Song of Moses and the Lamb." So 
let us be zealous in carrying this glad news to all the 
mourners in Zion not yet delivered, that they may join with 
us in this glad song. 

The entire Message as given in our text is now due to 
be proclaimed. We remember that on the occasion when 
our Lord read from the prophecy in the synagogue, He 
omitted the words, "and the Day of Vengeance of our 
God." That part of the prophecy was not due to be proclaimed; 
and Jesus could not have said of these words, 
"This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears," for He 
was not to proclaim as then at hand the Day of Vengeance. 



So He read only the parts of the prophecy whose fulfilment 
was then due to begin. 

But today the passage is due to be given as a whole. 
We are on the very eve of this great Day of Vengeance. 
We are now proclaiming in the words of the Prophet 
Zephaniah, "The great Day of the Lord is near; it is near 
and hasteth greatly, even the voice of the Day of the 
Lord; the mighty men shall cry there bitterly. That Day 
is a Day of Wrath, a Day of trouble and distress, a Day 
of wasting and desolation, a Day of clouds and thick darkness, 
a Day of the trumpet and alarm against the fenced 
cities and against the high towers [strong and well intrenched 
governments]. And I will bring distress upon 
men, that they shall walk like blind men, because they have 
sinned against the Lord. And their blood shall be poured 
out as dust, and their flesh as dung. Neither their silver 
nor their gold shall be able to deliver them in the Day 
of the Lord's Wrath; but the whole land shall be devoured 
with the fire of His jealousy."— Zephaniah 1:14-18. 

In that Day of terror and darkness men shall come to 
learn their need of a strong arm to deliver them. Their 
pride and self-sufficiency will be humbled into the dust. 
But out of that awful trouble mankind will come forth 
chastened and broken, and will be ready to be led out of 
the ruin and defeat of their own schemes and hopes, out 
of the darkness and chaos which in their ignorance and 
selfishness they precipitated upon themselves, out of the 
power of evil angels, into the light and blessing and deliverance 
then brought to them by the establishment of 
the Kingdom of God's dear Son, long promised for the 
blessing of all the families of the earth. 

It will be a lesson never to be forgotten. The sons of 
God, then exalted to the rulership of the Kingdom, will 
begin their work of healing and blessing, of binding up 
the crushed and broken hearts of men. Their own experience 
in the present life will have taught them how to 
sympathize with the poor, sin-sick world; and they will be 
able to pour into humanity's wounds the blessed balm of 
Gilead, "to give beauty for ashes," to wipe away all tears, 
and to lead all who will step by step up the grand Highway 
of Holiness then cast up for the people. "And the ransomed 
of the Lord shall return and come to Zion with 
songs and everlasting joy upon their heads; they shall 
obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall 
flee away." (Isaiah 35:10.) Only the incorrigible shall 
again have pronounced upon them the penalty of death— 
the Second Death, utter destruction. "These shall go away 
into everlasting cutting off, but the righteous into life 
eternal. "-Matthew 25:46. 



R5538 : page 279 

THE BLESSING OF THE "CUP OF SALVATION" 



"What shall I render unto the Lord for all His benefits toward 
me? I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name 
of the Lord. I will pay my vows unto the Lord now, 
in the presence of all His people."— Psalm 116:12-14. 

TO SPIRITUAL ISRAEL these words have a 

peculiar significance which they could not 

have had to the Prophet David. Nevertheless, 

we would suppose that the Prophet had 

to a considerable degree the proper thought 

as to the sentiment of the words. King 

David no doubt felt an appreciation of 

God's goodness. His Psalms show us that 

he had a very appreciative heart, grateful 

for the blessings that came to him from the 

Lord. Properly enough his heart cried out: "What shall 

I render unto the Lord?" What return can I make for 

all His lovingkindness? 

David knew of God's promise to Abraham; he knew 
that God would sometime bless all the families of the 
earth, and that this blessing would come through the Seed 
of Abraham. The Children of Israel knew that they were 
Abraham's seed. King David was one of these, and he 
felt that in some way he would be identified with this 
Promise. The matter was more or less vague to him; 
but, nevertheless, Abraham's Seed was to bless the world. 

In proposing to "take the cup of salvation," we think 
the Psalmist had in mind that whatever experiences the 
Lord might consider necessary for him he would accept; 
for he must have a share in that salvation. He would 
continue to call upon the Lord that he might have such a 
share; he would pay his vows unto the Lord "in the presence 
of all His people." He had made solemn vows, and 
he would fulfil them— he would consider this a privilege; 
he would delight in doing God's will. 

R5538 : page 280 

DEEPER SIGNIFICANCE TO SPIRITUAL ISRAEL 

To the Christian, however, all this has a much deeper 
significance. Beginning with our Lord Jesus, these words 
have a special meaning to each of the sons of God called 
to joint-heirship with the great Head of the Church. 
Having been begotten of the Holy Spirit and received 
into sonship, these wish to make a special return for all 
God's mercies. These have the actual forgiveness of 
their sins through Jesus, as David did not. His sins 
were only typically covered; and if he could say: "What 
shall I render?" surely much more should we say: "What 
shall I render unto the Lord?" 

The Apostle Paul exhorts us: "I beseech you, 
brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your 
bodies a living sacrifice, holy, and acceptable unto God— 
your reasonable service." This is what we gladly render, 
then— our bodies as living sacrifices. In every truly noble 



heart gratitude is the responsive chord to kindness and 
love; and no harmony is sweeter or more inspiring to 
noble deeds and lofty purposes. God would have His 
children cultivate for their own sake, as well as for the 
sake of others, all the graces of true nobility and moral 
excellence. It is therefore most fitting that we should 
note every deed of love and kindness toward us, and be 
careful to return the gratitude and appreciation due. How 
often does love go unrequited because selfishness or 
thoughtlessness crowds out the nobler instincts of the soul! 

While human love and acts of kindness often draw 
largely upon us for the exercise of this grace of gratitude, 
appreciation, how much more does the constant loving-kindness 
and tender mercy of our Heavenly Father thus 
fittingly draw upon our inmost being to respond in grateful 
acknowledgment and praise! To Him we are indebted 
for every good that we possess. What this implies only 
those can know who have been brought by His love into 
the secret place of the Most High, and made to feast upon 
the "finest of the wheat," the wealth of our Father's 
Storehouse. We are the special objects of His grace. 

"HIS LOVING KINDNESS, OH, HOW GREAT!" 

And who of us cannot trace a long line of special 
providences on our behalf? Who of us as we take a mental 
retrospect of our lives cannot exclaim with the poet: 
"Looking back I praise the way 
God has led me day by day!" 

How wonderfully the Lord has guided His people! 
His children have ever been His constant care. No good 
thing hath He withheld from them, and all things have 
been made to work together for their good if they obeyed 
Him. Who that has trusted the Lord through many years, 
through sunshine and shadow, through smiles and tears, 
by still waters and through storm and tempest, has not 
proved the verity of His precious promises and His abiding 
faithfulness! Surely, "Not one thing hath failed of 
all the good things which the Lord your God spake concerning 
you!" (Joshua 23:14.) In the smallest and in 
the greatest affairs of our lives He has ever watched for 
our interests. Every cloud has had a golden lining! 

What, then, shall we render unto the Lord for all His 
benefits? What have we, indeed, that we have not received 
from Him? Nothing! As a tender parent loves 
to see his child appreciatively accept his favors, so does 
our Heavenly Father regard our attitude toward Him, 
and our manifestation of appreciation of His favors and 
love toward us. His unspeakable gifts to us were purchased 
at a great cost to His heart. Then we will thankfully 
take the cup of salvation, through faith in our 
Redeemer, and pay our vows unto the Lord. We will 
drink this cup with our dear Master— this cup of suffering 
and of joy. "We will trust and not be afraid." 

The Father has made a special provision for those who 
have made a full surrender of themselves to Him. The 



experiences which He has arranged for them constitute 
"the cup of salvation." And in accepting this cup from 
the Lord, we are accepting all the experiences that come 
to us in His providence, whatever they may be— joy or 
sorrow, pain or pleasure or anything. As Jesus exclaimed: 
"The cup which my Father hath poured for 
me, shall I not drink it?" so should this be the language 
of our hearts. It had in type been foretold of our Lord 
that He should be lifted up, even as Moses lifted up the 
serpent in the wilderness. He knew that He was to be 
the great antitypical Sin-Offering; that He was to be 
"made sin" for fallen man. Yet this cup that the Father 
had poured for Him He declared Himself very willing to 
drink. And this is the cup which He has given to us. 
Our Savior said to His disciples who desired to sit 
next to Him in the Kingdom: "Are ye able to drink of 
the cup that I shall drink of?" He Himself continued to 
drink of that cup until the end— He drank the dregs of 
the cup. And so it will be with His followers. We are 
to drink of this same cup. It is our individual cup, and 
yet it is His cup. If we be truly loyal we will accept our 
share of the cup thankfully, gladly. And we know that as 
we drink of it He will be with us; we shall not be alone. 
He supervises the experiences of each of His members; 
and with every temptation and trial He will provide some 
way of escape, if the trial threatens to become too severe. 

THE CUP OF JOY IN THE KINGDOM 

On the occasion of the institution of the Memorial of 
His death, the Master in His conversation with the 
Apostles said: "But I say unto you, I will not drink 
henceforth of this fruit of the vine until that Day when 
I drink it new with you in My Father's Kingdom." 
(Matthew 26:29.) Our Lord was here contrasting two 
great Days— the Day of suffering and the Day of glory. 
This Gospel Age has been the Day of suffering. The 
Millennial Age will be the Day of glory, and is especially 
spoken of as "the Day of Christ." 

The fruit of the vine, the literal cup, represents two 
thoughts. The cup of wine is produced at the cost of the 
life of the grape. The grape loses its own individuality. 
The juice is pressed out, and thus the fruit of the vine is 
made ready for use. The cup of wine— the juice of the 
grape— represents, however, not only the crushing of the 
grape, but also the exhilaration that comes as the result. 
So in our drinking of this figurative cup. To us it 
symbolizes our Savior's sufferings and death, and our 
own participation with Him in these sufferings. But wine 
also represents joy, gladness, and is thus used in the 
Scriptures. So in the sense in which the Lord used the 
words "fruit of the vine," quoted in the preceding paragraph, 
the cup represented the joys of the Kingdom. 

In the earthly experiences of our Lord Jesus the 
Father marked out for Him a certain specific course. 
This course constituted His cup of suffering and death. 



But the Father promised Him that after He had drunk 
this cup faithfully, He should be given a different cup, a 
different experience— glory, honor and immortality. And 
then the Savior was authorized by the Father to make the 
same proposition to those who might desire to become 
His followers— that if they would suffer with Him, would 
drink His cup of death with Him, then they should participate 
with Him in His future cup of joy. 

"NOW IS THE ACCEPTABLE TIME" 

Our cup is a cup of joy and also a cup of bitterness. 
But when we are called upon to drink a bitter draft, let 
us remember Him who bravely and faithfully partook of 
this bitterness, rejoicing to do the Father's will; and let 

R5539 : page 281 

us take courage, and likewise rejoice that we are accounted 
worthy to share this cup with our beloved Lord. 
And as He who was perfect needed strength and help 
Divine in connection with His experiences in the drinking 
of the cup, as He sought the Father in earnest prayer for 
the needed assistance, so must we do. We should also be 
continually on our guard lest we enter into temptation, 
lest we look away from Him from whom alone cometh 
our help. 

"I will pay my vows unto the Lord now," said the 
Psalmist. And "now is the acceptable time— now is the 
Day of Salvation"— for the Church. Now is the time 
sacrifices are to be offered— not by and by. The Lord has 
so arranged that this Vow which we take upon ourselves, 
this Covenant of Sacrifice, must be fulfilled by us. The 
flesh which we consecrate must be consumed. If we seek 
to withdraw the sacrifice from the altar, we shall be 
dealt with in such a manner as to destroy the flesh; else 
we ourselves shall be destroyed. If we faithfully drink 
of the cup which the Father has prepared for us, we shall 
afterward receive the blessings which He has promised 
to those who thus drink. Therefore, now, in the present 
life, we drink of this cup He has given us; for unless we 
do this now, we shall have no share in the Kingdom 
blessings in the life to come. 

In our Lord's case, literal crucifixion was necessary. 
He must bear the fullest measure of the Law's demand; 
He must bear the penalty of its every violation, even as 
in the case of the vilest criminal under the Law; otherwise 
He could not have redeemed every Jew. He must 
bear the curse of the Law— He must hang on a tree. But 
in our experiences, the cross will not be a literal cross of 
wood; the nails will not be literal nails; but bitter words 
and slander and misrepresentation will surely be our portion 
—and perhaps physical violence in some form to 
some of the last members of the Body. We do not know. 

BY WAY OF THE CROSS 



"Whosoever will save his life shall lose it." We are 
all to pass through the trying experiences represented by 
the wine-press. We are to lay down our lives in the 
Divine service. We are to submit ourselves to the crushing 
experiences, to be obliterated as individuals, in the 
human sense, and to become New Creatures. "If we 
suffer [with Him], we shall also reign with Him"— not 
otherwise. So we joyfully accept the invitation to drink 
of His cup. And not until the cup has been drained to 
the last shall we receive the other cup— the cup of Kingdom 
joys. While our Lord had a great blessing in the 
obedience which He rendered to the Father, yet it was a 
trying time for Him down to the last moment, when He 
cried, "It is finished." And so with the Church. We 
must drink all of the cup; none of the contents is to be 
left. We must endure all of the experiences. 

All the sufferings of Christ will be complete when the 
Body of Christ shall have finished its course. The new 
cup of joy was given our Lord when He was received 
up into glory. Then all the angels of God worshiped 
Him. Soon our cup of joy will be given to us. No doubt 
it was a glorious time when the sleeping saints were 
awakening in the spring of 1878, and entered into their 
reward and received the cup of blessing. And one by 
one, those who were alive and remained at the Coming 
of the Master are being gathered Home. Undoubtedly 
we shall all partake of this joy with them soon, if we 
are faithful. We believe the fulness of joy will not be 
reached until all the members of Christ are with Him 
beyond the veil. Then we shall share His Throne and 
partake of His glory. Then with our beloved Lord we 
shall drink of the "new wine" in the Kingdom; for the 
promise is to all His faithful saints. 

"YE ARE MY WITNESSES, SAITH JEHOVAH" 

The concluding statement of the Psalmist as given in 
our text is that he would pay his vows "in the presence 
of all His [God's] people." It is not enough that we shall 
be loyal in our hearts; but the Lord desires a public confession, 
a witness before men. "With the heart man 
believeth unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession 
is made unto salvation." (Romans 10:10.) And 
all the witnesses for the Truth must be martyrs for the 
Truth. They must, in other words, be willing to suffer 
for it. And so it will be to a large extent with those who 
are faithfully, courageously, holding up the banner of 
Truth. They will be targets for the Adversary. 

Our Master said that whoever would not confess Him 
before men, He would not confess before the Father and 
before the holy angels. Only those who are thoroughly 
loyal are to be of this very select company of which our 
Lord is the Head, and which is soon now to be gathered 
into the Heavenly Garner. 

Then let us appreciate more and more this "cup of 



blessing" which we are privileged to drink with our 
blessed Master; and let us "call upon the name of the 
Lord" for grace to help in every time of need. We need 
Him daily, hourly, momentarily. And we may come to 
the Throne of Grace at any time in the name of our great 
Advocate. 

Our Father's ear is ever open to the cry of His children. 
They are as dear to Him "as the apple of His eye." 
They "are graven upon the palms of His hands." "As 
one whom his mother comforteth, so will I comfort you," 
is His promise to His own. All that we can render will 
be at best very, very little in return for all His bounties, 
for all His matchless grace toward us. But the measure 
of love and zeal that accompanies our little all will indicate 
the measure of our gratitude to our Heavenly 
Father and our great Redeemer. 

"What shall I render, Lord, to Thee? 

Thy love surpasses all my thought! 
What can a fitting tribute be 

To Him who my poor life hath bought? 

"Who sought me in my low estate, 

And raised me up to heights Divine! 
What words can fitly sound Thy praise, 

Or thought encompass love like Thine? 

"What shall I render, Lord, to Thee? 

My heart, my strength, my life, I bring ! 
My hands, my voice, in service glad, 

To Thee, my Savior and my King ! " 



DAY BY DAY, HOUR BY HOUR 

"God broke our years to hours and days 

That, hour by hour and day by day, 

Just going on a little way, 

We might be able all along 

To keep quite strong. 

Should all the weight of life 
Be laid across our shoulders, and the future, rife 
With woe and struggle, meet us face to face 

At just one place, 

We could not go. 

Our feet would stop; and so 

God lays a little on us every day. 

And never, I believe, on all the way 

Will burdens bear so deep, 
Or pathway lie so threatening and so steep, 
But we can go, if by God's power 
We only bear the burden of the hour." Anon. 



R5539 : page 282 

THE CHRISTIAN'S TOWER OF STRENGTH 

"The Lord is my Helper, and I will not fear 
whatman shall do unto me."— HEBREWS 13:6. 

THE Christian's position in the world is a 

peculiar one. None others can afford to be 

so courageous and independent as he. Yet 

the true child of God is not self-sufficient 

nor independent of any outside help. He is 

exhorted in the Word of the Lord to be not 

boastful, but humble-minded, realizing his 

powerlessness of himself and his need of 

God. Indeed, unless he is humble-minded 

he cannot be pleasing to the Lord. But at 

the same time he is to be full of courage and confidence. 

No power in the Universe is able to cope with our God; 

and He has declared that He is the Support and Shield of 

His children. He is the Strong Tower of those who put 

their trust in Him. 

If we abide in Christ and His Word abides in us, He 
will be our Deliverer in six troubles, and in the seventh 
He will not forsake us— because we have been called of 
God, because we have responded to that call, because we 
are seeking to glorify Him in our bodies. Hence we 
need not fear what any man can do unto us. The Apostle 
Paul, who exhorts us to courage and confident trust in 
God, was a noble example of courageous faith. He tells 
us why we have such abundant reason for assurance of 
faith and absence of fear of man. He says, "Let your 
conversation [conduct, manner of life] be without covetousness, 
and be content with such things as ye have; 
for He hath said, I will never leave thee nor forsake 
thee. So that we may boldly say, The Lord is my Helper, 
and I will not fear what man shall do unto me." 

TRUE FAITH NOT PRESUMPTION 

We should not say, The Lord is my Helper, and therefore 
He will not suffer my house to burn, nor burglars to 
break in and steal my belongings. I will not lock my 
doors at night; for the Lord is watching over me and 
mine. This would not be the spirit of a sound mind. It 
would not be true faith, but presumption. We should take 

R5540 : page 282 

all reasonable precautions to prevent losses of such kinds. 
The Lord expects us to do all in our power for our own 
protection, and not expect Him to work unnecessary miracles 
to protect us from our own carelessness and inefficiency. 
Under such circumstances He might allow us to 
become involved in difficulty and loss, and thus to learn a 
needed lesson. We are stewards of whatever the Lord 



has entrusted to us, and He expects us to exercise care in 
regard to whatever is properly under our care but belonging 
to Him. We should have buckets and water at hand 
so as to be ready in case of fire. We should have proper 
fastenings upon our doors and our windows. When our 
own duty is done, we are to leave ourselves fully in the 
Lord's hands, knowing that all will be well with us. 

If the Lord permits seeming calamity to come, we may 
rest assured that it will work out our good, if we are properly 
exercised by the experience. After having done our 
part, we should trust all consequences to Him, not doubting 
that He will care for us in His own best way. The 
Lord will give us whatever help along temporal lines He 
sees is for the highest interests of the New Creature, if 
we do not remove ourselves from His keeping and seek 
to manage our own interests. Even in the event of such 
a mistake, if we come to see where we have been wilful 
and have leaned to our own understanding and renew 
full allegiance to the Lord, the difficulties in which we 
have become involved may prove to be a real blessing in 
opening our eyes to our wrong course, in showing us our 
own insufficiency to guide ourselves, and in bringing us 
wholly back to God. 

"THAT WICKED ONE TOUCHETH HIM NOT" 

Our highest interests, our real interests, are matters of 
our Father's constant care. If we keep very near to the 
Lord, we are protected from the power of the fallen 
angels, who would, if permitted, bring about our ensnarement 
and overthrow. They cannot really harm us if we 
are watching and keeping our garments white. Only a 
lack of faithfulness would subject us to their power to 
any extent so far as our New Creature interests are concerned. 
They can neither harm our bodies in any way 
nor cause any violence to us, unless the Lord permits it 
for our highest good— perhaps for our deliverance and 
exaltation, as in the case of our Master. 

Let us, then, keep ourselves, that "that Wicked One 
touch us not." We are subject to various attacks by the 
deluded servants of the powers of darkness. There may 
be attacks upon our good name, our reputation, our bodies, 
or what not, with more or less legality. We are to a considerable 
extent subject to man, through "the powers that 
be." Yet our bitterest enemies are powerless to touch 
us, unless permitted by the Lord. And we cannot be 
touched by the great Adversary, if we remain true to our 
Covenant— true to the Vows we have taken to the Lord. 
The Adversary can never touch our real selves as New 
Creatures save by our own unfaithfulness. 

WE WILL WORSHIP OUR GOD ALONE 

It may be the will of God to permit us to suffer, just 
as He permitted John the Baptist to be imprisoned and 
finally beheaded, just as He permitted Jesus to be arrested 



and crucified, and He has permitted many of His saints 
in the past to be maltreated or killed. But we need not 
fear what men may do unto us, knowing that our God, 
whose we are and whom we serve, will be with us constantly, 
and will cause all things to work out His own 
glorious purposes for us and in us. 

We would, of course, be glad to please men, if this 
were possible. But wherever it is a question of pleasing 
God or pleasing man, we will say, as did the three young 
Hebrews to the king of Babylon: "Our God whom we 
serve is able to deliver us. ...But if not, be it 
known unto thee, O king, that we will not serve thy gods, 
nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up." 
We will not do anything contrary to the Divine will, to 
the command of Jehovah. We will worship our God alone! 

When the Jewish Council (Acts 4:13-20) commanded 
the Apostles Peter and John to speak no more in the name 
of Jesus, their reply was: "Whether it be right in the 
sight of God to hearken unto you more than unto God, 
judge ye; for we cannot but speak the things which we 
have seen and heard." When Pontius Pilate, the Roman 
governor of Judea, said to our Lord on the night of His 
arrest and trial, "Knowest Thou that I have power to 
crucify Thee, and have power to release Thee?" Jesus 
answered: "Thou couldst have no power at all against 
Me, except it were given thee from above." So it is with 
all the footstep followers of the Master. God's grace 
will be sufficient. Man is powerless to harm a hair of 
our heads, unless it is permitted of our Father in Heaven 
for His glory and our own highest welfare. 

COURAGE BORN OF FAITH 

The world has often wondered at the calmness of the 
Lord's humble little ones under circumstances which 
would cause the stoutest heart to quail. But to follow the 
course in life which will glorify our God and magnify 
His grace, to be able to meet wisely and courageously the 
trials and difficulties as they come to us as Christians, representatives 
of the King of Heaven, and to meet them in 

R5540 : page 283 

the spirit of rejoicing, counting our tribulations all joy, 
it is necessary that our hearts be in attune with the Lord, 
that we have no will but His, and that the fear of man, 
which bringeth a snare, shall be overcome. We cannot 
accomplish this in our own strength, but in the strength 
of God alone. We are instructed to fear Jehovah, and 
not to fear a weak mortal. The righteous are as bold 
as a lion, as gentle as a dove, as meek as a lamb. This 
peculiar combination of boldness, gentleness and meekness 
should characterize every Christian. 



R5540 : page 283 

MARY'S SWEET PERFUME 

--OCTOBER 4.-MARK 14:1-11.— 

"She hath done what she could."-VERSE 8. 

THE last five days of Jesus' ministry are full of 

interest. The incident especially marking 

our lesson occurred at the close of the 

Jewish Sabbath day just preceding our 

Lord's crucifixion. Jesus and His disciples 

had come to the Passover Feast, He telling 

them that He would there be crucified, but 

they thinking that He was speaking in some 

kind of figurative language. Indeed, at no 

time during Jesus' ministry did His crucifixion 

seem to be less likely than when it occurred. His 

preaching and the preaching of His disciples, first the 

Twelve and afterward the Seventy, had awakened considerable 

interest throughout all Jewry— especially in Galilee. 

Great throngs of people were at Jerusalem to celebrate 
this Feast, which would last a week. Thousands of them 
had heard of Jesus; and many of them had been recipients 
of His mercy in the healing of their diseases. Just a 
short time before, a considerable number had discussed the 
propriety of proclaiming Jesus king. Indeed, on the very 
next day after the incident of this lesson, the multitude, 
some following and some preceding Him while He rode 
upon the ass, had acclaimed Him king. They had cried 
out, "Hosanna in the highest to the Son of David, who 
cometh in the name of Jehovah!" 

But the Master knew that the masses would be only as 
children in the hands of the great teachers of the time. 
He knew that there was a murderous hatred against Him 
amongst the chief priests, the Scribes and the Pharisees. 
True, it is written that they hated Him without a cause; 
that is to say, without a just cause (John 15:25); but they 
had cause enough to hate Him, from their own viewpoint. 

THE ATTITUDE OF THE RELIGIOUS TEACHERS 

Although the Jewish nation had lost its liberty long 
before and had no prospect of ever winning it back, nevertheless 
there had never been a time since the days of 
Solomon when their political prospects looked so favorable. 
The Roman Emperors had manifested their willingness 
to co-operate with these very priests, scribes and 
religious leaders. The Emperors wished merely to rule, 
and realized that they could exercise more influence 
through these religious leaders than in any other way. 

Thus the great religious teachers felt themselves sponsors 
for the people. They perceived that their hold over 
the more ignorant Jews was being impaired by the teachings 
of Jesus. They felt so satisfied with themselves as 



claimed representatives of God and as intermediaries with 
the Roman government that they did not think it worth 
while to make inquiry respecting Jesus and His teachings. 
Indeed, from their viewpoint, everything was going along 
reasonably well. They could wish for nothing better than 
that their plans might not be interfered with. 

Many of them had lost all faith in God and in a future 
life. Others, retaining faith in God and His promised 
Kingdom, thought that affiliation with the Roman Empire 
would be the best way of strengthening their nation and 
preparing it for the Messianic glories. From this viewpoint, 
Jesus was a disturber of the peace. He did not 
belong to their clique. His manner, no less than His teachings, 
reproved them and tended to break all their influence 
with the people. 

The religious leaders had heard that Jesus was coming 
to the Feast. Our lesson tells us that they discussed how 
He could be wisely dealt with, killed, gotten rid of in any 
way. They seem to have been unanimous in believing 
that His destruction would be for the good of the Lord's 

R5541 : page 283 

Cause, as they misunderstood that Cause. Another Scripture 
tells us that Caiaphas, the chief priest, had declared 
that it was expedient that one man should perish rather 
than that the nation should perish. (John 1 1 :49-52.) 
They fancied that the teachings of Jesus, if allowed to 
proceed, would certainly awaken the people to a faith in 
the Messianic Kingdom. They thought of Jesus as an 
imposter, but feared that His teachings would incite some 
kind of fanatical uprising. 

The religious leaders had murder in their hearts. It 
was merely a question of how they could accomplish the 
murder and deceive the people, so as not to provoke those 
who had begun to exercise faith in Jesus. Their conclusion 
was that the Feast time would be an unfavorable 
one; for He would be surrounded by the multitude, some 
of whom thought Him a great prophet, others of whom 
considered Him to be the Messiah. Such was their attitude 
of mind when Judas went to them privately, suggesting 
that he would be in touch with the movements of Jesus, 
and that for a certain amount of money he would inform 
them of the most suitable time for making Jesus a prisoner 
—a time when the multitude would not be with Him. His 
plan was finally decided upon and carried out. 

THE FEAST--THE ANOINTING 

Jesus and His disciples were the honored guests of 
that Lazarus whom Jesus awakened after he had been 
dead three days. It was at the home of Simon the Leper, 
who probably was dead. Jesus was the guest of honor, 
His disciples sharing with Him. Martha and Mary, with 
Lazarus, were hostesses. The supper had progressed 
when Mary entered with a vial of very expensive perfume, 



the contents of which she poured upon the head of Jesus 
and, according to another account, subsequently poured a 
portion of the same perfume upon His feet. 

The house was filled with the perfume; Jesus was honored. 
Then came a voice of murmuring— "Why this 
waste?" St. John tells us that the leader of the murmurers 
was Judas, and that evidently several were influenced by 
his speech. Judas posed as the friend of the poor, intimating 
that his regrets were not selfish or personal, but 
that he thought what good might have been done to others. 

The Apostles afterward learned that this speech was 
hypocritical. At the time Jesus understood the anger of 
Judas, which led him openly to insult one of the hostesses 
of the occasion. St. John tells us the anger of Judas was 
because he had failed to get this money himself. He was 
the treasurer of the little company of disciples; he carried 
the money-bag; and, as they afterward came to know, 
he was a thief, who privately was laying by for himself. 
(John 12:6.) And Judas is probably not the only person 
who has plead for the poor and at the same time sought to 
divert funds to himself. 

R5541 : page 284 

THE MEASURE OF MARY'S DEVOTION 

The statement of Judas that the perfume was worth 
three hundred pence is probably not an extreme valuation. 
Three hundred pence would be about six dollars. At a 
time when the silver penny, worth sixteen cents, represented 
a day's labor, three hundred pence would practically 
represent the labor of a year. Sixteen dollars per ounce, 
sometimes more, has been paid for the attar of rose; and 
history tells us of fabulous prices paid for perfumes in 
the past. 

Today perfumes can be made and sold at trifling cost, 
in comparison with the past. And yet the ancients were 
passionately fond of perfumes; and the liberal use of 
them, as in the case before us, marked a deep respect, yea, 
reverence. Mary doubtless felt that her very highly 
esteemed friend Jesus, who had brought her brother back 
from the tomb, was none other than the Messiah, the Son 
and Representative of Jehovah God. The reverence which 
she felt for Jehovah she sought to express toward His 
highest Representative, Jesus. 

Poor Mary must have felt quite crushed as she heard 
the harsh criticism. But Jesus came to her defense, saying, 
"Let her alone. Why trouble ye the woman? She 
hath wrought a good work on Me. She hath done what 
she could; she hath anointed My body for its burial. The 
poor ye have always with you; and whensoever ye will ye 
may do them good; but Me ye have not always." 

Surely the Master's approval comforted Mary; and 
wherever the Gospel of the Lord has been preached, this 
story of her loving devotion, to the extent of considerable 
cost and probably considerable self-denial, has been told 



as a memorial of her, not merely to honor her, but especially 
to inspire and encourage others of God's people 
to the obtaining and exercising of a love which delights in 
service, yea, in costly sacrifice. 

A SUGGESTION WORTH CONSIDERATION 

A Boston printer, now dead, put on his business card 
the following helpful and practical suggestions:— "Do not 
keep the alabaster boxes of your love and tenderness 
sealed up until your friends are dead, but fill their lives 
with sweetness. Speak approving and cheering words 
while their ears can hear them. The kind things you say 
after they are gone, say before they go. The flowers you 
mean to send for their coffins, bestow now; and so brighten 
and sweeten their homes before they leave them. 

"If my friends have alabaster boxes laid away, full of 
fragrant perfumes of sympathy and affection, which they 
intend to break over my dead body, I would rather they 
would bring them now in my weary and troubled hours, 
and open them, that I may be refreshed and cheered, while 
I need them and can enjoy them. I would rather have a 
plain coffin without a flower, and a funeral without an 
eulogy, than a life without the sweetness of love and 
sympathy. Let us learn to anoint our friends beforehand 
for their burial. 

"Post-mortem kindness cannot cheer the burdened 
spirit. Flowers on the coffin shed no fragrance backward 
over the weary way by which the loved ones have 
traveled." 



-R5541 : page 284 

TWO PASSOVER MEMORIALS 
-OCTOBER 11. -MARK 14:12-25.- 



"As oft as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do proclaim 
the Lord's death till He come."-l CORINTHIANS 11:26. 

THE SUBJECT of today's lesson is one of the 

most interesting features of Jesus' earthly 

ministry. He knew that the Apostles did 

not know that this was to be His last supper 

with them. Although He had intimated the 

nearness of His death, His disciples had 

found it impossible to comprehend that any 

such disaster could be so near at hand as 

He had intimated. Jesus, however, with full 

consciousness of what it meant, was longing 

for the consummation of His work. It was probably on 

the very day at the close of which He and His disciples 

went to eat the Passover that Jesus said, "I have a 

baptism to be baptized with; and how am I in difficulty 



until it be accomplished!"— a baptism into death, which 
was finished the following day. 

Peter and John were the two disciples sent to make 
ready the Passover. Evidently Jesus was at Bethany, at 
the home of Lazarus, when He sent this word. It is supposed 
that the large upper room in which the Passover 
was eaten by Jesus and His disciples was the same one in 
which the Apostles and others were gathered to await the 
Pentecostal blessing. This very room is still pointed out 
by tradition, but is controlled by Mohammedans, who are 
especially jealous of Christians. 

In the evening of the same day, Jesus with the entire 
Twelve met in this room, all the preparations having been 
attended to. They met to celebrate the Jewish Passover at 
its appointed time. The lamb had been roasted, and the 
unleavened bread prepared, also the bitter herbs. Everything, 
we may be sure, was exactly in conformity with the 
original requirement; for Jesus and His Apostles were 
bound by every feature of the Jewish Law as much as 
were other Jews— the New Dispensation not yet having 
been ushered in. Every feature of the Law was binding 
up to the time of the Pentecostal blessing, which marked 
the Divine approval of the sacrifice of Jesus and the 
Divine acceptance of all those who had become His disciples 
by a full consecration. 

KINGDOM HONORS DESIRED 

So far from realizing that they were on the eve of a 
great tragedy, the Apostles believed that Jesus would very 
soon be enthroned as King. They remembered His promise 
that they should sit with Him in His Throne. This 
promise seemed so near of realization to them that they 
could think of little else but the degree of honor which 
they would have in the Kingdom. They seemed to feel 
that unless they contended stoutly for it, they would not 
get so honorable positions. Perceiving their attitude of 
mind, Jesus said to them, "The kings of the Gentiles exercise 
lordship over them; but ye shall not be so: but he 
that will be greatest amongst you, let him be as the 
younger; and he that is chief, as he that doth serve." 

These were new standards, difficult for them to understand; 
and apparently they are still difficult for the followers 
of Jesus to comprehend fully. The One who will 
be chief in the Kingdom will be the One who was the chief 
Servant in the flesh. This greatest Servant of all was, of 
course, the Lord Jesus Himself. But the Master intimates 
that the same principle holds good in respect to all of His 
followers. Whoever of them will most faithfully, most 
earnestly, most zealously, serve the brethren will thereby 
be increasing his favor with God, and be preparing himself 
for so much higher station in Messiah's Kingdom. 

With the thought that any menial service would signify 
admission of their unworthiness of a high place, the disciples 
made no arrangement for feet-washing, none wishing 
to assume the role of servant. In that sandy country 



feet-washing was almost a necessity when sandals were 
worn. By way of rebuke, Jesus arose from the table and 

R5542 : page 285 

performed this menial service for His disciples, telling 

them the import of the lesson— namely, humility— and intimating 

that no matter how humble a service they might 

be able to render to each other, they should be glad to 

render it. 

The lesson is still with us, not as a form or ceremony 
to be performed, but as an illustration of a principle. 
Any humble act of service done to one of the Lord's 
brethren corresponds to this feet-washing. 

THE CRISIS IN JUDAS' LIFE 

The Passover Supper proceeded— the eating of the 
lamb with the bitter herbs and the unleavened bread, which 
considerably resembled thick pancakes, and which was 
sometimes used instead of a spoon to sop up the essence 
of the meat. One of the Gospels declares that Jesus 
began to be heavy-hearted, and then said, One of you 
Twelve, eating with Me as My guest, as a member of My 
family, is plotting My betrayal. 

There may have been a double object in this statement. 
First, it would show the disciples that Jesus was fully 
aware of the premeditated betrayal. They would not, 
therefore, think that something had happened to Him unexpectedly, 
or out of the Divine Program. Second, our 
Lord may have meant this as a final reproof to Judas— 
to startle him, to cause him to think. At very best a 
traitor's course is dishonorable, but doubly so when the 
traitor accepts the hospitality of the one against whom he 
is plotting and eats his bread. 

Consternation spread amongst the disciples; and one 
after another they asked, "Is it I?" The import of this 
question would be, It is not I whom You have meant! 
Even Judas joined in the general inquiry, "Is it I?" The 
Apostle John was seated next to Jesus, and St. Peter 
beckoned to him that he should ask the Master who was 
meant. It was probably a whispered inquiry, heard by 
Jesus only. Our Lord's whispered reply was, "It is the 
one to whom I will give a sop." Presently, having prepared 
a special sop, a mark of special interest, He handed 
it to Judas. Thus St. John and St. Peter knew the affair. 

Apparently it was but a short time after this that Judas 
withdrew, the record being that "Satan entered into him." 
The spirit of the Evil One got complete control of him 
while he stopped, and weighed and balanced the matter of 
selling his best Friend for thirty pieces of silver. It is 
entirely probable, therefore, that Judas was not present 
when Jesus, a little later, instituted the Memorial Supper 
which Christians now celebrate. 

THE SIGNIFICATION OF THE MEMORIAL 



The Memorial Supper which Jesus instituted is totally 
separate and distinct from the Passover Supper, and yet 
they are closely related; for the one was the type and the 
other its archetype, or higher type, with a still higher signification. 
In the one a literal lamb was used to typify 
Jesus, the Lamb of God; in the other, the archetype, the 
breaking of the bread represented the death of Jesus. 

The Jews celebrated the birth of their nation and its 
deliverance from Egyptian bondage. This had its start in 
the passing over of their first-born when the tenth plague 
came upon the Egyptians. St. Paul shows us that the first-borns 
of Israel, spared in that Passover night, typified the 
Church of the First-borns, spared, or passed over, in the 
present time, while the night of sin prevails and before 
the morning of Messiah's Kingdom is ushered in. 

More and more Bible students are reaching the conclusion 
that the Memorial of Christ's death should not be 
celebrated monthly or quarterly or weekly; but that it 
should be considered the archetype of the Jewish Passover, 
and should properly be celebrated annually, and 
at about the same time as the Jewish Passover. 

We are not to understand that the Apostles comprehended 
the meaning of Jesus' words when He explained 
to them the signification of the Supper which He instituted. 
Rather, as He had already foretold, the Holy Spirit 
brought these things to their attention and enabled them 
to comprehend their meaning, after they had received the 
Pentecostal blessing and enlightenment. Now we may see 
the import of Jesus' words, "This is My body, broken for 
you." We perceive that He could not have meant, as some 
have thought, that the bread was turned into His actual 
body and the wine into His actual blood. On the contrary, 
He still had His actual body and His actual blood. 
He could not, therefore, have meant more than to say, 
This bread symbolically represents My body, which is to 
be broken for you; and this wine represents My blood, 
which is to be shed for you tomorrow— My life given up. 

Neither should we think that Jesus meant that special 
virtue would result to the disciples from the eating of that 
bread and the drinking of that literal cup. We should 
properly look far beyond these things, and see that He 
meant this: Only as you by faith partake of the merits 
secured by My death can you have the great blessing provided 
for you as My disciples. The Apostles believed that 
the death of Jesus was for their sins, and that it constituted 
the basis of their acceptance with the Heavenly 
Father. They realized that only as they appropriated the 
life of Christ would they be truly the recipients of all these 
blessings. 

St. Paul points out for us another important signification 
of this bread and cup. He declares the oneness of 
Christ and His Church. He tells us that there is but the 
one Loaf and the one Cup. Primarily, this Loaf was 
Christ Jesus; but in a secondary sense all the followers of 
Christ, after having been justified through His Sacrifice, 



are privileged to become members of His Body, parts of 
the one Loaf that is being broken. Likewise, after partaking 
of the merit of Christ's blood, His sacrifice, all of 
His true followers are counted as members with Him and 
as participators in that one Cup. 

Hear the Apostle's words: "The cup of blessing which 
we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? 
The bread which we break, is it not the communion of 
the Body of Christ? For we being many are one Bread, 
and one Body; for we are partakers of that one Bread."— 
1 Corinthians 10:16,17. 

THE SEALING OF THE NEW COVENANT 

Jesus spoke of the cup, the fruit of the vine, as representing 
the blood of the New Covenant. The Law 
Covenant was the Old Covenant, which failed to bring 
the blessings to the Jews, because they could not keep it. 
Hence, also, they were not qualified to bless the other 
nations of the earth. But God promised a New Covenant, 
a better one, which would be introduced by a new and 
higher, or superior, Mediator than Moses. That New 
Covenant, God declares, will accomplish what the old 
Law Covenant failed to accomplish; for the New 
Law Covenant will be inaugurated by Messiah, its 
Mediator, at His Second Advent. His Kingdom, established 
in power and great glory, will rule, bless and instruct 
mankind, and will "take away the stony heart and 
will give a heart of flesh" to all who will respond to those 
blessed opportunities. 

Jesus' death constituted the blood which seals, or 
makes efficacious, that New Covenant. But mark further: 
The Church is not to be blessed under that New 
Covenant of the Millennial Age, which will be inaugurated 
at the Second Coming of Jesus, at the establishment of 
His Kingdom. The Church is to be blessed in advance of 
that New Covenant. Indeed, their consecrated lives 

R5542 : page 286 

(blood), accepted by our Lord, are counted in as a part 
of His own sacrifice, which seals the New Covenant. 
Hence the New Covenant cannot be fully sealed until the 
entire Body of Christ, which is the Church, shall have 
shared with Him in the drinking of His Cup— in the 
sacrifice of earthly rights, privileges, life itself. 

THE COVENANT OF SACRIFICE 

Meantime, we see that Jesus and the Church receive 
their reward neither under the Law Covenant nor under 
the New Covenant, but under a special Covenant, called a 
Covenant of Sacrifice. Reference is made to this Covenant 
of Christ and the Church in the Psalms, where the Lord 
is represented as saying, "Gather My saints together unto 
Me, those who have made a Covenant with Me by sacrifice." 



(Psalm 50:5.) The gathering of those who enter 
into this special Covenant of Sacrifice with the Lord has 
been in progress for now over eighteen hundred years. 
We have every reason to believe that the sacrifice is 
nearly completed, and that soon all the sacrificers, members 
of the Body of Christ, will be glorified, changed by 
the power of the First Resurrection and will enter into 
the joys of their Lord, according to His promise: "To him 
that overcometh will I grant to sit with Me in My Throne." 

Our Lord indicated that He would no longer drink of 
the Cup; nor did He. His work, His drinking of the Cup, 
was finished the next day, on Calvary. There He completed 
the drinking of the Cup which the Father had 
poured for Him. The Father has poured the same Cup 
for all the followers of Jesus; and they must drink of 
His Cup, as well as partake of the merits of His broken 
Body, if they would be His joint-heirs in the Kingdom, 
soon to be established. 

This was the import of our Lord's words to St. James 
and St. John, His disciples, when they asked for special 

R5543 : page 286 

places in the Kingdom. Jesus asked, "Are ye able [willing] 
to drink of the Cup that I shall drink of, and to be 
baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?" They 
heartily declared their willingness. Jesus assured them 
that they should have their request; that if they were willing, 
He would see to it that they would drink of His Cup. 
And so it is with all of His followers. The Scriptures 
assure them, saying, "All things shall work together for 
good to them that love God, to the called ones according to 
His purpose." 



R5543 : page 286 

INTERESTING LETTERS 
A REPLY BY THE EDITOR 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I am pleased to acknowledge receipt of yours of 16th 
ultimo. 

After making copies of your letter, I went to the Editor 
of the Gazette and submitted to him your original letter. 
After reading it he said he would publish all except that 
portion relating to ordination. I hand you herewith the page 
of the Gazette containing the article, and I praise the Lord 
for rewarding your efforts in defending the Truth here. 

Through the Lord's providence I had heretofore been 
able, apparently, to parry every blow directed against the 
Truth, but in this attack of Rev. Ross the javelin seemed to 
pass me and strike notwithstanding my best efforts to turn it 
aside; but now the darkness disappears and the light again 



shines on the cause of Present Truth through the good defense 
which you have offered; the Lord has shown us again 
how He can make the "Wrath of His enemies to praise 
Him." The Editor of the Mirror (Protestant), a contemporary 
of the Gazette, told me he would run your letter in 
full. 

Dear Brother, would it not be well to let your letter come 
out in one of the BIBLE STUDENTS MONTHLY or in THE 
WATCH TOWER? It would give many of the dear friends 
some good ideas as to how to offer defense along this special 
line of the Adversary's attacks on you and the cause of 
Present Truth. I received a letter from a brother in Grenada, 
stating that some prominent Plymouth Brethren were circulating 
Rev. Ross' pamphlet. Of course, they will not circulate 
so very many, as the pamphlet costs 10 cents, and very 
few of the Plymouth Brethren or other denominations are 
willing to pay that much to defend their errors. 

How grand it will be when the people are delivered from 
the bondage of error! I am glad for the ministers' sake 
also, for they will not have to fight any more, and I am sure 
that will be a great relief to their minds! One Catholic 
gentleman told me that Catholics and others could argue with 
us until we got to the Bible, and then they had to stop ! 

Assuring you of my continued love and fullest confidence, 
which you have always had and which have never wavered 
since I laid my life upon the altar of sacrifice in 1 897, 1 am, 

Yours in the Redeemer's service, E. J. COWARD. 



Below we reprint the portion of our letter as published in 
The Port-of-Spain Gazette, Trinidad, B.W.I.: 

PASTOR RUSSELL REPLIES. 

MR. E. J. COWARD, 

Port-of-Spain, Trinidad, B.W.I. 

Dear Brother in Christ:— Yours of October 3d is before 
me. Thanks for its clippings from the Gazette and the 
Evangelical Christian. 

I am quite familiar with the slanderous screed issued by 
Rev. J. J. Ross. In Canada they have just two laws governing 
libel. Under the one the falsifier may be punished by 
the assessment of damages and money. Under the other, 
criminal libel, he is subject to imprisonment. I entered suit 
against Rev. Ross under the criminal act, at the advice of 
my attorneys, because, as he has no property, a suit for damages 
would not intimidate him nor stop him. The lower 
Court found him guilty of libel. But when the case went to 
the second Judge he called up an English precedent, in 
which it was held that criminal libel would only operate in a 
case where the jury felt sure that there was danger of rioting 
or violence. As there was no danger that myself or 
friends would resort to rioting, the case was thrown out. I 
could still bring my action for financial damages, but it would 
be costly to me and impotent as respects Rev. Ross. He, 



however, is having troubles of his own. Since he began to 
attack me, he has split two Baptist Congregations— one in 
Toronto, the other in Hamilton. The last heard of him, he 
was in London, Ont, and again in trouble with his congregation. 
A lying spirit is sure to be a boomerang. 

As respects my education in Greek and Hebrew: Not only 
do I not claim very special knowledge of either language, but 
I claim that not one minister in a thousand is either a 
Hebrew or a Greek scholar. To be able to spell out a few 
Greek words is of no earthly value. Nor is it necessary 
longer to study these languages, in order to have knowledge 
of the Bible. Our Presbyterian friends have gotten out at 
great cost Young's Analytical Hebrew, Chaldaic, Greek and 
English Lexicon Concordance, which anyone may procure. 
And our Methodist friends have issued a similar work- 
Strong's Analytical Concordance and Lexicon. And there is 
a still older one entitled Englishman's Hebrew, Chaldaic, 
Greek and English Lexicon and Concordance. Additionally, 
Liddell and Scott's Greek Lexicon is a standard authority. 
The prices of these are not beyond the reach of the average 
man. By these works scholarly information respecting the 
original text of the Bible is obtainable. I have all four of 
these works and have used them faithfully. Very few college 
professors, even, would risk to give a critical translation of 
any text of Scripture without consulting these very works 
of reference, which are standard. To merely learn to read 
the Greek and Hebrew without a six years' course in their 
grammars is more likely to hinder than to help in Bible 
study; far better take the acknowledged scholarship to which 
I have referred. 

Additionally I remind you of the many translations of 
the Bible now extant— all of them very good. I have all of 
these and find them useful in comparison in the study of 
any text— one sometimes giving a thought which another may 
not. The other day, for curiosity's sake, I counted Bibles in 
different translations, etc., in my study and found that I have 
thirty-two. 

As respects my business dealings, Brother Coward, I need 
not remind you that American Courts are very strict and that 
if anybody feels that I have wronged him out of a dollar, he 
would have no difficulty in haling me into Court. You have 
my assurance, dear Brother, that I do not owe any man on 
earth a penny and that I have never taken a penny from 
anyone unjustly. On the contrary, as you know, I have spent 

R5543 : page 287 

several small fortunes in seeking to do good to my fellow-men 
—in helping them to a better understanding of God and 
the Bible. Having once been an infidel myself, and having 
subsequently found that I had confused the teachings of the 
Bible with the teachings of the creeds, and that the Bible's 
teaching is a glorious, grand doctrine, it has since been my 
business and pleasure to do all in my power to help fellow-mortals 
out of darkness into the true light. 



If you choose, you may make such extracts of this as are 
likely to reach intelligent people through any of the newspapers. 
But really I care little for what men may say or 
think about me. Of course, such things are painful; but they 
are only what the Bible tells us will be more or less the experience 
of all who would be loyal to God and His Word. 
So persecuted they the saints and prophets of the past- 
even the Master Himself. And as for how I got my education 
—it seems to me of little consequence. I have enough 
to serve my own purposes, and, apparently, too much to 
please Rev. Ross and others of his type, who, not knowing 
how to meet my theological teachings, do not attempt to do 
so at all, but merely charge me with ignorance. As I read 
his vile slanders I thought of what the New Testament says 
about St. Peter and St. John. They were so woefully 
ignorant that all the people perceived that they were 
"ignorant and unlearned men." If they were living today, I 
suppose that the Rev. Ross and Co. would be after them to 
show them up as not having been ordained by the Baptists 
and not knowing anything anyway. 

Very truly your servant in the Lord, 

C. T. RUSSELL. 

The portion of our communication omitted above, follows: 
I need not tell you how absurdly untrue Rev. Ross' statements 
are in respect to my ordination; but really it seems 
strange how little people use their thinking faculties in such 
matters— how few who would read the Rev. Ross' statements 
would see their absurdity. For instance, he is a Baptist 
and was authorized or ordained by the Baptists— not by 
Methodists, Presbyterians, Lutherans, Catholics or Episcopalians. 
Would an Episcopalian recognize Rev. Ross' ordination? 
Surely not! Would a Roman Catholic recognize his 
ordination? Of course not. Ordination merely means authorization. 
The Catholics will authorize, or ordain, those 
only who belong to their faith. The Baptists will ordain, or 
authorize, those only who are Baptists. How foolish, then, 
to talk about ordination from their standpoint! 

But ordination from my standpoint, the Bible standpoint, 
the standpoint of an increasing number of Bible students all 
the world over, is different. It is a Divine ordination. But 
our Baptist friends and our Methodist friends would say 
that they, also, recognize Bible ordination, that they are not 

R5544 : page 287 

merely dependent upon each other. But we challenge them 
to prove that they ever had a Divine ordination or that they 
ever think of it. They merely think of a sectarian ordination, 
or authorization, each from his own sect or party. 

True, Catholics and Episcopalians are different and do 
recognize a Divine ordination. They claim that Jesus ordained 
His Twelve Apostles and that these have successors 
in the Bishops, who are styled "apostolic bishops," and under 



the theory of "apostolic succession" have the same power as 
the original Twelve Apostles to ordain and to teach. Bible 
students believe that they err in this claim and that the 
doctrine of "apostolic succession" is unscriptural. The 
Bible recognizes only Twelve Apostles. More than that, the 
Bible denounces all apostolic bishops as being in error. Referring 
to them, Jesus said that they claimed to be apostles, 
and are not, but do lie. (Revelation 2:2.) In other words, 
contrary to the superstitions of Catholics and Episcopalians, 
their bishops have no authority whatever to ordain anybody. 

What, then, is the proper ordination of a minister of 
Christ, and how can it be obtained, according to the Bible? 

We answer that God's ordination, or authorization, of 
any man to preach is by the impartation of the Holy Spirit 
to him. Whoever has received the Holy Spirit has received 
the power and authority to teach and to preach in the name 
of God. Whoever has not received the Holy Spirit has no 
Divine authority or sanction to his preaching. In other 
words, he is unordained in the highest, truest sense of that 
word. 

What is the secret of the opposition and slander that is 
being raised up against me and against all who, like me, are 
Bible students? It is malice, hatred, envy, strife, on the 
part of those who are still hugging the nonsense of the Dark 
Ages and neglecting true Bible study. They see that their 
influence is waning. But they have not yet awakened to the 
true situation. They think that I am responsible for their 
smaller congregations and small collections. But not so. 
The real difficulty with them is that the people are becoming 
more intelligent and can no longer be driven with the crack 
of a merely man-devised whip of fear. The colleges of the 
world have been teaching that the Bible is a foolish old book, 
until few preachers and few of the educated of the world 
believe it to be of Divine inspiration. Losing faith in the 
Bible, in the preachers and in the creeds, the people are drifting 
toward atheism. That is the real difficulty. 

While my work does not, indeed, help to build up any of 
the sects of Christendom, it is helping to establish Christian 
people in a true faith in God and in the Bible. It is giving 
them a firm foundation and an intelligent understanding such 
as they had prayed for and hoped for before, but never 
found. This is not because of great ability on my part, nor 
on the part of my associates, but because God's time has 
come for blessing Bible study in the light of present-day opportunities. 
It is as Jesus promised— the Wise Virgin class 
of Christian people, who "trim their lamps"— study the Bible 
—find it to shine out brightly and to point them to the new 
Age of blessing under Messiah's Kingdom. 

page 287 

"TIMES AND SEASONS" 

DEAR PASTOR:- 

The letter of a dear brother in THE WATCH TOWER of a 
somewhat recent date, drawing attention to the fact that a 



total eclipse of the sun would occur August 21, visible to the 

whole of "Christendom," exactly 40 days before October 1, 

the day which we believe marks the close of the Gentile Times, 

interested me deeply— particularly so, in view of the other 

coincidences which specially mark this year. April 10 synchronized 

with Good Friday and with the 14th of Nisan. On 

that day the moon reached its full at the moment (as near as 

we can ascertain) in which our Lord died (3:49 p.m. 

Jerusalem time). 

But more remarkable still, the following is worthy of 
notice: Next to the Passover, the great day of the Israelites 
was the Day of Atonement, which was commanded to be observed 
on the 10th day of the seventh month. (Leviticus 23:27; 
16:29.) After the daily sacrifice, the high priest sacrificed 
for himself and his fellow-priests a bullock for a sin-offering. 
After this a goat was offered, part of its blood being 
sprinkled in the Most Holy and the remainder, mingled with 
the blood of the bullock, was sprinkled toward both sides of 
the sanctuary. "Then shalt thou make the trumpet of the 
Jubilee to sound on the 10th day of the seventh month; in the 
Day of Atonement shall ye make the trumpet sound throughout 
all your land."— Leviticus 25:9. 

If we now turn to the dedication of the Temple, we find that 
it also took place in the seventh month, and "fire came down 
from Heaven, and consumed the burnt offering and the sacrifice." 
(2 Chronicles 7:1.) This apparently was on the 10th 
day of the month, the Atonement Day; and it was followed 
by the Feast of Tabernacles, beginning on the 15th day of the 
month. Then the assembly was dismissed on the 23d day of 
the month. (2 Chronicles 7:10.) This 10th day of the seventh 
month (Jewish sacred year) so particularly marked, falls this 
year on the 30th of September, the day closing the Gentile 
Times. 

The real 14th of Nisan this year seems to be an uncertainty 
among the brethren, some considering it to be April 9th. Page 
470, Vol. VI., states: "The Hebrew year begins in the Spring 
with the first appearance of a new moon after the Spring 
Equinox." Some seeing that the new moon occurred on 
March 26th at 6:9 P.M., Greenwich time, consider the following 
day to be the 1st of Nisan. But the Lord never acknowledged 
either Greenwich or New York time, and the time mentioned 
is 8:30 P.M. Jerusalem time, which was after sunset. The 
appearance of the new moon was therefore on the 27th, and 
the following day, the 28th, was the 1st of Nisan, commencing 
the Jewish sacred year. With all Christian love, dear Pastor, 

Yours in His service, A VINEYARD LABORER.-England. 

READ IT TEN TIMES 

A deeply interested subscriber to THE WATCH TOWER 
writes: 

"Will you please publish the First Chapter of the Second 
Volume of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES in THE WATCH TOWER? 
I have just read it for the tenth time, and its every word is so 
full of meaning, strength and encouragement to me that I 
would like others to have the same." 



Instead of re-publishing the Chapter we refer our readers 
to the Volume, merely approving the above suggestion of re-reading 
it. 



page 288 

INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION CLASSES 

STUDIES AND LECTURES UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



B. S. A. BEAREAN BIBLE STUDIES 
FOR THE MONTH OF OCTOBER 



QUESTIONS FROM MANUAL ON SERIES SECOND OF 
"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES' 

STUDY V. 

Week of October 4 Q.37 to 41 Week of October 18 Q.47 to 5 1 

Week of October 11 Q.42 to 46 Week of October 25 Q.52 to 56 

Question Manuals on Vol II., STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 5c each, or 
50c. per dozen, postpaid. 



page 289 

VOL.XXXV OCTOBER 1 No. 19 
A. D. 1914-A. M. 6043 



CONTENTS 

Rejoicing in Tribulation 291 

Persecution Sure Result of Faithfulness 291 

Present Methods of Persecution 292 

The Master's Crucial Test 292 

How Far Are Our Experiences 

Supervised? 294 

Jehovah's Abiding Presence with His People 295 

Idea of God's Omnipresence an Error 295 

Glorious Inheritance of Spiritual Israel 297 

The Anointing of the Church 297 

"Christ in You, the Hope of Glory" 297 

Conditions of Membership 297 

Why Gethsemane's Agony? 299 

The Cause of the Master's Sorrow 300 

An Unfaithful Treasurer's Fall 301 

"A Root of all Evil" 301 

Oblivion— No Hope of Resurrection 302 

Take Up Thy Cross and Follow Christ 302 

Our Convention Tour 303 

Interesting Letters 303 

page 290 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT 

The cloth bound edition of the Diaglott is permanently 
out of stock. We still have leather edition on hand. These 
are printed on a good grade of Bible paper, round corners, 
red under gold edges, silk sewed, black flexible sealskin binding. 
Price, $2.50, prepaid. With each order for the leather 
Diaglott goes a year's subscription to THE WATCH TOWER. 



R5553 : page 290 

CLASSES CO-OPERATING IN EUREKA DRAMA 
NO. "Y." 

A number of Classes find that the financing of DRAMA NO. 
"Y" is heavier than they can afford, and are planning to join 
their forces with other Classes— two or three Classes, for instance, 
taking the DRAMA between them. This is quite agreeable 
to us. However, the Society does not wish to sell the Parts separately, 
but would rather recommend that the whole outfit be 
ordered together, and handled on a partnership basis. In addition 
to costing less for each Class, it will require fewer 
operators from each Class. 

Incidentally, we urge that the speaking Elders of the 
Classes do not neglect the home service. Younger brethren, 
not used at all to speaking, and some sisters, make very acceptable 
operators for the DRAMA. The speaking Elders 
might follow the DRAMA, giving Chart Talks, etc. 



page 290 

When sending remittances to the Society, please remember 
to make them payable in all cases to the Watch Tower Bible 
and Tract Society. 



R5544: page 291 

REJOICING IN TRIBULATION 

"Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, 
and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for My sake. 
Rejoice, and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward 
in Heaven; for so persecuted they the Prophets 
which were before you."— Matthew 5:11,12. 



THESE words of our Lord are addressed to 

His disciples— not merely His Apostles, who 

were chosen to be His special messengers, 

but all His followers throughout this Age. 

A disciple is a pupil— one who is being 

taught by another. All who are Jesus' disciples 

are to take the message of our text 

to themselves. "Blessed are ye," signifies 

that persecution is a favor from God. Consider 

it as a favor from the Father when 

men shall revile you— not because of the reviling, but because 

they shall say these things of you falsely, for 

Christ's sake. 

No one would choose naturally to be persecuted or to 
have evil spoken against him. The Scriptures say that a 
good name is more to be esteemed than great riches. But 
if it is for Christ's sake that we suffer, we may know that 
the Lord will recompense us. In the Lord's arrangement 
there is to be a time of "evening up" for all we suffer 
here. Thus we lay up treasure in Heaven. All that we 
suffer now is storing up for us a far more exceeding 
and eternal weight of glory, if borne for Him. 

From this standpoint we should really desire persecution. 
We are not to strive for it, not to endeavor to bring 
it upon ourselves unnecessarily; but realizing that if we 
lack persecution we lack one of the evidences of being 
true disciples of the Lord, we rejoice when in the providence 
of God it is our portion. Some, it is true, might be 
reviled for something evil or unwise that they had done. 
There would be no blessing in such an experience. The 
blessing comes when the accusation against us is false and 
is for the Truth's sake. 

"All who will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer 
persecution." Hence we should investigate our lives to 
see whether we have this evidence that we are living 
godly. The Lord is the "True Light that lighteth every 
man that cometh into the world." We are the lesser 
lights. In letting our lights shine faithfully, we shall 
bring upon ourselves persecution. Let us not imagine 
that escape from persecution in our own case is the result 
of superior wisdom or tact on our part. "All who will 
live godly shall suffer persecution," is the promise, the assurance 
of Scripture. We should not court it, but should 
desire this evidence of our faithfulness, and should wish 
to be one of the "blessed" ones, of whom the Master 
speaks in our text. Then let us ask ourselves, Do I have 
persecution for Christ's sake? We should make a prayerful 
examination of our hearts to see whether we are fully 
loyal to God, to see whether we are letting our light 
shine out properly. If we lack this proof of sonship, we 
should inquire, What is the reason? 

PERSECUTION A SURE RESULT OF FAITHFULNESS 

A sister once said to the Editor, "I have no persecution, 
no opposition. Everything seems to be going favorably 



with me." She seemed troubled. We asked the sister 

to study her own heart to see whether or not she was as 

faithful as she knew how to be. Upon her reply we said, 

"Probably you take your persecutions with such grace 

that you are happy under them." The sister replied that 

she would be happy if she thought that was the case. 

Then we told her that the only other explanation we 

could think of was that the Lord was allowing her time 

to gain strength in order that she might bear what would 

come to her later. We told her to pray about it. A year 

or two after we again saw the sister. We recalled the 

circumstance, and asked her if she had yet had any persecution. 

She answered, "Oh, yes. I have had plenty 

of persecution, but I am happy and rejoicing in it!" 

It is impossible to rejoice in persecution until we get 
the right focus on the subject. We cannot do this of 
ourselves, and need, therefore, to take the matter to the 
Lord and confer with Him. After we have had "a little 
talk with Jesus," our faith takes hold on Him. The 
Apostle Paul tells us that we are to be exceeding glad 
and joyful in persecution and affliction for Christ. The 
Apostle Peter also declares, "If ye be reproached for the 
name of Christ, happy are ye; for the spirit of glory and 
of God resteth upon you. On their part He is evil spoken 
of, but on your part He is glorified. But let none of you 
suffer as. ..an evil-doer, or as a busybody in other 
men's matters; yet if any man suffer as a Christian, let 
him glorify God on this behalf."— 1 Peter 4:14,15. 

The Master was not surprised at the attitude of the 
chief priests and religious leaders of His day. He knew 
from the beginning that he would have their opposition 
and hostility, and He warned His disciples not to expect 
otherwise. As to the reason why there should be persecution 
against the Lord and those who faithfully follow in 
His footsteps, He himself tells us, saying, "The darkness 
hateth the light." Darkness stands for Satan, for sin, 
for everything contrary to righteousness. God is represented 
as the great light, "and in Him is no darkness at 
all." Light is healing, beneficial, health-giving. 

They who are of the darkness hate those who are of 
the light, because the light reproves the darkness, and the 
darkness does not like to be reproved. Wherever righteousness 

R5545 : page 292 

is, it is a rebuke to that which is sinful, dark. 
Our Lord stood for the light. He represented the Truth, 
the Heavenly Father. And those who were in darkness 
were in opposition to Him in proportion to their darkness 
—some of these knowingly, others in more or less of 
ignorance. "The god of this world hath blinded the 
minds of all them which believe not." Satan has been 
skilful in putting darkness for light and light for darkness. 

IN GOOD CONSCIENCE MANY HAVE OPPOSED LIGHT 



The fact that many of the world are in opposition to 
God and righteousness is not because as a rule they are 
evil of heart, but because Satan has succeeded in making 
the darkness seem desirable and the light undesirable. It 
was thus in the religious systems of Jesus' day, and we 
believe that it is the same in the religious systems of today. 
Saul of Tarsus was for a time one of those blinded 
by Satan. In persecuting the followers of Jesus he verily 
believed that he was doing God service. But when he 
was apprehended by the Lord and the light was revealed 
to him, he proved himself loyal to God. 

And so we trust it is with some who today oppose the 
light and truth now being proclaimed. They are deluded; 
but if their hearts are fully loyal to the Lord, if they are 
true to their consecration vows, the Truth will be revealed 
to them before "the door is shut"; for "ye, brethren, are 
not in darkness; ye are the children of light." "The wise 
shall understand." Soon the knowledge of the Truth will 
come to the "foolish virgins," and they will wash their 
soiled robes in the blood of Christ— during the great tribulation 
shortly to come to the whole world. And soon, 
too, the light of the knowledge of God is to fill the whole 
earth. But so long as Satan is "the Prince of this world," 
and there are those in the world who have his spirit, and 
those who are followers of the Lord and have His spirit, 
just so long must there be conflict. 

The opposition of the darkness to the light may be 
manifested in different ways. In the days of our Lord 
and the Apostles there were persecutions of Christians by 
Jews. Later, during the long centuries in which the Word 
of God was neglected and the Truth was obscured by 
gross errors, there were persecutions of Protestants by 
Catholics and of Catholics by Protestants and of Jews by 
both— all because of failure to study the Word of God 
and to follow its teachings. But very few in these dark 
times had access to the Word. 

Some of the opposition to our Lord was open, and 
some of it was hidden. Many of the Apostles, like their 
Master, suffered death by violence; and many of the faithful 
down through the Gospel Age have suffered violent 
deaths. At the present time, outward persecution is not 
sanctioned by law, nor is it tolerated to any great extent. 

PRESENT METHODS OF PERSECUTION 

Persecutors have all along used the weapon of reviling, 
slander, saying all manner of evil falsely against 
those who are God's true people. As the Bible declares, 
"Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh." 
Today slanderous charges are made and villainous, opprobrious 
expressions indulged in by opponents of the 
Truth, and this is the chief weapon, because the defamers 
have not the power at present to use open, personal 
violence. Public sentiment and law would not permit it. 
But the persecution is of the same brand, the same spirit 
—merely governed by circumstances and conditions. 



Those who would say all manner of evil falsely, knowing 
the charges are false, are the very kind who would crucify 
or burn at the stake, had they the power. Not being permitted 
to use personal violence by the present laws and 
the general sentiment, these are forced to content themselves 
with bringing all sorts of false charges— seeking to 
assassinate the reputation and destroy the influence of 
those who are proclaiming the Truth, the Word of God. 

The right attitude of the persecuted ones is indicated 
in our text. Instead of feeling downcast and discouraged 
by these experiences, and thinking them strange, evidences 
that God is against us, we should conclude the very reverse. 
We should say to ourselves, "This is the same 
kind of experience that the Lord had, and that His people 
of the past have had." So, "Marvel not if the world 
[especially the religious world— the world that hated Him] 
hate you. Ye know that it hated Me before it hated you," 
forewarned our Master. So far from being discouraged, 
we are to rejoice— not that any could rejoice in the persecution 
for its own sake, for persecution is grievous; 
but we are to rejoice because "great is your reward in 
Heaven." What we do not get here of prosperity, we 
shall get there— in the Kingdom. 

The Socialists say that they intend to have some of the 
good things now! They have not sufficient faith in the 
future blessings to be willing to wait. But the class addressed 
in our text are those who have faith in God and 
His promises, those who are associated with Christ, who 
understand that the experiences of this time are working 
out for them "a far more exceeding and eternal weight of 
glory," and they are content to await God's time. These 
are rejoicing in their hearts, realizing that they are enduring 
for righteousness' sake, that they are on the side 
of God, the side of right, the side of Truth, and realizing 
that these afflictions are only momentary, as it were; for 
the present life is but a mere span compared with the 
eternal life, the glorious immortality, so near at hand, in 
which we shall receive the blessings promised— joy forever 
with the Lord. 

"FOREWARNED IS FOREARMED" 

The Master gave all His followers fair warning that 
they were not to expect the world to appreciate their attitude. 
One might well reason that if one gave up sin and 
adopted a righteous course, the world would esteem him; 
that all would see the worthiness of his character and 
would show him special deference. But we must not 
expect this under the present reign of Sin. It would be 
a very broad way into the Kingdom, and a great many 
then might take this course for the favor of man, for the 
prosperity which it would bring them. The Lord could 
never demonstrate our fitness for the Kingdom honors 
under such conditions. 

If our great Master was called Beelzebub, we cannot 
expect that the members of His Household will be treated 



any better. If He who was perfect was held up to scorn 
as the Prince of Devils, we may expect similar treatment 
to be meted out to His followers by those whom the Adversary 
has blinded; for we are less able to uphold the 
standard of righteousness than was He. When His 
enemies attempted to make His character appear vile in 
the sight of others, He did not retaliate. Jesus did on 
proper occasions point out the wrong-doing, the wrong 
character, of those who were the religious leaders and 
teachers; but He did not do this in a retaliatory sense. 
On various occasions He accused them of being untrue, 
unholy, hypocritical; but He said nothing with a view to 
injuring them, but with the desire to show them their improper 
condition of heart, that they might profit by His 
instruction. He endeavored to help others to see the real 
condition of these blind leaders of the blind, in order to 
prevent them from falling into the ditch toward which 
their leaders were hastening. 

THE MASTER'S CRUCIAL TEST 

When the Scribes, the Pharisees and the Doctors of 
the Law tried to trump up charges against the Master and 

R5545 : page 293 

to put evil constructions upon what He said, He was 
patient under all these trying conditions. He submitted 
to the treatment. It might be asked, Why did God permit 
His Holy Son to suffer such revilings? Why did He not 
smite down those who did so wickedly? The answer is 
that the Father wished to demonstrate the kind of character 
that was pleasing to Him, and He wished to test the 
loyalty of Jesus Himself. Would He be submissive and 
obedient or would He resent these affronts? Would He 
say, "I will have none of this! I did not come into the 
world to bear such indignities"? His painful experiences 
were thus tests of His loyalty to the Father. 

Jesus knew that it was the Father's will that He should 
submit Himself, even unto death, and He had agreed to 
do this. Now the crucial test was: Would He continue 
loyal to the Father and carry out His purposes? If so, 
He would be worthy to be the Messiah, worthy to be the 
Divine Son of God throughout eternity. Our Lord's 
experiences had all been foretold in prophecy. In order 
to fulfil these prophecies it must be that He receive revilings, 
and He must accept them properly. The Apostle 
Peter shows that in this He was a worthy Example to all 
of His followers. As He who was holy, harmless, undefiled, 
did not seek to have the Father bring upon the 
revilers some punishment for their misdoings, so this is an 
example for us; so we should walk in His steps. 

SPIRIT OF PERSECUTION STILL HERE 

We realize that in our case there is none righteous, 



not one who is perfect. So we see that our enemies 
might have some cause to revile us. They might see 
some of our imperfections and have something that they 
could pick at and exaggerate. The Apostle Peter says, 
"Think it not strange concerning the fiery trial which shall 
try you, as though some strange thing happened unto 
you." As they said all manner of evil against our Lord 
falsely, we may be sure that they will say all manner of 
evil falsely against us. And as He bore it patiently, so 
are we to take patiently everything that comes to us, and 
to recognize that nothing can possibly happen to us except 
what the Father will foreknow and permit for our 
good and for His glory. Our Master left us a portion of 
His cup that the Father poured for Him. After the cup 
has all been drained, then will come the glory and the 
honor— but not now. 

We might naturally expect under the changed conditions 
of the present day, that those who are loyal to God 
and His Truth would not be maltreated and persecuted as 
in Jesus' day. But we believe there is another way of 
viewing the matter. We believe that Jesus, if He were 
here in the flesh today, would be persecuted and maligned 
by the worldly-minded, especially in the nominal Church 
systems. Now, instead of crucifying Him literally, or 
roasting Him at the stake, they would "roast" Him before 
the public— a more refined form of persecution— for the 
spirit of persecution is still here. 

In proportion as the followers of Jesus are faithful to 
the teachings of the Master, in that same proportion they 
will be out of harmony with everything opposed to the 
spirit of Christ, and in that same proportion they will be 
misrepresented and persecuted. In Jesus' day there were 
plenty of people who did reverence to the Doctors of the 

R5546 : page 293 

Law, who made broad their phylacteries and were very 

exact as to the letter of the Law, the paying of tithes, etc. 

Jesus did not seek honor and high position. But He appealed 

to the people to turn from sin, to walk in His 

steps, to stand for the Truth as against all unrighteousness 

and untruth. This appeal touched no responsive 

chord in the hearts of the worldly-minded. 

For this reason, we say that the world has not changed, 
that the world is still in opposition to the Word and its 
spirit— particularly the religious world. It is still true, 
however, as in the days of our Lord in the flesh, that the 
common people are inclined to hear the Gospel gladly, if 
not blinded by the religious leaders. But today, as in 
Jesus' time, many are influenced by the false representations 
of those to whom they have been accustomed to 
look as their spiritual shepherds. If then the world 
should come to be in sympathy with us as a people, and 
should speak well of us, and we should become popular, 
we should come under the condemnation expressed in the 
Master's words, "Woe unto you when all men speak well 



of you; for so did their fathers unto the false prophets." 
THINK IT NOT STRANGE 

If, on the contrary, we find that in spite of our best 
endeavors we are beset by opposition, and are viewed 
with suspicion, if unworthy constructions are placed upon 
our unselfish efforts to do good and to carry to others the 
glorious light which has so blessed our own hearts, let us 
not be surprised or feel aggrieved; for undoubtedly it is 
for the same reason that Jesus was opposed. 

The spirit of light is the spirit of Christ. The spirit of 
darkness is of the world. All who have sympathy for that 
which is evil, or have been so blinded that light appears 
as darkness, will oppose the light. There has been so 
much of selfishness in the world, and the people have 
been so often taken advantage of and duped, that we 
cannot wonder that they are slow to believe that there 
are any who can be actuated solely by the motive of 
blessing their fellows. 

It will be to the interest of some to promote priestcraft, 
and they will, therefore, seek to break down whatever 
is inimical to their interests. They say, "You are 
opposing us." We reply that we are only holding up the 
light. But they feel that the light that is reaching the 
people is undermining their influence. We believe that 
this is the secret of much of the strong opposition to the 
Truth that is prevailing in some quarters. There is a 
large number, we believe, who in many respects are good 
men, but who are fighting the light. We may suppose 
that they do not realize what they are doing— that unwittingly 
they are holding on to the ignorance of error, in 
bondage to Sin and Satan. For this reason they are in 
antagonism to those who are lifting the veil from before 
the Lord's people and showing them the character of 
God, that He is Love. Hence the conflict which is going on. 

Another phase of opposition is in respect to financial 
matters. When we claim that what is given to the Lord 
should not be obtained by cajoling the people, should not 
be pulled out of them, worked out of them, extorted from 
them, but that whatever is given should be a free will, 
voluntary offering, we are running counter to the custom 
of centuries. As one Baptist minister said to two of our 
brethren, "Think of Pastor Russell's advertising 'Seats 
free and no collections!' Where would we be if we did 
not have collections, or if the people got the thought that 
it is not the proper thing to pass the collection baskets?" 

THE REBUKE OF HIS PEOPLE SOON TO VANISH 

As our Master was hated without a cause, so let this be 
our experience, as far as possible. Let us see to it that 
the hatred, the malice, the envy and spirit of murder 
which is heaped upon us is entirely undeserved. Let it be 
our earnest endeavor that our lives, as fully as we are 
able, shall reflect the light of the Truth, shall be as noble 



and upright as possible in all things; that our words and 
actions shall glorify the Lord whom we serve, and be 
eloquent of our love for all mankind, especially for the 
Household of Faith, whether enlightened by Present Truth 
as yet or not. 

R5546 : page 294 

In a very little while, we believe, we shall be glorified 
with our Lord, if faithful. Then a new Dispensation will 
be inaugurated; and those who hate us now, chiefly because 
blinded and misled by the Adversary, will bow their 
hearts before us as the Anointed of the Lord, and we shall 
have the blessed privilege of uplifting them, of enlightening 
and forgiving them, of helping them to attain the 
perfect image and likeness of our God. 

HOW FAR ARE OUR EXPERIENCES SUPERVISED? 

The question might arise with some, To what extent 
does God supervise the experiences of His children? The 
Master said, "The cup which My Father hath poured for 
Me, shall I not drink it?" Then how would it be with our 
cup? Is God not also our Father? Are not we members 
of Christ? Who, then, but the Father pours our cup? 
But we know that God is not a participator in any evil 
thing: how, then, has He anything to do with the evils 
that come to His people? 

We answer, There are all manner of evil forces and 
influences surrounding us. These evil influences are of 
Satan and the fallen angels. "Our Adversary, the Devil, 
as a roaring lion walketh about, seeking whom he may 
devour," and the fallen angels also go about seeking how 
they may assault the children of the Lord. But they can 
have no power whatever against us except as the Father 
shall permit it. He will permit no evil influence to touch 
us to our injury as New Creatures, if we keep close to 
Him. And He will prevent harm or injury to our persons, 
unless he sees it will outwork good to us, if we are 
rightly exercised by it. 

ALL THINGS WORKING FOR OUR GOOD 

We have also the opposition of the world. But Satan, 
the Prince of this world, succeeds in blinding the minds 
of men, putting error for Truth, and darkness for light, 
in order to make the way of righteousness and obedience 
to God appear foolish and undesirable and extreme. Those 
who have more or less of the spirit of the world bring 
against the Lord's children in a perfectly natural way, 
aside from the direct influence of the Evil One and his 
cohorts, a certain amount of opposition. For instance, 
our Lord, as the time of His death drew near, was speaking 
to the Apostles about the great climax of His experiences 
—that He would go up to Jerusalem, that men would 
crucify Him, etc. Then Peter said, Lord, Lord, do not 



allow your mind to run in this channel! You have come 
to earth to be the great King ! Do not let the thought 
get into your mind that you are to be crucified! And the 
Lord turned to Peter and said, "Get thee behind Me, 
adversary!" He was the Lord's adversary for the time. 

So the world often become adversaries of the children 
of God in their zeal for what they think the more honorable 
and advantageous course for us. They urge, Do not 
take such an extreme view of things, and you will get 
along better. This is opposition to our consecration vow; 
and when we resist their well-meant efforts, they seek to 
thwart us and to bring us back to their views and ideas. 
The ideal of the world for us as Christians would be, Do 
good, and work for social uplift, for civic reform; build 
hospitals, establish orphanages, etc.; but do not spend so 
much time studying that old Bible, or they will call you 
an extremist or a heretic. So the world tries sympathetically 
to influence us. And our Father permits these influences 
to be brought to bear upon us for our proving. 
We may be sure that the Lord so supervises our experiences 
that nothing can come to us in any way whatsoever 
but what will work for our spiritual good so long as we 
keep ourselves in His love— so long as we wholly abide 
in Him. And death itself is powerless to touch us until 
God's time for us shall have come. 

Our flesh is our constant, ever-present adversary. It 
tries to say, No, no! Do not carry this thing so far! Our 
flesh is inclined to be in harmony with the world. But 
our New Creature replies, Jesus walked the way of 
sacrifice and suffering— and St. Paul, St. Peter and St. 
John. Then the flesh suggests that they were special persons. 
But we know that the Bible teaches us that the 
same course is to be followed by all of the Lord's faithful 
people, and that all these will receive persecution.— 
2 Timothy 3:12. 

All will not be crucified, nor will all be thrust 
in a caldron of boiling oil or be sawn asunder or 
beheaded. We shall probably not have any of these experiences; 
but we must suffer. So we bid our flesh be 
silent, and we rejoice in the experiences that we do have; 
for "if we suffer [with Him], we shall reign with Him." 
(2 Timothy 2:12.) Of course we rejoice! And the world 
says that we are going insane! 

THE PRECIOUS PROMISES OUR STRENGTH 

We are to remember, dear brethren— and this is to be 
a parting thought with us— that nothing can by any means 
harm us, aside from our Father's will. We are promised 
that not one hair of our heads shall be hurt— figuratively. 
And we have the guarantee from the Lord that "all things 
shall work together for good to those that love God," who 
put their trust in Him. Whatever would not be a blessing 
to us will not be permitted. Our trials and tribulations, 
rightly received, are to work out for us "a far more exceeding 
and eternal weight of glory."— 2 Cor. 4:17,18. 



As we look back, we can see that all who have walked 
in the narrow way have received persecution. Whoever 
has been in accord with God has been out of accord with 
the course of this world. There were the Baptists, and 
then the Methodists, who in the early days had persecution 
because they had more light than others. The Presbyterians 
also for a time, because they had greater light 
than others, received persecution. 

R5547 : page 294 

THE NIGHT ALMOST OVER 

And we must expect the same today. Persecution will 
come to those who have the courage of their convictions. 
The Lord tells us that the anointing that we have received 
of Him is for the very purpose that we may show forth 
His praises. (1 Peter 2:9.) We must examine ourselves 
to see if to any extent we have kept our light under a 
bushel. In the 1 1th chapter of Hebrews, St. Paul recounts 
the sufferings of the Prophets and worthies of 
old. Some of them were stoned to death, some sawn 
asunder; they were killed and persecuted in a variety of 
ways. These godly men endured much for righteousness' 
sake. "And all who will live godly in Christ Jesus 
shall suffer persecution." 

But the night is almost over. Soon the Lord will rise 
up. He will stretch forth His hands— His Power— and 
His children shall be delivered. Soon will come the 
glorious Reign of Messiah. Then all who will live righteously 
shall have peace. Altogether, dear friends, our text 
is very precious— one that should encourage our hearts 
and help to guide us on our way, and bring us comfort 
and rejoicing in these closing days of our pilgrimage. 



"Our God is love; He loves to hear our voices; 

In Christ we share the riches of His grace; 
He loves to fold His arms of comfort round us, 

And let us nestle in the children's place. 

"He loves to answer prayer, though not it may be 
In just the way that we should think the best; 

But in His own prospective, perfect judgment 
He gives the blessings and withholds the rest." 



R5547 : page 295 

JEHOVAH'S ABIDING PRESENCE WITH HIS PEOPLE 

"My presence shall go with thee, and 
I will give thee rest."-EXODUS 33:14. 



THE children of Israel had come out of Egypt; 
they had crossed the Red Sea, and had come 
to Mount Sinai. Moses had gone up into 
the Mount, had received the tables of the 
Law, and had come down and found the 
nation in idolatry, worshipping the golden 
calf which they had made. While Moses 
was still in the Mount, the Lord had told 
him that Israel had already turned aside 
from the true God to idols, and was offering 
sacrifice to a molten calf as the god who had brought 
them forth out of Egypt; and He instructed Moses to go 
down to the people. The wrath of God was hot against 
them, and He proposed to Moses that He consume them 
and make of him a great nation. But Moses besought 
the Lord for Israel, and the Lord was entreated of him 
and spared the nation from annihilation, and promised 
him that he should still be their leader. 

Then Moses went down from the Mount. He realized 
that Israel had grievously sinned, and his anger was 
kindled against them. He cast down the tables of the Law, 
which were in his hands, and broke them, when he saw 
and heard the dancing and feasting and shouting around 
the idol which they had set up for themselves. Here was 
a nation delivered by God from Egyptian bondage. The 
Red Sea had opened for them to pass over, by the power 
of Jehovah. They had also received various blessings 
along their way, notable proofs of Divine guidance. Yet 
in spite of all this, here was rebellion and idolatry! What 
could he expect of a people who had so little appreciation 
of God, that they were quickly turned aside? Even 
Moses' own brother, Aaron, led astray by the insistence 
of the people, felt it necessary to co-operate with them in 
the making of the golden calf. 

Then Moses took the calf which they had made, and 
burned it in fire, ground it to powder, scattered it upon 
the water and compelled the children of Israel to drink 
of it. He reproved Aaron, and then stood in the gate of 
the camp and said to all the people, "Who is on Jehovah's 
side? Let him come unto me. And all the sons of Levi 
gathered themselves together unto him. And he said unto 
them, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Put every man 
his sword by his side, and go in and out from gate to 
gate throughout the camp, and slay every man his brother, 
and every man his companion, and every man his neighbor. 
And the children of Levi did according to the word of 
Moses; and there fell of the people that day about three 
thousand men."— Exodus 32:26-28. 

MOSES' CRY AND ITS ANSWER 

The day following, Moses explained to the people how 
great was the sin of which they had been guilty and told 
them that he would go to the Lord in prayer, if peradventure 
he might make atonement for their sin. Then he went 
to the Lord in earnest supplication, pleading that if God 



would not forgive His people, He would also blot out his 
name from His book. But God answered, "Whosoever 
hath sinned against Me, him will I blot out of My book." 
He promised to send His angel before Moses, but assured 
him that He was not yet through dealing with Israel for 
their iniquity. He instructed Moses to tell them of their 
stiffneckedness and to command them in His name to put 
off their ornaments, that He might know what course He 
would pursue with them. 

The people obeyed God. They laid aside their ornaments, 
and humbled themselves and worshipped the Lord. 
Moses, heavy of heart, felt that unless God would in some 
special way give him the necessary wisdom and grace for 
the great task of leading so perverse a people into the 
inheritance which the Lord had promised them if they 
would serve Him, he would be utterly insufficient for the 
undertaking. So he again appealed to God in earnest 
prayer. He told Him of his trepidation and his earnest 
desire for His sustaining help and His presence with him 
in all the way, pleading, This is too great a work for me! 

Then the Lord assured Moses that He would go with 
him, that he should have His presence throughout the 
entire journey to the Promised Land; for he had found 
grace in His sight. He said, "My presence shall go with 
thee, and I will give thee rest." Moses then besought the 
Lord, "Show me Thy glory." It was here that God put 
Moses into the cleft of a rock and covered him with His 
hand while He passed by and let Moses see His glory 
from behind, saying, "No man can see My face and live." 

When God speaks of His presence with His servants 
we are not to think of His being with them in His bodily 
presence, but by His Spirit and through His angelic messengers, 
sustaining, blessing and guiding them. He protects 
them from whatever will harm them. He watches 
over their every interest and tenderly cares for them. 

IDEA OF GOD'S OMNIPRESENCE AN ERROR 

It is a common, but erroneous, thought that God is 
actually present in person everywhere. We do not understand 
the Scriptures to so teach. This generally prevailing 
error that God is everywhere present in person, and 
at the same time, has led many to think of Him as being 
not a person at all, but merely an influence. We understand 
the Bible presentation of the matter to be that God 
has a personal, bodily presence, aside from the power and 
influence which He exerts; and that He has a central seat 
of government, where He resides. 

"Heaven is My Throne, the earth is My footstool," 
says Jehovah. The One who has His seat in Heaven and 
whose footstool is the earth is a great God! But this is, 
of course, a forceful figure of speech, showing His all-embracing 
power and control. God does not actually sit 
in a certain part of His Universe and have His literal 
feet in another part. The language of Scripture accommodates 
itself to the mind of man, and speaks of God as 



if He possessed the same bodily members as humanity. 
But actually we know not what a spirit body is like. "It 
doth not yet appear," even to the saints of the Lord who 
are still in the flesh. 

We understand that the bodily presence of Jehovah is 
in Heaven. Everything in the Bible teaches us that He is 
very great— infinite in power. We read that "the Lord 
looketh down from Heaven; He beholdeth all the sons of 
men. From the place of His habitation He looketh upon 
all the inhabitants of the earth." (Psalm 33:13,14.) He 
has beheld men in their distress, and has provided for 
their deliverance "in due time." But we should clearly 
distinguish between this thought of God's looking down 
from Heaven and the thought that He is personally present 
on earth. We can see a mile off, or five miles off, by 
the power of our sight. We can be a hundred or more 
feet away and be present by the power of our voice; or 
aided by the modern invention of the telephone, we can 
be present by our voice several hundred miles away. In 
that sense of the word the Lord is present everywhere 
throughout His mighty Universe, and His power can be 
exerted everywhere. He has means by which He can be 
cognizant of all earthly affairs and of matters pertaining 
to all His great domain. 

We have these powers only to a very limited extent. 
The telegraph, the telephone, the telescope, etc., are all 
means by which our presence, power and influence are 
extended to a certain degree; but our powers are limited 
to this small planet, except as we further extend them by 
means of prayer, and thus set in motion influences whose 

R5548 : page 296 

extent we are not now able to fathom. But this latter 
privilege is only for a few at present. Not many thus 
have access to the Power which controls the Universe. 
And these who have the privilege of coming to the mighty 
King of Heaven may come only in His appointed way, 
subject to the conditions which He has made. 

We can place no limitations upon the power of 
Jehovah. The inventions of this Time of the End, which 
have increased our powers of communication, and so have 
united all parts of the globe, give us but a very faint conception 
of the infinite powers of the Almighty God. These 
inventions, we believe, will continue to increase and 
multiply through the incoming Age, thus adding more and 
more to the powers and blessings of mankind. These will 
give mankind a greater and greater appreciation of the 
majesty, glory and might of their Creator as they come to 
know Him as He is and to worship Him in spirit and in 
truth. Yet no human mind, even in perfection, will be 
able to comprehend the Mighty Maker of the Universe. 

GOD'S GUIDANCE THROUGH THE WILDERNESS 

So God promised Moses that His presence, His power 



and sustaining grace should go with him all the way. He 

wished Him to understand that he was not to perform his 

great work alone, without all-sufficient backing. "I will 

be with you," was the promise. The Lord's presence was 

indeed with the children of Israel in a very marked manner 

—continually with them from the time they crossed 

the Red Sea, guiding by blessings or by chastisements, as 

they should need. He was with them in the pillar of 

cloud by day and the pillar of fire by night, and by His 

presence in the Shekinah glory which covered the Mercy-seat 

in the Most Holy of the Tabernacle. After the 

Tabernacle was set up by God's instruction, these manifestations 

of His presence, His power and His watchful 

care never failed. The pillar of cloud and of fire guided 

their journeying s; and when these rested, it was an indication 

from God that they were to abide where they were 

until the pillar of cloud or fire again moved from its place. 

Moses had said to the Lord, "If Thy presence go not 
with us, send us not up hence"— this is too great a task 
for any man to accomplish alone. But if Thy presence 
will continue with us, if I can be shown Thy will and be 
continually directed by Thee, then I will be able to lead 
this people through the wilderness journey to the land of 
Canaan. Frequently the Lord spoke to Moses through 
the Tabernacle. Thus we see that the promise of His 
presence with him was fulfilled. The Lord gave him rest. 
He lived to be one hundred and twenty years old, yet was 
not his strength impaired nor his eye dim. We remember 
that there was a time when Moses realized that the work 
of judging the people was too great for him. He took the 
matter to the Lord, and seventy judges were then chosen 
to share his burden. The matters that were too difficult 
for them they brought to Moses. He went to God with all 
his difficulties and burdens and he had continual blessing. 

THE LESSON TO SPIRITUAL ISRAEL 

The experiences of Natural Israel have very important 
lessons for Israel according to the Spirit. A people 
originally a part of the world, we have been invited to 
come out from the world and to journey to a new Country, 
to come into a Heavenly inheritance. We are marching 
toward the glorious Kingdom promised us if we are faithful. 
There are trials and difficulties along the way. But 
our God has promised us, as He promised Moses His 
servant, that His presence shall go with us. Sometimes 
He seems to withdraw from us and to leave us to ourselves; 
but He does not really do so. He tests our loyalty 
and our faith in Him by withholding the sense of His 
presence at times. 

Shall we, then, like Israel of old, conclude that God is 
no more with us, and turn again to the gods we formerly 
worshiped— gods of wealth or of pleasure, gods worshiped 
by the nations around us? Shall we give ourselves up to 
revelry, worldly merry-making and sin? Shall we forget 
all the way by which our God has led us, all the great 



deliverances which the past of our lives have recorded? 

Shall anything— either "tribulation, or distress, or persecution, 

or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword, or life, 

or death, or things present, or things to come, or any other 

thing in creation, be able to separate us from the love 

of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord?" Surely not! 

The closer we live to the Lord, and the greater our 
faith, the more we shall realize the Divine direction, and 
the more we shall make use of the means He has provided 
for our strengthening and upholding. We may call upon 
Him in time of trouble; we may go to Him in prayer; and 
He never fails those who put their trust in Him and earnestly 
seek to walk in His appointed way. This being true, 
we may go forth upon our journey in perfect trust and 
confidence. Having consecrated our all to the Lord, we 
are to seek for His guidance, for His presence is with us, 
in all the affairs of our life. 

Few have such mighty burdens to carry as Moses 
had. But all of God's children have burdens to bear, and 
important responsibilities are resting upon each of us 
who have taken upon us the vows of our God. Each 
member of the Body of Christ, the true Israel of God, is 
privileged to have the continual guidance of the Lord in 
every experience of our wilderness journey. Heavenly 
Manna is furnished for our daily sustenance. The Water 
of Life flows out to us for our daily refreshing, from the 
smitten Rock of Ages. Our Father's chastening rod restrains 
us when we are in danger, or when we wander 
into any forbidden path. How lovingly He brings us back 
into the right way, and heals our wounds, and graciously 
forgives our stumblings and weaknesses! Surely we may 
have implicit confidence in our Heavenly Guide. Thus we 
may rest in Him and be kept in perfect peace. Our hearts 
can truly exclaim with the poet: 

"He has guided my steps where I could not see, 

By ways that I had not known; 
The crooked was straight and the rough made plain 

As I followed the Lord alone. 
I praise His name for the pleasant palms 

And the water-springs by the way; 
For the glowing pillar of fire by night, 

And the sheltering cloud by day. 

"There is light for me on the trackless wild 

As the wonders of old I trace, 
When the God of the whole earth went before 

To search me a resting place! 
Hath He changed for me? Nay, He changeth not; 

He will bring me by some new way, 
Through fire and flood and each crafty foe, 

As safely as yesterday." 

He who so faithfully cared for Israel after the flesh, 
who were a perverse and fickle people, will surely care 
more abundantly for His true, Spiritual Israel, who love 



Him supremely and are daily seeking more fully to know 
His will that they may do it. 

The Apostle Paul, in warning Spiritual Israel not to 
fall after the same example of unbelief of Natural Israel, 
and thus lose their hold on the Lord, says, "We who have 
believed do enter into rest." (Hebrews 4:3.) It was unbelief 
that led to the disobedience and perversity of Israel 
after the flesh, and that led to their final rejection by the 
Lord as His favored people, to whom should apply the 
most precious promises. They have lost forever as a 
nation the special place of favor which was theirs by inheritance. 
What a lesson this should be to Spiritual 

R5548 : page 297 

Israel! And yet we see that today the great mass of 
Spiritual Israel are falling "after the same example of 
unbelief." And they, too, will lose the chief place of 
favor, which was offered them when it was taken from 
unbelieving Natural Israel. Only a faithful "remnant" of 
both Natural and Spiritual Israel will gain the great inheritance 
held out to them by the Lord. 

THE GLORIOUS INHERITANCE OF SPIRITUAL ISRAEL 

Those who prove faithful during the present Dispensation 
shall inherit the most precious things which God has 
to offer, the secret things which were for ages kept hidden, 
but are now revealed to the true saints of God. The 
faithful of past ages shall inherit the earth as rulers and 
princes over mankind, during the glorious Reign of Messiah. 
Gathered to these will be Natural Israel then living. 
They shall have a rich heritage. What remains for them 
in the ages of glory to follow, we may not know with certainty, 
but it will be a blessed portion, we may be sure. 

The faithful of the present Age have been raised to 
"sit in Heavenly places with Christ Jesus"— "the Lion of 
the tribe of Judah." These faithful ones are the twelve 
tribes of Israel who are to reign with Him. These— only 
a Little Flock, in all 144,000— are of the faithful remnant 
of Natural Israel, who were gathered at the beginning of 
this Gospel Age, and the faithful remnant from the Gentile 
Church of this Age. (Revelation 7:4-8; 14:1-5.) 
These have "the peace of God which passeth all understanding," 
and which none others can know. "My peace 
I give unto you," whispers the Master to these. We have 
a rest of faith now; and we are assured that we who have 
entered into this rest shall in due time, if we faint not, 
enter into the complete "rest that remaineth for the people 
of God." This rest we shall enter into when we experience 
our glorious "change" in the First Resurrection, 
when we are transformed in body and made like our 
Lord, and shall see and know as we are now seen and 
known of God. We shall then be blessed with the exceeding 
glory which He has promised— immortality, His 
own nature— and a seat with our Savior in His Throne. 



The God of Israel is indeed ever present with His true 
people. He never forgets us, but is constantly looking out 
for our interests, guarding us in every time of danger, 
providing for our every need, both temporal and spiritual, 
whatever is best for the interest of the New Creature. 

R5549 : page 297 

He reads every thought of our hearts; He marks every 
impulse of devotion and love to Him; He shapes all the 
influences surrounding our lives for our disciplining and 
refining, and hearkens to our every cry for aid and comfort 
and sympathy and fellowship with Him. He is never 
for even a moment forgetful or off guard. "He that 
keepeth Israel neither slumbers nor sleeps." (Psalm 121.) 
If we call Him in the busy hours of the day, or in the 
silent watches of the night, He is near to uphold and sustain 
and protect, whether we can realize His presence at 
all times or not. 

How blessed the assurance of such constant, abiding 
care and faithfulness! No real child of God is devoid of 
these evidences of his precious relationship to the Father 
—the God of Israel. And the saints who have been called 
with the Heavenly Calling, and are faithfully responding, 
are His true Israel in the highest sense, heirs of all His 
choicest promises. How goodly a heritage is ours! 



R5549 : page 297 

THE ANOINTING OF THE CHURCH 

"The anointing which ye have received 
of Him abideth in you."— 1 John 2:27. 

UNDER the Divine arrangement with the 

nation of Israel their high priests, who represented 

the entire priesthood, were inducted 

into office by an anointing with a 

peculiar kind of rich perfume called the holy 

anointing oil. This oil was made according 

to a special prescription, and the people 

were not permitted to use it, upon penalty 

of death. After Israel had become a kingdom, 

the kings were also anointed with this 

holy anointing oil. 

These two offices of priest and king were afterwards 
shown to be typical of a united service which would find 
its antitype in One who was to be a Priest upon His 
Throne— a Royal Priest, a Priestly King. The Scriptures 
give us a type of this united office in the person of 
Melchizedek, of whom it is written that he was king of 
Salem and priest of the Most High God. (Genesis 14:18-20; 
Hebrews 7:1-17.) By thus comparing Scripture with 
Scripture we learn that Messiah, who is to accomplish 



the great work of blessing the world, is to be the One 
who will combine the offices of both king and priest. 

Examining the type closely, we find that the holy 
anointing oil was poured upon the head of the high priest 
only at the time of his induction into office. Poured 
liberally upon his head, the oil ran down to the very 
skirts of his priestly robes of office. As we shall see 
later, this circumstance was also typical. 

Looking forward from the type to the antitype, we 
perceive the Scriptures to teach that there is to be established 
in the earth a great Messianic Kingdom, which will 
bind Satan, restrain all evil influences and give the whole 
world of mankind a full opportunity of reconciliation with 
God. We also understand that there will be done a great 
priestly work in connection with this Kingdom. This also 
will be a part of Messiah's great work, which is thus 
shown to be twofold; as King He will rule mankind with 
a rod of iron for their blessing, and as Priest He will 
instruct, uplift, heal their diseases and awaken the dead. 

"CHRIST IN YOU, THE HOPE OF GLORY" 

The nation of Israel well understood that their Messiah 
was to be the promised Seed of Abraham, who was 
to bless all the families of the earth; but not until the 
time of our Lord's First Advent was it due to be understood 
that this Seed was to consist of more than one individual. 
The Apostle Paul calls our attention to this 
fact and declares that this was the Mystery hidden from 
previous dispensations— that the Messiah was to be, not an 
individual, but a company under one Headship. (Ephesians 3:2-7; 
Colossians 1:25-27.) Furthermore, this Messiah is 
not only to be multitudinous, but is to be gathered from 
amongst many nations. 

Only a few can understand this Mystery; many do not 
comprehend it yet; in fact, it is to be understood only by 
a special class, for whom it is designed. The Scriptures 
show us that the Gospel Age is set aside for the selection 
of this great antitypical King, greater than Solomon; this 
great antitypical Royal Priest, represented by Melchizedek. 
The call of this Age is for those who shall become members 
of this company, the antitypical Priest and King. 

CONDITIONS OF MEMBERSHIP 

All who would become members of this Kingdom class 
must look to our Lord Jesus as the One through whom the 
favor of God is to come to them. "Neither is there salvation 
in any other; for there is none other name under 
Heaven given amongst men whereby we must be saved." 
Since the death and resurrection of Christ a new way to 
life has been opened up. Christ will be the Head of the 
Church which is His Body; and the entire Church will 
complete the great antitypical Prophet, Priest and King— 
the long expected Seed of Abraham.— Galatians 3:8,16,29. 



R5549 : page 298 

Therefore let all who have offered themselves to God 
in consecration take up the cross and follow the Master; 
let them live as nearly as possible the life that He lived, 
walking in His steps. While we cannot be perfect according 
to the flesh, and while God cannot approve anything 
imperfect, yet our perfection is to be that of intention, of 
will; and thus through the Redeemer shall we approve ourselves 
unto Him. 

Reverting to the typical picture of the anointing of the 
Jewish high priest at the time of his induction into office 
and comparing it with the antitype, we perceive that the 
great antitypical Priest was anointed at Jordan. There 
our Lord Jesus, the Head of the Christ company, received 
the Holy Spirit without measure. At Pentecost the antitypical 
anointing oil began to flow down to the Church. 
As in the type the oil poured upon the head of the high 
priest flowed down to the very skirts of his garment, so 
the Holy Spirit has come down from the Head of the 
Church even to the last members of the anointed Body of 
Christ. --Psalm 133:1-3. 

THE ENTIRE CHRIST COMPANY ANOINTED 

We receive this anointing from the Father through 
our Lord Jesus Christ. All things are of the Father and 
all things are by the Son. (1 Corinthians 8:6.) The 
Father bestowed the Holy Spirit upon the Son, and authorized 
Him to bestow it upon His Body. This granting 
of the Holy Spirit was designed to be an anointing for 
the whole Body; for the Father recognized the Body 
when He recognized the Head. When Christ made imputation 
of His merit to cover the blemishes of the Church, 
He made us acceptable to the Father; and this acceptance 
was outwardly manifested by the tongues of fire, etc., 
which came upon the Apostles at Pentecost. This outward 
manifestation was not the most important thing, 
however; for the Apostles might have received the Holy 
Spirit without any special manifestation of Divine Power. 

The tongues of fire which descended at Pentecost, like 
the dove which lighted upon our Lord at His baptism, did 
not continue to be seen. Both the dove and the flame of 
light were merely outward representations for the purpose 
of convincing the beholders that the promised blessing and 
power had come. 

When Cornelius, the first Gentile convert, was received 
into the anointed company, there was another manifestation 
of the fact that the Holy Spirit had been given to the 
followers of Jesus. So there might be many manifestations 
of any fact. Even now God might give a manifestation 
to show that He had bestowed the Holy Spirit; but 
by so doing He would merely be indicating the fact— the 
holy Spirit was already there. The anointing which the 
Church received at Pentecost was the Divine sanction, the 
Divine recognition, of those consecrated to follow in the 



footsteps of our Lord. God thus gave outward demonstration 
of the fact that there was to be a Church. 

Since Pentecost the same Gospel call has gone forth 
throughout all the world— to as many as the Lord our 
God doth call. (Acts 2:39.) Those who accept the terms 
and conditions of that call come into the anointed company. 
When we come into Christ, we come into this 
anointing. We do not get into the Body of Jesus, but we 
come into this symbolical Body of the Anointed— The 
Christ. We enter into this condition in which we are 
"heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ" Jesus our Lord. 
Throughout this Gospel Age this anointing has continued 
in the Church. "The anointing which ye have received 
abideth in you"; it continues in you. Those who never 
come into this anointing will never be of the Church. 

ANOINTING AND BEGETTING 

As to how we may know that we have been begotten 
is another phase of the matter. At Pentecost when the 
Church began, there were outward signs by which this 
anointing was demonstrated— gifts of the Spirit, gifts of 
tongues, etc. These were merely outward gifts, the 
Apostle tells us, and might mean no more than tinkling 
cymbals or sounding brass. (1 Corinthians 13:1-3.) It 
might be that those having the gifts had merely come into 
relationship with God in an outward, formal way, and had 
made no real progress in spiritual things. 

God's arrangement seems to be that after we have 
come into this anointed company and thus may from the 
very beginning speak and think of ourselves as the 
anointed class, there will by and by come a manifestation 
that we have really entered into this class. This evidence 
will not be by our speaking with tongues, etc., but by the 
appearance of the fruits and graces of the Holy Spirit- 
meekness, patience, gentleness, long-suffering, brotherly-kindness, 
love. The manifestation of these fruits would 

R5550 : page 298 

seem to mean that we were becoming more and more 
actuated by the Spirit of Christ. 

But even here we must discriminate between the natural 
disposition and that acquired by growth in grace. 
For instance, there are those who have a great deal of 
patience— too much, in fact; they are indolent. Their 
patience, therefore, is not a fruit of the Spirit. In order 
to distinguish between natural traits and acquired graces 
we are to compare the person's natural disposition with 
his growth in grace and in the fruits of the Spirit. 

The anointing of the Spirit is not altogether the same 
as the begetting of the Spirit. The anointing relates 
merely to the recognition as a member of a class called to 
a special work in the Messianic Kingdom. When we become 
related to God through Christ we become members 
of the anointed company. But while the anointing is represented 



of the whole Church collectively, the begetting of 
the Holy Spirit is an individual matter. In various ways 
the Scriptures explain to us that we are begotten of the 
Holy Spirit by and through the Word of Truth. 

SANCTIFIED THROUGH THE WORD OF TRUTH 

In other words, no one can receive the Holy Spirit 
except he has received the Truth. As an illustration, 
Cornelius was a good man, who prayed much and gave 
alms liberally; all this, however, did not give him the Holy 
Spirit. But when the appropriate time came— the end of 
the seventy weeks of favor to the Jews— Cornelius was 
directed to one who would tell him what he ought to do. 
He was instructed by a holy angel to send for St. Peter 
to come to his house and to tell him words. (Acts 10:22.) 
Words were necessary. 

In order to become members of the Church of Christ, 
there must be intelligent action on our part— it is not 
something of a hocus-pocus. We may know, therefore, 
that no heathen, however noble by nature, could possibly 
be of the Church class; and the same is true of people 
who are civilized. Whoever is to be of the anointed company 
must have a knowledge of the privilege of coming 
into relationship with God through Christ. If any one 
has not had this information, he cannot possibly be of the 
Church class. 

It is the Word of God, the Gospel Message, that will 
bring people into relationship with God. So whoever will 
receive the Holy Spirit must first receive the knowledge 
of the Truth; and then this Truth will operate upon him. 
First he must take his stand for righteousness; next he 
must receive Christ as his Redeemer. Then, after having 
accepted Christ as his Savior, he must go forward and 

R5550 : page 299 

make a consecration of himself to walk in the footsteps 
of our Lord Jesus. If he merely understood that this is 
the will of God, we believe that he would be received of 
the Lord— begotten of the Holy Spirit. Then it would be 
God's order that he receive more instruction, because he 
had taken the proper steps thus far. 

THE PURPOSE OF THE ANOINTING 

How much of this is done automatically we may not 
surely know. As the skilful human being operates largely 
along automatic lines, so the great Creator would doubtless 
have automatic lines along which to work; and one 
step would lead on to one result, and another step to another 
result, etc. Our supposition is that God has some 
great principle operating automatically by which, under 
Christ, all whom He would accept would receive certain 
blessings individually. As soon as the individual would 
take the required steps, he would realize the Divine blessing 



and guidance in his affairs. 

All of the anointed have the mind of the great Head 
of the Church. So we are to seek to abide in Christ individually 
as well as collectively; for as we have come 
into the anointed class, so it is possible for us to go out 
of that class. To abide in Christ, we must, as New Creatures, 
grow in grace, in knowledge and in love; for as 
New Creatures we shall, if faithful to the end of our 
course, be perfected in the First Resurrection, and sit in 
the Throne with our Lord and King.— Revelation 3:21. 



R5550 : page 299 

WHY GETHSEMANE'S AGONY? 

-OCTOBER 18.-MARK 14:32-42.- 

"Watch and pray, that ye enter 
not into temptation. "-MATTHEW 26:41. 

FOLLOWING the institution of the Supper 
which memorializes His death, Jesus and 
His disciples sang a hymn, and then went 
out of the city to the Mount of Olives opposite 
—a distance of perhaps a mile. Apparently 
several important lessons were 
given to the disciples en route to Gethsemane. 
These St. John's Gospel records in 
Chapters 15-17. 

The word Gethsemane signifies an oil 
press— a name that is full of significance. When we remember 
that the Jews used the oil of the olives both for 
food and for light, and that Jesus is the Nourisher as well 
as the Enlightener of the world, we see a special fitness 
in His having His trying experiences, which almost 
crushed His soul, in a garden used for the crushing of 
olives and the extraction of their oil. 

Gethsemane was not a flower garden, but an olive 
orchard or garden. The supposed site is still carefully 
preserved, and guarded by Franciscan monks. In the 
Garden are some very ancient olive trees and one extremely 
old oak. The Garden is supposed to have belonged 
to some of Jesus' friends; and there is claimed to 
be some evidence that John Mark, the writer of the Gospel 
of St. Mark, was the lad who was awakened from 
his slumbers by the commotion incident to Jesus' arrest 
and who came forth in his nightgown.— Mark 14:51,52. 

A NOTE OF WARNING 

En route for Gethsemane, Jesus sought to impress upon 
his disciples the fact that they were entering a great 
crisis. He quoted to them the prophecy, "I will smite 
the Shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered." (Zechariah 13:7.) 



He said to them plainly that as a result they 

would all be offended— discouraged, stumbled, amazed. 

The thing that they were not expecting would occur. 

St. Peter, full of confidence in his own devotion to the 
Lord, denied this, declaring that it would not be true in 
his case— that even though it should be true of all the 
others, he was ready to die with the Master, rather than 
to deny Him. Jesus still insisted that St. Peter was in 
great danger. He was trusting too much to his flesh, and 
not looking to God and prayerfully watching against temptation. 
Indeed, all the disciples joined in the same remonstrance 
against the accusation that Jesus had made. They 
declared themselves loyal and ready for death. How little 
they knew what severe trials would come upon them ! 

Surely there is a lesson here for all the followers of 
Jesus— today as well as then. It is right that we should 
feel ourselves thoroughly determined to be loyal to the 
Lord's Cause to our very last breath; for such a determination 
is very necessary to victory. The mistake made 
by many is in not realizing how severe the trials and 
temptations may become— in not realizing the necessity of 
Heavenly assistance in our every time of need. The 

Apostle wrote, "When I am weak, then am I strong." (2 Corinthians 12:10.) 
By this he doubtless meant, When 

fully loyal to the Lord, I feel my own weakness and insufficiency, 
but I am strong because then I rely especially 
upon Heavenly aid— then I watch and pray, and am thus 
forewarned against the temptations. 

Doubtless in the end of this Age— in the closing days 
of this Gospel Dispensation— there will come Gethsemane 
experiences to the Church of Christ. Those who will 
stand those temptations and trials, and come off victorious, 
will be the ones whose faith and trust in the Lord are 
strong— those who watch and pray lest they enter into 
temptation, and who are thus safeguarded against it. As 
our Lord forewarned St. Peter and the other Apostles of 
their coming trial, so He has forewarned us of the great 
crucial test near at hand. Let us profit by the experiences 
of the Apostles recorded in this lesson. 

"SORROWFUL EVEN UNTO DEATH" 

Arrived at the Garden, Jesus left eight of the Apostles 
near the entrance, and went further into its shades with 
Peter, James and John. All were to watch, to be on 
guard against something that was to occur, something of 
which Jesus knew, but which seemed most improbable to 
the Apostles. They were unable to comprehend the Master's 
pessimism, even though they sympathized with Him. 

It was midnight, and they were accustomed to retiring 
early. The strain of the evening, and the weighty lessons 
which the Master had imparted, reacted in drowsiness. 
They slept, instead of watching and praying. This was 
true even of the three nearest to the Master. 

Wishing to be alone in His communion with the Father, 
Jesus went a stone's throw farther into the shades 



by Himself. Time and again, in the agony which came 
upon Him, He came seeking human sympathy, only to find 
His dearest ones oblivious in sleep. Well had it been expressed 
by the Prophet, "Of the people there was none 
with me." (Isa. 63:3.) He trod the winepress of grief alone. 

Not until He had finished giving admonitions to His 
Apostles and had left some to watch at the entrance of 
the garden, did the Master seem to give special thought 
to Himself and to the momentous events anticipated within 
a few hours. As He was leaving His favorite three, 
He gave utterance to the weight of oppression which 
seemed suddenly to rest down upon His soul. He exclaimed, 
"My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto 
death!"— I feel as if I would die now, without coming to 
that great crisis which is before Me. We read that "He 
was greatly amazed and sore troubled." The Greek is 

R5551 : page 300 

equally strong, signifying utter amazement and sore trouble, 
carrying the thought of loneliness, home-sickness, 
friendlessness. 

This feeling of wretchedness, despair, which suddenly 
came upon the Savior, continued for some time; for He 
went in prayer to the Father three times, petitioning that 
this hour might pass from Him, this terrible oppression 
which was breaking His heart. The Evangelist Luke, who 
was a physician, tells that the Master's distress was such 
that it brought on a bloody sweat. Although this record 
respecting the bloody sweat is not found in some of the 
older manuscripts, nevertheless physicians agree that such 
experiences have occurred to others in great distress. 

THE CAUSE OF THE MASTER'S SORROW 

How shall we explain the great distress of the Master 
in anticipation of His own death, of which He had knowledge 
in advance and of which He had told His disciples, 
assuring them also, as in this lesson, that He would arise 
from the dead on the third day? Why should the thought 
of death have so much more terror for the Redeemer than 
it has had for some of His followers, yes, than it has had 
for people in general? 

Hundreds of martyrs have gone to deaths equally terrible 
or more so. Hundreds have exhibited great courage, 
fortitude, in the face of equally horrible deaths. How 
shall we account for this attitude of the Savior and His 
so earnestly praying that the hour or the cup might pass 
from Him? 

In order to appreciate this question and its proper answer, 
we must remember how different was the Master 
from all the remainder of mankind. A death sentence 
rests upon all the world. We all know that it is merely 
a question of time when we shall die. We all know that 
the dying process can last but a few hours at most. Not 
only have we no hope of escaping death, but by reason 



of being nine-tenths dead already our intelligent faculties 
are more or less benumbed. We are more or less reckless, 
careless, and proportionately fierce. 

There are soldiers who will rush to battle in the face 
of instant death with apparently not a fear, and there are 
horses which will do the same thing. The greatest courage, 
however, is manifested by those who know, understand, 
appreciate fully, just what they are doing and who 
greatly fear death, but who notwithstanding press onward 
in obedience to the command of duty and of love. Jesus 
was such a soldier. He comprehended, as others had not 
comprehended, what death really is. He appreciated, as 
others did not appreciate, the meaning and value of life. 

Jesus had left the Heavenly glory, divesting Himself 
of the higher nature on the spirit plane, exchanging it for 
the human nature, because man had sinned and because 
in the Divine purpose and arrangement He was to die, the 
Just for the unjust, as man's Redemption-price. This was 
the Father's will concerning Him. He tells us that for 
this purpose He came into the world. This thought dominated 
His entire life. Daily He was laying down His 
life, in doing the will of God and in serving humanity. 
Now He had come to the great climax. 

The Heavenly Father had promised that if our Lord 
was faithful in this work given Him to do, He would be 
raised from the dead by Divine Power to the spirit plane 
of being and to a station still higher than He had before. 
He doubted not the Father's faithfulness in this matter, 
nor did he doubt the Father's Power. But the Father's 
provision and promise were conditional; only if our Lord 
would perform His part faithfully would He receive the 
resurrection to the higher life. If in any sense or degree, 
great or small, He should yield to sin, the penalty 
for sin would be upon Him— "Dying, thou shalt die." 

For three and one-half years His life had been devoted 
to God and to the doing of the Divine will. The 
only question was, Had He done the Divine will fully, 
completely, and absolutely, in such a spirit as had been 
pleasing to the Heavenly Father? More than this, could 
He, would He, pass through the experiences of the next 
few hours with proper courage, proper faith, proper obedience; 
or would He fail, and lose His all in death? 

NO ADVOCATE FOR THE MASTER 

Thus we see how different it was with the Master from 
what it is with any of us who seek to walk in His steps. 
We have nothing to lose; for as a race we are all under 
sentence of death. Besides, the followers of Jesus realize 
that He was the Son of God who died for our sins, and 
that His merit compensates for our imperfections because 
we abide in Him and desire to do the Father's will. 

But had the Master failed, there was no one to make 
good for Him. His failure meant everlasting death. Moreover, 
it meant the loss of all those special blessings which 
God had promised Him as a reward for special faithfulness. 



It meant the loss of the great privilege of doing the 
Father's work in uplifting humanity from sin and death 
conditions through the Messianic Kingdom. In a word, 
the Master's personal eternal life was in the balance that 
night in Gethsemane, as also were all His prospects of 
glory, honor, immortality and high exaltation at the right 
hand of the Father, far above angels, principalities and 
powers. 

No wonder the Master, realizing all this, was overwhelmed 
with the thought! No wonder He wished that 
if it were possible for the Divine Plan to be otherwise 
worked out, He might be saved from, spared from, the 
special tribulations and horrible experiences of the hours 
just before Him! Part of the horrors of that experience 
surely was the fact that He must be dealt with as a malefactor, 
as a blasphemer of God, as an enemy of God and 
of righteousness. 

To a debased and depraved soul, this would mean little; 
but to One full of love and loyalty to the Father such 
experiences would be terrible— that He who had sacrificed 
His all, even His Heavenly glory and His earthly interests, 
to do the Father's will, should be considered a blasphemer 
of God, and that He should be crucified as a malefactor, 
an injurious person! What a terrible experience 
to one of the refinement and nobility of soul which Jesus 
possessed, of whom we read that He "was holy, harmless, 
undefiled and separate from sinners"! 

Apparently this ignominy was the thing which Jesus 
prayed might pass away. He did not pray that He might 
not die; for He knew that He had come into the world 
for that purpose, and that only by His death could the 
death penalty resting against the human family be removed. 
He had been talking about His death repeatedly; 
He had not once thought of escaping death. He well 
knew that "flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom 
of God." But He did hope that the Father might have 
some way of passing by the special ignominy of that hour. 
Yet even in His greatest distress the Master prayed, 
"Nevertheless not My will, but Thine, be done." 

STRENGTHENED FROM ON HIGH 

St. Paul assures us that the Master's Gethsemane experiences 
were linked with fear— not fear of dying, but 
fear of remaining dead, fear that He would not be accounted 
of the Father worthy of that glorious resurrection 
which had been promised to Him on condition of absolute 
obedience. St. Paul says, "Who in the days of His 
flesh, when He had offered up prayers and supplications 
with strong crying and tears unto Him that was able to 

R5551 : page 301 

save Him out of death [by resurrection], was heard in 
respect to the things which He feared." (Hebrews 5:7.) 
He was saved out of death; and more than this, He was 



given the assurance by the Father that He would be saved 
out of death. 

This is the explanation of the statement that an angel 
of God appeared to Him in the Garden and strengthened 
Him— gave Him the assurance from the Father that He 
had been faithful up to that moment, and that the Divine 
blessing would be with Him in the hour of trial just at 
hand. From that moment onward, all the fear and agony 
were gone. If the Father had approved Him thus far, 
and if the Father's blessing and smile went with Him, He 
could endure all things, come what might. Throughout 
the remainder of that night and the following day, Jesus 
was the calmest of the calm, under the most trying circumstances. 
He comforted those who wept about Him; 
He committed His mother to the faithful St. John, etc. 

In these experiences of the Master, we find more or 
less a repetition in His disciples. When assured that their 
sins are forgiven, that the Father Himself loves them, that 
His grace is sufficient for them, and that the Redeemer's 
robe of righteousness covers them, the followers of Jesus 
can, under such circumstances, be courageous, even while 
dreading death. 

One great difference between the Master and His followers 
should be remembered: Whereas "of the people 
there were none" with Him, with us it is different; the 
Master is with us, saying, "I will never leave thee nor forsake 
thee." Moreover, with us also there is a fellowship 
of spirit amongst the brethren of Christ, whose words of 
encouragement by the way, as they watch with us and 
pray with us, are a source of strength in every time of 
trouble. Thanking Him for all the Divine provision and 
arrangements, let us go onward to our Gethsemane, strong 
in the strength which God supplies through His Son. 



R5552: page 301 

AN UNFAITHFUL TREASURER'S FALL 

-OCTOBER 25.-MATTHEW 26:14-25,47-50; 27:3-10. 

"Woe unto that man by whom the Son 
of Man is betrayed! "-MATTHEW 26:24. 

JUDAS hailed from the south of Palestine, 
while the other eleven of Jesus' disciples 
were Galileans. It is inferred that because 
of superior business qualities Judas was 
made the treasurer of the Apostolic company. 
The friends of Jesus noted the fact 
that He and His followers needed to give 
their entire time to the heralding of the 
Kingdom. It is not strange, therefore, that 
we read that some voluntarily donated 
money for their support. 



We cannot imagine Jesus and His Apostles begging 
for money or even "passing the hat" for a collection. To 
have done so would have been to discount Jehovah's declaration 
that all the gold, all the silver, and the cattle 
upon a thousand hills are His; and to imply that He 
would have need to ask for assistance. On the contrary, 
the Scriptures tell us that some voluntarily contributed 
to the Master's support; for instance, Joanna the 
wife of Chuza, Herod's steward, and others. (Luke 8:3.) 
Such voluntary donations made it proper that there should 
be a common treasurer for the company, and that he 
should be of superior business acumen. 

We find no reason for believing that Judas was a bad 
man at the time of his selection by Jesus to be one of the 
twelve Apostles. We have every reason to believe that 
he developed a bad character even under the most favorable 
influences— in the continual company of Jesus and 
the other Apostles, and with the Message of the Kingdom 
continually in his ears. There was, however, a beginning 
to his deflection; and the intimation of the Scriptures is 
that his temptation came along the lines of avarice, selfishness, 
love of money. 

"A ROOT OF ALL EVIL" 

Alas, how many honest men have been seduced from 
the path of righteousness by the love of money! We remember 
that one of the serious charges which Jesus 
brought against the Pharisees was that they were money-lovers. 
It would not seem at all strange if it should prove 
to be true that the difficulty with many Christians today 
also is along this line of love of money. It is still true 
that "the love of money is a root of all evil." (1 Timothy 6:10.) 
The Apostle declares that through this deception 
many pierce themselves with sorrows— not always so seriously 
as did Judas, however. 

Judas loved money to such an extent that he was willing 
to betray his Master for thirty pieces of silver which, 
on the basis of labor, amounted to between two hundred 
and three hundred dollars in value. Others have loved 
money to such an extent that they have sold their consciences 
to gain wealth. Some have sold the Truth for 
money believing that they would prosper in business better 
by advocating error. Some have sold the Church for 
money, and have been willing to preach what they did not 
believe for the hire of money and the approval of men. 
Some have sold their nation's interests for money, bartering 
their patriotism. 

Surely there is great need for every one to be on guard 
against the insidious influence of the love of money. But 
we should clearly distinguish between money and the love 
of money; for it is the latter which causes ruin and which 
entraps and ensnares the soul. Money represents toil, 
labor, accumulation; and as such it should be valued for 
the good it can do. But to love money, to serve it, to 
make it an idol and to allow it to alienate our hearts from 



God, we should not do. Let us not forget that this love 
of money was the primal cause of Judas' horrible failure. 

A FULFILMENT OF PROPHECY 

Not at first, but afterward apparently, did the disciples 
learn that Judas, who carried the treasurer's bag, was a 
thief. (John 12:6.) Doubtless even when appropriating 
the moneys contributed to the support of the little company 
of disciples, Judas could have some plausible excuse; 
for sin is always deceptive. Doubtless he would have said, 
"I laid the money away, thinking that the time would 
come when the Master and all of us would have greater 
need for money, and when my provident foresight would 
be appreciated." Brooding on the subject increased his 
desire for money, and led his active business mind to hatch 
out the plot for the betrayal of Jesus. 

The record is that when Judas perceived that Jesus had 
been condemned, he had remorse for his action and took 
back the money to the chief priests, wishing to undo his 
deed. They laughed at him, declaring that it was no concern 
of theirs, but his own, if he had betrayed innocent 
blood. Because the returned money was "blood money," 
they could not put it into the Temple Treasury again. 
Instead, they purchased therewith a piece of cheap land, a 
potter's field, as a burial place for strangers. Thus they 
fulfilled to the very letter a prophecy which they had 
probably forgotten: "Then was fulfilled that which was 
spoken by Jeremy the Prophet, saying, And they took the 
thirty pieces of silver, the price of Him that was valued, 
whom they of the children of Israel did value; and they 

R5552 : page 302 

gave them for the potter's field, as the Lord appointed."— 
Matthew 27:9,10. 

The account implies that Judas was surprised when 
Jesus was condemned. Apparently he surmised that Jesus, 
brought to the crucial test, would assert Himself as the 
Messiah and would triumph over His enemies. Judas thus 
probably thought that he would hasten the establishment 
of the Kingdom, in which he hoped to share. For his 
apology in the end he could say, "Well, we are ahead just 
thirty pieces of silver; and you may thank me for having 
brought matters to a climax sooner than otherwise." Thus 
he would have shone as a hero, as well as have demonstrated 
his financial wisdom and his suitability for the 
post of Grand Treasurer of the Kingdom. But in addition 
to all this, apparently he got a little angry at Jesus 
because the Master had approved of Mary's conduct in 
respect to the spikenard. It was under the impulse of that 
resentment that he first sought the priests and the Scribes 
to negotiate for the betrayal. 

OBLIVION-NO HOPE OF A RESURRECTION 



We are not hereby suggesting excuses for Judas. There 
can be no excuse properly offered for treachery to God 
and His Cause. We are merely pointing out the fact 
that every transgressor must first consent in his own mind 
to his wrong course. In other words, the mind, the conscience, 
must be perverted before each step of sin. Hence 
the words of Jesus are fully justified: "Woe unto that 
man by whom the Son of Man is betrayed! It had been 
good for that man if he had not been born."— Matt. 26:24. 

Such treachery, such willingness to hand over his 
Friend, his Teacher, and the One whom he had accepted 
as the Son of God and through whom he had expected 
the Messianic Kingdom, was perfidy of the worst type. 
With all the other Apostles, Judas had been called to walk 
in the footsteps of Jesus and to become a sharer with 
Him in the sufferings and trials incidental to loyalty to 
the Truth, misunderstood by the people, and if faithful 
to receive with his Master a share in the Heavenly Kingdom, 
which is to bless the world. Judas, with the others, 
had preached the Kingdom, had cast out demons, and had 
healed the sick, by the power of God operating through 
the name of Jesus. He had been constantly with the 
Savior, and knew of the purity of His life, knew of His 
loyalty to God. Therefore all these things constituted his 
responsibility and his guilt. 

The fact that he suicided implied a fulfilment of Jesus' 
words— that Judas wished that he had never been born. 
Every one who suicides declares the same fact. Yet there 
may be hope for other suicides, because of their ignorance, 
and because Christ died for all; and they, with others, 
must surely have a blessing and an opportunity for everlasting 
life as a result. 

But in the case of Judas, all this was discounted by the 
fact that he had already enjoyed such privileges, opportunity 
and knowledge, and had sinned against light and 
knowledge. The declaration that he went to his own place, 
his appropriate place, does not signify that Judas or anybody 
else is to be eternally tortured as a punishment for 
sin. Rather, his own place was oblivion, hopeless oblivion, 
without prospect of a resurrection. He died like a natural 
brute beast, nor could argument be shown why such a 
character, who had enjoyed such privileges, should ever 
have any future opportunity. 

HARMONY OF TWO RECORDS 

As to the fate of Judas, one Scripture tells us that he 
went and hanged himself. (Matthew 27:5.) Another 
Scripture declares that his iniquity accomplished the purchase 
of a field; and that, falling headlong, he burst asunder, 
and his bowels gushed out. (Acts 1:18.) To harmonize 
these two accounts is very simple. Both are true. 
To hang himself, he probably chose the branch of a tree 
overhanging a precipice, where he could the more easily 
accomplish his purpose. If under the strain the rope 
broke, we can readily see how his headlong fall took place. 



However, the matter of his death is of slight importance. 
The important thing is to notice how his soul died, 
in that he lost his relationship with God and with Christ, 
and all hope therefore of a future life. Yet the Master 
was gentle toward him to the very last, giving him every 
opportunity to relent and to retrace his steps, down to 
the very last act. 

The fact that God had foreknown from the beginning 
that one of the Twelve would betray Jesus, the fact that 
the purchase of the field with the blood money had already 
been prophesied, did not alter the responsibility of 
Judas for his own fall. It was not God's foreknowledge 

R5553 : page 302 

that injured Judas, but his own wrong course; and thus 

it is with all. God's knowing from the beginning whatsoever 

will come to pass does not affect us, for He merely 

knows in respect to us what we will do of our own volition, 

our own yielding to avarice, to sin. 

The testimony that Jesus knew in advance who would 
betray Him does not prove that Jesus knew this at the 
time when He chose Judas. He knew that the Scriptures 
intimated that one of His disciples would betray Him; 
and from the beginning of the deflection of Judas toward 
sin, toward avarice, Jesus knew that he must be the one 
who would commit the traitorous deed; yet in no sense of 
the word did Jesus' conduct lead Judas to the wrong, but 
rather forewarned him to the contrary. 



R5553 : page 302 

TAKE UP THY CROSS AND FOLLOW CHRIST 

"If any man will come after Me, let him deny himself, 
take up his cross and follow Me."— Matt. 16:24. 

THIS is a very beautiful and significant text. 
The words "come after Me" have not been 
properly translated; "follow Me" is a better 
translation. It was the custom in ancient 
times for a teacher to have a company of 
his disciples following him; as Socrates did, 
for instance. So our Lord's disciples, pupils, 
followed Him. They traveled with Him that 
they might have the opportunity of continually 
getting instruction from His lips. It 

was so with all the teachers in the olden time. Sometimes, 
as in the case of Gamaliel, they had a school— the 
pupils sat "at the feet of Gamaliel." They would discuss 
questions much as we do at "Bethel" table today. Their 
custom was that the pupils would ask questions and get 
the views of the teacher. 
Jesus said that any one whom He instructed might 



know from the beginning that he would have severe experiences; 

he would not receive great honor. On the 

contrary, those who would be His disciples must take up 

their cross and follow in His footsteps. There would be 

trials all along the journey, He told them. The Lord did 

not wish any to become disciples of His under a misapprehension. 

"Where I am, there shall also My disciple 

be." Those who follow Jesus in this vale of tears, witnessing 

for God and the Truth, will be blessed by Him 

and eventually share in His Messianic glory and honor 

and partake of immortality. 



R5553 : page 303 

OUR CONVENTION TOUR 



The blessing of our Heavenly Father has surely been with 
us richly on our Western Convention Trip. Everywhere the 
European Conflagration was the topic of absorbing interest. 
Many are convinced that the consummation of the Gospel Age 
is at hand, and everywhere the Household of Faith are lifting 
up their heads and rejoicing that their deliverance is drawing 
nigh, as our Lord foretold in His great prophecy, recorded in 
Matthew 24 and parallel Scriptures. 

The Editor and his stenographers left Brooklyn on August 
23 and arrived at Chicago on the 24th, in time for the inauguration 
of the I.B.S.A. Temple. This building has been 
leased by the Chicago friends for the use of the local Ecclesia 
and for the PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION, and is well adapted 
for its purpose, being centrally located. The attendance was 
1250 interested. The attention was excellent. 

From Chicago the party sped westward, and arrived at 
Spokane, Wash., on August 27. Here we spoke to an audience 
of deeply interested Bible Students, numbering about two 
hundred. Thence we went to Everett, August 28, where a 
public meeting had been arranged for. About six hundred 
were present and gave the closest attention to the discourse. 
At Bellingham, August 29, fourteen hundred were at the 
public meeting. 

From Bellingham the little party went to Vancouver, B.C., 
where seven hundred greeted them, giving very close attention 
to the discourse. August 30 was given to Seattle, Wash., 
where twenty-six hundred heard the address. Here, as elsewhere, 
the friends are very earnest and zealous. Thence we 
hastened to Tacoma, August 31, where fifteen hundred were 
in attendance. 

Our next stop was at Santa Cruz, Cal. Here an interesting 
and profitable eight-day Convention of Bible Students was 
in session. The attendance was estimated to be about seven 
hundred and fifty, chiefly from the Pacific States. The party 
remained at the Convention about four days, September 2-4. 
The Photo-Drama was shown four evenings, and was greatly 
enjoyed by many of the citizens. 

September 10 was devoted to a one-day Convention at 



San Diego. Twelve hundred were in attendance at the public 
meeting, and many were turned away, for whose benefit an 
overflow meeting was arranged. September 1 1 the party were 
at Los Angeles, where the attendance was thirty-five hundred. 
September 13, at Salt Lake City, thirty-two hundred 
were in attendance. Thence we went to Denver, September 
15, where six hundred friends listened to the discourse. Next 
was Colorado Springs, September 16, where eight hundred 
were in attendance. 

Then the party went South to Fort Worth, Texas, where 
a three-day Convention was in progress, with four hundred 
and fifty Bible Students present. While this Convention was 
not large, yet it was full of interest. Then came San Antonio, 
September 19, where twenty-one hundred listened with deep 
attention to a discourse on up-to-date topics. At Houston, 
September 20, twenty-four hundred assembled to hear the address, 
and nearly as many were turned away. On September 

21, at Beaumont, Texas, nine hundred listened with deep 
appreciation. 

Continuing our journey, we reached New Orleans, September 

22, where one thousand heard us. At Birmingham, Ala., 
September 24, fifteen hundred were present. Thence we went 
to Atlanta, Ga., where a four-day Convention met, September 
24-27, with approximately four hundred and fifty in attendance, 
the delegates representing many states. After leaving 

our Atlanta friends, we hurried on to the Saratoga 
Convention. 

The Saratoga Convention, although not a large one, was 
an extremely interesting gathering. The Convention proper 
numbered about 950. Some of the meetings ran up considerably 
more through local interest. One thing noticeable in this 
Convention, as well as at all the others, was the meek and 
quiet spirit of those in attendance. While all lifted up their 
heads rejoicing that our deliverance is near and hasteth 
greatly, nevertheless there was no spirit of excitement. Rather 
all seemed to realize that we have received of the Lord 
blessed promises and enlightenments which far more than 
repay for our trials and difficulties. All were resolved that 
the whole world would not compare with the Light and Peace 
and Hope already ours— not to mention the glorious things 
expected soon. Surely we prefer God's time, as well as God's 
Plan, above all others. If He but continue us in His favor, 
in the future as in the past, we may well rejoice in the experiences 
coming day by day, end when they may. 

During our trip we continually encouraged the dear Household 
of Faith to await God's time for the accomplishment of 
our hopes, preferring it to our own, if different. While we 
everywhere noted that patient waiting was manifested, yet, 
on the other hand, we deplored the over-confidence of some 
respecting the exact time of the glorification of the Church. 
We endeavored to distinguish between our hope and the time 
of its fulfilment, and urged all to cast not away their confidence, 
which hath great recompense of reward. However, 
the present great war certainly stimulates our confidence in 
every feature of the Divine Program. 



R5554 : page 303 

INTERESTING LETTERS 
EXTRACT FROM LETTER TO A FRIEND 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

I arrived home safe Friday afternoon after a somewhat 
adventuresome journey. 

At Yarmouth, I had an interesting experience. I was talking 
with two young women from Annapolis, when a young 
minister with whom they were acquainted came up, and they 
introduced me. Noticing my pin, he said in a rather challenging 
tone, "You are a Russellite?" "Yes," I said, "I am 
a Bible Student; and you are an Evolutionist." "Yes," he 
said. I then said, "I am glad to meet you. I have been wanting 
to hear the Evolution doctrine from a real Evolutionist." 

He then proceeded to explain Evolution. I then asked him 
where people would evolve to after death. He said the soul 
kept on evolving. I asked him where men got their souls if 
these were the outcome of Evolution, and monkeys did not 
have any. He replied that surely God could impart to each 
man a soul. He gave me a pamphlet on Evolution by Dr. 
Elliot, and I gave him my WATCH TOWER to read. 

When I had finished, he asked what I thought of it. I said, 
"I think it is very good for a man's idea, but he has no proof 
that it is correct— nothing at all to back it up, no proof of any 
kind. Now, I can prove everything I believe by the Bible." 

Then the minister said, "But the Bible is self-contradictory; 
and what proofs have you that it is correct?" 

"No," I said, "the Bible is not contradictory when you 
understand it; but it is the most harmonious and logical book 
ever written. Any one merely reading it must admit that it 
could not be written by man." 

He finally promised to read some of the STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES, which he told me he had in his home. 

May the Lord's blessing be with you and all the dear 
Bethel family. 

Your Sister in Christ, STELLA H. WATERMAN. 

page 303 
EVER-INCREASING INTEREST AND APPRECIATION 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

Greetings in the name of the Lord, and may Grace, Peace 
and Mercy be multiplied unto you from God our Father and 
our Lord Jesus Christ! 

As a constant reader of THE WATCH TOWER for twelve 
years, with ever-increasing interest and appreciation, words 
fail to express the grand blessings I have received through the 
teachings of its columns. For this I rejoice and am indeed 
thankful. Nevertheless, during this time I have deeply regretted 
to observe that the specially interesting points in which 



THE TOWER abounds were not more generally discussed 
among the brethren. I also noted that many of the 
dear friends, no doubt in their eagerness over the "new TOWER" 
which is so greatly appreciated, read them hurriedly and fail 
to assimilate many of the most precious points. Many do so 
with the thought of re-reading them more carefully later, but 
often fail to do so before the arrival of another TOWER. 

I am glad to note that recently, this is largely being overcome, 
in one instance, at least, by a suggestion from the San 
Francisco Board of Elders and Deacons. A meeting for the 
discussion of these interesting points in THE TOWER was arranged, 
and they are now being discussed during luncheon 
Sunday evenings. All are asked to read their TOWERS critically, 
noting the special points of interest and underscoring them. At 
the table the leader cites each article separately and the friends 
read the points they have underscored, in their proper order, 
with a brief comment. Some of the most important ones are 
then thrown open to the Class for discussion. This, I believe, 
is very helpful and stimulates a critical reading. 

Thanking you again for the columns of THE WATCH TOWER 
and your continued labor of love, I remain with prayers for 
our dear Master's continued blessing and guidance, in which 
Sr. A. joins, Your brother in the Lord, W. E. ABBOTT. --Calif. 



page 305 

VOL. XXXV OCTOBER 15 No. 20 
A. D. 1914-A. M. 6043 



CONTENTS 

View From the Watch Tower 307 

Shortening of the Days of Trouble 307 

Praying for Peace in Europe 307 

Catching Fish with the Gospel Net 308 

The Nature of the Harvest Work 308 

Our Present Attitude 308 

The Royal Law of Love 309 

Love and Consideration for the Weaker 309 

The Beauty of Self- Abnegation 310 

"Trees of Righteousness" 311 

One Cause of Spiritual Decay 312 

Depth of Root Shown in Vigor and 

Fruitage 312 

God's Word Alone Will Upbuild 313 

The Resurrection the Greatest of Miracles 314 

How to Become a New Creature 314 

Personality Makes Soul 315 

Mock Trials of Jesus 316 

Sowing and Reaping 317 

St. Peter Sifted Like Wheat 319 



page 306 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



R5559 : page 306 

SPECIAL FALL VOLUNTEERING 

Already over ten million copies of the regular 1914 Volunteer 
Matter have been distributed in the U.S. and Canada, 
although some places have not yet been supplied. We have a 
large quantity still on hand which, however, is being rapidly 
diminished. Further orders should be sent to us quickly. 

As a follow-up to the regular 1914 ("End of the World") 
edition, we have just issued another number of THE BIBLE 
STUDENTS MONTHLY (Vol. 6, No. 5) treating "The Distress 
of Nations" and the Cause of God's Anger— the prophetic 
aspect of the present European War, and its relation to the 
great Time of Trouble. We recommend the distribution of 
this new matter wherever the "End of the World" edition has 
gone. 

As heretofore, the Society gladly supplies this literature 
gratis, all charges prepaid. Order promptly whatever you can 
judiciously use, stating exactly what localities you expect to 
serve, and the census report of the population of the district. 
Also mention any large proportion of population speaking 
any other language than English. We will have this new 
Volunteer Matter in the German and other languages later on. 

The present is a favorable opportunity, while the eyes and 



ears of the masses are open. Let us labor "while it is day: 
the night cometh, when no man can work." "He that reapeth 
receiveth wages, and gathereth fruit unto life eternal: that 
both he that soweth and he that reapeth may rejoice together." 
--John 9:4; 4:36. 

page 306 

MUSICAL AND DRAMA RECORDS. 

It appears that the Phonograph records used by us are not 
usually kept in stock by music stores— in fact, many records 
are not procurable at all. We will be pleased to supply such 
as may be desired, and have provided a stock in advance. Any 
desiring a list of these records may drop us a post-card and 
have the list by return mail. 



I.B.S.A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 
FOR THE MONTH OF NOVEMBER 

Questions from Manual on Series Second of 
"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 
STUDY V. 

Week of November 1....Q. 57 to 61 Week of November 15... .Q. 67 to 71 
Week of November 8. ...Q. 62 to 66 Week of November 22... .Q. 72 to 76 
Week of November 29.. ..Q. 77 to 81 

Question Manuals on Vol. II., STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 5c. each, 
or 50c. per dozen, postpaid. 



R5554 : page 307 

VIEW FROM THE WATCH TOWER 

THE Scriptures foretell that in the end of this 

Age there will be a cry of "Peace! Peace!!" 

but that there will be no peace. (Jeremiah 6:14.) 

This prophecy has been fulfilled. 

When the First National Arbitration Board 

convened at Geneva, Switzerland, and gave 

its first reward, September 14, 1872, the cry 

of "Universal Peace" went up all over the 

world. There was to be no more war. All 

difficulties between nations were to be settled 

by arbitration. How sadly disappointed must those 

people be who, in spite of the many wars since that time, 

have continued to cry, "Peace! Peace!" Their theory 

has been that universal peace between the nations would 

speedily usher in the Messianic Kingdom. 

How few look to the Word of the Lord to see what 
He has to say on the subject or, looking, entirely disregard 
God's testimony through the Prophets, to the effect 



that the present Age would end and the Millennium 
be inaugurated, not by Peace Conventions and Peace 
Treaties, but by "A Time of Trouble such as was not 
since there was a nation." (Daniel 12:1; Matthew 24:21.) 
The Peace cry has received an especially severe shock 
in the present momentous war, involving more than any 
other war on the earth ever! Instead of the present war 
being nearly over, we incline to expect much more serious 
complications in Europe— that other nations will be 
drawn into the war. 

Notwithstanding the fact that the President and the 
Secretary of State of our own land are wise men, lovers 
and promoters of peace; and notwithstanding the fact 
that there is no apparent reason why our country should 
ever be involved in this war, nevertheless we are apprehensive. 
The great nations of the old world, impoverishing 
themselves and destroying their commercial interests, 
as well as being robbed of hundreds of thousands of valuable 
lives by this war, will not wish to see the United 
States towering high above them in every way by reason 
of its isolation. We may be sure that the crafty 
statesmen of Europe, while professing interest in our 
peace, will really do all in their power to embroil us in 
war by one device or another. 

SHORTENING OF THE DAYS OF TROUBLE 

While desiring peace at home and abroad, all who 
are children of the Highest must desire the Father's will 
to be done— rather than our own. Hence, should the war 
extend even to our own land, in spite of everything we 
can do to the contrary, let us not be discontented, but still 
pray, "Thy will be done!" Let us look beyond the present 
terrible war to the glorious things which God's Word assures 
us lie just beyond it; namely, Messiah's Kingdom. 

When we say that the Kingdom lies just beyond the 
war, we should note the fact that, according to the Scriptures, 
it will not be set up immediately. Following the 
terrible storm of this war will come a great revolution, 
symbolically styled "a great earthquake." (Revelation 16:18.) 
In conjunction with this social revolution, the 
Bible indicates that Churchianity will for a time be 
greatly exalted as the hoped-for power by which the revolution 
may be offset and stopped. During that brief time 
of Babylon's prosperity, the true Church will be in hard 
lines, from the earthly viewpoint. Nevertheless, "all things 
shall work together for good to them that love God, to 
the called according to His purpose." 

Following the revolution and Churchianity's exaltation 
quickly will come the anarchy, which the Bible everywhere 
symbolizes by fire, because of its destructive force 
and influence. That will be the time mentioned by our 
Savior, saying, "Unless those days should be shortened, 
there should no flesh be saved." (Matthew 24:22.) The 
Master tells us, however, that those days of anarchy and 
general strife— "every man's hand against his brother, 



against his neighbor, and no peace to him that goeth out 

or to him that cometh in"— shall be shortened. The establishment 

of the Church in glory, the bringing of the 

Elect into control of the world, will shorten those days 

and inaugurate the Reign of the Prince of Peace. 

PRAYING FOR PEACE IN EUROPE 

Our Honorable President with praiseworthy intent requested 
all Christian people to make October 4 a day of 
prayer for peace in Europe. However, we cannot concur 
with our Worthy President in this matter. Much as we 
appreciate peace— and we have all our life labored to be 
a peacemaker— we cannot pray the Almighty to change 
His plans to conform to those of our Honored President. 

For twenty-five hundred years God, through the Bible 
Prophets, has been telling His people about this great war 
and concerning the more terrible Armageddon which will 
follow it; and can we expect Him to reverse the program 
at our behest? 

The prayers of these millions praying for the prosperity 
of the Germans and the extermination of the Allies, 
and the prayers of other millions for the success of 
the Allies and the annihilation of the Germans, and the 
prayers of the Pope and of our President and other good 
people that this awful war shall promptly cease will all 
go unanswered, if we read our Bible aright. The war 
will proceed and will eventuate in no glorious victory for 

R5554 : page 308 

any nation, but in the horrible mutilation and impoverishment 
of all. Next will follow the awful Armageddon of 
Anarchy. 

After that, peace, lasting peace, may be hoped for, because 
God has declared it! It will be brought in by Messiah's 
Kingdom, for which so long we have prayed— "Thy 
Kingdom come; Thy will be done on earth as in Heaven." 

For forty years we have been proclaiming this very 
war and its glorious outcome, by sermons, oral and 
printed, and in our books on Bible Study in twenty languages. 
Now, when the very year has come and the 
prophecy is being fulfilled, could we consistently ask the 
Almighty to change His program? Nay! Rather, our 
discourse on October 4 was from the Master's words, 
respecting the present "DISTRESS OF NATIONS WITH PERPLEXITY, 
men's hearts failing them for fear of those 
things about to come on the earth."— Luke 21:25,26. 

Our address was given in the New York City Temple 
—fifteen hundred heard for two hours, and many were 
turned away. 



R5554 : page 308 



CATCHING FISH WITH THE GOSPEL NET 

"Jesus saith unto them, Follow Me, and I will 
make you fishers of men."— Matthew 4:19. 

OUR Lord's parables, figures of speech, and 

more or less "dark sayings," such as this 

one, were usually based upon incidents connected 

with His ministry. We remember the 

context here— He had been preaching at the 

Sea of Galilee, and had put out in a boat 

because of the crowd of people. (Luke 5:1-11.) 

The boat was one that was used 

in the fishing business, conducted by Peter, 

James and John. Following this discourse, 

Jesus invited these men to become His disciples, using the 

words, "Follow Me, and I will make you fishers of men." 

R5555 : page 308 

The expression, "fishers of men," suggests many good 
features illustrative of the work of the Gospel Age. In 
fishing for fish there is a carefulness exercised that is 
very necessary to success. The skilful fisherman studies 
what kind of fish-hook to use and what kind of bait to 
put on the hook. Then he catches the fish individually. 
Likewise very much of the work of this Age has been 
an individual work, accomplished by talking to people; 
those engaged in it should seek wisdom from on High 
to put the Message into such form as would be most 
helpful to people— that they may be caught by the Gospel. 

The Lord uses an illustration of a drag-net to represent 
the work of the Gospel Age. During the past eighteen 
centuries the drag-net of the Gospel has been passing 
through the world. It has not caught all the fish; for it 
has been drawn only through certain parts of the earth 
which God chose especially to favor. Thus He has drawn 
a net full; and He says that at the end of this Age there 
will be a sorting of these fish— a putting some back into 
the sea, as not worthy, and a retaining of others. 
Throughout this Age there have been some drawn by the 
Gospel who have been unsuitable for God's work; they 
have not been the kind of people God has wished to 
choose. Therefore He did not make things so plain for 
such that they would stay; but rather has left some subjects 
obscure, in order that such would reject the Truth 
and turn aside. 

THE NATURE OF THE HARVEST WORK 

However, aside from this Parable of the Drag-net, 
which represents the Lord's people as fishers of men, and 
which might in some respects seem applicable only to the 
close of the Gospel Age, there is another commission. The 
general commission to all of the Lord's people applies today. 
It reads, "The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, 



because He hath anointed me to preach the good tidings 
to the meek; to bind up the broken-hearted; to proclaim 
liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to 
the bound; to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, 
and the day of vengeance of our God; to comfort all that 
mourn; to appoint unto them that mourn in Zion; to give 
them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the 
garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness."— Isa. 61:1-3. 

We read that when Jesus was speaking to the people 
He made some remarks, and gave some parables forth, 
which they could not understand. For instance, He said 
that unless they would eat of the flesh and drink of the 
blood of the Son of Man there would be no life in them. 
They said, Who can understand that? Who can accept 
that teaching? So they walked no more with Him— they 
got out of the net. Throughout this Age the Lord has 
been gathering in the fish. But the great work of selecting 
is to be accomplished in the end of this Age. To a 
certain extent in this Age thousands of people have been 
caught in the Gospel net and have been more or less 
brought under the influence of the Truth; and yet they 
are not fit for the Kingdom. Without any unkindness 
towards them, the Lord now simply puts them out of the 
place not suitable to them. 

We are not to think of this comparison as perfectly 
representing this matter— but it has an illustrative power 
to be made useful in this connection. We do not really 
catch men as a fisherman catches a fish. The fisherman 
does the fish more or less harm in taking it out of the 
water, whether with a hook and line or with a drag-net; 
and those fish which are brought up in the drag-net are 
not honored in any manner. Our Lord used this illustration 
merely to represent how the Gospel fishing was to 
be done. His followers were to fish for men for the 
Kingdom— not to do them violence, but to do them good. 
Those who catch fish exercise a great deal of care. While 
catching the fish, they usually hide themselves, so that the 
fish will not see them, but the bait. So in drawing men 
to the Truth we should hide ourselves and throw out as 
bait those features of God's Word which would apply to 
this one or that one with whom we might be dealing. 

Coming down to the present time, the question might 
arise, Is this Gospel Message still to be sent out, or have 
all the fish been caught and the Gospel net drawn to the 
shore, and will there be no more received? We answer 
that we do not so understand. We believe that we are 
away down in the Harvest of the Age; if not fully at 
the end of the Age, we believe that it must be very near. 

OUR PRESENT ATTITUDE 

Looking at the Harvest of the Jewish Age, we see 
that it was forty years long in one sense of the word; 
yet the beginning of that forty years was a very indefinite 
thing— and the closing seemed to extend over six months, 
perhaps. We remember that in the beginning of our 



Lord's ministry there came forty days of His temptation; 

and that then came the time during which His disciples 

were being gathered to Him. For a year there was very 

little of importance accomplished. If we consider His experiences 

as typical, we might consider that the early part 

of the Harvest was not very sharply marked. The Harvest 

seemed to increase as it progressed, and did not culminate 

until after the destruction of Jerusalem. This 

fact leads us to wonder if there are not six months more 

of the Harvest here. 

R5555 : page 309 

The Lord evidently saw that it would be better for us 
that we should walk by faith, not by sight, and that we 
should have the experiences we are having. These experiences 
are excellent. We have been receiving things 
so good, so refreshing to us, that if they continue for six 
months longer, or six years longer, we shall be very glad 
that the Lord has given us this longer opportunity of testifying 
to His goodness. On the other hand, it may be 
that the work of the Harvesting of the "wheat" has been 
fully accomplished, and that the work of the present time 
is for the Great Company class and for the world. 

"So on we go, not knowing, 

We would not if we might; 
We'd rather walk in the dark with God 

Than go alone in the light; 
We'd rather walk by faith with Him 

Than go alone by sight." 

The consummation of the Gospel Age is now upon us. 
We are expecting wonderful things, glorious things. The 
thing especially looked for now is the ending of Gentile 
dominion. The dissolution of the nations is at hand, and 
that disintegration precedes the establishment of Messiah's 
Kingdom. 

At what time the Lord's people will be taken 
beyond the veil the Lord has not fully indicated. 
But we have the assurance that when He shall appear, 
be manifested— when His Epiphania shall occur— we shall 
be with Him, we shall be like Him and see Him as He 
is. He will not begin His great work of establishing the 
Kingdom until the Church shall be with Him. We may 
not understand all that this implies. Perhaps we may be 
with our Lord, in service on this side the veil for a 
while. We had not thought so; but we are simply willing 
that the Lord's will shall be done, whatever it may be, 
and we are waiting for the indications of His providence. 

"We know not what awaits us, 

God kindly veils our eyes, 
And o'er each step of our onward way 

He makes new scenes to rise; 
And every joy He sends us comes 



A sweet and glad surprise. 

"One step we see before us, 

Tis all we need to see, 
The light of Heaven more brightly shines, 

When earth's illusions flee; 
And sweetly through the silence comes 

His loving 'Follow Me.'" 



R5555 : page 309 

THE ROYAL LAW OF LOVE 



"We that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, 

and not to please ourselves. Let every one of us please his neighbor 

for his good to edification; for even 

Christ pleased not Himself. " —Romans 15:1-3. 

AS CHILDREN of God each one of us should 

use care that others are not injured by our 

liberty in Christ; for this would be condemned 

by the Law of Love. The Apostle 

clearly emphasizes this thought in this 

Epistle to the Church at Rome. He points 

out that all the Lord's children are not alike 

"strong in the faith." Some, weak in the 

faith, can see that Jesus is our Redeemer, 

but cannot realize as yet the liberty which 

we as sons have in Christ. One realizes that he is at 

liberty to eat whatever agrees with him; while another, 

who is weak, eats vegetables only, lest he violate some law 

under which he thinks himself. Some Christians condemn 

their brethren who eat meat, seeming to forget that 

our Lord ate flesh. We should learn to grant each other 

full liberty of conscience; the stronger should not despise 

the weaker, nor should the weaker judge others by himself. 

It should be sufficient for each of us to know that 

God accepts the others as well as ourselves, and manifests 

His acceptance by blessing them in His service. 

It is the same with reference to observance of days. 
One esteems one day above another, as the Apostle says; 
while another esteems every day alike. Let each carry 
out fully the conviction of his own mind— whatever he 

R5556 : page 309 

believes to be the will of God for himself. When St. Paul 
urges that each "be fully persuaded in his own mind," he 
does not mean that each should make up his mind what is 
the will of God for all His children, and then stick to his 
opinion, whether right or wrong, and be unwilling to listen 
to or consider the thought of any others of the brethren 
on the subject. On the contrary, he urges growth into 
the full liberty of Christ, counseling patience and consideration 



on the part of the stronger for the weaker. He 
approves the stronger, and plainly states that the brother 
who thinks himself under bondage regarding the eating of 
meat, the observance of Sabbath, etc., is the weak brother. 

LOVE AND CONSIDERATION FOR THE WEAKER 

The Apostle, however, counsels that if the weak 
brother observes such a bondage, not as an attempt to 
"keep the Law," and to justify himself thus before God, 
ignoring Christ's redemption-sacrifice, but because he 
thinks that our Redeemer wishes him to be bound by such 
ordinances and observances, than the stronger ones should 
not rail at his conscientious weakness, or make light of it, 
but should receive him as a brother, trusting that discipline, 
experience and growth in grace and knowledge 
will gradually bring him to the liberty which others of 
the brethren reach more quickly. 

Those strong ones who enter fully into the spirit of 
the Apostle's statement, "It is good neither to eat flesh 
nor to drink wine, nor anything whereby thy brother 
stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak," and deny themselves 
what their consciences permit, have the greater 
blessing. They can realize in an additional degree that 
they are following in the Master's steps; "for even Christ 
pleased not Himself." But if the stronger brethren by 
sarcasm and influence should try to force the weaker ones 
to use a liberty which they do not realize, it would be 
forcing them into sin. Therefore the weaker brethren 
should be left to the liberty of their own consciences. 
The influences of love and truth alone should be brought 
to bear upon them, in the hope of gradually educating 
them to an appreciation of their full privileges as free 
men in Christ. 

Thus the Body of Christ may be full of charity and 
unity, each member carrying out the convictions of his 
own mind as to the Lord's will, and each seeking to grow 
in grace and in knowledge, out of childhood's weakness 
into manhood's strength, as rapidly as possible, being developed 
as he feeds upon God's Word. 

The Apostle refers especially to the observance of days 
as a lack of development, saying (Galatians 4:10,11), 
"Ye observe days, and months, and times, and years. I am 
anxious on your behalf, lest my labor for you has been in 
vain." He here addresses those who had once known 
the liberty of sons of God, but who were now going again 
into bondage through false teaching. He recognized in 
them an evidence that they were not growing into the 
liberty of sons of God, but going backward toward the 
servant condition; and he was fearful that this weakness 
and failure to maintain the liberty of sonship might lead 

R5556 : page 310 

them even to reject the Gospel— that Christ gave Himself 
for our sins— and accept as a gospel a hopeless substitute 



—that Christ would save them if they kept the Law. 

But glorious is the liberty of the sons of God! Let us 
stand fast in it, as the Lord enables us to grasp it in its 
fulness, yet at the same time extending sympathy and 
love to those who have not yet reached the high vantage-ground 
where they can get a broad, comprehensive view 
of our blessed standing in Christ. Thus we bear the infirmities 
of the weak brethren, our companions in the 
Way, and thus we are in harmony with the Law of Love. 

THE BEAUTY OF SELF-ABNEGATION 

The Apostle appears to be drawing to our attention the 
thought that selfishness is the predominating principle of 
the world. People are seeking generally to please themselves 
—often unjustly, sometimes justly, but simply ignoring 
others. He is pointing out that the Christian is to 
take a different course. We are enlisted under the banner 
of Christ, which is the banner of Love. We are to look 
well to the rules which belong to this new order of things 
of which we have become members. The followers of 
Christ, instead of seeking their own selfish interests, are 
to consider the interests of others. Instead of seeking 
their own pleasure, they are to seek the pleasure of others, 
where this will not conflict with their vow of consecration. 

This does not mean that the disciples of Christ are to 
seek their own misery. But they are to give their thought 
and time to pleasing others rather than themselves. The 
Apostle tells us that this is the example set before us by 
our Leader, our Pattern— "For even Christ pleased not 
Himself." He was not in the world to seek to do the 
things pleasing to His own flesh. Quite to the contrary, 
He renounced His own fleshly interests and gratification 
for the benefit of mankind. So we covenant to do when 
we essay to walk in His steps. The denial of self, the 
taking up of the cross, means the renouncing of self-will 
and the leading of an unselfish life, in accord with the 
Divine Pattern and the Divine Plan. 

OUR BRETHREN OUR NEIGHBORS IN CLOSEST SENSE 

With this light upon the Apostle's words, our thought 
is that the primary meaning of the word neighbors as 
used by St. Paul is, those closest to us. That is to say, in 
the Church of Christ, our brethren are our neighbors; 
they are the ones nearest, closest to our hearts. All the 
children of God are our brethren; they are particularly 
our neighbors because they are on our own plane. We 
should especially seek to please these to their edification. 
This does not mean that we should necessarily please 
them according to the flesh; for this would, in many cases 
be quite the reverse of their edification. If we please the 
brethren rightly, we shall rather "stir up their pure 
minds," their spiritual minds, to love and faith and zeal, 
to good works. This implies that the word please is used 
here in a limited sense. 



It is not possible for us to please all people. The direction 
of our energies should be for their good as we have 
opportunity. Even though they be not saints, we should 
"provoke" them— rouse them— "to love and good works" 
as far as possible, and not to anger or malice or sin or 
anything unworthy. We may not always be successful 
in pleasing people to their edification. There may be 
times when even the brethren will feel aggrieved rather 
than pleased at our efforts to serve them. We think, however, 
that if we seek to please them to edification, striving 
to exercise the spirit of a sound mind, our course will 
have the Lord's approval and blessing, whether it has the 
approval of others— even the brethren— or not. 

So let every one of us endeavor to "please his neighbor 
for his good to edification." This matter of neighborhood, 
the condition of nearness, extends, next to the Church, to 
our own families. Of course, as relates to earthly obligations 
and temporal needs our family would have the first 
claim, and would be our neighbors, very near, according 
to the flesh. We should seek to please them for their 
edification— should seek to do them good, as here suggested. 
The same principle would extend, as we can 
readily see, to the butcher, the baker, the ice-man, etc. 
We are not to please any of these to their injury, or in 
any way that would not be for their edification. We are 
not to descend to the world's methods. If they wish to 
tell stories that are not good, not pure, we are not to join 
in with them. If we cannot please them by that which is 
good, we are to avoid unnecessary contact. We are to do 
good and to edify only. 

THE WORLD RECOGNIZES THE GOOD 

We should endeavor to be as pleasing as possible to all 
of our neighbors. If we rebuke in a rude way, it would 
not be pleasing to them, nor would it be likely to edify 
them. There is a way in which we can give proper reproof 
even to very worldly people. The world has a 
higher standard morally and religiously than they would 
be willing to acknowledge. Even if they sneer outwardly, 
in their hearts they recognize that which is good. We 
often find people who are impure in their own lives who 
like the society of the pure. They have some appreciation 
of the good, even though, being defiled themselves, they 
are likely to defile whatever they touch. 

It would not be proper for us to expect that we can do 
a great deal of good to worldly people— at least that much 
fruitage will generally be manifested— at present. Our 
aim should always be to please as far as possible, as far 
as loyalty to God and the Truth will permit. We should 
not be of that "grouchy" sort, always going through the 
world with a quarrel. Rather we should let our light 
shine, that they may see our good works, and thus "glorify 
God in the Day of their visitation." A sweet, kindly spirit 
is the very best recommendation we can give the world 
now of the power of the Truth. The Lord's people should 



be kindly disposed toward all men— in the Church especially, 
but also toward all with whom we come in contact. 

A WORD OF WARNING 

Let us here say that we fear that some of the Lord's 
children who have a husband or a wife not in harmony 
with the Truth, or perhaps more or less in harmony, but 
not fully consecrated to the Lord, make a mistake and 
perhaps by their example prevent the development of 
further interest in the companion. If, for instance, a 
husband is fully consecrated and his wife is not, the husband 
should exercise great care that his zeal for the 
Truth does not lead him to neglect his duty in helping to 
lift the burdens of household care, etc., which are pressing 
upon the wife. Volunteer work, meetings, etc., should not 
so fill his spare time as to cause him to overlook the fact 
that he owes a very special duty to his wife in ministering 
to her real needs or comforts. 

We fear that some have been embittered and hindered 
from a full acceptance of the Truth or led to opposition by 
such lack of loving, thoughtful consideration on the part 
of the companion who professes entire consecration to the 
Lord. If we really are fully the Lord's, our home is the 
first place where this should be demonstrated. No amount 
of zeal for the service of the Truth outside of our homes 
will excuse us from the duties which we owe to our 
families and which they have a right to expect. To fulfil 
our obligations is a real service for the Truth, and often a 
most effectual one. If there is water or coal or wood to 
carry, or other real services which a husband may and 
should render to his wife, these should not be neglected 

R5557 : page 311 

for any other service. If she is willing to attend some of 
the meetings, let him show an appreciation of her company 
and a pleasure to have her go. 

The same rule applies to the consecrated wife. Some 
time and personal service are just requirements of the 
husband; and the wife should exercise the spirit of justice, 
love and of a sound mind along this line, and not 
give her companion just cause to feel that he is forgotten, 
unloved and uncared for because of the wife's new interests. 
The husband is the rightful head of the home. There 
are duties which are obligations to every child of God, 
and to neglect or ignore these may be the cause of incalculable 
harm. The real duties of a husband or wife 
or parent or child are never abrogated when we give 
ourselves to the Lord. Each consecrated saint should seek 
by prayer and by the study of the Word and of Divine 
providences in our lives to discern the will of the Lord 
concerning us, that we may be "living epistles" which 
shall glorify our God, and not bring a reproach upon His 
cause or upon our own Christian profession. 



SACRIFICE OUR SPECIAL MISSION 

Each member of the Royal Priesthood is to remember 
that the special mission of our office, our vocation, our 
calling, in the present time is to sacrifice. One form of 
service frequently not discerned by the Lord's people is 
the opportunity of renouncing our own desires or plans, 
our own methods or preferences, and in the interests of 
peace accepting instead the plans, the desires, the preferences 
of others— where it is merely a matter of personal 
preference. Where we believe the Lord will be as well 
pleased to have the matter the one way or the other, a 
yielding of our own wishes often proves a blessing, both 
to the one yielding and to the one receiving the kindness 
and consideration. This is the spirit of love, the spirit of 
the Master. 

In the Body of Christ the different members have their 
various inherited weaknesses against which they must 
wage a lifelong warfare; and these weaknesses are sometimes 
of such a nature as to interfere to some extent with 
the rights and comforts of others as well as of themselves. 
And just here the Apostle offers the word of counsel, "We, 
then, that are strong, ought to bear the infirmities of the 
weak." This does not imply that we should not expostulate 
with such a one and endeavor to help him to get rid 
of his infirmity. This we should do, in the spirit of meekness 
and kindness, while we humbly endure the trial of 
our patience. It is his good that we are to seek, not chiefly 
our own greater enjoyment of physical or mental comfort. 
We are to please him for his edification, not by simply 
ignoring his fault, as though we considered it right, but, if 
there be suitable opportunity, by kindly urging him to 
strive against it, still humbly and patiently submitting to 
the discomfort it brings to us. 

If this spirit prevails, the Apostle further shows 
(1 Corinthians 12:24-26), there need be no schism in the 
Body; for the members all have a mutual care and a 
mutual love one for another— a care which seeks to encourage 
and strengthen all that is good and to discourage, 
by our example and sometimes by a kindly word, all that 
is unbecoming, and a love that throws its mantle over a 
deformity and endeavors to conceal a fault rather than to 
expose the weaker brother or sister to the reproach of 
the other brethren. Thus, in the true Church of Christ, 
which is knit together in love, if one member suffer, all 
the members suffer with him; or if one member be honored, 
all the members rejoice with him, and to some degree 
share the honor, just as in an earthly family, when one 
member rises to an honorable distinction, all the members 
of the family partake of that honor and joy. 

LET YOUR LIGHT SHINE! 

For such self-sacrificing love how necessary is the 
spirit of humility, gentleness, patience and faith! The 
Master's words along this line are very forceful— "Except 



ye be converted [from the spirit of the world to the 
Spirit of Christ] and become as little children [in meekness 
and teachableness], ye shall not enter into the Kingdom 
of Heaven." This blessed Law of Christ, the Law of 
Love, should rule in all who have taken by consecration 
the name of Christ. Its hallowed influence should radiate 
from us, not only among the brethren, but also out upon 
the world, as a powerful witness to the effect of the grace 
of God in the heart. Thus we shall demonstrate to them 
that the love of God received into a life brings peace and 
harmony and happiness; that it makes noble, devoted, 
faithful husbands; more kind, loyal and tender wives; 
more obedient, loving children; more kind, good neighbors; 
and that it pours "oil on the troubled waters" of all 
our experiences, bringing blessing wherever it reaches. 



R5557 : page 311 

"TREES OF RIGHTEOUSNESS" 

"As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk 
ye in Him, rooted and built up in Him, and established in the 
Faith, as ye have been taught, abounding therein 
with thanksgiving."— Colossians 2:6,7. 

THE context from which our text is taken 

seems to show that the Apostle is contrasting 

with the Gospel hope the various hopes 

which might go to establish one in some 

kind of faith, some kind of belief, some 

kind of course in life. But he is addressing 

those especially who have already accepted 

Jesus Christ as God's Representative 

—those who believe that God has sent His 

Son into the world to be the Redeemer of the 

race of Adam, and by and by to be the Deliverer of mankind 

from the power of sin and death. All those who are 

in Christ Jesus have received Him with this understanding. 

This is the only Message which God has sent; this 

is "the faith which was once delivered to the saints." 

DIVINE VS. HUMAN MESSAGE 

The Apostle Paul urged those to whom he wrote to 
continue in this faith, and not to try to combine earthly 
philosophy with this Heavenly Message. As they had 
received Christ as God's Anointed and their Sufficiency 
in all things— the One "in whom are hidden all the treasures 
of wisdom and knowledge," in whom "dwelleth all 
the fulness of the Deity bodily"— so they were to walk. 
As they had recognized Him as the Heavenly Teacher, 
so they were to continue to make progress in the same 
way— the path that leads to glory, honor and immortality. 
They were not to think for one moment that any human 



teaching could be mixed with the Divine Message; for 
any other doctrine would serve only to confuse the 
Heavenly Message in the minds of the hearers. 

This would not mean, however, that the teachings of 
the Apostles were to be ignored, for the Master especially 
informed the Church that His Twelve Apostles would 
be His mouthpieces. It would, however, guard us against 
any supposition that there would be any other teaching 
or any other Church to take the place of Jesus and His 
Apostles. To these He declared that whatsoever things 
they would bind on earth would be bound in Heaven, and 
whatsoever things they would loose on earth would be 
loosed in Heaven. 

R5557 : page 312 

DEVELOPMENT OF THE SPIRITUAL PLANT 

Having stated the matter in this way, the Apostle 
then uses a forceful illustration to show how we are to 
progress in Christ. Turning from the figure of a man 
walking in Christ as a member of His Body, St. Paul 
gives us the picture of a tree, the root of which goes 
downward and the trunk of which reaches upward, to 
obtain that nourishment which will give it strength and 
stability. As the roots of a tree push themselves downward 
and imbibe the nutriment of the soil, while at the 
same time the trunk and the branches reach up into the 
atmosphere to obtain through the leaves the necessary 
elements of growth, so the mentality of the Christian 
takes hold of the great and precious promises of the 
Word of God, while at the same time he is building 
character through his heart appreciation of these promises, 
in connection with the experiences of life. The 
roots of faith push down deep into the knowledge of the 
Divine Plan, while the tree of character grows higher 
and higher, developing and maturing the rich fruits of 
the Holy Spirit of God; for instruction is a form of 
construction. 

While the Christian is thus growing up in character-likeness 
to our Redeemer, and his roots of faith are reaching 
deep down into the deep things of the Word of God, 
he is becoming established, settled. A tree that is well 
rooted in the earth is hard to uproot. It has a wonderful 
strength, a wonderful hold upon the earth, and requires 
years to die out. So it is with the Christian whose 
faith has been properly established; he should be so fixed, 
so established in the promises of God's Word, that no 
wind of doctrine could overturn his faith. 

Whoever is continually looking around for something 
new is thus demonstrating the fact that he is not established 

R5558 : page 312 

in the Faith. Having once made sure that the 
Divine Plan is the Plan of God, we should not permit 



ourselves to be moved away from that position. On all 
Christians who are thus rooted and grounded in the 
Scriptures the theories of our day— Evolution, Christian 
Science, New Thought, etc.— have no effect whatever. 
No Christian growth will be developed nor spiritual life 
retained unless the soul becomes fixed and settled in the 
Truth as it is in Christ Jesus. 

ONE CAUSE OF SPIRITUAL DECAY 

When once we have seen the Plan of God as revealed 
in Jesus, and have given ourselves to God and the 
study of His Word, the only way to retain our spiritual 
life is to continue in this doctrine, to root ourselves in 
this soil and remain there. We are not to seek other 
fields with the thought that we can receive additional 
nourishment there, and that an admixture of other elements 
with what we have will be advantageous. No theories 
will mix with the Lord's Plan. It is complete; it 
needs no assistance from other systems of belief. Any 
attempt to incorporate with it theories and ideas of men 
will only destroy its value. We can never become rooted 
and built up in Christ by such a course; our spiritual decay, 
and finally our spiritual death, would be the result. 

No child of God can be carried about by every wind 
of doctrine; nor can he indulge in a morbid curiosity as 
to what this or that new theory may teach. To do so is 
very dangerous to the spirituality of a Christian. For 
one who has never known the Truth there might be some 
reason for such a course, but for one who has once thoroughly 
proven what is the Truth in Christ to go hunting 
around for new pastures in which to feed, there is no 
excuse. Either he has never been established in Christ, 
or else he has fallen into a spiritual decline. There is 
an exhaustless field for thought and for mental and spiritual 
activity in the Plan of God in all its varied 
features. 

We believe that God purposed to have a Seed of Abraham 
through whom a blessing would come to all the families 
of the earth. Those who look for the fulfilment of 
this Promise realize that Christ is the Seed of Abraham 
and that His work is to fulfil this Promise. For this purpose 
He came into the world. Later on, the Church learn 
that not only Christ Jesus, the Head, but also the Church, 
His Body, are sharing in the same faith, the same Promise 
made to Abraham. Each individual called has 
the opportunity of coming in, of exercising his faith, and 
of being built up as a member of the Body of Christ. By 
this time the Body of Christ must be nearly complete. 
The hour is at hand when this glorious Seed of Abraham 
is to take hold of the affairs of earth and bring in "the 
Restitution of all things spoken by the mouth of all the 
Holy Prophets since the world began."— Acts 3:19-21. 

As a tree does not breathe the same element at all 
times, and as it is not always flooded with sunshine, but 
needs also the rains and storms for its development, so 



the child of God needs varied experiences and sometimes 

change of environment to best develop all the fruits of 

the Holy Spirit. The great Husbandman knows just 

what experiences and surroundings each one of his 

"trees" needs— how much sunshine, how much rain, how 

much cold and how much heat, how much pruning— and 

He will supply just what is best adapted to each case. 

He knows how to vary these conditions, environments, 

etc., without disturbing the process of rooting and upbuilding, 

but developing it. This we do not know how 

to accomplish, but would bring upon ourselves spiritual 

disaster. So we need to keep ourselves continually under 

the care of the skilful Husbandman and earnestly co-operate 

with Him, that we may grow and become strong 

and immovable— firmly established. 

DEPTH OF ROOT SHOWN IN VIGOR AND FRUITAGE 

The depth and the spread of the roots of a tree are 
shown by the vigor and the fruitage of the tree. A tree 
that is not deeply and firmly grounded can neither bring 
forth rich, luscious fruit nor furnish cool, refreshing 
shade to man. Depth of root is absolutely essential. So 
the Christian's faith must be deeply grounded in Christ; 
and thus shall we also grow up into Him, learning more 
and more what is the Divine will as expressed in Him. 
The rooting process is unseen, and can be judged only 
by its outward manifestations. When there is luxuriant 
foliage there is good rooting. But the growth must not 
stop there; fruit must be borne. And so the spiritual life 
of the child of God will manifest itself more and more in 
its likeness to Christ. To vary the figure, the Christian 
will not only be a branch in the Vine, but will bear rich 
clusters of fruit, which should become more choice in 
quality and size year by year. 

We sometimes see Christians who have little knowledge 
of worldly things and yet have deep spirituality, very 
deep rooting and grounding in Christ, a clear insight into 
the deep things of God, and a rich Christian experience. 
Perhaps their knowledge of the usages of polite society 
is less than that of many others of their brethren; they 
may have had fewer opportunities to learn all these details; 
and yet their ripe attainments in Christ may shame 
some who are more outwardly correct according to the 
social standards of the world. How careful we should be 
that our standards of judgment and our estimates of 
character are fashioned after the pattern of the Master; 
that we look beneath the surface; that we note rather the 

R5558 : page 313 

real, the essential traits, than any outward peculiarities 
of the flesh which in the sight of the Lord would have 
no weight in deciding the quality of the character or the 
place in the Kingdom. 



SUGGESTIONS FOR REFLECTION 

If we are to be the judges of the world in the next 
Age, how shall we be fitted for this position, if we do 
not learn now how to take the proper viewpoint, the 
Lord's viewpoint, in our estimates of our brethren? If 
our love and our esteem for them is gaged by trifles, yea, 
by matters even unworthy of notice in the eyes of the 
Lord, are we developing the qualities of character which 
will fit us to be the judges of the incoming Age? How 
are we growing up into Christ in all things? Let us judge 
ourselves rigidly along these lines, that we may indeed 
become like the Master and win His final approval. 

The Apostle urges that we become established in the 
faith. This term refers to "the faith which was once 
delivered to the saints"— the one Faith. This is to hold 
at all costs. Satan will attempt to divert our minds into 
other channels, to draw our attention to some new thing. 
But the Plan of God, the Truth of God, as revealed in 
Jesus Christ our Lord, is but one. It is given us for our 
instruction in righteousness, "that the man of God may 
be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto every good work." 
(2 Timothy 3:17.) It is not the truth of Geometry or 
Trigonometry or Geology or Astronomy or any other science 
that we are to be diligent to study and be grounded 
and built up in, but God's Word. (John 17:17.) These 
other truths are very well in their way, but we have little 
time to study these now. We shall have all eternity 
in which to learn all the wonders of creation, but now 
we are to apply ourselves especially to the mastery of 
spiritual Truth, the deep things of the Mystery of God, 
revealed to His saints for a specific purpose. 

AN ESTABLISHED CHRISTIAN NOT A BIGOT 

The Truth embraces all the Scriptural teachings relative 
to Christ and His work, to our relationship to Him 
as members of His Body, and to the brethren as fellow-members. 
We are to abide therein with thanksgiving. 
We should familiarize ourselves with the different features 
of this Truth more and more. We should be clear 
in regard to what our Lord taught and why He taught 
it, and should know how to connect the different parts 
of the Truth into a harmonious whole. We are to be 
thoroughly furnished. We are heartily to appreciate the 
loving kindness of our God in revealing to us these glorious 
things, and to realize that we did not originate 
them ourselves, nor was any man the originator of them, 
but the Lord Himself. They are the Gift of God to us, 
and we are to be most thankful for this great Gift, to 
guard it jealously as a priceless treasure, and to let our 
light shine to the glory of God's name. 

The general sentiment among the teachers of false 
doctrine, and even among the world in general, who do 
not believe in the necessity or the advisability of being 
established in faith, is that to be established is to be 



bigoted. Those who are so unfair in mind as to receive 
and tenaciously hold what they have never proven, either 
by sound logic or by the authority of the Word of God, 
are rightly called bigots. But one who in simple, childlike 
faith accepts and firmly holds to what God has inspired, 
what He has caused to be written in His Word 
for our instruction, is not a bigot, but a strong, established 
character, and will stand when all the structures 
built upon the numerous theories and imaginings of men 
shall have fallen. The great Day now upon us is trying 
every man's character-structure, of what sort it is, and 
but very few, even among professed Christians, will stand 
the test. 

The few who will pass safely through this crucial trial 
without loss are those only who have become established 
in the Truth of God, "rooted and grounded and built up 
into Christ." The difference between a strong and steadfast 
Christian and a bigot is that one is established in 
Truth, and the other is established in error. The "fire" 
of this Day will continue to burn and to manifest the 
great difference between the two classes, until all have 
been tested and tried and found worthy or unworthy. 

IMPORTANCE OF SELF-SCRUTINY 

The Apostle's words in our text lead each child of 
God back to the time when he first made his own consecration. 
Under what conditions did we come into Christ? 
We recall that it required much humility on our part to 
acknowledge that we were sinners, utterly unable to save 

R5559 : page 313 

ourselves. Some seem to forget the way in which they 
started. They started with faith and humility and meekness, 
and with the desire to be truly built up into the 
Master's likeness. But they seem by degrees to lose 
sight of this, and begin to grow in another direction 
than straight upward into the fulness of Christ. They 
like to make some show before the world. They come 
to neglect the first principles of Christian development, 
while still talking about the doctrines, or making up doctrines 
of their own. 

Thus gradually these get away from the doctrines 
and the Spirit of Christ. The Apostle puts us on guard 
against these dangers: Are you sure that you ever really 
received Christ? Are you sure that you ever actually 
made a full consecration to God and became a New 
Creature? You should know this. If you did, then make 
sure that you are progressing in His likeness. Without 
careful scrutiny, you might think you are progressing 
when you are not. The Narrow Way remains narrow 
unto the end of the journey; a mere profession of faith 
and a certain round of observances are not sufficient. Remember 
that we are to confess the Lord by our looks, 
by our manner, by all the acts and words of life. 



Only by continual scrutiny of ourselves in the light 
of God's Word can we make real progress in the narrow 
way in which our Master walked. Truth is to become 
brighter and fuller and more luminous as we go onward. 
To this end, we must keep close to the Word and in line 
with His Program. The Lord will not accept little, undeveloped 
sprouts for the Kingdom, but He wants those 
that have grown and matured— strong, sturdy "trees of 
righteousness."— Isaiah 61:3. 

GOD'S WORD ALONE WILL UPBUILD 

Delve into the promises of God more and more. As 
you do this, the roots of faith will draw up the nutriment 
and send it out into your life, and you will grow, just as 
a tree grows, because nourished, fed. Thus alone will 
you become established in The Faith, and not in your 
imaginings nor the imaginings of others. Our faith is to 
grow stronger and more vigorous day by day. It is not 
to be a faith in ourselves or in anything apart from the 
Lord. Faith is what we started with in the beginning, 
and we shall need it in increasing measure as we go on 
in our upward way— faith in God and in His sure Word. 
All that we know as children of the Lord has come to 
us through the channel of Jesus, His holy Apostles, and 
the Prophets of old, and we are to continue feeding at 
this same table with thanksgiving. 

We are not to feel a spirit of bondage, and say to 
ourselves, "I would like to ramble outside; I do not like 
to confine myself merely to what the Bible teaches. I 

R5559 : page 314 

would like more liberty." This disposition is not the spirit 
of a true son of God. Such sentiments encouraged 
would lead to utter spiritual disaster. All such temptations, 
if they come, must be promptly and positively resisted. 
Our spirit should be one of deepest gratitude and 
thankfulness that we have been granted this glorious 
Divine Revelation. Following thus in the Lord's way, 
we find the only true joy, and can make the only true 
progress. "If ye do these things, ye shall never fall, for 
so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly 
into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior 
Jesus Christ."-2 Peter 1:10,11. 



R5559 : page 314 

THE RESURRECTION THE GREATEST OF MIRACLES 

IN HIS New Creation God began to create 
something entirely distinct from anything 
that He had yet made. The New Creature 
is not an earthly creature; and nothing 



that is of the earthly being will ever have 
a part, to our understanding, in that New 
Creation, either now or at any time. Nothing 
will carry over from the human to the 
Divine, the human to the spiritual. 

The human being is more or less depraved. 
He hears something about God, about the Divine nature, 
about what sin is and why it is undesirable, about the 
reconciliation which God has provided through Christ, 
and about the invitation to become joint-heirs with Christ 
in His Heavenly Kingdom. He becomes conscious of all 
this through his ears, through human power; for he has 
no other power. He must have a hearing ear, else he 
would not hear the Message at the present time. Some 
have more of the hearing ear, others have less. The one 
who has more of the hearing ear would be more attentive, 
more pleased, when he learns that God has a provision 
for the assistance of repentant sinners. The more 
the depravity the less of the hearing ear. The depraved 
person lives on a natural plane; therefore he has 
less inclination to come to God and less of the hearing 
ear to hear anything that God would have to say. But 
the class who cannot hear more or less distinctly have had 
their ears dulled by the Adversary with false doctrine. 

HOW TO BECOME A NEW CREATURE 

What we do see, then, is God's gracious invitation 
to become associates with Jesus; and this is Good Tidings 
to those who have the hearing ear. We say, "I am 
glad that God has invited me to come back into His 
family, and that He has provided for the covering of 
my imperfections. I am pleased to know that there is a 
special invitation now to those who have the mind of 
Christ and who desire to walk in His steps, and I gladly 
avail myself of the arrangement. In harmony with this 
invitation I offer myself a living sacrifice." 

When we have done this, we have been converted. In 
what way? We are turned around from the way of sin 
and from our own will, turned to go in the way of 
righteousness. This is conversion. 

The next step for us to take is that of making a consecration 
to become a living sacrifice to God. And that 
consecration of our all to God includes everything that 
belongs to us— all that we are— the human ego, personality 
—all of its hopes, aims, possessions, for the future in 
every shape and form. Everything is included in that 
consecration to God. Did this make us New Creatures? 
No. But it puts us in the way that we are eligible to 
that position. What is the next step? The next step is 
the application of the merit of Jesus, put over us as the 
wedding garment, covering our imperfections. Of what 
use is this to us? It makes us acceptable to God. The 
Apostle tells us to present our bodies living sacrifices, 
holy and acceptable to God, and our reasonable service. 
—Romans 12:1. 



The next thing in order is for God to indicate His 
acceptance of that which we offer and which is accepted. 
This He does by begetting us of the Holy Spirit. Just 
what this means we are not wise enough to know. God 
foreknew Jesus Christ as the Head of the Body and He 
foreknew us, the class predestined to be the members 
of that Body. And now by coming under the 
required conditions we are accepted as members 
of this class. We are to show our devotion and our 
loyalty, to show that our surrender of our will is a genuine 
thing. This we do by being exercised by our 
contact with the Truth. If we have been in error, our 
loyalty will be determined by the way in which we 
weigh the matter and decide it. If we decide the matter 
slowly, it means that we are a little obtuse. If we decide 
the matter quickly between the truth and the error, 
it means that we are loyal to God's will, His Truth, 
and thus we are all the more pleasing to Him, as 
a loyal child. If we decide the matter slowly He will 
not cut us off, but perhaps will give us some chastisements; 
for we are in the School of Christ. 

HOW THE NEW CREATURE GROWS 

In one picture we are represented as embryos, not yet 
born; in another picture as children, not yet having 
reached manhood, but as growing in grace and knowledge 

R5560 : page 314 

and character. Either picture is very beautiful. But 
we cannot mix them. We cannot imagine the child not 
born as growing in knowledge, etc., nor can we imagine 
one developing toward manhood as an embryo. In the 
embryo picture we perceive that every human child must 
grow, and that in order to do so it is dependent on nourishment. 
If some accident happen, that embryo might 
die; if there were some miscarriage, the embryo might 
never be brought forth into life. We see that from the 
time we became New Creatures in Christ, we began to 
develop the new mind. The brain is the same as before 
the new will developed, and the body the same; just as a 
mother is the same person that she was before the child 
was begotten. 

Let us consider the subject from another viewpoint. 
This New Creature is the governing power— the only 
thing that God recognizes, and that we recognize, as 
having control of this mortal body. Why does the New 
Creature have the control? Because the will is transferred 
from human interest to God's will. God's will is 
now our will as New Creatures. We have full rights 
and control in this body, whose earthly rights are given 
up. God has accepted the sacrifice, and the New Creature 
must be loyal in controlling the body in accord with the 
Divine will. Henceforth we are to see that the 
mortal body is kept under. Some people might say that 



we are treating it unkindly; but from God's standpoint 
we are treating it as wisely as possible, in order to do 
God's will. If it were God's will that we undertake some 
great work, we would certainly put the body through a 
course of training to fit it for the undertaking. 

Practically, the New Creature says to the mortal 
body, "You are my body only for the time being. I am 
the New Creature, desiring to use you in God's service, 
in order that I may see how obedient I can be to God's 

R5560 : page 315 

Cause." The old creature might say, "But I have some 
rights." The New Creature replies, "You have no rights. 
I shall use my judgment as to what you shall do or not 
do." If the New Creature yielded to the old creature, 
the latter would prosper in its own aims and projects, 
and the New Creature would be puny and weak in courage, 
strength and everything else. The New Creature is 
to assume control of all the interests of the old creature, 
to sacrifice all that is to be sacrificed to the will of God. 

PERSONALITY MAKES SOUL 

The more we do this, the stronger we become spiritually; 
and the stronger we become spiritually, the more 
ready we shall be for our change. What is our change? 
It is the spirit birth in the resurrection. Not one atom of 
this old body will go into the new condition. What, 
then, will go into the new condition? It is the New 
Creature? What is the New Creature? It is the ego 
which lives in the mortal body, which feeds not upon 
natural bread, but upon every word that proceeds out of 
the mouth of God. 

If God has a work for the New Creature to do in the 
present time, then we are to take reasonable care of this 
body. To misuse the body would not be in harmony with 
God's will. The body has become the New Creature's 
property. The New Creature will take the dominant 
control of that body. A spiritual body would not be a 
soul without the ego, the personality, the being, any more 
than would the earthly body. It is the ego, the personality, 
that makes the soul. Simply one hundred and fifty 
pounds or so of matter does not make soul. 

The soul is the thing that comes down from the father 
to the child. Adam and Eve gave soul to their children, 
and so that spark of life which God gave originally continues 
to come down. In the resurrection that soul, or 
spark of life, is carried over and becomes the new soul. 
This spark of life which God recognizes all the while 
and preserves in all of its development, is to be transferred 
to a new body that will be fully in harmony with 
it. There will not be any discord, any inharmony, between 
the new mind and the new body. If the new mind 
grows very strong now, it will have all the more difficulty 
and conflict with the old body and will have all the more 



desire for the new body. 

PROCESS OF TRANSFERENCE NOT KNOWN 

Can you explain to us how this new life will be transferred 
to the new body? We cannot. In the case of 
our Lord Jesus, we have the explanation that the Logos, 
a spirit being, left the spirit condition, came to earthly 
conditions and became the personality, ego, man, in 
earthly conditions. And we have the account that this 
same One who came into the world, the same One who 
died and went away again to Heaven, is coming again. 
It is the same ego. It has changed its character, its 
power, according to the different body. At first it had a 
spiritual body; afterward it had a human body; it now 
has a Divine body, superior to all. But the ego, 
the personality, has persisted with all of these bodies. 

Our ego, our personality, is to pass from this earthly 
body and be given a new body. The power by which this 
can be done is Divine Power. If anybody can explain 
what that is, of what the first man was made a soul, 
perhaps we could explain how it is with the New Creature. 
Or if any one can explain what makes the germ 
of wheat grow, perhaps we can explain how the New 
Creature has this germ and how it grows. We must 
trust in God's Power for this whole matter of the resurrection, 
not only of the New Creature, but also of the 
world in general. 

Whoever doubts Divine Power cannot believe in a 
resurrection. We cannot imagine, for instance, how 
Moses or Abraham or anyone else of the remote past 
can be raised to life so that he would know himself, read 
the story of his life in the Bible, and remember that the 
events therein recorded were true. How that can be 
God only knows. We believe it because God says it. If 
we knew how to do it, perhaps we could make a resurrection 
ourselves. 

A HELPFUL ILLUSTRATION 

But it is just as easy to understand about the resurrection 
of a man to the human plane and the bringing 
of him into a new human body as to understand how 
the New Creature, the new soul, can be brought into its 
new body. It is the New Creature that will get the new 
body. When we get our spirit bodies we shall know all 
about the process; for it is written that when we get the 
spiritual bodies we shall know even as we are known.— 
1 Corinthians 13:12. 

Meantime, however, we might find illustrations to help 
us to understand. Take, for instance, the making of a 
record for the phonograph. Something went out of the 
mouth, and made little indentations on a cylinder of wax. 
Later on, from that very wax cylinder the voice of the 
speaker is reproduced. Now, then, if we know how to 
reproduce the human voice, it gives us a little illustration 



of how God, with His unlimited Power, can preserve 
everything recorded by the convolutions of our brain, 
and of how these could be preserved in the future absolutely 
—everything by which we could know ourselves in 
the future. We do not know ourselves by the number of 
pounds weight we are or by the difference in our beard. 
We know ourselves by something in our mind. But if 
our reason be gone, then we would not know ourselves. 

God has made us New Creatures. He is the All-powerful 
One who knows how to do this. And the more we 
come to know about Him and the length, the depth, the 
height and the breadth of His Wisdom, the more we 
know how to appreciate all He has told us, and the more 
we have absolute confidence in Him. It is wise foolishness 
that God should promise a resurrection. The world 
cannot understand— to them it is foolishness. They cannot 
believe in a resurrection; therefore they cannot have 
the joy we can have through the exercise of our faith. 



page 315 

THE LIGHT OF THE WORD 

"The light of the Word shines brighter and brighter 
As wider and wider God opens my eyes; 

My trials and burdens seem lighter and lighter, 
And fairer and fairer the Heavenly prize. 

"The wealth of this world seems poorer and poorer, 
And farther and farther it fades from my sight. 

The prize of my calling seems surer and surer 
As straighter and straighter I walk in the light. 

"My waiting on Jesus is dearer and dearer 
As longer and longer I lie on His breast. 

Without Him I'm nothing, seems clearer and clearer, 
And more and more sweetly in Jesus I rest. 

"My joy in my Savior is growing and growing 
As stronger and stronger I trust in His Word. 

My peace like a river is flowing and flowing, 
As harder and harder I lean on the Lord. 

"My praise and thanksgiving are swelling and swelling 
As broader and broader the promises prove; 

The wonderful story I'm telling and telling, 

And more and more sweetly I rest in His love." 



R5560 : page 316 

MOCK TRIALS OF JESUS 



--NOVEMBER 1. -MATTHEW 26:57-68.- 

"As a lamb that is led to the slaughter, and as a sheep before its 
shearers is dumb, so He opened not His mouth."— Isaiah 53:7. 

JUSTICE is a quality of mind which naturally 
and properly commends itself to every 
rational being, civilized or heathen. Every 
nation strives, therefore, to have just laws 
upon its statute books; and it must be admitted 
that many of the laws of the world, 
including those of Lycurgus and those of 
Caesar, have manifested much wisdom and 
much justice. 

But the Jewish Law, given by God Himself 
at Mount Sinai at the hand of Moses, properly claims 
the highest place; and the laws of all nations in any 
degree claiming to recognize Christianity properly seek 
to represent the principles of justice on the highest plane. 
Nevertheless, when it comes to the interpreting of these 
laws, and their application to individual cases, we find 
that everywhere there is a tendency to make excuse and 
depart from the laws and from the principles of justice 
under the claim that the circumstances and conditions of 
the case make necessary such a violation of law and of 
just principles. 

The story of the conviction of Jesus unjustly, by a 
Jewish court and in violation of Jewish Law, must not 
surprise us nor be thought different from what has occurred 
in numerous cases in other courts. 

AN ILLEGAL ARREST 

Jesus was arrested, neither by Pilate's orders nor by 
Herod's nor by their soldiers. His arrest was made at the 
instance of the high priest and his associates, who particularly 
had concluded that the life and ministry of Jesus 
were inimical to their plans and projects and to what they 

R5561 : page 316 

considered to be the best interests of Judaism. The murder 
of Jesus was plotted in advance. But the murderers 
sought some excuse for their conduct, as all murderers 
do; and, being politicians, they sought also an outward 
form or semblance of justice, having regard for the opinions 
of others of tenderer consciences than themselves. 

Under the charge of the priests were a number of men 
who served as policemen in the Temple and its precincts. 
These were the servants of the high priest; and, armed 
with maces, swords and lanterns, they followed Judas, who 
knew beforehand that on this particular night Jesus did 
not intend to go to Bethany as usual, but purposed to 
rendezvous with His disciples in the Gethsemane olive 
orchard, or garden. 

They brought Jesus directly to the house of Annas, a 



superannuated high priest, whose son-in-law Caiaphas 
officiated in his stead. Annas attempted an examination 
of Jesus, but met with little success, and turned Him over 
to Caiaphas, whose house adjoined, being in the same 
courtyard. There, at probably three o'clock in the morning, 
the Sanhedrin had gathered. 

The plot for Jesus' death was deeply laid. The hours 
between the time when Judas left Jesus and the other 
Apostles at the Passover Supper and the time of this trial 
were spent in gathering the Sanhedrin from their various 
homes throughout the city. Conditions were considered 
desperate enough to justify all this arrangement for the 
murder of Him who "spake as never man spake"— because 
He taught the people— because His teaching of the people 
was weakening the power of the Scribes and the Pharisees 
and of the traditions of the elders.— John 7:46; Matt. 26:55. 

The theory of erroneous religious teachings is that 
ignorance and superstition are necessary for the preservation 
of sacerdotal power. Thus always has Error hated 
the Truth; thus always has Darkness hated the Light. 
The condemnation of Jesus was merely another triumph 
of Darkness over the Light. Yet it was a triumph only in 
appearance; for God's Plan was thus being carried out. 
The great Atonement for sin was thus being arranged for, 
the result of which will be the ultimate overthrow of sin, 
Satan and death, and the establishment of righteousness 
and truth worldwide and everlastingly. 

AN INIQUITOUS TRIAL 

The Sanhedrin was composed of seventy of the most 
influential Jews, an ecclesiastical court, whose voice properly 
had great influence with the Roman Governor, in 
whose hands lay, at this time, the power of life or death. 

Caiaphas not only filled the office of high priest, but in 
this particular case he acted as prosecuting attorney. 
While gathering the Sanhedrin, he had not been forgetful 
to collect witnesses, who are said to have been suborned, 
or bribed, to give their testimony. Of course, no attempt 
was made to bring before the Sanhedrin any of those 
whom Jesus had relieved from the power of evil spirits, 
nor any of those whose blind eyes He had opened or whose 
deaf ears He had unstopped, nor any of those whom He 
had awakened from the sleep of death. The high priest 
knew, for instance, particularly about the case of Lazarus, 
but they desired no such testimony. They were bent upon 
murder, to be accomplished in an apparently judicial form. 

Caiaphas called the witnesses, but found that their 
testimonies were self-contradictory; and it was a part of 
the Jewish Law that at least two witnesses must agree 
before any matter could be considered proven. Finally, 
two partly agreed that they had heard Jesus say something 
about the Temple— that He was able to destroy it and rebuild 
it in three days. They probably had misunderstood 
Jesus. However, their testimonies were too slight to 
make a basis for conviction. 



As a last resort, Caiaphas attempted to get Jesus Himself 
to say something which he could construe to be 
blasphemy. To the various questions Jesus answered 
nothing; but now Caiaphas exclaimed, "I adjure Thee by 
the living God, tell us truly, Art Thou the Messiah?" It 
would not do for Jesus to keep quiet and fail to answer 
this question. To have done so would have been to deny 
this great truth and to have failed to give proper witness 
to the Sanhedrin. He therefore avowed that Caiaphas 
had expressed the truth in what he had applied. 

Caiaphas leaped to his feet, anxious to grasp the opportunity 
of calling this statement blasphemy; but Jesus proceeded 
to say, "Hereafter shall ye see the Son of Man 
sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the 
clouds of Heaven." Affecting great horror at this, 
Caiaphas dramatically tore his priestly garment, as implying 
to the Sanhedrin that as a representative of God 
amongst them he had heard something awful indeed. 
Turning to the Sanhedrin, he inquired, "What further 
need of witnesses have we? Ye yourselves have heard 
His blasphemy. What think ye?"— What is your verdict? 
Their answer was, "He is worthy of death." 

Apparently only two refrained from this vote— Nicodemus 
and Joseph of Arimathea, both of whom had 
learned to have great respect for Jesus. But what power 
or influence could they have? At the very most, they 
could claim that the proceedings of the Sanhedrin were 
illegal, that the Law forbade that they should sit as a 
court to condemn anybody to death in the night-time. 
Hence Jesus was remanded to an adjoining court-room 
while the Sanhedrin waited to take its official action after 
daybreak. Meantime, in that waiting-hall, Jesus, condemned 

R5561 : page 317 

by the high priest as a blasphemer and malefactor, 
was subjected to various indignities by the attaches of 
the high priest's palace, who ignorantly supposed that 
whatever was done by the high priest must be right. 

SUBMISSIVE TO THE DIVINE WILL 

The Scripture which declares, "Ye have killed the Just 
One, and He doth not resist you," and the Golden Text 
of this lesson are in full agreement, and are both applicable 
to Jesus in these trials. Jesus opened not His 
mouth in the sense that He did not attempt to defend His 
life. Realizing that nothing was happening to Him contrary 
to the Father's will, He gladly permitted matters to 
take their course, without attempting to hinder the results. 

Who can doubt that His brilliant mind, and His 
tongue, which "spake as never man spake," could quickly 
have brought such an argument for His defense that 
Caiaphas and the entire Sanhedrin would have trembled 
and would not have dared to condemn Him! He spoke 
only what was necessary to be said that the Truth might 



be presented, and it was their own perversion of this 
Truth which His enemies styled blasphemy. 

The Scriptures intimate that the followers of Jesus 
must not expect full justice in the world, nor always to 
be rightly understood. They, too, are to remember that 
the cup of their experiences, like that of their Master, is 
supervised by Heavenly Wisdom; and that if they are 
obedient to the Divine arrangement, they will find that 
all of their experiences will eventually work out to their 
highest welfare. "We know that all things work together 
for good to those who love God." 



R5561 : page 317 

SOWING AND REAPING 

--NOVEMBER 8.-GALATIANS 6:1-10.- 

"Whatsoever a man soweth, that 
shall he also reap."— Verse 7. 

TODAY'S Study was intended, by those who 
mapped out these lessons, to be a temperance 
lesson. There is surely a sense in 
which it is true that those who yield to 
appetites which crave injurious stimulants 
and narcotics will certainly reap a slavery 
to those appetites, a corresponding weakening 
of their own characters. All 
good people— all who have at heart their 
own welfare and the welfare of humanity- 
must surely deplore the ravages of intemperance; and any 
word or example that would be helpful to fellow-creatures, 
that would assist them to become strong characters and 
useful members of society, should not be withheld. 

We may, however, be fully sure that nothing will completely 
and thoroughly liberate mankind from the weaknesses 
of their fallen nature, except God's appointed 
remedy— Messiah's Kingdom. But this conviction should 
not hinder us from taking our place publicly on the side 
of righteousness and of the best interests of humanity in 
respect to every question. 

Let us not, on the other hand, go to the extreme which 
some would approve, but let us follow strictly on this, and 
on every subject, the teachings of the Bible. Following 
this course now, in this lesson, it is our duty to call attention 
to the fact that the Apostle's words have no reference 
whatever to intemperance of one kind more than another. 
The Apostle is not addressing the world in general; much 
less is he addressing some poor inebriates. He is addressing 
the consecrated people of God, as he declares in the 
opening verses of the Epistle. 

These consecrated Christians the Apostle speaks of as 
brethren, and instructs them how they should deal with 



any of their fellows who might be overtaken in a fault, 
who might become entangled with some form of sin, not 
by reason of sympathy with sin, but by reason of weakness 
of the flesh or by unfavorable environment. The 
most spiritual ones of the Church should exercise themselves 
to bring about a restoration of the erring one to a 
condition of righteousness and fellowship with God. This 
they should do in a meek manner, remembering that they 
also are imperfect in the flesh, and that they also may at 
some time or other inadvertently fall into sin, contrary to 
their heart intentions. 

R5562: page 317 

In this manner they were to "bear one another's burdens" 
—assisting one another in battling against the weaknesses 
of the flesh and the besetments of sin. In this way 
they would be fulfilling the general law of Christ. 

The law of Christ is a law of service and self-sacrifice 
in the interests of others. Those who, finding a brother 
overtaken in a fault, merely throw back their heads, denouncing 
the brother in a haughty, imperious manner, in 
a holier-than-thou manner, have not yet attained a proper 
appreciation of what is the Law of Christ— the law which 
is to govern all the members of the Body. 

This law of Christ, the Apostle points out, is a Law of 
Love. Governed by this law of love, Jesus laid down His 
life, not merely for His friends, but even for His enemies. 
All therefore, who would claim to be disciples or followers 
of Jesus should have the same mind, the same disposition, 
the same spirit, and should seek to follow the 
same law of love. Thus the Apostle says, "We ought 
also to lay down our lives for the brethren" (1 John 3:16) 
—in seeking to assist the brethren out of difficulty 
and to bring them nearer to the Lord and to His standards. 

TOO MUCH SELF-ESTEEM 

The Apostle points out that one great danger which 
besets all the true followers of Jesus is headiness— thinking 
too highly of self and, therefore, not thinking highly 
enough of the brethren, especially of the brethren who 
stumble in some particular in which this individual has 
not himself, as yet, stumbled. 

One of the first lessons to be learned is that we are 
really nothing, that we are bundles of imperfection, that 
on the strength of our own merit we could not commend 
ourselves to God nor have His favor. Furthermore, we 
are to learn that in proportion as we think of ourselves as 
somebody, to that same extent we are not pleasing to God, 
and are in His sight all the more nobodies. If, therefore, 
anybody think of himself as a somebody in God's sight, 
he should begin to realize that he is nothing, a nobody 
unworthy of Divine notice, except through the favor of 
God in Christ. Such a person is deceiving himself and is 
hindering his own progress in the good way. 



Each one, therefore, instead of seeking to judge 
or to reprove his neighbor or his brother in Christ, 
should seek to prove out his own work. He should carefully 
discern to see to what extent he has made progress 
in the things which God has declared will be pleasing in 
His sight. He should seek to ascertain to what extent he 
has put away anger, malice, hatred, envy, strife, and to 
what extent he has put on the graces of God's Holy 
Spirit; namely, meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering, 
brotherly kindness, love. 

To whatever extent he can see that he is making 
progress along these Scripturally defined lines, to that extent 
he has ground for rejoicing, without in any sense or 
degree seeking to compare himself with others and thus 

R5562: page 318 

to estimate himself wholly by the imperfections which he 
may see in others. By following this course, each should 
be seeking to find out his own weaknesses, seeking to 
bear his own burdens and seeking, therefore, not to be a 
burden or a reproach to others— either to the Lord or to 
the brethren. 

Along the lines of this teaching, there is no room for 
clericism. Rather, as the Apostle says, "Those who are 
taught in the Word should communicate with those who 
teach in all good things," telling them of any blessings 
received or of any clearer views of the Word of God 
which have come to them. The Apostle may also have 
meant that those who receive blessings from a teacher 
may properly seek opportunity for recompensing that 
teacher, either with thanks or with co-operation or in 
some other way helping the teacher to forward his work 
of teaching in any good and profitable manner. 

There is a principle at stake here. God operates along 
the lines of justice, and He cannot be deceived. His eye 
reads the heart, the motive, the intention. We might 
even temporarily deceive ourselves with specious arguments, 
but no one can deceive God. It is a principle of 
the Divine arrangement that sowing shall bring reaping, 
and that the thing reaped shall be of the same character 
as the thing sowed.— Galatians 6:7. 

THE CHRISTIAN'S ARDUOUS TASK 

The world does not engage in this sowing and reaping 
that the Apostle speaks of; only the Church do so. The 
Church is composed of those who have heard the Voice 
of God offering forgiveness of sins through Jesus Christ 
to all those who become His disciples— offering also 
Divine assistance and the begetting of the Holy Spirit 
to a new nature and to glory, honor and immortality. All 
who have really and truly become followers of Christ, 
who have taken up their cross and have covenanted self-denial 
in walking in the footsteps of the Master— these 
alone are true Christians. 



It is for these to order their steps in harmony with 
the Lord's leadings and to know that the results of their 
lives will be in proportion as they follow their Covenant 
of Self-sacrifice and faithfulness as disciples of Jesus. 
These have covenanted to give up the world, its aims, its 
objects, its ambitions— to sacrifice all these, that they may 
become "heirs of God and joint-heirs with Christ" Jesus 
their Lord in the Heavenly inheritance.— Romans 8:17. 

These should understand that it is not sufficient to 
agree to sow to the Spirit, but that the reaping of spiritual 
blessings and of heart development will depend upon their 
faithfulness in sowing to these ends. "He that soweth to 
the Spirit"— that is, he that lives a spiritual life, seeking 
to serve the will or Spirit of God in all of his words, 
deeds and thoughts— will reap the largest crop of spiritual 
development in the various qualities which go to make up 
the character-likeness of the Lord Jesus Christ. 

On the other hand, those who sow to the flesh— that is, 
who live after the flesh, seeking to please their own flesh, 
seeking to do according to their fleshly minds or wills, 
or seeking to please the fleshly minds or wills of their 
friends or relatives— these must only expect that in their 
case the flesh thus cultivated will grow the stronger in 
power to control their lives, and that they will make proportionately 
less progress along the lines of the Spirit. 

In other words, the Apostle explains that every time 
we give heed to the fleshly inclinations of our fallen 
natures, we are hindering our own spiritual progress, and 
that the tendency of all such yielding to the flesh is 
toward corruption, toward death. On the other hand, to 
whatever extent we mortify the inclinations of the flesh 
and seek to live in harmony with the Spirit of the Lord, 
in that same proportion we shall grow strong spiritually, 
and be prepared for the everlasting life on the spirit 
plane which God has promised to those who shall demonstrate 
their love for Him and their loyalty to the principles 
of righteousness. 

This does not mean that only those who attain the 
complete mastery of the flesh will receive any blessing 
from the Lord, but that unless we manifest to the Lord 
an appreciation of the spiritual things, we shall not make 
progress therein, shall not be fit for everlasting life and 
shall not receive it; whereas, on the contrary, if our conduct 
shall manifest to the Lord our love for truth and 
righteousness and our desire to please Him, however weak 
our flesh, He will account such worthy of everlasting life, 
knowing that when they shall have the perfect bodies of 
the resurrection, they will be glad to live in absolute harmony 
with the Divine arrangements. Thus the Apostle 
on another occasion wrote, "The righteousness of the Law 
is fulfilled in us, who are walking not after the flesh, but 
after the Spirit."— Romans 8:4. 

FAITHFUL CONTINUANCE IN WELL-DOING 

In verses 9 and 10, the Apostle draws his argument 



to a conclusion. All who wish to do right— all who wish 
to live according to the lines marked out by the Holy 
Spirit through the words of Jesus and the Apostles- 
should not only start out well by making a full consecration, 
but should continue faithful, and not be weary of 
striving against sin and of being faithful to righteousness. 

God is seeking to develop and to fix character in His 
people; and in due time, after they shall have suffered 
awhile, fought and battled for a time against the weaknesses 
of the flesh, they will reap the reward; they will 
get the new bodies that God has promised— the Resurrection 
bodies. Then their battling and trials will all be 
ended; for the new bodies will be in perfect accord with 
the new will, and there will be no cause of conflict between 
the two. The work of grace will then go grandly 
forward, through them, for the blessing of the world. 

And, says the Apostle, let us not merely avoid harshness 
toward those who have been overtaken in a fault, let 
us not merely guard ourselves that we shall sow to the 
spirit and not to the flesh, and let us not merely avoid 
weariness in this good way; but let us additionally, "as we 
find opportunity, do good unto all men, especially to those 
who are of the Household of Faith." In so doing, we 
shall be copying our Heavenly Father's character. He is 
the Fountain of Blessing. From Him come the blessings 
of the present life— the sunshine and the rain— upon both 
the just and the unjust, upon the evil and the good. 

As the Heavenly Father is continually giving blessings, 
rather than seeking favors, so we as His advanced and 
developed children are to seek to have the same character-likeness, 
the same disposition, the same mind; namely, a 
disposition to do good to everybody, but especially an 
earnest desire to do good unto all who are the Lord's 
children— unto all who are of the Household of Faith. 



page 318 

"Go, labor on; spend and be spent— 
Thy joy to do thy Father's will; 

It is the way the Master went; 

Should not the servant tread it still? 

"Go, labor on; enough, while here, 
If He shall praise thee— if He deign 

Thy willing heart to mark and cheer; 
No toil for Him shall be in vain." 



R5563 : page 319 

ST. PETER SIFTED LIKE WHEAT 
-NOVEMBER 15. -MARK 14:27-31,53,54,66-72. 



"Let him that thinketh he standeth, take 
heed lest he fall." — 1 Corinthians 10:12. 

ST. PETER was admittedly a man of strong 

character, very courageous, but rather too 

impetuous. He is one of the two disciples 

of whom it is written that "The people perceived 

that they were ignorant and unlearned 

men." (Acts 4:13.) In some respects, 

therefore, St. Peter may be said to 

have had less advantage than Judas. Both 

had equal opportunities in the School of 

Christ; yet how different the results with 

the two men! The one went down into the Second Death 

despised; the other, after ups and downs of trial and discipline, 

passed to a reward of glory, honor and immortality 

with his Master, ranking amongst the highest 

of the Apostles. 

Our lesson for today deals with the special "sifting" 
which came to St. Peter at the time of our Lord's death, 
and of which he was forewarned by Jesus, saying, "Simon, 
Simon, behold Satan hath desired to have you, that he 
may sift you as wheat; but I have prayed for thee, that 
thy faith fail not." St. Peter's courage, manifested on so 
many occasions, was really his weak point. Notwithstanding 
all that Jesus had said to forewarn him of the 
sifting experiences that were just before him, St. Peter 
realized no dread, no fear. Hence he did little watching 
and praying in comparison with what he should have 
done, and self-confidence led to his undoing for a time. 

It was the same St. Peter who, when told that he 
would deny our Lord before the time for the cock to crow 
the next morning, declared that it surely was a mistake, 
for he was ready to die with his Master. It was the same 
St. Peter who drew his sword and cut off the ear of the 
high priest's servant, afterward healed by Jesus. It was 
the same impulsive St. Peter who was the first to acknowledge 
the Messiahship of Jesus. 

Jesus had inquired what people were saying about Him 
—who they said He was— and had finally asked, "Whom 
say ye that I am?" Then St. Peter answered, "Thou art 
the Messiah, the Son of the Living God." Jesus replied 
that this answer indicated that St. Peter was in a blessed 
condition of relationship with God, or otherwise he would 
not have had the knowledge to make this statement. He 
said, "Flesh and blood hath not revealed this unto thee, 
but My Father which is in Heaven." Who could think that 
this same noble character would be so overwhelmed with 
fear that he would deny his Master, even with curses! 

One thing which impresses itself quickly and forcibly 
upon our minds is the thought that the writers of the New 
Testament were certainly very different from the majority 
of writers in that they told the absolute truth without 
modification or varnish. Surely no other book is like the 
Bible in this respect. The founders of great religious 



world-systems and of various sectarian systems have 
manifested a very different spirit. Their heroes are all 
great, noble, educated, heroic. Never would they think 
of pointing out such weaknesses as those manifested by St. 
Peter on the night in which our Lord was betrayed, when 
he denied his Master. 

Surely this gives us greater confidence in the Bible— 
in its honesty, in its truthfulness. We can rely upon the 
fact that the men who thus freely tell of their failings, 
and who speak of their lack of learning, must have been 
men of great courage, great sincerity, great love for the 
truth. Surely their testimony is worthy of all acceptation. 

ST. PETER'S TRIAL UNEXPECTED 

Temptations will come in an insidious form. We cannot 
imagine that at the time when he cut off the ear of the 
high priest's servant St. Peter had any sympathy with the 
thought of denying our Lord. But circumstances and 
conditions changed. The Master was taken a prisoner. 
Whatever power He had previously exercised whereby He 
walked away from His enemies, and they could not take 
Him because His "hour had not yet come," that power He 
evidently was not exercising now— His hour had come. 
To see his Master apparently without friends in Heaven, 
delivered over to His enemies and led from one tribunal 
to the other, had a paralyzing effect upon St. Peter. 

St. John had such an acquaintance with some one connected 
with the palace that he was permitted to enter the 
court and bring St. Peter with him; but they had separated. 
St. Peter was in the courtyard. It was cold, and 
he approached an open brazier to warm himself. In the 
light of the court, surrounded by the gossiping servants of 
the palace, he was keenly scrutinized by one of the maids, 
who said, "Thou art also a disciple of the Nazarene." 

Stunned by the identification and wondering to what 
it might lead, St. Peter promptly denied that he had any 
knowledge of Jesus. Then he moved away to another 
part of the court, where the shadows were deeper and the 
people fewer. But again he was recognized as a Galilean 
and accused of being one of Jesus' disciples. Again he 
denied the charge. The third time he was approached 
with the same charge that he was one of Jesus' disciples 
and a Galilean, and that his speech betrayed him. Again, 
with cursing, he denied that he knew his Master. 

Terrible! we say. And surely St. Peter felt afterward 
that it was terrible; for just at that time, the early morning, 
came the beginning of cock-crowing, and he remembered 
the Master's words that Satan had desired to sift 
him as wheat, and that before the cock crew he would 
have denied his Master three times. The whole matter 
came upon him with crushing force; and, wrapping his 
cloak about his head, he hastened away into the darkness, 
weeping bitterly; for just about the time that the cock 
crew, Jesus was led forth not far from him, and as he 
looked at Jesus, the Master lifted up His eyes and looked 



at St. Peter. It was a sympathetic glance, not an angered 
one; but it went straight to the heart. 

St. Peter's crime was nothing like that of Judas; he 
had merely sought to protect himself. He had not sought 
to injure or even to risk the injury of his Master. The 
thoroughness of St. Peter's repentance is abundantly testified 
by his subsequent loyalty even unto death. Tradition 
has it that he was condemned to be crucified; and that, 
remembering how once he had denied his Master, he felt 
that it would be too great an honor for him to share exactly 
the same death as his Lord; and that, at his own 
request, he was crucified head downward. 

THE LESSON TO ALL CHRISTIANS 

Our Golden Text voices to all Christians the lesson of 
St. Peter's experiences— "Let him that thinketh he 
standeth, take heed lest he fall." When we are weak in 
our own estimation and, full of faith, cling tenaciously to 
the Arm of the Lord, then we are really strong in the 
might which God supplies through His Eternal Son. Another 
lesson is that however different the experiences of 
God's people, all who fall into line for the great promotion 
to the First Resurrection must expect to endure 
severe sittings, provings— of their love for the Lord, the 
Truth, the brethren, and their loyalty to all these. 

Let us never forget that sittings are permitted, not because 
the Lord has no interest in us, but because only 
those who can stand sittings, trials and tests, are fit for 
places in the Kingdom. 



page 321 

VOL. XXXV NOVEMBER 1 No. 21 
A. D. 1914-A. M. 6043 



CONTENTS 

Making Ready for the Reign of 

Righteousness 323 

Earth's Great Universal Empires 324 

Counterfeit of Christ's Kingdom 324 

God's Two Witnesses 325 

Due Time for Understanding Chronology 325 

Evidences of Our Lord's Parousia 326 

Inauguration of Messiah's Kingdom 
Gradual 327 

Battle of Armageddon 328 

The Jewish Question 329 

Jerusalem No Longer Downtrodden 329 

Expectations of the Church 329 

Re the Deliverance of the Church 330 

Who Shall Stand? 331 

Jesus Tried by Pilate 332 

The Same Spirit Prevails 333 

The Prudent Hideth Himself 334 

"In Everything Give Thanks" (Poem) 335 

Interesting Letter 335 

page 322 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



AN OPPORTUNE SERVICE 

Watch the newspapers closely, especially the Monday's 
editions of dailies in the larger cities. If Brother Russell's 
sermons appear, write a letter or card of appreciation to the 
paper at once, expressing your hope that the sermons may continue 
regularly. If you notice the sermons in a paper from a 
distance and write promptly the more will your communication 
be appreciated by the editor of the newspaper. 



CONCERNING 1914 VOLUNTEER MATTER 

This year's Volunteer matter is specially appropriate. If 
you have any of it on hand, get it out quickly. If you have 
not had it, order all you can use within a month, but no more. 
It will not be republished. Its principal article is entitled, 
"END OF WORLD IN 1914-Not the view of Pastor Russell, 
nor the I.B.S.A." It is just what a great many people 
need to counteract erroneous impressions. It is excellent 
for travelers on trains and street cars. 



R5573 : page 322 

ASSOCIATED BIBLE STUDENTS 

We suggest that the above name be used by all classes 
locally in newspaper advertising and otherwise instead of 
the title, International Bible Students Association, which name 
properly belongs only to national and international use. 

When advertisements appear on the religious page of newspapers 
classified denominationally, this title, ASSOCIATED BIBLE 
STUDENTS, can be used instead of a sectarian name. 

page 322 

CHRISTMAS ORDERS 

Order in November, early as possible, whatever you desire 
from our stock for Christmas. This will accommodate us, 
and avoid disappointment on your part. We remind the 
classes of the advantage of ordering mottoes together for 
one shipment. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR DECEMBER 



After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
December follow: (1) 227; (2) 70; (3) 151; (4) 4; (5) 145; (6) 
46; (7) 194; (8) 114; (9) 305; (10) 15; (11) 197; (12) 38; (13) 
226; (14) 6; (15) 7; (16) 157; (17) 133; (18) 78; (19) 305; (20) 
Vow; (21) 19; (22) 12; (23) 214; (24) 110; (25) 130; (26) 331; 
(27) 303; (28) 104; (29) 326; (30) 128; (31) 29. 



R5563 : page 323 

MAKING READY FOR THE REIGN OF RIGHTEOUSNESS 

"The nations were angry, and Thy wrath is come, and the time 
of the dead, that they should be judged, and that Thou shouldest 
give reward unto Thy servants the Prophets, and to the 
saints, and them that fear Thy name, small and great; 
and shouldest destroy them that 
destroy the earth."— Revelation 11:18. 

IT MAY be that many of the Lord's people 

were expecting more than they should 

have looked for to occur with the opening 

of the Jewish year 1915, which began with 

September 21. The human mind seems to 

have a natural tendency, and one with 

which we should have sympathy, to expect 

matters to culminate more rapidly, fulfilments 

to come more suddenly, than they 

ever do come. For instance, the Scriptures 

tell us that about the time of the sounding of the Seventh 

Trumpet, certain great events, enumerated in our text, 

will begin to take place. Many Christian people, looking 

at the statement, expect all this to be fulfilled in a 

few minutes, or a few hours, or at most a few weeks. 

But as we come to understand the Scripture, we perceive 

that it covers the thousand years of Christ's Reign. 

"The nations were angry, Thy wrath is come, and the 
time of the dead that they should be judged." The 
Church are the first to receive their judgment, the decision 
in their case; for the world God has appointed a 
thousand-year Day. (Acts 17:31; 2 Peter 3:8.) "And 
that Thou shouldest give reward unto Thy servants the 
Prophets [the Ancient Worthies] and to the saints [all 
the holy ones], and them that fear Thy name, small and 
great." All this latter class— the world of mankind— will 

R5564 : page 323 

be judged, will have the decision passed upon them, according 
to the way in which they will conduct themselves 
under the Millennial conditions. And Thou shalt 
"destroy them that corrupt the earth." If this verse contains 
so much that a thousand years will be required for 



its fulfilment, the same may be true of other Scriptures. 

Another Scripture (Daniel 12:1), describing the period 
of transition from Gentile supremacy to Messiah's 
Kingdom, declares, "There shall be a Time of Trouble 
such as was not since there was a nation." Our Lord 
discussed this statement in His great prophecy, and 
added, "No, nor ever shall be." (Matthew 24:21.) After 
speaking about the tribulation that should come upon the 
Jews in the close of their Age, the Master said, "Jerusalem 
shall be trodden down of the Gentiles until the 
Times of the Gentiles be fulfilled." (Luke 21:24.) We 
think it reasonable for us to hold that if there are Gentile 
Times to be fulfilled, they must have been foretold; 
and that if they have been foretold, then they were foreordained, 
or planned of God, who knew beforehand how 
long those Gentile Times would be and when they would 
be fulfilled. 

Our Lord's words, then, seemed to suggest to us the 
propriety of searching to see what we might discover 
concerning the Times, or years, of the Gentiles. Looking 
through our Bibles and our histories, we found that 
there was a particular date when God took away the 
Kingdom from His typical people, Israel; and that at 
that time He gave over the dominion of the world with 
more or less of a lease of power to the Gentiles. We 
also found that, as far as we can see from the Bible, this 
date when the Kingdom was taken from the last king of 
David's line, King Zedekiah, was the year 606 B.C. (We 
would not say that it was not 605 or 607, but that as 
nearly as we can tell it was the year 606 B.C.) Then 
we reasoned that if 606 B.C. was the time when God 
took away the typical kingdom, no doubt He had at that 
time the purpose of giving some lease of power to the 
Gentile nations; and we looked to see what history and 
the Bible had to say upon the subject. 

THE IMAGE OF GENTILE SUPREMACY 

Merely repeating what we have studied in the series 
of books called STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, only putting 
the information in another form, we found that when 
God took away the kingdom from King Zedekiah, He 
gave the dominion to the Gentiles, the Emperor Nebuchadnezzar 
being the first of these world-rulers. We 
learned, in the Scriptures, that God gave Nebuchadnezzar 
a dream. By morning the king had forgotten the 
dream, but it was afterwards explained to him by the 
Prophet Daniel. In his dream Nebuchadnezzar saw a 
great image, the head of which was made of gold, the 
breast and the arms of silver, the belly and the thighs 
of brass, the legs of iron, and the feet of iron smeared 
with miry clay. 

The Prophet Daniel explained that this great image, 
which stood before Nebuchadnezzar, represented all the 
Gentile kingdoms. Babylon, Nebuchadnezzar's kingdom, 
was represented by the head of gold; next came the 



Medo-Persian, represented by the breast and the arms of 

silver; then Greece, represented by the belly and thighs 

of brass; then came Rome, represented by the legs of 

iron; next came the so-called Holy Roman Empire, represented 

by the feet smeared with miry clay; and last, 

the present governments of Europe, represented by the 

ten toes, also of iron smeared with miry clay. 

R5564 : page 324 

According to this vision given to the Emperor Nebuchadnezzar 
and interpreted by the Prophet Daniel, God 
designed that picture, image, to represent all the Gentile 
governments that would ever have sway over all the earth. 

When we had this matter clear, then we said, The 
period of time during which these universal empires will 
have controlled the world must be the Times of the Gentiles. 
Through our Lord Jesus Christ, God has mentioned 
the Gentile Times (Luke 21:24), and now in the 
Old Testament we find out how many Times there are- 
how many years; for in Scriptural usage a Time means 
a year. 

As we studied the subject still further, we found that 
God had told the Israelites that they would come under 
His disfavor for Seven Times. (Leviticus 26:14-28.) 
These could not be literal years; for the Israelites passed 
through many tribulations as long or longer than seven 
years. The question then was, What kind of years were 
these Times to be? We concluded that if they were not 
literal years, they must be symbolical. Since a literal 
year, Jewish reckoning, contains 360 days, and since in 
prophecy a day represents a year of actual time (Ezek. 4:6), 
each symbolic "Time" would be 360 years. So then, 
this period of Seven Times must mean 7 x 360 years, or 
2520 years. 

Thus we found that this was to be the period of time 
during which Israel was to be overturned (Ezekiel 21:25-27) 
—to have their kingdom and their government 
subject to the Gentiles. Meantime, while setting aside 
His own typical kingdom, God said to the Gentiles, I 
will not be ready to set up My Kingdom for some time. 
In the interim you may have the opportunity to demonstrate 
what you can do for the world. Institute the best 
government that you can. Do your very best to rule the 
world justly and wisely. 

EARTH'S GREAT UNIVERSAL EMPIRES 

Full of confidence that they would rule the world in 
the best possible way, the Babylonians essayed to do so, 
but soon reached a sad climax. There followed a general 
program by which the rights of the people were disregarded, 
the wealthy getting everything and the poor practically 
nothing. Next came into power the Medes and 
Persians, who also started out very well, with just designs 
and every endeavor to do right. We recall that 



Cyrus, the first Medo-Persian Emperor, set free the Jews 
and gave them permission to return to Jerusalem; and 
that he also sent back the holy vessels of the Temple, 
which were very valuable, but which he would not retain 
because they belonged to God. Cyrus attempted to maintain 
a just and righteous government; and yet before 
long, the Medo-Persian Empire failed to bring satisfaction 
to the people or to prove to be a great blessing to 
the world. 

Then came the turn of Greece. Alexander the Great, 
before he was twenty-one years of age, had conquered 
the world. For quite awhile Greece ruled the world. 
Grecian civilization and various systems of Grecian philosophy 
went out world-wide. Greek theories on all kinds 
of subjects have more or less permeated all the great 
countries of earth; even in our day the influence which 
went out from Greece is felt in every form of religion 
the world over, the religion of Christendom being itself 
a mixture of Grecian mythology and Christianity along 
with the teachings of the Mosaic Law and the Jewish 
Prophets. But Greece had her day, and had to bid farewell 
to the sceptre of power. 

Next came the Roman Empire, with its various forms 
of government, each of which was tried with the endeavor 
to rule the world wisely and justly. The result of 
all this was the centralization of power to a greater or 
less degree, the wealth regathered into the hands of a 
few, and the masses of the people neither blessed nor 
satisfied. Then the Roman system began to fall. 

By and by came in that mixture of Christianity and 
Roman civil power which was represented in the iron 
feet of the image, which were smeared with miry clay; 
the gloss of Christianity covering the civil power as the 
clay covered the feet of the image. This gloss did not 
make the nations really Christian, but has merely caused 
these kingdoms and governments to look upon themselves 
as though they were Christian; and this is what they call 
themselves— Christian Germany, Christian Great Britain, 
Christian France, Christian Russia, Christian Italy, and 
Christian Austria-Hungary. 

A COUNTERFEIT OF CHRIST'S KINGDOM 

Miry clay looks very much like stone; and God used 
a stone to symbolize His Kingdom in the same symbolic 
picture that He used the miry clay smeared over the iron 
feet to represent nominal Christians. Christ's Kingdom 
has not yet been established; but it will be built on the 
wreck of these present institutions, which outwardly resemble 
Christ's Kingdom, calling themselves Christian 
nations on all their coins and declaring that God is reigning 
in these kingdoms. Collectively they call themselves 
Christendom, which means Christ's Kingdom; and they 
were led to do this through the teachings of the Church 
during the Dark Ages— not the True Church, but people 
who deludedly thought that they were the Church of 



Christ and who persecuted the real Church. 

We include as sectarian churches all that are not the 
real Church. There are many spurious churches; all cannot 
be right. The question is, Which is the right one? 
None will acknowledge the others to be the right one, all 
claiming to be right. Not one of them is the right one, 
as we have concluded from the Bible description of the 
Church of Christ. God recognizes only the one composed 
of those who are consecrated to Him— found in the Greek, 
the English, the German, the Swedish Churches, amongst 
the Baptists, the Methodists, the Lutherans, the Presbyterians 
and amongst people who do not attend any church 
at all. All who are God's saints are members of His 
Church; all others are merely imitation Christians. These 
great systems calling themselves His churches are without 
authority of God, without Scriptural recognition. They 
are merely human institutions, and in them only the saintly 
ones are recognized of God at all as His people. 

The Bible sets forth that these spurious churches are 
Babylon, a term which signifies confusion. They are a 
confused mixture, not only of all classes of people, but of 
all classes of doctrines, and quite contrary therefore to 
anything that God and His Word uphold. From this confused 

R5565 : page 324 

mass of people, God is calling out His people, saying, 

"Come out of her, My people, that ye be not partakers 

of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues" (Revelation 18:4), 

and telling them that very suddenly a great 

calamity will come upon this great institution called 

Christendom, which will entirely demolish this system in 

every sense of the word. 

THE END OF THE GENTILE TIMES 

Studying God's Word, we have measured the 2520 
years, the Seven symbolic Times, from that year 606 B.C. 
and have found that it reached down to October, 1914, as 
nearly as we were able to reckon. We did not say positively 
that this would be the year. We merely left every 
one to look at the facts of history and reckon for himself. 

R5565 : page 325 

Would this date be the time or would it be some other 
date? we asked. Many of us concluded that as far as we 
could see, October of this year would show the end of 
the Gentile lease of power; for when October comes we 
are getting down to the end of the Jewish year. The year 
1914 actually ended Sept. 20, 1914, Jewish reckoning. 

Now the question comes, Have the Gentile Times ended 
or not? Some perhaps may be inclined to say, "No; they 
have not ended." Others would say, "When the Gentile 
Times shall have ended, we would expect that the Gentiles 
would be entirely ousted from all power and control, and 



that Christ's Kingdom would be established. Were there 
not a great many things that we expected would take place 
when the Gentile Times would end?" 

We find that some have one idea and others another. 
Some think that just the next hour after midnight would 
see a great, grand change everywhere— evil blotted out in 
sixty minutes or in sixty seconds. But would it be a reasonable 
expectation that the Gentile kingdoms would be 
snuffed out inside of an hour or inside of a day? If God 
had said so, it would be different; we know that God has 
all power to do His will everywhere. But are we in any 
sense of the word to expect such a sudden transition— that 
going to bed on the night of September 20, we would find, 
on the morning of September 21, all the kingdoms of the 
world destroyed and the Kingdom of Christ set up, the 
saints in glory, etc. Such would be a lightning change! 
We do not think that any would have been justified in so 
thinking. If any had such expectation, it was unwarranted. 

GOD'S TWO WITNESSES 

Now look back and see what happened immediately after 
the expiration of different time periods. For instance, there 
are great day periods mentioned in the Bible, namely, the 
1260 symbolic days, the 1290, the 1335 and also the 2300 
days. (Daniel 12:7,11,12; 8:13,14.) We have not the 
time to go into details concerning all of these time periods. 
They are familiar to us, and are treated in detail in the 
volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. Therefore we 
merely refresh your memories. 

The 1260 years ended in 1799. From their beginning to 
their culmination, the power of persecution held sway. 
When the 1260 years ended, was anything done in an hour, 
in a day, or in a year to stop the persecution? Nay! One 
of the results was that God's Two Witnesses were exalted 
to heaven. These Two Witnesses of God, the Old and New 
Testaments, were exalted to heaven, were lifted up in the 
sight of the people, taken up to a position of great influence 
and dignity which they never before had enjoyed. 

EXALTED TO HEAVEN 

Previous to that time the Church held that the Bible 
went hand in hand with the voice of the Church; that the 
voice of the Church was the voice of the bishops and the 
popes; and that the Bible was only to corroborate the 
voice of the Church. But after the expiration of the 1260 
prophetic days, the Bible began to take a new position. 

We remind you that it was between the years 1 803 
and 1813 that many of our great Bible Societies were organized. 
Only then the printing of the Bible in every 
language and in cheap form was commenced, and the 
Bible began to go out to all nations. The Bible was 
lifted up before the people— was exalted to heaven, in the 
sense in which our Lord meant when He said, "Thou, 
Capernaum, art exalted unto heaven." The Bible was 



greatly exalted in contrast to the degraded position which 
it had occupied during the Dark Ages. But several years 
were consumed in bringing it up to this high position. 

"THE TIME OF THE END" 

Of course, error all along has more or less combated 
the Truth, but nevertheless the Truth has been going 
forward, step by step. The year 1799 marked the beginning 
of the "Time of the End," when various events 
were to occur. According to prophecy— "Knowledge 
shall be increased"; "the wise shall understand"; and 
"there shall be a Time of Trouble such as was not since 
there was a nation." (Daniel 12:1-10.) These various predictions, 
the fulfilment of which was to follow 1799, have 
been in process of fulfilment throughout the past century. 
The running to and fro did not reach any particular 
development for some time after the Time of the 
End had begun. The progress in the use of steam power 
was gradual. First came the steamboat; then came the 
first railway train. These inventions of necessity had to 
precede the predicted "running to and fro." 

Only within the past few years have we reached a 
maximum of speed on railways and steamships. Apparently 
they have begun to slow down. Very few trains 
now go faster than twenty-four miles an hour; and so 
with the great steamships Mauretania and Lusitania, 
which are types of the very swiftest steamboats. Indeed, 
these vessels might not have been built were it 
not that the British government wished to have some 
very swift cruisers in time of war. 

These wonderful inventions which characterize our 
day have come gradually since 1799. After the first part 
of the period came the increase of knowledge, which is 
reaching its climax. We are now at the place where in 
civilized lands compulsory education is doing about all it 
can do for the people; and some nations are trying to 
restrain education. A prominent Russian statesman recently 
said that education is the basis of all the revolutionary 
spirit amongst the people, and that if the people 
had less of it there would be less trouble. In due time 
all the other nations will learn the lesson that without 
some restriction, education is a dangerous thing. To an 
unregenerate heart it means power in an unregenerate 
hand— which is not always safe. 

DUE TIME FOR UNDERSTANDING CHRONOLOGY 

The Prophet Daniel's statement that "the wise shall 
understand" apparently refers to the end of the 1290 
days mentioned in the same chapter. This period terminated 
in 1829. Shortly after 1829 the message of the 
nearness of the Second Advent of Christ began especially 
to be promulgated by William Miller. As a result of the 
exaltation of the Word of God, certain doctrines were 
brought forth in a very prominent way. 



We have all read about the great Miller Movement 
started in this country. (See STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 
Vol. III., page 84.) We are not endorsing the teachings 
of Brother Miller. While he had some correct thoughts 
on Scripture, he also had some incorrect ones— just as 
had Brother Calvin and other brethren since his day. But 
the time had come for the announcing of the Second 
Coming of Christ; and while the Second Advent did not 
occur in 1844, as the followers of Brother Miller had anticipated, 
yet beginning gradually in the year 1829 certain 
doctrines were brought to the attention of the Church 
which had never before been noted— certain doctrines respecting 
man's immortality, spiritual and human natures, 
etc. These subjects led to a careful searching of the 
Scriptures and to confidence in the Word of God above 
the traditions of men. 

The increase of light has gradually progressed, and 
has by degrees been dispelling the darkness of error in 

R5565 : page 326 

both doctrine and practise, until today the Lord's people 
have a great deal of blessing. We are now more than 
a hundred years from the beginning of the Time of the 
End; and this development of Christian knowledge has 
been steadily progressing, opposed in various ways, but 
nevertheless fighting on to victory. 

Another prophetic period mentioned by the Prophet 
Daniel was the 2300 days. This period was to mark certain 
things, and at the expiration of these days the Sanctuary 
was to be cleansed. This work of cleansing the 
true Church, the Sanctuary class, from the defilements 
of the Dark Ages culminated, we believe, in 1846, the 
time of the fulfilment of the 2300 days. But the work of 
cleansing was not accomplished in a moment or a day or 
even a year; and the cleansing was but limited. 

We come now to the 1335 days, which culminated in 
1875. Of these days the Prophet had said, "Oh, the blessedness 
of him that waiteth, and cometh to the thousand 
three hundred and thirty-five days" (years)! (Daniel 12:12.) 
At that time great blessings came to the people 
of God; for at that time our Master returned, preparatory 
to taking up His great power and commencing His long-promised 
reign of a thousand years. The time for His 
Parousia had come, and He was here! The nature of 
those blessings we need not repeat; in fact, they could not 
be explained in a few words. But ever since the Presence 
of the Master we have had evidences of the great 
blessings coming to us, as foretold by the Prophet Daniel. 

EVIDENCES OF OUR LORD'S PAROUSIA 

In what way will the Lord take His great power and 
reign? The Scriptures show us very clearly. In line 
with the same chronology the Scriptures teach us that 
there is a time for the Parousia, or Presence of the Lord. 



That time, as far as we are able to calculate, began in 
1874. Since that date we have been living in the Parousia 

R5566 : page 326 

of the Son of Man. Is there anything to corroborate 
this? Yes. In the first place, we look for the Lord's 
dealing with His people, the Church. We should expect 
that at the time of our Lord's Coming His people would 
hear His "knock"— the knock of the prophecies, and whoever 
would open his heart and receive the things in a consecrated 
attitude of mind the Lord would gird Himself 
as a Servant and would come forth and serve Him.— 
Revelation 3:20. 

All of the special blessings that we, as a company of 
Bible Students, have received during the past forty years 
have been the result of the Lord's Presence. He has 
been our Servant and has been bringing forth things new 
and old out of His storehouse. These old things have 
been coming forth in a new way— not because of human 
ability or skill, but because it is the Lord's due time for 
these things to become clear— the doctrine of Redemption, 
the Ransom, the meaning of the term Body of Christ, 
the explanation of how the death of Christ is justification 
for our sins, the imputation of His merit for the Church, 
the giving of the merit to the world, what the sanctification 
of the Church really means, the begetting of the 
Holy Spirit, the begotten ones becoming New Creatures 
in Christ, and what this term, a New Creature, signifies, 
how the New Creature differs from the old creature, how 
the First Resurrection is to bring this New Creation glorious 
privileges and Divine blessing— glory, honor and 
immortality. -SCRIPTURE STUDIES, Vol. II., page 103; Vol. 
V., page 421; Vol. VI., pages 59-84. 

Our Lord, present, but invisible, has brought us light 
along every feature of the Divine Plan, not only respecting 
those things that were old— justification, sanctification 
and redemption— but also respecting the philosophy 
of God's dealings— how our Lord became flesh and dwelt 
among us, how He was holy, harmless and undefiled, and 
yet was born of an earthly mother. All these things 
which were once confusing to us, but which are now 
brought to light, are evidences that the Lord is here serving 
His people. We know that we have received these 
things. We do not believe that we have received them 
from any human tongue or pen, but from the Lord, who 
is giving us "meat in due season." The result of receiving 
this spiritual food is that many people have been 
sanctified— have experienced a transformation of mind 
that leads them to rejoice in laying down their lives for 
the brethren and in walking in the footsteps of Jesus. 

A gentleman recently called on us, and made the remark 
that after seeing the PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION he 
got his first glimpse of God's character and learned to 
love God. He had been an Episcopalian, then a Christian 
Scientist, and then for fifteen years an unbeliever; but 



now he has gotten clearer views of God and His Plan. 

Although he is a very talented man, he is doing what he 

finds to serve the Lord— helping to fold the volunteer literature. 

The first intimation we had of his interest was his 

giving of $50 for the work. After seeing the PHOTO-DRAMA, 

he had gotten so much good from it that he 

wished to help it along. 

This we mention as showing the power of the Truth, 
in contrast with the opposite influence of error. While we 
cannot say that we number ourselves by millions, yet we 
can say that nearly fourteen thousand have taken a very 
special Vow that implies their full consecration to the 
Lord; many others are writing in to say that they have 
taken that Vow— some of them years ago; and there are 
some from whom we shall never hear— still others who 
have never taken the Vow, but who are fully consecrated, 
as far as we know. 

If we ask Christian people whether or not they have 
given up everything they have to the Lord, the majority 
of them will say, "No. I want to live a good Christian 
life; but I never made full consecration to the Lord." All 
these blessings enumerated are the result of the very 
precious Truth that has come to us, and to thousands of 
others. These have been very greatly blessed and helped, 
even though they have not made a full consecration to the 
Lord. This is a good evidence that something unusual has 
occurred within the period of the Harvest time. Moreover, 
this work has been growing. It has been supported 
in a way that is marvelous to ourselves and to our enemies. 
Possibly many of the dear friends wonder if there is not 
a miracle performed. But there has been no miracle, yet 
it is marvelous in our sight that so much has been done 
with a comparatively small amount of money; for amongst 
the Lord's people there are not many rich, not many 
learned.— 1 Corinthians 1:26-29. 

THE TIME OF HARVEST 

Our Lord indicated that at His Second Coming all His 
servants who would be in the right condition of heart 
would hear His knock; and that if they would open to Him 
immediately, He would come in and sup with them. What 
does this statement signify? It means that His knock 
showed that the time for the great Representative of God 
—our glorified Lord— to be here had come; and that all 
who were ready would hear that knock, the prophetic 
knock, calling attention to the prophetic testimony that 
thenceforth we could look forward to Messiah's beginning 
His Parousia, His Harvest Work, at once with all 
denominations. 

When the year 1875 came, was everything accomplished 

R5566 : page 327 

within twenty-four hours? Surely not! Did everybody 
awake at the same minute? Have they not been getting 



awake all through the Harvest Time? And some of 
us have not been awake very long. Some of us did not 
hear the knock when first our Master returned; but just 
as soon as we did hear and opened our hearts, we got the 
blessing; for we were in the proper attitude of heart to 
receive. This is true in the United States, in Canada, in 
Great Britain, in Africa, Australia; true everywhere. 

What has occurred during this time? We have had a 
Harvest period, and the work of the Harvest has been 
going on silently, gradually. The Lord has been judging 
amongst His people, just as He said He would. He said 
that He would call His own servants first and reckon with 
them. Of course, none of this was from anything that we 
saw with our eyes, but from an unfolding of God's Word. 

THE RESURRECTION OF THE SAINTS 

Through the testimony of God's Word we understand 
that the Resurrection began in 1878; not that we saw anything 
by the natural sight of the eyes, but that through the 
eyes of our understanding we recognized that the time had 
come for that great transaction, the First Resurrection, as 
far as the sleeping saints were concerned; and we understand 
that there commenced the time mentioned by the 
writer of Revelation, when he declared, "Blessed are they 
who die in the Lord from henceforth," marking a particular 
time, before which it would not be a blessing to die, 
but after which it would be a blessing. "From henceforth: 
Yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their 
labors; and their works do follow them."— Rev. 14:13. 

That particular time came, we believe, in 1878; then, 
not only the Apostles were awakened, but all the faithful 
in Christ Jesus, all the sleeping members of the Body of 
Christ. That was the beginning of the Resurrection of 
the Body of Christ— the Lord judging among His people 
first, before the judgment of the world. He foretold that 
when He would come He would call His own servants and 
reckon with them— not with the world— giving reward to 
those of His Church who had gone before, giving them 
part in the First Resurrection, and then afterward dealing 
with us, "who are alive and remain," so that each one of 
us who are of the Lord's people, may at death be "changed 
in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye," during the 
sounding of the last trumpet— the Seventh. 

We are living now under the sounding of this great 
Trump of God; not that we are hearing anything with our 
natural ears, but that we are hearing with the ears of our 
understanding that God's time has come, and that the great 
institution which He is arranging for the future is now 
being inaugurated. 

The next prophetic period is the Time of Trouble. In 
one sense, perhaps, this began back about 1872. That was 
the time when Communism began to be broached afresh, 
when Socialism began to spread itself. We believe that 
many people are counted Socialists who are not really 
Socialists, but who might become such under favorable circumstances 



and conditions— which likely will develop before 

1916 A.D. This development of Socialism is connected 

with anarchy. The hopes and methods of Socialists 

will prove failures and then they will be so wrought up 

as to bring on the great Time of Trouble. Meantime, also, 

arrangements have been going on gradually for the present 

war. While outwardly proclaiming (1872 A.D.) at 

the Geneva Peace Conference that all the nations would 

band themselves together and advocate the peaceful settlement 

of difficulties, and while yet crying "Peace! 

Peace!" nevertheless, notwithstanding all this, the nations 

of the world have progressed in the building of great warships 

and the drilling of troops. 

We will not go into details further; we merely wish to 
impress the thought that these fulfilments of prophecy did 
not come suddenly, but gradually— that they had a particular 
time for beginning, and were sure of accomplishment. 
In view of these lessons from the past, what should 
we think about the future? We should not conclude that 
everything would be transformed inside of one minute, or 
one hour, or one day, but gradually. 

INAUGURATION OF MESSIAH'S KINGDOM GRADUAL 

This leads us to expect that the remaining prophetic 
periods will have a similar fulfilment, and that September 
20 of this year, 1914, probably marked the end of the Gentile 
Times. If so, what we are witnessing now amongst 
the nations is a conflict to their finish. This is exactly what 
we should expect. Evidently the Lord is behind the matter; 

R5567 : page 327 

the Lord's Kingdom will manifest itself more and 
more. It will not be fully manifested, however, until the 
Church is with her Lord in glory. "When He shall be 
revealed, we also shall be revealed with Him in glory." 

Should we expect that the Lord would reveal Himself 
the very moment Gentile Times end? No. The Bible 
declaration is that He shall be revealed in "flaming fire." 
Just how long after the Gentile Times close will be the 
revealment in "flaming fire" we do not know. Seemingly, 
following this great war will come the greatest "earthquake" 
that ever occurred— a revolution that will involve 
all the civilized nations. (Revelation 16:18.) Then 
Socialism may loom up, but will be short-lived and develop 
into anarchy. That anarchy will be the "flaming fire" revealing 
the new Kingdom, taking vengeance, bringing 
retributive justice upon the world— preceding its blessing. 

If the harvest work of our Lord's presence (parousia) 
has been a gradual work for forty years leading up to the 
present time, and if the Time of the End is a slow period, 
how long would this period be, in which present institutions 
will be ousted, and the present order of things be 
condemned and done away with, to make way for the 
Reign of Righteousness? We answer that according to 



such pictures we might expect the transition to run on a 

good many years. We might expect it to be five, ten or 

twenty years. But there is something, on the other hand, 

that leads us to anticipate that it will not be very long. 

The Lord has told us that He will "make a short work 

of it." Just how short the work will be would be conjectural. 

Every one may have his own opinion. At one 

time the Lord speaks of it as being "in one hour;" another 

time, as "in one day;" and the Apostle speaks of it as 

coming like travail upon a woman with child— suddenly. 

We remember also that there is a certain parallel between 
the Jewish Age and the Gospel Age. The forty 
years' Harvest of the Jewish Age, which began with Jesus' 
ministry, 29 A.D., ended in the year 69 A. D.— just as we 
believe that the Harvest of this age began with 1874 and 
ended with this fall, 1914. It was in the year following 
the expiration of forty years of the Jewish Harvest that 
the end of the Jewish polity came— at the destruction of 
their city. And so the parallels would lead us to suppose 
that one year from the present time would finish this short 
parallel period, this great work of disaster upon the world, 
the overthrow of the nations, viz., the attempt of the different 
nations to gain supremacy— the failure of their 
efforts— then the fire of God's anger, anarchy, the destruction 
which will sweep the whole world and usher in Messiah's 
Kingdom. 

The Master tells us that unless these days were shortened 
there would be no flesh saved. (Matthew 24:22.) 

R5567 : page 328 

It will be a part of Messiah's Kingdom work, not only to 
dash those nations to pieces, but to stop the anarchy when 
it shall have done its work, when it shall have demonstrated 
to the human mind the fact that nothing that man 
can do will be able to help the race. Then when man's 
extremity shall have been reached, Messiah's Kingdom will 
take hold; and the great disaster will be throttled, the 
blessings of the Kingdom will begin, and mankind will 
receive them in proportion as they are in the right attitude 
of heart to respond. 

PRELUDE TO THE TIME OF TROUBLE 

We see that God gave the lease of dominion to the 
Gentiles. The words of the Prophecy were that Zedekiah's 
crown would be overturned, overturned, overturned, until 
He comes whose right it is, and God would give it to Him. 
Has the Kingdom begun in any sense of the word? We 
so believe. We think that the light now going forth is 
under the direction of the Captain of our Salvation. We 
think that the present distress amongst the nations is 
merely the beginning of this Time of Trouble. They did 
not wait for the time to come when they would be smitten. 
In their "anger" they got into trouble before their lease 
had expired. 



At present the nations show such a bitterness toward 
each other, such a desire to conquer and destroy one another, 
that they are determined to continue the war, even 
if it result in the loss of their own wealth, the destruction 
of their own homes, and of one another. The spirit of 
competition, which was supposed to have died, had only 
been covered up for a little while; and the spirit of the 
Adversary is still there. Although they are called Christian 
nations, they have not received the Spirit of the Lord; 
they have not received the spirit of meekness, gentleness, 
long-suffering, brotherly kindness and love, the fruits of 
the Holy Spirit; but on the contrary, the spirit which St. 
Paul says consists of hatred, wrath, strife, murder— works 
of the flesh and the Devil. For this reason they are angry 
and have involved themselves in the present turmoil. 

The nations did not even wait for God's wrath to come, 
but began to bring it upon themselves nearly two months 
in advance. They became so angry that they began to 
destroy each other even before their lease of power had 
expired. God's wrath will continue in this great Time of 
Trouble to its completion— the "fire." The great dreadnaughts 
and super-dreadnaughts, great guns and little 
guns, Czars and Emperors, will soon dash each other to 
pieces. The anarchy that will follow this war will be the 
real Time of Trouble. 

THE BATTLE OF ARMAGEDDON 

Our thought is that the war will so weaken the nations 
that following it there will be an attempt to bring in 
Socialistic ideas, and that this will be met by the governments 
—the wealthy and all classes interested in the present 
order of things, "the world which now is," the present 
"heavens," or ecclesiastical system, and the "earth," the 
social order. The present order will be supported by the 
rich, by financiers, politicians, princes of industry, and 
the kings upon the thrones. All these will do their best to 
maintain present conditions, and will summon the clergy 
to their support. Then will come a general uprising everywhere; 
on one side those who are beneficiaries of the present 
institutions will be against any change. Against them, 
on the other side, will be the masses, who are striving to 
better their condition; for in God's Plan, the time has 
come for a change. 

Shall the Lord's people have any part in the struggle? 
Nay! Let us ever keep in mind that we are peacemakers. 
Not only are we peaceable ourselves and seeking to live 
peaceably with all men, but we are to be peace-promoters, 
and to help others to see things straight and right. That 
course would be tending toward putting away anarchy and 
strife; but anarchy will surely come, despite all endeavors 
to the contrary. 

Nevertheless, the Lord shows us through His Word 
that there is to be a victory on the part of the New Order 
of things, now coming in. The Socialists do not want 
anarchy; but they are not far from it. Anarchy is the 



worst thing that could be— a lack of some form of government 
being the worst thing the world could experience. 
The warring element will fight out this battle; and this will 
be the way in which God will promote the change, which 
is represented in the Bible as a great "fire," which will 
consume the present "heavens," or ecclesiastical ruling 
powers, and the "earth," or social institutions. 

Following that great "fire," then, will be manifested the 
"new heavens and the new earth." The new heavens, the 
new ecclesiastical ruling power, will be the Church of 
the future in Glory, the Bride of Christ, enthroned with 
Him. The new earth will be the new order of things on 
the earth, which will be in the hands of the Ancient 
Worthies, "whom the Lord will make Princes in all the 
earth," when His Kingdom shall be fully established. 

"THY KINGDOM COME" 

Our text proceeds to say, "And the time of the dead, 
that they should be judged," that they should receive their 
proper rewards and punishments, and be righteously dealt 
with, is closely associated with this time of angry nations. 
The whole dead world will be dealt with during that 
thousand years of Christ's Reign. The object of that dealing 
is that He "should give reward to His servants the 
Prophets," beginning at the proper time. Their reward is 
that they are to be the earthly Princes in the Kingdom, in 
all the earth. "And to the saints." The saints will be 
changed in the First Resurrection, "right early in the 
morning." (Psalm 46:5, margin.) "Them that fear Thy 
Name, small and great," shows the reward of all those 
who will come into harmony with the Lord during the 
thousand years— this pictures the blessing of Restitution 
coming to all mankind. These blessings they are to receive 
as they show their obedience to Him in all things. 

What will the consummation be? "And shouldest 
destroy them which destroy [or corrupt] the earth." Those 
that give forth a corrupting influence and that refuse to 
come into harmony with righteousness during the thousand 
years will be destroyed from amongst the people. Nothing 
will be left of them. Everything evil will be destroyed, 
root and branch; only the righteous will prevail throughout 
all eternity. All having sympathy with unrighteousness 
will be destroyed. We see, then, that the entire Millennial 
Age will be needed to accomplish the work outlined 
in our text. It is not to be suddenly accomplished; we are 
not to expect a sudden fulfilment of that work. 

Will the culmination of Gentile Times bring in the 
Kingdom by a very slow change, or how will it be done? 
September 21 did not bring any great change, but it saw 
this anger and this war-fever already begun amongst the 
nations. The spirit of anger has been brewing in them 
for the past forty years. They have been in preparation 
all this time, not spending money for amusement, but 
for foreseen war. They have built great navies knowing 
that the majority of these vessels were to go to the scrapheap 



as soon as new types of battleships came in, making 
all the older ones obsolete. They were not wasting their 
money. They recognized that this great struggle was coming. 
In the German Navy, the custom is to instil into the 
men the thought that they will be the conquerors of the 

R5568 : page 329 

world, and they expect this great war to decide the matter. 

We are treading upon what might be termed, perhaps, 
dangerous ground, in assuming the possibility, even, that 
during this year that has begun there would be such an 
upheaval of nations, such an attempt on the part of kings, 
rulers, political princes and merchant princes to hold things 
where they are; and that to do this they will probably raise 
up the churches to great power, in order that they may 
through them, if possible, hold back the new order of things. 
Whether this comes within this year or a longer period, 
no matter; we believe this is the way which the Bible indicates 
it will come. When the church systems shall be 
thus raised up, all who stand for the Plan of God will be 
evil-spoken of, evil thought of, whereas they are the best 
friends of the world, the truest— just as the Lord is the 
truest friend of the whole human family. But if Jesus 
was crucified, so will these have trying experiences, and 
although the offenders may be of the Household of Faith, 
we must feel kindly toward them. As St. Peter said to 
his Jewish brethren, "I wot, brethren, that in ignorance 
ye did it, as did also your rulers."— Acts 3:17. 

THE JEWISH QUESTION 

Some one may say, We do not see the Jews back in 
Jerusalem yet. Is Jerusalem still trodden down of the 
Gentiles? In reply, we ask, What do you think our Lord 
meant when He said that Jerusalem shall be trodden down 
of the Gentiles until the Times of the Gentiles be fulfilled? 
Do you think that the walking over the stones and 
streets in Jerusalem was what the Lord meant by the 
treading down of Jerusalem? If so, you were very foolish 
in your thought. Jerusalem represents the Jewish polity, 
government, institution, people. The Jews had already 
been trodden down for centuries before our Lord's remark 
—in fact, they were under the heel of the Romans 
at the time Jesus uttered those words; and they would 
continue to be under the domination of those Gentile governments 
"until the Times of the Gentiles be fulfilled." 

Gradually the Jewish people have been emerging from 
their down-trodden condition— persecuted for eighteen 
centuries. The time is here when the Message has been 
and is still being delivered to them, as recorded in Isaiah 40:1,2: 
"Comfort ye, comfort ye My people, saith your 
God. Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto 
her, that her warfare is accomplished, that her iniquity is 
pardoned; for she hath received of the Lord's hand double 
for all her sins."— Isaiah 40:1,2. 



This prophecy was fulfilled, as pointed out in the 
STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, in the year 1878; and ever 
since that time, the star of Judaism has been rising; the 
Jews have become more prosperous ever since, as they 
themselves realize. Nowhere have they been so prosperous 
as in these United States, where they have received 
their greatest blessing; while in Russia and Germany they 
have been persecuted to some extent, but not in the same 
degree as formerly. 

JERUSALEM NO LONGER DOWNTRODDEN 

The treading down of the Jews has stopped. All over 
the world the Jews are now free— even in Russia. On 
September 5, the Czar of Russia issued a proclamation to 
all the Jews of the Russian Empire; and this was before 
the Times of the Gentiles had expired. It stated that the 
Jews might have access to the highest rank in the Russian 
army, and that the Jewish religion was to have the 
same freedom as any other religion in Russia. Where are 
the Jews being trodden down now? Where are they being 
subjected to scorn? At present they are receiving no 
persecution whatever. We believe that the treading down 
of Jerusalem has ceased, because the time for the Gentiles 
to tread down Israel has ended. 

As to a government in Palestine, the Jews have just 
as much of a government as any other people there. 
Nominally, the Turkish government has the rule. When 
we have the opportunity, we intend to call the attention 
of our Jewish friends to the fact that the time of their 
disfavor and the Times of the Gentiles have expired, and 
that they may re-establish their kingdom in Palestine; for 
there is nothing now that intervenes. Some years ago, we 
called their attention to the fact that the Gentile Times 
were fast closing; and the Message, by the way, went all 
over the various countries of the world where Jews live, 
it having been printed in the Yiddish and the German 
languages. That Message has carried peace to them, telling 
about their restoration and pointing out to them this 
very time. Now we are able to tell them that the Gentile 
Times have expired, and that they may go up and take 
possession of the land. We do not know how soon they 
will take possession. According to their faith it will be 
unto them. 

A proper conception of the Divine Plan and arrangements 
shows that now is the time for the Jews to get the 
land of Palestine from the Turkish government. The 
Turks are anxious to get some money, and, as they do not 
have very much at the present, it seems as though they 
would be willing to get rid of something that is not doing 
them any particular good. Now would be a good opportunity 
for the Jews to offer to buy Palestine; and they 
would probably get their country for a few million dollars. 

The Turks realize that if they lose in the present war, 
they would lose Palestine; in this favorable time the sale 
of that country would be of some value to them. There 



is nothing in our Lord's statement, "Jerusalem shall be 
trodden down of the Gentiles until the Times of the Gentiles 
be fulfilled," that would militate against this thought. 
On the other hand, everything is in its favor; for the 
treading down of the Jews has ceased. Now it is merely 
for them to go up and possess their land. 

THE EXPECTATIONS OF THE CHURCH 

Some one may ask, Since the fulfilment of the various 
time prophecies demonstrates that God's methods of operating 
are slow, may it not be that the Kingdom will not 
be ushered in for five, ten or even twenty-five years? 
Our reply is, we are not a prophet; we merely believe 
that we have come to the place where the Gentile Times 
have ended. If the Lord has five years more for us here, 
we shall be very glad to be on this side of the veil; and 
we feel sure that all the Lord's truly consecrated children 
also will be glad to be on this side if it is the Lord's will. 
If the Lord has even one more year for us as good as 
the past year has been, what more could we ask? 

Nothing could induce us to part with that knowledge 
of God and His Plan in which we rejoice today. All the 
world over, that which makes the Lord's people appear 
happy is not special beauty on the outside, but the Light 
on the inside, the Light of the Knowledge of the glory of 
God, the Light of the Knowledge of the Divine Truth in 
our hearts. This Light shining through these earthen 
vessels is heart-cheering and comforting. We cannot 
imagine anything better. As the poet says, 

"It satisfies my longings, as nothing else can do." 
We are happy to be coworkers with God; and by and by 
we shall be coworkers with Him on the other side the veil. 

Look back now and see how the Lord's promises have 
been fulfilled— how during this time of Harvest it has 
been, as He said it would be, a blessed time. Listen to 
the words of the Prophet concerning the time since 1875, 
and note how his prophecy has been fulfilled: "Oh, the 
blessedness of Him that waiteth, and cometh to the thousand 

R5568 : page 330 

three hundred and five and thirty days"— the blessedness 
of those who have been living from 1875 onward. 

What blessings have we received? Just as the Bible 
has said to us, so has it been. Those who open their 
hearts to the Lord find that He not only comes in and 
sups with them, but that He becomes their servant, comforts 
them, and serves them with "meat in due season." 
This accounts for all these blessed truths upon which we 
have been feasting since we have entered into the light 
of Present Truth; and it proves that this Divine Plan of 
the Ages is not from any human being nor is it a human 
plan or scheme; for no human being is capable of bringing 
such glorious things out of the Word of God. 

Looking back over the past eighteen hundred years at 



the futile efforts of able, good men and women to bring 
something reasonable and harmonious out of the Bible, 
we find nothing satisfactory. On the contrary, we are 
ashamed of all the creeds of the past. Even those made 
in the past century do not satisfy anybody's longings. 
Those who are paid to preach them are ashamed to do so, 
and cover them up as much as possible. 

Our Lord said that at His Second Coming He would 
serve things "both new and old"; and this has been so. 
Not merely are new things coming to our attention respecting 
the glory of the coming Kingdom and the work 
throughout the thousand years of Christ's Reign, but old 
things are coming to us in a clearer, better light. Among 
these is the doctrine of Justification by Faith, about which 
Brother Luther preached centuries ago, and which we 
thought had been correctly defined and thoroughly understood. 
Now we find that we did not understand Justification 
by Faith at all. Sanctification was preached by good 
people, too. When we came to a Biblical understanding 
of the subject of Sanctification, all that we knew before 
seemed childish and contradictory. How beautiful and 
harmonious these doctrines became! Then there are the 
types of Leviticus, which picture all the glorious features 
of the Divine Plan. All these familiar subjects are now 
shining as new, having been brought forth by our great 
Master, who is doing the serving, who is giving "meat in 

R5569 : page 330 

due season," "things both new and old." 

Take the doctrine of Baptism, which has been preached 
about for all these centuries past. Now we are finding out 
that what we did not know about it has filled volumes. 
When we come to an understanding of the subject of 
Baptism, it is beautiful, grand! We never supposed that 
it had so much meaning. The reason for all this increase 
of knowledge is that we are living in the blessed time mentioned 
by the Prophet Daniel, "Oh, the blessedness of 
him that waiteth and cometh to the 1335 days"— in other 
words, as aforesaid, those who are living after the expiration 
of the 1335 days. We are living in the time during 
which God has been pouring in upon our hearts and 
minds all this joy, peace and blessing mentioned by the 
Prophet; but it did not happen in one hour, in one day, 
or in one year. It has been a gradual unfolding of 
Divine Truth. The path of the just shines more and more. 

"WISE AS SERPENTS-HARMLESS AS DOVES" 

We all agree that with the end of all of the different 
prophetic periods of the past, evidently there was no sudden 
explosion of new things; but that, on the contrary, the 
new conditions came in gradually. Now, however, in 
respect to this time in which we are living, there seems to 
be a little difference; for in speaking of this great Time 
of Trouble coming upon the world and about the changes 



to take place at this present time, the Lord everywhere 
represents it as coming suddenly. "In one hour," is a 
frequent expression; not meaning necessarily a literal 
hour, but a very short space of time. "In one day" is 
another expression, indicating a brief period of time. The 
Lord says He will make a "short work in the earth." We 
believe it. We remember again that the Master says, 
"Unless those days should be cut short, no flesh would 
survive; but for the Elect's sake these days shall be 
shortened." 

What did He mean? We believe that this spirit of 
frenzy that is now manifesting itself in the Old World is 
bound to spread, and that this national anger, hatred, 
malice, of one nation against another will extend to persons. 
We think it very wise, then, that the public press 
and the various officials of this country are seeking to have 
all recognize the fact that we are a mixed people, and 
that we have our natural sympathies with those of our 
kinsfolk who are beyond the seas, and any special activity 
in seeking to defend any particular nation now at war 
would cause malice and hatred, would tend toward 
the condition spoken of in the Bible when "Every man's 
hand will be against his neighbor and his brother." 

We think it very wise on the part of the government 
officials to advocate that we take no side in the present 
war; for to do so would foster the spirit of anarchy; and 
we think that so far as all religiously-inclined people are 
concerned, they should do all in their power to prevent 
the spread of this spirit of anarchy, even though it will 
surely come. In this way we shall be doing our duty, 
even if our endeavors to bring peace to the world are 
thoroughly ineffective. We should always bear in mind 
that we are representatives of the Lord of Righteousness 
and of the great King of Peace, who will ultimately take 
the Throne of Power. 

RE THE DELIVERANCE OF THE CHURCH 

What shall we expect concerning this great change 
coming in the next year? It seems to us possible that 
one year might work all this great change that we are 
expecting. But perhaps it will not be so. We must wait 
and see. We merely suggest the possibility that in one 
year all these great things will come. That will be very 
sudden, as travail upon a woman with child— without 
warning. This war came without warning, and very 
speedily the nations were fighting one another; for the 
time has come. 

As these things were previously held more or less in 
restraint, now the Lord is letting them loose gradually; 
and He will let them loose more and more until the great 
anarchy comes which would entirely destroy our whole 
human race unless it was arrested. In the meantime the 
Kingdom class will have been glorified, and our great 
King will have taken unto Himself His great power, and 
with the Elect, the Body of Christ, the Church, He will 



bring in peace and blessing to mankind, as soon as the 
world shall have passed through the fire of anarchy and 
the present order of things shall have been dissolved in 
the great heat— not a moment sooner. Then the Elect of 
God will interpose that the world may not be destroyed, 
that humanity may not destroy itself; and then will be the 
beginning of the blessings that are to come to all people 
through Christ, through the merit of His sacrifice, through 
the channel of The Christ glorified— Jesus and His Joint-heirs 
in the Kingdom. 

As we look at these things, we realize that we have 
every reason to do all in our power to prepare ourselves 
for this glorious work. We remember also what our 
dear Redeemer told us to do: "When ye see these things 
begin to come to pass [do we see them? We think so!], 
then lift up your heads and rejoice, knowing that your 
deliverance draweth nigh." Just how nigh, the Lord did 
not say. Therefore, we may not attempt to say. 

R5569 : page 331 

But we cannot be far from our change; and we advise 
that all of the Lord's people live day by day just as though 
this was the last day on this side the Veil, and that tonight 
or tomorrow would usher us into the glorious things 
beyond the Veil. Living in this way will surely be at 
least a good experience for us, bringing blessings and 
ripening of character. What a blessed way to live!— 
every day in anticipation of seeing our Redeemer and 
sharing in His wonderful work! The things connected 
with this present time seem less and less important to us, 
on account of which our names are cast out as evil by 
those who are living for all they can get out of the present 
life. 

"DRINK YE ALL OF IT" 

What may be done to our mortal bodies? None have 
the power to injure us as New Creatures. We are waiting 
for our change, which will come to some in one way 
and to some in another. God be praised! His will be 
done! Our Master had a cup at the conclusion of His 
experiences, and it was an especially bitter one, His suffering 
as an evil-doer and as a blasphemer being especially 
severe. Under the Jewish Law, blasphemy of God's name 
was really one of the most grievous crimes, and was 
especially punished by ignominious death. Jesus was not 
the blasphemer, but the Scribes and Pharisees were the 
blasphemers. Yet Jesus was to die as the blasphemer, 
while those who were really doing the blaspheming were 
the ones who put Him to death! 

We should not wonder if in the Divine arrangement 
God might have some such bitter cup for the feet-members 
of the Body of Christ. Why should we think 
so? For various reasons. We have so much favor from 
God, that it would seem that we would deserve to have 



severer testings and a fuller and more bitter cup than 
others have had. Furthermore, the Scriptures seem to 
imply that it will be so. 

Elijah was a type of the Church, and we remember that 
at his departure he went in a chariot of fire; and we believe 
that this symbolically represents the time of trouble 
on the Church when the time of our departure shall come. 
Then, again, John the Baptist was a semi-type, the semi-antitype 
of Elijah. John's experiences were very bitter. 
He was imprisoned for a while and not permitted to do 
any preaching; and he no doubt wondered in the time of 
his imprisonment whether or not he had been mistaken 
in his glorious expectations in regard to the Messiah. 
Then came the sudden edict for him to be beheaded. 
Herodias and Salome were anxious to get rid of him, but 
King Herod was not. We remember that in our interpretation 
of this type the king represents the civil power, 
Herodias represents the Roman Catholic Church and 
Salome, the daughter, represents the Protestant Churches 
Federated. These are more or less united to the civil 
powers, the "Mother" especially. We remember that there 
was some special dancing on the part of Salome before 
the king, who was so pleased with her that he told her 
that she might have anything she desired, even to the half 
of his kingdom. After she had conferred with her mother, 
they decided that the best thing that could happen for 
them would be the death of John the Baptist. 

So it was in the Master's case. The religious rulers 
decided that the best thing that could be done was that He 
should perish. We remember that it was the last high 
priest of the Jewish nation, Caiaphas, who prophesied 
respecting Jesus that it was expedient that one man should 
die for the people rather than that the whole nation perish. 
So it was in the case of John. Herodias and Salome concluded 
that John the Baptist should die, and thereby they 
would cease to have his continual reminder of their wrong 
course; and so they would have him beheaded. 

Whether or not this is to be a part of the antitype 
remains to be seen. It would not surprise us if it will 
be so. We are not speaking positively; but we wish to be 
"wise as serpents." Let us not be surprised at whatever 
things the Lord may permit to come. Let us remember 
that our Master was given a bitter cup of suffering in His 
closing hours, and that the Father did not seek to remove 
it from Him. But Jesus meekly accepted it, saying, "The 
cup which My Father hath poured for Me, shall I not 
drink it?" So we should be well prepared for whatever 
cup of bitter experiences and ignominy the Lord may have 
for us. At the same time we should have in our minds the 
refreshing thought given us by the promise in the Scriptures, 
that the Lord will not permit us to be tempted, or 
tested, above what we are able to bear, but will with the 
temptation provide a way of escape. The further assurance 
is that "All things shall work together for good to 
them that love God, to the called ones according to His 
purpose."— Romans 8:28. 



R5570 : page 331 

WORDS OF ENCOURAGEMENT 

Have we heard the Call to be the Bride, the Lamb's 
Wife, to come out of the world, to be dead to the world, 
to give our wills to Him, to sacrifice our earthly treasures? 
Have we become footstep followers of Jesus? "If 
any man will be My disciple, let him deny himself [give 
up his own self-will], take up his cross and follow Me." 
Have we been following the Master, and will we continue 
to follow Him? In our hearts we should be saying, Yes. 

The Master said that in the Regeneration those who 
would now follow Him would have glorious bodies, like 
His own. "We shall be like Him, and see Him as He is" 
—sharers in His glory. May that be the portion of all 
of us! Let us rejoice together in the glorious things that 
our God has arranged for those who are His Church- 
first for the great Head of that Church, our Lord Jesus, 
and later for us, His humble followers, who are seeking 
to become Joint-heirs with Him in His Kingdom. 

Let us remember that it is not knowledge alone that 
sanctifies. Knowledge is valuable to the sanctifying of 
the spirit only when we comply with the conditions that 
we shall mortify the self-will of the flesh and cultivate 
more and more of the Spirit of our Lord, about which St. 
Peter tells us. We are exhorted to put off all these: 
malice, hatred, wrath, strife, etc.; and to put on all these: 
joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, 
meekness, brotherly kindness and love. The Apostle Peter 
says, "If these things be in you and abound, they make 
you that ye shall be neither barren nor unfruitful in the 
knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ"; and "thus an 
entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly into the 
everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus 
Christ." (2 Peter 1:5-11.) Let our ambition and aim be 
to have a share in that Kingdom ! 

"WHO SHALL STAND?" 

Let us remember that we are in a testing season. The 
Apostles had a similar one during the interim between our 
Lord's death and Pentecost. After our Lord's resurrection, 
He appeared to His disciples a few times, and then 
they did not see Him for many days. Then they became 
discouraged and said, "There is no use waiting"; "I go 
fishing," said one. Two others said, "We will go with 
thee." They were about to go into the fishing business 
and leave the work of fishing for men. This was a testing 
time for the disciples. So also there is one now. If 
there is any reason that would lead any to let go of the 
Lord and His Truth and to cease sacrificing for the Lord's 

R5570 : page 332 



Cause, then it is not merely the love of God in the heart 

which has prompted interest in the Lord, but something 

else; probably a hoping that the time was short; the consecration 

was only for a certain time. If so, now is a 

good time to let go. 

Very probably it is now as it was when Jesus said to 
His disciples on a certain occasion, "Will ye also go 
away?" The answer was, "Lord, to whom shall we go? 
Thou hast the words of eternal life." We would starve 
spiritually if we went to any other than the Lord's table. 
We know not anywhere else to go. We shall stay right 
at the Lord's table. He has been feeding us on the Message 
of Truth and Life, and we believe that He will put 
on the table everything necessary for those who are hungering 
and thirsting for the Truth; and that the Truth on 
every subject necessary for us will be given as the Lord 
is pleased to reveal it; for He has promised, "they shall 
be filled." 



R5570 : page 332 

JESUS TRIED BY PILATE 

--NOVEMBER 22. -MATTHEW 27:11-26.- 

"Pilate saith unto them, What then shall I do 
unto Jesus who is called Christ?"— Verse 22. 

PILATE was the Roman Governor of Judea, 

the representative of Caesar's government. 

We are not inclined to blame him seriously 

for the death of Jesus. He acted as he 

was expected to act. He was in Judea, not 

to settle Jewish theories or religious disputes, 

but to keep the people of Judea quiet, 

orderly, subject to the government of Rome. 

It was policy, so far as compatible with the 

peace and quiet of the country, that he 

should rule justly; but justice was to be sacrificed at any 

time in the interests of the Roman Empire. Tradition 

has it that Pilate had heard previously of Jesus, and had 

even met Him by appointment privately, making inquiry 

respecting His teachings. 

Our last lesson showed us Jesus before the Jewish 
Sanhedrin as early in the morning as possible, before the 
people would be generally astir, before therefore there 
could be any general co-operation on the part of Jesus' 
friends, by the people, respecting His arrest, etc. As 
quickly as possible the high priest and representatives of 
the Sanhedrin hurried Jesus to the Praetorium, asking 
Pilate to condemn Him. Pilate inquired as to what charge 
they had against Jesus. They evasively answered that of 
course He was a wicked man, worthy of punishment; else 
they would not be there at all accusing Him. 



Pilate reminded them that under the Roman usage 
they had great liberty in dealing with all disputes of a 
religious kind, that he was not posted in Judaism, and 
that therefore they should deal with the case themselves. 
The priests responded that they knew this; but that they 
had no power to inflict the death penalty. Thus they 
revealed the depth of their wickedness— that they had 
been plotting deliberately to have Pilate inflict the death 
penalty upon an innocent person. Then they began to 
accuse Jesus, claiming that He was perverting the nation 
—turning it away from loyalty and obedience to the 
Roman government— that He was telling the people that 
they should not pay taxes to Caesar, and that He was 
claiming Himself to be the Jewish King Messiah. 

These were serious charges before the Roman Governor, 
which he was bound to consider; and we have 
noticed that they were totally different charges from those 
brought against Jesus by the Sanhedrin trial. Although 
the charges were false, Jesus made no defense. He knew 
that the time had come for Him to die. He would not 
attempt to turn aside that which He knew to be a part 
of the Divine Program for Him. 

JESUS BEFORE PILATE 

Pilate looked upon Jesus, no doubt thinking that one 
so gentle in appearance would not be at all likely to raise 
an insurrection that would be injurious to the interests of 
the Roman Empire. Another account tells us that Pilate 
perceived that the chief priests and scribes were moved 
with envy in making their charges. Pilate perceived that 
something in Jesus' teachings appealed to the people more 
than did the teachings of these religious rulers, and that 
he was being asked to perform a mean and unjust act for 
persons who sought to shirk their own responsibility. 

However, Pilate must not appear to be sympathetic 
with the Nazarene. He must not appear to treat lightly 
the charges made respecting another king than Caesar. 
He therefore demanded of Jesus, "Do You not hear the 
things witnessed against You? Why do You not answer, 
and plead guilty or not guilty?" Jesus said nothing. 

Pilate then went out to the Scribes and Pharisees, who 
had refrained from entering the Praetorium because the 
day was the beginning of the Passover. After conferring 
with the chief priests and hearing from them, apparently, 
Pilate asked the question, "Art Thou the King of the 
Jews? Do You acknowledge that?" Jesus responded 
by asking, "Is the question because of anything that you 
see and know of My teachings, or is your question merely 
based upon the assertion of My enemies?" Pilate replied 
that the chief men of Jesus' own nation had delivered 
Him, and now he would like to know what He had done 
that was the cause of this opposition. 

Jesus answered that His Kingdom was not of this 
world— this present Age or order of things. He was, 
therefore, not in conflict with Caesar's kingdom. This 



would account to Pilate for the fact that neither Jesus 

nor His friends made any manifestation of rebellion 

against the civil government, as would have been the case 

if His had been an earthly government. His Kingdom, 

He declared, was of the future. Pilate replied, "You do, 

then, claim to be a King, and that some time and somewhere 

You will exercise dominion?" Jesus answered that 

He was a King and that to this end He had been born, 

to this end He came into the world. He must bear witness 

to the Truth; and all who were of the Truth, and 

only such, would be able to appreciate His testimony. 

"Ah," said Pilate, "that is a question with everybody: 
What is Truth? Nobody seems to know." Then he went 
forth to the Jews and said, "I find no crime in Him. He 
is in no way a malefactor against Caesar or his laws. He 
has done nothing that could lead me to interfere justly 
with His liberty or His rights." 

The high priests and the Doctors of the Law were 
alarmed. Was it possible that just at the moment when 
they had hoped to crucify Jesus, He would escape 
from them! Then they vehemently charged that Jesus 
was stirring up the people, preaching everywhere, and that 
His preaching had begun away off in Galilee. When 
Pilate heard the word Galilee, he asked, "Is He a Galilaean?" 
Being told that He was, Pilate said, "Then I 
can easily transfer this whole troublesome matter to 

R5571 : page 333 

Herod, King of Galilee," the latter at the time also having 
his palace in Jerusalem. 

Jesus was sent to Herod, who had a curiosity respecting 
Him. He had heard many things of Jesus, and would 
have liked to see Him do some miracle. Herod asked our 
Lord questions, but there was no response. The chief 
priests and Scribes violently accused Jesus to the king. 
Herod and his soldiers mocked Him, and sent Him back 
to Pilate with a gorgeous robe on, a mocked King. This 
act of deference on the part of Pilate, and the return of 
the courtesies by Herod, bridged over an enmity which 
had existed between the two for some time. 

NEITHER PILATE NOR HEROD CONDEMNED 

Addressing the accusers of Jesus again, Pilate said, 
"Ye brought unto me this man as one that perverteth the 
people. Behold, having examined Him before you, I have 
found no fault in this man touching those things whereof 
ye accuse Him: no, nor yet Herod; for I sent you to him 
(and he sent Him back unto us) and behold, nothing 
worthy of death has been done unto Him. I will therefore 
chastise Him and release Him." Evidently the chastising, 
or whipping, of Jesus was done to save His life — 
with the thought that the Jews would be appeased in 
having Jesus suffer to this extent. 

At this time of the year on several occasions Pilate 



had released prisoners in honor of the Passover. The 

multitude at this time cheered Pilate, and inquired whether 

or not he would release some prisoner. Thinking this a 

favorable opportunity to dispose of Jesus and get Him 

out of the hands of the chief priests and leaders 

of the people, Pilate said to the people: "Shall 

I release this One to you who is in prison claiming 

to be the King of the Jews?" The crowd 

looked to their religious leaders and were incited 

to urge the governor to release Barabbas, the highway 

robber. Pilate said to the throng, "What, then, shall I 

do with Jesus, called the Messiah?" And the multitude, 

influenced by their clergy, cried out: "Let Jesus be crucified!' 

Pilate asked: "Why, what has this man done? I 

find no cause of death in Him. I will therefore chastise 

Him and release Him." Jesus was therefore delivered 

over to the multitude, only too willing to mock Him, as 

well as to scourge Him. Pilate said to the waiting Jews, 

"I will bring Him out shortly, scourged, and you will 

know that I find no crime in Him." 

PILATE'S ENDEAVORS TO FREE JESUS 

Jesus, therefore, came out wearing the crown of 
thorns and purple gown. Pilate said unto them: "Ecce 
homo!"— Behold the Man! See the One whom you are 
trying to have me put to death. Behold that He is one of 
the noblest specimens of your race or of humanity. See 
Him in His sorrow and humility. Behold the beautiful 
dignity of His character. Whatever you have against 
Him, you will feel placated now that you see His humility. 
But they cried out, "Crucify Him, crucify Him!" Pilate 
answered: You may crucify Him if you choose, but I find 
no fault in Him— I find no crime in Him. Then the Jews 
came to the real point of the matter, the real reason of 
their opposition, namely, that Jesus had declared Himself 
to be the Son of God and that they considered that 
blasphemy. When Pilate heard that he was all the more 
afraid and returned the question to Jesus: Whence art 
thou? But he got no answer. Then saith Pilate unto 
Him, Speakest Thou not unto me? Knowest Thou not that 
I have power to crucify Thee, and have power to release 
Thee? Jesus answered, Thou couldst have no power at 
all against Me except it were given thee from above: 
therefore he that delivered Me unto thee hath the greater 
sin." Then Pilate thought again to release Jesus, and yet 
it might stir up tumult in the city, which his office obligated 
him to keep in peace and quiet. But the Jews 
cried out: If thou release this man thou art not Caesar's 
friend; everyone that maketh himself a king speaketh 
against Caesar. This was putting Pilate in an awkward 
position. To release Jesus would seemingly make him 
the supporter of Caesar's opponent— the more strange, 
because Jesus was accused by His own countrymen and 
really had nobody to defend Him except Pilate himself. 

To add to Pilate's perplexity he had at this time received 



a message from his wife, urging him to have 

nothing to do with opposition to Jesus, and informing him 

that she had had a special dream respecting the matter. 

Again Pilate had recourse to the people, as in contradistinction 

to their rulers. Presenting the noble personage 

of Jesus before them he exclaimed, "Behold your King!" 

But this seemed only to incense the multitude, who cried 

the more vehemently, "Away with Him! Crucify Him! 

We have no king but Caesar." 

In desperation Pilate had water poured upon his hands 
and washed them in the sight of the people, saying, I am 
innocent of the blood of this righteous man! See ye to 
it." The people cried, "His blood be upon us and upon 
our children!" 

And has it not been so! For more than eighteen centuries 
the Jews have suffered— aliens from God! without 
prophet! without priest! without sin-offerings! without 
Atonement Days! (Hosea 3:4,5.) Ah! but the time 
nears when, their iniquity being pardoned, the Lord will 
pour upon Israel the spirit of prayer and supplication; the 
eyes of their understanding will be opened and they shall 
look upon Him whom they pierced and they shall all the 
more praise Him!— Zechariah 12:10. 

Complying with the demands of the people in all things 
not contrary to the interests of the Roman Empire, as 
was his bounden duty, Pilate surrendered to the demand 
and delivered Jesus to death and released to them 
Barabbas, the robber. 

THE SAME SPIRIT PREVAILS 

Let us not think that human nature has changed during 
the past eighteen centuries. Rather let us believe that, 
the circumstances being the same today, Jesus or His 
disciples might be executed in any land, provided the civil 
magistrates desired their death and deemed it expedient 
in the interests of peace, and especially provided their 
religious rulers and teachers demanded such a sacrifice of 
the innocents, considering it necessary to their own hold 
upon the credulities of the people. 

Let us not be surprised if similar experiences should 
come to some of God's saintly people in the near future. 
The pages of history show that so-called interests of religion, 
voiced by religious rulers, have been powerful with 
civil rulers to the subversion of justice and the death of 
the innocent throughout the Age. The course of 
God's people at all times should be that marked out by 
the Master— full resignation to the will of God— full 
realization of God's supervision of all the interests of His 
Cause— and full trust that the results will work out a far 
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. 



"Though all the world my choice deride, 
Yet Jesus shall my portion be; 



For I am pleased with none beside; 
The fairest of the fair is He. 

"Thy sufferings I embrace with Thee, 
Thy poverty and shameful cross; 

The pleasures of the world I flee, 
And deem its treasures only dross. 



R5571 : page 334 

THE PRUDENT HIDETH HIMSELF 

"A prudent man foreseeth the evil, 
and hideth himself."— Proverbs 22:3. 

LET NO one suppose that it will be possible to 

escape the difficulties and trials of the great 

Time of Trouble, whose shadow is now 

clouding the earth. The most and the best 

that could be hoped for in this direction 

would be an amelioration of the conditions 

by the exercise of that wisdom which 

cometh from Above, described by the 

Apostle, who says that it is "first pure, then 

peaceable, easy of entreatment, full of 

mercy and good fruits." To whatever extent any individual, 

anywhere, shall follow this prescription of 

Heavenly wisdom, to that extent we may be sure he will 

have God's favor. And that favor guarantees to the recipient 

that "all things shall work together for his good." 

The most valuable lessons that any parent or counselor 
can give to those subject to his direction would be, first, 
the Golden Rule— inculcating absolute justice— nothing 
less; secondly, in addition to justice as represented by 
the Golden Rule, should be the lesson of mercy, compassion, 
sympathy, the spirit of helpfulness. The third 
lesson in the series should be meekness, gentleness, 
patience, long-suffering. The fourth lesson should be 
economy in everything— avoidance of waste— the realization 
that what he does not need, some one else does need. 

In suggesting the foregoing lessons, we are presupposing 
a Christian basis— that our readers are themselves 
children of God, who have been feeding at the Lord's 
table upon spiritual, Heavenly food; and that they have 
been seeking to bless their families by training them in 
harmony with the Lord's Word. 

For the dire distress which we see nearing, such character 
preparation is the best heritage that any parent 
could leave to his child. Bonds and stocks will be unavailable 
for food; bank accounts may become uncertain, 
and the possession of money may become a temptation to 
the vicious to rob and to murder; but a good character 
cannot be taken away. Its possession will give a measure 
of peace and security and confidence in the Lord that is 



beyond all price. 

We recommend that none be urged unduly to make a 
full consecration of their hearts, their lives, their all, to 
the Lord and to His service. The lives of God's people 
should in every case be "living epistles, known and read 
of all men"— especially by their own families. Those lives 
should testify not only to the completeness of the consecration 
to the Lord, but also to the peace and joy and 
comfort resulting. "Let the peace of God rule in your 
hearts; and be ye thankful." (Colossians 3:15.) Your 

R5572 : page 334 

being a living epistle, without a single word of exhortation, 
will be powerful in its lessons to all those directly 
under your influence. Additionally, at a suitable time, it 
would be proper to intimate to your family, friends and 
neighbors the comfort and joy, peace and blessing, which 
you have received through a full acceptance of the Lord 
Jesus Christ and the Message of His Word, and what 
pleasure it would be to you to see your dear ones similarly 
blessed, comforted and spiritually healed. 

It is better, however, that your children and friends 
should refrain from any profession of consecration to the 
Lord which would be a mere hypocrisy. There are too 
many hypocritical professors already. They are doing 
harm to the Cause of Christ as well as harming themselves; 
for hypocrisy seems to be especially disdained of 
the Lord, and an insurmountable wall of hindrance to the 
hypocrite himself. Our influence, therefore, should always 
be on the side of honesty, not only in matters financial 
and social, but also, and particularly, in respect to 
God and religion. 

ALSO PROVIDE THINGS HONEST 

The Apostle urges God's people to provide for their 
own— for their own families— their necessities, and He 
urges that such provision shall be honestly made— if not 
honestly, then not at all. Again he exhorts the Lord's 
people to "labor with their hands," that they may have to 
give to others who may be in need. These exhortations 
are not to be understood as recommendations to lay up 
earthly treasure— an earthly fortune. The Lord's people 
are to live in harmony with their faith— to lay up their 
treasure in Heaven. These suggestions, therefore, respecting 
temporalities, are not recommendations to hoard 
wealth, but merely to "use this world as not abusing it." 

In harmony with the text at the head of this article, 
and in accordance with our views of the possibilities of 
the future, we have some recommendations to offer to our 
readers. While we are not certain that all the dire calamities 
of the Day of the Lord will befall the earth within 
the next eleven months, nevertheless, there seems to be 
a sufficient possibility of this to warrant us in making certain 
provisions against the distress of that time— in the 



interest of our families, our friends and our neighbors. 

We recommend to those having dry, clean cellars, or 
other places suitable and well-ventilated, to lay in a good 
stock of life's necessities; for instance, a large supply of 
coal, of rice, dried peas, dried beans, rolled oats, wheat, 
barley, sugar, molasses, fish, etc. Have in mind the keeping 
qualities and nutritive values of foods— especially the 
fact that soups are economical and nourishing. Do not 
be afraid of having too much of such commodities as will 
keep well until the heat of next summer begins, even if 
it were necessary to sell then, at a loss, to prevent spoiling. 
Think of this hoard to eat, not too selfishly, but 
as being a provision for any who may be in need, and who, 
in the Lord's providence, may come your way— "that you 
may have to give to those who lack."— Eph. 4:28. 

Do not sound a trumpet before you, telling of your 
provisions, intentions, etc. "Hast thou faith? Have it 
to thyself before God." Only your own family should 
know of this storing of food, and they should be under 
strict injunctions not to tell it to others. At most, suggest 
to your friends or neighbors the wisdom of keeping 
a stock of staple foods ahead in view of the possibilities 
of storms and strikes, etc., during the winter. Do not 
attempt to go into too great details respecting the Time 
of Trouble; for the majority of people are blind and deaf 
anyway on this subject. 

Do not make these purchases on credit if you have not 
the money. Leave the matter, and exercise the more 
faith; but remember that the Golden Rule is the very 
lowest standard that can be recognized by the Lord's people 
and that it comes in advance of any kind of charity. 



"Though troubles assail and dangers affright, 
Though friends should all fail, and foes all unite, 
Yet one thing secures us, whatever betide; 
The promise assures us, 'The Lord will provide.' 

"When Satan appears to stop up our path, 
And fills us with fears, we triumph by faith; 
He cannot take from us, though oft he has tried, 
The heart-cheering promise, 'The Lord will provide.' 

"When life sinks apace, and death is in view, 
The word of His grace shall comfort us through; 
Not fearing nor doubting with Christ on our side, 
We're sure to die feeling, 'The Lord will provide.'" 

R5572 : page 335 

"IN EVERYTHING GIVE THANKS" 

We thank Thee, Lord, for raiment, and we thank Thee for 

our food, 
We thank Thee for our shelter, O, Thou Giver of All Good; 



We thank Thee for the day on which our eyes first saw the 

light, 
We give Thee thanks for every sense, for hearing and for 

sight. 

We thank Thee for the sunshine, and we thank Thee for the 

rain, 
We thank Thee for the pleasure and we thank Thee for the 

pain. 
We thank Thee for the friends we've won, and for the friends 

we've lost, 
We thank Thee for the heart-aches which these separations 

cost. 

We thank Thee for the tender love which makes us clearly see 
That every severed heart-string hath but drawn us nearer 

Thee. 
We thank Thee for forgiveness when we fail in word or deed, 
We praise Thee for sufficient grace in every time of need. 

We thank Thee, blessed Father, for the gift of Thy dear Son, 
We thank Thee and we praise Thee for the victory He won. 
We thank Thee for His righteousness, His robe so pure and 

white, 
We praise Thee that, when clothed in it, we're blameless in 

Thy sight. 

We thank Thee, oh, we praise Thee for Thy good and precious 

Word, 
We bless Thee for the wondrous faith its promises have 

stirred. 
We thank Thee for the glorious Hope of Immortality— 
Our hearts are longing, Lord, with Thee to dwell eternally! 

We thank Thee for "That Servant," for the love of each dear 

Saint, 
We bless Thee for their fellowship when heart and strength 

grow faint. 
And thus we give Thee thanks, dear Lord, for each and 

every thing, 
And pray that Thou wilt keep us safe beneath Thy sheltering 

wing! 
Oct. 24, 1914. GERTRUDE W. SEIBERT. 



R5572 : page 335 

INTERESTING LETTER 

GREATER IS HE ON OUR PART 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

I wish to tell you of a strenuous experience I had soon 
after leaving Atlanta, Monday morning following the close 
of the Convention. Soon after the train started, I went to 



the rear of the coach to hand out literature; and nearly everyone 

accepted the papers until I had almost reached the end of 

the car. I offered a fine-looking man one; he refused, attacking 

me violently, saying he "wanted nothing whatever to do 

with Russell's devilish literature." Said he knew all about 

Russell, lived in Brooklyn, had read his books and THE 

WATCH TOWER, knew all about the libel suit. He spoke loudly 

enough for all around us to hear him. And I saw we had 

the attention of nearly all in the car. So, while he raged 

with slander against our dear Pastor and all his followers, I 

lifted my heart to God to direct me, and quietly waited until 

he had subsided sufficiently for me to speak; and I said, "Sir, 

you are mistaken; all you have said about Brother Russell is 

as base and false as Satan himself, and you know it, and because 

you can't find fault with his teachings, or combat him 

with Scripture, you try to slander his character behind his 

back." 

He replied, "I am a Baptist minister myself, and know all 
about Russell and his methods; and furthermore, you are 
paid $125 to hand out this stuff; and I have been offered $165 
to do the same."* I replied, "You are mistaken, sir, I am 
not paid a cent, have not been offered a cent, have not asked 
for a cent, and do not want a cent— as it is a glad and willing 
service for the Lord." "For Russell," he hotly and quickly 
replied. 

I said, "Furthermore, sir, no member of the I.B.S.A. 
has ever made you any such offer as you claim, and if you 
will prove it to me, I will sign a check for a thousand dollars 
in your favor. All you have said about Pastor Russell is as 

R5573 : page 335 

base and false as Satan himself." He made no reply, and 
grew silent. I said, "Brother, you say you are a Baptist minister 
and a professed mouthpiece of God, who tells us in 
His Word to 'speak evil of no man' (whether good or bad). 
Now, do you think you are showing the spirit of Christ, or of 
Satan, in your false and slanderous remarks just uttered? 
We know that there are but the two Masters." 

He made no reply and grew very red in the face; and a 
gentleman sitting two seats ahead of him, who had been 
facing him and listening to all that had been said, and who 
knew him, said, "John, would you like to have some hot 
water?" to which the reverend (?) gentleman replied, "No, 
I'm in hot water enough now;" and the listeners simply 
roared with laughter, which made him madder and his face 
crimson. I then left him, saying, "Brother, I fear you will be 
in still hotter water before the Lord gets through teaching 
you some needed lessons." As soon as I got back to my 
seat, a young man came to me, offering me money, "for some 
more tracts like the one you gave me, if you have any more." 
I told him I did not want any money, that freely I had received, 
and freely I gave, and he was welcome to all he 
wanted. He took four or five and went back to his seat. 

Another young man came with his Bible, asking me to 
explain some things he did not understand in Revelation. A 



sister sitting in front of me had a Bible with the I.B.S.A. 
Comments, which she handed me, and I turned to them and 
read to him. He looked at the Bible and said he must have 
one like it, and gave me his name and address, and promised 
to read some literature I would send him. 

Then another young man came with his Bible, and asked 
to sit down by me and asked me to explain some Scripture 
texts he did not fully understand. He also gave me his name 
and address; and I promised to send him some literature. Both 
are traveling men and live in Atlanta. When I got home I 
mailed them each a copy of THE DIVINE PLAN OF THE AGES, 
Missionary Report, several different tracts, etc. Yesterday I 
heard from one of them, saying he was reading the PLAN OF 
THE AGES, and was deeply interested, and thought he would 
subscribe for THE WATCH TOWER if he was as much pleased 
when he finished reading as he now is. I see from his letterhead 

that he is a very prominent member of the 

Baptist Church and a leader of its Bible Class. His name 
is . 

All this was the result of one man's prejudice and opposition 
to the Truth; and shows how God can make the wrath 
of man to praise Him. I certainly felt honored, and thanked 
Him for the opportunity of witnessing for Him, though in 
an unpleasant and unexpected way. That preacher looked 
at me as though he could chew me to pieces, and I suppose 
he thought he would in a few words silence and put me to 
flight; but with the dear Lord's help I stood my ground and 
came off victor. Pray for me, dear Brethren, that I may 
be used more and more to honor and glorify His precious 
Name, and show forth His praises unto others; for I do delight 
to do His will, and I do so want to gain that most 
glorious of all prizes— immortality, beyond the Veil, and be 
forever with my God and Saviour. 

I am realizing more and more the shortness of the time 
in which to prepare for the Kingdom. When I think of the 
change that is just ahead of us, I think of some fairy dream; 
and yet I know that the Gentile Times are ended and the 
new Dispensation is being ushered in. 

I am glad that I shall not be here and have an inheritance 
in the flesh, but I shall be glad to see the work of Restitution 
begun, to see the earth blossom as the rose and to see man 
made perfect, a fit ruler for the restored Paradise. 

I want to see the dead come back and to hear the shouts 
and songs of joy. And to be where we can see all this and to 
help to bring it about and to know that our efforts are wise, 
that our Lord directs and will succeed in the great undertaking, 
is a prospect most transporting. 

Yours humbly in Christ's dear Name, 

MRS. DR. E. Y. WALKER. 

["This honor have all His saints"— to bind their kings with 
chains and their princes with fetters. (Psalm 149:8,9.) We 
are inclined to believe that this sister effectually bound a 
princeling of ecclesiasticism. No doubt the Lord will grant 
special opportunities and aid to others worthy of the honor 
—saints indeed.! 



*A publishing company of Philadelphia styled International Bible Press 
has a bookselling proposition something like the above. It offers $125 
per month, provided a certain number of books are sold, or 40% on what 
may be sold, if less than the limited number. Our Society has no connection 
whatever with this concern. 



page 337 

VOL. XXXV NOVEMBER 15 No. 22 
A. D. 1914-A. M. 6043 



CONTENTS 

There Shall Be Showers of Blessings 339 

Bible Harmonious and Consistent 339 

Dawn of Hope for the World 340 

Restitution Not Change of Nature 341 

Scope of the Angels' Song 342 

Progression of God's Great Plan 342 

Christ's Death a Blessing to Universe 343 

"My Presence Shall Go With Thee" (Poem) 343 

Smitten of God, Afflicted 344 

Son of Man Lifted Up 344 

The Risen Christ 345 

Our Lord No Longer Human 346 

Holiday Remembrancers 347 

I.B.S.A. Bibles and Other Bible Study Helps 348 

Scriptural Proofs of Spirit-Begetting 349 

Interesting Letters 350 

London Drama Experiences 350 

The Brethren in Switzerland 351 

I.B.S.A. Eureka Drama 351 

Interesting Drama Experiences 351 

page 338 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 



FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 

ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



R5575 : page 338 

A WORD TO COLPORTEURS 

The European War is causing many people to think seriously. 
It so closely agrees with what they have from time 
to time seen in THE WATCH TOWER publications or have heard 
from WATCH TOWER subscribers, that they are now wondering 
if there is not some Truth connected with our presentation 
respecting the Millennium and the great Time of Trouble 
with which the Millennial Age will be inaugurated. 

Pastor Russell's sermons on "Armageddon," "Distress of 
Nations," "The Financial Outlook," etc., have also stirred 
many thinking people. They are wanting to know more about 
these things. The present is a very opportune time for calling 
to their attention the true Gospel of the Bible, as it is presented 
in the six volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. 

Colporteurs who a short time ago had difficulty in getting 
the attention of the more well-to-do people, are finding matters 
different now. They are selling the STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES in complete sets (six volumes, and a year's subscription 
to THE WATCH TOWER, for $2.65) where formerly 
they sold a single volume. 

Poverty or, at least, lack of wealth, has generally been a 
stimulant to Bible study. Now the wealthy are feeling themselves 
poor, or in danger of becoming poor by the depreciation 
of their stocks and bonds. These, therefore, are in a 
more favorable condition to hear the Word than they have 
been for a long time. 

The STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES are still going forth. The 
October average sales amounted to over thirty-six thousand 
volumes. We mention this by way of encouragement to those 
who are in the Colporteur work, as well as for the benefit of 
those who are contemplating engaging in this most profitable 
section of the Harvest work. We have the Message which 
the people need. We have the heart to give it to them. And 
have we not confidence in God and courage sufficient to enable 
us to do all reasonably within our power in the Divine service? 



CREATION-DRAMA AT HOME 

Notice in our issues of August 1 and 15 the description of 
the Eureka Drama X. Many of our readers may like to buy 
for themselves, their families or their friends, one of these 
outfits as a Christmas gift. Records and all cost little more 
than an ordinary "Victrola" without records. 

If you have a "Victrola" or graphophone we can supply 
the entire set of 96 Drama Lecture and 9 hymn records 
for $29. 



R5573 : page 339 

"THERE SHALL BE SHOWERS OF BLESSING" 

"They shall not hurt nor destroy in all My 
holy Mountain [Kingdom]."— Isaiah 11:9. 

ACCUSTOMED as all mankind have been to 

misrule and misgovernment, it was necessary 

that assurance should be given to Israel 

that the Kingdom of Messiah which 

God would one day set up in the earth 

would not only have good motives and intentions, 

but would also possess superior 

power of knowledge and judgment. And 

this is what the Prophet Isaiah pointed out. 

The new King will not need to rely upon the 

common channels of information in the giving of His 

blessings and in the administering of His reproofs and 

chastisements, but will have a superhuman endowment of 

power by which He will know the very thoughts and intents 

of the heart. He will not need to judge after the 

hearing of the ear or by the sight of the eye, as must all 

earthly rulers, however well in ten tioned.— Isaiah 11:3,4. 

It was proper also that Israel and all others should 
know that the Kingdom of God to be established would 
be absolutely just and impartial; for their experiences 
have demonstrated that even the wisest and best of their 
rulers, lawmakers, judges, etc., have been largely governed 
by selfishness. The world's great ones have amassed 
wealth at the expense of their subjects, and have made 
their special friends wealthy and have granted them special 
privileges, often-times at the expense of the poor, the 
helpless, the despised. Hence the Lord through the 
Prophet assures us that earth's new King will administer 
equity toward all; that the meek, the backward, the 
modest and unassuming, those who are indisposed to 
press their claims and to assert their rights, will have 
His particular assistance; and that the poor, who have 
few to sympathize with them or to encourage or help 
them, will find in the new King a Friend. 



MILLENNIUM NOT THROUGH EVOLUTION 

Those who expect the Millennial Kingdom to come 
as a result of present efforts, under the order of society 
now prevailing, and who believe that the world is gradually 
approaching the Millennium by an evolutionary 
process, should carefully consider this Word of the Lord 
through the Prophet, as shown in our text and context. 
The Prophet declares that when Messiah shall take the 
reins of government, His first step will be to judge the 
poor, and to reprove the rich in equity, in the interests 
of the meek of the earth. How could this be possible, 
if equity had already prevailed by a gradual process, so 
that there were no poor and no rich, and so that all had 
become meek? 

Other Scriptures in harmony with this testimony of 
the Prophet Isaiah, show that the very work which our 
Lord is to do at the beginning of His Reign will be to 
correct the wrongs then prevailing. Our Lord Himself 
implies that the earth will be far from being in a blessed 
condition at His Second Advent, when He asks the question, 
"When the Son of Man cometh, shall He find The 
Faith on the earth?" (Luke 18:8.) The Revelator also 
gives no uncertain testimony on this subject. He says: 
"And the seventh angel sounded; and there were great 
voices in Heaven, saying, The kingdoms of this world 
are become the Kingdom of our Lord and of His Christ; 
and He shall reign forever and ever. ...And the nations 
were angry, and Thy wrath is come, and the time 
of the dead that they should be judged, and that Thou 
shouldest give reward to Thy servants the Prophets, and 
to the saints, and to them that fear Thy name, small and 
great, and shouldest destroy them that corrupt the 
earth."— Revelation 11:15-18. 

BIBLE HARMONIOUS AND CONSISTENT 

Many Scriptures are of like import. The position of 
the Bible is throughout harmonious and consistent. It 
describes the present time, while sin is prevailing, as "the 
present evil world," in which "the prince of this world" 
rules, and in which the Lord's true people, the Body of 
Christ, the heirs of the Kingdom, "suffer violence," and 
declares that this violence is working out for those who 
are rightly exercised by it a character which will be approved 
by the Lord. The Scriptures point out that to 

R5574 : page 339 

God's faithful saints who suffer now will be granted this 
glorious new Kingdom in joint-heirship with Messiah. 
They shall be given the dominion "under the whole 
heavens," as declared by the angel to Daniel the Prophet. 
(Daniel 7:27.) This dominion Jehovah will wrest by 
force from the "prince of this world," Satan, and will 
give it to His Son, whose Bride will share her Bridegroom's 



Kingdom. This transfer will be accomplished 

in a great Time of Trouble, which is to end this present 

world, the present social order. 

In our context the Prophet goes on to say, "He shall 
smite the earth with the rod of His mouth, and with the 
breath of His lips shall He slay the wicked." It is very 
evident, then, that at the time of the establishment of the 
Kingdom there will not only be poor needing assistance 
and succor, but there will be the wicked also. The rod 
of Messiah's mouth signifies the judgments which He has 
already expressed, and which have very largely gone unheeded 
by Christendom. We remember His declaration: 

R5574 : page 340 

"He that rejecteth Me, and receiveth not My words, 
hath One that judgeth him; the word that I have spoken, 
the same shall judge him in the last Day" (John 12:48) 
—the Day of Judgment, now present, since 1874. Christendom 
in general has admitted the righteousness of the 
Lord's Word, but those who attempt to live in harmony 
with that Word are remarkably few. Consequently, when 
the time shall come that "judgment shall be laid to the 
line and righteousness to the plummet," and when this 
judgment shall begin at the nominal House of God, the 
nominal systems will fall— condemned by that Word. 

Only the faithful few, the Lord's jewels, shall "be accounted 
worthy to escape those things coming upon the 
world," when, as elsewhere described, "He [The Lord] 
shall speak to them [the world] in His wrath, and vex 
them in His sore displeasure"— when He shall render 
vengeance to His enemies, and recompense to those who 
have known the Master's will, yet have done it not. "Vengeance 
is Mine, I will repay, saith the Lord." "Wait ye 
upon Me, saith Jehovah, until the day that I rise up to 
the prey; for My determination is to gather the nations, 
that I may assemble the kingdoms, to pour upon them 
Mine indignation, even all My fierce anger; for all the 
earth shall be devoured with the fire of My jealousy. For 
then will I turn to the people a pure language [message] 
that they may all call upon the name of the Lord, to 
serve Him with one consent." (Zephaniah 3:8,9.) 
"Righteousness shall be the girdle of His loins, and faithfulness 
the girdle of His reins." (Isaiah 11:5.) The 
girdle represents diligence, service; and the proclamation 
here is that Messiah will be a faithful, diligent Servant 
of God, accomplishing all the work entrusted to His care. 

GREAT CHANGES IN ANIMAL CREATION 

The reference in this 1 1th chapter of Isaiah to the 
change of disposition in the animal kingdom, so that the 
wolf and the lamb, the leopard and the kid, the calf and 
the lion, will dwell in harmony, is in full accord with the 
general Scriptural outlines of "the Times of Restitution 
of all things." Not only is mankind to be restored, to be 



brought back to his primeval condition of human perfection 
and harmony with his Maker, but the lower animals 
will also share in the blessing and the restoration of 
order to be accomplished by the Reign of Christ, now, 
we believe, very near at hand. 

In the Genesis account there is no intimation that the 
animals over which Adam had control were wild, vicious, 
at enmity with man. On the contrary, the implication is 
that they were in complete subjection to their perfect 
master. We may reasonably suppose that while the race, 
under the disintegrating influence of man's death sentence, 
gradually lost more and more of the likeness of 
their Maker in which the first man was created, they at 
the same time lost the power of control over the lower 
animals. 

The nature of the power possessed by the perfect 
Adam may still be imperfectly traced in the superior 
ability of certain of the fallen race to control the brute 
creation. Thus we see that some men can exercise mental 
force and control, not only over wild horses, but also 
over the ferocious beasts of the jungle. Adam was declared 
by the Lord to be the king of earth, and as such he 
was recognized by the lower orders of creation. After 
mankind had lost his original mental power to control 
the lower animals, a warfare sprang up between them, in 
which man has been compelled to pit force against force, 
as he has lost his hold upon the animal creation. 

The restoration of mankind to that exalted position 
which was lost by sin implies naturally, therefore, a restoration 
of the brute creation to primeval conditions, 
such as is suggested in the prophecy which we are considering. 
The same thought is conveyed in the statement 
that "a little child shall lead," or control, the wild 
beasts, when these are brought into their proper relationship 
with mankind. In chapter 65:25 of Isaiah's 
prophecy, it is stated of the Millennial conditions that 
"the wolf and the lamb shall feed together." The reference 
may be to men who were formerly of wolflike and 
of lamblike dispositions, or character; or it may refer to 
animals, or to both. The expression in either case signifies 
a blessed Reign of Peace. The Prophet continues, 
"And the lion shall eat straw like the bullock, and the 
dust shall be the serpent's meat." If this refers to literal 
lions, it would imply that they will lose their carnivorous 
dispositions, and that they will undergo some change 
which will make them herbivorous, as animals were originally 
created. (Genesis 1:30.) It would seem to imply 
that animals will not then prey upon one another. 

DAWN OF HOPE FOR THE WORLD 

The expression, "Dust shall be the serpent's meat," is 
similar to the statement in Psalm 72:9, regarding Messiah's 
coming dominion: "His enemies shall lick the 
dust," signifying the destruction of the serpent, or rather, 
of the great Adversary, Satan, whom the serpent symbolizes. 



"They shall not hurt nor destroy in all My holy 
Mountain [Kingdom], saith the Lord." 

The birth of the true Zion, the Church of Christ, will 
be the cause of rejoicing among all who truly love righteousness; 
for, though it will at first dash in pieces all 
their long-cherished hopes, it will be the dawn of a real 
hope for all the world. It will humble their pride and 
despoil them of all their cherished possessions and of 
what they have come to consider their rights. It will 
break down their boasted institutions, civil, social and 
religious, and completely wreck the present social order. 
Yet it will be the necessary prelude to the establishment 
of the grand New Order, which will come to be "the desire 
of all nations," as soon as they shall see its vast 
superiority to the old order. 

TWO CLASSES BORN OUT OF ZION 

In describing the birth of the "Man-child," The 
Christ, whose Head was born more than eighteen hundred 
years ago, and the Body of whom is now soon to 
be born, the Prophet Isaiah exclaims (chapter 66:7,8), 
"Before she travailed she brought forth; before her 
pain came, she was delivered of a Man-child! Who 
hath heard such a thing? Who hath seen such things? 
Shall the earth be made to bring forth in one day? Or 
shall a nation be born at once? For as soon as Zion 
travailed she brought forth her children." The especially 
marvelous thing that the Prophet here records is that a 
"Man-child" is to be born out of Zion before Zion 
travails. This is a striking reference to the fact, elsewhere 
clearly taught, that the ripe "wheat" of the Gospel 
Church are to be separated from the unripe wheat and 
the "tares" at the end of this Age, that they are to be 
exalted and glorified before the burning, the consuming, 
trouble shall come. 

This "Man-child," then, is the Little Flock, the Body 
of Christ, the true Zion. Out of nominal Zion will come 
this First-fruits class, before the nominal System will be 
overthrown; for she will die in her travail pains, and in 
dying, will bring forth her later children, the Great Company. 
In this great Day of the Lord, nominal Zion will 
bring forth the Man-child and these later children. 

"Shall I bring to the birth and not cause to bring 
forth? saith the Lord. Shall I cause to bring forth and 

R5574: page 341 

shut the womb? saith thy God." Ah, no! As surely as 
the Head was brought forth, so surely shall the Body also 
be born. The birth shall certainly be completed. The 
great composite Christ shall come forth entire, not one 
member lacking— and before Zion's travail has begun. 
But "who hath heard such a thing? Who hath seen such 
a thing?" And so, after the Man-child is delivered, 
the Mother System will give birth, when her travail pains 



come on, to a great company of children! This Great 
Company is described in the Apocalypse as coming up out 
of "the great tribulation," and washing their robes, 
spotted and soiled, and making them white, "in the blood 
of the Lamb." 

Following the birth of these two classes of the Lord's 
people, will come the birth of the Jewish nation. They 
shall be awakened from the sleep of Hades, in which as 
a nation they have been for over eighteen centuries. All 
this will take place in the early dawn of the Day of 
Christ. O what rejoicing there will be! Fleshly Zion 
and Spiritual Zion will rejoice together! Then soon the 
poor, chastened world will begin to join in the songs of 
praise to the God of all Grace. What wonderful times 
are just before us! Though clouds and darkness for a 
brief time obscure the bright beams of the blessed Millennial 
Dawning, soon the glorious "Sun of Righteousness" 
shall rise in splendor, and its beams will rapidly spread 
over all the earth, scattering the darkness of sin, dispelling 
the fogs of error and superstition, and bringing the 
world into the light of the knowledge of the glory of God. 

RESTITUTION NOT CHANGE OF NATURE 

The entire testimony of Scripture in regard to the 
blessings to come to the world in the New Age show that 

R5575 : page 341 

they are all to be earthly. The declaration that even the 
brute creation shall be changed in nature is a promise 
that in that blessed Day there will no more be a condition 
of antagonism and enmity between mankind and the 
lower orders of God's creatures, but all shall be peace 
and harmony. It would be wholly unnecessary to change 
the disposition of the animals, to bring them into subjection 
to man, if all the race were to be changed into spirit 
beings, and become like the angels. Many prophecies 
speak of mankind in the Times of Restitution as human 
beings, adapted to the earth and enjoying the blessings 
of the earth. They are to "sit every man under his vine 
and under his fig tree; and none shall make them afraid." 
(Micah 4:4.) "They shall build houses and inhabit them. 
...They shall not build and another inhabit;. ..they 
shall long enjoy the work of their hands."— Isa. 65:21-25. 

These promises for the world in general have no 
reference to the class being chosen out of the world during 
this Gospel Age. The promises to these are all 
spiritual. They are to be made like Christ, and "see Him 
as He is." (1 John 3:2.) They are called to the obtaining 
of His glory. As they "have borne the image of 
the earthy," so shall they "also bear the image of the 
Heavenly." (1 Corinthians 15:49.) They are promised 
a share in Christ's resurrection— the First Resurrection. 
They are to reign as kings and priests in a Kingdom 
which earthly beings cannot inherit. "Flesh and blood 



cannot inherit the Kingdom of God; neither doth corruption 
inherit incorruption." (1 Corinthians 15:50.) They 
have been called with a Heavenly Calling. They are not 
of the world, even as their Lord and Head is not of the 
world.— John 17:16. 

WHY MANY FAIL TO UNDERSTAND THE WORD OF GOD 

With many the difficulty in understanding these distinctions 
is a failure to rightly divide the Scriptures, as 
St. Paul counseled Timothy, saying, "Study to show thyself 
approved unto God, a workman that needeth not to 
be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth." (2 Timothy 2:15.) 
This process would enable them to discern 
that the Kingdom of God per se consists only of 
our Lord Jesus and His "little flock" of overcomers, to 
whom He says, "It is your Father's good pleasure to 
give you the Kingdom." (Luke 12:32.) These are to 
constitute the reigning class, as many Scriptures point 
out. At first the world of mankind will be subjects of 
this spiritual Kingdom, and afterwards become citizens, 
or members, if they come into harmony with its laws and 
regulations and into a condition of reconciliation with 
God, becoming the children of Christ, who will be the 
Age-lasting Father of the world during the Mediatorial 
Age. He will be the One who shall bring the entire race 
of Adam— both those who still have a measure of life 
and those who have gone down into the tomb— back from 
the condition of death into full perfection of life, if they 
then prove willing and obedient. Otherwise they shall be 
cut off in the Second Death— everlasting destruction. 

KINGDOM EVIDENTLY NOT YET COME 

The Prophet Daniel, in explaining Nebuchadnezzar's 
dream regarding the Great Image, shows that the Kingdom 
of God when first set up at the introduction of the 
Millennial Age will be but a small Stone, which has been 
"cut out without hands," but which will become a "great 
Mountain and fill the whole earth." (Daniel 2:31-45.) 
This Stone Kingdom is quarried out of the "earth" by the 
Lord. It is at first insignificant in size, and it seems to 
the world as powerless. But as soon as set up in power, 
this Kingdom will smite the "great image" of earthly 
rulership, and shall grind it to powder (in the coming 
Time of Trouble), and the wind shall carry it away. This 
Stone Kingdom is the holy Mountain referred to in 
Isaiah 1 1 :9. A mountain is the Scriptural symbol of a 
kingdom. Hills seem to be symbolic of the smaller governments 
of earth.-See Isaiah 2:2; 40:4; 51:5; 59:18; 
Psalm 46:2,3; 97:5. 

Nothing shall be permitted to do violence or to work 
injury throughout all God's holy Kingdom, after it shall 
have been established. Love will be the Law, and 
Divine Power will be the means which will enforce that 
Law. All who do not conform to it will be "cut off from 



among the people," as the Lord declared through the 
Apostle Peter. (Acts 3:23.) How evident it is that this 
Kingdom has not yet come, when we see that amongst 
mankind selfishness is the rule, individually and nationally, 
and that there are many influences of evil which 
hurt and destroy throughout the world today. So we 
continue to pray: "Thy Kingdom come; Thy will be 
done on earth, as it is done in Heaven." And we believe 
that this petition so long offered by the Lord's saints is 
very soon to be answered. 

After Messiah has crushed the power of evil, after 
He has overthrown all the great systems of error and 
vice, and has set the people free, He will accomplish 
the blessing of humanity by the spread of the knowledge 
of Jehovah's character. The Apostle Paul also assures 
us that it is the will of God that all men shall come to a 
knowledge of the Truth in order to be saved. He assures 
us that there can be no salvation without knowledge. 
None will ever be saved by ignorance. As yet 
only a comparatively few of earth's millions have come 
to such a knowledge of God as to be able to exercise 
faith in Him and in the great Sacrifice which He has 
provided for the whole world. 

R5575 : page 342 

COMPREHENSIVENESS OF PLAN OF SALVATION 

But the fact that but few in the present life come to 
this saving knowledge shall in no wise thwart the great 
Divine Plan, nor make the death of Christ on behalf of 
the entire race of Adam of no avail. The Lord assures 
us in His Word that, in due time, the true Light shall 
lighten "every man that cometh into the world." (John 1:9.) 
This includes all the heathen and all those of 
imbecile mind, who could not in this life grasp the Truth, 
as well as all infants who have died before reaching the 
age where they could know of God and His Truth in 
Christ. It includes the dead, as well as the living. For 
"there is none other name given under Heaven among 
men whereby they must be saved," but the name of Jesus. 
God has thus made ample provision for all. 

Nor are we to suppose that the knowledge which is to 
become world-wide during Messiah's Reign is merely a 
little sprinkling of knowledge, such as has come to a very 
limited portion of the world here and there in spots, up 
to the present time. The Lord's people have received the 
droppings of grace and Truth, but the provision for the 
next Age will be abundant and universal. The knowledge 
of the Lord shall be ocean deep— like the fulness of the 
sea. Showers of blessing shall come down upon the 
world in copious measure. The effect will be "like rain 
upon the mown grass." (Psalm 72:6.) When the grass 
has been freshly cut and its roots are thus the more accessible, 
how quickly it responds to the refreshing 
showers ! And how rapidly does it spring up in renewed 



vigor! So it will be with mankind, after they have been 
shorn of all that has encumbered them and prevented the 
showers of grace from reaching their hearts. How 
quickly they will respond to the refreshing rains and 
showers of blessing so copiously bestowed upon them, 
and will spring up into life and beauty as they drink in 
the rich supplies of grace! 



R5576 : page 342 

THE SCOPE OF THE ANGELS' SONG 

"Glory to God in the Highest, and on earth 
peace, good will toward men!"— Luke 2:14. 

THE song which the angels sang at the birth 

of the Savior has been seized upon and misapplied 

by some who do not see the Plan 

of God for the salvation of the world. Becoming 

discouraged by the seemingly poor 

prospect for the world's conversion, these 

have put forth a version of this passage 

more in harmony with their own doubts 

and misconceptions. To these the prayer 

which our Master taught His disciples to 

pray, "Thy Kingdom come; Thy will be done on earth, 

as it is done in Heaven," has lost its meaning; for they 

see no hope of its fulfilment except in a very limited 

sense. Hence they prefer to translate the latter part of 

the verse, "And on earth peace, among men of good will." 

Were this the proper rendering, our hopes for the ultimate 

good of all, as far as this passage is concerned, 

would surely suffer eclipse; for very few thus far in the 

history of the race have been "men of good will," men 

who unselfishly endeavored to any appreciable degree to 

bring about the good of their fellows. 

But we do not believe this to be the thought of the 
original. It is not in harmony with what we have clearly 
seen to be the Plan of God for mankind. Such a translation 
eliminates the thought of God's eventual good 
will toward all the world, and greatly minimizes the 
scope of this glorious song. It implies merely that men 
who have a feeling of good will are or will be at peace 
among themselves. How utterly barren of hope for all 
men would such an expression be! And how little the 
song of the angels would mean if this were its burden! 

On the contrary, this song was a prophecy of God's 
purpose to bring about through the newly born Child 
the abrogation of the curse and the establishment of 
peace and sinlessness among mankind, in which God and 
man would become at-one. It was an expression of 
God's good will, His good purpose, to bring man back 
to the image and likeness of Himself, in which Adam 
was created. When this shall have been accomplished, 



then peace will dwell in all the earth; for the causes of 
inharmony will have been eliminated. 

The world of mankind came under the curse, or sentence, 
of death because of the sin in Eden— because our 
first parents disobeyed God's righteous command. All 
humanity, therefore, are members of an accursed race- 
under penal servitude, which ends in the tomb. The 
race has been learning the lesson of the exceeding sinfulness 
of sin, and its terrible effects. But God has 
promised to take away the curse and to bring a permanent 
blessing in its place. This will mean a return to 
His favor, to full harmony with Himself. 

PROGRESSION OF GOD'S GREAT PLAN 

We speak of this song as a prophecy because the 
peace has not yet come, nor the good will, in the sense 
that God's face is as yet turned toward man. It is a 
declaration of what God purposes to do. He has not 
good will toward the present sinful, rebellious attitude 
of the race. He has never good will toward sin. We 
are not to understand that God was expressing His good 
will toward man when He pronounced the sentence of 
death upon him. God's curse indicated His ill-will toward 
man— in other words, His displeasure because of 
man's sin. He wished man to suffer ill as a just punishment 
for his wilful disobedience. God cut him off from 
fellowship with Himself. He was not bound injustice 
to do anything more for the race. But in His infinite 
mercy He provided a deliverance for mankind. He foreknew 
man's fall, and planned His redemption from before 
the foundation of the world. 

Through all the ages since the fall of Adam God's 
Plan has been slowly, steadily progressing. While men 
have been learning in pain and tears and trouble the 
nature and results of sin, God has been selecting His 
saintly ones, His Elect— first, the Elect who are to be 
the earthly princes in His Kingdom of Blessing; lastly, 
the Elect who are to reign over all as kings and priests 
of God on the highest plane of existence. The chief of 
all the Elect is His well-beloved Son, the Savior of the 
world, whose birth the angels proclaimed to the shepherds 
watching on the plains of Judea, nearly nineteen 
centuries ago. (Isaiah 42:1.) When all the elect ones 
are chosen and prepared, then the blessing of the world 
at large will be inaugurated. "For the earnest expectation 
of the creation waiteth for the manifestation of the 
sons of God [the Church]. For the creation was made 
subject to frailty, not willingly, but by reason of Him 
who hath subjected the same in hope; because the creature 
itself also shall be delivered from the bondage of 
corruption into the glorious liberty of the sons of God." 
-Romans 8:19-21. 

R5576 : page 343 



The coming of the Son of God to earth was only 
preliminary to His offering of Himself as a Ransom for 
the forfeited life of Adam, the father of the race, in 
whom all his posterity fell. But even when our Lord 
had died as man's Ransom-price, God's favor did not 
come to the world. Jesus was next raised from the 
dead a glorious, Divine being. Then He ascended up 
on High, and appeared in the presence of God for those 
who were to be of the spiritual Elect. Thus the last 
became first in God's Plan. The merit of Jesus' death 
was utilized first on behalf of these. It has not yet 
been applied for any others. The Church of Christ now 
have this promised peace and good will. It is granted 
only to those who have come into vital relationship with 
God through Christ— the fully consecrated ones. 

The Scriptures show that after these are all selected, 
prepared and glorified, the next step will be the application 
to all men of the merit which has been imputed 
to these Elect, and through whom it is to go to the 
Worthies of old and to the entire world of mankind. 
This spiritual class have been chosen to be members of 
the Body of Christ, joint-associates with Him in the 
Messianic Kingdom. All of these who prove entirely 
faithful are to attain this exalted position. As soon as 
all the spiritual class have been glorified, the sins of all 
the world, those living and the dead as well, will be 
legally canceled by the application of the virtue, the 
merit, of the sacrificial death of Jesus. Then they will 
be freed from the condemnation of the sentence of death. 
The death penalty will be lifted. They will be turned 
over to The Christ, Head and Body, the Great Mediator. 
The curse will be removed. 

The great work of the Millennial Age will then begin. 
It will be a work of gradual uplift during the entire 
thousand years of the Reign of The Christ. The 
dead will be gradually awakened and brought to a clear 
knowledge of the salvation of God in Christ. All will 
then have the opportunity of coming into the blessed 
condition of peace and good will proclaimed by the angels. 
By degrees they will be brought, if they will, to 
where they will be ready to be received by the Father, 
to be introduced to Him. This will be the blessed experience 
of all who will be obedient to the rules and requirements 
of the Kingdom. If they prove unwilling 
and disobedient, after being brought to a clear understanding, 
they will be "cut off," destroyed, as not worthy 
of further effort on God's part for their reclamation. 

CHRIST'S DEATH A BLESSING TO THE UNIVERSE 

We understand that the sacrifice of the Son of God 
will be a blessing also to the inhabitants of worlds not 
yet peopled, who will not have had any personal experience 
with sin. God apparently purposes that after 
mankind have been restored, and all the incorrigible destroyed, 
He will allow no further infringement of the 



Divine Law. Indeed, we can see that if at the beginning 
of his deflection Satan had known the results of his 
own course, he would probably not have taken the step 
which he did. We are not to think of Satan as being 
foolish by nature. He was a glorious being, Lucifer, 
"the son of the morning." If Father Adam and Mother 
Eve had foreseen the results of their disobedience, they 
would not have taken such a course; for to have done 
so with foreknowledge would have meant that they were 
very unwise, foolish, of unsound minds, whereas they 
were created perfect, in the image of their Creator. 

We believe that if the angels who kept not their first 
estate had known the end from the beginning— if they 
could have looked down the ages and seen the direful 
consequences of their course of sin and disobedience— 
they would have been appalled, and would have taken 
no such disastrous step. The fact that they have gotten 
into sin, and have developed such sinful tendencies, proclivities 
and preferences, is no proof that this would 
have been their course if they had known as much in 
advance as they now know. It is our hope that some 
of these may yet be reclaimed, if they are properly repentant, 
in their great Judgment Day, now at hand. 

God seeketh such to worship Him as worship Him in 
spirit and in truth. Our thought is that all these worlds 
surrounding us are designed to be homes to many intelligent 
beings yet to be created. We believe that it is 
God's delight to give joy and blessing to many creatures, 
on various planes of existence. And God is making of 
this experience of mankind with sin a valuable lesson, a 
lesson that will be beneficial, not only to themselves, but 
to all the worlds that will ever be populated. These 
might be instructed and informed in advance of their 
developing any sinful tendencies just what the nature 
and tendency of sin is. They will probably be told the 
story of the tendency of sin— what it did for the people 
of earth, what it cost to redeem and restore them. They 
will be told, probably, that sin degrades mind, body and 
morals; that its influence is only deteriorating; that once 
deteriorated, one learns to prefer sin, notwithstanding all 
the misery and degradation it brings; and that God will 
never grant everlasting life to any except as they gladly 
co-operate to that end— that He will never influence any 
against their own will. 

It would seem, then, that the great work accomplished 
at Calvary will have an influence as wide as 
the Universe. And this thought might be applied to the 

R5577 : page 343 

first part of the song of the angels, "Glory to God in 
the Highest!" God will be glorified by all the angels, 
by every rank of spirit beings. He will be glorified by 
His exalted Church, then of the Divine nature; by restored 
humanity, by all the intelligent creatures on every 
plane, in every Age! Yea, more and more glorious will 



be His honor as the years of eternity roll on, and as 
other peoples of other planets are brought into being 
and brought to know Him and to share His wonderful 
bounties and blessings, and to learn the blessedness of 
loving and serving Him. 



"MY PRESENCE SHALL GO WITH THEE" 

Almighty God, the Lord of Heaven and Earth, 

O, Thou, the Source and Centre of each sphere, 

The Lord of Being, throned afar, whose hand 

Upholds the weight of worlds, yet, wondrous thought! - 

Nor day nor night too occupied to note 

E'en when a sparrow falls to earth, whose eyes 

A watch-care keep o'er every child of Thine; 

Whose guardian angels daily shape the course 
Of those who love Thee more than life itself; 
Whose chastening rod doth guide them in the way 
That leads to endless life! How sweet to feel 
Thy presence ever near, to know that Thou 
Dost never sleep nor slumber while Thy child 
In time of need doth cry for help from Thee! 

O, Thou, in Whom no shade of turning lies, 
Thou changeless and unvariable One! 
Though all unfaithful prove; yea, though the earth 
And heavens depart, by faith we clasp Thy hand, 
We calmly rest our weary hearts on Thee, 
Assured that Thou wilt ne'er forsake, that we 
Shall be forever precious in Thy sight! 

October 19, 1914 G. W. SEIBERT. 



R5577 : page 344 

SMITTEN OF GOD, AFFLICTED 

--NOVEMBER 29.-MARK 15:22-37.- 

"Surely He hath borne our griefs, and carried our 
sorrows; yet we did esteem Him stricken, smitten of 
God, and afflicted."— Isaiah 53:4. 

THERE is no room for dispute respecting the 
facts associated with the crucifixion of 
Jesus. The only room for contention is in 
respect to the Divine limitation and reason 
for the crucifixion. The Prophet Isaiah 
gives the Divine explanation to us. 

SORROWFUL WAY! 



The Savior was greatly weakened by 
His three years of ministry, in which He 
had given forth His vitality freely to the 
people in the healing of their diseases. Besides this, He 
had been on a constant strain, without sleep, from the time 
He had sent His disciples to prepare the Passover. This 
period had included the trying experiences connected with 
the Passover and the institution of the Memorial Supper, 
the journey to Gethsemane, the hours of agony and weakness 
there, the experiences following, the trial of the 
Sanhedrin by the high priests, the trial before Herod and 
before Pilate, the scourging, etc.— all had been a constant 
strain on Him. Now, condemned to crucifixion by those 
for whom He had sacrificed His Heavenly home and 
glory, He was additionally required to carry His own 
cross. He did so until finally His weakness under its 
weight hindered, and a passing farmer was compelled to 
assist— whether by carrying the cross entirely or by walking 
behind Jesus and carrying a portion of the weight is 
not made very clear by the original text. 

Where were Peter, John, James, Thomas and the other 
Apostles, that they did not volunteer assistance? Doubtless 
they were deterred by fear. But oh, what a blessing 
they missed! Tradition has it that the Cyrenean farmer 
who bore the cross by compulsion afterward became one 
of the followers of the Nazarene, through having the 
Truth of the Savior's Message borne in upon his heart by 
the experiences of that hour. 

Crowding around were weeping women, and we 
wonder that none of them lent a helping hand. Turning 
to them, Jesus said, "Weep not for Me. Weep for yourselves 
and for your children." The Master's words in 
this connection, respecting their seeking the mountains 
and hills for covering and protection, are assumed 
by some Bible students to belong in part to the great 
trouble which came upon the Jewish people thirty-seven 
years later in the destruction of Jerusalem. And it is 
assumed that that destruction of Jerusalem and this 
trouble were types which foreshadowed the greater distress 
which will occur in the closing time of this Age. 

Certain it is that the same expressions in respect to 
the mountains and hills is used in respect to the end of 
this Gospel Age. When at His Second Advent Christ 
shall be revealed in flaming fire of judgments, it will consume 
the present order of things and prepare the way for 
the new King. We are not to assume that any one 
would pray for mountains to fall upon him when he could 
take his own life in a much easier way. Rather, the 
thought seems to be that many will seek and desire and 
pray for hiding, for protection against the raging troubles. 
The rocks of society are its social organizations, each of 
which seeks to protect its own membership. 

"If they do these things in the green tree, what shall 
be done in the dry?" said Jesus. He here seems to liken 
the Jewish nation to the fig-tree which quickly withered 



away under His curse, or sentence. So, five days before 
His crucifixion, Jesus, riding upon the ass to Jerusalem 
and weeping over it, had said, "Your house is left unto 
you desolate." Now, in so short a time, while the fig-tree 
was still green, its rulers had reached a desperate place, 
so that they were willing to violate all law and set aside 
all conscience in His crucifixion. 

If so quickly the evil worked to such a horrible outrage 
of justice, what might not be expected later on, 
when that Jewish fig-tree had thoroughly dried and all 
the sap (spirituality) had gone out of it? Similarly, in 
the end of this Age we may expect that the Church, the 
Body of Christ, the saints, will suffer violence, that thus 
the salt of the earth will be removed, and that quickly 
thereafter a general putrefaction will set in— anarchy. 

THE SON OF MAN LIFTED UP 

Jesus had foretold His crucifixion, saying that "as 
Moses lifted up the brazen serpent in the wilderness, 
even so must the Son of Man be lifted up"— be crucified. 
The brazen serpent was thus used as a type of Jesus. 
He was actually holy, harmless, undefiled; but He took 
the sinner's place— He was treated as the sinner. The 
severest penalty under the Law was crucifixion— "Cursed 
is every one that hangeth upon a tree." And so, says the 
Apostle, Jesus was made a curse for us. (Galatians 3:13.) 
Although He knew no sin, He took the place of the 
sinner. Jesus died for our sins, according to the 
Scriptures. 

The words of our text that say, "Father, forgive them, 
for they know not what they do," are not to be taken into 
account, because they are not found in the oldest Greek 
manuscripts. Besides, Jesus must have known that the sin 
of the Jews would bring a penalty. He had foretold in 
His parable that God would punish them and burn up 
their city. (Luke 20:14-16.) In the context the statement, 
"Weep for yourselves," implied a punishment upon 
the Jews for their sins, and that this sin would not be 
wholly forgiven them. As a matter of fact, we know 
that the Jews have been cut off from Divine favor for 
now eighteen centuries. It is proper for us to assume 
that Jesus was in full harmony with the Father in respect 
to all this Divine arrangement, and that He did not ask 
something contrary to the Divine will. 

St. Paul refers to this matter also, saying respecting 
the trouble which came upon the Jews at the time of the 
rejection of Jesus, "Wrath is come upon them to the 
uttermost, that all things written concerning them should 
have fulfilment."— 1 Thessalonians 2:14-16. 

On the other hand, we may well be assured that Jesus, 
who was giving His life for the Jews, would not wish 
that they should not have punishment that would be due 
to them for the great sin of destroying the One whom 
Jehovah had especially sent to them, as His representative, 
His Son. A just penalty for such wilful sin would 



undoubtedly be utter destruction. But the Apostle points 
out that "the blood of Jesus speaketh better things"— not 
justice. (Hebrews 12:24.) His blood speaks forgiveness 
of sins, not only for the remainder of the world, but also 
for the Jews. It speaks a full opportunity for reconciliation 
with God during the Messianic Kingdom. 

St. Peter corroborates the thought that the Jews were 
not wholly responsible for their course because of (at 
least) a partial ignorance. Addressing some of them 
afterwards he said: "I wot that in ignorance ye did it, as 
did also your rulers"; for if they had known they would 
not have crucified "the Prince of Life." (Acts 3:15-17.) 
The Prophet Zechariah shows us that in God's due time 
the eyes of understanding of the whole world will be 

R5578 : page 345 

opened. All will see things differently enough, and the 
Jews are especially mentioned— "They that pierced Him." 
Then the Lord will pour upon them the spirit of prayer 
and supplication, and they shall look upon Him whom 
they have pierced, and they shall mourn for Him 
(Zechariah 12:10), realizing that they maltreated their 
best Friend, their Redeemer. 

THEY PARTED MY GARMENTS 

The stony-heartedness of the Roman soldiers is indicated 
by the fact that while Jesus was dying they cast 
lots for His seamless robe, dividing His other garments 
amongst them. We have God's promise that the result of 
the Millennial Kingdom will be to take away the stony 
heart out of the flesh and to give instead tender hearts. 
Oh, how much all mankind need full restitution to the 
image and likeness of God, originally represented in Adam 
and subsequently represented in the Man Jesus! 

The attitude of the world is further represented in the 
two culprits who were executed at the same time, one on 
each side of Jesus, who by the inscription over His cross 
was styled King of the Jews. One of these companions in 
tribulation railed at Jesus as a fraud, bantering Him to 
manifest any power He had by saving Himself and His 
associates. Little did he realize that if Jesus had saved 
Himself He could not have been the Savior of the world! 

The other thief befriended Jesus, declaring that He 
had done nothing amiss and was unjustly accused. Then, 
turning to Jesus, he expressed his faith in Him by asking 
a reward for his kind words. He said, "Lord, remember 
me when Thou comest into Thy Kingdom." The poor 
thief knew that Jesus claimed to be a King. He was 
standing near when Jesus was asked the question, "Art 
Thou a King," and heard the answer, "My Kingdom is 
not of this Age." The thief recognized that Jesus was 
worthy to be a King, so noble of character and of appearance 
was He. What if He were really what He claimed 
to be? What if finally, in the great Beyond, this One 



should prove to be the Messiah? He would at least tell 
the truth and declare a word in His defense, and he would 
at least ask kind remembrance if this One ever reached 
His Kingly Power. 

The answer of Jesus seems to have been very generally 
misunderstood by us all in the past. We thought 
that He promised the thief to be with Him that same day 
in the Kingdom. Yet we knew that, according to other 
Scriptures, Jesus Himself was not in the Kingdom that 
day, but in Joseph's new tomb; that He did not rise from 
the dead, from Sheol, from Hades, the tomb, until the 
third day; and that even then He said to Mary after His 
resurrection, "I have not yet ascended to My Father and 
your Father, My God and your God." Evidently, then, 
Jesus could not have said that He and the thief would be 
together in Paradise that same day. 

The true explanation is at hand. Paradise, lost 
through the fall six thousand years ago, is about to be 
restored by Messiah in His glorious Kingdom. It was 
then that the thief asked to be remembered— "when Thou 
comest into Thy Kingdom." The thief has been sleeping 
in death since, waiting for the time for Messiah's Kingdom 
to come. The answer of Jesus was in full accord 
with this: Amen. So be it. "Verily, I say unto thee, 
this day [this day when I seem not to have a friend, and 
when nothing seems more unlikely than that I would ever 
have a Kingdom, I tell you today], thou shalt be with 
Me in Paradise." 

Jesus' Kingdom will quickly begin the work of turning 
the world into a Paradise. And, in the resurrection 
of the hosts who have fallen asleep in death, that thief 
will be remembered by the Master. Undoubtedly a great 
blessing will be his in Paradise, because of his comforting 
words spoken on the cross, and especially because those 
words indicated that he had a tender and contrite heart, 
such as will be the first to have blessings in the Kingdom. 

Jesus commended His mother to His disciple John, 
which implies that the husband, Joseph, was no longer 
living. It shows us, too, the Master's careful thoughtfulness 
of the interests of His loved ones in His own hour 
of extreme suffering. 

The Master's dying cry, "My God! My God! why hast 
Thou forsaken Me?" attests to us the fact that He did not 
claim to be the Heavenly Father, but the Son of God. It 
also shows us how the Master endured to the very limit 
the penalty of the sinner. The penalty of sin was not 
merely to die, but also to be cut off from fellowship with 
God. Jesus, in taking the sinner's place, must for a 
moment at least have the full experience of the sinner's 
alienation. 

The Master's cry, "It is finished," reminds us of His 
statement of the day previous, "I have a baptism [into 
death] to be accomplished, and how am I straitened [in 
difficulty] until it be accomplished"— until it be finished. 

"Father, into Thy hands I commend My spirit," reminds 
us of the fact that Jesus was laying down His life, 



that the spirit of life which He possessed was that which 
had been transferred from a previous condition. He had 
not forfeited His right to life, as had Adam. He might 
therefore still speak of it as His own spirit, His own right 
to life— merely surrendered for the time, merely laid down 
under the Divine promise that it should be given to Him 
again in the resurrection. 



R5578 : page 345 

THE RISEN CHRIST 

-DECEMBER 6. -MARK 16: 1-8; MATTHEW 28: 1 1-15.- 

"Why seek ye the living amongst the dead? 
He is not here, but is risen."— Luke 24:5,6. 

THE resurrection of the dead is an astounding 

proposition. Its accomplishment will 

be the greatest manifestation of Divine 

Power ever made to angels and to men. 

The awakening of Jairus' daughter, of the 

son of the widow of Nain, and that of 

Lazarus the friend of Jesus, are nowhere 

styled resurrections of the dead. They 

were merely awakenings, the last of these 

being the most wonderful because, Lazarus 

had been dead four days, and putrefaction had set in. 

The resurrection of the dead promised in the Bible 
is to bring back the personality and the consciousness of 
thousands of millions of humanity who have died, who 
have gone to dust under the Divine sentence, "Dying, 
thou shalt die." "Dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou 
return." There could be no resurrection— no escape from 
that Divine sentence— except in the way God has arranged; 
namely, that Jesus took the place of the original 
sinner, Adam. Purchasing him back from the death sentence 
meant the purchase of all who died in him. Thus 
we read that Christ died, "the Just for the unjust, that 
He might bring us to God."— 1 Peter 3:18. 

Fallacious ideas have gone abroad to the effect that 
it will be the body merely that will be resurrected— that 
God will collect from the four winds every particle of 
dust which once composed a portion of a human body, 
and will reorganize the race out of the same particles of 
matter which once composed it. The absurdity of this 
proposition grows upon us as we consider that the carcases 

R5578 : page 346 

of the dead have more or less gone into vegetation, 
and thus into other animals and other humans. This is 
well illustrated by the story of the apple tree, the roots 
of which penetrated a coffin and assumed the shape of 



the corpse. The apples were eaten by various people, 
and some of them by swine, which in turn were shipped 
to various parts of the country. 

This anecdote well illustrates the unreasonableness of 
the common misunderstanding of the Bible teachings. 
The difficulty has been that we lost sight of the fact that 
the Bible declares that it is the soul which dies. "The 
soul that sinneth, it shall die." (Ezekiel 18:4,20.) Our 
bodies are being changed and renewed, Science tells us, 
every seven years. The body in which Adam sinned, 
therefore, passed away— and many other bodies— during 
the nine hundred and thirty years of his experience. But 
his soul, his personality, himself, died but once, nine hundred 
and thirty years old. It is the soul that dies, that 
has been redeemed, and that is to be resurrected. "Thou 
sowest not that body which shall be." 

OUR LORD NO LONGER HUMAN 

Christ, as the Logos with the Father, was a living 
soul, or being, on a high spirit plane. For man's sake 
He humbled Himself and became a bondsman— "took a 
bondsman's form, and was found in fashion as a man" 
—a human soul. As a human soul, or human being, He 
died— "He poured out His soul unto death." He made 
"His soul an Offering for sin." "He shall see [the reward 
of] the travail of His soul and shall be satisfied." 
-Isaiah 53:10-12. 

It was Jesus the human soul that died, but He was 
raised from the dead a Soul of a higher order. At that 
time, as He foretold, He ascended "where He was before"; 
that is to say, on the spirit plane. He was "put 
to death in flesh, but quickened [or made alive] in spirit." 
(1 Peter 3:18.) He took the fleshly nature merely 
for the great purpose of giving man's redemption-price; 
and after He had surrendered that ransom-price by giving 
Himself up to death, the Father raised Him up to 
glory, honor, the Divine nature— "far above angels, principalities 
and powers, and every name that is named." 
(Philippians 2:9.) He that ascended thus in His resurrection 
was the same that had previously descended from 
the Heavenly to the earthly condition, as St. Paul says. 

Because in His resurrection Jesus was so different, 
from this viewpoint we are prepared to understand why 
He conducted Himself so differently after His resurrection 

R5579 : page 346 

from what He had done before. After His resurrection 

He appeared and disappeared, we read. He 

showed Himself to His disciples for a few moments at 

a time, and then vanished from their sight. Never before 

had He done anything of the kind. After His resurrection 

He appeared in different bodies, different 

forms, different clothing. To Mary He appeared as the 

gardener. To the two walking to Emmaus He appeared 



as the stranger. He appeared not only as a different 
person, but also in different clothing; for His clothing 
had been parted amongst the soldiers. 

How evidently He was put to death in the flesh, but 
quickened in spirit! It was the Spirit Jesus who 
showed Himself, assuming different human forms and 
clothing, as best suited the occasion. This Spirit Being 
could, and did, come into the assemblies of the disciples 
when the doors were shut and fastened for fear of the 
Jews. He created, or materialized, a body and clothing 
in their presence; and after a few moments He vanished 
out of their sight, dissolving the body and the clothing, 
while He, the Spirit Being, remained invisible. Thus 
He was with the disciples for forty days before He ascended; 
yet they saw Him not, except a few minutes at 
a time on seven different occasions. 

Those forty days were very necessary for teaching 
the Jewish disciples, and all of the Lord's followers since, 
two great lessons: 

(1) That He was no longer dead, but alive; 

(2) That He was no longer a man, but a Spirit. 
"Now the Lord is that Spirit."— 2 Corinthians 3:17. 

IMPORTANCE OF OUR LORD'S RESURRECTION 

That our Lord was no longer flesh, but a Spirit Being 
with celestial glory, is clearly established by St. Paul's 
narrative of his own experiences. He explains that it 
was necessary that the twelve Apostles should be able to 
bear witness to the fact that Jesus had risen from the 
dead. There could have been no Gospel Message of 
hope of Divine favor through a dead Savior. If Christ 
had not risen, then who would there be who could ever 
establish the Messianic Kingdom? Who would there 
ever be who could give to the Church a share in the 
First Resurrection and make them sharers in His Heavenly 
glory? If Christ had not risen, who would there 
be who could call forth from the tomb the sleeping billions, 
awakening them, through the Voice which speaks 
peace through Jesus Christ, to the opportunities of everlasting 
life through obedience to the Kingdom? 

The Apostle calls all this forcibly to our minds, saying, 
"If Christ be not risen from the dead, your faith is 
vain; and all who have fallen asleep in Christ have perished." 
(1 Corinthians 15:16-18.) From this we see 
that St. Paul in no way shared the views of those who 
unscripturally claimed that Jesus, while dead, was really 
alive; and that the resurrection of the dead is a mere formality, 
quite unnecessary to the carrying out of God's 
Plan. The Divine teaching is that the dead know not 
anything, and that the resurrection of the dead is an 
absolute necessity to any future life or hope or blessing. 

The fact that Christ has risen from the dead is a 
guarantee of God's power to raise the dead. Additionally, 
it is a guarantee that Jesus accomplished the work 
which He came into the world to do. It proves to us 



that He must have kept the Divine Law perfectly; else 
He would not have been worthy of a resurrection from 
the dead. It proves, additionally, the value of His death 
—the efficacy of it as the offset of Father Adam's sin, 
and thus as the Ransom-price for the sins of the world. 

POST-RESURRECTION MANIFESTATIONS 

St. Paul tells that he saw Jesus after His resurrection. 
He tells us that our Lord's appearance to him was 
as that of a bright light shining above the brightness of 
the sun at noonday. He tells us the effect that it had 
upon his character and upon his eyesight— that one 
glance at the glorious Jesus destroyed his sight, which 
was afterwards partially restored by Divine mercy. This 
was the eighth appearance of Jesus to His disciples. In 
seven of them He appeared in flesh; in one He appeared 
in glory above the brightness of the sun. He was the 
same at all times, but the manifestations were different. 

The manifestations in the flesh during the forty days 
correspond exactly to those manifestations which Jesus 
had made long previously, one of which was to Abraham. 
He ate and talked with Abraham; but Abraham knew not 
that he talked with the Lord, and thought of Him only 
as a man, because He appeared in human form and ordinary 
clothing. He vanished from Abraham's sight as 
He vanished from the Apostles' sight and from Saul's. 
He was a Spirit Being when He appeared to Abraham; 
and He was a Spirit Being after His resurrection, when 

R5579 : page 347 

He appeared to His Apostles. It was in the meantime 
that He was made flesh for the very purpose of suffering, 
the Just for the unjust. 

Having accomplished the suffering, there was no further 
reason why our Lord should remain flesh. The Lord 
of Glory in Heaven is not flesh, not a man. If He were, 
He would be "a little lower than the angels." But the 
Apostle assures us that in His resurrection He has ascended 
far above the angels. -Phil. 2:9-11; Heb. 1:3,4. 

It was just as easy for Jesus to appear in one form 
as another, in one kind of clothing as another. He appeared 
in various forms, that the double lesson might be 
impressed that He was not dead, and that He was no 
longer a man. His second appearance with the wounds 
to convince St. Thomas is especially noteworthy. He 
was ready to give any demonstration that was necessary, 
because, unless His disciples really believed in His resurrection, 
they could not do the work that was before 
them, nor could they even receive the Holy Spirit at 
Pentecost. The Holy Spirit was not given except to 
those who believed in Jesus— who accepted the fact of 
His death as the Sacrifice for sins and who trusted in 
Him as the Savior through whom would come the Divine 
blessing, begetting them of the Holy Spirit and restoring 



them to fellowship with God as children of God. 
FURTHER SCRIPTURAL PROOFS 

If further evidence be necessary that Jesus is not a 
flesh being— that He is no longer a man— that evidence 
can be found in the Apostle's assurance that flesh and 
blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, and that therefore 
every member of the Church must be changed before 
he can enter into and share Christ's Kingdom. The 
change will be from earthly state, or condition, or soul, 
to spirit condition, or soul, or being. The Apostle declares 
that we must all be changed, that we may be like 
our Lord. If our fleshly body must give place to a spirit 
body in order that we may be like our Lord, it is manifest 
that He is a spirit body, a spirit being, a spirit soul. This 
also agrees with St. Paul, respecting the resurrection of 
the Church. He says, "It is sown in weakness, it is raised 
in power; it is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory; 
it is sown an animal body, it is raised a spirit body." 

A totally different thing, however, is brought to our 
attention by the same Apostle in Philippians 3:21, where 
he declares that the Lord Jesus will "change our vile 
Body, that it may be fashioned like unto His glorious 
body." The thought here is in respect to the Church as 
a whole, and not the individual bodies of the Church. 
The Apostle is speaking of our vile Body, in the singular. 
The thought is that Jesus, the Head of the Church, had 
His experiences of humiliation prior to His death and 
His resurrection. The Head of the Church was exalted, 
was glorified, more than eighteen centuries ago. Since 
then, all who have espoused His Cause have become identified 
with a Body, or company, that is despised of men, 
a humiliated Body, of which St. Paul says, "We are 
counted as the filth and offscouring of the earth." But 
at the Second Coming of Christ the humiliation of the 
Church, His Body, will cease, because the Lord will gloriously 
change His Body in the First Resurrection. Thereafter 
it will no longer be a Church, or Body, reviled but 
glorified. 



page 347 

HOLIDAY REMEMBRANCERS 

OUR gifts should in some sense of the word 
always represent ourselves. All who recognize 
themselves as New Creatures should 
have this in mind at this season of the 
year. We refresh your memories by the 
following brief announcements of items we 
carry in stock, additional to our general 
stock of Bibles and Bible Study Helps 
mentioned on the reverse side of this page. 



"Studies in the Scriptures." India paper edition, fine 
sealskin binding, gold edges, light, small, beautiful, $4.80 (LI). 

"Studies in the Scriptures." Morocco, over boards, gold 
edges, but on paper the same as the ordinary cloth edition, 
suitable for book-shelf $3.60 (15s) of six volumes, postpaid. 

"Studies," Volume I., with Pyramid Chapter added. This 
special edition is very suitable for presentation to uninterested 
friends. Many have had their interest awakened by the reading 
of the Pyramid Chapter. We recommend this Volume 
for gift purposes. Postpaid 50c. (2s Id), but, to stimulate 
its wide circulation, ten copies for $2.50 (10s lOd). 

Scenario of the Photo-Drama of Creation. The ninety-six 
short, pithy lectures of the Creation Drama can be supplied 
in print in four styles: 

(1) A free edition with one picture to each page. 

(2) A pamphlet edition with four times as many illustrations. 
Price 10c. each part— three parts complete 25c— 

postage included. 

(3) The same in cloth binding under one cover complete 
for 50c, postage included. 

(4) The same de luxe, gilt edges, finer paper, $ 1 each, 
postage included. 

This should be in every home. Its lessons are most entertaining 
and instructive for old and young. It has no peer. 

Wherever the Drama has been shown should be excellent 
territory for colporteuring these Scenarios. Terms in lots of 
one hundred copies by freight or express, charges collect— 
one-half the above retail prices. 

Classes bunching their orders are entitled to colporteur 
rates on similar quantities. 

"Poems of Dawn." Nearly three hundred very choice 
poems topically divided, the very thing each should have near 
him for a leisure moment. The value of these as spiritual 
stimulants is inestimable. They can be appreciated by all 
Christians, though of course especially by those possessing a 
knowledge of Present Truth. Postpaid in cloth binding 25c 
(Is); leather-bound 50c (2s Id). 

"In the Garden of the Lord." This little booklet is a 
choice poem from the pen of Sister Seibert. It contains sixteen 
colored illustrations, twenty-four pages. Postpaid 6c 
(3d) each; per dozen 65c (2s 8d). 

Choice Motto Cards for home embellishment and spiritual 
refreshment. 

Packet Mz, containing fifteen small cards with different 
texts, postpaid 50c (2s Id). 

Number Ma, containing fifteen small and six a little larger 
sized cards, $1 (4s 2d). 

Number Mc, containing six small and six medium-sized 
cards, $1 (4s 2d). 

Number Me, containing two large and two medium cards. 
$1 (4s 2d). 

Where $5 (LI lOd) worth of these are sent to one address 
the saving in package and expressage would be 50c, making 
the price $4.50 (18s 9d). Order by number only. 

Postcards. Assorted mottoes and designs, 15c (7-l/2d) 
per dozen; two dozen, 25c (Is l/2d); 100 for $1 (4s 2d). 



Memory Cards. We have two different sets of these— 
No. 1 and No. 2. Colors of the cards indicate the topic. As 
for instance, purple represents royalty and the Kingdom, 
garnet represents the redeeming blood, etc. On one side of 
the cards are texts appropriate to the color. On the reverse 
side of the card is the citation of where it is found. Fifty 
cards to the pack, 25c. (Is Id) per pack, postpaid. These can 
be used personally or with a company of friends. The design 
is to commit the text to memory and its citation. Many have 
found these very useful. 

Jerusalem Remembrancers of Olivewood. Brother Russell 
purchased a quantity of these on the occasion of his last visit 
to Jerusalem. We still have some paper weights remaining— 
made of olivewood highly polished. Postpaid 10c. (5d) each. 
In quantities, 80c. (3s 4d) per dozen. 

Write your letters and correct P.O. address very plainly; 
also give name of nearest express company. 

Write your orders on a separate sheet of paper from your 
letter. If answering a letter marked File A, File R, or otherwise, 
refer to it in the opening paragraph of your letter. 



page 348 

"I.B.S.A." BIBLES AND OTHER BIBLE STUDY HELPS 

First in this list we mention the several volumes of 

"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" SERIES 

[SEE OVER] 

We commend also, as aids, the following publications (not all our own), 
which we supply at specially low prices because of the assistance they 
lend to the study of God's Word. We mention these somewhat in the 
order in which they seem to us to be desirable aids. 

OUR SPECIAL "I.B.S.A." BIBLE 

Hereafter to distinguish our own special edition from other 
Bibles, we will refer to it as the "I.B.S.A." Bible. This Bible is 
becoming more and more indispensable to all readers as they learn 
how to use it. The translation, of course, is not at all different from 
that of other Bibles of the Common Version. 
We specially recommend it for its smallness 
of size, lightness of weight, and good-sized 
print, and above all for the helps to Bible 
students and teachers bound with it; printed 
on India paper; excellent press work. Its 
special feature, distinguishing this Bible from 
all others, is 

BIBLE TEACHERS' MANUAL. 
Parti. 
Biblical Comments from Genesis to Revelation, 



with references to the STUDIES IN THE 

SCRIPTURES and others of our publications 

showing the page where the text is more 

fully discussed and elaborated. We can 

scarcely imagine anything more helpful than 

these for Bible study. It is so easy to turn 

to the reference and ascertain if the matter 

has been treated and where and how. It represents 

four hundred and eighty-one pages 

of matter. 

Part II. 

INSTRUCTORS' GUIDE TEXTS. 

This is a topical arrangement of Bible 
subjects specially convenient for those who 
have opportunity for teaching others the 
Divine Plan of the Ages. Its various Topics 
are arranged under distinct headings and the 
various texts bearing upon the subjects are 
collated. With this help a novice has at his 
command, well-furnished, "the Sword of the 
Spirit." It is in condensed form, very convenient, 
and consists of eighteen pages solid 
matter. 

Part III. 

BEREAN TOPICAL INDEX. 

The Berean Topical Index, alphabetically 
arranged, presents a large variety of subjects 
showing references to the STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES and others of our publications 
treating the same. This feature covers twenty-eight 
pages. 

Part IV. 

DIFFICULT TEXTS EXPLAINED. 

SPURIOUS PASSAGES NOTED. 

In this, specially difficult texts are brought 
to the attention and references given showing 
where they are treated in our publications. 
Following this is a full list of various 
interpolations and spurious passages of the 
Scriptures not in the original MSS., as 
proven by the oldest Greek MSS.— fifteen 
pages. 

These four features, representing five hundred 
and forty-two pages, are not to be found 
in any other Bibles on earth and, in our 
opinion, they are of almost priceless value. 
One of our interested readers if he could not 
procure another would not sell his copy for 
a hundred dollars— many of them surely 
would not take thousands for it. 



All of our "I.B.S.A." Bibles contain the 
above, and some of them, the numbers of which end with a nine, contain 
additionally Bagster's Bible Study Helps, including an alphabetical 
index of proper names and Bagster's Bible Concordance and Maps— a 
total of one hundred and eighty-six pages. 

We not only supply these Bibles at cost price, but, because of 
the large quantities ordered at a time, we are enabled to secure a 
cost price which is really phenomenal. The very low prices must not 
lead you to think that these are manufactured in any slipshod manner. 
They are first class in every particular. The prices are, many of them, 
less than one-half of what you pay for such books almost anywhere else. 

So great is the demand for these "I.B.S.A." Bibles that hereafter 
we purpose carrying no others in stock except pocket Bibles and 
large type Bibles for the aged. We will still, however, be pleased to 
serve anyone who desires other Bibles. We can procure for these wholesale 
rates, usually twenty-five per cent, off, plus postage. 

DESCRIPTION AND PRICES-'T.B.S.A." BIBLES 

1918, price $1.65, postage prepaid, is a beautiful book. It is small 
and light. Size 4-3/4 x 6-3/4 inches. It has minion type, red under gold 
edges, divinity circuit, French Seal. Looks like the genuine sealskin, 
but it is in reality good sheepskin. 

Number 1919, price $1.75, postage prepaid; the same book, the 
same Bible; the same every way except the addition of Bagster Helps, 
Concordances, etc., making this size a trifle larger. 

Number 1928, price $2.65, postage prepaid. This is the same 
book exactly as number 1918, except that it has genuine morocco binding; 
leather-lined. 

LITTLE LARGER, IONIC TYPE, SELF-PRONOUNCING 

Number 1939, price $1.95, postage prepaid. This is the same book 
as 1919, the same binding and contents, but it has a coarser print and 
is a little larger book. Size, 5-1/2 x 7-1/2 inches. 

Number 1959, price $3.65, postage prepaid. This is the same book 
as 1939 except that it has splendid morocco binding, is calf-lined and 
silk-sewed. Bibles similar in quality and finish are listed in many 
catalogues at $8. 

The sale of these books is not restricted to WATCH TOWER readers. 
They are valuable aids in Bible study, and open to the public. 

Remit with order. We can secure such prices only by paying spot 
cash and must sell on the same terms. Insurance, 5c. additional. 

Anyone ordering patent index on any of these Bibles should so 
state and should add twenty-five cents to the price. 

Should any desire other Bibles we will be pleased to 
supply publisher's catalogue, giving full description and 
prices. We are usually able to secure a discount of 25 
per cent, on the publishers' list prices. 

DAILY HEAVENLY MANNA 

FOR THE HOUSEHOLD OF FAITH 

The demand for this publication increases year by year. 
Our present edition of the "Manna" contains the same texts 



and comments as all former editions. Every alternate leaf is blank -ruled, 

for use as an autograph and birthday record. Its value increases 

as additional autographs of friends are secured. It is printed on 

fine bond paper. We now have it in three different grades of binding, 

at very reasonable prices, considering the class of workmanship. 

The following wholesale rates postpaid are granted to all WATCH 
TOWER subscribers: 

Purple cloth, silver embossed $0.35 

Dark blue cloth, silver embossed, German 35 

Leatherette, blue edges, Swedish and Norwegian 35 

Leatherette, gold edges, Swedish and Norwegian 65 

Genuine Morocco, gold edges, English and Norwegian 1.10 

We hope this little book will find a place at every breakfast table; 
that spiritual refreshment may thus be enjoyed with the natural food. 

THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT 

This very valuable work, published under the author's copyright 
by Fowler & Wells Co., New York City, has been sold by them at $4 
in cloth and $5 in half leather binding. For several years a friend, an 
earnest Bible student, desirous of assisting the readers of our Society's 
publications, has supplied them through us at a greatly reduced price; 
now he has purchased the copyright and plates from the Fowler & 
Wells Co., and presented the same to our Society as a gift that the poor 
of the Lord's flock may have this help in the study of the Word. 

REDUCED PRICES. -This will be sold with THE WATCH TOWER 
only. On thin paper, in full morocco leather, divinity circuit, red under 
gold edges, silk sewed, leather lined, $2.50 (10s. 6d.) includes postage 
and one year's subscription to THE WATCH TOWER. 

THE TISCHENDORF NEW TESTAMENT 

This is the ordinary Common Version in cloth binding. As footnotes 
it gives the reading of the three oldest Greek MSS., Sinaiticus, 
Vaticanus and Alexandrine, wherever these differ from the Common 
Version. This is a very valuable little work, published in Europe, 
which we specially import. Price, 50c, including postage. 

LEESER'S TRANSLATION OF THE OLD TESTAMENT 

This is the standard translation amongst English reading Hebrews, 
by one of their own rabbis. It is not perfect, but is a valuable aid 
in critical study of the Old Testament. Our special price, in leather 
binding, including postage, is $1.10. 

ANALYTICAL CONCORDANCE TO THE SCRIPTURES 

In English, Hebrew and Greek, by Prof. Young (Presbyterian). 
A valuable work for all critical students. We are not permitted by the 
publishers to cut their price, but we may and do give in addition, postage 
free, any four volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, cloth binding 
with each Concordance, or six volumes if purchaser pays expressage. 
Postpaid, cloth binding, $6. 

EXHAUSTIVE CONCORDANCE TO THE SCRIPTURES 



In English, Hebrew and Greek, by Prof. Strong (Methodist). 
This is also an able work and useful in critical study. It has some 
advantages over Young's; after getting used to it we prefer it. 
Special reduced prices in cloth binding, $3.96; half leather, $5.96. 

CRUDEN'S CONCORDANCE TO THE SCRIPTURES 

A valuable work, but scarcely necessary to those who have either 
of the above mentioned. English only. Cloth binding, $1, delivered. 

SMITH'S BIBLE DICTIONARY 

This is one of the most desirable editions of Prof. Smith's work. It 
is a large volume of 1,020 pages. Cloth binding, $1.30, including postage. 

"BIBLE TALKS IN SIMPLE LANGUAGE" 

This is the best book of its kind we have ever seen. It presents 
the Bible stories in simple, but not childish language, and seems 
remarkably free from the bad theology so common in this class of 
books. All Christian parents should have a Sunday Bible lesson with 
their children, and this book furnishes interesting topics, to which may 
be added as much concordant "Present Truth" as the age of the 
children will justify. Parents are responsible for their children's 
training in theology as well as in morals. 

624 pages, 250 illustrations; cloth sides, leather back and corners, 
gilt edges. A subscription book at $3. Our special price, $1, postpaid. 

MISCELLANEOUS 

Hymns of Dawn, with music (cloth) $0.35 

Hymns of Dawn, without music (flexible) 06 

Poems of Dawn (leather) 50c; cloth 25 

Memorizing Text-Cards (100 in pkg.— two assortments, Nos. 1 and 

2), per pkg 25 

CHARTS (Blue Prints, soft cloth): 

Plan of the Ages, 5 ft, $1.00; 8 ft 1.50 

Chronology of the Bible, 8 ft 1.50 

Tabernacle of the Wilderness, 8 ft 1.50 

BINDERS for THE WATCH TOWER: 

Spring Back (holds 1 yr.) 50 

CROSS & CROWN PINS (Gold, with red enamel): 

1/2" and 5/8" (ladies' or gents' style) each $1 and 1.15 

5/8" celluloid, per doz. 25c; each 03 

Missionary Envelopes, per hundred, 25c; per M 2.00 

Vow Bookmarks (paper) 25c per 100; (silk) each 05 

Booklets (on Hell, Spiritism, Evolution, Tabernacle Shadows, Our 
Lord's Return), also Berean Question Booklets on each volume 

of SCRIPTURE STUDIES each 5c; per doz 50 

Report on Foreign Missions, each 05 

Tracts in all languages FREE 



R5579 : page 349 



SCRIPTURAL PROOFS OF SPIRIT-BEGETTING 

"Of His own will begat He us with 
the Word of Truth."— James 1:18. 

THE SCRIPTURES tell us that our Lord left 

the glory which He had with the Father 

before the world was and came to earth, 

becoming a man, "for the suffering of 

death," that He might give Himself "a 

Ransom for all." At the age of thirty, we 

are told, He went to Jordan and presented 

Himself as a Sacrifice to God. After His 

baptism, as He came up out of the water, 

the Holy Spirit descended upon Him, "the 

Heavens were opened unto Him." He was then led of 

the Spirit (this newly begotten Spirit) into the wilderness 

for forty days, to commune with the Father, to study 

the types and prophecies of the Scriptures, and to be 

tested of the Adversary. Thereafter, He was able to see 

clearly the course which the Father had marked out for 

Him, as shown in these types and prophecies. 

In inviting His disciples to follow Him, our Lord 
made it very plain that in so doing they must of necessity 
be baptized into His death and partake of His cup of 
suffering, that they might live and reign with Him. 
Throughout the Scriptures it is pointed out that the 
Church are to be members of the Body of Christ, of which 
He is the Head. They declare that He is our Forerunner, 
the Captain of our salvation; that "as He was, so 
are we, in this world"; that His experiences are to be our 
experiences. They declare that He is "leading many 
sons"— His brethren— to God, to glory. 

The steps that we are to take, then, are exactly the 
steps that He took whom we are to follow. He is our 
great Pattern. We are enabled by faith to see, under 
Divine guidance, the redemption which Jesus accomplished 

R5580 : page 349 

for us, and our opportunity of becoming His disciples, of 
being baptized into His death. Baptism into death would 
be far from desirable, unless there were some way by 
which it might be made a gateway unto life; and this way 
was provided by God. It was opened first for His Son. 

JESUS' HUMAN AND SPIRIT NATURES TYPIFIED 

In the type of the Atonement Day, our Lord's human 
nature was represented in the bullock, which was offered 
for sacrifice. The high priest, clothed in the white linen 
garments of sacrifice, represented Him as a spirit-begotten 
New Creature, after His human sacrifice was accepted, 
and while the actual consuming of His human body was 
in process. The high priest, clothed in the "garments of 
glory and beauty," represented Him after His resurrection 



to the Divine nature, after He was born of the Spirit 

and highly exalted to glory, honor and immortality by the 

Father, as a reward for His faithfulness.— John 3:3-8. 

So at the time when we present ourselves to God in 
consecration, and our sacrifice is accepted of Him, we die 
as men; but we are likewise begotten to the new nature, 
the new life. And this new life, begotten from above, 
continues to grow by the assimilation of spiritual nourishment, 
until it will, in due time, be born a fully developed 
spirit being, like unto our Lord. (1 John 3:2; Romans 8:29.) 
This process and its outcome are brought to our 
attention in the Scripture which declares of our Lord that 
He was "the First-born from the dead." And this word 
born [gennao, in the Greek] is the same word which is 
translated begotten. It relates to the entire process of 
bringing forth. This is a progressive matter; first there 
is the begetting, then the period of gestation, then birth. 

Our Lord's baptism to the new life was at the time 
He made His consecration unto death at His baptism. 
The New Creature there begun was growing during the 
three and a half years thereafter. This period, as before 
mentioned, was represented in the high priest in the type. 
At His baptism He was begotten as a Son of God on the 
highest plane— the Divine. John the Baptist here bore 
witness of Him, saying, "I saw the Spirit descending from 
Heaven like a dove, and it abode upon Him." The record 
of the Scriptures is that only those who are begotten of 
the Spirit can see spiritual things.— 1 Corinthians 2:9-16. 

DEEP TRUTHS NOT VISIBLE ON THE SURFACE 

It is asked: Why is it that a fact of so great importance 
as the Lord's begetting of the Spirit is not stated 
in so many words, but must be proven by deduction? We 
reply: To those who are spiritually minded there is very 
strong evidence indeed, yet it might be passed over by 
others and not recognized at all. This is likewise true of 
other important Scriptural doctrines. There is one 
Scripture which declares that through the exceeding 
great and precious promises we may be made partakers of 
the Divine nature. Other Scriptures state that the followers 
of Christ shall share His glory, honor and immortality. 
These latter Scriptures imply the same thing 
as the first, though only the one text (2 Peter 1:4) states 
the matter in just those words. 

In respect to our Lord's resurrection, it is declared 
that "He was put to death in flesh, and made alive in 
Spirit." (1 Peter 3:18— Diaglott.) This Scripture does 
not say that He was raised a Spirit, but this is the evident 
meaning; and we know that this was the case: "Now 
the Lord is that Spirit." (2 Corinthians 3:17.) In 
Colossians 1:18 we read of our Lord: "And He is the 
Head of the Body, the Church, who is the beginning [of 
this New Creation], the First-born from the dead." As 
our Lord was born from the dead a spirit Being, He must 
have been previously begotten of the Spirit, as birth is 



always preceded by begetting. 

In speaking of the resurrection of the Church, which 
is declared to be Christ's resurrection (Philippians 3:10), 
the Apostle Paul says: "It is sown an animal 
body, it is raised a spiritual body." So it is "here a little 
and there a little" that we must find these precious truths. 
This seems to be the way in which the Lord has prepared 
the Bible— giving here a little and there a little of these 
jewels of Truth. Those who are superficial in their 
search will overlook the most important features of 
Truth, to find later that they have only a small part. 

CLEARER LIGHT NOW SHINING 

As we search the Scriptures, and learn how to rightly 
divide and rightly combine its various elements, now that 
the dawning light of the New Dispensation is shining on 
the Word, making it more luminous to our view, we see 
the wonderful whole— the great Plan that we and others 
had previously passed over and failed to discern. Those 
who are not of the right class will not be able to see the 
Truth in all its wondrous clearness, beauty and harmony. 
If we have the right spirit as children of God, we shall 
want to know what God has in reservation for His people. 

This gives an opportunity for the operation of the 
Spirit of the Truth upon our hearts and minds. This 
desire leads us to come together for Bible study, when 
the worldly would say: Let us play billiards or chess or 
pool. They complain to us: You have already read that 
Bible several times. We tell them that we have and with 
a great deal of blessing. 

Thus, as we are desiring to know the Lord's Plan and 
His will concerning us, He reveals it to us more and 
more; and thus, little by little, we gain a great aggregate 
of Truth, which greatly rejoices our hearts, gives us an 
intelligent understanding of the wonderful day in which 
we are living, and gives us calmness and confidence, while 
the hearts of others are failing them for fear. 



R5580 : page 350 

INTERESTING LETTERS 
LONDON DRAMA EXPERIENCES 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We feel sure you will be glad to hear of the splendid witness 
that is being given by means of the PHOTO-DRAMA OF 
CREATION at The London Opera House, Kingsway. The 
guiding hand of the Lord has been so wonderfully manifest 
in every detail of this exhibition that the brethren are rejoicing 
greatly in the privilege of having a share in it. In 
fact, they are realizing that the message of the PHOTO-DRAMA 
is the only one that can bring comfort to the hearts of the 



people in these distressing times. 

It had always been our desire to secure the Opera House 
for a presentation of the PHOTO-DRAMA, as it is, without 
doubt, the most suitable building in London for that purpose; 
but the state of our treasury did not admit of the payment 
of the large sum required to rent the place. We had, however, 
given the Solicitor of the Opera House to understand 
that we should be glad to enter into negotiations for the 
house if he could make a more favorable offer. About the 
beginning of October a letter was received from the Solicitor, 
stating that they had a period free from October 12th to October 
27th which they could offer us. On receipt of this we 
immediately called upon them and told them that we had spent 
most of the money allotted for this particular purpose, that 
their offer had come too late. Upon going thoroughly into 
the matter, an offer was made of LI 00 for the hire of the 
building. Mr. Wylie, the Solicitor, who has lately evinced 
considerable interest in our work, closed with the offer. He 
has since visited the exhibition on two occasions, and states 
that the interest aroused in him has led him to read his Bible 
after many years of neglect. 

It was resolved to advertise this presentation by means of 
a distribution of 400,000 DRAMA tracts. Although only a 
week elapsed between the definite booking of the Opera House 
and the commencement of the exhibition, the brethren entered 
into the work of distribution with such a zeal that practically 
all the tracts were given out before the opening day. In 
addition to the ordinary means of advertising by posters, circulars, 
etc., a large number of window-cards were produced 
and these proved very effective. Some of the brethren called 
upon large business houses, warehouses, stores, hotels, hospitals 
and all places likely to engage a large staff, with the 
show-cards and supply of tickets, which they were generally 
pleased to accept. Some houses desired as many as 500 tickets, 
which they guaranteed to distribute amongst their staff. 
In the same manner they called upon P.S.A.'s, Men's Bible 
Classes, Sunday Schools, etc., requesting them to announce 
the DRAMA to their members and providing them with tickets; 
it was reckoned that 90% of the places thus visited co-operated 
with us in this matter. As there were a great 
number of boxes available in the Opera House, special invitation 
cards for these were sent out to the aristocracy and 
persons of good address in London; and, as a result, our 
boxes were nearly always filled by a class of people that the 
DRAMA has not hitherto touched to any extent. 

Having done our utmost to make the presentation public, 
we anxiously awaited its first exhibition on the afternoon of 
Monday, October 12th. A large number of brethren were required 
for ushering, stewarding and other duties connected 
with the exhibition; and all realized their great privilege of 
service and fulfilled their duties faithfully and well. Many of 
the public commented on the orderly and gracious manner in 
which everything was carried out. One gentleman who attended 
was so greatly impressed by the dignified and courteous 
manner in which the sisters performed their duties, that 
he particularly asked his mother to come to see how the 



DRAMA was conducted, as he felt sure that all who were taking 

R5581 : page 350 

part in it were Christians. At his suggestion she came 

the next day and enjoyed a time of fellowship with several 

of the ushers, and also on the succeeding Sunday at the 

Tabernacle. Another gentleman stated that he had been 

grossly misinformed regarding Pastor Russell and his teachings; 

for he saw the effect they had upon those who were 

helping to present them. He is a leader of a large Men's 

Bible Class, which he intends to bring to the DRAMA. Another 

stated that the spirit of the workers showed him that 

it was not a theatrical display, but that the work was being 

done for the glory of God. Each day, before the commencement, 

the brethren assembled to sing a hymn of praise and to 

request the Lord's blessing upon all the proceedings. 

The audiences on the first day were not large, but the two 
following days noted good increases, while on the evening of 
the fourth day our house was completely filled, as was the 
case almost every subsequent evening. The public seemed so 
eager to witness the DRAMA that many hundreds waited in 
a queue outside for a long time, in order to gain admission 
and even then, because of the limitations of the house, we 
were compelled to turn away a great many. Quite a crowd, 
however, waited at the door for nearly an hour in the hope 
that some of the audience might come out at the intermission, 
when they would take their places. It was deemed wise not 
to admit children; but on Saturday and Sunday afternoons 
they were permitted to come in if attended by adults. 

Our audiences were made up from all classes and kinds 
of people; we have noted many of the clergy in attendance. 
One vicar wished to know the object of the PHOTO-DRAMA. 
When we explained this to him, he seemed intensely interested 
and expressed his joy that this beautiful building should 
be used for such a worthy purpose. He asked for tickets that 
he and his wife might come and see it again. A Church of 
England Rector has attended the DRAMA several times, and 
found it so interesting that he has purchased five bound scenarios 
and has brought many of his friends to witness it. Two 
bishops have also been present, and several titled people. 

Each day we receive, by mail, a great number of requests 
for tickets; and many of the applicants express their appreciation 
of the PHOTO-DRAMA. The following letter is from 
a gentleman who sends us a donation for the work: "I beg 
of you to accept the enclosed token of my appreciation of the 
beautiful pictures being shown by you at the London Opera 
House. I am convinced of the vast amount of good that is 
being done by the films and lectures. Let me add that I 
cannot but admire the disinterested spirit in which this good 
work is being carried out, especially in this self-seeking, commercial 
age." We had a letter, too, from a minister who, 
after seeing the DRAMA, writes, "While I could not see eye 
to eye with all Pastor Russell's views I must testify to his 
faithful Scriptural delineations. As a Biblical student I feel 
bound to wish him and his workers God-speed in their attack 



on the anti-Scriptural and God-dishonoring doctrine of eternal 
torment." He further requests that, if possible, one of 
our speakers come and address his Bible Class on the topic, 
"Pastor Russell's Message to the World." 

We have been impressed by the manner in which the public 
assist us in advertising the DRAMA with the least expense. 
Many apply for window-cards that they may exhibit them in 
their shops, etc.; and others take supplies of tickets to distribute 
amongst their friends. Practically all who attend 
seem to be deeply interested in what they see and hear. The 
serious times in which we are living seem to be preparing 
the hearts of some to receive the truth. At the conclusion 
of one session a lady came to one of the stewards and said, 
"I have been to all the pictures and lectures, and I feel I 
must thank somebody. I do not know whom to thank; there 
seems to be nobody; so I want you to convey my message of 
thanks and appreciation to the right quarter." Another lady 
told us she had inquired at the Religious Tract Society's 
office respecting the PHOTO-DRAMA, and was strongly urged 
not to go; but she was evidently so impressed by the advertisement 
that she decided otherwise. She was delighted with 
the Message and considered it the finest thing that had yet 
been done to bring the people back to the Bible— which fact 
she did not fail to impress upon the R.T.S. officials. 

At the intermission the lady ushers give opportunity of 
purchasing the Scenario to any who desire to do so; and, as 
a result, a great number of these have been sold. Altogether 
we have disposed of nearly 2,300 scenarios during the fifteen 
days. We enclose a detailed report of the attendances and 
scenarios sold for each day, from which you will see that very 
few of the latter were sold on the Sundays. The reason for 
this is that we did not mention the sale on Sundays, as a great 
many Christian people object to the sale of books on Sunday, 
and this might prove a stumbling-block to some who might 
otherwise have received the truth, as well as giving a better 
impression to the people in general. 

Remarks regarding the beauty and acceptableness of the 
exhibition are frequent, and surprise is often shown at the 
generosity of so good a show being free. Expressions of 
appreciation have been offered by people of standing. One 
such lady stated, after the Finale, that it was good to come 
in touch with those who had a message of comfort and hope. 
Another expressed her intention of attending the Tabernacle. 
Both had signed cards. 

These, and many other evidences of interest amongst 
those who were attending the DRAMA, gave us great encouragement 
and reason to suppose that we would have a most 
successful Finale. This took place on Tuesday, the 27th of 
October; and our hopes were realized in every way. In the 
afternoon, over a thousand people were present, while in the 
evening, the house was completely filled and hundreds were 
turned away, being unable to gain admission. Brother Hemery 

R5581 : page 351 

gave the lectures on both occasions; and at the conclusion 



many seemed eager to sign their cards, a total of twelve 
hundred being received. 

Owing to the increasing interest in this particular presentation, 
we have arranged to continue at the Opera House for 
another twelve days, report of which will follow later. 

Truly, the people appreciate the Message that the DRAMA 
has to give. It demands even the respect of openly avowed 
agnostics and is making many realize that Jehovah is their 
Rock and their Fortress, their Strength, in whom they will 
trust. With much love in the Lord as ever, we are, 

Your brethren and fellow-laborers, 

INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSN. 



THE BRETHREN IN SWITZERLAND, ETC. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

After a long, but unintentional silence, I will write to you 
again, hoping these lines will find you in good health, as they 
leave me. 

Many things have happened over here since I last wrote to 
you. The newspapers in America must keep you posted about 
them. Respecting our personal experiences I can tell you, 
dear Brother, that the Lord has kept us wonderfully; we cannot 
thank Him enough for His goodness toward us. 

Our dear friends at Muelhausen have passed through 
dreadful times; the city and surroundings have been twice the 
scene of very hot battles, where thousands of French and 
German soldiers have lost their lives. Within four weeks 
Muelhausen has been twice in French and three times in 
German possession, and even today the fights about Alsace 
continue. As the border between Switzerland and Germany, 
e.g., between Basel and Muelhausen, was closed for several 
weeks, we were left entirely without news from them. Lately, 
venturing to cross the border in order to visit the brethren, I 
learned of their wonderful preservation— for not one was 
hurt. They send you special greetings and ask you to continue 
to remember them in prayer that they may be kept 
faithful unto the end. 

Our dear friends in Belgium and North France must have 
suffered much, too; I am sorry to say it is quite impossible to 
communicate with them. 

Here in Switzerland, and especially in Basel, there was 
very great excitement; many people thought the "end of the 
world" was coming. All our army was called in and still 
guards the borders against invasion. Spiritually we had a 
good season, for very many who didn't believe our Message 
before are now on our side. The meeting halls are always 
overcrowded, and we have to look for larger halls. All public 
lectures are under the military censor; but they are not 
so strict here as in Germany. 

By all these practical experiences we are more than ever 
convinced that the end of the present order of things is at 
hand and the Messianic Kingdom will soon be established. 
How we all do long for the realization of this grand hope 



and sure expectation! How true is the chronology and how 
precise its fulfilment! We are glad that we never gave up 
our expectations for 1914. 

Re PHOTO-DRAMA: As the slides came so late, we were 
only ready for public presentation in Berne the very day the 
mobilization decree came out, disturbing the whole arrangement. 
Brother Krull will no doubt have given you an oral 
report of our experiences. 

The first two weeks in August everything seemed upside 
down; but when the people became a little more quiet we 
profited thereby and started the Drama— though still under 
many difficulties. While all other cinematographic shows were 
shut by the Government, I succeeded in getting a permit 
for two weeks, but we were allowed to operate only four 
times a week. We had the large, magnificent hall on the Exhibition 

R5582: page 351 

grounds packed full every time (1,400 visitors), so 
that more than 12,000 people saw and profited thereby. 

Tomorrow we start again in Zurich (largest city in Switzerland). 
As we have no phonograph records I must read 
the lectures. 

In France we were not able to do anything. Many of the 
brethren are in military service, and I might be called in any 
day. 

The bank in Berne, where you sent the money, and which 
was, under normal conditions, a safe one, shut its doors, like 
all other banks, allowing only very small sums to go out. I 
succeeded, however, in getting more than half of the money 
by the following transaction: As the Government had put its 
hand over the banks, and as the brethren needed food, we 
put up a large stock of the most necessary articles, and the 
merchants, presenting their bills for this cause to the bank, 
received payment, as this was in the interest of the Government. 
As the social conditions will be still worse in winter 
we may be glad to have this lot of rice, dried bread, beans, 
condensed milk, etc. 

I hope you approve this action, and would be glad if you 
could advise us of other good means for ameliorating the 
great tribulation which came so unexpectedly upon Europe. 
Many people have no work and many brethren in the Truth 
have lost their positions. We tried to employ some as Colporteurs, 
but the people of the cities have little money and 
cannot buy books. In the country the people are in better 
circumstances and the Colporteurs sell a few books every day. 
So we are trying to continue the Harvest work until our 
Master calls us to the Harvest beyond the veil. 

We may not be able to communicate with each other much 
longer, and I take this opportunity to say again how much I 
love you, including with myself my wife and many other 
dear friends, all of whom appreciate the love and interest you 
have always manifested toward us. 

Soon you will hear the blessed words, "Well done, good 
and faithful Servant! Thou hast been faithful over a few 
things, I will now make thee ruler over many things, enter 



thou into the joys of thy Lord." 

With hearty greetings to you and the Household of Faith 
at Bethel, I remain, 

Your thankful brother in the Lord, 

EMIL LANZ.-Switzerland. 



I.B.S.A. EUREKA DRAMA 

DEAR BRETHREN:-Greetings in the name of the Lord! 
Enclosed find report to date. The beginning of our Drama 
was on Thursday. We did not have time to advertise it, or 
we should have done so; but the Lord permitted us to be 
greatly blessed in an advertising that we knew not of. 

A lady had advertised a Lodge meeting for the same night 
and at the same hall, not knowing we had rented the hall. 
She had secured a number of new members to be initiated. 
When she came she found the "picture-show" in progress, 
and began to devise means of getting the people out of our 
meeting. 

She sent the Town Marshall to notify them to come out. 
He saw the pictures and sat down and stayed until the close. 
Finding the Town Marshall did not return, she asked our 
doorkeeper to help her. He replied that he could not see how 
he could get the people out; so she sent another man up. 
After looking over the shoulders of about thirty who were 
standing, he returned to the lady and said, "Lady, you had 
better go home; they have the finest pictures I ever saw, and 
there is the 'talkiest' man up there I ever heard!" 

She had six gallons of ice cream to treat her crowd, but 
she didn't get a chance to use it. "God moves in mysterious 
ways His wonders to perform." 

Our prayers go up daily for the Heads of the various 
departments of the Tabernacle Office, that they may have 
more grace and wisdom in the work that remains to be accomplished. 
Love to all. 

Yours by His grace, B. A. GARR.-Ky. 



INTERESTING DRAMA EXPERIENCES 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

We are having some glorious encouragements in the work. 
There are wonderful crowds out here in Demorest. One man 
said, "It disgusts me to see how some of the very people who 
have misrepresented you folks are on hand early, and crowd 
forward to get the best seats." 

The Methodist minister was present on Sunday when part 
three was shown. During the crucifixion scene the power 
was temporarily shut off. While waiting for its return he 
got up and spoke of the wonderful impression made by the 
pictures, and told the people that they ought to have a deeper 
realization of what the Savior had done for them as a result 
of the PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION. 



Truly our God is a wonder-working God. What faith 
these things should develop in us! 

A brother was telling at Convention about some ministers 
at a certain place where Drama was being shown, who were 
worrying for fear people would think they had something 
to do with it. A merchant present remarked, "There is no 
danger people will connect you with it, because it is conspicuously 
announced there will be no collection." 

Yours in Christian Love, B. H. BARTON. 



page 353 

VOL. XXXV DECEMBER 1 No. 23 
A. D. 1914-A. M. 6043 



CONTENTS 

Spirit-Begotten Sons of God and Their 
Development 355 

How They Are Drawn 356 

Daily Battle of the Spirit-Begotten 357 

Temptations Peculiar to the New Creation 358 

World Not Able to Understand Us 358 

Our Sympathetic High Priest 359 

Seeing Things and Bewildered 360 

A Slump in Salvation 360 

Your Good Hopes for 1915 361 

"Watch Tower" Subscriptions 362 

The Church's Ordination 363 

"A Little While" (Poem) 364 

"Where He Was Before" 365 

Manner of Our Lord's Return 366 

Interesting Letters 366 

Re Distribution of B.S.M 366 

Turns Atheists to the Bible 367 

Report of Eureka Drama 367 

Mid-Winter Louisville Convention 367 

page 354 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



NOVEMBER 1ST ISSUE IN DEMAND 

Anticipating a heavy demand for extra copies of our 
November 1st issue, which is largely devoted to a systematic 
treatment of existing conditions as they stand related 
to Bible prophecy and Messiah's Kingdom, we arranged 
with our printers for considerably more than ordinarily 
required for our subscription list. Those desiring copies to 
give to their friends may have them at 5 cents each, or 40 
cents per dozen, postpaid, while the supply lasts. 



R5586 : page 354 

EUREKA PROGRAM-FAMILY PROGRAM 

In some of our back issues we have explained what constitutes 
the EUREKA DRAMA X, without pictures— only phonograph 
and DRAMA records, including musical records; also 
the Y DRAMA, with tinted slides, DRAMA lectures, music, etc. 

Now we have a third suggestion, viz.: EUREKA FAMILY 
DRAMA. It consists of a phonograph of good, clear tones and 
a choice selection of records from the DRAMA and some musical 
records. A few of these records might be said to be a 
little shop-worn, but none of them are bad— most of them are 
strictly new. They are priced so as to bring them within the 
reach of many of our readers who could not afford to purchase 
the regular DRAMA, but who would like to have some 
of the records for their own family use and for such of the 
public as might choose to hear our most wonderful records. 

The entire outfit represents twenty of the short lectures of 
the Scenario, four beautiful hymns and a disc-phonograph 
(concealed horn)— all for $12, or if all new $15. You would 
need to count on cost of expressage according to distance 
from Brooklyn. 

page 354 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR JANUARY 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
January follow: (1) 34; (2) 208; (3) 114; (4) 25; (5) 201; 
(6) 115; (7) 127; (8) 305; (9) 258; (10) Vow; (11) 299; (12) 
47; (13) 221; (14) 197; (15) 307; (16) 324; (17) 128; (18) 175; 
(19) 152; (20) 52; (21) 202; (22) 109; (23) 173; (24) 300; (25) 
240; (26) 284; (27) 101; (28) 303; (29) 28; (30) 119; (31) 245. 



R5582 : page 355 

SPIRIT-BEGOTTEN SONS OF GOD AND THEIR 
DEVELOPMENT 

"If ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the flesh, ye 
shall live. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they 
are the sons of God."— Romans 8:13,14. 

ONLY those who have the right spirit, disposition, 

will or intention, can keep the Divine 

Law, and only those who are in perfect harmony 

with God will He recognize as sons. 

The holy angels are sons of God on the 

angelic plane; cherubim are sons of God on 

their plane of being; and Christ and the 

Church in glory are sons of God on the 

Divine plane. All these are sons of God, 

yet they exist on different planes. They are 

all governed by the Spirit of God; and unless they had 

that Spirit, they could not be recognized as sons; for no 

one can keep the Divine Law except those who have the 

Divine disposition. 

Before Adam fell he was a son of God. (Luke 3:38.) 
He had the Spirit of God, in the sense of having the right 
spirit, disposition, will, intention. But after he had become 
a transgressor of the Divine Law, he was considered 
a sinner. All of Adam's race are still sinners except 
those who have come into Christ. In the Millennial Age, 
however, Adam's race will have the privilege of coming 
into Christ. He will be The Everlasting Father, the 
Father who will give everlasting life to all those who will 
obey the instructions given under the Messianic Kingdom. 

In order to reach that condition of Divine approval, 
mankind must have the spirit of the Truth, and must be 
developed along that line. Before they will be counted, 
or recognized, as sons, they must have the spirit, or disposition, 
of righteousness. Until they attain that spirit, 
they will not be able to render acceptable service; for the 
Lord seeketh such to worship Him as worship Him in 
spirit and in truth. In their fallen condition mankind 
are not able to keep the Divine Law. Even during the 
Millennial Age they will keep it only in part, until they 
shall have been brought back to the image of God in the 
flesh.— Genesis 1:26. 

WHO ARE THE SONS OF GOD? 

Thus far there has been a very limited number of sons 
of God on earth, according to the Scriptures. Throughout 
the Jewish Age God was the Instructor and Guide of 
His people through Moses and the Prophets; but the 
Israelites were not sons of God, and they did not have 



the Spirit's begetting to sonship. On the contrary, they 
were only a House of Servants. (Hebrews 3:5.) The 
Holy Spirit of God was not yet given to any of the fallen 
race; for Jesus was not yet glorified.— John 7:39. 

The Scriptures speak of the Spirit of God as a special 
influence coming from God upon a special class, in a 
special manner, since a particular event— and not before 
that event. This coming of the Spirit was made manifest 
at Pentecost, so that it might stand out separate and distinct 
from anything that had ever before occurred. This 
power, or influence, is variously called the Holy Spirit, 
the Spirit of God, the Spirit of Christ, the Spirit of 
Truth, the Spirit of a sound mind, the Spirit of sonship. 
The various qualities described by these appellations are 
all applicable to the same class; namely, those who are 
begotten of the Spirit. 

These spirit-begotten ones are a particular class who 
have taken up their cross and become followers of Christ, 
and who are on this account recognized of the Father 
by the begetting of the Holy Spirit. This Spirit 
of Truth so illuminates the Bible that the Revelation 
of God may be better understood by those who have 
the Holy Spirit. They are able to comprehend the deep 

R5583 : page 355 

things of God, which cannot be comprehended without it. 
While others not having this Spirit of God might get some 
truth from the Scriptures, this special class have the very 
essence of the Truth. 

SOME NATURALLY DRAWN TO GOD 

We call to mind certain Scriptures which speak of a 
leading of God's people prior to their begetting of the 
Holy Spirit. Speaking of a kind of drawing that came 
to those who afterward became His disciples, our Lord 
said, "No man can come to Me, except the Father who 
hath sent Me draw him." (John 6:44.) This drawing is 
not the work of the Holy Spirit of begetting, which comes 
to those accepted of God through Christ and received as 
sons. On the contrary, that which the Scriptures speak 
of as a drawing of God, and which we have all experienced, 
seems to be a natural drawing along the lines of 
the flesh, not toward things sinful, but toward holiness, 
yet along lines which belong to the natural man. 

For instance, when God created Adam, naturally he 
would love God, naturally he would desire to serve God, 
naturally he would desire to be obedient to God and to 
worship Him. These desires were all natural to him because 
he was in a natural condition— the condition in 
which he was created— pure. Sin has made mankind unnatural. 
But even after sin had entered in and had perverted 
the original character which God gave, certain 
longings for God remained in the human heart— even 



R5583 : page 356 

amongst depraved people. They would rather be in harmony 
with Him, be related to Him, have Him as their 
Protector and Friend. 

God does not draw mankind by any other means than 
that original power which He implanted and which has 
not been altogether lost through the fall of the race of 
Adam. All mankind have degenerated from the image of 
God; but the desire for worship, for righteousness, for 
harmony with God, is much stronger in some people than 
in others. In proportion as one desires righteousness, in 
that proportion that one is drawn toward God, feels after 
God, if haply he might find his Creator. He is feeling 
after God because he wishes to find Him. 

HOW THEY ARE DRAWN 

This is the drawing, we believe, that comes to every 
one of us. Before we gave ourselves to God in consecration, 
we had a desire to come to Him, and that desire was 
something awakened in us. But it was there before it 
was awakened. Then something occurred that turned the 
thoughts toward God. Perhaps it was some great sorrow, 
some calamity, which drew the heart to God; and with it 
came the feeling that our grief should be taken to Him. 
Along with that desire, probably came the thought, "God 
will not hear me." This is a very proper conclusion, for 
there is no way of approach to God except through the 
Redeemer, who said, "I am the Way, the Truth and the 
Life." 

Just as the Roman centurion Cornelius needed instruction 
as to how to approach God, so the soul feeling after 
Divine assistance also needs instruction. We verily believe 
that thousands upon thousands have been turned away 
from God because of the creedal misrepresentations of His 
righteous character. When people begin to realize that 
our God is loving, just, merciful, they will turn to Him. 
We find that some are now being attracted toward God 
through the PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION. Recently we 
heard of a lawyer who felt that he had lost his hold upon 
God altogether; but, as a result of seeing the DRAMA, he 
drew nigh to God and made a consecration of himself. 

This, we believe, is the way in which we are drawn to 
the Father, whose influence is related to everything beautiful 
and harmonious in nature. Not until we have the 
desire to go back to God are we ready to be directed by 
the great Advocate; for when we come to the Advocate, 
He very pointedly says, "I cannot receive you except upon 
one condition." That condition, He tells us, is that we 
take up our cross and follow Him. (Matthew 16:24.) 
Consequently it would not be wise to tell any one about 
the narrow way unless he had some drawing toward God. 

We see, then, quite a clear distinction between the 
drawing of the Father— that drawing which persists everywhere 
—and what in the Scripture is called the Spirit of 



God. That Spirit is given only to the sons of God. "As 

many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of 

God." (Romans 8:14.) That Spirit takes hold of them, 

guiding them in various ways— sometimes by putting property 

into their hands, sometimes by taking it away from 

them, sometimes by permitting sickness to come. The experiences 

of these sons of God enable them to grow in 

grace, in knowledge and in love, that thus they may be 

fitted and prepared for positions on the spirit plane. 

THE SPIRIT POURED UPON ALL MANKIND 

During the Millennial Age things will be somewhat 
different from what they are now. Christ will have representatives 
in the earthly phase of the Kingdom, and 
through them the Word of God will go forth to the people. 
As many as will then be drawn toward God will be privileged 
to come into relationship with Him through consecration. 
They will then receive the Spirit of God in the 
sense of blessing, but not in the sense of begetting, as the 
Church receives it now. 

The Ancient Worthies will be the earthly representatives 
of the Messianic Kingdom. The Christ, however, 
will be the great Teacher in glory, from whom all instruction 
will come through these earthly representatives. As 
people begin to get the true, the real knowledge about the 
glorious character of God, they will begin to see how 
inferior they are. Then they will be in condition to 
receive instruction. 

No one will be compelled to have instruction, however; 
but whoever is out of accord with the Kingdom 
will have restrictions put upon him. The Prophet Zechariah, 
speaking of earthly affairs under the Kingdom, says, 
"And it shall be, that whoso will not come up of all the 
families of the earth unto Jerusalem to worship the King, 
the Lord of hosts, even upon them shall be no rain." 
(Zechariah 14:17.) If we interpret the word rain symbolically, 
we perceive that the thought is that upon such 
nations there will be no Divine blessing— if there were 
no rain, there would be no fruitage. But the rain, the 
blessing, would be upon those who would be in harmony 
with the Lord. 

When people come into harmony with God, they will 
consecrate their lives and their bodies to His service. 
Then they will begin to get the blessings in their minds 
and bodies; and in this sense of the word they will get 
more of the Spirit of the Lord— the Spirit of His mind. 
So through His Truth and through the Divine judgments 
of that time, the Lord will "pour out His Spirit upon all 
flesh." (Joel 2:28.) In proportion as they receive His 
Spirit, they will come into the attitude of sonship. 

But even then they would not be sons in the full sense 
of the term. We might say that the Church are not sons 
in the full sense of the word, but that we shall be sons 
indeed when we shall have experienced our resurrection 
change. So in the Millennial Age, as people come into 



harmony with the Divinely arranged Messianic Kingdom, 
they will be coming nearer and nearer to the standard of 
sonship. By the end of the Millennial Age they will have 
attained that condition of mentality which Adam had 
when he was perfect. All this blessing they will get 
through Christ and His associated Church. 

THE WORK OF THE SPIRIT IN THE CHURCH 

Because our Lord will give everlasting life to the 
world of mankind, He is called "The Everlasting Father," 
the Father who gives everlasting life. (Isaiah 9:6.) All 
the willing and obedient will become His children during 
the Millennium. Then at the close of the Messianic 
Kingdom the children of The Christ will be introduced 
to their Grand-Father. Since they are to be sons of 
Christ, who is the Son of God, the Heavenly Father will 
be their Grand-Father. Then the whole world will be 
back into harmony with God as the sons of Christ. 

During this Gospel Age, however, God is not operating 
upon the world. Whatever there is in the world of 
natural beauty is the result of the operation of the Power 
of God in a general way. Our text does not refer to this 
operation of God's Power, or Spirit, but to His influence 
upon the hearts of men. In the New Testament writings 
it refers to those who have become His people by making 
a full consecration of themselves and then being begotten 
of the Holy Spirit as New Creatures in Christ. (2 Cor. 5:17.) 
All such are recipients of special Divine care. 

The Scriptures speak of the Spirit of Truth, the 
Spirit of the Father, the Spirit of Christ. All these are 
synonymous terms, which represent the Divine influence 

R5583 : page 357 

exercised upon the people of God. Having been begotten 
of the Spirit, we should remember that, as the Apostle 
suggests, we are to be perfected. We must make a certain 
development. We progress until finally we are born 
in the First Resurrection. Perfection will be attained 
then, not before. Meantime, in order to be ready for that 
resurrection, a certain development must take place. 

MAKING READY FOR SPIRIT CONDITIONS 

In our context the Apostle is telling how we may attain 
to this life condition, how to make ready for the birth 
of the Spirit in due time. He says that such a development 
will be attained through the Spirit, or Power, of 
God. This Spirit operates in various ways. For instance, 
God's Message applies to the Church. Therefore 
the more we understand the Plan of God, the greater will 
be that Power in our hearts; and the deeper our consecration 
to the Divine will, the more sympathy will we 

R5584 : page 357 



have and the greater will be our desire to do the Divine 
good pleasure. 

The change going on within our hearts is neither by 
men nor of men. God began this work in us. Therefore 
we must look to Him to complete the work which He has 
begun in our hearts by the Message He has given us. So 
we go to Him in prayer, and we study His Word, to know 
the meaning of that Word and thus to be enabled to put 
it into expression in our lives. Just as we require food 
to strengthen our mortal bodies, so we must also have 
spiritual food to strengthen the New Creature. This 
spiritual food God has given us abundantly, in order that 
we may get spiritual strength to understand His will 
better than before. 

This operation of God through the Holy Spirit is a 
gradual work. So beclouded are we by the errors of our 
former beliefs that we are not prepared to see the deep 
things of God at the first glance. Therefore we need to 
study, to meet together with those of like precious faith. 
Thus we are helped to see the deep things. 

GOD'S WILL CONCERNING US 

As we come to understand the matter more clearly, 
our thought on the subject changes gradually. When we 
first came to God, we had the thought that God's will 
toward us was that we should enjoy ourselves, live good, 
moral lives, and take care of our bodies; and that if we 
are God's people, we should have abundance; and that 
those who could not live in harmony with God would be 
destroyed. This would be the thought of the natural 
man. The Apostle says that the natural man cannot see 
the things of the Spirit of God, because they are spiritually 
discerned. But this is not at all God's way of 
dealing with us. 

By and by we begin to discern that our Heavenly 
Father prepares us for the spiritual things by showing us 
how to destroy the earthly condition and how this will be 
brought to an end. This is a new thought to us; and we 
ask ourselves, Does God wish me to mortify, deaden, destroy, 
the earthly condition? Am I not to seek to cultivate 
my talents and to live a natural life? 

The natural man says, Follow natural things; do as 
you please so long as you are not interfering with the 
rights of others. But the New Creature is not to heed 
the natural inclinations of the flesh. We have asked the 
Lord to transform us, to renew our mind, and ultimately 
to give us what He has promised. Therefore we do not 
belong to the world at all, and our course is to be that 
which is marked out in the Scriptures. 

THE WORK OF THE NEW CREATURE 

Our text does not mean that we are to mortify our 
bodies in the way that some have thought. According to 



history, there have been earnest souls in the past who 
have used whips on their bodies until they produced severe 
pain, and then have worn hair jackets, etc. Sometimes 
these bodily tortures have been carried so far that 
the skin would be covered with sores. Others have 
undertaken to mortify their bodies by lying down to be 
literally walked on, etc. We cannot question that whoever 
would do these things must have a motive for so 
doing, and we cannot think it a bad motive; nevertheless, 
we believe that those who do such things have a wrong 
conception of the meaning of our text. 

By the expression, "Mortify the deeds of the flesh," 
the Scriptures mean that the people of God are to put to 
death in themselves all natural practises that are not in 
harmony with the Spirit of God. We are all born sinners, 
the Bible declares, and therefore we are not to 
follow the bent of our fallen nature. We are to have the 
Spirit of God, the Holy Spirit, which will guide us in the 
way in which we should go. We are to mortify every inclination 
of the body that is not indorsed by the new mind. 

There are certain qualities of the mortal body that are 
to be destroyed, and therefore are to be warred against 
at all times. Then there are other qualities which are 
to be utilized in the service of righteousness. Once we 
were under sin; but now we have a new mind. Henceforth 
we are to treat the old creature as an earthen vessel 
merely. Under the direction of the Holy Spirit, we are 
to know how to do this. The first step in the process is 
to reckon our body dead. Having reckoned it dead 
toward sin and toward everything of an earthly nature, 
we are then to reckon it alive in the sense of awakening, 
quickening, all the tendencies, attributes, that can be 
brought into the service of God. This is the second step. 

THE DAILY BATTLE OF THE SPIRIT-BEGOTTEN 

After we have been begotten of the Spirit, we are 
New Creatures. In every sense of the word we are free 
from our body. Whatever parts of our human nature we 
find to be in opposition to God and His will we are to 
mortify, deaden, as soon as we discover them. This 
process is a continual warring against, fighting against, 
the old nature. The Apostle distinctly calls it a warring 
between the flesh and the Spirit. But while warring 
against certain elements which are legally dead, we find 
that the flesh is not dead actually. But if we live according 
to the Spirit, and not according to the flesh, God will 
not recognize the flesh, nor shall we. We shall recognize 
only the New Creature. 

The battle is a daily one. All our members must be 
brought into harmony with God and His will. We are to 
endeavor to see everything from the Divine standpoint. 
The thought is not that we shall ever perfect these mortal 
bodies, but that while we are living on the earth and have 
to do with these bodies, it is our duty and our privilege to 
make the body do the will of the New Creature. 



Our bodies were slaves to Sin. Now we say, "I have 
the right to control this body. I am a New Creature, but 
this is my body. I shall increase my power over this 
body, and use it more and more in the service of the Lord. 
It is not my intention to do foolish things— to leap from 
a pinnacle to see whether my body will remain alive; but 
under the guidance of the Holy Spirit, I am to get out of 
it the most that I can, in the service of the new Master." 

All this is necessary to our development in character. 
God has called the Church to glory, honor, immortality 
and joint-heirship with Christ. If we do not prove overcomers, 
we shall never be ready for so great an exaltation. 
This exalted position will not be given to any 
mortal merely because he says that he desires to be something 

R5584 : page 358 

different from what he is. On the contrary, we 

must work out our own salvation with fear and trembling. 

Those who profess entire consecration to God must demonstrate 

this by putting away everything that is contrary 

to the Divine will. As these seek to build character, they 

will be growing "strong in the power of His might." 

Those who will pursue this course to the end are the class 

that He is calling for, and those alone will prove worthy 

of the place to be given to the "more than overcomers." 

REJOICING IN TRIBULATION 

The world will have a thousand years during which to 
bring their bodies into harmony with the will of God. 
Gradually mankind will come to the place where they will 
be thoroughly loyal to the Lord. The stony heart will be 
taken away. To all those who through obedience reach 
this condition God will be pleased to give life everlasting. 

But with the Church it is different. During this 
Gospel Age the Lord is selecting and directing those who 
of their own will desire to lay down their lives in His 
service. They love Him, and He is pleased to call them 
His holy ones. No good thing will He withhold from this 
class. Eye hath not seen, ear hath not heard, what God 
hath in reservation for those that love Him— those who 
have through consecration been begotten of the Holy 
Spirit, and who are going forward from grace to grace, 
living not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. For this 
class God has provided His very best things. 

To this class the Scriptures declare that "through 
much tribulation we must enter into the Kingdom of 
God." Some might say that these have a hard time. But 
all Christians can agree that it is possible to reach that 
degree of development where one can rejoice in all these 
experiences in which the flesh is being mortified, deadened. 
This is not because we are so different from other people 
that we like what they dislike, but because we see a reason 
why this tribulation is permitted. We know that this is 
God's plan for us; and by these evidences of mortification 



of the will of the flesh, of the things of the flesh, we see 
that we are growing in the favor of our Heavenly Father. 

These have the peace of God ruling in their hearts. 
They know that all of their affairs are under Divine 
supervision. The world have their troubles and fears 
and forebodings. But those who have put their trust in 
the Lord have a peace which the world can neither give 
nor take away. But we cannot explain this to the world; 
for they cannot understand it. 



R5585 : page 358 

TEMPTATIONS PECULIAR TO THE NEW CREATION 

"We have not an High Priest who cannot be touched with the 
feeling of our infirmities, but was tempted in all points like 
as we are, yet without sin. Let us, therefore, come boldly 
unto the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain mercy 
and find grace to help in time of need."— Hebrews 4:15,16. 

ST. PAUL had been speaking respecting the 

antitypical Priesthood, and had been showing 

that Aaron had been only a typical 

priest, that the Levitical priesthood never 

really took away sin, that a better Priesthood 

was necessary, that this higher Priesthood 

was represented in Melchizedek, and 

that God had declared that Jesus would be 

"a Priest forever, after the Order of 

Melchizedek." Jesus is a Heavenly High 

Priest— not an earthly high priest. The thought, then, 

might be gathered that if our Lord is not an earthly priest 

He would not know how to sympathize with us. But 

the Apostle assures us that our great High Priest can 

fully sympathize with us, because "He was tempted in all 

points like as we are." 

We are not to understand the Apostle to mean that 
our Lord was tempted in every manner that the world is 
tempted. He had none of the temptations peculiar to 
a drunkard, etc. His was not an unbalanced mind. He 
was tempted "like as we are"— The Church. Like our 
Master, we are not, as New Creatures, tempted as are the 
world. The world has its own kinds of temptation. We 
are not of the world. We are being tested as spirit-begotten 
children of God. We are tested as to our loyalty 
to Him, as to our faith and obedience. Of course, while 
still in the flesh, we are liable to temptations along the 
line of our natural tendencies as members of the fallen 
race, but these are not our temptations as New Creatures. 

THE WORLD NOT ABLE TO UNDERSTAND US 

The world knows nothing of our peculiar trials as 
New Creatures. They know merely about the common 



trials and weaknesses of humanity. But we, having been 
justified in God's sight, and set apart for His service, 
desire to carry out our new aims. We are no longer of 
the world. The world, the flesh and the Devil seek to 
turn us aside, to draw us back into the old ways; and 
these temptations are liable to make us forget our 
covenant of special relationship to the Lord, and what 
we have agreed to do and to be. It is in this respect that 
we are being especially tempted and tried, and we must 
ever be on our guard. We know that Jesus, our great 
Head, was tried in like manner with us. 

When Jesus told His disciples that He was going up 
to Jerusalem, and that He would be betrayed into the 
hands of the chief priests and the scribes, and they would 
condemn Him to death and deliver Him over to the 
Gentiles, who would mock and scourge and crucify Him, 
St. Peter said: Master, do not talk that way— it is discouraging 
And why speak of these strange things about 
eating your flesh and drinking your blood? Lord, do not 
say these things! God forbid; this shall not be your lot! 

So even His chosen Twelve could not understand the 
Master. Jesus answered (but not in the crudity of the 
Common Version), "Get thee behind Me, adversary"— you 
are becoming My opponent. You would undo the very 
work I am doing. Instead of helping you are hindering 
Me, because your thoughts are not God's thoughts, but 
men's. -See Matthew 16:21-23. 

And so it is with many who seek to show us kindness, 
who think they are serving our best interests. They say 
that we are foolish in thinking so much about religion. 
They mean well. They do not realize that we must be 
about our Father's business. This is the kind of temptation 
that comes to us as Christians, as followers of the 
Master. The special temptations of the Lord's children 
are not temptations to commit gross immoralities; and 
the temptations of Jesus were not of this kind. But He 
did have the temptation to withhold the Truth and to give 
something that would be more palatable. 

Some of our nominal church friends may say to us: 
Why do you not engage in slum work, or in social uplift 
work? You are continually talking about the Kingdom! 
the Kingdom! As God's ambassadors we are here for 
the very purpose of telling men about the Kingdom, about 
the glorious things God has in reservation for His saints, 
and also His purposes for the world. We know that 
human "slumming" methods will fail to save the world, 

R5585 : page 359 

but the Kingdom will save it. The temptation is to do 
something that others would applaud, instead of doing 
and saying things of God's Word that bring disapproval 
from the world and the nominal church people. The 
Editor has friends who say to him, If you would not talk 
as you do, and write as you write, more people would 
listen to you. You could be very popular if you would 



speak a little differently. You are putting too much religion 
into your sermons. We reply, Yes, but we are 
speaking and writing to instruct the people respecting 
God's Word, character, Plan; and respecting His present 
call to the Church. 

THE CHARACTER OF THE MASTER'S TEMPTATIONS 

The Master probably had presented to His mind the 
suggestion: Now take an easier way. This way that 
seems to be indicated is the crudest possible one. Go to 
God and tell Him that it does not seem right to you, who 
have been loyal through all these ages, that you should 
be subjected to such treatment; that this seems a very 
strange way to treat a faithful Son; that there can be no 
good reason for it, and nothing can be gained by it. Ask 
God if He cannot make some change. Ask Him if He is 
not overdoing the matter. 

And so we, His followers, may sometimes have similar 
suggestions. But a murmuring, rebellious spirit would 
prove that we are not in the right attitude of heart; it 
would prove that we had either never really submitted 
our will to the Lord or else had withdrawn it, and that 
we lacked confidence in Him. Any such temptations 
must be promptly resisted by the child of God. 

When St. Peter sought to defend our dear Master 
from the soldiers and officers who came to arrest Him, 
though knowing what the end would be, Jesus said: "The 
cup which My Father hath poured for Me, shall I not 
drink it?" He did not think for one moment of yielding 
to any temptation to use His superior power to prevent 
His enemies from taking Him. He showed them that He 
possessed such power; for they all went backward, and 
fell to the ground. Thus He made it manifest that had 
He chosen to exercise His supernatural power He was 
infinitely stronger than they, and submitted not because 
He must, but because He was in reality voluntarily submitting 
Himself to death. This was a demonstration of 
His previous declaration: "No man taketh My life from 
Me, but I lay it down of Myself." (John 10:17,18.) He 
steadfastly refused to yield to any appeals from His flesh 
to escape or to lessen His sufferings. "He was tempted 
in all points like as we are, yet without sin." 

We might weaken sometimes; we might come short— 
and we do come short. We cannot fully live up to the 
glorious standard. Christ was without sin. We have 
sin abounding in our flesh, and we have weaknesses 
which He did not have. But if we are to follow in His 
steps, we are to overcome, and to prove overcomers to 
the end. We are not to say to ourselves; I cannot live 
as Jesus lived, even if I try ever so hard; what is the use 
of setting up so perfect a standard? But there is use in 
it; and we should earnestly strive to come as near as possible 
to that standard. By keeping this glorious Pattern 
ever before us, we shall be able to come much nearer perfection 
than if our standard was lower. We must have no 



less than this perfect standard as our aim, if we expect 
to win the prize for which we have entered this race. 

If Jesus had sinned and had come short in any way, it 
would have meant failure complete. He would never 
have had a resurrection. This was typified in the Jewish 
high priest when he passed under the veil with the blood. 
The high priest who had not followed every instruction 
of the Law in the offering of his sacrifices would have 
died under the veil. This was what Jesus feared in 
Gethsemane, when "He offered up strong crying and tears 
unto Him who was able to save Him out of [Greek ek] 
death"— not to save Him from dying, but to save Him 
out of death by resurrection. And the record is that He 
was heard and was strengthened, comforted. (Luke 22:39-45; 
Hebrews 5:7.) As soon as He had the Father's 
assurance that He had not violated any conditions, and 
that He would not go into eternal death, He was content 
to suffer any other experience that might come to Him. 

OUR SYMPATHETIC HIGH PRIEST 

From the fact that our High Priest was tempted and 
suffered, we may know that He is not one who is cold and 
indifferent. On the contrary, He is One who is full of 
sympathy, who has had the largest kind of experience. 
(Hebrews 2:18; 5:8.) If then, we have temptations, 
what must we do? We are to come to our great High 
Priest; and as we come to the Throne of Heavenly Grace, 
we may come with boldness (or, more properly translated, 
with courage, not doubting), knowing that the One who 
meets us there is fully able to sympathize with our every 
sorrow and need, and with our every temptation. 

If we have not sinned wilfully, if our sins have been 
those of imperfection of the flesh through besetment, so 
that at the time we were not able to overcome and to control 
the flesh properly, we may come with courage, knowing 
that the Lord understands all about the weaknesses 
of our fallen human nature— He remembers that we are 
but dust: (Psalm 103:13,14.) St. Paul says we cannot 
properly judge even ourselves as respects our own weaknesses. 

R5586 : page 359 

He says (1 Corinthians 4:3,4), "With me it is a 
very small thing that I should be judged of you or of 
man's judgment; yea, I judge not mine own self;. ..but 
He that judgeth me is the Lord." He knows how to 
make all due allowance. Then let us not hesitate to come 
to Him in prayer, pleading His promises. Let us seek 
for the mercy of the Lord, knowing that we shall receive 
it, when we are truly striving to be faithful to Him. 

Our Father knows all about these experiences we are 
having, and He made the provision for our covering. He 
provided succor from our difficulties, that we might come 
in as members of the Body of Christ, even though imperfect. 
He knows that we cannot fully control our imperfect 



bodies. But as we become stronger, we should be 
better able to control the mortal body. The new will 
should subjugate the old mind, and have better success in 
conquering the flesh. We must scrutinize ourselves and 
our progress; we should not be satisfied nor feel that we 
are proving overcomers, unless we can from time to time 
see growth in ourselves in Christlikeness and in ability to 
subdue the old nature with its impulses and tendencies. 

No other arrangement would have been so good for 
us as the one the Lord has chosen. We have our weaknesses 
and imperfections charged up to us; but God has 
provided a way by which we can have them all forgiven, 
if they are unavoidable or if there has been no wilfulness 
connected with them. Any measure of wilfulness in a 
child of God requires expiation by stripes. If we judge- 
closely inspect or scrutinize— ourselves, our thoughts, 
words and actions, we shall require less judging and disciplining 
by the Lord to correct our faults. If we realize 
that we have been remiss in any way in keeping our vows, 
if we think that we have been lax in some particular at 
any time, it is helpful to impose some penalty upon ourselves 
that we shall feel. We should go to the Lord in 
earnest prayer, asking forgiveness, and promising Him 
by His grace to strive to be more watchful in the future. 

R5586 : page 360 

We should daily scrutinize ourselves along this line, and 
never lightly pass over any failure. 

How precious and comforting the realization that our 
merciful High Priest is touched with the feeling of our 
infirmities! We should never, however, relax our vigilance 
because of this knowledge, or take any advantage 
of His mercy. But we rejoice that we have a Mercy Seat 
to which we can go as soon as we are conscious of our 
inability to be all that we would, and rejoice to know that 
we shall not be turned away. 



R5586 : page 360 

SEEING THINGS AND BEWILDERED 

FEW realize the wonderful change that has 

come over public sentiment during the last 

forty years— the Harvest time of this Age. 

The increase of knowledge prophesied for 

our day came on time and is doing its 

work. It is opening eyes of understanding 

long blinded by ignorance, superstition, 

false doctrines. Not only is this true in 

respect to God's consecrated people, who 

are now so much more clearly understanding 

the Bible and its Message, but it is true in large 

degree of the intelligent people of the world who make 



no profession of Christianity, yet have a good respect 
for the principles of righteousness, justice and mercy. 

Misled by the errors which have adulterated Christianity, 
these well-disposed people wonder to what extent 
the Church's claims might be true, to the effect 
that present kingdoms constitute Christendom— Christ's 
Kingdom. Naturally they would doubt it, wondering 
why Messiah's Kingdom would make so little progress 
in the earth and exhibit so little power. This leads on 
to a double confusion: 

(1) They wonder why all Christian people do not 
undertake the political, social and financial problems of 
the world and bring harmony out of confusion, and thus 
accomplish the world-wide uplift which should be expected 
if Christ's Kingdom is controlling the world and 

if Christian people are commissioned of the Lord to 
convert the world and uplift it socially, etc. 

Many preachers and professed Christians are similarly 
led astray from the real commission of the Church 
by these errors— so that they abandon the preaching of 
the Gospel, and instead preach Sociology, etc., etc. 

Thus it comes that the comparatively few Christian 
people who are following the Scriptural lines carefully, 
and preaching the authorized Gospel of Christ, are discredited, 
hindered, rebuked, made to appear to the world 
as neglecting their commission. 

On the other hand, how plainly the Bible presents 
the subject! The true Church is commissioned by the 
Lord, not to convert the world, but to take out of the 
world a Little Flock of faithful footstep followers of 
the Lord. These are to pass through great tribulation, 
in order that they may enter into the Kingdom, which 
is still future. They are not to mix in politics, etc., but 
to throw their entire influence on the side of the preaching 
of the Gospel to all who have hearing ears to the 
intent that, thus drawn, called and sanctified by the 
Truth, an elect class of one hundred and forty-four thousand 
shall finally be completed and, by the "change" of 
the First Resurrection, pass from the earthly nature to 
the Heavenly and become the Bride of Christ, His associate 
in the great Kingdom which He will then establish 
world-wide, to the blessing and enlightenment of all 
the families of the earth. 

(2) The world's second difficulty growing out of the 
adulteration of Christian doctrine could not be better illustrated 
than by the following article which we clipped 

from The New York Call. Evidently the writer is genuinely 
puzzled, as thousands of Christian people are puzzled, 
by the present war and by the fact that professed 
Christians are fighting on all sides, under every government 
except the Turkish. What are they fighting for 
and what are they fighting against, if so be that all of 
these kingdoms are Christ's Kingdoms— Christendom? 
Surely this war and the more terrible conditions which 
the Bible shows us will follow it will gradually open the 
eyes of mankind more and more. By and by, when the 



"flaming fire" of anarchy shall sweep the world, every 
eye of understanding will have discerned the gigantic 
error of the creeds which for a time misled us all. Their 
eyes will see through the trouble; and gradually they 
will understand the facts, the great lesson, that all the 
kingdoms of this world are human and are in large degree 
associated with the empire of the "Prince of this 
world," and that these are being overthrown to the intent 
that Messiah's Kingdom shall be established under 
the whole heavens. The article from The Call follows: 



R5587 : page 360 

A SLUMP IN SALVATION 

"It is not only Socialism that has gone under in the 
European fracas, but the Salvation Army has also disappeared 
on the continent. Ten thousand of its most 
active members and workers are now fighting under literal 
banners of 'Blood and Fire' instead of the metaphysical 
symbol known by that name, under which the 
army conducted its warfare against 'the Devil.' 

"The organization and system have completely collapsed 
on the continent, and in neutral countries the army 
is financially broken. A reconstruction of the entire 
army will, it is said, become necessary after the war is 
over. Its officers declare that it has suffered more than 
any religious organization in existence except that of the 
Catholic Church. In this country the well-to-do are closing 
down on their donations, the churches give nothing; 
the industrial plants, from which most of the money was 
extracted, have mostly gone out of business and collections 
at street meetings have fallen to the vanishing point. 

"The report seems to show that this concern was no 
different from thousands of others based frankly on 
material considerations. When economically affected, it 
disappeared as they did. The metaphysical signboards 
and trademarks under which it carried on business became 
utterly useless and impotent in the face of material 
collapse. Actual, physical warfare, simply blotted out 
the abstract conflict between 'Sin and Holiness,' which 
the army was supposed to continually wage, and 'salvation' 
became a drug on the market. Those to whom it 
is offered without money and without price have no use 
for it, and those who formerly put up the price so that 
it might be brought to 'perishing sinners' have quit; and 
both the sinners and those who carried them the glad 
tidings are equally perishing on the battlefields of Europe, 
fighting the 'battle of the Lord' on opposing sides. 

"But in this respect, the army is by no means unique. 
There is nothing which purports to represent 'religion' 
today that can stand up against war, from the haughty 
ultra-respectable, established state churches to the 'religion' 
of the gutter. The universal impotency of all of 



them suggests that they, too, should be sent to the scrap 
pile along with 'militarism.' If the world needs 'religion' 
of any kind, it needs an utterly new and different one, 
instead of one that serves 'the Devil' in war time, and 
pretends to oppose him in time of peace." 



R5600 : page 361 

YOUR "GOOD HOPES" FOR 1915 

[The plan here proposed we designate "GOOD HOPES," 
because nothing is actually promised— only your generous 
hopes expressed, based upon your future prospects as they 
now appear to you. The plan has proved not only so beneficial 
to the cause of Truth, but also so blessed to the hopers, for 
some years past, that we again commend it to all as Scriptural 
and good. Those who desire to make use of this plan 
can fill out both of these memoranda. One should be kept 
for the refreshment of your memory; the other mail to us.] 

-TO THE- 

"WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY." 

Dear Friends:— I have read with interest of the openings 
for the STUDIES and Tract work in foreign lands and here 
at home. I need not tell you that I am deeply interested in 
the spread of the Glad Tidings of the lengths and breadths, 
the heights and depths of redeeming love expressed for us 
in God's great Plan of the Ages. 

I am anxious to use myself— every power, every talent, 
voice, time, money, influence, all— to give to others this 
knowledge, which has so greatly blessed, cheered and comforted 
my own heart and placed my feet firmly upon the 
Rock of Ages. 

I have been considering carefully, and praying to be instructed, 
how to use my various talents more to my Redeemer's 
glory and for the service of His people— those 
blinded by human tradition who are, nevertheless, hungering 
for "the good Word of God," and those also who are 
naked, not having on the wedding garment of Christ's imputed 
righteousness, the unjustified, who stand, at best, in 
the filthy rags of their own righteousness. I have decided 
that so far as my "money talent" goes, I will follow the rule 
so clearly laid down for us by the great Apostle Paul (1 Cor. 16:2), 
and will lay aside on the first day of each week, according 
to my thankful appreciation of the Lord's blessings 
during the preceding week. Out of this fund I wish to contribute 
to the several parts of the Lord's work specified on 
the back of this letter. Of course, I cannot in advance judge 
or state particularly what the Lord's bounty may enable 
me to set apart weekly, and hence you will understand the 
sum indicated to be merely my conjecture or hope, based 
upon present prospects. I will endeavor to contribute more 



than I here specify; and should I not succeed in doing as 
well, the Lord will know my heart, and you, also, will know 
of my endeavors. 

My only object in specifying in advance what I hope to 
be able to do in this cause is to enable those in charge of 
the work of publishing and circulating the Tracts, etc., to 
form estimates, lay plans, make contracts, etc., with some idea 
of what I will at least try to do in the exercise of this, my 
highly appreciated privilege. 

My present judgment is that during the coming year, by 
self-denial and cross-bearing, I shall be able to lay aside on 
the first day of each week for Home and Foreign Mission 
Work (to assist in circulating SCRIPTURE STUDIES in foreign 
languages, and in publishing the BIBLE STUDENTS MONTHLY 
in various languages, and in supplying these gratuitously to 
brethren who have the heart and opportunity to circulate 
them widely, and in meeting the expenses of brethren sent 
out as Lecturers to preach the Divine Plan of Salvation, and 
in general to be expended as the officers of the Society may 
deem best), the amount of per week. 

To comply with United States Postal Laws, all or any 
portion of my donation may be applied as subscription price 
for WATCH TOWER sent to the Lord's poor or others, as the 
Society's officers may deem advisable. 

That the work be not hindered, I will endeavor to send 
you what I shall have laid aside for this cause at the close 
of each quarter. I will secure a Bank Draft, Express Order 
or Postal Money Order as I may find most convenient, and 
will address the letter to 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
BROOKLYN TABERNACLE, 13-17 HICKS ST., BROOKLYN, N.Y. 
or, London Tabernacle, Lancaster Gate W., England; or, 
Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne, Australia. 

(Name) 

(Post Office) (State) 

page 362 

WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTIONS 

ON "GOOD HOPES" ACCOUNT. 

The friends who contribute to the "Good Hopes" (described 
on the reverse of this sheet) at times desire to send 
THE WATCH TOWER to friends who are not yet interested 
enough to subscribe for themselves, or to deeply interested 
friends who are too poor to subscribe and backward about 
accepting our Lord's Poor offer. They are invited to give us 
such addresses below— the expense to be deducted from their 
donations. Give full name and address, and write very 
plainly, please, mentioning the length of the subscriptions. 



WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTION RENEWALS 

Most of our subscriptions end with the year, so we take 
this opportunity to remark that we shall be glad to hear 
promptly from such as desire the visits of THE WATCH TOWER 
continued. The Lord's Poor friends have been requested to 
send their applications in May. When names are dropped and 
afterward renewed it makes us unnecessary trouble. When 
desiring to know date of expiration look on your TOWER 
wrapper. Date is given in lower left-hand corner. 

A PRIVILEGE AND A SERVICE 

We are convinced that THE WATCH TOWER lists do not 
contain the names of one-half of those deeply interested in its 
teachings. The total is small enough surely, and we are not 
content that the name of any should be missing. We believe 
that all such will be stimulated and encouraged on the "narrow 
way" by its semi-monthly appearance on their table, 
reminding them afresh of spiritual matters which the world, 
the flesh and the Devil continually tend to crowd out of mind 
and heart. 

We have at times required that all desiring THE WATCH 
TOWER on credit, or free, as "the Lord's Poor," should make 
personal application; now we request every subscriber to inquire 
among those whom he knows to be interested in Present 
Truth, and to obtain the consent of all such to send in their 
subscriptions either on credit or free, as their circumstances 
may necessitate. Any getting it on credit may at any future 
time request that the debt be canceled, and we will cheerfully 
comply. We desire that as nearly as possible THE WATCH 
TOWER lists shall represent all deeply interested in its message. 

Our object is not the gain of "filthy lucre," but "the perfecting 
of the saints for the work of ministry"— present and 
to come. (Eph. 4:12.) We offer no premiums, desiring the 
co-operation of such only as appreciate the privilege of being 
co-workers with us in this ministry. 

CREATION DRAMA SCENARIO 

This is a condensed statement of the Divine Plan of the 
Ages— profusely illustrated— much information in little space: 

Paper-bound Edition (3 parts) 25c. prepaid 

Cloth-bound Edition 50c. " 

Cloth-bound Edition, super-paper, gilt edges. ..$1.00 " 

To THE WATCH TOWER subscribers in any quantity, express 
or freight collect— at wholesale rate— one-half the above. 
Specify if desired "charges collect." 

CHOICE MOTTO CARDS-1914-1915. 

We have, as usual, very choice sorts. These cards are 
made in Europe, hence subject to heavy expenses for freight 
and duty. Nevertheless, we can supply them in the United 
States and Canada at less than retail European prices, because 



we supply them at about cost price— that is to say, about one-half 

the usual American prices. Besides this, we prepay postage 

or express charges. Our object is to encourage the embellishment 

of the homes of the Lord's people with faith-stimulating 

and courage-inspiring texts tastefully prepared. 

To facilitate the handling of these motto cards we assort them 

in packets, carefully packed, at the following prepaid rates: 

No. Mz.— Fifteen small cards, different texts, 50c pk. 

No. Ma.— Fifteen small and six larger, $1.00 pk. 

No. Mc— Six small and six medium-sized mottoes, $1.00 pk. 

No. Me.— Two large and two medium mottoes, $1.00 pk. 

Where a Class or several individuals choose to order together 
to one address we can save a little in the expressage, 
justifying the offer of five of the One Dollar packets and one 
of the Fifty-cent packets for Five Dollars, or more, at the 
same rate, assorted, as you please. 

DAILY HEAVENLY MANNA 

Those who use this book as we recommend are surely 
being blessed. It should be on your breakfast table regularly. 
Its daily text should be read and commented on freely by 
all. Then the MANNA comment should be read. Introduce 
it to your friends as a help toward godly living. 

The following wholesale rates postpaid are granted to all 
WATCH TOWER subscribers: 

Purple cloth, silver embossed $0.35 

Dark blue cloth, silver embossed, German 35 

Leatherette, blue edges, Swedish and Norwegian 35 

" gold edges, Swedish and Norwegian 65 

Genuine Morocco, gold edges, English and Norwegian 1.10 

MISCELLANEOUS 

Hymns of Dawn, with music (cloth) $0.35 

Hymns of Dawn, without music (flexible) 06 

Poems of Dawn (leather) 50c; cloth 25 

Memorizing Text-Cards (100 in pkg.— two assortments, 

Nos. 1 and 2), per pkg 25 

Scriptural Post Cards (assorted) per doz., 15c; per 100. 1.00 
CHARTS (Blue Prints, soft cloth): 

Plan of the Ages, 5 ft. $1.00; 8 ft 1.50 

Chronology of the Bible, 8 ft 1.50 

Tabernacle of the Wilderness, 8 ft 1.50 

BINDERS for THE WATCH TOWER: 

Spring Back (holds 1 yr.) 50 

CROSS & CROWN PINS (Gold, with red enamel Cross): 

1/2" and 5/8" (ladies' or gents' style) each $1 and $1.15 

5/8" celluloid, per doz. 25c; each 03 

Missionary Envelopes, per hundred, 25c; per M 2.00 

Vow Bookmarks (paper) 25c per 100; (silk) each 05 

Booklets (on Hell, Spiritism, Evolution, Tabernacle 
Shadows, Our Lord's Return); also Berean Question 
Booklets on each Vol. of SCRIPTURE STUDIES; each 5c; 

per doz 50 

Report on Foreign Missions, each 05 



Tracts in all languages FREE 



R5587 : page 363 

THE CHURCH'S ORDINATION 

-DECEMBER 13. -MATTHEW 28:16-20; LUKE 24:36-49.- 

"Lo, I am with you alway, even unto the 
end of the world. "-Matthew 28:20. 

TODAY'S Study relates to the commission, or 

authorization of service, which Jesus appointed 

to His Church in His discourses 

during the forty days following His resurrection. 

First we have the Master's 

words on the evening after His journey 

with two of His disciples to the village 

of Emmaus, near Jerusalem. Then we 

have a part of the general commission which 

Jesus gave just before He parted from 

His disciples and was received up into Heaven. 

The lessons of that journey to Emmaus and of subsequent 
appearances must have been very valuable to all 
the followers of Christ at that time. He said, "These 
are the words which I spake unto you, while I was yet 
with you [while I was yet the Man Christ Jesus, before 
My resurrection change], how all things must be fulfilled 
which were written in the Law of Moses and in 
the Prophets and in the Psalms concerning Me. Then 
opened He their understanding, that they might understand 
the Scriptures, and said unto them, Thus it is 
written, and thus it behooved Christ to suffer, and to 
rise from the dead the third day; and that repentance 
and remission of sins should be preached in His name 
among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem." 

The Evangelist sums up in few words conversation 
and Scriptural exposition which probably occupied at 
least an hour. We are not told what these expositions 
were which opened their eyes of understanding, but we 
can surmise. He probably explained to them the significance 
of the Passover lamb that was killed at that time 
of the year, and showed that He was the Antitype of that 
lamb. He probably explained to them the true significance 
of the Passover— that in the type the first-born of 
Israel were passed over, and subsequently represented by 
the tribe of Levi, including the priests; and that the antitype 
of these first-borns is the Church of the First-borns, 
whose names are written in Heaven— all the saintly followers 
of Jesus who will be of the Royal Priesthood, and 
the antitypical Levites, their servants, in the work of the 
world's uplift during Messiah's Kingdom. 

The Master doubtless also gave them some suggestions 
respecting the antitypical Atonement Day and "the 



better sacrifices"— that He Himself began "the better sacrifices,' 

which would be continued in His disciples; and 

that, the sacrifices being finished, the Atonement blessings 

would go forth from the High Priest to all the 

earth, during Messiah's Kingdom of a thousand years. 

POWER FROM ON HIGH PROMISED 

Whatever features of the great Plan the Master unfolded, 
we have the assurance that His auditors were 
deeply interested. Their sadness disappeared. Their 
first thoughts were merely that they had lost their blessed 
Master, His counsels, His instructions; but now, through 
this enlightenment, their hearts burned with a fresh inspiration 
of knowledge. They saw heights, depths, 
lengths and breadths that they had never dreamed of in 
God's Plan. They saw that the death of Jesus was necessary 
for the carrying out of all the hopes and prospects 
inspired by the promises of God. They saw that 
they themselves were privileged also, not only to suffer 
with Him, but also to be glorified. 

The concluding part of the Master's Message on that 
occasion was, "Behold, I send the promise of My Father 
upon you." The Father had promised in various types 
that the Church, the Bride of Christ, would receive the 
Holy Spirit from Jesus, their Head. It was typified, for 
instance, in the holy oil which, poured upon the head 
of Aaron, typifying Jesus, flowed down upon the body of 
Aaron, typifying the anointing of the Church. 

This promise of the Divine acceptance of the Church 
was all-important. Without it the disciples would have 
no commission, and could not be ambassadors for God. 
Jesus indeed had sent out The Twelve, and afterwards 
the Seventy; but they were His personal representatives, 
and He had given them of His own spirit, His own 
power, by which they worked miracles, cast out devils, 
etc. But they had never been recognized of the Father. 
As we read, "The Holy Spirit was not yet given, because 
Jesus was not yet glorified." (John 7:39.) They must 
wait for this begetting and anointing of the Holy Spirit. 
It alone could imbue or qualify them for the Divine service 
—to be God's ambassadors and representatives. 

"LO, I AM WITH YOU ALWAY" 

St. Matthew's account of our Lord's benediction upon 
His disciples and His commissioning of them to declare 
His Message, is full of interest to us. By His appointment 
the Eleven met Him in a mountain in Galilee. For 
a few moments only He appeared to them. They worshiped, 
some fully convinced, others wavering. It was 
for the convincing of such waverers that Jesus remained 
during the forty days. And we are sure that He fully 
accomplished His work of convincing the Eleven; for 
they were all of one heart and one mind when they 
waited in the upper room for the Pentecostal blessing. 



Jesus came near to them, and declared that full authority 
had been given unto Him in respect to both 
Heavenly things and earthly things. Unless they could 
realize this, it would be impossible for them properly to 
represent Him before the world. He had not this power 
and authority previously, during His earthly ministry. He 
was then in process of trial as respects His faithful loyalty 
even unto death, even unto the death of the cross. 
But after He had demonstrated His loyalty, the Father 
had raised Him from the dead to a glorious fulness of 
power. He was thus declared to be the Son of God with 
power by His resurrection from the dead. He wished 
His disciples to know that He was no longer under the 
human limitations or under the limitations of the Death 
Covenant. That work He had finished. He had entered 
into the blessing, the reward. He had experienced His 
change and now had all power, not only in respect to 
earthly things, but also in respect to Heavenly things. 

Prophecy had declared that unto Him all would 
bow, both those in Heaven and those on earth. He 
had entered into the condition where this prophecy would 
soon begin to be fulfilled. He had ascended up on High, 
where all the angels worshiped, gave heed to Him as 
the Father's exalted One. Not yet is the latter part of 
the promise fulfilled— that all on earth should bow to 
Him. The time for such a recognition will be during His 
Messianic Kingdom of a thousand years. As now, all 
who come to a true knowledge of Jesus as the Son of 
God gladly bow their knee to Him as the Father's Representative, 
so gladly the world will come to recognize 
the Only Begotten and render obedience to Him. 

Eventually every knee shall bow and every tongue 
confess; for, according to the Divine arrangement all 
who fail to appreciate the glorified Son of God at that 
time will be destroyed— counted unworthy of any further 
blessings and favor of God, who has bestowed upon Christ 
all the blessings which He designs for the fallen race. 

R5588 : page 364 

"GO YE THEREFORE, AND TEACH" 

Here is the commission. Primarily it belonged to the 
eleven Apostles, but subsequently it included St. Paul, 
who took the place of Judas and who was "not one whit 
behind the very chiefest of the Apostles." (2 Corinthians 11:5.) 
The Apostles, and they alone, are authorized as 
mouthpieces of the Lord Jesus Christ and His Church to 
the world. All that has been told us of Apostolic Bishops 
being successors of The Twelve is false, unscriptural. 
They had no successors; they are with us yet. The Master's 
Message through them is given us in the New Testament, 
of which one of them wrote, "The Word of God is 
sufficient, that the man of God may be thoroughly furnished." 
(2 Timothy 3:16,17.) To the Apostles was 
given the great work of inaugurating the Church. They 



were endued with the power at Pentecost. 

But while Jesus appointed especially the Twelve Apostles 
to be His mouthpieces to the Church, and declared 
that whatsoever they would bind on earth we might know 
was bound in Heaven, and that whatsoever they would 
declare was not bound on earth was not bound in the 
sight of Heaven, nevertheless the Lord arranged that 
each member of the Church should be His representative, 
and that each in proportion to his opportunity and ability 
might have a share in proclaiming the Gospel Message. 
Whoever receives the Spirit of begetting, the anointing, 
is included in the statement of Isa. 61:1-3 as a member 
of the Body of Christ, under the anointed Head, Jesus. 

Thus we read, "The Spirit of the Lord God is upon 
Me; because the Lord hath anointed Me to preach good 
tidings unto the meek; He hath appointed Me to bind up 
the broken-hearted," etc. Everyone who receives the 
Holy Spirit is thus ordained, or authorized, to preach, according 
to his or her opportunity or limitation of circumstances 
or conditions. One limitation of the Apostle is 
that the sisters are not to teach in public. (1 Tim. 2:12.) 
Nevertheless there are plenty of opportunities for all. 

Evidently, therefore, a great mistake has been made 
in the arrangement of a clergy class, who declare themselves 
to be the only ones who are ordained, or authorized, 
to preach or to teach God's Message. Jesus and the 
Apostles knew nothing of a clergy class or of a laity 
class. On the contrary, our Lord declared, "All ye are 
brethren; and One is your Master, even Christ." And 
the Master and His twelve Apostles especially forbade 
anything approaching a lordship amongst His followers, 
anything like a clerical class. 

THE CHURCH'S COMMISSION 

The Message given is, "Go ye, therefore, and make 
disciples from all nations." The commission is not to 
make the nations disciples, but, as elsewhere expressed, 
to gather out of all nations those willing to be disciples 
of Christ, whether rich or poor, learned or ignorant, noble 
or base. A disciple of Christ is a follower, one who 
learns, one who copies. Jesus defined this discipleship, 
saying, "If any man will come after Me [be My disciple], 
let him deny himself [set himself aside, ignore himself, 
his talent, his will, his wealth, his everything— discipleship 
first], and let him take up his cross and follow Me." 

The intimation is that all true followers of Christ, all 
true disciples, will find the path in which the Lord will 
lead a difficult one, in which their own wills must be 
continually crossed, opposed— a way in which they will 
continually have difficulty according to the flesh. However, 
the promise is that eventually, "Where I am [in 
Heaven or in Kingdom glory], there shall My disciple be." 

While the Church of Christ has properly viewed water 
immersion as a symbol of death to the world, death to 
self, and of rising to newness of life as members of 



Christ, the Body of Christ, nevertheless the water baptism 

is only a picture of the true. So here it is stated that 

our commission is not water baptism, but baptism into 

the name of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit. 

"Into the name of" signifies into accord with, into fellowship 

with. All of Christ's disciples are to recognize 

the Father's name as standing for righteousness; and 

they are to become dead to every other principle than 

that which His name represents, and to be thoroughly 

immersed into that name of righteousness, justice, truth. 

Ignoring all other names, such as Lutherans or Wesleyans 
or Calvinists, or State Church names, such as Roman 
Catholics or Anglican Catholics or Greek Catholics, 
these are to be thoroughly immersed into the name of 
Christ and to recognize His name and to be His members, 
His Body, His Church. Furthermore, they are to 
be immersed into the name of, the recognition of, the 
Holy Spirit— their own spirit, their own wills being dead. 
Their own aims, hopes and prospects are to be ignored. 
God's holy will, God's mind, God's holy purpose, are to 
be their will and purpose. 

Thus we see our commission as respects all people of 
all nations who have an ear to hear our Message. We 
are to make them disciples and to immerse them into the 
name of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit. We 
are to teach them to observe all things whatsoever Jesus 
commands. This is the extent of our authority. We are 
not to organize human systems and to call them kingdoms, 
churches, or other names. We are merely to prepare 
the followers of Jesus, co-operating with God, who 
will work in them to will and to do His good pleasure. 

"UNTO THE END OF THE WORLD" 

"And lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of 
the world." His words have been understood to signify 
that the world is to come to an end; whereas what the 
Master really said, according to the Greek, is that He 
would be with His people, even to the end of the Age- 
down to the time when this Gospel Age will have accomplished 
its Divinely purposed mission of gathering out a 
sufficient number of disciples of Christ to complete the 
Divine purpose— until the Gospel Message shall have accomplished 
the sanctification through obedience to the 
Truth of a proper number to complete the Bride of Christ 
in glory, the Royal Priesthood. Then the end of the Age 
will come. Then will come the Master Himself, to gather 
His Elect, to glorify them with Himself, to establish His 
Kingdom, to bless the world of mankind— the non-elect. 



R5586 : page 364 

"A LITTLE WHILE" 



How long, O Lord, till I am meet 
To hold with Thee communion sweet? 
How long until Thine eyes shall see 
The Spirit's fruits complete in me? 

When shall I come to Thee, my Lord, 
As promised in Thy blessed Word? 
When shall I see Thee as Thou art, 
And satisfy my longing heart? 

Ah, then, how mean will seem these toys, 
These transitory, earthly joys! 
How short appear this dreary way, 
When night hath turned to endless day! 

Then, peace, my soul, be strong, my heart, 
And bravely strive to do thy part; 
"A little while," He soon shall come, 
And say, "Enough, my child, come home!" 

NOV. 22, 1914. GERTRUDE W. SEIBERT. 



R5588 : page 365 

"WHERE HE WAS BEFORE" 

-DECEMBER 20. -LUKE 24:50-53; ACTS 1:1-11.- 

"What and if ye shall see the Son of Man ascend 
up where He was before?"— John 6:62. 

THE forty days which followed our Lord's 

resurrection were sufficient time for the 

Divine purpose. The disciples had lost their 

first bewilderment, created by the crucifixion 

of the One whom they supposed was about 

to take the throne to rule Israel and the 

world. We can see the wisdom of the 

Divine method of communicating the facts 

to the disciples. They were not alarmed, 

as they would have been if Jesus had appeared 

to them in a light above the brightness of the sun, 

as He afterwards appeared to Saul of Tarsus. Gradually 

they learned that their Lord was no longer dead, but 

alive; and that He was no longer a human being, but now 

a spirit being— that He was no longer confined, therefore, 

to the usages of humans, but, like the angels, could come 

and go like the wind, appearing and disappearing at 

pleasure. 

It was a slow lesson. After the three appearances of 
the first day, they looked for Him each day until the following 
Sabbath, when the fourth appearance, or manifestation, 
was made. This delay only whetted their appetite, 
their craving, for knowledge respecting Him. 



Meantime they could, and did, think over all the things 
which Jesus had said to them during His earthly ministry. 
They perceived wherein they had mistaken a Heavenly 
Kingdom for an earthly one— or at least mistook the time 
of the establishment of Messiah's Kingdom. 

The lesson given on the way to Emmaus must have 
been very impressive. It dealt with the prophecies which 
related to Jesus, and explained to them how these 
prophecies were already in fulfilment— some of them already 
fulfilled, and some of them still future. Well did 
they remark that their hearts burned within them when 
He made these explanations! 

AN IMPORTANT LESSON 

After the four appearances, apparently two full weeks 
passed without any manifestation. In that time the tension 
relaxed, and the affairs of earth began to assert 
themselves. What would the disciples do? Privately 
they had been thinking of the wisdom of returning to 
their former employment, from which Jesus had called 
them to be fishers of men; but none of them cared to 
broach the subject to the others. St. Peter, always a 
leader of thought and action, finally declared himself: 
"I go a fishing"— I am going back to the fishing business. 
A word was all that was necessary. The others were of 
the same mind, and the old firm was reorganized. 

For just such a decision Jesus had delayed His ascension. 
He would show them that their continuance in the 
work of fishing for men could go on in His absence with 
His blessing. The Master oversaw their interests, and 
that night gave them "bad luck." They caught nothing. 

R5589 : page 365 

They were discouraged, but it was "good for them." As 
is written, "All things work together for good to those 
who love God"— even their financial disappointments. 

In the morning Jesus stood on the shore and called to 
them, asking them whether they had any fish for sale. 
They replied that they had caught nothing. The Master 
said, "Cast the net on the other side of the boat." They 
might have said that such advice was foolish, but they 
were in the mood to do anything to get rid of their "bad 
luck." They cast the net as directed, and quickly it was 
filled with great fishes. Then they knew that the One on 
the shore must be their risen Lord, who had thus made a 
new manifestation of Himself to them. 

The fishermen hastened to the shore. They had known 
only one experience like this ever, and that was when on 
a previous occasion the Master had given them a similar 
great catch. The boat moved too slowly for St. Peter. 
He was afraid that somehow the Master would disappear. 
Girding upon him his fisherman's coat, he swam to the 
shore. The Master did not leave, but invited St. Peter 
and companions to breakfast from fish already on the fire. 



Here was a great lesson. Their Master could provide 
cooked fish when necessary, and could give them just as 
much success as He saw best in respect to their fishing 
business. He who could thus provide for their needs on 
this occasion could do so in the future, should He send 
them forth again, authorized to speak in His name. None 
of them asked the Stranger His name; for, although His 
features and His clothing were different, they knew that 
it was another manifestation of their Lord, who was no 
longer a human being and who was able to appear in 
various forms, as He had done. 

The lesson taught, Jesus vanished. He had one other 
meeting with His followers in Galilee. It was a prearranged 
meeting. Jesus had sent word that He would 
meet His followers there. St. Paul says that about five 
hundred brethren saw Him, and were witnesses of the 
resurrection.— 1 Corinthians 15:6. 

OUR LORD'S PARTING INSTRUCTIONS 

Our lesson today relates especially to the ascension of 
Jesus. This took place near Jerusalem— at Bethany. Apparently 
He met with His followers in the Holy City— 
perhaps at a very early hour, by appointment. He led 
them out to Bethany, talking the while, explaining the 
things that would be to their advantage to know— the 
things they would need to be thoroughly convinced of 
before He would leave them, and before they would be 
in a proper attitude of faith to be prepared for the blessings 
He had yet to send. 

St. Luke, who also wrote the Book of Acts, tells us 
that the essence of Jesus' teaching during the forty days 
was in respect to the Kingdom of God. Still they understood 
not; indeed, it was not possible for them to understand 
fully until they would receive the begetting of the 
Holy Spirit. It was toward that point, therefore, that 
Jesus directed their attention, saying that they should 
not depart from Jerusalem nor engage in any work of 
preaching, but should simply wait for the promise of the 
Father, of which He had previously told them— the gift 
of the Holy Spirit. He explained that John the Baptist 
had indeed used the water baptism, but that He intended 
that all His followers should receive a superior baptism 
and qualification— the baptism of the Spirit at Pentecost. 

On this last occasion, which was probably the seventh 
manifestation, the disciples had gotten their bearing to 
such an extent that they asked the very significant question, 
"Lord, wilt thou at this time restore the Kingdom 
to Israel?" The Kingdom had been taken away from 
Israel away back in the days of Zedekiah, king of Judah. 
At that time Jehovah had said that He would overturn 
the Kingdom until Messiah would come— "until He comes 
whose right it is, and I will give it unto Him."— 
Ezekiel 21:25-27. 

The disciples considered Jesus to be the Messiah, and 
thought that the Father's time had come for giving Him 



the Kingdom. But they had been witnesses to the contrary— 
that the Kingdom of Heaven had suffered violence 
at the hands of the rulers, that the rightful Heir to the 
throne had been slain, and that He had risen from the 
dead. They had regained their confidence that there 
would be a King, and they were now inquiring whether 

R5589 : page 366 

it would be at this time or at some future coming of the 
Master that His Kingdom would be established. 

The Master's answer was significant: "It is not for 
you to know the times and the seasons, which the Father 
hath kept in His own hand"— in His own power. The 
Master had already intimated to His disciples that at the 
appointed time they would know the times and the seasons, 
but it was not due for them to understand those 
things then. They must wait patiently. The development 
of patience would do them good, would strengthen their 
faith, would strengthen their character in general. 

For the Father to have made known the long interval 
of nearly nineteen hundred years before Messiah's Kingdom 
would be established would not have been wise- 
would not have been for the good of His people, who 
would have been discouraged in view of the long delay 
of their hopes. The Master therefore merely indicated 
that they must walk by faith and not by sight, and especially 
that they must not expect to understand anything 
respecting God's program until after they would receive 
the anointing of the Holy Spirit. 

After receiving the Spirit, they would be fully qualified 
to be God's representatives and to speak the Message; 
and from time to time they would be given the "meat in 
due season." Thus they would not be in darkness with 
the world, and the Day of the Lord would not come upon 
them as a thief in the night or as a snare. The Pentecostal 
blessing which they received qualified them fully 
for the work of the ministry, even though it did not cover 
their natural blemishes; for it was after they had received 
the Holy Spirit that we read, "The people perceived 
that they were ignorant and unlearned men." 

OUR LORD'S ASCENSION 

Our Lord's ascension was a spectacular one, so far as 
His Church was concerned, but not in respect to the 
world. Of the world He had already said, "Yet a little 
while, and the world seeth Me no more." The world did 
not see our Lord during the forty days in which He manifested 
Himself to His disciples; for He showed Himself 
to none except His faithful, consecrated ones. The ocular 
demonstrations so helpful to His disciples culminated 
with an actual ascension of the Lord into the air in the 
body in which He had just been with them. Because they 
were not yet spirit-begotten, they doubtless needed just 
such a manifestation to help their faith, to lead them to 



understand that they would see the Master no more until 
He would come with power and great glory to assemble 
all His saints to Himself and to bless the world. 

Our Golden Text reminds us that Jesus spoke of this 
ascension beforehand. The ascending up where He was 
before should not, however, be understood merely to signify 
a return to a previous place. Rather, it should be 
understood to signify a return to a previous condition— 
a spirit condition, which the Master had left to be made 
flesh, that He might ransom the world. 

As Jesus parted from His disciples into the clouds out 
of their sight, we assume that the body in which He had 
just appeared was dissolved, or dematerialized. The use 
of it was merely to help to establish the faith of the disciples 
and to be a means of instruction, an assurance that 
Jesus had gone permanently— that they need not expect 
to see Him further in any kind of manifestation. It was 
an object lesson. 

MANNER OF OUR LORD'S RETURN 

One of the evangelists recounts that after Jesus had 
disappeared angels materialized and addressed them, saying, 
"Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into 
Heaven? This same Jesus, who is taken up from you 
into Heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have 
seen Him go into Heaven." This statement has led some 
to believe that at His Second Advent Jesus will materialize 
and appear in the flesh; but to our understanding they 
are laboring under a grave misapprehension. The world 
is to see Jesus no more; and the Church is to see Him 
only with the eye of faith until that time when they shall 
experience their change, in the end of the Age. Then 
we shall see Him as he is— not as He was; for we shall 
be like Him. Then we shall know even as we are now 
known.— 1 Corinthians 15:50-52; 1 John 3:2. 

It is worthy of notice that the angels laid stress upon 
the manner of the going, and that the manner agrees with 
what the Bible tells us respecting our Lord's Second Coming. 
He went quietly, secretly, unknown to the world- 
He is to return as a thief in the night; and none will 
know of His return except those whose eyes of understanding 
will be opened to discern the signs of the presence 
of the Son of Man. These will be His loyal, saintly 
few. So Jesus explained, saying that at His Second 
Coming it would be for a time as it was in the days of 
Noah— mankind would be eating, drinking, planting and 
marrying, and would not know of His presence.— 
Matthew 24:37-39. 



R5590 : page 366 

INTERESTING LETTERS 



RE-DISTRIBUTION OF B.S.M. 

DEARLY BELOVED PASTOR:- 

We realize how very busy you are, and this keeps us from 
writing you often, telling you how much we appreciate your 
labor of love on behalf of the Household of Faith. We 
certainly feasted upon the November 1 st TOWER. What 
could be stronger evidence as to our present position than is 
there offered? We praise our Father for such a channel of 
blessing, and we ask Him, each day, dear brother, to 
strengthen your heart, realizing something of the persecution 
that comes upon you as a result of your faithfulness to Him 
and to His Cause. 

We have had such blessings in the last few weeks in putting 
out the Volunteer matter! We want to tell you the method 
we have adopted; if it is new, perhaps a line in THE TOWER 
would bring the same blessing to other classes. It has been 
our privilege to meet with many of the classes throughout the 
United States, and having served one of the large ones as 
Captain of the Volunteer work for three years, we naturally 
notice this branch of the work, its effectiveness, etc. When 
we first took charge of the work the friends were merely 
throwing the Tracts into the yards; in a short time nearly 
all were placing them on the gallery, and a little later they 
were putting them inside the screen door, or under the door. 
Our method is to ring the bell, and meet the one who comes 
to the door with a smile, making some remark about the contents 
of the "sample copy of the little non-sectarian religious 
paper" we wish to present them. 

As to the advantages of this method, it is a problem among 
business men, nowadays, to get advertising matter into the 
hands of prospective customers. To illustrate: I have gone 
to houses many times while colporteuring, and when the lady 
would come to the door about the first thing she would do 
would be to grab up a bunch of advertising matter that had 
been put inside the screen, and wad it up for the stove or 
waste-basket. Of course, our literature would get the same 
treatment; result, waste of thousands of dollars. 

Now, as to the blessing that accrues from the method 
which we have adopted: First, the Tract is not destroyed; 
second, we feel that we have done the Father's work as well 
as we would do our own work; third, we meet many who 
say, "If this is Russell's literature I don't want anything 
to do with it." What an opportunity this affords to defend 
the Truth! Nearly all will admit that they have not read 
the literature, but have heard this, that, or the other about 
it. By using a little tact we can break down the prejudice 
and often get them interested. Fourth, we find many who 
are interested to some extent in Present Truth, who do not 

R5590 : page 367 

know that there is a class in the city. Sister Dunn met a 
gentleman who was reading your sermons regularly, but did 
not know that there were classes of Bible Students. She 
loaned him the books, and in a few weeks he made a full 



consecration to the Lord. 

One of the brothers who was working with me met a 
minister recently who, when he learned that we had Pastor 
Russell's literature, was so angry that his lips quivered when 
he tried to demean you. He finally admitted that he had not 
read your writings, and that he could not prove a single assertion 
he had made. He also came down from his haughty 
stand and admitted that he did not understand the Bible. 

These are a few of the blessings, dear brother, that come 
as a result of doing the Master's work rightly. What courage 
it develops in one to go right up to a door with a Message 
from the King of kings! We get some polishing, of course; 
but isn't that what we need? We meet people who have 
never heard of Present Truth, as many times as Denver has 
been served with the literature. The reason is, as above 
stated, the Tracts had found their way into the stove or 
waste-basket, along with other advertising matter. 

Trusting that others may receive some of the blessing that 
we are receiving, through a few lines in THE TOWER on this 
subject, we beg your forgiveness for taking up so much of 
your valuable time. 

Sister Dunn joins in loving greetings to yourself and all 
the dear family at Bethel. 

Faithfully, your brother and fellow-servant in the One 
blessed Hope, DR. W. H. DUNN.-Colo. 



TURNS ATHEISTS TO THE BIBLE 

DEAR BRETHREN AT LONDON:- 

I notice that the only place the PHOTO-DRAMA has been 
actively opposed in the London area is at Ilford (where, by 
the way, the meetings have had overflow attendances). The 
first start was apparent early Sunday morning (when we 
arrived to rig up the booth, screen, etc., for the afternoon 
presentation) by the appearance of well-written warnings in 
yellow chalk on the pavement outside admonishing the passers-by 
to "Beware of Pastor Russell's lie," etc., but as the 
expected passers-by were all more or less in bed the "early 
birds" demolished the "worms" with a duster. 

By the time the afternoon presentation started several energetic 
opponents were at the entrance supplying everyone 
with opposition literature. We asked one mild looking friend 
whether he thought he was exhibiting the Master's Spirit. 
He said, "My Master is the Lord Jesus Christ; Mr. Russell's 
master is the Devil." 

We had the opportunity at intermission time to give the 
exact quotation concerning this information to the crowded 
audience, with the result that the opponents received quite 
cold comfort as the crowds passed out from the PHOTO-DRAMA, 
and the attempt to get up an argument and collect 
a crowd failed entirely. It was most noticeable that the 
people went straight off to their homes and ignored the odd 
folks outside. And it was quite evident that what the public 
had seen had proved beyond doubt that the Devil was not 



connected with the PHOTO-DRAMA or its founder; in fact, 
the opponents, who are at work every night, have proved a 
standing advertisement. 

But more interesting still, and certainly to our surprise, 
is the fact that we have been opposed in the same way by 
members of the Rational Press Assn. (atheists, really). A 
brother who had converse with one of them writes me the 
following remarkable information of what was said: "A 
glance at the leaflet showed me that it discounted the miracles 
of the Scriptures, and stated that they were not to be seriously 
considered in the light of science and proper reasoning." 
"I asked the gent why he discounted the miracles, and 
if he discounted these why not put away the whole of the 
record of Holy Writ." He replied, "Exactly! I do not believe 
any of it, save a few historical points, which other books 
give." Then I said, "Why do you then come outside a religious 
meeting such as this and confine your efforts to discounting 
the miracles?" He replied, "Well, this Mr. Russell, 
whose teachings you have heard tonight, puts an entirely 
different construction on the miracles, and now some who 
had turned aside from Scriptural teaching and taken up a 
sound, scientific reasoning (i.e. Atheism) are believing what 
he says." 

Surely "the wisdom of the wise will perish" when the 
beams of Truth are focused on them. 

Yours in the dear Lord, F. GUARD, SR. 



INTERESTING REPORT OF EUREKA DRAMA 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

I am herewith sending the report of exhibition of PART 
III., which closed the series at Holze, 111. However, we had a 
fourth meeting, a finale, at which was given an illustrated 
lecture. The speaker used for his subject, "The Two Sacrifices." 
Slides were shown of Abraham offering up Isaac, 
and the explanation was made that it typified Jehovah offering 
up His dear Son in sacrifice. Also a great deal was said 
about "Hell," and slides were shown of Dante's Inferno. Then 
with a brief explanation of the words Sheol, Hades, and 
Gehenna, the "Bible Hell" was shown, the speaker commenting 
quite liberally on the same. 

At the close of the meeting fifty names were handed in 
out of an audience of 125. This was very encouraging to us, 
and the class is much elated over their first experience with 
the "EUREKA DRAMA." 

All these meetings were held in the School House. The 
town is very small, there being not over 150 inhabitants; and 
at least 400 people were served— an average of 100 at each 
meeting. Many farmers attended, and all seemed well pleased. 

Some of the class felt somewhat reluctant on entering upon 
this new branch of the work, but now all are rejoicing exceedingly 
in the glad service. At first there seemed to be a 
little fear of encountering much opposition, etc.; but when 
once we realize that it is the Lord's work, and that He has 



promised "never to leave us nor forsake us," these big mountains 
that we see at first dissolve into molehills. 

The class has an automobile, which is used in the work. 
Getting an early supper, we load up our paraphernalia and 
start off to the place of meeting, so as to have plenty of time 
to set up the machine and get up the curtain. Prayer is first 
offered, asking the Lord's blessing on the work, which surely 
has been with us. 

Yours rejoicing in the service of the King of kings and 
Lord of lords, LOUIS F. WIEBRECHT.-Illinois. 



CREATION DRAMA DID IT 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

My wife and I truly thank our Heavenly Father for the 
great and priceless blessing which has come to us through 
your instrumentality. It was your beautiful PHOTO-DRAMA 

R5591 : page 367 

which was the cause of our seeing and accepting the Truth 
as our own. 

We believe that we owe you, and the Ecclesia, which we 
attend regularly, a debt which we shall never be able to pay. 
We feel as if the DRAMA was brought here for us alone. 
With that feeling in our hearts we can see and truly appreciate 
our dear Heavenly Father's great love for us. But we 
cannot see where we are deserving of such great love. 

We are truly happy now; we were not happy before. We 
could see too much of one another's faults. We sought worldly 
things, but now we count them "loss and dross," as the 
Apostle says. 

We have your six volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. 
They are a great help. We spend as much time as we can 
in reading and studying them. We have taken the Vow. 
We read your Morning Resolve, and the DAILY HEAVENLY 
MANNA every morning. They are a source of comfort to 
us. There are many things which I have to be thankful for. 
I won't try to enumerate them, because my dear Heavenly 
Father has been bountifully blessing me ever since I fully 
accepted the Lord as my Redeemer. I shall continue to pray 
for you, dear Brother, and I ask your prayers. 

Your brother in the Lord, 



page 367 

MID-WINTER LOUISVILLE CONVENTION 

We have secured the Seelbach Auditorium for our Convention 
-January 15th, 16th and 17th. It is on the 10th 
floor of the Seelbach Hotel, S. W. Cor. of 4th and Walnut 
Sts., diagonally across the street from Macauley's Theatre; 



in case of a crowd at Brother Russell's meeting, January 17th, 
we will use this Auditorium for overflow meeting. Auditorium 
seats 800 and is reached by four elevators. Friends 
can be accommodated in Seelbach, four to room, with bath, 
for $1.00 per person, not including meals; other good lodging 
can be had for 75c. up; meals from 15c. to $1.50 each. 
Trusting you can give notice in next WATCH TOWER, and 
praying our Heavenly Father's blessing upon our mutual 
efforts to praise and serve Him, I am, with Christian love, 

Your brother and fellow-servant, WALTER D. PELLE. 
Sec'y I.B.S.A., Louisville, Ky. Class, 
2438 Portland Ave. 

Address all communications to Dr. Pelle. 



page 369 

VOL. XXXV DECEMBER 15 No. 24 
A. D. 1914-A. M. 6043 



CONTENTS 

1914-AnnualReport-1914 371 

A Very Notable Year 371 

Creation Photo-Drama 371 

The Eureka Drama Work 373 

Service in Newspapers 373 

Many Tons of Free Literature 374 

Our Correspondence Department 374 

Colporteuring "Studies in Scriptures" 374 

The Pilgrim Service of the Year 374 

Hope an Outgrowth of Confidence 375 

Confidence Indicative of Heart 
Condition 376 

Confidence Regained 378 

Savior of the World 378 

"The Common Salvation" 379 

New Creatures in Christ 379 

Israel's Experiences Typical, Allegorical 380 

God's Favor Returning to Israel 381 

"Drink Ye All of It" 382 

The Test Now Upon the Church 382 

page 370 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 



Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



1915-YEAR TEXT-1915 

As our Year Text we have chosen the Master's words so 
full of meaning, "Are ye able to drink of My Cup?" These 
words gain in force and weight as we ponder them. 



MORNING RESOLVE CARDS 

A beautifully designed card (3-1/2 x 5-1/2 inches) with a very 
fine reproduction in colors of a renowned profile likeness of 
our Lord. Across the bottom of the card is a splendid small 
picture of "The Last Supper." A grapevine and clusters of 
grapes form a significant border, and the text, "Are Ye Able 
to Drink of My Cup?" is a reminder of our consecration vow. 
On the reverse side of this card, "My Morning Resolve," is 
neatly printed. Price, postpaid, 25c per dozen, 3c each. 



1915-VOLUNTEER MATTER-1915 

Prepare for an early campaign. We are now ready to 
receive applications for B.S. MONTHLY for this effective 
work. Get your arrangements as classes well ordered, and 
through your class Secretaries send us your orders promptly. 



I.B.S.A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 
FOR THE MONTH OF JANUARY 
Questions from Manual on Series Second of 
"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 
STUDIES V.-VI. 



Week of January 3...Q. 102 to 108 Week of January 17.. .Q. 116 to 121 
Week of January 10...Q. 109 to 115 Week of January 24.. .Q. 1 to 7 
Week of January 31... Q. 8 to 14 

Question Manuals on Vol. II, STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 5c. each; 
or 50c. per dozen, postpaid. 



R5591 : page 371 

1914-ANNUAL REPORT-1914 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

FOR the sake of our many new readers we explain 

that the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND 

TRACT SOCIETY, as the parent organization, 

represents all the activities in Christian work 

with which THE WATCH TOWER and its 

Editor are associated. All the work done 

through the INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS 

ASSOCIATION and PEOPLES PULPIT 

ASSOCIATION, directly and indirectly, is the 

work of the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND 

TRACT SOCIETY. The Editor of THE WATCH TOWER is 

the President of all three of these Societies. All financial 

responsibility connected with the work proceeds from 

the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY. From it 

the other Societies and all the branches of the work receive 

their financial support. There is nothing unusual 

in this. It serves to keep the different parts of the work 

separate. Just so our Methodist friends have a Methodist 

Book Concern, an Epworth League for the young 

people, and both Home and Foreign Missionary Societies, 

besides numerous other aid societies, etc., etc. 

Our division of the work was made necessary by the 
fact that the parent society Charter by the State of Pennsylvania 
is not by law permitted to hold property in New 
York State; hence the necessity for organizing a subsidiary 
society to hold any real estate in New York. 
Similarly, the laws of Great Britain prevent any foreign 
society from holding title to real estate there. This 
necessitated the organization of the INTERNATIONAL 
BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION with a British charter. 
Thus it comes that we use sometimes the one name and 
sometimes the other in various parts of our work— yet 
they all in the end mean the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND 
TRACT SOCIETY-to which all donations should be made. 

1914 A VERY NOTABLE YEAR 

For instance, we have for forty years been looking 
forward to the present year as the one in which Gentile 
Times would expire and the one, therefore, in which we 



might expect some special manifestation of the transfer 
of earth's government to its new King, Messiah. We 
had hoped that the ending of the Gentile Times might 
have signified the ending also of the Church's times, or 
years, in the flesh, the ushering of all the Lord's consecrated 
people into the Kingdom. The latter expectation 
brought, we are sure, a great blessing to our thousands 
of readers. It brought them quickening of spiritual 
interests, and zeal to know and to do the Master's 
will. It brought them heart searchings, to see whether 
or not they were ready for the Kingdom. It brought 
them a condition of peace with God which passeth all 
human understanding, so that now they are able to rejoice 
in the will of the Lord, whatever it may be. If the Lord 
will continue us in His favor, it will matter little to us 
whether we are on this side of the Veil or on the other 
side— so great are our joys and blessings, and so pronounced 
the peace which rules our hearts. 

In God's providence the present year has been the 
most wonderful one in the history of our Society. We 
believe that the Lord has used it mightily in pulling down 
prejudice, ignorance, superstition and error. It seems 
as though this year we had the grand climacteric of all 
previous efforts on the part of God's consecrated people 
to show forth the praises of Him who has called us out 
of darkness into His marvelous light. In order that the 
results may be seen in their truly miraculous light, it is 
proper that we remind our readers that we have no 
church organization in the ordinary sense of the word, 
no bondage of any kind, no obligation to pay, either to 
the parent society or anybody else, either ten per cent, or 
any other sum. We remind you also that no solicitations 
for money in any way are authorized by this Society; 
that every amount, therefore, which has come into our 
hands, and been used, has been a voluntary donation 
from a willing heart. We remind you also that it is true 
of the Lord's people in general, just as the Scriptures 
tell, that among them are not many rich, not many wise, 
not many learned, not many noble, but chiefly the poor of 
this world, rich in faith, heirs of the Kingdom. 

With this before your minds, keep in memory the fact 
that last year, the year before and several years back, 
the brethren, THE WATCH TOWER readers, have been 
spending generously, according to their ability, both of 
time and money. Now suddenly, as is evidenced in their 
growing faith in the Lord and the Truth, in the fact that 
we are nigh at the door of the New Dispensation, everywhere 
there has been a willingness to give and much 
rejoicing in the privilege. Let these few words prepare 
you for the, to us, stupendous results of the year, which 
show that about One Million Dollars have been spent in 
the service of Present Truth this year by the Classes for 
Theatres, etc., and by the Society. 

CREATION PHOTO-DRAMA 



After two years of preparation, the PHOTO-DRAMA 
was barely ready to give its first exhibition in January 
last. It did not get properly started with a full swing 
in America until April. In July we made a start in 
Great Britain. By September the DRAMA had begun operations 
on the Continent of Europe— in Germany, 

R5591 : page 372 

Switzerland, Finland, Sweden and Denmark. By October 
it had reached Australia and New Zealand. Few 
can appreciate the amount of labor involved in preparing 
each DRAMA outfit. The arrangement and preparation 
of the films used is comparatively an easy matter. Our 
difficulty lay in procuring copies of fine art pictures illustrative 
of the history of the world from the dawn of 
creation to the present time and into the future. We 
adopted, and adapted, everything we could find already 
prepared and suitable to our purposes; but this left hundreds 
of paintings and sketches to be made, from which 
in turn to make the stereopticon slides. 

With all this accomplished, a still further difficulty 
presented itself. We wished to have those beautiful 
pictures hand-colored— really beautiful. To attain our 
purpose we had some painted in Paris and some in 
London, while the majority were done in Philadelphia 
and New York. We required of these artists their very 
best skill in coloring. We should not forget to say that, 
with others, our own Art Room turned out a large share 
of the work. Although we are not adding to the number 
of panoramas with painted slides, yet the breakage is so 
great that even now we have twenty continually at work 
on replacements and in photographing and tinting the 
Eureka Dramas. 

God kindly veiled our eyes as respects the amount of 
labor connected with the DRAMA. Had we foreknown the 
cost of time and money and patience necessary for the 
start we would never have begun it. But neither did we 
know in advance the great success that would attend 
the DRAMA, and that through it nearly eight million 
people in the United States and Canada have already 
heard a glorious Message from the Word of God (a 
precious Message that they will never forget), also that 
other hundreds of thousands in other lands are hearing 
in their own tongues "wonderful words of life." We 
had twenty DRAMAS, which, in FOUR PARTS, were able to 
serve eighty cities each day. The audiences varied from 
four thousand down to less than a hundred, according to 
place and circumstances. 

The Classes which put on the DRAMAS in the various 
cities experienced great blessings and also great trials. 
They had precious opportunities for serving, sacrificing 
time and money. These faithful sacrifices the Lord rewarded, 
as He always does. The trials of faith and 
patience sometimes arose from accidents causing delays 
in the receiving of films; sometimes from misunderstandings 



between the friends in connection with the 

service of the DRAMA; sometimes through misunderstandings 

along financial lines because of not being experts 

in the matter of keeping accounts. But, rightly 

received, all these trials had their good effect, helping to 

test love, to develop patience and thus to broaden Christian 

character. It is safe to say that the DRAMA has 

done as much for the friends of the Truth as for the 

R5592 : page 372 

public in general. This is surely saying a great deal; for 
in one city the newspapers published that in the week 
following the showing of the DRAMA their police court 
records showed one-half the usual criminal cases. 

The special advantage of the DRAMA seems to have 
accrued to a certain class of people whose faith had 
well-nigh slipped, who were beginning to doubt the Bible 
and everything connected with the future. Some of these 
have written us very beautiful and pathetic letters of 
appreciation and of thanks to God. Some have contributed 
to the Society's Funds to assist in defraying the 
expenses of the DRAMA further. 

We had various things to contend with in order to 
keep the DRAMAS all busy every day. Train schedules 
were not always to our convenience. Then, too, the 
friends who engaged the place of exhibition could not 
always get the dates that would have served best. In 
order to adapt ourselves to the various times and seasons, 
opportunities, etc., it was often necessary to take what 
might have appeared a very zig-zag course. Hindsight 
might have enabled us to do better in some instances, but 
we used the best foresight which we possessed. We had 
a large force of extremely competent Brethren continually 
at work safeguarding the interests of the DRAMA and 
the engagements. Perhaps a sufficient number of mistakes 
occurred to keep us all very humble, to make us 
realize that when that which is perfect shall have come 
and that which is in part shall have been done away, the 
whole world may move the better in consequence. 

The expenses of the DRAMA were, first, the preparation 
of the films and the slides. This was considerably 
accomplished before the DRAMA started, of course. But 
the large amount of money necessary for this preparation 
was not included in the statements of last year and 
the year before. The friends who contributed the money 
were quite agreeable that it should be used for this purpose 
and not be reported until the DRAMA would begin. 
Those preliminary expenditures are included in the 
present financial report. Another item of expense was 
the railway fares of approximately one hundred and 
twenty people, their food, shelter and clothing. The 
shorter the stay in each place, the higher the rates for 
board, lodging and traveling. These expenses all appear 
in the financial statement under the head of the DRAMA 
expenditure. 



However, there is another item of DRAMA expense 
which does not appear in our report; namely, the expense 
borne by the various Classes in connection with 
the DRAMA presentation. It is difficult to estimate the 
total, but we do know of three cities which have each 
spent more than Ten Thousand Dollars in conjunction 
with the showing of the DRAMA in their own cities. We 
believe that it will be safe to say that the total amount 
expended by the different Classes for the preaching of 
the Gospel through the DRAMA would total somewhere 
between $150,000.00 and $200,000.00, in addition to what 
our financial report shows. What a wonderful blessing 
thus came to the Lord's people! If it is more blessed to 
give than to receive, as the Master declared, then surely 
these have had rich blessing. 

Quite naturally these heavy expenditures on the part 
of the different Classes caused a considerable decrease 
in the contributions which otherwise would have come 
to THE WATCH TOWER treasury. The friends, having 
given of their substance freely, could not in every case 
fulfil all of the "Good Hopes" they had entertained at 
the beginning of the year. Nevertheless, we are sure that 
a great surprise awaits every reader to see how large 
have been the contributions this year, notwithstanding 
the financing of the DRAMA'S expenses in the home cities. 
The results are greater than anything we have had before. 

Doubtless many of our foes imagined that by this time 
THE WATCH TOWER readers would be disconsolate, disheartened, 
etc., and that many of them would be regretting 
that they had spent their money so liberally for 
the Truth. But not so! The spirit of service seems to 
burn within the hearts of the dear friends everywhere. 
Gratitude to God, appreciation of the Truth and desire 
for further opportunities of service— these are prompting 
to love, joy, faith, confidence, rejoicing. 

While the field seems riper than ever for the Message 

R5592 : page 373 

of the Truth since the war began, the Lord's providence 
is making it clear to us that expenses must be reduced. 
The twenty DRAMAS are now reduced to six, and we 
know not how long they may continue active. One other 
DRAMA has been taken over by a Brother who engaged 
to spend Ten Thousand Dollars in the expense connected 
with the showing of it. The Society always follows the 
plan of watching the Lord's providences. The more 
money we receive, the more we spend. As the funds 
diminish, we curtail expenses. We have no desire to 
lay up treasures on earth; neither must we incur debts. 
In this connection we should add that so great a work 
could not have been accomplished for less than double 
the amount shown in our financial columns had it not 
been that all of our Managers, Superintendents, Operators, 
etc., gave their time freely, voluntarily, merely 
receiving things needful— which we supplied not only to 



those who were out in the field operating the DRAMA, but 
also to the many in the Bethel Home connected with the 
preparation of the slides, films, management, etc. 

THE DRAMA OUTSIDE AMERICA 

Splendid reports are coming to us from the showing 
of the DRAMA in Great Britain. It has been presented in 
six different places in London to large and appreciative 
audiences. It opened at the Prince's Theatre, remaining 
there for several weeks. Then it showed in various 
suburban districts of London before reaching London 
Opera House. The presentation in the latter place has 
been phenomenal. It showed there approximately five 
weeks, afternoon and evening daily, including Sunday. 
In the evening hundreds were turned away— very much 
the same as when the DRAMA was shown in the great 
Auditorium Building of Chicago. In the London Opera 
House an exceptionally high-class of visitors were present. 
Several hundred pounds Sterling were voluntarily 
handed in, thus permitting continuance of the exhibition. 
By the time the engagement at the Opera House was 
closed, the interest was so great that the London friends 
found themselves able to undertake the exhibition of the 
DRAMA in Royal Albert Hall-one of the largest and 
most notable buildings in Europe. It has a capacity altogether 
of nine thousand, but probably not more than 
five thousand could be comfortably seated and have a 
view of the screen. We have yet to hear of the results. 

In various other cities of Great Britain two other 
DRAMAS have been operating as continuously as possible, 
the dear friends demonstrating their love and loyalty by 
their self-sacrificing arrangements for the presentation of 
the DRAMA. In Glasgow the DRAMA had an especially 
good reception. 

Good word reaches us from Sweden, Denmark, Finland, 
Germany and Switzerland. In each of these very 
large auditoriums are obtained. The people crowd to 
see the pictures and hear the lectures. The free 
Scenarios are taken with avidity. The Lord's blessing is 
with the work, and many hearts have been made glad. 
We have just heard from Australasia that the DRAMA 
there has started and bids fair to be a good success. 

THE EUREKA DRAMA WORK 

Our readers will remember that reference was made 
in these columns to the Eureka Drama No. X and 
No. Y, suggested to the Classes and private individuals 
as useful in connection with their Class Extension work. 
These notices appeared in our issue of August 1st, Page 
238, and in our issue of August 15, Page 254; also in 
November 15th issue, Page 2. Our readers will be 
deeply interested to note the success of these DRAMAS. 
They are going into the various small towns, villages, 
school-houses, in the vicinities contiguous to the owners 



of the DRAMAS. 

Consider DRAMA X first. We have sent out a total of 
fifty-six outfits, but we have had reports from only six 
of these. These reports certainly are encouraging. They 
have shown in nineteen different places, sixty exhibitions 
altogether, with a total attendance of 1,231, an average 
of over twenty at each entertainment. The X DRAMA, 
be it remembered, has no slides, no films, but merely the 
phonograph musical and lecture records. We trust that 
the possessors of the other fifty outfits of DRAMA X are 
doing similarly good work and that we shall hear from 
them at their convenience. 

EUREKA DRAMA Y reports show as follows: Of the 
forty-five outfits sent out twenty-nine have reported. 
They have served two hundred and seventy-two places, 
giving eight hundred and four exhibitions to a total attendance 
of 69,053. The average attendance was 86. 
Three thousand five hundred and ninety-seven cards inquiring 
for further literature were received. The number 
of DRAMA Scenarios and STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
sold has not been reported, but over a quarter of a 
million of Scenarios have been distributed free. 

How interesting to note the leadings of the Lord's 
providence! The people in the rural districts seem hungry 
for just what these DRAMAS present. We trust that the 
sixteen other Y DRAMAS are doing as well as the twenty-nine 
included in this report, and that we shall hear from 
them soon. The Lord seems especially willing to bless 
all of His consecrated ones who seek to devote time, 
strength and money to His service. These agencies are 
mighty through God to the pulling down of the strongholds 
of error and to the upbuilding of His saints in the 
"most holy faith," in preparation for the glorious resurrection 
"change," which we are all hoping for soon. 

When we speak of fourteen DRAMAS being disbanded, 
we do not mean to say that they are done away with. 
The operating corps are disbanded. The slides, films, 
records, etc., etc., are stored, awaiting such a change in 

R5593 : page 373 

the Lord's providence as may permit their service to be 
resumed. We are not without hope of this. 

SERVICE IN NEWSPAPERS 

As our readers are aware, Pastor Russell's sermons 
and weekly Bible studies have for several years been 
very widely published in the secular newspapers. The 
number publishing is not so large as formerly; nevertheless, 
we are probably reaching more people than ever, by 
reason of inserting the sermons in metropolitan newspapers 
—in New York, Boston, Chicago, Philadelphia, St. 
Louis, Baltimore, Washington, Los Angeles. 

The difference between the two services is that in the 
smaller cities the sermons are published strictly as news, 



the newspapers paying for the stereotyped plates twenty-five 
cents per column weekly. It is the business with 
these, conducted by a newspaper syndicate, that has fallen 
off considerably. The number now publishing the sermons, 
etc., regularly, is about one thousand. 

Newspaper space in large cities is counted too valuable 
generally to justify the publishing of a sermon of 
two or three columns weekly. Besides, if one newspaper 
would publish, the others of the city would decline to 
publish as news. Furthermore, the publishers claim that 
since there are many talented men in all large cities, these 
would expect their sermons also to be published, or else 
would be offended. To publish the sermons of a large 
city would be a huge contract. The Society has felt, 
therefore, that this large field of influence, the large witness 
to the Truth possible through the immense circulation 

R5593 : page 374 

of these papers well justifies the expenditure in this 
way of some of the money at its disposal. It will be 
encouraging to all of our readers to know that the sermons 
are now reaching weekly approximately five million 
five hundred thousand readers. 

We trust that some good is being accomplished. We 
are continually coming into touch with noble souls being 
reached in this way, and doubt not that many others are 
being influenced who have not yet come to the place 
where they wish to express their interest by writing. The 
money expended in this department this year has been 
large; but we believe that it has been very economically 
spent, and the evidences are that it was wisely spent. 

MANY TONS OF FREE LITERATURE 

From year to year we have wondered what would be 
the limit of the capacity of our friends in the matter of 
the distribution of free literature. The quantities have 
grown enormously. Many who cannot give all of their 
time in the Colporteur work, Colporteurs also and Pilgrims 
(indeed, all our readers), have found opportunities 
for engaging as volunteers in the Lord's service in the distribution 
of reading matter, which we provide approximately 
in thirty languages— even the freight or expressage 
or postage being met from the Society's funds. 
Indeed, while we supply the literature freely, it is a fact 
that many of those ordering it are donating largely to 
the Tract Fund. 

It is difficult for people to estimate quantities, especially 
when the figures run up high. We will not stop to 
calculate how many car loads of paper went into tracts, 
nor how many times these papers would girdle the earth. 
We will merely state the facts in quantities, although we 
are aware that very few appreciate what a thousand is, 
or ten thousand, or a hundred thousand, or a million. In 
a word, then, the total distribution of free literature, 



during the year just closed, in the United States and 
Canada alone amounted to forty-seven million six hundred 
and ten thousand (47,610,000) copies. Of this quantity 
about two-thirds (30,000,000) were BIBLE STUDENTS 
MONTHLIES, and seven million eight hundred and fifty 
thousand (7,850,000) were free Scenarios of the PHOTO-DRAMA 
OF CREATION. Thus you will see that these were 
good-sized Tracts, containing many valuable lessons for 
those wishing to read them. 

OUR CORRESPONDENCE DEPARTMENT 

Naturally the increase of the work has led to great 
increase in the correspondence. Nevertheless, we have 
not been able to write the dear friends as fully and elaborately 
sometimes as we would have liked. The Editor 
hopes that all the readers will charitably remember that 
his capacity is limited, and that he cannot do all that he 
would like to do in the way of answering the letters of 
the friends. In fact, letters are rarely answered at all 
unless something in them especially calls for reply. 
Sometimes the reply is made by sending a marked copy 
of some of our publications dealing with the subject, 
which the correspondent has forgotten or failed to see. 
The Editor hopes that the dear friends will continue to 
accept THE WATCH TOWER articles as his personal letters 
to them. In this way he can best serve the largest 
number. 
The total number of letters received during 

the year was 199,139 

The total number of letters sent out during 
the year was 428,273 

COLPORTEURING "STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 

Our readers well know that we esteem very highly 
indeed the Colporteur Branch of the service. God seems 
to have blessed it in a wonderful manner. We are glad 
to be able to report that the falling off in Colporteur 
work during the year was not so great as might have 
been expected. The DRAMA work became an attraction 
to many of the friends, some of whom left the Colporteur 
work to engage in the DRAMA— later on returning to the 
Colporteuring. A comparison with last year's output 
shows a less number of volumes put out; yet the figures 
are wonderfully large. Be it remembered, too, that very 
few of these books are sold in stores and very few of 
them sent out from the Office direct in answer to mail 
orders. Nearly all of them represent the direct exercise 
of mind and body on the part of a noble band of the 
Lord's people— brethren and sisters known by the general 
name of Colporteurs. Amongst them are some from the 
home and family, the shop, the work-bench, the farm, 
as well as some clerks, bookkeepers, stenographers, 
draftsmen, teachers, preachers, lawyers, doctors. The 
more influence any one has the larger is his talent, all of 



which has been consecrated, if he entered the Body of 
Christ which is the Church. 

Our enemies have helped us considerably. Their 
slanderous misstatements undoubtedly stopped some from 
purchasing and from reading the books, but in other cases 
their harsh, unchristian words and conduct had a reverse 
effect to that which was anticipated and intended. 
Some bought from curiosity. Some said, "If Pastor Russell 
has something different from the preachers, we would 
like to see what it is; for we have not been satisfied for 
a good while with what has been doled out to us— which 
satisfies neither head nor heart." 

At one time we think the Colporteurs avoided as much 
as possible giving the name of the author of STUDIES IN 
THE SCRIPTURES for fear the customer would be prejudiced. 
Now, however, many of them are finding that the 
surest way to interest their customers is to tell them that 
the books are written by Pastor Russell, and that they 
are not like other religious books, but absolutely different, 
both in matter and style, and contain the very subjects 
they have been perplexed about for a long time— the 
subjects concerning which they have asked their ministers 
repeatedly and unsuccessfully. 

The DRAMA has helped also, wherever it has gone, 
stirring up an interest in the books. Besides, many of 
the Colporteurs have solicited orders for the bound editions 
of the PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION SCENARIO. We 
trust that all of our readers feel, as we do, a very warm 
interest in the Colporteurs; and that, as they may have 
opportunity, they will speak to them words of encouragement; 
for their way is not always strewn with thornless 
flowers. 

The total output of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES during 
the year past was more than 2,000 copies daily. 

In cloth binding 623,018 

In magazine edition 78,000 

THE PILGRIM SERVICE OF THE YEAR 

The Pilgrim Service during the year was immense; 
but for a time it took a little different course from its 
previous and usual one. Aside from special lectures 
following the exhibition of the DRAMA, special series of 
Pilgrim Meetings were held in many of the large cities. 
These sometimes continued every Sunday for months, the 
local friends providing the auditoriums, the Society 
providing the speakers. This kept busy the Brooklyn 
Brethren and necessitated their traveling over considerable 
distances— to Boston, Washington, Richmond, Providence, 
Detroit, Buffalo, Cleveland, Toronto, Hamilton, 
Montreal, Philadelphia, Baltimore, etc. These meetings, 
while not taking the Brethren long from the Office work, 

R5594 : page 375 

did entail considerable expense for railway fares. However, 



we believe that the expenditures were wisely made, 
and that the results justified the efforts and outlay. This 
extra service is responsible for much of the extra cost 
of this Department above other years. 

Total number of Pilgrims employed 76 

" " " public meetings held 3,217 

" " " semi-public meetings held.... 2,931 

" " " miles traveled 817,475 

The expense will be found in the Financial Report. 
Some extra services have been cut off. We are endeavoring 
to trim our sails to the lighter financial 
breezes. Should the Lord's providence be favorable, you 
will quickly discern increased activities along all propitious 
lines. 

WATCH TOWER ACCOUNT-- 19 14 

Balance on hand 1913 $1,333.95 

Tract Fund and Good Hopes 414,880.48 

Sundry P. & L 42,419.96 

Special Accounts (amply secured) 107,000.00 

$565,634.39 



EXPENDITURES. 

Free Literature and Newspapers $125,462.60 

Pilgrim Department (advertising, etc.) 61,686.37 

PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION 314,876.91 

To British Branch 24,165.44 

To German Branch 14,735.52 

To Australasian Branch 10,723.68 

To China, Japan, Korea, etc 5,705.48 

To India and South Africa 3,845.00 

To Swedish, Danish, Norwegian, Polish, 
French, Italian, Hungarian, Arabic, 

Greek, Finnish 2,146.30 

To West Indies 609.97 

Cash on hand 1,677.12 

$565,634.39 



R5594 : page 375 

HOPE AN OUTGROWTH OF CONFIDENCE 

"Cast not away, therefore, your confidence, which hath great 
recompense of reward; for ye have need of patience, that after 
ye have done the will of God ye might receive 
the things promised."— Hebrews 10:35,36. 

CONFIDENCE is another word for trust. 
The Apostle's thought, then, is, Cast not 



away your faith, cast not away your trust, 

which hath great recompense. It seems 

strange to us, sometimes, that God should 

purpose to reward faith rather than works. 

Surely almost anybody else would have 

made a Plan which would have said, I will 

reward you according to what you can accomplish. 

But God has declared that He 

will reward us according to our faith, our confidence, our 

honesty, our sincerity. Under the present conditions God 

can do nothing with a dishonest man. During the 

Millennial Age this class will receive the necessary 

stripes— just exactly what they need— to bring them 

rightly into accord with righteousness. But for the time 

being, God is making an appeal only to the honest-hearted. 

As we come to the Bible and get it clearly before us, 
as our eyes become anointed with the Holy Spirit and 
we see into the deep things of God, we find that He has 
a great, a wondrous Plan. When His Kingdom shall be 
established, then all the families of the earth shall be 
blessed, and the light of the knowledge of the glory of 
God shall fill the whole earth. None shall need to say 
to another, Know thou the Lord; for all shall know Him, 
from the least unto the greatest of them.— Jer. 3 1 :34. 

God is not dealing with the world yet, but is dealing 
with the few. There was a time when He dealt with 
typical Israel alone. Then, beginning with our Lord 
Jesus, who kept the Law which the Israelites could not 
keep, and who obtained the blessing accruing from the 
Law Covenant— from that time God's Plan has been, we 
see, to gather out of all nations and out of all parts of 
the earth a people for His name, to bear the name of 
Jesus, to be the Bride, the Lamb's Wife. 

As a woman is joined to a husband and bears his 
name, so this company is called out from the world to 
bear the name of Christ. The word Christ signifies, as 
we know, The Anointed of God, and includes Jesus, the 
Head of The Christ, and all the members of the Church 
which is His Body. God purposed the selection of the 
Church, and He purposed that it should not be accomplished 
by force, by compulsion. If any have thought 
that God has been dealing with the world, they have been 
mistaken. We are told in the Bible that God has been 
drawing a class, calling a people, a very different thought. 
Our Lord Jesus is the great Shepherd of the sheep. The 
sheep hear His voice and follow Him. 

It is a wonderful privilege to become a member of the 
Body of Christ. God is not forcing any one to become a 
member. How strange it would be for us to think that 
He said, If you do not become a member of the Bride 
class, you shall go to eternal torture! Nay, dear brethren, 
He lays before us the grandeur of the Divine Plan, that 
seeing it, we might be eager to become heirs of God and 
joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord. This is set before 
us in the Bible as a great Prize, "a Pearl of great price." 
If we do not care to come in under the invitation given, 



then we need not come at all. 

AN HONEST HEART -A WILLING MIND 

We remember that the Apostle declares that the Gentiles 
rejoiced that they had been accounted worthy to 
hear. (Acts 13:48.) Do we realize what an honor it is 
that God has asked us to hear His Message? It is a 
great honor, to our understanding. The one thing that 
is the basis of God's favor is sincerity. There are people 
who are born dishonest, born insincere. The Message 
was never designed of God for a dishonest mind. 

There is something about the dishonest, insincere, 
self-sufficient, that would surely lead them to take a 
wrong course. We think of a gentleman— a well educated 
man, an engineer. He was well-balanced mentally 
and could talk on any subject. One day we told him 
something of the Divine Plan and of the call of the 
Church. He replied, "Well, I do not care to have anything 
to do with it. I do not wish to have my sins forgiven; 
I wish to bear the penalty of my own sins. If 
other men are going to get along, I shall get along, too." 

Jesus said that if one would receive His Message, he 
must receive it as a little child— in that pure, simple manner 
that a little child would receive a message. It is 
natural for a little child to be full of confidence. How 
often we hear a child say, "My papa can do anything ! 
My papa says thus and so." And so the Heavenly Father 
would have us honest, faithful, full of confidence in Him, 
trusting what He has said, not doubting. He would have 
us to be loyal to Him. 

"Cast not away, therefore, your confidence," said the 
Apostle. He had been telling these Christian Hebrews 
that they had a good degree of confidence. They had 
accomplished a good work. They had endured hardness 
in various ways, partly while they themselves were made 

R5594 : page 376 

a gazing-stock, and partly while they were the companions 
of those who were so used. The Apostle went on to say 
that God was not unjust to forget their labor of love. 

A POTENT TEST OF LOYALTY 

But, dear brethren, it is not enough to make a good 
consecration; it is not enough that for a time we fight a 
good fight. No, indeed! God is not accepting to the 
Kingdom those who once were faithful. He desires to 
have those who were once faithful, who were afterwards 
faithful, who are always faithful! He desires to have in 
the Kingdom class those whom He can trust implicitly, 
those to whom He can safely give the glory, honor and 
immortality that He has promised to the faithful. And 
before they receive this high reward and exaltation, they 
must be thoroughly tested and proven. We see the 



reasonableness of this arrangement in every particular. 
If "He has called us to the obtaining of the glory of our 
Lord Jesus Christ," He expects us to be found worthy of 
that honor— not that we could do anything to make ourselves 
worthy of so great exaltation, not that we could 
merit it in ourselves, but He expects us to be true 
overcomers, and to develop the character necessary for 
so high a position of responsibility and glory. 

Have you given God the glory in all the affairs of 
your life, in whatever measure of success you have attained 
in His service? or have you often taken the glory 
to yourself? This is a good question for each one of the 
Lord's children to ask himself. We know that we have 
deserved no glory whatever in connection with what we 
possess or what we have accomplished. If any have attempted 
to take glory to themselves, they have taken the 
glory from the Lord. We must be so loyal that in presenting 
the Truth to others we will say, "This is not my 
Plan. I am glad to tell you anything that I know about 
it, but it is not man-made. It is all God's Plan." 

So, then, let us remember the Apostolic injunction: 
"Cast not away your confidence." What confidence are 
we to have? Confidence in God. In whom else could our 
confidence be placed? Many of the world have no confidence 
except in themselves. Others place their confidence 
in some earthly hero. One man says, I have confidence 
in King George; I will follow him to death. Another 
man says, I have full confidence in Kaiser Wilhelm; I 
will follow wherever he leads. A third man declares, 
I have great confidence in President Wilson. What 
does President Wilson or any of these rulers know about 
the future? No one but God and He who is executing 
God's will, know to a certainty, except in so far as God 
has seen fit to reveal His purposes. 

We as the Lord's people look up and see our great 
Creator's wonders in the heavens, and we say, How great 
is our God! Then as we look at ourselves and find how 
wonderfully we are made by our Creator, so that by 
thinking, by the power of the mind, we can move the 
different parts of the body— the hands, the feet, the eyes— 
oh, we say, this is the most wonderful machine in all the 

R5595 : page 376 

world! And so we are led to exclaim, Surely this great 
God, our God, our Father, is willing to tell us, His people, 
who love Him and desire to know His will, what His will 
is! He must have a good Plan; for He is wise, He is 
loving, He is just. 

CONFIDENCE PROPORTIONATE TO KNOWLEDGE 

And so we have found our old Bible, which perhaps 
was long covered with dust, and we have studied about 
God's Justice, Wisdom, Love and Power. And we have 
learned to have confidence in that dear old Book; for its 



Message is so consistent, so reasonable, so loving. The 

Bible explains how sickness, sorrow and pain came to be 

in the world. It informs us that all these came as the 

result of sin, and that from the very beginning God foreknew 

the fall, and purposed the restitution of mankind 

from sin and death. The Bible points out that the blessing 

to all men would come when Messiah would come. 

Thus we have confidence in the Word of the Lord and 
in the great Plan presented in that Word. And we have 
confidence that God has invited us to be joint-heirs with 
Christ in His Kingdom, that He is taking out a people 
for His name— those who will confess their sins, will 
acknowledge that they themselves are not great— those 
who will, when they receive God's favor, be so loyal to 
Him that they will be ready to lay down their lives. 

Ah, yes! Others lay down their lives for earthly kings, 
and we have a King of kings and Lord of lords, and if 
we could not lay down our lives in loyalty to Him, what 
would we think of ourselves! We have a good God, 
worthy of all confidence, and we trust Him. In proportion 
as we have knowledge of God, of the Bible, in proportion 
as we have grown in grace by seeking to walk in 
the narrow way, in that same proportion our confidence 
is growing stronger and stronger. 

CONFIDENCE INDICATIVE OF HEART CONDITION 

The only question remaining is, Will we be found 
faithful? The Scriptures declare that He is faithful who 
has promised, and that He will do exceeding abundantly 
more than we could ask or think. He has determined 
that all who will receive the great blessing will be those 
who will demonstrate their loyalty to the fullest degree. 
Hence the Apostle urges, "Cast not away your confidence, 
which hath great recompense of reward." 

God will one day reward our confidence. Why is it 
that the Lord will especially reward our confidence? The 
reason is this: Our confidence in God represents our 
heart condition, and it will go down like a barometer in 
falling weather if we lose our faith. Our hearts cannot 
be wholly stayed on God except as we are strong in faith. 
The only instances in which Satan will be permitted to 
take away the confidence of God's people will be in the 
cases of some who have not been living up to their light. 
The Lord will permit such to go gradually into darkness. 

So we are to keep firm hold of our confidence; for 
this assures us that God is our Father. We all know 
something of the wireless telegraphy which is now being 
used in a marvelous manner on the sea and on the land. 
And this is only a feeble illustration of the wireless communication 
that maintains between the true Christian and 
the Heavenly Lord. In every circumstance this confidence, 
leaning on the Lord, will look to Him. There will be the 
wireless communication between Father and child. 

When the Lord's people find themselves in difficulty, 
they should reason like this: What is the Lord's will? 



What does His providence indicate? He has said that all 
things shall work together for good to me because I love 
Him; therefore, having confidence in God, I am sure that 
all things shall indeed work out for my good. I have 
faith in His Wisdom and His Power and His Love. He 
could have protected me from this difficulty had He seen 
best. So the fact of its reaching me proves that He saw 
fit to permit it for a wise reason. He has promised that 
He will not suffer me to be tempted, tried, beyond what I 
am able to bear. As He is faithful, He will never fail to 
keep that good promise. So then, I will "not cast away 
my confidence, which hath great recompense of reward." 

CONFIDENCE IN GOD TO BE TESTED 

If God would reward according to works, some of His 
children would get very little. The very ablest of God's 
people cannot do very much. We spend one-third of our 

R5595 : page 377 

time in sleep; we need perhaps eight hours more for preparing 
our food, etc.; and we have a thousand and one 
things to do in the remaining eight hours. How little 
time we have, after all, even if we have cut off many 
things that once took more or less of our time! The most 
intelligent people have very little time to spare. 

Do your very best, and try to note how little you will 
be able to accomplish by the close of the day. Think of 
those five minutes, that half hour, etc., and count up and 
see how much you render to the Lord your God daily. 
We fear that each of us would be ashamed to see how 
little time the sum total would make. And if the reward 
depended on our works, it would surely be a very small 
reward. God knows also that some have more time at 
their disposal and some less, and that some have more 
talents and some less. 

Some are able to give ten times as much as others. 
How much would you like to do for the Lord? How 
much do you strive to do for the Lord? It will be in 
proportion as you have confidence in Him. As you come 
to have more trust in the promises, you will try harder 
and harder to live up to all the terms and conditions of 
discipleship. If you have but little confidence in the Lord, 
you will be like the man who was told that if he would go 
to a certain place he would find a fortune, and who replied, 
It is absurd to consider anything of the kind! If 
some one should say, Behind a curtain in a certain corner 
there is hidden a bag of gold, and any one who will go 
there for it may have it, it would be safe to say that not 
two persons out of a hundred would go to look for it. 

God is testing your faith, your confidence, and our 
own. And, oh, that is worth so much more than all the 
wealth of the world! We have been invited to try for 
the great Prize. We said, Yes, Lord! Yes, Lord! Then 
He said, Will you be faithful under the conditions which 



I impose? I am watching to see how faithful you are 
every hour, every minute. I will protect you from the 
pitfalls in the way, as you strive to show forth My praises; 
I will uphold you in every trial. My dear children, I 
want to give to you a great blessing. You have all entered 
on a common basis. You would be very unequal in 
the race if I should take you according to your natural 
qualifications. I will judge according to your heart and 
how you do in little things. He that is faithful in the little 
things, in that which is least, will be faithful in that which 
is greatest. I will reckon the matter thus. That is a fair 
proposition, and exactly what the Lord says. God purposes 
to reward greatly all faithfulness. 

THE NATURE OF THE PRESENT TEST 

But there is another phase of the confidence. Bible 
students all over the world have been expecting certain 
things to occur; and we have been hoping that the Lord's 
time is near for the setting up of the Kingdom, the time 
for the fulfilment of the prayer, "Thy Kingdom come." 
We have been hoping for this; but if it should not come 
as soon as expected, we will still hold fast our confidence. 

There are not many people in the world who are hoping 
to die soon; and it is only our confidence that makes us 
have this hope. If we did not have a strong confidence in 
the outcome, then we would not have the desire to pass 
beyond the veil. We are speaking of our confidence to 
those whose eyes of understanding have been enlightened 
to see the lengths, the breadths, the heights and the depths 
of the love of our God, and to know something about the 
times and seasons of our Father's Plan. 

The Apostle tells us, "Ye, brethren, are not in darkness, 
that that Day should overtake you as a thief. Ye 
are all children of the light, children of the Day; we are 
not of the night, nor of darkness." (1 Thess. 5:4,5.) 
God has promised that He will give His true children the 
light at the time appointed, and that they shall have the 
joy of understanding His Plan at the appropriate season. 
"What more can He say 
Than to us He hath said!" 

The Editor has been rejoicing in these blessed experiences. 
Even if the time of our change should not come 
within ten years, what more should we ask? Are we not 
a blessed, happy people? Is not our God faithful? If 
any one knows anything better, let him take it. If any 
of you ever find anything better, we hope you will tell us. 
We know of nothing better nor half as good as what we 
have found in the Word of God. As the hymn expresses it: 
"It satisfies my longings 
As nothing else can do." 

Personally, we can say, If God has some further experiences 
for us, we are glad that He has; if we need 
further polishing, we hope He will give it to us. If it 
takes a year to get the polishing necessary, we desire to 
have this time allotted. Or if He desires to have us do 



some work in the polishing of others, and if we should 
not get into the Kingdom ourself, we would be glad to 
have His will done. 

We have sometimes asked, How many brethren would 
be willing to take a thousand dollars for what they know 
of the Truth? Not a hand was seen! Who would take 
ten thousand dollars? None! Who would take a million 

R5596 : page 377 

dollars? Who will take the whole world in exchange for 

what he knows about the Divine character and the Divine 

Plan? Nobody! Then we said, You are not a badly discontented 

crowd, dear friends. If you feel so rich that 

you would take nothing in exchange for your knowledge 

of God, then you feel just as rich as we do. 

CONFIDENCE LOST 

The Editor has known from earliest childhood what it 
is to call God his Heavenly Father; for he had Christian 
parents. And then, when fifteen years of age, we gave 
Him our heart, and reverenced and worshiped Him with 
what amount of knowledge we had. Although indoctrinated 
along Calvinistic lines to believe that only the 
Elect would reach glory, and that all the non-elect would 
experience eternal torment, we were accustomed to think 
of ourself as one of the Elect, and to appreciate the Love 
of God, which had provided for the salvation of the Elect. 

A few years later, however, reason began to assert 
itself over superstition. We inquired of ourself, Where is 
this Hell which you preach? What do you really know 
about it? Confessing our own ignorance, we went to our 
teachers and Elders; but to our amazement we found that 
they knew no more about it than ourself. Then we stopped 
preaching and began to think and to examine the creeds. 
We found that the difference between them was trivial. 
All had the one foundation of Heavenly salvation for the 
few and eternal woe for the thousands of millions. 

The more we investigated, the more sure we felt that 
a great mistake had been made; that a real God could not 
have made such an arrangement as our creeds declared. 
We threw them all away; and thinking that the Bible was 
the basis for them all, we threw the Bible after them. 

SOUL-HUNGER FOR GOD 

But having once known our Heavenly Father, we could 
find no rest without Him. Our soul hungered for His 
love and care. We still held to the great fact that our 
Universe had an intelligent, personal Creator; for His 
Wisdom and Power were before us on every starry night. 
The more we studied anatomy, the more thoroughly we 
became convinced that all humanity, yea, every creature, 
is "fearfully and wonderfully made," and that the eye, the 



R5596 : page 378 

ear, the nerves, the power to move in response to mere 
thinking, could not have come by chance, could not have 
been evolved by a nature god. We worshiped the God of 
Wisdom and Power, and sought to know more of Him, 
confident that we should find Him good. 

Left to the resources of our own brain, we reasoned, 
Could others and ourself possess as the gifts of our 
Creator the qualities of justice and love, which we esteem 
to be the very highest of our faculties, and yet the Creator 
Himself be devoid of these attributes? Our mind 
answered, Surely He who formed the eye to see and the 
ear to hear and who gave humanity the qualities of justice 
and love must possess these qualities in infinite measure. 

Thus with the eyes of our understanding we beheld 
the great God of the Universe, infinite in Wisdom, Justice, 
Love and Power. Again we worshiped Him, rejoiced that 
we could have confidence in our God and realize that He 
had made neither the earth nor the race of mankind in 
vain, but that He had some wise, just, loving purpose in 
connection with our creation. 

CONFIDENCE REGAINED 

Our next thought was, Would not a just and loving 
God be pleased to make known His purposes to those of 
His creatures who desire to do His will? Would He be 
ashamed of His purposes? Would He ignore the qualities 
of mind which He has given us? Again our mind 
answered, You may confidently seek God's Message to 
humanity. Thinking that we had already examined the 
Bible sufficiently, we turned our attention to heathen religions, 
only to find them less rational in some respects, 
though less fiendish, than our own creeds. Evidently the 
most intelligent peoples have been the most thoroughly 
seduced by Satan and his doctrines of demons, into believing 
the most horrible things respecting the Creator and 
His purposes toward His human creatures. 

Finally, we resolved to begin anew the study of the 
Bible, first assuring ourself that our colored creed-spectacles 
were thoroughly broken and our mind entirely untrammeled. 
Gradually the Lord led us to clearer and yet 
clearer light upon His Word, until we found that the basis 
of all our difficulty lay in the fact that we had followed 
Satan's lie told to Mother Eve in Eden— "Ye shall not 
surely die." From that time onward the entire Bible 
became illuminated, grand, beautiful, harmonious; and 
now it stands pre-eminent before our mind as God's Word! 

No tongue or pen can tell the peace, the joy and the 
blessing which a clear knowledge of the true God has 
brought into our heart and life. The Story of God's 
Wisdom, Justice, Power and Love fully satisfies the cravings 
of both our head and our heart. We are seeking no 
further. There is nothing more to be desired than to get 
this wonderful Story more clearly before our mind, and 



to appreciate more and more the Divine character as 
illustrated by the great Divine Plan of the Ages, which 
our Heavenly Father is gradually outworking for the 
blessing, first of the Church, and afterwards of all the 
families of the earth. 



R5596 : page 378 

SAVIOR OF THE WORLD 

--DECEMBER 27.-2 CORINTHIANS 5:14-21.- 

"Far be it from me to glory, save in the Cross 
of our Lord Jesus Christ."— Galatians 6: 14. R.V. 

TODAY'S Bible Study reminds us afresh of 

the fact that Jesus is not merely the Savior 

of the Church, but that He is also the 

Savior of the world. In the past, Bible 

students have overlooked this great truth, 

to their confusion. Now we see that God 

has provided two distinctly different salvations 

—the one for the Church in the 

Gospel Age, and the other for the world 

in the Age to follow this— the period of 

Messiah's Kingdom. 

Not only do we see that there are two different salvations, 
but also that they are wholly different, totally 
different in kind. They are alike in some things, however. 
Both are salvations from sin and from its power 
and its penalty, the curse— sorrow, pain, crying, sighing, 
dying. Both are salvations to an everlasting happiness. 
But there the similarity ends; for the Church is to be 
saved by a change of nature, while the world is to be 
saved without a change of nature— by a resurrection to 
the perfection of human nature. 

The Church's salvation, which is now in progress, has 
its beginning in the "hearing" of faith. The Message of 
God's grace is proclaimed here and there by stammering 
lips, which do not appeal to many of the great or wise or 
learned, but chiefly to the poor of this world, rich in faith. 
Such of these as are of humble mind, of "broken and contrite 
heart," are charmed with the Message of forgiveness 
of sins and reconciliation to God through the 
Redeemer. As they approach and seek to draw near to 
God, He through His providences draws near to them. 
If they continue to hunger and thirst after the Lord and 
His Message, He will satisfy them. He will show them 
His Covenant. He will enable them to understand the 
terms and conditions upon which they may be received 
back into fellowship with God as dear children— no 
longer aliens, strangers, foreigners— no longer condemned 
to death, but on the contrary justified to life. 

Here comes to them another test of their love of 



righteousness, their hunger for fellowship with God; for 
the requirements made of them seem at first to be exacting. 
These requirements, as stated by the Master Himself, 
are: "If any man will be My disciple, let him deny 
himself [renounce his own self-will], take up his cross 
[begin to live contrary to his own preferences in that he 
will do according to the Divine will, instead of according 
to his own will, where it crosses the Divine], and follow 
Me." Then he must continue to follow in the Master's 
footsteps— faithful unto death. 

Some, upon learning of these stringent conditions of 
discipleship, turn back and follow no longer in pursuit of 
the Lord's favor, forgiveness, reconciliation, blessing, 
begetting of the Holy Spirit. It is their option; and 
their course will decide their worthiness or unworthiness 
to be counted in with the special class whom the Lord is 
now selecting from the world to be the Church— "the 
Bride, the Lamb's Wife." 

THE BLESSINGS OF FAITH 

We are not to think of those who reject the Lord's 
cross and refuse to make a full consecration of their lives 
as being, therefore, condemned either to eternal torment 
or to anything else. The call of the Gospel Age is a 
favor and a privilege. Those who respond get a special 
blessing; those who reject miss that special blessing. They 
are not condemned (damned) in any sense of the word 
because of rejecting the privilege of walking in the 
Master's steps. On the contrary, as the Scriptures declare, 
they were already condemned— condemned in 
Adam, because members of his family, sharers of his 
weaknesses and unworthiness of life— sharers of his 
death sentence. They failed to escape from that condemnation, 
and thus they continue under it. 

R5597 : page 379 

It is of the Church class only that St. Peter writes, 
"Having escaped the corruption that is [still] in the 
world." (2 Peter 1:4.) As the Apostle Paul wrote, 
"We were children of wrath, even as others [still are]." 
(Ephesians 2:3.) By believing in Christ, by accepting 
His terms, by becoming His disciples through full consecration, 
we secure forgiveness for the sins that are 
past, and additionally secure relationship with the 
Heavenly Father through our Redeemer, our Advocate. 
Now His acceptance of us is by and through the begetting 
of the Holy Spirit, and this is granted to none others 
than those who come by His appointed way. 

Those begotten of the Holy Spirit are Scripturally 
styled "New Creatures in Christ." To them, "old things 
have passed away, and all things have become new." 
They have new aims, new objects, new hopes in life. To 
them, earthly things have no value, except as they can be 
used to glorify the Lord and to serve Him. Earthly 



learning, reputation, honor, titles, are valuable only as 
they can be used in some way to the glory of God— in 
the service of His Cause or for the benefit of fellowmen, 
especially those of the Household of Faith. To these, 
earthly prospects, political hopes and ambitions, etc., are 
nothing; for they have before their mind's eye Heavenly 
prospects, which include joint-heirship with Christ in His 
Messianic Kingdom of a thousand years and, after that, 
additional glory and honor in the ages to follow. 

But all these blessings, you note, are heard with the 
ear of faith, seen with the eye of faith. Thus the Lord 
selects and draws only those who can and do exercise 
faith; for "without faith it is impossible to please God." 

Those who either never hear, or hearing fail to respond, 
or responding go for a little way and then stop 

when they come to the crucial test of self-denial, self -renouncement 
—these lose all those spiritual blessings 
which the others, if faithful, will attain— Heavenly 
honor, Heavenly glory and immortality through the 
change of nature begun at the time of their begetting and 
to be consummated in their complete change in the First 
Resurrection. These the Apostle describes as "sown in 
weakness, raised in power; sown an animal body, raised 
a spiritual body; sown in dishonor, raised in glory." 

But even those who lose God's highest blessings and 
rewards will still have open before them great and wonderful 
favors of God, all of which were purchased by 
the Redeemer's precious blood— by His sacrifice for our 
sins, by His submission of His life for the forfeited life 
of Adam, for the recovery of Adam and all his race 
from the sentence, or the curse, of death. These blessings 
for the world, however, are not to be clearly seen or 
appreciated yet, except by those who are especially taught 
of God— those who have been begotten of the Holy Spirit 
and thus enabled to understand "the deep things of God." 
— 1 Corinthians 2:10. 

"THE COMMON SALVATION" 

The point we are here especially making is that God 
has provided a salvation for the world, as well as a salvation 
for the Church. The Bible tells us of the general 
facts of these salvations. It assures us that "God so 
loved the world [as well as the Church] that He gave 
His Only Begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in Him 
should not perish, but have everlasting life." (John 3:16.) 
We noticed at first that the penalty that is upon 
the world is not an eternal torment penalty, but a penalty 
of destruction. Christ died that the race might not 
perish, but in due time recover from the death penalty 
through faith in Christ and obedience to Him. 

Only the few can exercise the great faith that is 
necessary to a place in the Heavenly reward as members 
of His Bride class. By and by, when the knowledge of 
God shall fill the whole earth as the waters cover the 
great deep, all will understand; all will hear and be able 



to believe in God's goodness and in His wonderful arrangement 

on man's behalf. Those who will then believe, 

and who will then accept God's favor on its terms of 

loyalty and obedience to the best of their ability, will be 

blessed by Messiah's Kingdom. 

The blessing, as the Bible describes it, will be the 
rolling away of the curse and the rolling on, instead of 
the curse, "the blessing of the Lord, which maketh rich; 
and He addeth no sorrow with it." This work of rolling 
away the curse and rolling on the blessing is the appointed 
work of Messiah's Kingdom for a thousand years. 

We may be sure that by the time His Kingdom shall 
end, and shall be delivered up to the Father, our Lord 
will have fully accomplished all the great work which 
was committed to Him of the Father and for which He 
has shown His worthiness by His co-operation in the 
Father's Plan, to the extent of dying for the race. And 
this King of Glory, Messiah, will have for associates 
those who, like Himself, delight to do the Father's will— 
those who delight to walk in His steps. His perfection, 
His sacrifice, making good for their defects through the 
fall, enables them to become join t-sacrificers with Him. 
Of these the Apostle writes, "For if we suffer with Him, 
we shall also reign with Him; and if we be dead with 
Him, we shall also live with Him." 

NEW CREATURES IN CHRIST 

In today's Study St. Paul deals especially with the 
Church class. He explains to us that it is the love of 
Christ that has exercised the constraining, or drawing, 
power upon our hearts. The love of Christ is merely the 
love of the Father, but as men we would not be able to 
understand the Father's love. We are enabled to understand 
that love as it was manifested by our Redeemer; 
and thus through Him we look upward to the Father, 
and are able to appreciate something of the love that is 
beyond all human understanding. As St. Paul points 
out, Christ's love was manifested in that He died for all. 
When we say "for all," it means that the whole race was 
dead, that none had a right to everlasting life, and that 
none could commend themselves to God so as to be 
worthy of everlasting life. 

The Apostle explains that all who realize this matter 
fully, clearly, should indicate the fact by consecrating 
their lives to the Lord, to live unto Him, to know His 
will, to lay down their lives in the service of Him who 
died for them and who rose again. These have a special 
love for the Lord and they, properly, have a special love 
for each other. They are seeking to live, not after the 
flesh, but after the Spirit— in harmony with the begetting 
of the Holy Spirit, which they have received. 

Hence they more and more are thinking of Christ, 
not as the Man Jesus, but as the glorified Lord. So also 
they are learning to think of each other, not according 
to the flesh, but according to the heart; for "if any man 



be in Christ, he is a New Creature." To such, earthly 
things— earthly hopes, aims and prospects— have gone, 
and all things have become new. They have new hopes, 
new ambitions, new relationships. If faithful, they will 
receive the glorious things which God has in reservation 
for those who love Him. 

These things are of God. They are not of the 
Apostle's making up, nor of Jesus' origination. The 
Father Himself originated the whole Plan and arrangement. 
He has already reconciled us to Himself by Jesus 

R5597 : page 380 

Christ. We are fully given over to Him. We have no 

rebellion in our hearts. He has reconciled us to Himself 

through His Son; and God has nothing against us. 

"There is now no condemnation to those who are in 

Christ Jesus." Their sins are forgiven. Instead of condemning 

them, God justifies them. As St. Paul says, "It 

is God that justifies; who is he that condemns? It was 

Christ that died," giving full satisfaction for our sins. 

THE SERVICE OF RECONCILIATION 

These New Creatures, begotten of the Holy Spirit, 
are given a work to do. They are not only to have a 
work in the future as kings and priests, joint-heirs with 
Christ in the blessing of the world, but they have a work 
to do at the present time, a work for God. They are to 
be ambassadors for God. They are to be His representatives 
amongst men. They are to seek to tell the Message 
of God's Love to those who do not understand it. They 
are to tell the way of return to God to those who know 
not the way and to those who give evidence of a desire 
for reconciliation. They are thus ministers, or servants, 
of the way of reconciliation even in the present time. 
All those reconciled in the present time by faith and 
obedience are privileged thus to become members of the 
Bride class— joint-heirs with Christ in His Kingdom. 

In the 20th verse it will be noticed that the word 
"you" is in italics, indicating that it is not in the original. 
The passage does not read properly with the word 
"you." It should be omitted. God is not beseeching the 
Church through the Church, or through each other, to 
be reconciled; for all of the Church are reconciled. 

The Apostle is telling us that God through us is beseeching 
or urging mankind— all who have the hearing 
ear— to be reconciled to Him, telling them that He is 
willing to be reconciled to them, and explaining the basis 
of this reconciliation; namely, that Christ took the sinner's 
place, that He personally knew no sin, but was 
holy, harmless, separate from sinners, and that those who 
receive this Message may have the privilege of coming 
into the righteous condition acceptable to God, and thus 
of being inducted into the Bride class, who will complete 
the Royal Priesthood beyond the Veil, and for a thousand 



years have the glorious work of blessing all the families 
of the earth. 



R5598 : page 380 

ISRAEL'S EXPERIENCES TYPICAL, ALLEGORICAL 

--JANUARY 3.-JUDGES 2:1-19.- 

NATURAL ISRAEL'S ENEMIES-SPIRITUAL ISRAEL'S ENEMIES- 
NATURAL ISRAEL'S JUDGES OR DELIVERERS-SPIRITUAL ISRAEL'S 
REFORMERS AND HELPERS -TYPICAL IDOLATRIES AND 
THEIR ANTITYPES-ISRAEL'S LAST DELIVERANCE NOW DUE- 
GENTILE TIMES HAVE END ED-PALESTINE SOON WILL 
BE POSSESSED BY ABRAHAM AND HIS NATURAL SEED UNDER THE 
SUPERVISION OF MESSIAH AND HIS SPIRITUAL BRIDE, THE CHURCH. 

"I will heal their backsliding, I 
will love them freely."— Hosea 14:4. 

TODAY'S Study tells us of the death of 

Joshua, who became the leader of the Israelites 

at the death of Moses. He was 

a worthy example of faithfulness to God 

amongst his people. Under Divine direction 

he divided the land of Palestine 

amongst the ten tribes of Israel, giving each 

his portion with the understanding that the 

portion was the gift of the Lord, and that 

the more faith possessed the more quickly 

would the tribe enter into its inheritance. 

The Israelites were enjoined by the Lord through an 
angel, especially sent as God's representative, that they 
should speedily take possession of the land, driving out 
their enemies, destroying their idols and altars of worship, 
and thus conquering the entire country for themselves 
as God's people and ridding themselves and their 
children of all idolatrous temptation. But instead of 
doing this, they made leagues with the various heathen 
peoples inhabiting the land, and brought themselves into 
more or less of a friendly relationship. This disobedience 
to Divine command proved to be a serious snare. 

In studying the history of Israel, we are to remember 
that the Apostle tells us those things were allegorical. 
(1 Corinthians 10:11.) They were true, they were real 
occurrences; but their chief object and purpose, from 
God's standpoint, was to illustrate certain great truths 
for Spiritual Israel, coming afterwards— the Gospel 
Church. Thus, for instance, when the Christian enters 
upon his new life as a result of his consecration to God, 
it corresponds to crossing Jordan— dying to old interests 
and entering into the new inheritance. Under the leadership 
of Jesus, our Joshua, we enter into new life full 
of courage and faith. Victories result. 



Then we learn that the New Creature is to conquer 
the perverted appetites of his own flesh, which correspond 
to the idolatrous peoples who resided in Canaan. It is 
the duty of the New Creature to drive out these earthly 
hopes, ambitions, weaknesses, perversions, and oppositions 
to the Lord and His righteousness. If the work 
of exterminating were carried on thoroughly, the result 
would be a ripened character, strong in the Lord, full 
of faith, obedience, joy, peace and blessing. 

However, like the Israelites of old, in too many cases 
the Lord's people make a truce with their own fleshly 
weaknesses. They fail to drive these out, and fail to 
overthrow the altars of passion, avarice, etc. These 
weaknesses and depravities of the flesh for a time cower 
before the new nature, entreating mercy, patience and 
a measure of gratification. But so surely as these are 
granted, the result is that the passions and weaknesses 
become stronger and stronger and the New Creature is 
worsted in the battle, until he must cry to the Lord for 
deliverance, lest he perish before the onslaught of his 
own passions and desires. Thus the lives of many 
Christian people are a succession of battlings and defeats 
—captivities. The battle should have been fought 
out at first. The will should have been fixed firmly on the 
side of righteousness, truth, obedience to God. 

It is difficult to determine how much all of the Lord's 
people suffer as a result of not being firm enough, rigorous 
enough, in their dealings with their own flesh, especially 
at the beginning of their Christian experiences. 
The only remedy is to cry unto the Lord as the Israelites 
did when they found themselves hard pressed. As the 
Lord delivered them, so He is willing to deliver all of 
His Spiritual Israelites. 

However, it is certainly a shame for Christians that 
their defeats are so numerous, as it was a shame to the 
Israelites that, during the period of the Judges, they were 
eighteen times oppressed by their enemies— slaves where 
they should have been masters. The one great lesson of 
all this to the Natural Israelites and to the Spiritual 
Israelites is the lesson of God's mercy, as expressed in 
our text. The Lord is very gracious, willing to forgive 
our trespasses and to assist us when we realize our 

R5598 : page 381 

wrong condition and appeal for help. "I will heal their 
backsliding, I will love them freely." 

JOSHUA'S WISE EXHORTATION 

The Book of Joshua closes with the account of his 
death, and the Book of Judges begins with incidents 
covering the same period. When Joshua realized that 
his work was done and that he was about to be gathered 
to his fathers— to sleep with his fathers in death— he 
called the Israelites, and reminded them of the Lord's 



mercies and manifest favors toward them in bringing 
them thus far and finally giving to each tribe the allotment 
of its inheritance in the Promised Land. Then 
he warned them respecting the dangers of the situation, 
the necessity for being separate from the people of the 
land— Gentiles; otherwise the tendency might be toward 
idolatry. He urged upon all a full settlement of the 
mind, the will, on the side of the Lord and against all 
the heathen religions. It was then that he took his stand 
and announced, "Choose ye this day whom ye will serve; 
as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord." The 
others joined with him in the same resolve. 

Our lesson tells us that all the days of Joshua, and 
the days of the others of the judges who outlived Joshua, 
things went well with the Israelites. They had the Lord's 
blessing and were prosperous. These leaders had in mind 
the Lord's wonderful dealings, and realized the importance 
of being on the Lord's side, if they would have 
His blessing. The idolatries that came in were subsequent. 

The true God has always prohibited idols, while the 
false gods have usually been represented by idols. The 
idols, according to human reasoning, would appear to 
be an excellent way of keeping religion before the mind; 
but it was not God's way, and hence was not advantageous. 
As the Israelites noted the idolatrous worship 
of their neighbors, they doubtless felt that the latter were 
the more religious, because of this outward demonstration. 

Moreover, in connection with the heathen forms of 
worship were various licentious practises, which to some 
extent would draw from curiosity and, through the weaknesses 
of the flesh, appeal to the Israelites. The true 
God, on the contrary, had instituted in their midst a 
worship which was pure in itself, in every way condemning 
sin, pointing out the necessity for its cancelation and 
the need for drawing near to God in the way of His 
appointment. In a word, the true religion appealed to 
the highest and noblest sentiments, while the false religions 
of the Canaanites appealed to the baser passions, 
combining a form of godliness with gratification of the 
flesh, dancings and various saturnalia. 

But as for the Christian who condemns the Israelites 
very severely for wandering off, time and again, into 
the idolatries of his heathen neighbors and requiring to 
be punished of the Lord that he might turn again and 
seek the Lord in the right way— let such Christian remember 
the antitype— how forms of godliness are 
inclined to take the place of true heart-worship, reverence; 
and how the weaknesses of the flesh are inclined 
to assert themselves, to justify themselves and, if possible, 
to make themselves appear to be in accordance with 
the Divine will. Let them remember that many today 
worship the golden calf more than they worship God, 
requiring chastisements time and again to correct them, 
to awaken them to their real condition. Let them remember, 
too, that the Christians have made idols equally 
as hideous as any made by the heathen— not idols of 



stone or wood or bronze, but more hideous misrepresentations 
of the Divine character— our printed creeds. 

Verse 17 and its connections seem to indicate that the 
record of our lesson covers a long period of centuries 
of Israel's experiences, under many judges. When they 
repented, the Lord raised up judges, or, as we say, deliverers, 
through whom their adversities would be corrected. 
Yet even these repeated experiences did not deeply 
enough impress the great lesson, so that they needed to 
learn their lessons over and over. When the judge 
would bring them back from their adversities, and 
they would have rest for some years during his lifetime, 
it was merely to fall away after his death. Nevertheless, 
the Lord's Covenant was with the nation. The 
centuries since have shown the persistency of God's mercy. 

GOD'S FAVOR RETURNING TO ISRAEL 

As we have previously pointed out, the Bible indicates 
very clearly that Israel's last great lesson of oppression 
under the Gentiles closed in 1914. The period of 
chastisement, twenty-five hundred and twenty years long, 
began where the crown was taken from King Zedekiah, 
B.C. 606. (Ezekiel 21:25-27.) They have not been an 
independent nation in all these twenty-five hundred and 
twenty years. As the Lord declared, Zedekiah was the 
last of the line of David who should reign until Messiah's 
Kingdom would be established. The end of Gentile 
Times, then, marks the beginning of Messiah's Kingdom. 
Everywhere we see manifestations that He as the 
great Judge is taking over the affairs of the world, and 
that Israel's final deliverance is at hand. 

Spiritual Israel must first be delivered by the glorious 
"change" of the First Resurrection. Thus the Spiritual 
Empire will first be established. Following that great 
event and the incidental Time of Trouble will come the 
exaltation of representatives of Natural Israel to be the 

R5599 : page 381 

earthly exponents of the Heavenly Kingdom. These will 
be the Ancient Worthies of the Hebrew people— Abraham, 
Isaac, Jacob and all the Prophets. Others of the 
Hebrew people, delivered from Gentile domination, will 
nevertheless get their blessing through their acceptance 
of the Kingdom arrangements, which includes the 
thought that their eyes of understanding will open and 
that they will recognize the great King. 

Thus it is written that they that pierced Him shall 
look upon Him and mourn because of a realization that 
they crucified the Prince of Life. Nevertheless they will 
have a great blessing, in proportion as they have been 
seeking conscientiously to serve God and the principles 
of His righteousness. Then the Lord will pour upon 
them the spirit of prayer and supplication, in connection 
with which they will have so much blessing. (Zechariah 12:10.) 



And this blessing of the Lord, coming upon 

Israel first, means also the blessing of all the world. 

All who realize the fulfilment of the Times of the 
Gentiles should be looking for and co-operating with the 
further steps of the Divine Plan. One of these is Israel's 
repossession of the control of Palestine, the inheritance 
of Abraham and his family. The time is ripe. It remains 
for Jews, who by God's favor have the wealth now, to 
use that wealth in the furtherance of the hope of Israel. 
But a failure on man's part to appreciate and use opportunities 
will not interfere with the Divine Plan. The 
hour of blessing is coming. Through some instrumentality 
Palestine will shortly pass into the possession of the Jews. 

Note the fact that promptly at the close of the Jewish 
year in September, Russia published her decree giving the 
Jews full religious liberty and privileges as citizens. Germany 
quickly followed. Great Britain also honored the 
Jews. Legally, therefore, the Jew today— since the close 
of Gentile Times— is accorded the same liberties as other 
people. He is no longer "trodden down of the Gentiles." 



R5599 : page 382 

"DRINK YE ALL OF IT" 

"Are ye able to drink of the cup that 
I shall drink of? "-Matthew 20:22. 

THE incident which is narrated in our context 
occurred just previous to our Lord's 
death. He had gone up to Jerusalem. He 
had made the triumphal entry into the city. 
Now He was waiting for the grand climax 
of His experiences. He had forewarned 
His disciples and had explained to them 
that the chief priests would deliver Him 
up to be crucified. 

But the Apostles in general did not understand 
the Lord's words. On many occasions His 
words had been figurative. So now they wondered what 
He meant. They did not know what kind of figure of 
speech this could be. They thought that He was near 
to sitting on His Throne, and that they would be with 
Him. So thoroughly were they convinced that the establishment 
of the Kingdom was at hand that St. James 
and St. John— their mother acting as spokesman, advocate 
—had asked that when He came into His Kingdom 
they two might sit near Him, the one on His right hand, 
and the other on His left. They were expecting that 
in a day or two important events would take place which 
would bring them into the Kingdom. 

Our Lord's answer to this request was intended not 
only for the disciples there before Him, but undoubtedly 
for all His disciples throughout the Gospel Age, to set 



before them the conditions on which the Kingdom was 
to be attained. Our Lord stated the matter very plainly, 
asking James and John, "Are ye able to drink of the 
cup that I shall drink of, and to be baptized with the 
baptism that I am baptized with?" They did not understand 
these words in full, but perceived that it meant 
some kind of death. "Are you able?"— Are you willing? 
They replied that they were. 

The word able, while it contains the thought of force, 
strength, nevertheless expresses willingness; for it refers 
to the will. The thought is not, Are ye physically able?— 
but, Are ye mentally able? This thought would properly 
be represented by the word willing. Are your wills 
strong enough? The two disciples determined that they 
were. "Yes, Lord, we have a will to do the whole thing, 
whatever it may be." They were fully given up to the 
Lord, to do His will. They would be willing for anything. 
They had such appreciation of the Kingdom, and 
such confidence in the Lord that whatever He was about 
to do they were willing to do. 

OUR LORD'S REAL BAPTISM 

And so it is with us. Our wills are made up. "Are 
ye able?" Surely! There is not a doubt— nothing to 
interfere. That which the disciples could not understand, 
and which we could not have understood had we 
been in their places, we fully understand now, because 
we have the assistance of the Holy Spirit to guide and 
help us in the understanding of the deep things of God. 
We see that the Lord meant that He was immersed into 
death. At the beginning of His ministry, He gave up 
all of His earthly interests in every sense of the word. 
This was His sacrifice. It was symbolized by baptism 
into water, but it was really a baptism into death. He 
had been fulfilling that baptism for three and a half 
years; and the next day He would die, as He well knew. 
"I have a baptism to be baptized with, and how am I 
straitened until it be accomplished!"— Luke 12:50. 

The thought is, "I am feeling greatly straitened until 
that baptism be accomplished. It will be accomplished 
tomorrow. I find that connected with that death there 
are difficulties that I had not expected. I am anxiously 
waiting for tomorrow, for the completion of My sacrificial 
death." 

Our Lord had not supposed that His consecration to 
death would mean a death of such serious indignity, humiliation 
and misrepresentation of His character— an 
ignominious death. He had known that He was to be 
crucified, had told His disciples so and was entirely willing 
thus to die. But as He got down to the core of the 
matter, He saw that the arrangements were that He was 
to die the death of a criminal. It was an entirely different 
matter to be crucified as a criminal. Because He 
was a good man, it was most trying to Him to be arrested 
as a blasphemer— one guilty of the worst crime 



known to the Jews. To be condemned on the charge of 
blasphemy and to be led by His own countrymen to be 
put to death, when He was really giving up all that He 
had for the service of God, was a terrible ordeal for 
Him— much more of a test for Him than it would have 
been for one who had been tainted with sin, and who 
was less sensitive because of his wrong life. Jesus 
seems frequently to have referred to this cup, as if He 
instinctively shrank from the experience. 

THE CHURCH'S CUP OF EXPERIENCE 

In a broad sense, the figurative expression, cup of 
experience, might be used in referring to every affair of 
our lives. But this is apparently not the way in which 
Jesus was using this word at this time. He used it in 
respect to something in the future. "Are ye able to drink 
of the cup that I shall drink of?"— in the future— that 
cup which I shall drink within the next few hours. That 
cup was a terrible draft to Him— not the dying, not the 
cross. He had not asked that He might be spared the 
dying, that He might avoid death. But He had asked 
that this bitter cup of ignominy, that He should be put 
to death as a blasphemer, might be set aside; and yet 
He said, "The cup which My Father hath poured for 
Me, shall I not drink it?" After He had cried out with 
strong cryings to God and had received the assurances 
of God's favor, He was then ready to drink of this cup. 

So it is with the Lord's followers. It is hard that 
our good should be evil spoken of, that we should be 
declared to be poisonous to every religious sentiment. 
This is a part of our experience. To have people separate 
us from their company would be a trifling thing. 
To die in some respectable way would be a small matter. 
But to be put into a false light, to have our good made out 
to be evil, these are trying experiences. Our attitude is 
to be the same as that of our Master, "The cup that 
our Lord shall pour, shall we not drink it?" We have the 
word of the Apostle that all things shall work for good 
to those who love God, to the called according to His 
purpose. With these thoughts before our minds, we are 
to be of good courage and to accept the cup of experience 
which the Lord has for us. We know not how 
near that cup may be. Perhaps with the Church it is 
the same as with Himself. Perhaps there will be a 
measure of acknowledgment that we are right about the 
Divine Plan. Then through the machinations of the 
church systems we may be delivered up— possibly to death. 

THE TEST NOW UPON THE CHURCH 

The disciples at the First Advent did not realize how 
near they were to the experiences of Gethsemane and 
Calvary. It may be so with us now, for aught we know. 
Therefore we realize the importance of our lives being 
such as the Lord has marked out for us. Watch ye, 



lest ye fall in the hour of temptation! The hour of 
temptation was upon them; therefore it was important 

R5599 : page 383 

that they keep themselves in the right attitude. And 
so should we do now, when we believe the Age is closing 
There may be peculiar tests, which the Lord may not 
wish us to know— they would not be such tests if we 
knew of them in advance. Therefore we should be on 
guard that we may be found loyal and faithful, and that 
we may demonstrate our faithfulness unto death in the 
way that the Lord has prepared for us. 

It would appear as though the present time may be 
one in which the Lord is giving His people a test of a 
new kind. Even though we see the Gentile nations in 
process of disintegration, there is an opportunity for 
some to doubt the whole matter and to say, "There have 
been wars before, and I suppose there will be wars yet! 
This is not the end of the Gentile Times, as I thought 
it would be." Such people, if they had been engaged 
in the Lord's service, might leave it and go into worldly 
society, or become engrossed in business, or what not. 
This is most particularly the very time in which such 
testings might come. Therefore we should be on our 
guard lest any spirit of doubt come upon us. "Watch 
and pray, lest ye enter into temptation." 



