





COVER SUBJECT
Immigration—Dreams and Realities



In Search of a Better Life

GEORGE felt desperate. He could not get enough food for his family. At the same time, neighbors were getting sick, and some appeared to be starving. A few hundred miles to the south, however, lay a richer country. ‘I’ll move abroad, find a job, and then have my family join me,’ he thought.
Patricia also dreamed of a new life abroad. She had no work and few opportunities. She and her boyfriend decided to travel from Nigeria to Algeria, on their way to Spain, unaware of how harsh the journey across the Sahara Desert would be. “I was pregnant,” she said, “and I was determined to give my child a better life.”
Rachel wanted a new start in Europe. She had lost her job in the Philippines, and relatives assured her that domestic work was plentiful abroad. So she borrowed money for the plane fare and said farewell to her husband and daughter, promising them, “We won’t be separated for long.”
It is estimated that more than 200 million people like George, Patricia, and Rachel have moved abroad in recent decades. Although some have fled from wars, natural disasters, or persecution, most have moved for economic reasons. What problems have migrants faced in their new land? Do all find the better life they seek? How do children fare when a parent leaves in search of a better income? Consider the following answers to these questions.
AN ANCIENT MIGRANT
  “Migration . . . is the oldest action against poverty,” wrote economist J. K. Galbraith. Such action was taken by the patriarch Jacob, the founding father of the nation of Israel. Because of a famine in Canaan, Jacob and his extended family of nearly 70 individuals moved to Egypt, where they stayed for a very long time. (Genesis 42:1-5; 45:9-11; 46:26, 27) In fact, Jacob died there, and his descendants remained in Egypt for about 200 years before returning to Canaan.





Getting There and Getting Established

The first challenge of moving abroad is often the journey itself. George, mentioned in the first article, traveled hundreds of miles (km) with little food. “The journey was a nightmare,” he recalls. Many immigrants never even arrive at their destination.
Patricia’s goal was to reach Spain. She traveled in an open truck across the Sahara Desert. “The journey from Nigeria to Algeria took us a week, and 25 people were crammed into the truck. En route, we saw many corpses, as well as people just wandering about in the desert waiting to die. Apparently, some truck drivers heartlessly abandon passengers along the way.”
Unlike George and Patricia, Rachel was able to fly to Europe, where domestic work awaited her. But she never imagined how much she would miss her two-year-old daughter. “Every time I saw a mother caring for her young child, I felt sick inside,” she recalls.
George struggled to adapt to his new country. Months passed before he could send money home. “Many nights, I cried because of loneliness and frustration,” he admits.
After several months in Algeria, Patricia reached the Moroccan border. “There,” she says, “I gave birth to my baby daughter. I had to hide from traffickers who abduct migrant women and force them into prostitution. Finally, I got enough money for the risky sea crossing to Spain. The boat was in bad shape and ill-equipped for the large number of passengers. We had to bail water out of the boat with our shoes! When we beached at Spain, I did not have the strength to walk ashore.”
Of course, would-be migrants should take into account more than the possible risks associated with travel. They should also consider potential language and cultural barriers in the new land, as well as the cost and legal complications of trying to become citizens or permanent residents there. Those who fail to obtain legal status often find it hard to obtain good employment, quality housing, education, or health care. They may also find it difficult to obtain a driver’s license or a bank account. And all too often, undocumented immigrants are exploited, perhaps as a source of cheap labor.
Another factor to consider is money itself. Really, how secure is it? The Bible gives this sound advice: “Be wise enough not to wear yourself out trying to get rich. Your money can be gone in a flash, as if it had grown wings and flown away like an eagle.” (Proverbs 23:4, 5, Good News Translation) Keep in mind, too, that our greatest needs are for things that money cannot buy—namely, love, emotional security, and family unity. How sad when parents allow the desire for money to override their love for each other or any “natural affection” they have for their children!—2 Timothy 3:1-3.
As humans, we also have a spiritual need. (Matthew 5:3) Hence, responsible parents do everything in their power to fulfill their God-given responsibility to teach their children about God, his purpose, and his standards.—Ephesians 6:4.
“WE WISH THEY HAD MADE A DIFFERENT DECISION”
  “The eldest of three girls, I was nine years old when Mother left for Europe,” says Airen, who lived in the Philippines. “She promised us better food, better schooling, and a better home. I still remember the day she left. She hugged me and told me to take care of my sisters, Rhea and Shullamite. I cried for a long time.
  “Four years later, Father left to join Mother. When he was with us, I tried to follow him wherever he went. When he said good-bye, my sisters and I clung to him until he boarded the bus. Once more I wept inconsolably for a long time.”
  Shullamite, the youngest of the three girls, recalls: “When Airen was nine years old, she became my mother, so to speak. I took my problems to her, and she taught me how to wash my clothes, make my bed, and so on. When our parents phoned us, I sometimes tried to explain my feelings to them, but I couldn’t express myself clearly. I don’t think they always understood.
  “People often asked me if I missed my parents. ‘Well, yes,’ I would reply. But quite frankly, I didn’t really remember my mother. She left when I was four, and I got used to being without her.”
  “When I was 16,” says Airen, “my sisters and I finally set off to be reunited with our parents. I felt so excited! But when we arrived, I found that we had grown apart from them.”
  Rhea adds: “I kept my problems to myself. I was timid by nature and found it hard to show affection. In the Philippines, we lived with our uncle and aunt, who had three children of their own. Although our relatives cared for us, they were not like real parents.”





  In conclusion, Airen states: “We did not suffer when we were a poor family—we never went hungry. But my sisters and I did suffer when we were left behind. Our family has been reunited for nearly five years now, but the years of separation have left their mark. We know that our parents love us, but we wish they had made a different decision.”





A United Family—More Important Than Money

The stories of immigrants may vary, but many have a common thread, as can be seen in the examples of George, Rachel, and Patricia, mentioned earlier in this series of articles. The family suffers when a parent departs or a spouse leaves his or her mate, and years may go by before the family is reunited. In the case of George’s family, that took over four years.





Rachel finally flew back to the Philippines to get her daughter after being separated from her for nearly five years. Patricia reached Spain with her baby daughter in her arms. “She is all the family I have, so I try to take good care of her,” Patricia says.
Many immigrants stick it out in their new country despite loneliness, economic setbacks, and a prolonged separation from their family. They have invested so much in the move that when things do not work out, few have the courage to cut their losses and go home to face possible disgrace and humiliation.
One who did have such courage was Allan, from the Philippines. He found a good job in Spain, but 18 months later, he returned home. “I missed my wife and my young daughter too much,” he says. “I decided I would never work abroad again unless we could emigrate as a family. And this is what we eventually did. Family is far more important than money.”
Something else is also more important than money, as Patricia discovered. She arrived in Spain with a copy of the “New Testament,” or Christian Greek Scriptures. “I viewed the book as a charm,” she said. “Then I came in contact with a woman who was one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Previously, I was not interested in talking to representatives of this religion. So I asked the Witness many questions in order to expose her beliefs as wrong. But, contrary to what I thought, she was able to defend her beliefs and answer my questions right from the Bible.”
What Patricia learned taught her that having lasting happiness and a sure hope for the future depend not on location or money but on having insight into God and his purpose for us. (John 17:3) Among other things, Patricia learned that the true God has a name—Jehovah. (Psalm 83:18) She also read in the Bible that God will soon eliminate all poverty by means of his Kingdom government in the hands of Jesus Christ. (Daniel 7:13, 14) “[Jesus] will deliver the poor one crying for help, also the afflicted one and whoever has no helper. From oppression and from violence he will redeem their soul,” says Psalm 72:12, 14.
Why not take the time to examine the Bible? This book of divine wisdom can help you set sound priorities, make wise decisions, and endure any present trials with joy and hope.—Proverbs 2:6-9, 20, 21.



