





THE BIBLE’S VIEWPOINT
The Needy



Does God care about the needy?

“Let your manner of life be free of the love of money . . . For [God] has said: ‘I will by no means leave you nor by any means forsake you.’”—Hebrews 13:5.

HOW GOD SHOWS HIS CARE
 When a worshipper of Jehovah God comes into hard times, God’s care may be evident in various ways. One of those ways is the loving support rendered by fellow Christians.a Says James 1:27: “The form of worship that is clean and undefiled from the standpoint of our God and Father is this: to look after orphans and widows in their tribulation.”
The early Christians came to the aid of one another. For instance, when it was foretold that a famine would severely affect the land of Judea, the Christians in the Syrian city of Antioch determined “to send a relief ministration to the brothers dwelling in Judea.” (Acts 11:28-30) As a result, their needy fellow Christians received essential provisions. This voluntary giving demonstrated Christian love in action.—1 John 3:18.



How can the needy benefit themselves?

“I, Jehovah, am your God, the One teaching you to benefit yourself.”—Isaiah 48:17, 18.

GOD HELPS US TO HELP OURSELVES
 As millions of people have discovered, the wisdom found in the Bible is practical and is unsurpassed. Proverbs 2:6, 7 says: “Jehovah himself gives wisdom; out of his mouth there are knowledge and discernment. And for the upright ones he will treasure up practical wisdom.” When people tap into that wisdom, they benefit themselves.
For example, they avoid harmful and costly habits, such as drug or alcohol abuse. (2 Corinthians 7:1) They also become honest and more conscientious and responsible, thus improving their job prospects or making themselves even more valued as employees. Says Ephesians 4:28: “Let the stealer steal no more, but rather let him do hard work, . . . that he may have something to distribute to someone in need.”



Is there evidence that the Bible’s wisdom helps the needy?

“God’s wisdom is proved right by its results.”—Matthew 11:19, The New English Bible.

RESULTS THAT SPEAK FOR THEMSELVES
 Wilson, a temporary worker who lives in Ghana, was about to finish his term of employment. On his last day, while washing the managing director’s car, Wilson found money in the trunk. His supervisor told him to keep the money. But Wilson, who is one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, refused to steal. Instead, he returned the money to its owner. Rather than being laid off, Wilson received full-time employment and was later made a senior officer.
In Europe, Géraldine lost her job because her employer disliked Jehovah’s Witnesses. The employer’s mother, however, told her daughter that she had made a big mistake. She said, “If you want an employee who is trustworthy and will take her job seriously, you could not find a better worker than one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.” Her daughter did research on the Witnesses, and Géraldine got her job back.
When Sarah, a single mom in South Africa, went through hard times, she experienced Christian love in action when members of her congregation gave her family needed food and transportation. Later, her children said, “We have many parents in the congregation.”
Numerous similar experiences could be related. These call to mind Proverbs 1:33, which reads: “As for the one listening to me [Jehovah], he will reside in security.” How true that is!



In some lands, the government provides welfare for the needy. Where this is not available, the responsibility falls primarily on the needy ones’ relatives.—1 Timothy 5:3, 4, 16.

