Catching Animals in East Africa
By “Awake!” correspondent in Kenya
ARE you a person who enjoys visiting the zoo or an animal park? And do you delight to see animals from faraway places and perhaps dream of the day when you will be able to see them in their natural habitat? If so, we invite you to come along on a safari in East Africa and to share the wild and dangerous experience of catching some of the animals that now live in the many parks and zoos around the world.
We are fortunate to be able to go along with a government-authorized catcher who, on this occasion, has a comparatively “small” order to fill: 12 elephants, 5 rhinos, 30 zebras, 15 wildebeests, 27 giraffes and several other plains animals. The trip into this region will consume about three months, and so, obviously, a great deal of preparation is made to ensure its success.
During this time we shall be “living in the rough,” so to speak, and, hence, adequate camping equipment is needed, plus sufficient food supplies, cooking equipment, first-aid kits and, of course, spare parts for our Land Rovers and trucks. These include springs, axles and many tires. Also, we must be sure to have the proper clothing: The usual lightweight safari suits (khaki, to blend in with the surroundings), a sweater for the evenings (which can be cool even in Africa), and boots to protect our feet from snakes, soldier ants and various other dudus (insects) that seem to take great delight in biting us. Too, a suitable hat to protect one from the blazing African sun is necessary.
Having made all this necessary preparation for ourselves and the crew, we must not forget the animals that we hope to catch. Suitable pens must be on hand to receive the animals as they are caught, and, of course, once caught, food and water must be provided for them.
Prior to the start of our safari, our host will have been “spotting” the game from his light aircraft, so we have a good chance of finding the animals we want.
Traveling to the Catching Area
Our party of twenty consists of mechanics, those who will feed and care for the animals, a catching crew of eight, and ourselves. We are quite a sight as we rattle and bump over the varied terrain. Some of the roads we travel on are quite satisfactory, but at other times the trail appears more like a dried-up riverbed than a road.
It is the dry season, and, as a result, our caravan raises a huge dust cloud stretching far out behind us. How grateful we are at the end of each day to wash away the dust that collects in eyes, ears and nose! How pleasant, too, to stroll around our campfire in the evening or just to sit quietly after being jostled and rolled around all day in our vehicles!
One of the most common noises in the plains of East Africa is a weird whistling. For a stranger it is an eerie sound, but our host explains that it is caused by the wind blowing through seed pods of the thorn tree that have been hollowed out by insects. This, along with the chirping of the crickets and locusts, plus the cough of the leopard and the growling of the lion, gives us memories of our trip that are unforgettable.
Eventually we reach the place where we will make a semipermanent camp and where the animals, as they are caught, will be penned. They must be gradually weaned onto domestic food in preparation for new homes in the many zoos far from their native Africa.
The Catch
Daily the sight and sound of animals around the camp increase as the pens are gradually filled with prize catches. Since the actual catching of the animals can be very dangerous, no inexperienced persons may go along. But they will enjoy hearing the many experiences and hazards as we relate them around the camp.
Can you imagine yourself chasing after a rhino, or a fleet-footed wildebeest, racing over unknown ground, twisting, turning, dodging the many bushes and anthills (which, if we hit them, could mean disaster), trying to throw the loop or lasso around the neck of the quarry? Once it has been caught by the neck, the catchers must quickly rope the feet of the animal and loosen the neck rope. Otherwise it may cause damage and even blindness in some animals. Or how would you like to try your hand at catching a zebra or a giraffe by the tail as he speeds along?
Careful selection of the animals that are to be caught is made, to see that they are neither too old nor too young. Young ones require too much care, and an old animal never adapts to the new life and diet. So half-grown animals are the ones we are after. Opinions differ as to the most dangerous “catch.” Some consider the rhino to be the worst; others, the elephant, and most will agree that the buffalo is a formidable adversary​—treacherous and unpredictable. In the opinion of our host the elephant is the most hazardous, as making the catch entails separating our choice from the herd​—not an easy assignment when the youngsters are watched over very carefully by many “aunties,” as well as their mothers.
The day arrives when our order is complete and we can begin our return journey. To most inexperienced people this would appear to be the end of the story. But for the animals it is just the beginning.
Adapting to a New Way of Life
For the next thirteen weeks our animals will need special attention as we slowly wean them to domestic foods such as lucerne, oats and barley. During this time they must get used to the small cages that will be used to ship them to their varied destinations. This is achieved by coaxing them nearer and nearer to the cages with their food until eventually the animals move in and out of them quite freely and unafraid. By the end of the quarantine and acclimatization period the animals seem to be content with their new way of life and are ready to be transported to their new home, where they will bring happiness and delight to young and old, perhaps including you!
Persons who participate in a safari like this can all the more appreciate what a great deal is involved in bringing these wonderful animals alive to their home countries. While we are grateful to those who enabled us to see such wonders, our main gratitude goes to the One who “created all things,” the One who provided man with such an interesting and delightful home, this wonderful planet earth with its seemingly endless variety of animal life.​—Rev. 4:11.
We look forward, too, to the time when it will no longer be necessary to keep such animals in cages in order to see them at close range. God’s Word the Bible tells us that the time will come when it will be possible to walk unafraid among them and to take even greater pleasure in these creatures, the works of a loving Creator.

