




Close-up picture of the stage and the banner above it



1922​—One Hundred Years Ago

“GOD . . . giveth us . . . victory through . . . Jesus Christ.” (1 Cor. 15:57, King James Version) These words, chosen as the yeartext for 1922, assured the Bible Students that their faithfulness would be rewarded. During that year, Jehovah did reward these zealous preachers. He blessed them as they started to print and bind their own books and to use the radio to spread Kingdom truths. Then later in 1922, it was clear once again that Jehovah was blessing his people. The Bible Students were able to gather at a landmark convention in Cedar Point, Ohio, U.S.A. That convention has influenced the course of Jehovah’s organization down to this day.



“A BREATH-TAKING IDEA”

Demand for literature increased as the preaching work expanded. The brothers at Brooklyn Bethel were producing magazines, but they still depended on commercial firms for hardcover books. After a book shortage lasted for months and began to hinder the preaching work, Brother Rutherford asked Robert Martin, the factory manager, about the possibility of producing books.




The Concord Street factory in Brooklyn, New York



“It was a breath-taking idea,” recalled Brother Martin, “because it meant the opening of a complete typesetting, electroplating, printing, and binding plant.” The brothers leased space at 18 Concord Street in Brooklyn and obtained the needed equipment.
Not everyone was happy about this new development. The president of a company that had been producing our books visited the new facility. He remarked: “Here you are with a first-class printing establishment on your hands, and nobody around the place that knows a thing about what to do with it. In six months the whole thing will be a lot of junk.”
“That sounded logical enough,” Brother Martin reported, “but it left out the Lord; and he has always been with us.” Brother Martin was right. Soon the new bindery was producing 2,000 books per day.




Operators standing by their linotype machines on the factory floor






REACHING THOUSANDS BY RADIO

In addition to printing some of their own books, Jehovah’s people began using a new method of spreading the good news​—radio broadcasting. On Sunday afternoon, February 26, 1922, Brother Rutherford spoke on the radio for the first time. He delivered the talk “Millions Now Living Will Never Die” on radio station KOG in Los Angeles, California, U.S.A.
An estimated 25,000 heard the program. Some of them sent letters expressing appreciation for the broadcast. One of these letters was from Willard Ashford, a resident of Santa Ana, California. He commended Brother Rutherford for an “entertaining and interesting” presentation. He then added: “With three sick ones in the house it would have been impossible for any of us to have heard you except through this means, even had you spoken in the next block.”
More broadcasts followed in the coming weeks. By year’s end, The Watch Tower estimated that “at least 300,000 people [had] received the message by wireless [radio].”
Encouraged by the response, the Bible Students determined to build a radio station on a property in Staten Island, not far from Brooklyn Bethel. In the coming years, the Bible Students would use this station, WBBR, to spread the Kingdom message extensively.



“ADV”

The June 15, 1922, issue of The Watch Tower announced that a general convention would be held in Cedar Point, Ohio, from September 5 to 13, 1922. Excitement ran high among the Bible Students as they descended on Cedar Point.
In his welcoming address, Brother Rutherford told the audience: “I come to think, with absolute confidence, that the Lord will . . . bless this convention and send forth a witness as has never been given here on earth.” The speakers at that convention repeatedly encouraged the preaching work.




The crowd attending the 1922 Cedar Point, Ohio, convention



Then on Friday, September 8, some 8,000 attendees filed into the auditorium, eagerly anticipating a talk by Brother Rutherford. They were hoping that he would explain the meaning of “ADV,” which was printed on their invitations. As they took their seats, some no doubt noticed a large roll of canvas above the platform. Arthur Claus, who had traveled to the convention from Tulsa, Oklahoma, U.S.A., found a seat that would allow him to hear well, a real feat in the days before sound amplification was used.
“We were hanging on every word”

To ensure that there were no interruptions, the chairman announced that no latecomers would be admitted to the auditorium during Brother Rutherford’s talk. At 9:30 a.m., Brother Rutherford began by quoting Jesus’ words found at Matthew 4:17: “The kingdom of heaven is at hand.” (King James Version) When discussing how humans would hear about this Kingdom, he stated: “Jesus himself declared that in the time of his presence he would conduct a harvest of his people, during which he would gather unto himself the true and loyal ones.”
Brother Claus, who was sitting in the main auditorium, recalled: “We were hanging on every word.” But suddenly, he felt sick and had to leave the auditorium. Arthur exited reluctantly, knowing that he would not be readmitted.
In a few minutes, he began to feel better. He related that as he walked back toward the auditorium, he heard a great applause. That set him on fire! He decided that he would hear the rest of this wonderful lecture even if he had to climb on the roof to do so. Brother Claus, a young man of 23 at the time, found a way to climb to the roof. The skylights were open, and as he approached them, he noted that “the hearing was excellent.”
But Arthur was not alone. Some of his friends were also on the roof. One of them, Frank Johnson, ran over and asked him, “Do you have a sharp pocket knife?”
“Yes, indeed,” said Arthur.
“You are the answer to our prayers,” replied Frank. “Do you see this huge roll? It is a banner, tied to these nails. Listen carefully to the Judge.a When he says, ‘and you must advertise, advertise,’ cut these four cords.”
So Arthur, knife in hand, waited with the others for the signal. Soon Brother Rutherford reached the climax of his talk. Spurred on by emotion and zeal, Brother Rutherford must have fairly shouted: “Be faithful and true witnesses for the Lord. Go forward in the fight until every vestige of Babylon lies desolate. Herald the message far and wide. The world must know that Jehovah is God and that Jesus Christ is King of kings and Lord of lords. This is the day of all days. Behold, the King reigns! You are his publicity agents. Therefore, advertise, advertise, advertise, the King and his Kingdom!”
Arthur related that he and the other brothers cut the cords and the banner rolled down as smoothly as any banner could. In harmony with the letters “ADV,” the banner read: “Advertise the King and Kingdom.”



AN IMPORTANT WORK

The convention in Cedar Point helped the brothers to focus on the important work of Kingdom preaching, and those with a willing spirit were happy to have a share. A colporteur (now known as a pioneer) from Oklahoma, U.S.A., wrote, “The district we worked is in the coal region, and the poverty there is great.” He said that often when people heard the message found in the Golden Age magazine, “they [would] burst into tears.” He summed it up this way, “It is such a blessing to comfort them.”
These Bible Students felt the urgency of Jesus’ words found at Luke 10:2: “The harvest is great, but the workers are few.” As the year ended, they were more determined than ever to advertise the Kingdom message far and wide.



Brother Rutherford was sometimes called “the Judge” because he had served on occasion as a special judge in Missouri, U.S.A.

Witnessing to the World
On February 26, 1922, the Bible Students participated in a “world-wide witness.” Bible Students around the world held special meetings where interested people could hear the talk “Millions Now Living Will Never Die.”
The talk was translated into at least 33 languages, and The Watch Tower noted that nearly every qualified public speaker was used to deliver this talk. Bible Students in Great Britain organized 306 meetings, and 67,010 people attended. In Belgium, France, and Switzerland, more than 15,000 French-speaking people attended these meetings. Encouraged by the positive response, the Bible Students organized subsequent “world-wide witness” days in that same year​—on June 25, October 29, and December 10.


