
Do You Remember?




Have you carefully read the recent issues of The Watchtower? Well, see if you can answer the following questions:
In helping their children spiritually, why should immigrant parents evaluate the matter of language?
The children will likely learn the local language at school and in their environment. It can be useful for a child to know more than one language. Parents should consider where the youths will best grasp the truth and progress spiritually, whether in association with a congregation that uses the local language or with one that uses the immigrant’s language. Christian parents put their children’s spiritual well-being ahead of personal preferences.​—w17.05, pp. 9-11.
When Jesus asked Peter: “Do you love me more than these?” to what did “these” refer? (John 21:15)
It seems that Jesus was referring to the fish lying nearby and/​or the fishing business. After Jesus’ death, Peter returned to his former occupation​—fishing. Christians should weigh the place that secular work has in their heart.​—w17.05, pp. 22-23.
Why did Abraham ask his wife to say that she was his sister? (Gen. 12:10-13)
In fact, Sarah was Abraham’s half sister. If Sarah had said that she was his wife, Abraham might have been killed and thus could not have produced the offspring whom God had promised him.​—wp17.3, pp. 14-15.
What technique did Elias Hutter introduce to help those wanting to learn Hebrew?
He wanted to enable students to distinguish between the root of Hebrew words in the Bible and any associated prefixes or suffixes. To that end, he printed the root in solid letters but the prefixes or suffixes in outline form. A similar approach is found in footnotes in the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures​—With References.​—wp17.4, pp. 11-12.
What factors should affect a Christian’s view of keeping a firearm for protection against other humans?
Some are: God views life as sacred. Jesus did not urge his followers to get swords for protection. (Luke 22:36, 38) We are to beat our swords into plowshares. Life is more valuable than material things. We respect the conscience of others, and we want to be exemplary. (2 Cor. 4:2)​—w17.07, pp. 31-32.
Why do Matthew’s and Luke’s accounts differ as to Jesus’ early life?
Matthew focuses on Joseph, such as his reaction to Mary’s pregnancy and the divine messages to flee to Egypt and later return. Luke is more focused on Mary; for example, her visit to Elizabeth and her reaction when the boy Jesus remained at the temple.​—w17.08, p. 32.
What are some things the Bible has had to endure?
The meaning of words and expressions used in the Bible have changed over time. Political developments have affected the common language. There has been opposition to the translation of the Bible into common languages.​—w17.09, pp. 19-21.
Do we have a guardian angel?
No. Jesus spoke of his disciples’ angels looking upon the face of God. (Matt. 18:10) He was saying that angels are interested in his disciples, not that angels are miraculously protecting each one of them.​—wp17.5, p. 5.
What is the highest form of love?
When it is based on right principles, a·gaʹpe is the highest form of love. It can include affection and warmth. But it reflects high principles, such as unselfish actions for the good of others.​—w17.10, p. 7.




