Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING JULY 1
Song 104
12 min: Announcements and local announcements. Consider information on page 1 dealing with April’s activity. Review congregation’s service report for that month.
15 min: “Offer Sacrifices of Praise to Jehovah.” Question-and-answer coverage. Brief demonstration showing two publishers preparing for the field ministry.
18 min: Organized to Accomplish Our Ministry. Talk by well-qualified elder. Cover from page 142 (subheading) to page 147 (subheading).
Song 132 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JULY 8
Song 211
15 min: Local announcements, including field service arrangements and accounts report. “Kingdom Hall Expansion Program.” Question-and-answer coverage.
18 min: “Presenting the Good News​—With Magazines.” Question-and-answer coverage of material. Have capable publisher demonstrate a 30- to 60-second presentation for store-to-store work using the July 8 Awake! Publisher approaches manager and says: “We have set aside time today to call very briefly on business people in this area. We believe we have something a number of them will find beneficial. It involves the question of whether you have the right to refuse medical treatment you do not want. Four aspects of the subject are considered in four articles in this issue of Awake! We leave it, with its companion magazine, The Watchtower, on a contribution of 30c.” (If it is appropriate, you may request to speak with others in the establishment, stating that you will be brief and not unduly disrupt their work schedule.)
12 min: Talk, with audience participation, based on article, “Do You Meditate or Just Daydream” in the February 1, 1984, Watchtower.
Song 46 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JULY 15
Song 128
 5 min: Local announcements.
12 min: “The Blessings of Pioneering.” Question-and-answer coverage. Highlight 2 Corinthians 9:6. Interview or obtain comments from regular and auxiliary pioneers, or those who have pioneered in the past, as to the joys and blessings they experienced.
18 min: Organized to Accomplish Our Ministry. Talk by experienced elder. Cover from page 147 to end of chapter.
10 min: Arrange according to needs of your congregation. Or, well-balanced talk based on the article “Greed Can Be Deadly” from the July 1, 1984, issue of The Watchtower.
Song 163 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JULY 22
Song 53
 5 min: Local announcements. Encourage brothers to schedule Saturday magazine witnessing this week. Suggest publishers arrange to work with auxiliary and regular pioneers this week for mutual encouragement.
15 min: “Our Supportive Role in the Congregation.” Questions and answers.
10 min: Interviews. Service overseer interviews those effective in directing interest to the organization. Discuss with them why there is a need to do this early in the study and have them outline what they do to help Bible students begin associating with the congregation and make progress toward dedication.
15 min: Preparing magazine presentations. Father reviews 30- to 60-second magazine presentations with family. Refers to “Feature Articles” paragraph on page 2 of the July 22, 1984, Awake! Helps family members prepare following presentation: “Unemployment is a major world problem. It is even high in the United States. Is there anything families can do to lessen its impact? What may help in finding a job? If no jobs are available, what other possibilities are there? Whether your family is currently affected by unemployment or not, the articles starting on page 3 will be of benefit to you. The Watchtower and Awake! are available for a contribution of 30c.” Father takes several recent issues of Awake! and shows how easy it is to use “Feature Articles” section on page 2 of each issue to develop brief, simple magazine presentations. He shows another family member how to develop a presentation from the August 1, 1984, Watchtower: “Many persons question the existence of God. Others believe in God and would like to be closer to him. This issue of The Watchtower raises the question ‘How Close Is God to You?’ It shows how young ones can be helped to be close to God. This vital information together with the Awake! is yours for 30c.”
Song 194 and concluding prayer.

