Our Supportive Role in the Congregation
1 It is Jehovah’s will “that all sorts of men should be saved.” (1 Tim. 2:3, 4) Indeed, the Christian congregation is made up of a wide variety of individuals, each with differing abilities and personalities. What can each one of us do to help others grow spiritually and remain strong in the faith?
2 No matter what our circumstances, each one of us can be a source of encouragement to others. As individuals we can share in supplying “what is needed” in accord with Ephesians 4:16.
GIVE WHAT IS NEEDED
3 Two important things emphasized in this Eph 4 verse 16 will serve to build up the congregation. These are cooperation and love. Thoughtful effort is necessary in order to extend ourselves in behalf of others. In each congregation there are some who may need help to share in the ministry each month. Can you help? Sometimes parents can be of assistance to one another by taking turns baby-sitting when there are a number of small children who cannot accompany them in the field service. Parents should take the initiative to teach their children suitable presentations that they can use in the door-to-door ministry. Have you taught them to use a simple magazine presentation? If they can read, have you taught them a Scriptural presentation? Such effort demonstrates your love for and support of the congregation.
4 What else can be done to give what is needed? Can you offer to work with a pioneer who lacks a partner? At meetings for field service, support the pioneers by being on time and then leaving quickly for the field. All can make it a point to share encouraging field service experiences with others in the congregation.
DIRECTING INTEREST TO THE ORGANIZATION
5 How important it is for all of us to direct interested ones to the organization! Explain the Congregation Book Study arrangement to Bible students and invite them to come along to the study with you, perhaps arranging to bring them. Help them to get acquainted with others before and after the book study. Tell them about the Public Meeting and Watchtower Study and arrange to bring them to these meetings so that they will feel comfortable. By sitting with them, sharing your songbook and having an extra copy of The Watchtower ready, you will also help them to feel at ease. The sooner new ones begin attending meetings the faster they will progress in the truth.
6 You may know of some who attended the Memorial but are not yet publishing. Our desire is to help them become dedicated, baptized Witnesses who actively follow in the footsteps of Jesus Christ. (1 Pet. 2:21) Time and thoughtful attention given to the needs of such ones is necessary for that goal to be realized.
7 Elders and ministerial servants especially have the privilege of supporting others in the congregation. They are encouraged to note the needs of the flock and then work to help “each respective member in due measure.” They also support the congregation by exerting themselves in the field service, since their good example is encouraging to all.
8 David observed, “How good and how pleasant it is for brothers to dwell together in unity!” (Ps. 133:1) The full support of each one, giving what is needed, directly contributes to the unity and prosperity of the congregation.

