The Blessings of Pioneering
1 “These three years have been the happiest in my life.” “My greatest blessing is the new strengthened relationship I have with Jehovah.” “I have tried it out for the first time last month, and I wish I had tried it before . . . I really found joy and peace of mind.” These are comments made by some who have experienced the blessings of serving as regular and auxiliary pioneers.
2 Such comments are not unusual when you consider what is stated at 2 Corinthians 9:6: “He that sows bountifully will also reap bountifully.” Logically those who do more in the service will reap greater joy and blessings. (Acts 20:35) Some whose circumstances do not permit them to meet the requirement of hours for regular pioneers arrange their affairs so as to auxiliary pioneer each month. Others plan to auxiliary pioneer as often as they can. Often the interest found by auxiliary pioneers in just one month results in so many return visits and Bible studies that it keeps them very busy for several months to come.
3 Similarly others, although not able to auxiliary pioneer, have been able to increase their share in the ministry. They reap many blessings as a result of ‘sowing bountifully.’
WHAT BLESSINGS?
4 After auxiliary pioneering for a full year, one brother wrote to thank the Society for encouraging this activity. Describing the joy and benefits received, he said: “I have become surer of myself at the door and a better teacher . . . The most joy has come from studying the Bible with people.”
5 Regular pioneers have had similar experiences. One sister said: “I have only been a regular pioneer for a little over a year now. In this time my faith has certainly increased by means of Jehovah’s motivating spirit. . . . If I knew then what I know now in regard to the joy experienced from being a full-time proclaimer of the good news, I would have started in the regular pioneer work much sooner.” Another said: “It has provided for me a stability in decision-making I never had. When truly hard decisions came up, I asked myself, how will my pioneering be affected? My answers became easier. Pioneering has helped me to see how true the words at Acts 20:35 really are.”
6 The Pioneer Service School is another blessing available to those who have been regular pioneers for at least a year. What do those who have attended this school have to say? “I found it the highlight of my pioneering career.” “I have really learned how to study, meditate and use my time more wisely.” “The school helped me to rely more upon Jehovah and to see the need to keep busy in his work.” “I feel as if I have a tremendous foundation to begin to build on. Certainly we can’t apply all the information at once, but what a spiritual banquet to reflect upon. A sure fight against discouragement!”
CAN YOU BE A REGULAR PIONEER?
7 If you have been serving regularly as an auxiliary pioneer, likely you have had to make some adjustments in your schedule and perhaps even changed your life-style to some extent. Did you not find these changes to be worth the effort when compared with the blessings you received? With improved scheduling, would you be able to increase your time in the field service each day and begin serving as a regular pioneer in September? We encourage you to give this your prayerful consideration.

