R104 : page 1 

VOL. I. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., JUNE, 1880. 

NO. 12. 

page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 

PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 

REGULAR CONTRIBUTORS. 

J. H PATON, .... ALMONT, MICH. 
W. I. MANN, .... SWISSVALE, PA. 
B. W. KEITH, . . . DANSVILLE, N.Y. 
A. D. JONES, . . . PITTSBURGH, PA. 
L. ALLEN, HONEOYE, N.Y. 



In no case will the Editor be responsible for all sentiments 
expressed by correspondents, nor is he to be understood as 
indorsing every expression in articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS, 50 CENTS PER YEAR, In Advance-includes 
postage. 



All communications should be addressed to "ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER," as above, and drafts, money orders, etc., made 
payable to the Editor. 



R104 : page 1 



"ECCE HOMO"--BEHOLD THE MAN. 

This exclamation by Pilate (John 19:5) concerning Jesus, seems 
to express his admiration of the perfect man. Pilate saw that "for 
envy" the Jews had delivered Jesus up to death, and Roman 
though he was, and alien and stranger to the covenants and 
promises-without God- yet he had sufficient justice in his 
nature to cause him to shrink from taking the life of so noble a 
specimen of humanity; yet he as governor, must keep the peace 
of the country, and preserve the good will of the people. 

Thinking that by scourging him the clamor would cease, he did 
so, and declared that he found no cause of death in him, and 
would let him go. But when the people cried out the more— 
"Crucify Him! " he brought Jesus forth before them, as though 
thereby he expected to move to reverence the stony-hearted 
crowd, and exclaimed, "Behold the Man!" as though he would 
say to them: Could you really put to death such a man? 

And as we look back, every action of his life, from first to last, 
marks Him as THE man, "one above all others." When first 
brought before the governor, charged with claiming to be a king, 
Pilate seems to have been so much impressed with His personal 
appearance and majesty that for a time he was almost a convert, 
and inquires: "Art thou a king, then?" Our grandest conceptions, 
we believe, fall far short of the reality when we try to picture to 
ourselves what none of us have ever seen— a perfect man. There 
he stands, the embodiment of physical, mental and moral 
perfection.-"BEHOLD THE MAN." 

But not before Pilate only, does He thus appear to tower above 
all other men. As a child, when among the Doctors of the Law, 
He was a marvel. When a man, as a natural leader, He had but to 
say, "Follow Me," and His disciples forsook their nets and 
obeyed. As a teacher, the common people and Israelites in 
whom there was no guile, heard Him gladly, for "He taught 
them as one having authority," and they said, "Whence hath this 
man this wisdom?" How His superior mental acumen shone out 
when the Scribes and Pharisees sought to catch Him in His 
words, and were defeated with their own argument- "Why 
tempt ye me? [It is utter folly for imperfect men to seek or 
expect to entrap the perfect one.] Give me a penny. Whose 
image and superscription is this upon it?" They answer, 
"Caesar's." He said, "Render unto Caesar the things that are 
Caesar's, and unto God the things that are God's." No wonder 
that they marveled at such an answer, and thousands who have 
read it since have marveled, and said: "Whence hath this man 
this wisdom?" 

Even the soldiers, when about to take Him in the Garden, were 
so worked upon by the majesty of His presence, that like as wild 
beasts shrink from the eye of their keepers, these went 
backward, and fell to the ground, and could not take Him until 



"He gave Himself" into their hands. No; they had often, during 
the three and a half years of His ministry, "sought to take Him, 
but could not, because His hour was not yet come." This 
influence and power was not exercised over the poor and 
unlearned soldiery only, but also over the learned and noble, for 
when the rulers and Pharisees had sent certain of their number to 
take Him, they returned without Him. In reply to their question- 
"Why have ye not brought Him?"-the answer was: "Never man 
spake like this man. " Why was there this difference between 
Jesus and all other men? Because, we answer, all other men 
have had their mental, moral and physical power impaired by 
sin, some more and some less, according as sin has gained more 
or less control of each. 

Adam, the head of our race, was created a perfect man— perfect 
mentally, morally and physically. Not that he had ever yet tried 
or used these perfect qualities, but still he possessed them, and 
could, as time and opportunity presented, make use of them. He 
was what phrenologists would term a perfectly balanced man. 
But how sin, which entered so quickly, has marred this 
perfection! Adam's disobedience brought him under the penalty- 
- "Dying, thou shalt die. " And from that moment, Adam, as a 
whole, mentally, morally and physically, began to grow weak 
and die. In fact, the physical nature of man is so far the basis of 
the others that he cannot be either mentally or morally perfect if 
physically imperfect. Thus death has passed upon all men, and 
all we can do is to hasten or retard the effect. To this end, men 
establish medical colleges, hospitals, etc., to inform themselves 
as to the best way to prolong physical health; schools of learning 
and science, to prolong and increase mental power or health, and 
schools of law and theology, to hold in check, as much as 
possible, immorality and vice, and to develop moral health. And 
in all these things men are more or less successful, yet none may 
ever expect to restore the race to perfection in any of these 
respects. Perfection can and will be accomplished only in "the 
times of restitution of all things," when Jesus and His Bride, 
made one with Him, "shall restore all things." 

But what does all this prove? It shows "that God hath made man 
upright, but he has sought out many inventions." The futile 
efforts of men to bring themselves back to perfection should 
also prove God's word true: "Thou hast destroyed thyself, but in 
Me is thy help. " God has arranged to help or bring mankind 
back to the condition of the first man-perfect manhood, 
mentally, morally and physically. This is restoring what was 
lost-a restitution of all things through Christ. We are well aware 
that many of God's dear children differ with us on this matter 
and regard Adam an imperfect creation, and claim that, when it 
is declared, "God saw that it was good, " He must have been 
looking down to the "New Creation," and that it was this New 
Creation that God declared to be in His image and likeness. If 
this be true, then the spiritual man is but the development of the 



natural man; i.e., the natural reaching its full proper perfection. 
But the scriptures teach us that these two natures are distinct and 
separate: the one, earthly and fleshly; the other, spiritual and 
heavenly. The one, begotten and born of the flesh; the other, 
begotten and born of the spirit. The first partakes of the nature of 
man; the New Creation become "partakers of the Divine nature. " 
As well might we say that God looked upon a grain of corn and 
called it very good, because it would eventually develop into a 
man, as to say that God called the natural man very good 
because He saw that he would develop into a spiritual being. 
They are totally different natures. The Divine nature is not 
developed out of the human nature, but was first, and the 
expressed conditions for the obtaining of the new nature is, not 
to develop and perfect the old, but to crucify it. 

We, on the contrary, hold that while the New Creation will 
certainly be the express image of God, yet this does not interfere 
with the fact that the natural man, Adam, was created in God's 
image also; not physically, for God is a spirit, but in the qualities 
of mind. God had created the fish, fowl and lower animals, and 
yet of them all there was none that could appreciate and 
recognize Him and His great works; none that could 
comprehend His wisdom and power. 'And God said: Let us 
make man in our own image and in our own likeness. [One upon 
whom the higher qualities of reason, justice, mercy, love, &c, 
will be bestowed.] Let him have dominion over every living 
thing. " Let man bear the same relationship to all earthly 
creatures which God bears to the whole creation; i.e., be its ruler 
and governor. 

R104 : page 2 

Thus man, a lord of earth, having dominion, is a type or likeness 
of the Lord of all, and in his perfection we believe that man was 
recognized by all the lower animals as their lord. Doubtless his 
character as well as his personal appearance made him the 
worthy object of their respect and veneration. Even to-day, 
notwithstanding the fall, and that all are at least half dead, we 
find men possessed of sufficient willpower, &c, to command 
and obtain the obedience of even savage beasts. What power 
may not have been possessed by the perfect man? 

Now to return to our subject— Jesus. Behold the Man! We 
understand the scriptures to teach that Jesus, having laid aside 
the glory, took upon himself the form of a servant and was 
found in fashion as a man; not in the fashion of a sin-blighted 
man, physically, mentally and morally depraved, but in fashion 
as a man such as God made Adam —a "very good," a perfect and 
upright man. We believe that Jesus was as much a direct 
creation of God when born of Mary as Adam was when born in 
the womb of the earth, and that He partook no more of a sinful 
nature by His association with Mary, than Adam did by his 
previous association with the earth. 



Thus God sent His Son in the likeness of sinful flesh. All men 
are said to bear the image of the earthly Adam (1 Cor. 15:49). 
Although, as a matter of fact, we have lost much of the grandeur 
and beauty of character, mind and form, yet we are in his 
likeness. So Jesus, in taking the form of a perfect man, would, of 
necessity, be in likeness to sinful flesh. We may be sure He was 
not born with a depraved nature, for He was ever in harmony 
with the Father. "For the carnal mind is enmity against God, for 
it is not subject to the laws of God, neither, indeed, can be." 

Another thing assures us: "In Him was no sin" -"He knew no 
sin. " And this being true, it follows that He could not know or 
experience any of the penalties of sin except as He did so 
voluntarily. For the same justice that says, "The soul that 
sinneth, it shall die," and that can, by no means, clear the guilty, 
also guarantees life to the obedient and innocent. Jesus' life, 
then, was not forfeited, but was guaranteed. All the powers of 
heaven stood pledged to defend the "Just One. " He Himself said: 
"I lay down My life; none of you taketh it from me. I could ask 
My Father, and He would give me more than twelve legions of 
angels to defend it. " 

Sickness and pain are as much a part of the penalty of sin as 
death 

R105 : page 2 

itself; in fact, they are the beginning, and therefore a part of 
death. And if Jesus, being free from sin, was, as we have seen, 
free from death, by the same law of justice He must also have 
been created free from sickness and pain. But is it not written, 
"Himself took our infirmities and bear our sicknesses?" Was He 
not "a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief?" Yes, truly, 
He was, and let me say that if, while on earth, He had been 
unmoved by the sorrow and pain which surrounded Him, it 
would have proved that He was not a perfect man, for that being 
who can live in a world of sorrow, wrapped up in self and 
oblivious to the sufferings of his fellows, has lost the first and 
grandest distinction between a man and inferior animals. Yes, 
Jesus did take our infirmities; but how? Were they laid upon 
Him from His birth? Did He grow up afflicted with the various 
maladies and loathsome diseases which beset sinful men, 
especially men on the lowest round of the ladder, covered with 
moral and physical pollution? Was He thus corrupt? No; our 
minds revolt at such a thought, as we consider Him who was 
"holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners." No, they 
were not laid upon Him, but "Himself took our infirmities and 
bear our sicknesses." When we read, "He hath laid upon Him the 
iniquity of us all," we understand it to mean that when Jesus 
voluntarily became our ransom, the Father accepted it, and laid 
upon Him the chastisement of our sin. But did that chastisement 
consist in sufferings? By no means. Thousands of the human 
family have suffered intensely, and the sufferings and groanings 



of the whole creation from Adam down would make amends for 
a vast amount of sin if suffering could expiate sin, but it cannot. 
The wages of sin is death, not suffering. Therefore, "Christ died 
for our sins, ...even the death of the cross." But "Himself took 
our infirmities and bear our sicknesses." Let me illustrate how I 
think He, being perfect, could take of our ailments: Brother M., 
living in Vermont, a man of great faith, and an earnest, loving 
child of God, moved by strong sympathy for a brother who had 
been crippled with a lame back for a long time, made him a 
subject of prayer, and feeling convinced that it was the Lord's 
pleasure to heal through his instrumentality, he went to him and 
laid his hands upon the lame back. The man was instantly cured, 
but so great had been Brother M.'s sympathy for him that the 
lameness went to his own back, and it was several days before 
he fully recovered from it. Brother M. has not unlimited power 
of healing, but has been used several times since the above, 
which was his first. And he informed me that at each time it is 
accompanied by intense sympathy for the afflicted and some 
pain to himself, but that as he learned to govern and control his 
sympathy it has the less effect upon himself. This first started 
the thought in my mind— May not the miracles of Jesus have had 
such effect upon his grandly sympathetic and loving nature? We 
remember well the case of the poor woman with an issue of 
blood, how that coming near the Savior and touching the hem of 
his garment, she was immediately made whole. And Jesus 
turned him about, and said: "Who touched me, for I perceive 
that virtue (power, strength) is gone out of me." (Luke 8:46.) 

Yes, we believe that every cure performed by Jesus served to 
exhaust, to some extent, his very life forces, yet He gave 
Himself-spent His life in acts of love and kindness to poor 
fallen humanity. Thus, He shared our sorrows, sickness and 
pain. Weeping with those who wept, He was touched with a 
feeling of our infirmities. Already perfect as a man, He was, by 
these self-imposed sufferings, "made perfect" as our High Priest. 

Think of Him— nobly grand in character, form and deed, and 
both Christian and infidel to-day will agree with the decision of 
God and of Pilate 1 800 years ago, viz. : "I find no cause of death 
in Him. " Having proved Himself entitled to life, "He gave 
Himself a ransom for all," "He tasted death for every man, even 
the death of the cross." "BEHOLD THE MAN." "He hath set us 
an example that we should walk in His footsteps." 

"We did esteem Him, smitten, stricken of God and afflicted" 
(Isa. 53:4), just as the prophet declared many would do, but 
now, examining carefully the record, we find that God created 
Him perfect, and "Himself took our infirmities and bear our 
sicknesses." 



R105 : page 2 



KEEPING THE LAW. 

The Law is a great measuring line which God has let down to 
humanity. In the pride of the natural heart, many lay hold of it 
and think they measure pretty nearly what God wants. The Jew 
thus took the letter of the law and found it a difficult matter to 
commend himself to God even by that, but when the great 
teacher, Jesus, showed us the spirit of the Law, all who 
understood his teaching, saw that they were far too imperfect 
ever to measure themselves with it. According to Jesus' 
definition, it is murder to hate a brother, and adultery to desire. 
In a word, "The Law, " as Jesus defined it, is the full measure of 
a perfect man's ability. And as since sin entered the world, all 
men are under its penalty, "There is none righteous, no, not 
one. " Then, since all are imperfect, surely none can keep the 
perfect law, and so Jesus declared: "None of you keepeth the 
Law;" and Paul says that if the law could have been kept, Christ 
would not have died. Gal. 2:21. Again: "That no man is justified 
by the law is evident." Gal. 3:1 1. None can keep it, because sin 
has blemished all whom it has touched; all are imperfect. 

Does some one say that he can keep the Law? Come with me to 
Palestine and see perhaps a copy of yourself. A certain young 
man came to Jesus, saying: "Good Master, what shall I do to 
inherit eternal life?" Jesus takes advantage of the words "Good 
Master," to show him that he has acknowledged His authority, 
so that when he should afterward tell him what to do, he could 
not make the excuse that he doubted his authority to so instruct. 
Jesus then said to him: "Thou knowest the commandments" — 
That is to say, you know that God has arranged and promised 
that those who keep the commandments may live forever. "They 
that do those things shall live by them. " This young man 
evidently had expected this answer, for with joy he replied: "All 
these have I kept from my youth up. " He was indeed an 
exemplary man. "And Jesus beholding him loved him. " And he 
answered him, "One thing thou lackest." He was almost perfect 
says some one. He almost kept the whole law. No, we think not; 
the one thing he lacked, was, in Jesus' estimation, the chief 
commandment of all;-viz: "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God, 
with all thy heart, soul, mind, and strength. " This chief 
commandment he had not kept. Instead of loving the Lord with 
all his powers, he was loving his wealth with a part of his heart; 
and with a larger part too, it would seem, since he was willing 
rather to cling to it than to obtain eternal life. His heart divided 
its attention between God and earthly riches, and Jesus gave him 
such a command as would most quickly show him where his 
heart's affection centered. Another might have no riches to 
divide his heart, but he might have instead, a good name, or 
worldly fame, and either of these might be sharer of much of the 
love of the heart so as to prevent his loving the Lord with all his 
strength. This young man concluded that the Law, as Jesus 
interpreted it, was more than he could keep. Let any one who 



thinks he is keeping the whole law, begin with this first 
commandment, repeat it slowly and apply it to himself.— "Thou 
shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy mind, 
with all thy soul, and with all thy strength. " A perfect man can 
do no more; an imperfect or sinful man cannot live up to this 
perfect standard of love and obedience. A man even on the 
upper rounds of the ladder, and nearest perfect, could not keep 
this perfect law, to say nothing of the poor degraded beings 
pushed by sin down to the lowest round. 

No, there is but one who ever kept it or could keep it. Think you, 
was he a perfect man, or a degraded one on the lowest round of 
the ladder as some have claimed? O, he was the perfect one of 
whom the all wise Father could, and did say: "This is my 
beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. " And as we scan his 
words, his acts, his character, we exclaim, 

Fairer is he than all the fair 
Among the sons of men. 



R103 : page 3 



MY SONG. 

For the "Watch Tower. 

So long have I dreamed of the beautiful goal, 
That a touch of its sunshine has lit up my soul; 
Its chords are all thrilling with music divine, 
And its song is forever, "Dear Jesus is mine!" 

The Bird, when the tempest is raging with power, 
Flies in haste to her dear little nest in the bower; 
Thus safe 'neath his wing I can sweetly recline, 
And sing on forever "Dear Jesus is mine!" 

When beautiful Eden awakes from the fires, 
And the conflict of ages of sorrow expires; 
In the great restitution, of glory divine, 
I'll still sing in Paradise, "Jesus is mine!" 

VESTA N. JOHNSON. 



R105 : page 3 



PRE-EXISTENCE OF CHRIST. 

For some time past, by letter and otherwise, questions have 
been asked me like the following: "Brother Paton, do you, or the 
other writers for ZION'S WATCH TOWER, deny the conscious 
pre-existence of Christ?" I would answer all such queries 
through the paper. 



For myself, I answer, I not only do not deny it, but I most firmly 
believe it, and have invariably taught and defended it, both in 
preaching and writing, not only as true, but as a very important 
fact. Since the doubt has been set in motion in the minds of our 
readers (I am quite sure it was never caused by anything which 
has appeared in the WATCH TOWER), it has been my privilege 
to converse on this subject with all in our list of "Regular 
Contributors," who have written for the paper, and also with 
Brother Russell, the editor, and, if I know the meaning of words, 
there exists among us, on this subject, the most perfect oneness. 
What puzzles me is, how any one ever originated the thought 
that we do not believe it. I think that some one must have been 
very anxious that we should deny it, and that the wish has been 
father to the thought. I cannot expect to counteract fully the false 
impression made by such a report, 

R106 : page 3 

unless those who have circulated it among the people will be fair 
enough to circulate our correction. When a Christian brother has 
unintentionally misrepresented another, it should be considered 
not only a duty, but a privilege to correct the mistake. Should 
this not be done, and a part of our brethren who do not read this 
paper, are allowed to think that Brother Paton and other brethren 
have so far lost their light as to deny the conscious pre-existence 
of Christ, we will be compelled to ask the Lord for patience and 
courage to bear it, as we have often done during these months of 
misrepresentation. If there were no danger of harm to others by 
such reports, it would be but a small matter to us individually. 

That we meet with some whom we believe to be Christians, and 
in some respects seem to be well advanced, who do not believe 
in the conscious or personal pre-existence of Christ, is true. 
Though never having doubted this great truth for a single 
moment, even when reading the arguments offered against it, yet 
we have never been disposed to make our opinions on this 
subject a test of fellowship. We rejoice that it has been our 
privilege to convince some of the truth of our position. We have 
often said that the statements of the Bible are on the side of the 
pre-existence, but the opposite view has been sustained in many 
minds by unanswered questions as to how this or that could be. 

We regard this subject and several others as revealed, but 
without the philosophy being given. It is not explainable, and 
yet it is true. "No man knoweth the Son, but the Father" 
(knoweth). Matt. 1 1 :27. All we can know is what is revealed. 
"Without controversy, great is the mystery of godliness: God 
was manifest in the flesh." 1 Tim. 3:16. He is the root of David, 
as well as his fruit, or "offspring." Rev. 22:16. He is David's 
Lord, as well as David's son. Matt. 22:42-45. These and other 
scriptures teach us, that in Christ was combined the Divine and 
human. He is called both "Son of God" and "Son of Man." 
Perhaps some one supposed we were denying His personal, 



conscious pre-existence, when, some time ago, we stated that, so 
far as we know, He was not called a Son until He came into the 
flesh, but that He was called the Word. If His being called the 
Word, in His pre-existent state, proves that He was not a Person, 
then He is not now and never has been a Person, for He was the 
Word and Truth when in the flesh, (John 1:14 and 14:6), and in 
His future glorious manifestation as Conqueror, "His name is 
called the Word of God." Rev. 19:13. If the statement is 
unscriptural, we will gladly be corrected. But we believe that 
Person, who was called the Word, had a conscious existence 
before "the Word was made flesh" (John 1:14), or before He 
took on Him the seed of Abraham. Heb. 2:16. He that took our 
nature, should not be confounded with the nature which He 
took, though in Him, they were mysteriously blended. We 
believe His action in taking upon himself human nature and 
human form was voluntary, and is a grand exhibition of 
benevolence and love on His part, and therefore used as a 
motive for the Christian. 

"Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus: who, 
being in the form of God,. ..made Himself of no reputation, and 
took upon Him the form of a servant and was made in the 
likeness of men. " After which, "being found in fashion as a man, 
He humbled Himself, and became obedient unto death, even the 
death of the cross." Phil. 2:5-8. 

The reason assigned by some, why we ignore the pre-existence 
of Christ, is that we might oppose the proposition that Christ's 
real death was in leaving the glory and becoming a man. We 
will ignore no such glorious doctrine for the purpose of 
opposing so absurd a proposition. The above scripture of itself 
overthrows the assumption, by giving the order of events. He 
left the glory, took human form, and afterward humbled Himself 
unto death. Some have supposed, on account of the influence of 
an assumed human leadership, that the Bible asserts that Christ 
left the life He had with the Father, instead of the glory. 
Brethren, no person can be infallibly led of the Spirit who 
ignores the distinction between the glory of a life and the life 
itself. Christ did not die by becoming a man, but He became a 
man that He might die. Hence, "we see Jesus, who was made a 
little lower than the angels, for the suffering of death... that He, 
by the grace of God, should taste death for every man." Heb. 
2:9. The incarnation, or coming in the flesh, was before the 
death. See, also, vs. 14,15. He voluntarily accepted the work. 
The body was prepared for sacrifice, and He says, "Lo, I come 
to do Thy will, O God. " After which the body, which was 
prepared for sacrifice, was offered (sacrificed). Heb. 10:5,7,10. 

It was not the pre-existent One, but "the man Christ Jesus" that 
gave Himself a ransom for all (1 Tim. 2:5,6), and yet He left the 
glory for the purpose of becoming a man, or taking upon himself 
human nature and form, that He might become a sin offering. 



The same spirit of benevolence that moved Him to leave the 
glory controlled Him throughout. So we can say, as did Paul: 
"For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though He 
was rich, yet for your sake He became poor, that ye through His 
poverty might be rich. " 2 Cor. 8,9. 

We would neither belittle nor magnify the physical or mental 
sufferings of Christ's life or death. We know not how much He 
suffered. That all His sufferings were necessary there can be no 
doubt. "For in that He Himself hath suffered, being tempted, He 
is able to succor them that are tempted." Heb. 2:18 and 4:15. We 
freely assert, however, that the Bible nowhere teaches that the 
pain He suffered made atonement. In the type, a perfect beast 
had to be slain, not tortured. "Christ died for our sins." 
"Reconciled to God by the death of His Son. " 

Christ's coming in the flesh and His death are related to each 
other, but they are not identical. Perhaps we go farther than 
some by saying we believe in the dual, or double, nature of 
Christ. In the atonement work (Lev. 16), He was represented by 
a double type-Priest and Sacrifice. He was both Priest and 
Sacrifice. As the priest took the beast (a lower being) and 
offered it as a sacrifice, so we have seen that Christ took our 
nature and form, a body prepared for sacrifice. The priest killed 
that which he took; was it not so with Christ? Christ "was made 
of the seed of David, according to the flesh, and declared to be 
the Son of God, with power (or powerfully declared) by the 
resurrection." Rom. 1:3,4. The resurrection did not make Him 
the Son of God, but declared the fact. If He was the Son of God, 
and also Son of Man, He had two natures. He was "put to death 
in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit." 1 Pet. 3:18. "And you 
hath He reconciled, in the body of His flesh, through death. Col. 
1:21,22. 

It was not the blood of the priest that was required, but the blood 
of what the priest offered. The two being combined in Christ, 
has made it more difficult to grasp. "Every Spirit that confesseth 
not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is not of God. " 1 John 
4:3. 

If the Lord Jesus, when on earth, was nothing but flesh-a mere 
man —then He could not be truly said to have come down from 
heaven. His flesh was of the earth, earthly, as much as ours, and 
yet it is repeatedly stated that He came down from heaven. See 
John 3:13 and 31. "He that cometh from above is above all: he 
that is of the earth is earthly and speaketh of the earth: He that 
cometh from heaven is above all. And what He hath seen and 
heard, that He testifieth." 

Christ was the true bread, that came down from heaven. Ch. 
6:33,38,50,51,58. "The Second Man is the Lord from heaven." 1 
Cor. 15:47. A mere human being, having our fallen nature, as 
some tell us Christ was and had, should not have received 



worship, and could not have forgiven sin, both of which Christ 
did. Having taken our humanity, without its sin, He was in that 
nature made a sin offering. He then ascended on high to apply 
the merit of the work He had done, just as the priest, having 
slain the beast, carried its blood in to secure the object for which 
it was shed. 

He did not make atonement with the priest's blood, but with 
what was shed. Our object in writing this article is not to oppose 
new or advanced truth, but to defend long established truth 
against old error dressed up in a new form. We defend the pre- 
existence of Christ, and also the relation between His coming in 
the flesh and His death in the flesh. The first prepared the way 
for the second; the second was the ransom. Both were necessary, 

R106:page4 

and parts of the same plan, and both express God's great love for 
man. Take the pre-existence of Christ out of the plan, and there 
was no condescension on His part, and no motive to 
benevolence for us, as the apostle presents it. Take the death of 
Christ out of the plan, and the types of death are useless, and 
there is no ransom, and therefore no restitution. He came down 
to die, and having done the work, then He returned to the glory 
He had with the Father before the world was. John 17:5. Christ 
is our Redeemer, by the Ransom. His earth life is our Example. 
He is our Forerunner into the perfect life, and the Regenerator 
by that life imparted. In Him all fullness dwells. He comes 
again, but not as a Sin Offering, and hence not in the flesh, but 
in a spiritual body, and all who, by the Spirit, have fellowship 
with His sufferings and are made conformable to His death, 
shall be made like Him and share the glory of His reign. Here, 
we know in part; there, we shall know as we are known. "When 
that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be 
done away." 1 Cor. 13:9-12. Meanwhile, let charity prevail. 

J. H P. 

[This article was sent in April 10th, intended for last month's 
paper, but was crowded out. -EDITOR.] 



R107:page4 

Casting Away and Receiving. 

Rom. 11:15. 

Bible students of the past, as well as those of the present day, 
have noticed that the dispersion, and ultimate restoration of the 
Jewish nation- literal Israel-is the subject of considerable 
portions of both old and new testament prophecies. As prophecy 
cannot be understood with any great degree of clearness until 
about the time of its fulfillment; the subject has necessarily been 



enveloped in a good deal of mystery in the past; and it is still, 
with those who do not keep pace with the development of 
prophecy. Various attempts have been made, by those who 
discard the millennial reign of the kingdom of God, to show that 
these prophecies would never have a literal, but a mystical 
fulfillment. Some have taken the position that they were 
conditional, and that the conditions have not been met; and 
others affirming that they were all fulfilled at the restoration 
from the Babylonian captivity. But it will be observed that the 
prophecies of Haggai and Zachariah were made after that; and 
those of the new testament, several hundred years after. Jesus, in 
giving the signs which would precede the complete development 
of the kingdom of God, says: And when ye shall see Jerusalem 
compassed with armies, then know that the desolation thereof is 
nigh.... For these be the days of vengeance, that all things which 
are written may be fulfilled. ...For there shall be great distress in 
the land, and wrath upon this people. And they shall fall by the 
sword, and shall be led away captive into all nations; and 
Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles [Ethnon 
Nations] until the times- years-of the Gentiles be fulfilled. 
Luke 21:20-24. 

This prophecy involves the inference that the times-years-of 
the Gentiles, have been foretold, or they could not be fulfilled; 
that Jerusalem represents the Jews among the nations; and that 
the treading down will cease, when the times are fulfilled, and 
the kingdom established— vs. 31. As has been many times 
shown, the times of the Gentiles last about thirty-five years from 
the spring of 1880; and the return of the Jews to Palestine is 
rapidly becoming an indisputable fact. 

It is not designed to enter into an exhaustive argument as to the 
probability of the complete fulfillment of the large class of 
prophecies in regard to this wonderful people; but to glance at a 
few passages which state clearly the reason why God has dealt 
with them as he has; covering a period of hundreds of years; 
which will explain what has puzzled so many, why their national 
identity has been preserved. In the 16th of Jer., where their 
dispersion and ultimate gathering, after they had been 
recompensed double for their sins, is foretold; the Lord explains 
how they will be preserved, for the fulfillment of the prophecy, 
in the 17th verse: For mine eyes are upon all their ways; they are 
not hid from my face, neither is their iniquity hid from mine 
eyes. The double, in this connection, gives a positive clue, not 
only to their dispersion at the 1st Advent, but also to their 
gathering at the 2d. Advent, and the year when the comforting 
words of Is. 60:1-2 would begin to be spoken, as has been 
shown, was fulfilled in 1878. Amos, 9th chapter, speaks of their 
being sifted among all nations, and of their permanent 
upbuilding. James, in quoting this prophecy, seems to 
understand that the rebuilding of the tabernacle of David, which 
fell after Jesus left their house desolate, would take place at the 



2d Advent. There must be a purpose in it all, worthy of an 
allwise and loving Father, who formed and will carry out the 
great plan of salvation; and it is stated by Jesus, in part, at least: 
That the residue of men might seek after the Lord, and all the 
Gentiles —nations—, upon whom my name is called, saith the 
Lord who doth all these things-Acts 15:13-18. The work of the 
gospel age is expressed in the 14th verse:— taking out of the 
nations a people for his name-the wife of Christ; selecting the 
kings and priests, to reign with Christ. 

The kingdom was taken from them, to be given to a people 
bringing forth the fruits thereof-Matt. 21:43. The same is 
expressed by Paul: Now if the fall of them be the riches of the 
world, and the diminishing of them the riches of the Gentiles, 
how much more their fullness-Rom. 11:12. That their fullness 
will finally embrace the dead as well as the living, is intimated 
in verse 15: For if the casting away of them be the reconciling of 
the world, what shall the receiving of them be, but life from the 
dead? See, also, Ezek. 37, where it is positively stated that the 
whole house of Israel will be brought up out of their graves, and 
placed in their own land. 

Paul says further: For I would not, brethren, that ye should be 
ignorant of this mystery, lest ye should be wise in your own 
conceits, that blindness in part is happened to Israel, until the 
fullness of the Gentiles is come in; and so all Israel shall be 
saved; as it is written, (Ps. 14:7.) There shall come out of Zion 
the deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob; for 
this is My covenant unto them, when I shall take away their sins. 
As concerning the gospel, they are enemies for your sakes; but 
as touching the election, they are beloved for the father's sakes; 
for the gifts and calling of God are without repentance. (He has 
promised, and He will perform.) For as ye in times past have not 
believed— obeyed God, yet have now obtained mercy through 
their unbelief; even so have these also now not believed— 
obeyed, that through your mercy they also may obtain mercy. 
For God hath concluded them all in unbelief, that he might have 
mercy upon all-Rom. 1 1 :25-32. 

That they will remember and turn unto the Lord, after their 
restoration, is clearly taught in both old and new testament 
prophecies. The Hebrew word translated heathen; like the Greek 
word rendered Gentile, means nation. 

But I had pity for mine holy name, which the house of Israel had 
profaned among the heathen, whither they went.... And I will 
sanctify my great name, which was profaned among the heathen, 
which ye have profaned in the midst of them; and the heathen 
nations shall know that I am the Lord, saith the Lord God, when 
I shall be sanctified in you before their eyes; for I will take you 
from among the heathen, and gather you out of all countries, and 
will bring you into your own land. Then He says He will 
sprinkle clean water upon them to cleanse them; and give them a 



new heart; and put his Spirit within them, and cause them to 
walk in his statutes; then adds: And ye shall dwell in the land 
that I gave to your fathers; and ye shall be my people, and I will 
be your God. 

And not only that, but the land which has been so long desolate 
and unproductive, will return to its former fertility. And I will 
call for the corn, and will increase it, and lay no famine upon 
you; and I will multiply the fruit of the tree, and the increase of 
the field, that ye shall receive no more reproach of famine 
among the heathen— Ezek. 36:21 to end of chapter. Read also the 
37th chapter. After speaking of the valley of dry bones, which is 
explained to be the whole house of Israel, to be brought up out 
of their graves; the prophet is told to take two sticks, and write 
upon them; and the sticks whereon thou writest shall be in thine 
hand before their eyes; and say unto them: Thus saith the Lord 
God: Behold, I will take the children of Israel from among the 
heathen, whither they be gone, and will gather them on every 
side, and bring them unto their own land; and I will make them 
one nation in the land, upon the mountains of Israel; and one 
king shall be king to them all; and they shall be no more two 
nations, neither shall they be divided into two Kingdoms any 
more at all.... My tabernacle also shall be with them; yea, I will 
be their God, and they shall be my people; and the heathen shall 
know that I, the Lord, do sanctify Israel, when my sanctuary 
shall be in the midst of them for evermore. 

Also the 38 and 39 chapters of Ezek., after speaking of trouble 
with God-Russia, after their return, and are dwelling in the 
mountains of Israel; gives the purpose for which it is all brought 
about; their own good, and the good of the nations, in clear, 
positive language. 

Daniel 12:1, speaks of their deliverance in a time of trouble, 
such as there never was since there was a nation. 

Zech. 8 teaches of their return; the building of Jerusalem; and a 
time of trouble, when every man's hand will be against his 
neighbor; and closes with a thus saith the Lord. In those days it 
shall come to pass, that ten men shall take hold out of all 
languages of the nations, even shall take hold of the skirt of him, 
that of him that is a Jew, saying: We will go with you: for we 
have heard that God is with you. Zech. 14 tells us of the 
gathering of the nations against Jerusalem; that the Lord will 
come with all the saints, and fight against the nations; that He 
will be King of all the earth; and that the left of the nations 
which came against Jerusalem, shall even go up from year to 
year, to worship the King, the Lord of hosts, and to keep the 
feast of tabernacles. In Ezek. 21, we read of their last king- 
Zedekiah: And thou, profane, wicked prince of Israel, whose 
day is come, when iniquity shall have an end; thus saith the Lord 
God; remove the diadem, and take off the crown.... I will 



overturn, overturn, overturn it; and it shall be no more, until he 
come whose right it is, and I will give it him- 25:28. 

R107 : page 5 

They were overturned, 1st at the Babylonish captivity, 606 
B.C., where their treading down began; 2nd, at the destruction 
of Jerusalem, A.D. 70; the 3rd time will be the one spoken of in 
Zech. 14, and right there he will come whose right it is: or will 
then complete the conquering of the nations; and the kingdoms 
of this world will become the kingdom of our Lord and his 
Anointed ones. And so we might quote largely from Is., Jer., 
Ezek., Amos, Zeph, Zech., and other prophets, showing that the 
children of Israel will return to their own land. And the united 
testimony of Prophets and Apostles is that it was 

R108:page5 

designed of the Lord to prove a glorious blessing to themselves 
and all other nations; bringing them to acknowledge that God is 
the Lord. 

And how could it be otherwise? When such a vast amount of 
prophecy becomes a fact, it will prove the scriptures true; and 
when they are proved true by fulfillment, it can but be a terrible 
blow to scepticism and infidelity. Jesus said: I tell you before it 
come, that, when it is come to pass, ye may believe that I am he- 
John 13:19. 

And so the result will be to the nations, when they see so much 
come to pass; and probably on this account Israel were scattered 
among all nations. Then it will be true that: The wayfaring men, 
though fools, shall not err therein-Is. 35:8. The apology for 
presenting this subject, is, that the return of the Jews, and the 
time of trouble are becoming apparent facts; and it is believed 
that the two facts will be the means, in the next 35 years, of the 
conversion of the 144,000 Jews, and the great multitude of all 
nations, who will come up out of or after the great tribulation, 
with their robes washed white in the blood of the Lamb-Rev. 7. 

B. W. K. 



R108:page5 



NUMBER SEVEN. 

(CONTINUED.) 



The fact has been noticed that the number seven is made very 
prominent in the Bible-both Old and New Testaments. It is the 
basis of reckoning, and nearly everything is complete by sevens. 
It may be both interesting and profitable to look at the many 
places where it is used. 



We have seen already that seven is the basis of the creation 
week, the ordinary week and the week of thousands. The wave 
sheaf, and its antitype, the resurrection of Christ, were "when 
the Sabbath was past"-the eighth day, or first day of a new 
week. Lev. 23:1 1, and Mark 16:2. The wave loaf and its 
antitype, the descent of the Holy Spirit, were on Pentecost, or 
the fiftieth day, and hence also on the first day of the week. Lev. 
23:15-16, and Acts 2:1. And the perfect new creation is not 
reached until the week of thousands is past, or the beginning of 
another cycle. 

The types of the old creation are seventh day types, and the 
types of the new creation are first day types. By observing what 
is said of these types in Lev. 23, it will be seen that these first 
days were to be holy convocations and rest days, though not by 
the fourth commandment, which related exclusively to the 
seventh day. Those who are more interested in commemorating 
the old creation, will of course observe the seventh day of the 
week, and those who are more interested in commemorating the 
dawn of the new creation will observe the first day of the week. 
But in the New Testament there is no command to observe 
either. The Christian has been drawn to the first day of the week 
by the law of association, which is one phase of the law of the 
Spirit. 

The seventh day finds its antitype in the seventh thousand-the 
Sabbath that remains. When we have entered the Millennial 
reign, it will not be as it was in the typical observance, one day 
in seven, but a continual Sabbath. That will be the fulfillment of 
the Sabbath, or keeping it in the Spirit. There is a sense in which 
believers now are keeping that continual Sabbath; the same 
sense in which we are now the body, or bride of Christ; the same 
sense in which we are now said to have eternal life, and to be in 
the kingdom. In this sense the gospel age is the age of 
fulfillment of the seventh day, and we believe the rule will hold 
good that no type given in the old dispensation, to be entirely 
fulfilled in either the gospel or millennial ages is to be observed 
during the gospel age. 

But to come to other features: Enoch, "the seventh from Adam," 
(Jude 14), was translated. He seems to be a type of the perfect 
earthly man; and we suggest that this case indicates God's way 
of disposing of such men, during the seventh thousand years. If 
not for this, why did it happen to be the seventh, 

R109 : page 5 

and why tell us anything about it? We would not be too positive 
on such points. 

Clean beasts went into the ark by sevens. Gen. 7:2. Seven days 
was the period fixed for the entrance into the ark, and on the 
seventh day the waters began to come on the earth. Verses 4:10. 
It was in the seventh month the ark rested. Gen. 8:4. Noah sent 



out a dove which returned to him, because it could find no rest; 
"And he stayed yet other seven days," and sent her out again. 
Verse 10. This time she brought the olive leaf, then "he stayed 
yet other seven days" when he sent her out and she returned no 
more. Verse 12. And it was with Noah's seventh century the new 
world began. Verse 13. Do all these things come by chance? 
Others may see more of their meaning than we do. 

Jacob served seven years for each of his two wives, Leah and 
Rachel. Gen. 29:18-30. Jacob is typical of Christ. He stood at 
the head of the Jewish dispensation with his twelve sons as 
Christ with His twelve apostles stands at the head of the gospel 
dispensation. These two equal periods seem to represent the 
equality of the two dispensations. Jacob served for a wife and 
got the one first that he did not want, and afterward the one he 
really loved. 

Some one has said there is not even a type of the Jewish church 
being the bride of Christ in any sense, or that He came to them 
as the Bridegroom. Will those who accept of the allegorical 
character of the writings of Moses repudiate this case of Jacob? 
The Jewish church is often spoken of as the Lord's wife, and as 
not being true to Him. Jesus says, "All that the Father hath is 
mine. " "He came to His own and His own received Him not. " 
John introduced Him as the Bridegroom. John 3:29. Jesus 
speaks of Himself as the Bridegroom with them. Mark 2:19-20. 
There is as much evidence of Christ being the Bridegroom to 
that typical church, as that He was the Reaper in the harvest of 
that typical dispensation. 

In Pharaoh's dreams which Joseph was called to interpret, there 
were "seven well favoured Kine," eaten up by "seven other 
Kine" ill favored and lean fleshed; and "seven ears of corn" on 
one stalk, rank and good, devoured by "seven thin ears." The 
dream, as interpreted and fulfilled, referred to seven years of 
plenty, followed by seven years of famine, God's mercies and 
His judgments are complete, but mercy rejoiceth against 
judgment. 

In Leviticus 26, the expression "seven times" is four times 
repeated in reference to the duration of the rule of its enemies 
over Jerusalem. It has often been shown that this is the basis and 
key of the Times of the Gentiles (Luke 21 :24), or the duration of 
Gentile rule over Jerusalem. A time is a year; a prophetic year is 
360 common years and has been so fulfilled. "A time, times and 
a half" (i.e., 3-1/2 times) has been fulfilled as 1260 literal years 
in the Papal dominion over the nations, between A.D. 538 and 
A.D. 1798. 

If three times and a half are 1260 years, seven times are 2520 
years. From B.C. 606, where the desolation of Jerusalem began, 
2520 years reach to A.D. 1914. According to this application of 
the number seven, Jerusalem will be free at that time, and 



thence-forward be a praise in the earth. The application is 
clearly confirmed by the events of to-day-the trouble brewing 
among the nations, and the beginning of Jewish restoration. 

The prophetic argument on the Two Dispensations shows that 
favor was due to that people in 1878, and the door was legally 
opened for their return, by the Anglo-Turkish treaty of that year. 
From 1878 to 1914, is a period of 37 years for their rise, and is 
equal to the period of their fall, from the time Jesus left their 
house desolate in A.D. 33, until their complete destruction in 
A.D. 70. 

Their fall was from natural nationality, and they will rise to the 
same. "This child is set for the fall and the rising again of many 
in Israel. " Jesus has the work of restoring the natural, and also 
the work of imparting all manner of spiritual blessings. 

The long period of 2520 years and their bitter experience under 
the dominion of the beasts, (human governments, Dan. 7) is 
clearly represented in Dan. 4, by the "seven times" of 
Nebuchadnezzar and his bitter experience among the beasts. 
This being a type covers only seven literal years. Why, if there 
is nothing in all these things, can such a harmony be developed 
on the basis of number seven? 

J. H. P. 



R108:page5 



THE STRAIT GATE. 



Strive to enter in at the strait gate: for I say unto you, many will 
seek to enter in, and shall not be able. Luke 13:24. 

Christ's mission to earth was to save men. It has been truly said 
that the difference between the anti-Christian and the Christian 
religions is, that in all of the former, men are seeking after God; 
in the latter, God is seeking after men. In one sense, Christ has 
already accomplished the salvation of all. That is, all were lost, 
and He has found them. More than that, He has purchased them. 
But His work is not thus finished. He desires to raise them 
immeasurably above their lost condition, and to render them 
eternally secure. To do this work, He must have their co- 
operation. To be saved in the highest sense, men must come to 
the Savior. Hence, one important part of His mission was to win 
followers. 

Christianity now is presented to the unbeliever in the most 
attractive form, and every inducement that can be offered is 
presented to persuade men to come to Jesus. They are told that it 
is an easy thing to be a Christian; that they have only to say the 
word, to make the public confession, join the church, and they 
are safe. We do not question the benevolence of the motive 



which prompts this, but we do question both the authority and 
the wisdom of the plan. Will such work stand in the day that 
tries by fire? 

The Savior never urged men to come to Him. The truth He 
taught had sufficient power to draw those who were susceptible 
to its influence. His words possessed the peculiar property of 
satisfying the hunger of earth-weary, toil-burdened and desolate 
hearts. And these are they who are especially 

R108 : page 6 

invited. The only direct invitations given by Him who came to 
win ALL, were given to this class. "He that is thirsty, let him 
come to me and drink. " "Come unto me all ye that are weary 
and heavy-laden, and I will give you rest." Only those who feel 
the need of rest and life can appreciate the invitation. The rich, 
the popular, those absorbed in business; in brief, all who are 
content with the things of this life, are scarce likely to leave 
them for things for which they feel no need. As a rule, the more 
content we are with earthly things, the less we desire heaven; 
and God never gives of heavenly things except they are 
earnestly desired. 

When great multitudes followed Him, He turned and said unto 
them: "If any man come unto me, and hate not his father, and 
mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, 
and his own life, also, he cannot be my disciple. For which of 
you, intending to build a tower, sitteth not down first and 
counteth the cost, whether he hath sufficient to finish it? Lest 
happily after he hath laid the foundation, and is not able to finish 
it, all that behold it begin to mock him, saying, This man began 
to build and was not able to finish." Luke 14:25-30. 

There are many builders in this day of whom that saying is too 
true. Thrice better had they never begun. Could I be heard, I 
would say to all: Do not come without counting the cost. It will 
cost you all that you have and are or ever can be. "Whosoever he 
be of you that forsaketh not all that he hath, he cannot be my 
disciple. " But if you can afford it, the investment will bring 
good returns. He would not be certain of success in any earthly 
profession, who did not apply time, means, heart and mind to 
the acquiring of his object. Can less be expected of him who 
lives for God, and who expects to be made like Him? 

Why did not Christ urge men to be Christians? Did His great 
heart feel no pity for the careless, the proud, the wise, and 
prudent, in their conceit? Why was the gate made so strait that 
only the most determined could win an entrance? Thank God, 
these questions can now be answered. 

He was working in harmony with God's plan. The plan is to call 
out and perfect the church first to be made a blessing to those 
who are left. 



God is not limited, in His dealings with us, to our life here. 
Man's sin consigned him to the grave. Christ's righteousness 
brings him back from the grave. Men have long advocated the 
far-reaching power of the Savior's death. They have taught that 
his blood could avail for all. Few have realized the revealed 
truth that His blood does avail for all. He who gave Himself a 
ransom for all, thereby has ransomed all, and the due time has 
now come for this to be testified. 

"Behold the Lamb of God who taketh away the sin of the 
world. " "God was in Christ reconciling the WORLD unto 
Himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them. " The salvation 
here taught does not depend upon their acceptance of Him. He 
who laid the foundations of the gospel, laid them broad enough 
and deep enough to sustain the whole structure of human 
salvation. Jesus, who worked out His Father's will, had no 
occasion to be in haste. During the gospel age He is gathering 
out the jewels for His crown-the church of the first-born. 
Hereafter, He will take to Himself His great power and reign. 
Then all the nations whom He has made will come and worship 
before Him. If our work be guided by a knowledge of His plan, 
though the results may seem less, they will be more effectual. 
Above all, let us so live that He may do the work through us, 
now and hereafter. 

L. A. A. 



R109 : page 6 

Is Sin a Type or a Reality? 

It has been suggested by some one as an advanced truth, that 
the cleansing of our theology is the antitype of the bearing away 
of sin by the scape-goat, making sin a type of false theology. 
This is a novel if not a dangerous idea. Novelties are striking; 
new things are eagerly sought for, and too apt to be received as 
truth, without careful examination, or to be received as advanced 
truth because new. But if "faith is counted for righteousness, 
why is not false theology counted for sin?" we are asked. This 
seems plausible, and may carry conviction to many trusting, 
honest souls, but it is sophistical. It is not a proper contrast. If 
faith were a clean theology, then a false theology would be 
unbelief. Unbelief is one kind of sin. The Holy Spirit reproves 
the world of sin because "they believe not on Me," said Christ. 

But a personal faith in the Lord Jesus Christ is not to be 
confounded with a perfect knowledge of God's plan of salvation. 
Every babe in Christ has faith in Him. He could not be even a 
babe without this, but his knowledge of the plan may and should 
be a growth during his whole life. When Christ said to one who 
came to Him, "Oh, woman, great is thy faith," he certainly could 



not mean that she had an extensive knowledge of the plan of the 
ages. It would be presumption to think so. 

It has been the privilege of every Christian to have a strong faith 
in Christ, but it has never been the privilege of any Christian to 
have a perfect knowledge of God's plan. We do not underrate 
the value of knowledge, nor in any sense belittle the 
responsibility of the Christian to grow in knowledge. God 
forbid. But we believe, in order to have the right effect, it is best 
to call things by the right names. Sin is sin— transgression of law, 
and ignorance is not always sin. Jesus says: "If you were blind, 
ye should have no sin." 

The Holy Spirit was not promised to lead each individual into all 
the truth, but the church as a whole, as represented by the 
apostles, was to be led into all truth, and we can not doubt that 
the Christians of every generation have had all the truth due in 
their time. 

But the holiest and most enlightened Christians, even now 
living, may well adopt the language of the Apostle Paul, "Now 
we know in part, but when that which is perfect is come, then 
that which is in part will be done away." 1 Cor. 13. That 
certainly cannot be until after the marriage— the complete union 
and glory for which Christ prayed (John 17), when "we shall see 
as we are seen, and know as we are known. " The papacy claims 
infallibility, and therefore sets itself up as the judge of men. Let 
all beware of imitating the unworthy example. Intercourse with 
a great variety of Christian people has convinced us that many 
dear children of God have a strong faith in the Lord Jesus, which 
enables them to lay hold on many blessings, both temporal and 
spiritual, though in many cases their knowledge of the plan of 
God is deficient. Others, wiser in the mysteries of God, seem 
sometimes to have a weaker faith, less love and a less perfect 
life, 

"They that be wise shall shine as the firmament, but they that 
turn many to righteousness, as the stars." Dan. 12:3. The stars 
are brighter than the firmament. Oh, that we might be able to 
combine wisdom, love and Christian work in our lives. 

Faith is one thing; knowledge is quite another. "Add to your 
faith virtue, and to your virtue knowledge, " &c. Sin is one thing, 
and imperfect theology is another. "Now ye are clean" was 
spoken to the disciples in an early stage of experience, but it was 
their life-work to learn. He that is in Christ is counted "complete 
in Him," faith being counted for righteousness. A perfect 
theology is never counted for righteousness, though it is one 
important part of the disciple's work to grow in grace and 
knowledge. Faith is at the foundation, where but little 
knowledge is expected, while the knowledge comes gradually, 
as we advance. 



It would do violence to language to introduce the phrase 
"imperfect theology" where the word "sin" occurs, which would 
not be the case if they meant the same thing; and it must be an 
"imperfect theology" indeed, that assumes to confound them. 
"By one man an imperfect theology entered into the world and 
death by an imperfect theology." "By the law came the 
knowledge of an imperfect theology." "Until the law, an 
imperfect theology was in the world, but it is not imputed where 
there is no law." "Behold the Lamb of God, that taketh away 
the—" No, we will not write it, it is too absurd. But it is no more 
absurd than the idea that the scape-goat work associated with 
cleansing the sanctuary in the law, was a type of the cleansing of 
theology here. The removal of sin from the sanctuary, would, it 
seems to us, far more fitly represent the cleansing of the church 
from all the works of the flesh, so that they might bring forth 
more fully the "fruits of the Spirit." Gal. 5. The tendency seems 
to be to make too little of character by exalting theology. And 
the false application of sin as a type of false theology, while it 
does not lead us to think little of a clean theology, it does lead us 
more clearly to see that character is the ideal of Christian life— 
the "wedding garment." 

"No truth is vital, nor any error fatal, which, when believed and 
obeyed, does not affect character. " 

J. H. P. 



R110:page6 

POPULAR WITH ONE MAN. 

Major Whittle and P. P. Bliss, while engaged in evangelistic 
work for the Master, started for a new field of labor on a bitterly 
cold night. As they passed from the station-house towards the 
railroad train, they reached a gate before which a man stood, 
who said to the hurrying passengers, "Show your tickets." Of 
course the demand was annoying to many who were compelled 
to unloose their heavy wrappings, and to withdraw their hands 
from comfortable gloves; and it is not strange that expressions 
of discontent and of anger were loud and frequent. When the 
two Evangelists were going through the gate, the Major 
remarked pleasantly to the keeper, "You are not a very popular 
man with this crowd tonight. " "I don't care a cent for this 
crowd," was the surly reply; "I just want to be popular with one 
man." "Ah, my brother," said dear Bliss on entering the train, 
"that is a lesson for you and for me." 

Yes, and it is a lesson for every Christian in these last and 
perilous days. More men are making shipwreck of their faith on 
the coast of popular favor than in any other part of life's 
treacherous sea. They are seen all along the shore like dismasted 



and rotting hulks, instead of leading and pointing the way to the 
peaceful haven, that can not be far distant. Of too many who 
commenced their public ministry as faithful witnesses for Jesus, 
it can be said, as the lonely apostle wrote of a former friend and 
companion, "Demas hath forsaken me, having loved this present 
world." (2 Tim. 4:10). 

So in the last state of the professing Christian body described in 
the epistle to the church of the Laodiceans, 

R110:page7 

where the end and doom of Christendom are graphically 
portrayed, we have the same subtle and fatal spirit at work. 
Laodicea means "Justice for the people," and while the Church 
boasts that she is rich, and increased with goods, and has need of 
nothing, it is evidently implied that she is governed by popular 
clamor, and Christ is turned out of his own house, left standing 
at the door, knocking to catch the ear of any man, before the 
whole corrupt mass is spued out of his mouth. Rev. 3:14-20. 

Are not the evidences of this popular control of the Church 
increasing every day with frightful rapidity. Custom after 
custom, and doctrine after doctrine, sanctioned by divine 
enactment and sacred by the faith and observance of the saints 
through eighteen centuries, are yielded at the demand of public 
sentiment, until the pulpit, to a lamentable extent, has become a 
place for the delivery of popular lectures, and the Church 
building a place for popular entertainments. Let a preacher 
openly deny the Lord who bought him, disowning his divinity, 
ridiculing the necessity of his atoning blood, sneering at the 
authority of the Scriptures as superior to human reason, and at 
once the secular press, which in our cities at least is almost 
wholly in the hands of so-called "free thinkers," lauds him to the 
skies, as a man of genius, and broad culture, and large charity. 
Nay, multitudes in the Church unite with the enemies of Christ 
in celebrating his praise, especially if he increases the pew 
rentals, and attracts a crowd. 

Well, be it so. It is just what the word of God plainly tells us 
must come to pass in the last day of perilous times, when the 
church will contain "lovers of their own selves;... lovers of 
pleasures more than lovers of God; having a form of godliness, 
but denying the power thereof." (2 Tim. 3:2-5.) "When they will 
not endure sound doctrine; but after their own lusts shall they 
heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears; and they shall 
turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned into 
fables," (2 Tim. 4:3-4); when "there shall be false teachers 
among you, who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even 
denying the Lord that bought them." (1 Pet. 2:1.) 

But this furnishes all the stronger reason why those "who are 
kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, ready to 
be revealed in the last time, " should more and more make it their 



single aim "to be popular with one man." Let them not care a 
cent for the crowd out of the church, or in the church, but each 
say like the Apostle, with lofty and unswerving consecration: 
"None of these things move me, neither count I my life dear 
unto myself, so that I might finish my course with joy, and the 
ministry, which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the 
gospel of the grace of God. " (Acts 20:24.)-"The Truth. " 



R110:page7 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 

Q. If I understand you aright in your article on the "Ten 
Virgins" of last number, your view is that while overcoming 
Christians of all ages are virgins and will be joined to the 
Heavenly Bridegroom, yet the parable of Matt. 25, refers to 
those of that class living in our day, and who here and now as 
parts of the company have been used to represent the whole in 
the fulfillment of the parable. Am I correct? 

A. You are correct, we do not limit the virgins of all ages, but 
believe this parable to refer to virgins at the close of this age. 
We cannot say however that every Christian shall have the high 
honor of being united with Jesus as his bride and joint heir. The 
word, only authorizes us to say that "He that overcometh shall 
inherit all things." We will not judge who are "overcomers"-the 
King has come in, he will judge righteous judgment. 

Q. Your article in March No. "Three Covenants" states that the 
words covenant and testament are the same and from the same 
Greek word, and that the "New Covenant" is a thing of the 
future. To which covenant then does Jesus refer when He says: 
"This is my blood of the New Testament?" Matt. 26:28. 

A. In the article referred to we found that the Abrahamic 
Covenant was an unconditional promise and for that reason it 
needed and had no medium. God simply confirming it by oath. 
"For when God made promise to Abraham, because he could 
sware by no greater, He swore by himself" that by these "two 
immutable things"— the promise and oath-in which it was 
impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong consolation. " 
Heb. 6:13-18. We found also that the Law Covenant which was 
430 years after did not disannul this one, that it was separate and 
distinct. "The Law" was not unconditional, but- "Whosoever 
doeth those things shall live by them. " And because it had these 
conditions binding on God on the one part, and Israel on the 
other, it required and had Moses as its mediator. Paul is intent 
on proving this distinction between the Law and the Abrahamic 
covenant and in Gal. 3:20, points out to us that the distinction 
between the unconditional and conditional is apparent from the 
fact that to the latter, God gave a mediator, while to the former 



none was given. -"For a mediator is not of one (or when there is 
but one party to the contract) but God is one. " Therefore a 
mediator being given with the Law, proves that it had bindings 
upon Israel as well as upon God. 

Rill : page 7 

Then we looked at the New Covenant and found that it has 
conditions binding upon God and the world, therefore it should 
have a mediator. God binds himself to "restore all things," to 
save men from death and to bring them to a knowledge of the 
truth, (1 Tim. 2:4), to "pour out His Spirit upon all flesh" (Joel 
2:28) and to put a new spirit within them (as it was in Adam 
before sin entered) (Ezek. 36:26) and to write his law in their 
hearts (more than Adam had) Jer. 31:33, and he will set his 
sanctuary (dwelling-the Church) in the midst of them 
forevermore. (Ezek. 37:26.) And the conditions upon the World 
are, that then, they shall obey the Lord's prophet or be cut off 
from life, (the second death). "Every soul shall die for his own 
sin." Jer. 31:30. "It shall come to pass that every soul that will 
not hear that prophet, shall be cut off from among the people. 
Acts 3:23. But who shall be the mediator of so great a covenant? 
Paul assures us that "Jesus (is) the mediator of the New 
Covenant. " Jesus accepted the high position and sealed or 
ratified that New Covenant with his own blood (death) just as 
Moses had ratified the Law Covenant, which was a shadow of 
this, with the blood of a bullock and a goat sprinkling 
(cleansing) all the people; so Jesus died but instead of sprinkling 
all the people at once, he waits 1 800 years to "take out a people 
for his name"- His "bride"-"His body"— to be associated with 
him in the work of sprinkling or cleansing all the people. 

He said to his disciples of old and to us now: "Take up your 
cross and follow me"— crucify the flesh —and the same thought 
is suggested when Jesus took the cup saying: "This is my blood 
of the New Covenant shed for many (the world in general) for 
the remission of sins." By passing it to each of us and saying, 
"Drink ye all of it," he virtually invites us to drink into his death, 
to "be made conformable unto his death. "-"Are ye able to drink 
of the cup (death) that I shall drink of, and to be baptised with 
the baptism (death) that I am baptised with?... Ye shall drink 
indeed of the cup that I shall drink of, and be baptised with the 
baptism that I am baptised with." Matt. 20:22. "We know that as 
many of us as were baptised into Jesus Christ were baptised into 
his death," (Rom. 6:2) and we know just as well what "the cup" 
signified when we find Jesus in the garden praying: "Father if it 
be possible, let this cup (death) pass from me." So when Jesus 
passes us "the cup," he says to us: Die with me, I will thus 
permit you to join with me in sealing the New Covenant and by 
and by when the body is complete, associate you with me in the 
glorious work of sprinkling (cleansing) "all the people," as parts 



or members of the "one mediator between God and men," when 
the New Covenant comes into operation. 

How very forcibly every feature of the law seems to shadow 
forth the fact that, "If we suffer with him we shall also be 
glorified together." We believe "that if we be dead with Him we 
shall also live with Him. " Let us then reckon ourselves dead 
indeed unto sin, and though in the world be not of it. 

Q. What are the two immutable things of Heb. 6:18? 

A. You will find our understanding of this question in the above 
answer, to be God's promise and oath to Abraham. 

Q. Are there any reasons for thinking that Jesus will appear in 
the flesh to his church? 

A. We know of no reason for so thinking but many reasons to 
the contrary. Brother Paton's article- "EXPEDIENT FOR 
YOU"— in this No. is so much to the point that we will not 
answer you further. If it does not fully satisfy you, we shall be 
glad to know of any points of difficulty and answer them. 



R110:page7 



TO OUR READERS. 



The present number of the WATCH TOWER ends the first 
volume, the first year of its existence. From the numerous letters 
containing kind and encouraging words, speaking of the light 
thrown on various scriptures through its teaching, we have 
reason to hope that our labor is not in vain in the Lord. While we 
labor not for human praise and thanks, but to receive, of the 
Master, "well done, good and faithful servant," yet these kind 
words from our fellow pilgrims are not to be despised. Like a 
cup of cold water, they greatly cheer and refresh us. 

We have felt called to a defense of the truth. During this harvest- 
time of shaking and sifting in which we are living, there is 
danger of throwing away with the rubbish some of the very 
foundation pillars of truth. Many of these fundamental truths are 
being attacked by the great enemy of truth, and the more of 
God's children he can enlist with him the more successful is he. 
It was needful, therefore, that we should exhort you to take unto 
you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand 
(stand against the evil attacks) in (this) the evil day, and having 
done all, to stand. (Eph. 6:13.) Our lamp shining on the 
Tabernacle service and types of the law has had the effect of 
confirming these old truths and establishing our hearts in the 
faith. As we have seen Jesus' death typified by the Paschal Lamb 
and the bullock of sin-offering, so we have learned that we (the 
church) have been filling, and must continue to fill, the type of 
the goat of sin-offering, thus being made "conformable unto his 



death" and "filling up the measure of the sufferings of Christ 
which are behind. " 

Many tell us by letter, and some by word, that we are in their 
prayers, and we now request that 

R110:page8 

during the coming year ZION'S WATCH TOWER may be the 
special subject of your prayers, and in the words of Paul, that 
you pray for us that God may open unto us a door of utterance to 
speak the mystery of Christ. (Col. 4:3). 

To those who wish the paper, but who cannot afford to pay, the 
terms for the next year are the same as for the past one— "Ask 
that ye may receive. " A postal card will do. If you send us the 
names of any you think would be interested and benefited 
thereby, we will send them sample copies free. You might, thus, 
to some extent, "do good and communicate. " 



Rill : page 8 

"The Day Dawn, or the 
Gospel in Type and Prophecy." 

The first copy of this work has just been received from the 
printer, and the entire edition of 4,000 copies will be ready for 
delivery by the time this paper reaches you. It is a more 
exhaustive and elaborate work than we had at first expected; 
more so by far than anything ever presented on the above topics, 
from our standpoint. It contains 334 pages in clear and distinct 
type. To give an idea of its size, we would say that it contains 
about three times as much matter as the "Three Worlds," a book 
familiar to most of our readers, now out of print. 

From the first hasty examination we should say it is a work 
which will do an inestimable amount of good, and to many, will 
be an instructor second only to the Word of God. It is written in 
a plain, unassuming manner, seeming to indicate that the writer 
had learned that "great I and little you" are no part of the Good 
News. Both the I and you are as far as possible dropped from 
notice, and the subject is made so beautifully plain and clear, 
that many, we believe, will bless God for having been permitted 
to read it. It is divided into twenty-nine chapters, and like God's 
book, contains things "both new and old. " 

We copy from the book, the following terms which are certainly 
low: "Price of Day Dawn, in paper covers, 50 cts. 

cloth .75 cts. 

Those interested and unable to pay, are welcome to a copy free, 
by asking for it. Our object is to spread the truth, and as we have 
freely received, we would freely give to such as need. 



Address the Publisher, A. D. Jones, Pittsburgh, Pa., or the 
writer, J. H. Paton, Almont, Michigan. " 

We hope that every reader of the WATCH TOWER will avail 
himself at once of these liberal terms. The time arguments alone, 
clearly and plainly stated, should do you fifty dollars worth of 
good if not more. Those who can afford to do so, should keep a 
dozen copies on their loan list. 



Rill : page 8 

Bible Class Department. 

Q. Please explain Mark 9:43-44. "If thy hand offend thee, cut it 
off: It is better for thee to enter into life maimed, than having 
two hands, to go into hell, into the fire that never shall be 
quenched; where their worm dieth not and the fire is not 
quenched. " 

A. The English word hell, (in Com. English version of N.T.,) is 
used to translate three entirely different Greek words: One of 
these, "tartarus," occurs but once-2 Pet. 2:4, and signifies, 
according to best Greek scholars, our atmosphere. (Satan-"the 
prince of the power of the air. ") Another Greek word translated 
by the word hell, is "hades." This is used eleven times in the 
N.T., and is ten times improperly translated hell. The word 
signifies the grave, or a state of death, or the dominion of death. 
The Author of the Emph. Diag., says: "To translate hades by the 
word hell, as it is done ten times out of eleven in the N.T., is 
very improper, unless it has the Saxon meaning of "helan"-to 
cover -attached to it. The primitive signification of hell only 
denoting what was secret or concealed. This perfectly 
corresponds with the Greek word, hades, and the Hebrew 
equivalent, sheol; but the theological definition given to it at the 
present day, by no means expresses it. It is said that in some 
parts of England to-day, it is not uncommon to hear the old 
Saxon use of this word, as when a man speaks of helling 
potatoes, (covering them,) and helling his house (shingling or 
covering it). 

The third and only other Greek word translated by our word 
hell, is "gehenna." It occurs twelve times. The same author 
quoted above, says of gehenna: "It is the Grecian mode of 
spelling the Hebrew words which are translated "The valley of 
Hinnom." This valley was also called "tophet," a detestation, an 
abomination. Into this place were cast all kinds of filth with the 
carcasses of beasts and the unburied bodies of criminals who 
had been executed. To consume these, fires were kept 
continually burning. Gehenna then, 

R112:page8 



as occuring in the N.T., symbolizes death and utter destruction, 
but in no place signifies a place of eternal torment. 

Kimchi, on Psa. 27:13 says: "It was a place in the land (valley) 
near to Jerusalem, and was a place contemptible where they did 
cast things defiled and carcasses, and there was there a continual 
fire to burn polluted things and bones, (Brimstone was thrown in 
to continue it) and therefore, the condemnation of the wicked in 
a parabolic way, is called Gihinnom. " 

One thing is sure, nothing was ever cast into this "Valley of 
Hinnom" to be kept in torment. Only dead bodies were cast into 
it as a mark of special ignominy, and what the fire did not come 
in contact with, the worms destroyed, so that in any case the 
result was destruction. See Isa. 66:24. (The Jews were not 
allowed to torture even dumb animals.) Jesus apparently made a 
lesson from surroundings, as was his custom. So now, he says: 
If any of your members— eye, hand, etc., so ensnare you as to 
endanger your being cast out from men as a criminal, and cast 
into this Valley of Hinnom, it is too expensive a member to 
keep, even though it be dear unto you as your eye or right hand. 
It would be far better to cast off the troublesome member and 
save your life. 

So, too, we can see that every Christian is called upon to— 
"Mortify" (put to death) therefore, your members which are 
upon the earth— uncleanness, covetousness, &c. (Col. 3:5). 
These evil members must be lopped off, else they will choke the 
life of Christ commenced, and prevent your entrance into that 
everlasting life, and render you a vessel fitted to destruction, 
symbolized by Gehenna- "Valley of Hinnom." 

But it may not be uninteresting to some to know that the 
following parts of the text of Mark 9 are interpolations, and are 
not found in the best MSS. Sinaitic and Vatican -viz: vs. 44 and 
46 are both entirely omitted; also, in vs. 45, the words "into the 
fire that never shall be quenched," and in vs. 47, the word "fire" 
is omitted. See "Emp. Diag. " and "Tischendorf. " 



Rill : page 8 



'SUBMIT AND COMMIT." 



I read in a friend's book, not long ago, an extract which 
commenced with the following words: "The longer I live the 
more profoundly am I convinced that the all-in-all of practical 
Christianity may be summed up in two words— 'submit and 
commit.'" Truer words have seldom passed from human pen; 
and this is the great lesson that grace by her gentle discipline 
teaches, and that the will of man has to learn. Submit —cease 
first from thy rebellious self-assertions, and next from thy proud 
efforts to correct and amend thyself; and then commit— cast 



thyself into the hands of Omnipotent Love. Claim it of the new 
Adam that He shall, dwell within thee, accomplish, as He has 
undertaken, what thou canst not do, and regulate in peace and 
harmony, under His scepter, the once jarring and conflicting 
forces of thy nature. So shall there indeed be a great calm, a 
stillness, a rest within thy consecrated heart, and thou shalt be in 
a position to make proof of all the wealth of thy promised land- 
the land that flows with milk and honey-as thou proceedest to 
live, not only soberly, but righteously and Godly. Only let us 
take heed lest it should be said of thee or me, reader, "We see 
that they could not enter in, because of unbelief. "-School of 
Grace. 



R112:page8 

The Editor's Eastern Trip. 

Invitations to stop and see the little companies at various points 
en route to and from Lynn, Mass., have been so numerous, that 
we have been obliged to forego the pleasure of complying with 
some five requests. In future, however, we hope to be able to see 
these also. 

The entire arrangement of meetings, etc., in each place, will be 
left in charge of the person mentioned below. Any arrangements 
they may deem proper will be agreeable to me. They may 
arrange for one, two or three meetings a day, and, if they 
choose, select my subjects, or announce the general topic as 
being "Things Pertaining to the Kingdom of God. " The route, 
committee of arrangement and time of my arrival are as follows: 

CHAMBERSBURG, PA H. E. Hoke. 

Wednesday, noon, June 2d. 

READING, PA LB. Kine, No. 102 N. 8th st. 

Saturday night, June 6th. 

NEWARK, N.J...Mrs. E M. Deems, 500 Washin't'n st. 
Tuesday night, June 9th. 

LYNN, MASS Amos Hunt, No. 13 Ingols st. 

Sunday, A.M. (early), June 13th. 

CLINTON, MASS Mrs. M. T. Miner. 

Wednesday, June 16th. 

SPRINGFIELD, MASS....R. W. Stearns, 96 Gardner st. 
Friday, June 1 8th. 

FT. EDWARD, N.Y..J. C. Sunderland. 
Tuesday, June 22d. 

MONTROSE, PA D. D. Lathrop. 

Friday, June 25 th. 



BERWICK, PA A. B. MacCrea. 

Saturday night, June 26th. 

JERSEY SHORE, PA S. M. Bond. 

Wednesday, June 30th. 

By the above, it will be seen that the stay at each place will 
average about two days. I shall expect almost continuous 
meetings while with you. 



R121 : page 8 

JESUS gave his perfect natural life to redeem fallen, natural 
men and to restore them to the perfect natural condition, so we, 
as his bride, members of his body are first by faith reckoned or 
accounted perfect through his sacrifice, and secondly, permitted 
to give this justified nature a "living sacrifice." Thus we are 
associated with Jesus in his death, the expressed conditions 
being, that if we thus give up all the Adamic, we may become 
partakers of the "Divine Nature"-be made "New Creatures in 
Christ Jesus." "For if we be dead with Him, we believe that we 
shall also live with Him. " "If we suffer with Him, we shall also 
be glorified together. " 



R121 : page 8 

BROTHER H. B. RICE writes that he, from temporary loss of 
business and sickness in his family, has been kept quite 
occupied of late, but has not lost his interest in the WATCH 
TOWER. He says: "I believe that the blood of Jesus Christ 
cleanseth us from all sin. It was certainly not laying aside 
immortality. It was shedding his blood— pouring out his soul (or 
life) unto death. " He says he finds time to preach the glad 
tidings, and recently delivered a series of eleven lectures in 
Stockton, Cal. He has again obtained a situation in San 
Francisco, and has removed there. 


