VOL. XXVIII MAY 1 No. 9 
A.D. 1907--A.M. 6035 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 131 

State Churches in Disruption 131 

The Situation in France 132 

Berean Studies on the Tabernacle 133 

Yearly Requests for Pilgrims 134 

Filthiness of the Flesh and Spirit 134 

Fighting the Good Fight 135 

The Cleansing Power 136 

Perfecting Our Holiness 137 

A Lesson on Divine Providence 137 

Foreordained of God a Leader 138 

Assuredly God was with Him 140 

"Thou Mayest Bring forth My People" 142 

Some Interesting Letters 143 

page 130 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



INDIA PAPER STUDIES 



Our printers, after waiting for months for the India paper 
on which to print for us an edition of STUDIES in six volumes, 
found after printing some of the first volume that the paper is 
not up to the standard guaranteed to us. They have placed 
another order for the best India paper, but it may be six 
months before they receive it; and we need not expect the 
books before November. 

KARATOL-INDIA EDITION VOL. I 

Two thousand copies of STUDIES I. had been printed before 
the defect in the paper was discovered. These we have procured, 
bound limp in imitation leather, called karatol, so that 
we can supply them at 25c each— any quantity— charges prepaid. 
There will be no more after this lot. Describe them in 
ordering as "Karatol— India Studies." 

MUSIC PRACTICE FOR CONVENTIONS 



As the friends become acquainted with the music in our 
new Hymns of Dawn (cloth, 35c, postpaid; 25c by express, 
collect— 333 of the choicest hymns of all ages) they find the 
melodies grand indeed. They are of the sort that never wear 
out. And many of them are grandly solemn and helpful to a 
spirit of reverence and worship. 

It is proposed to use these Hymnals at the General Conventions 
this year, and we urge the dear friends everywhere to 
practice these tunes that our Convention singing may be a specially 
inspiring feature. At the upper right corner of many of 
the pieces will be found a reference to another tune considered 
appropriate, indicated thus: "Alt(ernative) 129," or other hymn 
number. Where a tune given is unfamiliar try the alternate, 
until you have time for practicing the former. 

COLPORTEURS AND SHARP SHOOTERS 



All are sharpshooters who do what they can to sell DAWNS 
or STUDIES amongst friends and neighbors. Colporteurs take 
and work territory systematically, giving a part or all of their 
time. Sharpshooters who order 25 volumes at a time by express 
or 30 copies by freight, charges collect, are granted colporteur 
rates, viz., 16c each for Vols. I., II., III., and 20c each for Vols. 
IV., V., VI. 

Colporteurs desiring partners in the work should send 
postal card request for an aide. They will find the General 



Conventions very favorable opportunities for such alliances. Appliances 
for use on bicycles for delivering will be exhibited. 

DAILY HEAVENLY MANNA--READY IN MAY 



Our new edition of the "Manna" will contain the same 
texts and comments as the former one; but it will have twice 
as many pages. Every alternate leaf will be blank ruled, for 
use as an Autograph and Birthday Record. It will be printed 
on fine bond paper and bound in handsome dark blue cloth. 
It would be well worth $1 or more in any bookstore. 

NEW PRICES, WHOLESALE AND RETAIL 

The new "Manna" will be sold by Manna Colporteurs and 
others at 50 cents each (60c when gotten by mail or prepaid 
express). The wholesale rates, open to any TOWER reader, 
are as follows— cash with order: 

1 copy, postpaid, each 35 cents 

10 copies or more, by express, prepaid 30 " 

10 " " " at your charges. 20 " 
30 " " by freight 20 " 

We of course prefer the DAWNS or STUDIES to be colporteured; 
but a good follow-up work can be done with "Manna" 
by those who cannot do the regular work with DAWN-STUDIES. 



R3984:page 131 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
STATE CHURCHES IN DISRUPTION 



THE State Churches— religious institutions supported 

by the general government— owed 

their beginning to the theories of Antichrist, 

when Satan, the great deceiver who beguiled mother 

Eve, in the third century beguiled the majority of those 

who believed in Christ. The deceptive theory by which 

he accomplished this was that the Church had misunderstood 

the teachings of the Lord and of the apostles 

respecting the second coming of Christ and the establishment 

of the Kingdom of God at that time. Satan's 

new theory was that God had laid this responsible 

work upon the shoulders of the Church now— not waiting 

for the second coming of Jesus; that it was the 

duty of the Church to convert the world, and that then 

Christ would come and approve the work. The theory 

further was that this conversion of the world at the 



hands of the Church was to be accomplished by a vicegerent 

of Christ— that is to say, that the Lord would 

select from amongst the clergy one who would represent 

Jesus and reign in his stead; and others (cardinals, 

bishops, etc.) would represent the apostles and 

faithful of the "little flock," who were promised a 

share in the Kingdom. The theory gradually developed, 

and in the fourth century the Bishop of Rome 

was recognized as the head of the Church and Christ's 

vicegerent or reigning representative in the world, and 

to himself about that time he gathered the "Sacred 

College," or "little flock," composed of cardinals. 

From that time on, quietly, the people were instructed 
to regard the Pope as the king of the world, 
God's representative, Christ's vicegerent, and the 
head over all kings and princes. As this idea prevailed 
amongst the people they were taught to look to the 
popes for their approval of kings and princes and laws, 
until finally a wonderful power was built up, and any 
king or prince out of accord with the Papacy could 
very easily be dispossessed of all authority. Another, 
having the papal sanction, would make war upon him; 
and the people, believing that the papal sanction 
meant the divine sanction, would support the papal 
decree. It was under these conditions that the public 
government was required to set aside from the public 
revenues money for the support of Roman Catholic 
churches and ministers throughout their domains. 

This custom, once universal throughout Europe, 
received a severe shock, a set-back, in Reformation 
times. But the kings and princes supporting the Reformation 
movement, wishing to have some religious or 
spiritual approval to sanction their authority in the 
minds of the people, voluntarily accepted the Reformers 
and their approval as instead of the papal sanction. 
Thus it was that Reformed churches in Great Britain, 
Sweden, Norway, Denmark, Germany and Switzerland 
were organized and became Protestant State churches 
as thoroughly as they had previously been Roman 
Catholic State churches. The principle was the same 
—it was merely a different Church which was now supported. 
Roman Catholic dominion still prevails in 
Italy, Hungary, Spain, Portugal and, until very recently, 
in France. These governments, authorized by the 
Papacy, supporting the Papacy financially, have been 
known as Christian governments, and they in turn 
have inscribed upon their coins and in their official 
documents that they reign over the people by the grace 
of God (indicated to them through the Papacy). Similarly 
the Protestant countries above named, carrying 
the State Church idea with them, are known as kingdoms 
of God, and they also on their coins and in their 
official documents declare that their kings and princes 
reign by the grace of God, as indicated through their 
recognition by the Reformers and by their support of 
the Church. 



In some countries, particularly in Germany, all 
religions are recognized by the State, and a provision 
made for salaries to pastors and teachers, whether Lutheran, 
Roman Catholic, Presbyterian, Methodist, 
Jews, or what not— so long as a congregation of German 
people, recognized by the government as a denomination, 
desire such ministers. 

Now, however, we are coming to a time of general 
disruption along these lines. The people are getting 
awake to the fact that the kings and princes are reigning 
under a law of selfishness instead of under a divine 

R3984 : page 132 

code and authorization. They are learning, too, gradually, 
that a majority of ministers are preaching and 
teaching as a matter of business, and with a view to 
getting as much as possible of the butter of honor of 
men and salary along with their daily bread. Popular 
government is consequently tending more to the thought 
that those who believe certain doctrines should pay for 
them, and that the public should not be taxed for its 
religion, which should be free and should be provided 
by those in accord with the promulgated tenets. This 
is the program followed in the United States, and 
the progress of this country in every way has been 
a wonderful lesson to the people of other countries, 
who in various ways are seeking to copy our methods, 
thus corroborating the thought set forth by Bartholdi's 
Statue of Liberty, that personified in this nation Liberty 
is enlightening the world. 

Word comes from various quarters of Europe to 
the effect that Church and State union is threatened 
with dissolution. In Great Britain, in Sweden, in 
Switzerland, in Spain, the matter is being actively discussed, 
and the indication is that the accomplishment 
will not be far off, while in France there is a great turmoil 
through the dissolution of the Roman Catholic 
Concordat or agreement with the French government 
by which now the French are free from all State support 
so far as Roman Catholic and all other religious 
systems are concerned. 

THE SITUATION IN FRANCE 

At the time of the French Revolution all the Church 
property of France was confiscated, but in 1801 Napoleon 
Bonaparte entered into an agreement with Pope 
Pius VII., long known as the Concordat. It is this 
Concordat or agreement that has just been dissolved 
in France, and which returns to the care of the people 
all of the Church property, which is presumed to be 
theirs because it was built at their expense. 

Under the terms of the Concordat the French government 
became responsible for the maintenance of the 
clergy and the churches, and the clergy were recognized 



as civil servants of the French nation. French 
bishops and others of the Roman Catholic clergy could 
be appointed only by the approval of the government. 
Thus the Catholic Church was completely under State 
control. The Papacy, naturally enough, did not very 
highly appreciate this arrangement, which placed her 
interests so much in the hands of the French government, 
and consequently there was continual friction, 
the clergy striving in various ways to ignore their responsibility 
to the government, and the Papacy seeking 
more and more to maintain the control of the 
clergy and to oppose any and every interest and matter 
in the French government that seemed to be inimical 
to Roman Catholic interests. The light of our day 
upon every subject strained this relationship more and 
more, and the intriguing on the part of the Jesuits 
against the Republic and in favor of a monarchy- 
esteemed to be more desirable for the Papacy's interests 
—had the effect of leading the government in 1881 
to endeavor to expel the Jesuits and to control other 
Roman Catholic orders, with a view to the protection 
of the interests of the Republic, the foes of which 
they were realized to be. The movement was only 
partly successful because of the blindness of the people 
to the real situation. Not until the beginning of 
the present century did the government have a sufficient 
support from the people to take its stand— to 
resent papal influence in its affairs. 

On December 11, 1905, the French Congress passed 
a bill which provided for the separation of Church and 
State, but giving one year during which the churches 
could make their arrangements for conforming to the 
law. Meantime inventories of all the Church paraphernalia 
were made, and everything was prepared for the 
proper taking over of the property for the State on 
December 1 1, 1906. The essence of this law set forth 
that the State should no longer provide for the salaries 
of the clergy nor for the expenses of religious services, 
and that thenceforth the use of the Church edifices and 
equipments would be for the people— that no foreign 
religious power such as the Papacy would be recognized. 
On these terms all who desired to use the 
Church buildings were invited to organize congregations, 
whose representatives or trustees would be dealt 
with by the government, and receive the right or permission 
to use the buildings for religious purposes. 
These trustees would be answerable to the government 
for the proper use of the buildings. Thus the churches 
of France would have been put practically on the same 
basis or footing as the churches in the United States, 
except that here the title-deeds may be in the name of 
the Pope, while a congregation not in harmony with 
the Pope or head or the holder of the title could be 
legally expelled; whereas under the new laws of France 
each congregation is independent and cannot be expelled 
from the Church edifice or by order of presbyteries 



or synods or bishops or the Pope, since the 

title-deed is in the government, by which the possession 

is guaranteed to the congregation. This 

feature of the law really places religion in France 

upon the most independent plane imaginable, permitting 

the congregation to formulate its own creed, and 

R3985 : page 132 

if desirable to change the same from time to time. 

The law provided that if its terms were not met by 
December 1 1, 1906, the churches should be closed and 
the property confiscated to the State. After this law 
was framed, about a year ago, the Pope condemned it, 
but gave no positive instructions as to procedure; and 
matters standing thus, the French government, just 
before the law went into effect, to avoid a conflict with 
the Papacy, announced that regular services might be 
continued another year if the congregations would comply 
with the law of 1881, which required application to 
the police department for the privilege of holding services, 
and a declaration of loyalty to the government. 
But just before the law was to go into effect the Pope 
precipitated matters by issuing an encyclical instructing 
all the priests and church-wardens to abstain from 
any declaration or application to the authorities. 

This was esteemed by the French government an 

R3985 : page 133 

attempt on the Pope's part to intermeddle with its 
affairs and an endeavor to block the laws of France— 
an incitement of the French people to rebellion against 
the laws of their country. Consequently the government 
took prompt steps, and in resentment of the interference 
deported the papal representative at Paris, 
and gave orders that bishops or priests or others who 
attempted either by word or act to interfere with the 
execution of the law should be placed under arrest. 
Thus the dissolution of Church and State arrangements 
in France was effected without special disorder, though 
the Pope and his representatives in a quiet way, so as 
not to become amenable to the law, are seeking still to 
arouse the people to resentment against the government 
by refusing to perform various acts and functions 
which Catholics are led to believe are all important 
and to be performed only by the clergy, viz., baptism, 
rites for the dead, etc., etc. Evidently the time when 
the Pope could overthrow governments by giving a 
hint to the people through the clergy is about past. 

It is high time that these unscriptural unions of 
Church and State come to an end. They were built 
upon fraud to begin with, and have prospered through 
frauds continually. As God never authorized the Pope 
to be the vicegerent of Jesus, never authorized his 
reign upon earth over kingdoms and peoples, never 



authorized him to set prince against prince and to 

cause awful bloodshed for the maintenance of papal 

influence, and never authorized the governments recognized 

by Papacy to call themselves Christendom 

(Christ's kingdom), and as the Protestant unions of 

Church and State had no more authority than the 

papal, it is well that all of these human institutions 

go down, that the shackles of superstition should be 

broken, and the people should be the better prepared 

to learn that all the kingdoms of this world are man-made 

and selfish in origin and practice, and that the 

Kingdom of God's dear Son, the Millennial Kingdom, 

which will shortly be inaugurated, will be the only 

rightful spiritual empire to have control of all the 

affairs of the world of mankind. Its control of human 

destinies will be to the advantage of every creature— 

to lift them up, to set them free from superstition and 

by restitution processes to bring back into harmony 

with God and into the divine likeness all who will obey 

the great King of that day. O Lord, thy Kingdom 

come; thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. 

OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE TRUTH IN FRANCE 

At this distance it would appear that the present 
crisis in religious affairs in France would be a most 
favorable opportunity for the presentation of the Truth 
amongst the people of that land. While Protestants 
there are very few, undoubtedly there are many Catholics 
who are generally enlightened and now being set 
free from their superstitious reverence for Romanism. 
These as well as the Protestants should be ready for 
the glorious message of the Millennial Kingdom and 
the better government, spiritual and temporal, which 
the Lord is providing and which shortly will be established. 
We would like to encourage the dear friends 
of the Truth under such conditions to be vigilant for 
the use of every opportunity— to go forward in the 
name and strength of the Lord with holy courage, to 
lift high the light and the royal banner. Similarly 
conditions are growing more favorable in Italy and 
Austria and Hungary. He that reapeth receiveth 
wages, and each one desiring to reap should first see 
what lies nearest to his hand and in which department 
of the service he could most effectively and most economically 
enlist his talents. "He that reapeth receiveth 
wages and gathereth fruit unto life eternal."— 
John 4:36. 



page 133 

BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES ON THE TABERNACLE 
THE ATONEMENT-DAY BURNT OFFERINGS 



MAY 19 

89. Why was Aaron instructed to bring two rams for 
burnt offerings? Lev. 16:3,5; T.73, par. 1. 

90. Why did he remove his linen garments and put on 
"the garments of glory and beauty" before he 
offered the "burnt offerings"? T.72, par. 4; 73, par. 3. 

9 1 . Were both rams then treated in the same manner? 
Lev. 9:12-16; T.73, par. 2. 

92. What was thus typified? T.73, par. 2. 

93. What was the difference between the "burnt offering" 
and the "sin offering"? T.73, par. 3. 

MAY 26 

94. When will God manifest his acceptance of the complete 
sacrifice for the sins of the world? Lev. 9:22-24; 

Rev. 14:1-7. 

95. Why are the sacrifices of Christ and the members 
of his body called the "better sacrifices"? Heb. 7:19; 
9:23. 

96. Must we expect God to bestow upon us, as his chosen 
Priesthood, honor and dignity before men, 

while we still "tabernacle" in the flesh? Phil. 2:5-10; 
I Cor. 4:8-14; T.73, par. 3. 

97. Where did the High Priest offer the sacrifice of 
burnt offering? Lev. 16:24; T.74, par. 1. 

98. Explain the difference in the significance of the 
garments worn by the priests during the "Day of 
Atonement" and those assumed by the High 

Priest at its close? T.74, par. 2. 

JUNE 2 

99. What did the washing of his person in water by the 
High Priest, after finishing the sin offering and 

before sacrificing the burnt offering, signify? 
Lev. 16:24; T.74, par. 2. 

100. Why was there "no man in the tabernacle of the 
congregation," the "Holy," when Aaron went 

into the "Most Holy" with the blood, both of the 
bullock and the Lord's goat? Lev. 16:17; T.74, 
par. 4; 75, par. 1,2. 

101. Will any special punishment be visited by the 
Lord upon those who, by reproaches, persecutions, 
etc., aided in destroying the humanity of 

page 134 

Christ (the bullock) and the little flock (the 
goat)? Lev. 16:28; T.75, par. 4. 

102. Will those who succeed in destroying the humanity, 
the flesh, of the great company (the scapegoat) 



receive any special retribution? Lev. 16:26; 
T.75, par. 6; 76, top of page. 



THE BLESSINGS FOLLOWING THE ATONEMENT-DAY 
SACRIFICES 

JUNE 9 

103. What was the standing of the children of Israel 
before God, after the Atonement-Day sacrifices 
were ended? Lev. 16:33,34; T.76, par. 1. 

104. To whom or to what are the sacrifices of Jesus 
and his Church offered? Lev. 16:14,15; T.76, 

par. 2. 

105. For what sins did they atone? Rom. 5:17-19; T.76, 
par. 2. 

106. When will God for the first time recognize the 
race of mankind? Lev. 9:8-23; Rom. 8:19-21, 
Diaglott; T.76, par. 2. 

JUNE 16 

107. What will be the glorious results of that recognition? 
Rev. 22:1-3; Isa. 11:6-9; 25:6-9; 35:1-10; 

29:18-20; T.76, par. 2. 

108. Will the blessings resulting from the reign of 
righteousness established after the close of the 
antitypical Day of Atonement come instantaneously 
or gradually? Isa. 62:10-12; John 5:28,29, 
Diaglott; I Cor. 15:23-25, Diaglott; Isa. 65:20, 
etc.; T.77, par. 1. 

109. Was this gradual work shown in the typical sacrifices 
of the children of Israel? and how? T.77, 

par. 2. 

110. How can we "rightly divide" and understand these 
different typical sacrifices of the Jewish age? 

T.77, par. 3. 

111. What are the two features or parts of At-one-ment? 
T.77, par. 4. 

112. How and when is the first part of this At-one-ment 
to be effected? T.77, par. 4. 

JUNE 23 

1 13. How and when is the second part effected? T.77, 
par. 4. 

114. Does the selection of the Bride of Christ, during 
this age, to be associated with him in the future 
uplifting and regenerating of the world, indicate 

that, naturally, they are any better or purer than 

the remainder of mankind? I Cor. 1:26-29; Rom. 3:10; 

Psa. 49:7; T.78, par. 1,2. 

115. In whom then does all the virtue of the great 
Atonement sacrifice lie? T.78, par. 2. 



page 134 

YEARLY REQUESTS FOR PILGRIM VISITS 

OUR "Pilgrim" service is becoming a very important 

factor in the "Harvest" work. While the 

brethren chosen for this service are not sent 

forth as perfect, the Society considers them worthy 

brethren everyway— ensamples to the flock in doctrine 

and practice. They travel continuously, as per announcements 

on the last page of the TOWER. All of 

their expenses, of every kind, are met by the Society: 

they do not solicit money or anything else, either for 

themselves or the Society. The service is free— the expenses 

being borne by the contributors to the Tract 

Fund. We seek divine guidance as to who shall be 

engaged in this service and where it shall be rendered. 

With the means put at our disposal we seek to do our 

best for the general welfare of the Lord's cause. 

The routine of the Pilgrims is in circuits arranged 
in harmony with the interest shown and requests received; 
and since many changes occur during a year 
we desire that REQUESTS FOR PILGRIM VISITS be made 
yearly, in May. Please answer the following questions, 
or as many of them as apply in your case. These responses 
are filed for our information for twelve months. 
You need not repeat the questions, but merely indicate 
them thus: (a), (b), etc. A postal card will serve our 
every purpose and be easy to file away. All interested 
classes please attend to this matter at once. 

(a) How many "Bible Students" reside in your vicinity? 

(b) Are weekly meetings held by you? 

(c) How many are usually in attendance? 

(d) Where do you now meet? (Full street address.) 

(e) At what hours are the Sunday studies held? 

(f) Was a vote taken on the "Pilgrim" invitation? 

(g) How many voted for the invitation to be sent? 
(h) How many, if any, voted against the invitation? 
(i) Would a suitable place be found for a public 
meeting? 

(j) What attendance do you think could be secured for 

the public session by such notification and advertising 

as your class would give? 

(k) Would a suitable place be found for semi-private 

meetings for the interested? 

(1) Have the members of your class chosen leaders in 

accord with DAWN VOL. VI., chapters 5 and 6? If 

so, give names and full addresses. 

(m) Give full names and full addresses of the two to 

whom notification of a coming Pilgrim should be 

sent, and please notify us of any change. 

(n) If your town is not on a railroad give name of proper 



railroad station to stop at, and tell how Pilgrim 
could get from station. Would he be met? 
(o) Give writer's name and address in full. 



R3985 : page 134 

FILTHINESS OF FLESH AND SPIRIT 

"Having therefore this promise, dearly beloved, let us cleanse 
ourselves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting 
holiness in the fear of the Lord."— 2 Cor. 7:1. 

WE ARE not to understand the Apostle here to 
mean that we are to cleanse ourselves from 
the condemnation of original sin. Time and 
again the Apostle Paul and all the writers of the New 
Testament reiterate in various forms the declaration 
that by the deeds of the law no flesh can be justified in 
God's sight. This signifies that nothing that we can 
do can enable us to live perfectly, even if original sin 

R3985 : page 135 

were cancelled for us; hence it would be a still greater 
impossibility for us not only to live perfectly now but 
to accumulate a merit which would cancel for us our 
share in the original transgression. On the contrary, 
the Scriptures with united voice declare that only by 
the shedding of blood could there come a remission of 
original sin— that only "by his stripes are we healed:" 
that the "Lord laid on him [Jesus] the iniquity of us 
all," "He died the just for the unjust that he might 
bring us to God," and that by virtue of his sacrifice for 
our sins we are made acceptable with God, and the 
condemnation against us as members of Adam's race 
is set aside that we may have a new start. (Heb. 9:22; 
Isa. 53:5,6; I Pet. 3:18.) Not only so, but knowing that 
in our fallen flesh dwelleth no perfection, the Lord has 
graciously arranged to cover all our blemishes that are 
of heredity and not of intention, not of our willing. 
Thus we have what is Scripturally known as justification 
by or through faith in the great atonement which 
God has effected through the death of his Son. 

It is this class, already justified "through faith in 
his blood" (Rom. 3:25), that the Apostle addresses in 
the words of our text— urging them to cleanse themselves 
from all filthiness of the flesh and the spirit. 
What does he mean? If we were cleansed by faith in 
Christ why address us thus along the line of works of 
our own for our own cleansing? We reply that our justification 
by faith was granted to us as the basis for 
our consecration to God as disciples of Jesus, as "followers 
of the Lamb." None were thus accepted unless 
in their hearts they turned from sin, desiring to be in 



harmony with God and his righteousness. Their consecration 

to God on the basis of their justification signified 

that they had not only turned from sin but that 

they had united their hearts and lives with Jesus— that 

they had enlisted under him as the Captain of their 

Salvation, to fight the good fight against sin in its 

every form, within and without, under his guidance 

and direction. Should these now after enlisting rest 

content and do no fighting against sin, either in their 

own mortal bodies or in their surroundings, it would be 

an indication that they had not the Spirit of Christ, 

which calls to mind the declaration of the Apostle, "If 

any man have not the Spirit of Christ he is none of 

his. "-Rom. 8:9. 

"FIGHTING THE GOOD FIGHT" 

We see then that it is God's will concerning us that 
we should do more than renounce sin in our minds— 
we are to give our hearts to the Lord, desiring fellowship 
with him: we are to be imbued with his spirit of 
opposition to sin, so that as New Creatures we will 
fight the good fight of faith against the Adversary and 
the world's spirit of selfishness, and against the weaknesses 
and blemishes and sinwardness of our own 
mortal bodies. These were the conditions of our enlistment, 
the conditions under which we were accepted 
of the Lord, and we must fight this fight of faith, as 
the Apostle says, if we would lay hold upon eternal 
life— if we would ever get the great reward of glory, 
honor and immortality with our Captain. Our text does 
not relate to our resistance of the Adversary and the 
world, but confines itself to our dealings with ourselves, 
which certainly is our chief concern, our chief 
battle— he who rules his own spirit, his own mind, is a 
greater soldier, a greater hero, than he that captures 
a city in literal warfare. This is the Lord's estimation 
of the matter, and hence should be ours.— Prov. 16:32. 

The Lord requires such a demonstration on our 
part— of activity against the motions of sin in our flesh, 
in our minds, as a demonstration that the New Creature 
is alive to the responsibilities of its conduct as a 
soldier of the cross, and additionally because he has 
decreed that none shall be of the little flock of joint-heirs 
with his Son who do not in these respects of loyalty 
to the Father and to righteousness and opposition 
to sin demonstrate their heart-likeness to Jesus. The 
Apostle affirms this, saying that we are "predestinated 
to be conformed to the image of his Son." (Rom. 8:29.) 
Whoever refuses or neglects the development of such a 
character-likeness or copy of Christ's mind, disposition, 

R3986 : page 135 

is refusing or neglecting the only terms and conditions 
on which he may hope to make his calling and 



election sure to a place in the Kingdom class. In view 
of this how zealously we should strive to fulfil the 
urgent admonition of the Apostle— to demonstrate and 
to increase to fervency our love for righteousness, for 
truth, for all the ways of the Lord, by opposition to 
sin, especially in our own bodies, cleansing ourselves 
of all filthiness of the flesh and of the spirit (mind). 

FILTHINESS OF THE MIND 

The cleansing of our minds is far more important 
than the cleansing of our flesh, because we might succeed 
measurably in cleansing the flesh while the mind 
might still be impure. In such a case we would remember 
the Pharisees whom the Lord rebuked, saying, 
Ye make clean the outside of the cup or platter, but 
within are full of all manner of uncleanness, impurity. 
(Matt. 23:25.) Out of the mind proceedeth evil 
thoughts, as the Apostle declares, and these evil 
thoughts, these wrong conceptions, have to do with all 
the filthiness of the flesh. It is mainly, therefore, to the 
mind that the Lord appeals throughout his Word during 
this Gospel age. He invites us first of all to set 
our hearts right, our wills, and then having done this 
to allow the new will to rule our minds, and thus the 
new will through the cleansed mind institutes a rule 
and order and purification of the flesh. 

Were we perfect there would be little difficulty in 
ruling our minds and our bodies as soon as the will 
had been fixed for righteousness; but six thousand 
years of falling from the image and likeness of God 
have wrought great havoc in us all. Hence, as the 
Apostle declares, "In my flesh dwelleth no perfection"; 
and again, "We cannot do the things that we would"; 
and again, "The spirit [here the New Creature, the 
will] indeed is willing, but the flesh [the old nature, 
mental and physical] is weak." (Rom. 7:18; Gal. 5:17; 
Matt. 26:41.) This discrepancy between the new will, 
the new mind, and the mind of the flesh and the flesh 
itself, both reckoned as dead but really quite alive, 

R3986 : page 136 

requiring continual vigilance to restrain them and keep 
them in line with the New Creature's intentions, means 
quite a fight, and success in this fight means a victory, 
and victory in this fight is what the Lord proposes to 
reward with the special honors and blessings proffered 
during this Gospel age. It is quite unnecessary here 
to detail the various forms which this filthiness of the 
mind may assume— all of them selfish, all of them more 
or less degraded, all of them tending downward, and 
hence in opposition to the resolutions and covenants 
of the New Mind, the New Creature. A part of this 
filthiness of the mind is selfishness, which frequently 
is so mean as to be ashamed of itself, to seek to hide 



itself under various pretexts of generosity, etc., and 
by outward ostentation, gifts, etc. Other features of 
the filthiness of the mind are jealousy, covetousness, 
ambition. These various forms of selfishness are all 
to be recognized, as the Apostle declares, as of evil 
origin, works of the flesh and of the Devil. Lasciviousness 
or sensuality is a further part of this filthiness— 
another form of selfishness or love of self-indulgence. 
With all of these conditions of the mind, the New Creature 
should be in opposition to the extent of despising 
them, fighting against them, destroying them. 

"FILTHINESS OF THE FLESH" 

Although, as our Lord's words intimate, an outward 
cleansing of the flesh and making clean of the 
outside of the cup would not prove a purity within of 
the mind, of the heart, the proposition is reversely true 
that outward filthiness does indicate a filthiness of the 
mind, because the mind controls, and if it were purified 
the result would be a cleaning up of the outside. 
Indeed we may be pretty sure that the love for the approval 
of others would lead almost everyone to keep his 
externals, seen by men, fully up to the standard of his 
mind if not above it. It is easier to cleanse the flesh 
than to cleanse the spirit, the mind. The Apostle's 
urgent exhortation is that all who are the Lord's people 
should cleanse themselves of all filthiness of the flesh 
and of the spirit. 

A brother once said to us, "How does it come that 
the reading of MILLENNIAL DAWN affected my outward 
life as nothing else ever did? I used to drink in moderation, 
I used to smoke immoderately, occasionally I 
played a game of cards with the rector of the Episcopal 
Church to which I was attached, I chewed tobacco, 
and occasionally used strong language, of which I am 
now ashamed. My friends gave me tracts and booklets 
on smoking and on the use of intoxicating liquors, 
but they had no weight with me. I replied, in substance, 
'Mind your own business, I am able to take 
care of myself.' But after reading MILLENNIAL DAWN 
a change took place. I gave up all those things of 
which before I had not been ashamed. They all appeared 
in a new light— as unworthy of me as a son of 
God and follower of the Lamb. Now the strange thing 
to me is this: I looked all through the DAWNS to see 
what I had read there that had influenced me thus, and 
to my surprise I could find no condemnation of the 
things I had renounced. Now my question is, How 
does it come that the book which says nothing on this 
subject has had such a powerful influence over me, 
while the other books which said much on the subject 
had no influence?" 

We replied, "Brother, the DAWN is merely a restatement 
of the Bible itself and puts matters in the 
Bible way. Hence it did not ask you as a New Creature 



to lop off some of the unsightly branches of your fallen 
disposition, but it did hand you the axe of Truth and 
suggest to you that you cut down the whole tree, 
branches and all, pointing out to you that the New 
Creature would live and flourish and finally be perfected 
only as it would master the old nature and thus become 
"more than conqueror," and be counted worthy of 
a share in the Kingdom, because of its character-likeness 
to our Lord.— Luke 3:9. 

THE CLEANSING POWER 

Does some one say that it requires great strength 
of character, great power of the will, to cleanse our 
minds and our flesh? We answer, Yes, and that is exactly 
what the Lord seeks to develop in us. All of his 
joint-heirs in the Kingdom will be found to be strong 
characters, and that because of the development of 
character in the present time in the conflicts with the 
flesh. Does some one else suggest that with the cravings 
of the flesh such a victory is impossible? We reply 
that the Apostle's words do not indicate that the flesh 
will be made absolutely pure and perfect. His suggestion 
is that it may be cleansed of its filthiness— 
so that everything coarse, rude, slovenly, dirty, 
filthy in thought or in deed, in mind or in person, would 
be reprehensible to us, offensive. Moreover, we gain 
this desirable and glorious condition not suddenly but 
gradually. The cleansing process must begin at once, 
but it will continue until our latest breath, for although 
we can and do quickly become pure in heart, pure in 
intention, pure in our wills, it certainly does require 
time to accomplish the purification of the mind and the 
flesh. The power which begins this cleansing, which 
continues it acceptably in the Lord's sight, is the new 
will; and this very fight against sin and uncleanness 
strengthens the will so that each victory makes it more 
ready and more capable for the next conflict. By use 
our wills grow stronger. Hence the necessity not only 
of a thorough consecration at the beginning, but the 
necessity also for keeping this in memory, that the will 
may always be firm, prompt, unflinching as respects 
loyalty to God, righteousness, truth, holiness, love. 

"GOD WORKETH IN YOU" 

The Apostle elsewhere declares along this line, 
"Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling, 
for it is God that worketh in you to will and to do of 
his good pleasure." (Phil. 2:12,13.) We have just been 
considering how we should work out our salvation, 
that the new will must hold its dominating influence 
over the fleshly mind and body (reckoned dead) in 
order to gain our ultimate victory. But now we inquire, 
How does God work in us to will and do his good 
pleasure? We answer that he strengthens our new 



minds, our consecrated wills, by revealing to us more 

R3986 : page 137 

and more clearly the significance of the exceeding 
great and precious promises of his Word. Thus is the 
power of God exercised toward all those who are his 
through his Word, through his providences, through 
the brethren in whom he has already worked, and a 
part of whose business it is as his representatives to 
build one another up in the most holy faith, and to assist 
one another in the cleansing of the flesh and the 
spirit. 

This thought is brought out in the context. We 
quote, "What part hath a believer with an unbeliever, 
and what agreement hath a Temple of God with idols? 
For we are the Temple of the living God, even as God 
said, 'I will dwell in them and work in them: and I 
will be their God and they shall be my people.' Wherefore 
come ye out from among them [the untrue, the unbelieving, 
the unclean] and be ye separate, saith the 
Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive 
you and will be to you a Father. And ye shall be 
to me sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty. "~ 
2 Cor. 6:15-18. 

Now notice the Apostle's argument— "Having, 
therefore, this hope, dearly beloved, let us cleanse 
ourselves." Ah, yes! there is a promise in these 
words, "the power of God unto salvation to everyone 
that belie veth"— the power of God that, in proportion 
as it is received into good and honest hearts, will work 
in them not only to will aright but also to do aright, 
thus leading to the cleansing both of the mind and of 
the flesh. Whoever can comprehend what it is to be a 
member of God's holy Temple class, must realize the 

R3987 : page 137 

holiness, sacredness, purity that would properly attach 
to any and everything connected with it. As the Apostle 
again says, referring to these gracious hopes and 
promises, whoever has such a hope in him will purify 
himself even as he is pure. (I John 3:3.) The thought 
of being accepted as the sons and daughters of the 
Lord Almighty must be impressive to every heart in 
proportion as it is appreciated. Few are so gross as 
to suppose that God would have any fellowship with 
that which is unclean and impure. And when we see 
that the divine arrangement through Jesus' sacrifice 
covers all of our unintentional blemishes and weaknesses, 
surely we cannot ask for more— that it should 
cover from the divine sight intentional weaknesses, 
intentional blemishes or even slackness on our part in 
putting away all filthiness of the flesh and of the spirit. 

PERFECTING OUR HOLINESS 



While we are reckoned of the Lord as perfect, as 
holy from the moment we are accepted as members of 
his family, covered by the precious robe of Christ's 
righteousness, he expects of us, as we have seen before, 
a manifestation of energy in the vanquishing of 
the motions of sin in the flesh, and in the perfecting of 
holiness in our lives. God has but one standard, and 
that standard is perfection of holiness. His direction 
to us is, "Be ye perfect, even as your father in heaven is 
perfect." (Matt. 5:48.) At the same time our Lord 
knew well that in the present life, under present conditions, 
and acting through our present mortal bodies, 
it would be an absolute impossibility for any one of his 
followers to ever attain perfection in the sense or degree 
that the Father is perfect. Nevertheless it was 
proper that our Lord should give the perfect standard 
or pattern just as the school-book sets before the child 
a copper-plate engraving showing the perfect, the desirable 
standard of writing, not with the expectation 
that the child will ever succeed in exactly copying the 
engraving, but with the desire that the child shall improve 
itself by attempts at copying. So the Lord 
wishes us to be continually attempting to copy his perfection 
and to recognize no inferior standard. Hence 
our text's declaration respecting our perfecting holiness 
can mean no more than that we shall do our best 
to reach the standard of perfection in holiness to the 
Lord— come as near to that standard as is possible, a 
little nearer every day we live. 

Our text declares that this perfecting of holiness 
is to be attained through a reverence for the Lord— an 
appreciation of his greatness, his perfection. The 
Christian who according to the flesh is deficient in 
veneration will have greater difficulty along this line 
of perfecting holiness than one who has naturally large 
veneration. A great deal of reverence for God and 
holy things is surely a great aid in our appreciation of 
the Lord's wonderful greatness and wisdom, power, 
justice, love; and the greater our appreciation of him, 
the higher our esteem of the pattern set before us, the 
better undoubtedly will be our success in the copying 
of it. A person who has naturally little of reverence 
for God and holy things, and who is naturally coarser 
and more self-centered and self-satisfied, has correspondingly 
a harder work before him if he would make 
his calling and election sure. He will the more need 
to remember his deficiency, and to cultivate reverence 
for the Lord and to humble himself— "He that humbleth 
himself shall be exalted; he that exalteth himself 
shall be abased. "-Matt. 23:12. 

In view of these things we urge upon all of the 
Lord's consecrated people a fresh determination to follow 
the counsel of the Apostle, and to allow the divine 
promises and prospects to work in our hearts to the 
cleansing of our minds and our flesh from all filthiness, 



to the perfecting of our new natures in holiness, 
in the reverence of the Lord. 



R3987 : page 137 

A LESSON ON DIVINE PROVIDENCE 

--EXODUS 2:1-15.-MAY 26.- 

Golden Text:— "And Moses was learned in all the wisdom 
of the Egyptians, and was mighty in words and in 
deeds."— Acts 7:22. 

OF the greatness of Moses the renowned Gladstone 
said:— 

"We have in the history of Moses a great and powerful 
genius, an organizing, constructing mind. Moses belongs to 
the great class of nation-makers; to a class of men who 
have a place by themselves in the history of politics, and 
who are among the rarest and highest of the phenomena of 
our race." 

Another says:— 

"He was great as a lawmaker and organizer, a general, 
a historian, a poet, an orator, and a saint who walked with 
God. It is not too much to say that our modern civilization 

R3987 : page 138 

is built upon his work. And his greatness is enhanced 
enormously when we remember that his only material was 
a disorganized horde of emancipated slaves, encamped in a 
desert. Probably the majority of thinkers would rate Moses 
as the greatest man of earliest history." 

FOREORDAINED OF GOD A LEADER 

The proper view of Moses' career must surely take 
into account that he was a special servant of God and under 
special divine providence. While this view may not 
commend itself to the world, it surely does increase the interest 
of all who are in heart accord with the teachings of 
the divine Word. We shall see that all of the Lord's providences 
regulated the affairs of this wonderful man from his 
earliest infancy; and some of us may see still further that 
there was an interposition of divine providence in respect to 
the development of the babe even before its birth. Saint 
Paul, who was another of those remarkable characters 
whose interests were superintended by divine power, said of 
himself that the Lord "called me from my mother's womb." 
The inference we draw from this statement is that the Apostle 
recognized that certain traits of character and disposition 
were his from the moment of his birth— traits and dispositions 
which specially prepared him for his subsequent work 
as a minister of the Gospel. Applying this principle to 



Moses, we may well attribute much of the fineness and 
breadth of character and the extreme humility of this "meekest 
man in all the earth" to prenatal influences. 

He was born so: God had him in mind as a suitable 
one for his purposes, and equipped him with those qualities 
so necessary to one whom he would so largely use in so 
great a work as the deliverance of his people from the bondage 
of Egypt. Nothing in this implies a divine interference 
with free moral agency. As it was possible for the Apostle 
Paul to have declined to preach the Gospel, and even to 
have repudiated the Lord and be a "castaway," so also it 
was possible for Moses to have repudiated his mission and 
to have chosen the pleasures of sin for a season. Had 
either of these men taken the wrong course we may be sure 
that the divine plan would not have been interfered with, 
so diverse is the wisdom and power of God. Another could 
have been raised up to do the work of the Apostle or the 
work of Moses, and divine providence could have so arranged 
for their instruction and development that the divine plan 
would have suffered no loss. Nevertheless, so complete, we 
may be sure, were the arrangements of God in respect to 
Saint Paul and Moses, that it was more natural for them to 
take the course which they chose than to have taken the 
opposite one. 

HIDDEN IN THE BULRUSHES 

As we begin to look for divine providence in the affairs 
of Moses we find them standing out at every juncture. He 
was born at that particular time when Pharaoh Rameses II. 
had laid commands upon all the Hebrew parents that their 
male children should be promptly strangled at the time of 
birth, under dire penalties upon themselves and the child 
they would permit to live. We know not how long this law 
remained in effect, but it served in this particular juncture 
to introduce Moses into the royal family by a most remarkable 
chain of circumstances. Miriam, his sister, was born 
about nine years before, and Aaron, his brother, in time to 
escape this law; and when Moses was born his mother "saw 
that he was a goodly child, and hid him three months." 
Apparently there was something extraordinary in the appearance 
of the child, not only in the eyes of its own parents 
but also in those of the princess who subsequently adopted 
him. Stephen says of him, "He was exceeding fair,"— margin, 
"fair to God," (Acts 7:20)— and Josephus recounts that 
as a man he was so handsome that passers-by would turn 
to gaze after him, and even laborers forgot their tasks in 
the spell of his rare beauty. 

To hide the child for three months must have been 
quite a task, especially when the law respecting infants 
was known and probably a reward offered for the detection 
of those evading it. At last it was necessary for the mother 
to part with the babe, and the ark or basket made of bulrushes 
was prepared and overspread on the outside with pitch to keep 
it dry. With the babe therein it was placed near the bank of 
the river amongst the rushes, which would prevent it from 



floating down the stream and hide it from the curious. 

The spot was selected, too, somewhere near the royal palace, 

and near that portion of the river set apart for bathing 

for the use of the royal family, and at a time when the princess 

was known to take her daily bath. The location was 

R3988 : page 138 

on the river Nile. Rawlinson says:— 

"The capital of Egypt, the abode of the royal family at 
that time, was most probably Memphis, occupying nearly the 
site on which now stands the great city of Cairo. The 
household of Amram dwelt under the shadow of the three 
great pyramids, those 'artificial mountains,' the most impressive 
monuments that have ever been raised by human 
hands." 

BROUGHT FORTH-FROM THE WATER 

In harmony with the expectation Pharaoh's daughter 
took her usual bath on the day in which Moses was placed 
in the ark amongst the rushes, and at an opportune moment 
the babe cried. The princess is said to have been a married 
woman but childless, and we may well imagine the 
interest and curiosity aroused in her heart and the hearts of 
her maidens in attendance when the cry of the babe was 
heard. An attendant brought the ark and opened it before 
the princess, and the weeping babe excited the compassion 
of the womanly heart. At once she guessed the truth, that 
this must be a Hebrew child, whose parents, unwilling to 
strangle it, had disposed of it in this manner, perhaps in 
hope. 

Watching at a distance, little Miriam, Moses' sister, then 
about nine years of age, following her instructions, ran to 
see the find and to promptly propose to the princess that 
she might get one of the Hebrew women to act as a nurse 
for the child. This was approved, and of course Miriam 
called the mother. The princess gave direction that the 
nurse should take full charge of him and receive pay for so 
doing. Thus the family fortunes were helped, and at the 
same time full protection assured, for the child was recognized 
as the adopted son of the princess. It is supposed 
that about seven years elapsed before Moses was brought to 
the princess, and that meantime he enjoyed the care and 
instruction of a godly mother. Meantime, we know not 
just when, the princess gave the child the name Moses, 
which signifies, "delivered from the water." Some translate 

R3988 : page 139 

the word to mean, "born from the water," supposing 

that the princess probably meant by this to signify that she 

had borne Moses as her son, borne him from the water. 

To those who have eyes of faith to see it, there is a 
great chain of providential circumstances here; to others, 
who have no such eyes, these were merely accidents and 



happen-sos. Each one of course will be strongly convinced 
of the correctness of his own view, but in this case as in 
many others truth is stranger than fiction, and all these 
things were, under divine providence, working together for 
the accomplishment of the divine purpose in connection 
with that child, with that man, and with the nation which 
God intended he should subsequently lead out of bondage 
as the typical people of God. Dean Alford expresses this 
thought beautifully in the words,— 

"The bark is wafted to the strand by breath divine, 
And on the helm there rests another hand than mine." 

"MIGHTY IN WORD AND DEED" 

Our Golden Text from Stephen's discourse reminds us 
that "Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians 
and was mighty in words and deeds." What a wonderful 
preparation that wonderful boy needed in order to make of 
him the great Captain of the Lord's hosts. Egypt at that 
time had two great universities, one at Heliopolis, the other 
at Hermopolis. Moses is said to have been instructed in 
the former, situated about twenty miles north of Memphis. 
Giekie describing it says: "Shady cloisters opened into lecture 
rooms for the students and quiet houses for the professors 
and priests, in their many grades and offices." Another 
writer says: "A splendid library was at his disposal. The 
library of the Rameseum at Thebes— a structure built by 
Rameses II.— contained 20,000 books." 

It seems almost a miracle that the boy Moses could 
pass through such experiences as he had in the palace and 
in the school without being seriously injured by the vain 
philosophies prevailing and honored in these places. Evidently, 
however, he was not only well born as respected his 
religious instincts, but the influence of his mother, his nurse, 
undoubtedly had much to do with shaping his child mind 
and holding him firm in the faith of the Hebrew— the faith 
in the Oath-Bound Abrahamic Covenant, to the effect that 
his race at some time would be blessed by the Lord and 
made very great, influential in the world, and thus be the 
divine channel for the blessing of all the families of the 
earth. At all events we have every indication that Moses 
was not only not spoiled by his education, in the sense of 
having his faith overthrown, but that his natural modesty, 
humility, meekness, continued with him to manhood's 
estate. 

WHEN MOSES WAS GROWN 

This date according to the Scriptures was his fortieth 
year, for the life of Moses was divided into three distinct 
parts of forty years each. An eminent writer says, "According 
to Josephus, the Ethiopians made an incursion into 
Egypt and routed the army that was sent to resist them. 
Panic spread over the country, and Pharaoh trembled at 
the approach of the swarthy savages. The oracles, well 
aware of his remarkable abilities, advised that the command 



be entrusted to Moses. He immediately took the field, surprised 
the enemy, defeated them with heavy slaughter, drove 
them back into their own territory and followed them up so 
hard, capturing one city after another, that they found no 
asylum until they reached the swamp-girdled city of Meroe. 
Moses is said to have returned from this campaign the most 
popular man in the kingdom, having also learned thoroughly 
the weakness and strength of the people and of Pharaoh." 

MOSES THE PATRIOT 

The favor enjoyed as the adopted son of the princess 
in the palace and throughout the land did not quench the 
sympathy and patriotism of Moses' heart. He perceived the 
injustice heaped upon his brethren, and in his sympathy for 
one of them he smote a taskmaster so that he killed him. 
He buried him in the sand, thinking that nothing further 
would come of this, that his brethren the Hebrews would be 
helped to that extent, and that they would surely keep the 
secret of his favor and defence. In this, however, he found 
himself mistaken, for when endeavoring to correct a dispute 
between two Hebrews the fact that he was the murderer of 
an Egyptian was flung in his face by the one who was at 
fault. Soon the word reached everywhere, even to the king, 
who began quietly, as the Hebrew word signifies, to seek an 
opportunity for slaying Moses— not so easy a matter, however, 
as the latter was very popular; but in fear Moses, 
beginning the second fortieth year of his life, fled into the 
land of Midian, where he remained for forty years, returning 
for the deliverance of his people when he was eighty years 
of age. 

We cannot say as some might that each child, each 
youth, each man, by giving attention to the divine guidance, 
might become a Moses. Very few are prepared by nature 
and providence for so exalted a position, and generally there 
are comparatively few opportunities for them. Israel did 
not need more than one Moses. We can, however, say that 
divine providence has a general charge of all the affairs of 
his people. If it is not in our province to be a Moses, it is 
a part of the Lord's providence to be one of his people, to 
be cared for by the Lord through a Moses, through a Deliverer. 
We cannot all be reared in palaces and educated in 
great institutions of learning nor become mighty in word and 
deed, but we should each look for the leadings of divine 
providence in our own experiences and be glad to fill any 
position marked out to us therein, assured that,— 
"God's providence is kind and large; 

Both man and beast his bounty share. 
The whole creation is his charge, 
But saints are his peculiar care." 

But while we cannot occupy so prominent a place in 
earthly affairs as did Moses, let us look to the divine providences 
in the affairs of our lives, and let us note that still 
greater privileges, opportunities and honors are ours through 
Christ. 

If the adoption of Moses by Pharaoh's daughter was a 



remarkable matter, much more wonderful is our own experience 
in that God first of all redeemed us by the precious 
blood of Christ, and then without our consent and upon our 
consecration adopted us into his family as the Bride of his 
Son, to be "heirs of God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ 
our Lord, if so be that we suffer with him, that we may also 
be glorified together." (Rom. 8:17.) There is nothing in all 
the novels and romances in the world that in any degree 

R3988 : page 140 

compares with the marvels of this glorious grace of God bestowed 

upon consecrated believers of this Gospel age. Do 

we really believe it? So surely as we do the effect will be 

manifested in our words and thoughts and doings. Imagine 

a young peasant woman invited to become the bride of a 

king of a prominent earthly throne: would not the thought 

of her espousal and the coming honors and blessings and 

privileges fill her heart almost to the exclusion of every 

other subject? Would not the preparation for the wedding 

day be to her and to her friends the all-absorbing topic of 

interest, engaging time, talent, influence, attention, in every 

sense of the word? And yet all this would be to a view of 

an earthly honor that might be very fleeting, with a prospect 

of earthly happiness; or it might prove bitterly disappointing, 

and at the very most, and considered from the 

most advantageous standpoint, could only be a blessing for 

a few years. 

Compare this with the glorious prospects that are set 
before the Lord's espoused virgin Church— glory, honor, 

R3989 : page 140 

immortality, eternal life with him who loved us and bought 

us with his precious blood and with the Father. Truly those 

who really believe this message, who recognize of a truth 

that they have been begotten to the new nature and have 

received the spirit of espousal— surely these could have no 

greater power and influence operate in their lives to sanctify 

them and separate them from the world, and to bring 

them into close fellowship of spirit with their Redeemer. 

Another thought: As Moses was learned in all the wisdom 

of the Egyptians and proved himself mighty in words and 

deeds, so those whom the Lord is now selecting for joint-heirship 

in the kingdom of his dear Son are required to 

learn lessons in the great school of experience, in the school 

of Christ, and they are required to manifest character and 

be overcomers— strong in the Lord and in the power of his 

might— mighty in words and in deeds for the Lord and for 

the Truth. And thank God, however humble our speech, 

or insignificant our station, he is reckoning these matters to 

us according to our attitude of heart; and the smallest word 

or act done through loyalty to him and to principles of 

righteousness is counted as mighty through God to the 

pulling down of the strongholds of error, and to the establishment 

ultimately of the Kingdom of God under the whole heaven. 



R3989 : page 140 

ASSUREDLY GOD WAS WITH HIM 

--EXODUS 3: 1-14. -JUNE 2.- 

Golden Text:— "And he said, Certainly 
I will be with thee."-V. 12. 

UNDOUBTEDLY God's providences had to do with the 
general character of Moses, even before his birth, 
as well as with his educational training for the 
great work he was intended to perform. Nevertheless we 
see it would be quite contrary to all divine usages for the 
Almighty to have coerced his free moral agency. The 
natural trend of character being developed, it was necessary 
for Moses himself to decide respecting its use. The central 
feature of this lesson is that, with all the preparation and 
all the fitness of the man Moses for the great work of delivering 
Israel from Egypt, the secret of his success lay in the 
fact that God was with him— God was the Deliverer of 
Israel; Moses was merely his servant and representative in 
connection with the work, as the Lord himself declared— 
"I am the Lord thy God, who brought thee out of the land 
of Egypt and out of the house of bondage. Thou shalt have 
no other gods before me." 

LONG YEARS IN PREPARATION 

When we consider the eighty years of Moses' life, in 
which he was in preparation for the great work of the Lord, 
it helps us to appreciate better the fact that our God is 
never in haste— "Known unto the Lord are all his works 
from the foundation of the world." He has no need for 
haste; he knows the end from the beginning, and every 
feature of the divine plan is properly timed. Thus 4000 
years and more passed before Jesus was born, and yet the 
Scriptures assure us that it was in due time that God sent 
forth his Son, born of a woman. (Gal. 4:4.) This thought 
should give us great confidence in the certainty of the development 
of the Lord's plans at the proper time. He is not a 
man that he should err in judgment; he is working all 
things according to the counsel of his own will. In this 
thought all his true people may rest in confidence; whether 
matters seem to culminate rapidly or slowly, each feature 
will be in its "due time." Although so much time was consumed 
in preparation for the deliverance of Israel, yet when 
the appropriate hour was come, in that one morning the 
whole nation started to move. Let us all learn the lesson 
more and more to wait on the Lord, and then to be ready to 
move promptly when he indicates that his appointed time 
has arrived. 



EIGHTY YEARS OF SCHOOLING 

The life of Moses is divided into three parts of equal 
length. The first forty years brought him to ripe manhood 
and made him familiar with all the learning of the Egyptians. 
The second forty years began when he fled after 
killing the Egyptian and had found that his brethren were 
not prepared for deliverance nor willing to accept his assistance 
as their friend and brother, and ended when he returned 
to Israel, under the divine direction, and successfully 
led them forth from Egypt. The third forty-year period of 
his life, beginning with the exodus, terminated with his 
death at the end of the forty years in the wilderness, just as 
the people of Israel were about to cross over into Canaan. 
The period of Moses' life from forty to eighty years of age 
was spent as a shepherd in the service of his father-in-law 
Jethro, otherwise called Ruel. We may be sure that in that 
long period of time this meek man, who was ready to do 
with his might whatever his hands found to do, had large 
opportunities for learning lessons of patience. 

Doubtless like David, the shepherd, Moses learned to 
think of the sheep and his care over them, and to consider 
God the great Shepherd of his flock, and probably often 
wondered why, after giving the gracious promise to Abraham, 
God had left his flock, the children of Abraham, in apparently 
hopeless bondage. Doubtless, too, he thought of his 
own endeavor to help the people, and how they had shown 
such a spirit of discord as made it impossible for him to aid 

R3989 :page 141 

them as he would. Doubtless he had thought many times 

of how it would have advantaged his own earthly interests 

had he followed the course marked out for him by his foster-mother, 

Pharaoh's daughter, and remained a member of the 

royal family of Egypt and a sharer in the honor and dignity 

of those who oppressed his people. Doubtless he thought 

of how he had apparently blighted his entire life and spoiled 

all of his earthly prospects by his desire to do good to his 

brethren— his desire to serve their best interests. Doubtless 

he thought of their ingratitude and failure to appreciate him, 

their resentment of his kindly-meant assistance, saying, 

"Who made thee a ruler or judge over us?" 

Probably in the mind of Moses the matter resolved 
itself in the thought that he had done his duty, the best he 
knew how to do, although the entire matter had resulted in 
failure; and it is probable he was more or less despondent 
respecting the future, as a meek, humble-minded man would 
be apt to feel. Meantime under the Lord's providence he 
went hither and thither with his flocks and herds to the very 
land in which later on he was to lead the people of Israel. 
In those forty years he must have become very familiar with 
the vicinity of Sinai and lower Palestine. Little did he 
know the value of the teachings he was then learning. The 
lesson in all this for us is faithfulness to God and to duty as 
he gives us to see it, leaving all the results with him. 



Another lesson is that present experiences, trials and difficulties 
may be fitting and preparing us for a future useful 
service for the Lord and his people, even though at the time 
we see no relationship or connection between the two. 

THE BURNING BUSH 

Here our lesson opens, showing Moses at eighty years 
of age shepherding his flock on the rearward side of Mount 
Horeb, called Mount Sinai, where subsequently the law was 
given. As Moses looked, behold a bush burned near him, 
supposedly a thorn-bush, which sometimes grows to quite a 
height and quite a thickness in that country, and is known 
as shittim wood— the kind of wood used in the construction 
of the Tabernacle. As Moses looked at the flame he perceived 
that the bush was not consumed, and considering this 
a most remarkable phenomenon he turned aside and drew 
near to it to observe the matter. It was then that the Lord 
spoke to him from the midst of the burning bush, and Moses 
at once knew that what he had witnessed was a miracle by 
which the Lord would attract his attention with a view to 
communicating some important lesson. 

God usually has a symbolical meaning in every miracle, 
and in this one the representation is supposed to be Israel 
in the midst of tribulation, yet not consumed. Later on, in 
Reformation times, the Church of Scotland appropriated this 
burning bush as its emblem on its banner, because its experience 
had been similar in that it had passed through severe 
afflictions and distresses and trials, yet had not been consumed. 
And is not the burning bush a good illustration of 
the experience of Christ and all of his members? Are they 
not indeed surrounded by fiery trials? and do they not 
emerge from these unscathed, uninjured?— on the contrary, 
blessed, developed, strengthened, made meet for the inheritance 
of the saints in light? 

Well do the Scriptures declare that the fear, reverence, 
of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom. We greatly deplore 
the growth of irreverence in our day, and urge upon all of 
our readers for themselves and for their families the cultivation 
of this proper attitude of mind, so helpful to our preparation 
for the life that now is and that which is to come. 
Liberty and independence, while excellent qualities, are 
always to be valued and conserved and protected, are never 
to become license, never to lead in any degree to irreverence. 
This is the more necessary to us for two reasons: 

(1) Because of the growing irreverence of the world about 

us, born of a declining faith in God and everything supernatural; 

(2) because of our growing enlightenment in the 

R3990 : page 141 

Truth, by which we see that the fears of an eternity of torture 
were groundless, there is a danger of losing that proper 
reverence for God which belongs to and is an integral part 
of love. 
The Prophet David writes, "Keep thy foot when thou 



goest into the house of God"— take heed to your standing, 
take heed to your walk, take heed to your conduct. Whether 
the house of God be a great temple, as in past times, under 
divine direction, or whether it be the temple of God, which 
is the Church of Christ in the flesh, we should realize that 
reverence is befitting to us in connection with everything 
that is holy and consecrated. We should realize that whoever 
neglects the cultivation of reverence in respect to these 
matters is making his own pathway slippery and dangerous. 
He who reverences little and is careless is much more likely 
to stumble, to fall, and be utterly cast down. If even Moses, 
the "meekest man in all the earth," needed from the Lord as 
his first instruction a lesson of humility, shall we not suppose 
that such a lesson is necessary to us? Yea, verily! 

Let us honor the Lord in our hearts, in our outward 
demeanor. Whether we bow to give thanks for our daily 
bread, whether we bow our knee night and morning in 
acknowledgment of divine care and providences, or whether 
we meet with those of like precious faith, let us see to it that 
reverence marks our conduct and our words as well as rules 
in our hearts. Let us, too, take off our shoes, let us lay aside 
the ordinary conduct of life by which we are in contact with 
the world, and in all our ways acknowledge him, especially 
when we hearken to his voice in the study of his Word as 
his people. 

"SEEN THEIR AFFLICTION"-"HEARD THEIR CRY"-"KNOW 
THEIR SORROWS" 

With these words the Lord informed Moses briefly that 
he had not been negligent of the interests of Israel. By these 
words he allows him to understand that not until this time 
had the appropriate moment come for interference on behalf 
of Israel. And this thought of the divine knowledge, sympathy 
and care, and waiting for a due time, would give Moses 
all the more confidence in the Lord's ability to do according 
to his own good purposes when his time had come. 
And so it is with us: If we look back over the 1800 years 
and more of this Gospel dispensation, and perceive how the 
Lord's cause has been permitted to be overwhelmed by the 
forces of evil during the "dark ages" and even yet, we stand 
amazed, and might be inclined to say, "Does God not know? 
does God not care? that he allows his own name to be dishonored 
and his Truth to be trampled under foot and his 
faithful people to suffer?" 

The Lord assures us, too, that he knows all about these 

R3990 : page 142 

matters and is very sympathetic, far more so than we, and 

he is both able and willing to grant the deliverance needed 

at the appropriate time. What confidence it gives us now 

when we look back and behold that Spiritual Israel has 

been preserved through all these centuries! that notwithstanding 

the fiery affliction and adversity that burned 

against them, they have not been consumed! How it comforts 



and cheers us now to hear the Lord's voice telling us 
of the deliverance that is just at hand, and sending by us 
his messages of love and power to all those who have and 
are to hear, and who are desirous of having liberty from the 
power of the world, the flesh and the Adversary. O, yes! 
we occupy holy ground, we hear the holy voice, our eyes 
are opened to see the wonderful things. The Lord be praised! 
Let us give heed to his Word. 

"THOU MAYEST BRING FORTH MY PEOPLE" 

First of all the Lord informed Moses, "I am come down 
to deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians," etc.; 
then he adds, "Come now, therefore, and I will send thee 
unto Pharaoh that thou mayest bring my people, the children 
of Israel, out of Egypt." It is to be noted that God 
expressly declares himself to be the Deliverer, and had 
Moses been then disposed to boast of his own powers and 
doings we presume that the Lord would not have used him, 
but would have found some one else for the work. Whenever 
the Lord sends us on any special mission, we may be 
sure that he does not wish us to undertake it as our own 
mission, nor to claim the honor of the success attending it. 
He merely deigns to use us as his instrumentalities, whereas 
he could do the entire work much easier, we might say, 
without us. How wonderful it seems that God throughout 
all his dealings, past and present, has been willing to use 
his consecrated people. Telling them on the one hand that 
they are unworthy, he assures them on the other hand of his 
willingness to use their imperfections and to overrule and 
guide in respect to their services for him and his cause. 

The prime essentials evidently in the faithful performance 
of such a commission would be reverence for the Lord 
and humility as respects our own talents and abilities. It 
was so with Moses, the "meekest man in all the earth." 
Not stopping even to tell the Lord of his appreciation of the 
facts that he had been chosen for and had undertaken this 
great work, Moses was overwhelmed with the thought that 
the Lord would deign to use him as a messenger, and he 
promptly disclaimed any special qualifications therefor. 
Indeed, he evidently felt, as well as said, that there were 
others much more capable of the work than himself. But 
was it not this very appreciation of his own unworthiness 
that helped to make him suitable for the Lord's business? 
And so with us: we may be sure that when we feel strong 
then we are weak, and when we feel weak in our own 
strength then we are best prepared to be strong in the Lord 
and in the power of his might and to be used of him as his 
instruments. It was so with the great Apostle; it must be 
so, we believe, with all whom the Lord will deign to use and 
acknowledge in any part of his service. 

Overwhelmed with a realization of the responsibilities 
of the work suggested, Moses protested to the Lord that he 
had not the qualifications, and the Lord's answer was that 
this was true, but that his weakness would be perfected in 
the Lord's strength— "Certainly I will be with thee." And 



this being true, how could the mission be a failure? It is 
equally true with us today: if the Lord be for us and with 
us, who could be against us? How could the work fail? 
Many of the Lord's people are being called out of Babylon 
and its confusion and darkness, its oppressions and its 
bondage, to creeds of the "dark ages," and its social boycotts, 
etc., to worship the Lord in spirit and in truth, to give 
their hearts, all that they have, to him and his service. 

And all the members of the body of Christ, the antitypical 
body of Moses, are permitted to have a share, as the 
Lord's representatives, in this work of declaring the fall of 
Babylon, the presence of the King, and the gathering together 
unto him of all who have made a covenant with him 
by sacrifice. While feeling our unworthiness of so great an 
honor, and our inability as respects so great a work, let us 
remember that the Lord himself is with us, and that since it 
is his work it will go onward and accomplish the designs 
intended, and gather out eventually all who are truly the 
Lord's, whether we are faithful or whether we are unfaithful. 
But let us be faithful, and thus maintain the relationship 
to the great antitype of Moses, and ultimately be associated 
with him in the glories of the Kingdom, in the 
dispensing of the blessings and judgments of the future age. 
--Acts 3:23. 

Not only did the Lord assure Moses of his presence and 
power and cooperation in the mission, but also that it would 
result successfully— that he would bring the people out of 
the land of Egypt and into this very mountain, and to the 
very place where the Lord was then communing with him. 
The matter began to take tangible shape before Moses' 
mind: as God said it would be so, undoubtedly his word 
would be fulfilled. So the Lord's assurances to us, that the 
results will come anyway, are an encouragement to us to go 
forward and to do our parts. The Lord will do the 
work, and the whole question is whether or not we will have 
a glorious share in it as his members and representatives. 

"I AM THAT I AM "-HE WHO IS-JEHOVAH 

Whatever confidence Moses had in his brethren, and 
their readiness to believe the promises of God and to accept 
deliverance from Egypt, he seems to have lost. Even while 
God was telling him of the success of the mission upon which 
he was being sent, Moses' mind was reverting to the attempt 
he had made forty years before, and so he objects: "Lord, 
when I come unto the children of Israel and shall say unto 
them, The God of your fathers sent me unto you; and they 
shall say unto me, What is his name? what shall I say unto 
them?" The people of Israel, long in association with the 
Egyptians, had doubtless lost much of their faith in the one 
God of their fathers. Their heathen neighbors and 
masters of the Egyptian nation recognized various gods, 
and seemed to be greatly prospered, and it is altogether 
probable that the Israelites had by this time come to wonder 
which god they should count as theirs and what his name 
might be. Moses' question seems to imply that his thoughts 



ran in this channel. God's reply was the giving of his name, 
Jehovah, for the words, "I am that I am," signify the same 
as the name Jehovah— the self-existent one, the one who 
always exists. 
Perceiving that the question only covered a part of 

R3991 :page 143 

Moses' meaning, the Lord proceeded to prove to his servant 
that this name would not be an empty sound in his mouth, 
but that he would be with him and exercise powers which 
would exemplify his greatness, his dignity, his ability to deliver 
the people. Taking advantage of the common things, 
the Lord referred to the shepherd's staff which Moses carried 
and bade him throw it to the ground; it at once became 
a serpent. Moses' faith was again tested, and the 
Lord bade him take it up again, and it became a staff in his 
hand as at first. The assurance that he would be able to 
give the people this demonstration and other demonstrations 
that God had sent him to them strengthened Moses' confidence 
in God and made up for his lack of confidence in 
himself. And this should be the case with all of us; we 
are not to have confidence in ourselves, but if we go forth 
strong in the Lord and in the power of his might, confident 
and rejoicing because he is with us, we are not only safe as 
respects ourselves but in the proper condition for the Lord 
to more and more use us in his service— "He that humbleth 
himself shall be exalted; he that exalteth himself 
shall be abased," is the divine method of procedure. 

Moses urged further that he could find some one much 
more capable of telling the good tidings than himself. He 
said, "I am slow of speech," I never was an orator that 
could answer, reason out, this matter with Pharaoh. I 
should feel so abashed upon coming into his presence, and 
so feel my insignificance, that even though I were your representative 
I fear that I would not be able to present your 
message in a proper manner. Meeting this objection, the 
Lord told Moses that he would give him his brother Aaron 
as a mouthpiece. Thus strengthened and encouraged, the 
meekest man in all the earth set out upon his mission to 
meet the greatest king of earth at that time, Pharaoh 
Menephtah. 

Let each of us then, dear readers, impress upon our 
hearts the essence of this lesson, that if God be with us and 
for us, however humble and weak of ourselves, we may be 
mighty through him to the pulling down of the strongholds 
of error and for the building up of his people in 
the most holy faith, and for their deliverance from the 
bondage of error. Let us in the name of the Lord do 
with our might what our hands find to do, but always 
with the thought that we serve the Lord. Let his words, 
"Certainly I will be with thee," be the strength in our 
every endeavor in his name and cause. 



R3991 :page 143 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

The last three months of 1906 were quite trying to 
me. My occupation brought me too much in contact 
with the world, so much so that I am not at all satisfied 
with myself; but I am starting in the new year 
with much experience and a full resolve to profit 
thereby. I am going to seek the Lord more diligently 
through his Word, and through association with his 
people. I intend giving up my present employment to 
seek a position elsewhere, where I can have more time 
to give to active service for him who bought me with 
the great price. Here I am completely penned up. I 
do not have even nights or Sundays in which to meet 
with the Lord's people, so I must get out where I can 
keep the rust from collecting on my armor. I shall put 
at least one-half of my time in spreading the glad news 
of the great Rest Day just at hand for all who are weary 
and heavy laden. Remember me at the heavenly Court, 
that I may have that grace that is all-sufficient. Trusting 
in him, I am 

Your brother and fellow-servant, 
J. W. B.,-Wash. 



Following is a letter written by a business customer 
to one of our friends:— 

"I want to thank you for the little pamphlet you 
sent me last year when you answered my letter 
saying you could not fill my order. It was one 
of those 'Old Theology' tracts you sent. I do not know 
you or your faith, but that little paper has done more 
for me than money could buy. Whoever you are I hope 
it has done even more for you. So I heartily thank you 
for sending it. It was bread cast upon the water and 
a hungry soul found it. I have now, from that pamphlet, 
the MILLENNIAL DAWN series and am reading the 
fourth volume, having read the first, second and third 
and liked them very much. 

I feel I owe it all to you, for I never knew of that 
kind of literature. I said all to you, but I will take that 
back; I owe it all to God, but believe that you or whoever 
sent it to be the instrument he used in answer to 
my prayers. I hope many other hungry souls may be 
fed by the same means. Our efforts in scattering the 
precious truths will be a blessing to us as well as to 
those they reach. 

I thought I was a Christian for a good many years, 
but I have only found out what a true Christian is, and 
know the mass of people will not accept that doctrine. 
But I hope there are still more Truth-hungry souls who 
may find it, and that it will prove a blessing to them as 



it has to me. 

I might say more, but as I do not know the sender 
will only say in conclusion, may the Lord bless you 
and keep you faithful for that high calling he has in 
store for the faithful. 

Yours in the blessed hope, 

J. H. S.,-Neb. 



page 143 

DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

When I wrote my last letter I was entirely without 
peace. But I believe as a humble penitent that the 
fault lay with myself. I was very much disappointed 
with this life and could not make up my mind to commence 
at the bottom of the spiritual ladder like a humble, 
trusting child when I thought I was very near the 
top. But yet I have been brought to see that that is 
the very thing I must do. And now the Lord has given 
me the peace for which I prayed so long in vain. I get 
up each morning with the earnest desire to feel myself 
to be a perfectly unknowing being, ready to be led and 
taught by him. And I have come to the realization that 
while I may not have to commence from the bottom it 
is better for me to see myself only one-fourth up 
instead of three-fourths. 

Very humbly and gratefully your sister, 
I. F.,-Cal. 



page 145 



SEMI-MONTHLY 