Do You Appreciate Jehovah’s Earthly Organization?
LOOK at a well-cut, magnificent diamond, and what do you see? A jewel that is truly a thing of beauty. Now examine that diamond through a microscope, and what do you see? Likely there are scratches, cracks, inclusions, or other flaws.
Would you destroy or discard the diamond simply because of the way it looks under a microscope? Of course not! Just step away from the microscope, and you can still appreciate the beauty and extraordinary brilliance that makes it stand out among other gems.
Like a diamond, Jehovah’s earthly organization stands out in many ways. No other organization on earth enjoys an intimate relationship with the Creator. In a letter to first-century anointed Christians, who cherished a heavenly hope, the apostle Peter referred to this special relationship. He said: “You are ‘a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people for special possession.’” (1 Peter 2:9) Today a great crowd of “other sheep,” with the hope of everlasting life on earth, have joined the remaining ones of that “holy nation” in worshiping God. (John 10:16) Together these two groups form an organization that stands out like a beautiful and extraordinarily brilliant gem.
Avoid Viewing Others With a Critical Eye
But we must recognize that this worldwide organization consists of imperfect humans. So, what would happen if we viewed it through a figurative microscope? Yes, we would find sinful tendencies and personality flaws in the individuals who are part of it.​—Romans 3:23.
The apostle Paul admitted that he had such flaws. He said: “When I wish to do what is right, what is bad is present with me.” (Romans 7:21) Every Christian experiences the same conflict. All make mistakes. Moreover, sooner or later many suffer because of someone else’s mistakes. Should we be discouraged or disenchanted when the flaws and imperfections of fellow Christians come to light? Should that diminish our appreciation for Jehovah’s organization? Of course not! Rather, we should step away from the microscope, as it were, and quit focusing on the imperfections of individuals.
The Scriptures list a number of traits that would identify those upon whom the holy spirit is operative. Some of them are “love, joy, peace, long-suffering, kindness, goodness, faith, mildness, self-control.” (Galatians 5:22, 23) In contrast, the religious, political, and business organizations of this world often display what the Bible refers to as the works of the flesh: “enmities, strife, jealousy, fits of anger, contentions, divisions, sects, envies, drunken bouts, revelries, and things like these.” (Galatians 5:20, 21) Thus, like a brilliant diamond among ordinary rocks, Jehovah’s people stand out in the midst of a spiritually corrupt world.​—Matthew 5:14-16.
“Fitly United in the Same Mind”
One outstanding feature of a diamond is its close-knit, strongly bonded atomic structure. Similarly, Jehovah’s earthly organization manifests an unmatched unity in doctrine and brotherhood. Those who are part of that organization apply the admonition found in the Bible at 1 Corinthians 1:10, which states: “Now I exhort you, brothers, through the name of our Lord Jesus Christ that you should all speak in agreement, and that there should not be divisions among you, but that you may be fitly united in the same mind and in the same line of thought.”
Jehovah’s Witnesses have also risen above racial prejudice and national pride. Having “the wisdom from above,” they do not ‘make partial distinctions.’ (James 3:17) We give glory to Jehovah for what he has accomplished in this regard in an organization made up of imperfect humans.
In contrast, the magazine The Christian Century, speaking of the year 1990, stated that “the world seemed more than ever divided by religious parties and by ethnic and nationalist sentiments intimately tied to religious beliefs. From India to Europe and from the Middle East to the Pacific, religion mingled with ethnic and nationalist allegiances​—often with politically volatile results.” Clearly, those who desire to serve God can only turn to the one organization that enjoys Jehovah’s spirit and blessing.
‘Like a Diamond, I Have Made Your Forehead’
The diamond is the hardest naturally occurring substance known to man. The Bible refers to the use of diamonds in scratching or engraving hard materials. (Jeremiah 17:1) Notice, too, Jehovah’s words to Ezekiel: “Look! I have made your face exactly as hard as their faces and your forehead exactly as hard as their foreheads. Like a diamond, harder than flint, I have made your forehead.” (Ezekiel 3:8, 9) Jehovah gave Ezekiel a diamond-hard determination that enabled him to prophesy to an obstinate people.​—Ezekiel 2:6.
Similarly today, Jehovah has granted his people diamondlike hardness in the face of great opposition. Jehovah’s Witnesses have endured legal bans, mob actions, lynchings, beatings, unjust imprisonment, torture, even executions. Yet, they have shown their faith to be unbreakable.
“My Own Servants Will Rejoice”
The Bible predicted a time when people would have a “form of godly devotion” but prove “false to its power.” (2 Timothy 3:1, 5) One newspaper reports that “Protestants, Roman Catholics and Jews are all concerned with the decline” in their churches and synagogues. Jehovah’s Witnesses, on the other hand, are serious students of the Bible. In growing numbers, young and old, men and women, all of them attend several weekly meetings. A letter to a newspaper stated about them that “their religion is the most precious thing they have, and their only concern is to share it with others.”
Such an attitude makes Jehovah’s organization stand out like a precious diamond. And the credit goes to the One who strengthens and guides imperfect individuals through his holy spirit.
The prophet Isaiah foretold: “This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah has said: ‘Look! My own servants will eat . . . Look! My own servants will drink . . . Look! My own servants will rejoice . . . Look! My own servants will cry out joyfully because of the good condition of the heart.’”​—Isaiah 65:13, 14.
Today we see the fulfillment of this prophecy. God cares for his people in an extraordinary way! Hence, if you associate with them, do not allow any negative thinking to rob you of your joy. Look at the whole picture and remember: No other organization on earth enjoys God’s special care and protection. Never cease to treasure your privilege of being a part of it.

