Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Truth Seekers Respond to Informal Witnessing
THE Bible informs us that sheeplike persons will respond to the Fine Shepherd’s voice. (John 10:27) This has been the case in many lands, including Britain.
□ For example, in 1988, just before Christmas, Pamela, one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, answered the telephone in the office where she worked and spoke to a salesman working for the same company in another part of England. At the conclusion of the call, the man asked: “Are you ready for Christmas yet?” Pamela said: “No!” “Aren’t you a bit late?” the caller inquired. “I don’t celebrate Christmas,” Pamela replied. The man said that was unusual and asked why. Pamela told him that she was one of Jehovah’s Witnesses and went on to explain that there was no command in the Bible to celebrate Jesus’ birthday, and besides, Jesus was not born on December 25. Moreover, Christmas was originally a pagan celebration. The caller said that it all sounded very interesting.
Three months later Pamela answered the phone, and the caller said: “Do you remember speaking to me before Christmas and telling me that you didn’t celebrate Christmas? Well, I have found the truth!” It was the same man, and he explained that two weeks after Christmas, two Witnesses called at his home. He invited them in, and a Bible study was started. He related that he had made rapid progress in his studies. He told his live-in girlfriend that their life-style was not pleasing to Jehovah, so they separated, and now they were both attending meetings at the Kingdom Hall.
At the end of the year, they were accepted as unbaptized publishers, and early in 1990 they married. Then they were baptized together. A splendid result from a brief, informal witness over the telephone!
□ Jehovah blessed another sister who witnessed informally in England. When an insurance man came to her door, the sister asked him if he would like to be guaranteed good health, happiness, and everlasting life. He said yes and asked her which insurance policy she was talking about. Being shown from the Bible God’s promise of everlasting life in Paradise on earth, he accepted a copy of the book You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth and read the whole publication in one evening. When he visited the sister again, he told her that the information was marvelous​—if only he had the faith to believe it. The sister explained that he needed to study the Bible and attend meetings at the Kingdom Hall. A Bible study was arranged, and he began attending meetings. He was baptized in the fall of that same year. Just one year later, he married the daughter of the sister who had first witnessed to him. “So,” the sister says, “I gained both a brother and a son-in-law through my informal witnessing!”
It is a fact that truth seekers respond when Bible truth is conveyed by informal witnessing. As Jesus said, his sheep listen to his voice.

