Vol. XXXIX 


PITTSBURGH, PA., NOVEMBER 1, 1918 


No. 21 


VIEWS FROM THE TOWER 

"For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your toays my ways y saith the Lord, For as tiie heavens are higher than 
the earth, 90 are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts" — Isaiah 55:8, 9. 


The grand truth so succinctly stated in this text is not 
appreciated by any except the mature Christian; and it takes 
years of experience in the school of Christ to learn this lesson
 well. Very few learn the lesson properly; but as a re* 
suit these enjoy a calm and a peace in their daily life which 
others do not. These also have a greater confidence than 
others possibly can have. In the words of the Apostle, "We 
know that all things work together for good to them that 
love God." Such have learned that the failure of their own 
plans, the thwarting of their own purposes, is not an evil 
nor an evidence of divine disfavor. They have learned that 
this is the very way which God uses to teach them the lesson
 that divine wisdom is superior to human wisdom; and 
what confidence, what hope, what joy fill the hearts of these! 

With such mature Christians every trial is but "light 
affliction/' "not worthy to be compared with the glory which 
shall be revealed." When seeming calamities come into their 
lives, they "sorrow not as those who have no hope" ; for' they 
recognize the Father's loving hand in every experience, assigning
 to them needed lessons, in order that they may be "made 
meet for the Master's use." This lesson of full submission to the 
divine will must be learned by us all, ere we can hope to share 
with our Lord in his kingdom. 

The past two years of the church's experience have been 
fraught with many such lessons. How often the Heavenly 
Father has seemingly hindered the accomplishment of our 
plans, and afterwards shown us his own grand designs, which 
we have always found to be higher, grander in every sense, 
than our own! 

A SUCCESSION OF STOPBISES 

It would seem well at this season, the memorial of the 
translation of "that faithful and wise steward" from earthly 
to heavenly activities (Revelation 14:13), to review the Lord's 
dealings with his people, both individually and collectively, 
and learn lessons thereby. Two years ago the Lord's people 
were all engaged in harvest activities, with no thought of 
any sudden change. Brother Russell had gone on an extended 
trip. Few realized how near he was to his journey's end. 
On the morning of November 1, 1916, word had gone all 
around the world that Pastor R usse H had died on the afternoon
 of October 31. How little did the masses realize earth's 
loss! How few realized that his work was continuing! None 
realized hi3 gain. 

From that time on, apparently the Lord has been giving 
to the church a aeries of experiences different from what we 
had had before, a succession of surprises, every one of which 
was needed, that we might learn the lesson of our text. The 
report of Brother Russell's death came as a shock to us all, 
and proved a trial of our faith. Most of us had planned his 
demise at a different time and in a different way. Now our 
minds were more or less bewildered; and we began to question
: "Has the harvest ended? Is the door closed? Are 
we of the great company class? Who will carry on the work 
now ?" 

At first we were inclined to mourn our loss unduly, to 
grieve over Brother Russell's departure. But soon our sorrow
 was turned to joy; for it speedily became manifest that 
the Lord had simply exalted Brother Russell, and had given 
him greater powers and grander opportunities of service than 
were ever his before. Furthermore, when, we realized that his 
interest in the members of the church remaining in the flesh, 
and his ability to assist them, had been increased manifold, our 
joy increased proportionately. 

THE TEST WOW UPON THE CHURCH 

Slowly the rnajority regained their equilibrium, as the 
Lord manifested his ability to carry on the work. How much 
we all needed to learn that lesson in order to stabilize our 
faith! How grandly the Lord fulfilled his promise to raise 
up shepherds to care for the flock! How marvelously the 
work progressed for a time! How strenuous was the activity, 
and how we did enjoy it for a time ! 

Suddenly, however, divine providence so overruled that 
the work should come almost to a standstill. How the Lord's 
providences seemed to change! How differently events were 
occurring from what we had expected! Another needed trial 
was upon the church. While engaged in the activities of the 
harvest work and while smiting Jordan, we had learned lessons
 of confidence, humility and patience; but the dear Lord 
saw that we needed to learn these same lessons from another 
angle. Would we continue to have confidence, to be humble 
and patient, when all our activities had practically ceased? 

The Lord is still permitting this test to 'be upon us. Would 
we lose our confidence now, and conclude that the Lord had 
deserted his work and his people, when he has told us: "I 
will never leave thee nor forsake thee"? Would we lose our 
humility to the extent that we would assert that the Lord 
had cast off the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society, and was 
no longer using it as his agency for comforting and blessing 
his people? Would we become so impatient with the Lord 
and nis ways that we would take things into our own hands 
and cease to recognize the church as a Scripturally organized 
body, and consider ourselves at liberty to "draw away disciples
 after" ourselves? Would we so far lose the Master's 
spirit and forget his injunction not to judge, not to condemn, 
that we would thus injure our brother ? How could the work 
possibly contimue now?' Who could be found with ability to 
carry it on? 

An early demise of the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society 
was predicted by some; and all the dear sheep wondered what 
would be the outcome. Quietly and grandly the Lord impressed
 the lesson again, that his work was not dependent 
upon the ability of man, but that the Father was able to 


VII— 34 


[6349] 


(323-333) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


perfect praise out of the mouth of babes and sucklings. During
 the past few months the grand old ship, which has weathered
 the storms of centuries, has passed through some terrific 
gales. The powers of the air have done their worst to destroy
 it; but the fact that it is still afloat is due to the other 
fact that "the Lord is in the ship/' Some, fearing the storm, 
have deserted the ship, forgetful that our safety lies in remaining
 in it. We pity them, and rejoice that the majority 
have stood the test. 

ANOTHER WEEDED TEST 

How we needed this lesson, also! A few have been entrapped
 by the adversary, but we are glad to say that every 
day's mail brings to the office the assurance that some of them 
have recovered their balance; and for this we rejoice. It is 
plainly evident that the friends are gradually learning the 
lesson that "man proposes, but God disposes"; that God's 
thoughts, ways and plans are not ours. In this connection 
we might add that the removal of the Society's headquarters 
to Pittsburgh is proving to be another test to some ol the 
Lord's dear ones. Very evidently still further lessons of 
confidence* in the Lord are needed. Human wisdom and sentimentality
 would have dictated our stay in Brooklyn; but 
divine providence forced us to move; and we wish to say that 
there aTe so many evidences of the Lord's providences in the 
removal that we cannot enumerate them. This work has not 
been accomplished without severe trials; but we have invariably
 found that these proved to be blessings in disguise. The 
Lord has permitted us to 'be confronted with almost insurmountable
 obstacles, only to brush them quickly aside at the 
proper time. 

How fitting it seems that the great work begun by our dear 
Pastor at Allegheny, under the Lord's providence, forty years 
ago should be finished here! There is every evidence, however, 
that there is a further work ahead, after a brief resting season
 ; and we counsel all the Lord's people to be patient, courageous
 and humble. The Scriptures clearly point out a second 
smiting of Jordan, and some texts seem to imply still further 
unfoldings of God's Word. In Romans 15:4 we are told that 
everything written in the Old Testament was for the instruction
 of the church, while she is in the hoping time — -written 
for her comfort and to help her to learn lessons of patience. 

This thought suggests an understanding of all the prophecies
 before the church shall be glorified. May not the "many 
like words" "added" to the book which was burned and which 
Jeremiah rewrote (Jeremiah 36:32) be the corroborative testimony
 of all the prophets — Isaiah and all the minor prophets? 
It would not surprise us if this were the case. We believe that 
The Watch Toweb will be used as the Lord's official organ 
to disseminate his truth until that work shall have been finished
. But however this may be, time alone will tell. 

During this little resting time let us practise "washing one 
another's feet," rendering to the various fellow members of 
the body those loving little services which are "an odor of a 


sweet Hlcense' , to God. And let us not forget to grow in grace 
and in knowledge ourselves. Now is the time to put on the finishing
 touches to our own character and to help the brethren 
to do the same. 

A SPECIAL MEMORIAL 
This issue of The Watoh Towee contains a supplement 
which should awaken in every loyal heart the blessed memory 
of the faithful loyalty and loving zeal of that noble man of 
God, Charles Taze Russell. How grandly his message and his 
example have encouraged us in the past! How the memory 
of these encourages us still! How beautifully he always acquiesced
 to all the divine providences which came into his own 
life and into the work which he loved so well! 

"Deep in unfathomable mines 

Of never failing skill 
God treasures up his bright designs 
And works his sovereign will. J ' 

And now, dear friends, we warn you that the trials are not 
ended. W e shall need to gird on the whole armor of God that 
we may be able to stand in the still more evil days to come. 
The prophet forewarns us, saying, "Who shall be able to 
stand?" The apostles declare that every man's faith shall 
be "tried so as by fire." (Malachi 3:2; 1 Corinthians 3:13; 1 
Peter 4:12; Revelation 6:16, 17) All the "wood, hay and 
stubble" will be "burned." If we would be disloyal under any 
trial, God will surely permit that trial. If our faith will fail 
at any point, the Lord will surely give us that test. If we can 
be induced to injure or to condemn our brother, our test will 
be along that line. If we are disposed to substitute our plans, 
our ways, our thoughts for God's plans, ways and thoughts, we 
are ^ot yet ready for the Messianic kingdom; and God will 
surely give us opportunities to manifest our true disposition 
and the intents of our hearts, 

A WOBD OF EXHOBTATION 

Not in vain did the prophet say: "He shall be like a refiner
's fire and like fuller's soap," when he shall "purify the 
sons of Levi" This surely indicates the thoroughness of the 
test at this time The Revelator adds : "They that are with 
him are the called, the chosen and the faithful"." Let us leave 
the disposing of our individual affairs in the Lord's hands, as 
well as the disposing of the church's affairs, and the Society's 
affairs, also. The Lord will never desert his people. "O thou 
of little faith, wherefore dost thou doubt?" 

When we shall have learned well the lesson that "God is 
able to save to the uttermost," that "he who has begun a good 
work will finish it," and that he chooses his own times and 
ways for the accomplishment of all his plans, then we shall 
have learned to distrust our own wisdom, our own plans ; and 
we will submit joyfully to every experience which our Father 
permits to come into our lives. Then, and not until then, do 
"we know that all things work together" for our good, individually
 and collectively. 


Beloved one! 
Beyond earth's sunshine and its rain, 
Beyond all weariness and pain, 

Thou art at rest. 
E'en though we mourn our loss, we joy to feel 

Thou art so blest. 

faithful one! 
Now privileged to see unfold 
God's purpose in the scroll unrolled 

By Christ's own hand; 
And thou host made report: "I've done as thou, 

Lord, didst command." 


SPECIAL DIVINE PROVIDENCE 

[Reprint from August 1, 1893, issue which please see.] 

"IN MEMORIAM" 


radiant one! 
Along the dark and narrow way 
Thy faithfulness casts back a ray 

Of hope and cheer; 
For thou so joyously thy cross didst bear, 

With scarce a tear, 

blessed one! 
We pray for strength to do God's will, 
To wait and suffer and be still, 

As thou hast done, 
Nor faint nor fear, but still run on until 

The prize is won. 


"THY SAINTS SHALL GLORIFY THEE" 

[Reprint from October 15, 1900, issue which please see.] 

PURITY A QUALIFICATION OF THE ROYAL PRIESTHOOD 

"Be ye clean, that hear the vessels of the Lord."— Iaaiah 52:11. 


This unjunction of the Prophet Isaiah was addressed primarily
, no doubt, to those who were connected with the Jewish 
priesthood or identified with the Lord's house, the Jewish Temple
. The law required that the priesthood should be clean. 


There was an outward cleansing provided for, we remember, 
both in the Tabernacle and in the Temple service. The priests 
had the laver of water at which they were to wash before handling
 the vessels of the Lord's house. Doubtless also the in- 


[6350] 


November 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(334-235) 


struction included the thought that they should be clean in 
their lives, in their conduct before the people; for they represented
 the Lord. 

We believe that in a larger and broader sense, in a prophetic
 sense, this text has application bo the church of Christ, 
the royal priesthood, of which Jesus is the great High Priest, 
identified with the true temple of God. The vessels of the 
Lord's house might represent the various truths of the Lord's 
Word — a variety of truths on a variety of subjects. To a 
certain extent the term "vessels" might apply to the different 
books of the Bible. In a way still different the term might be 
made applicable to the Lord's people themselves, represented 
as 'being the vessels of the Lord in that we contain and give 
forth his word. The Apostle says, for instance (2 Timothy 
2:20, 21): "In a great house there are not only vessels of 
gold and of silver, but also of wood and of earth and some to 
honor and some to less honor." He exhorted that these vessels 
should be kept clean, ready for the Master's use. 

In our text, the vessels would seem to represent the truths 
of God's Word, and those who bear them the priests. The application
 is quite clear to us who are followers of the Lord 
Jesus, the antitypical priesthood, the royal priesthood, which 
St. Peter mentioned. (1 Peter 2:1!) We should all be clean. 
This cleansing began with us before we have 'become priests. 
When we purposed to become priests, to accept the Lord's 
invitation, a certain cleansing of heart and life took place. But 
in addition to this cleansing from individual shortcomings, we 
need cleansing from the defilement of original sin, which can 
be effected only through the merit of the blood of Christ. This 
cleansing took place after we had presented ourselves to God 
in -consecration. Having thus been cleansed and accepted of 
the Father to membership in the royal priesthood, it is necessary
 that we keep cleansed; so the Scriptures again exhort: 
"Cleanse yourselves from all filthinees of the flesh and spirit.*' 
— 2 Corinthians 7:1; 1 John 1:7. 


This cleansing work is one that may well be considered 
continual; for despite our very best endeavors we find that 
weaknesses of the flesh still cling to us more or less. It is impossible
 to put away absolutely every imperfection of thought, 
word and deed while we are in the mortal body. Our personal 
cleansing work, therefore, as well as the cleansing of the blood 
of Christ, must continue as long as we live; and a constant 
watchfulness to avoid sin and all the defilements of the fallen 
earthly nature is necessary. 

The thought given in this text is to be continually before 
our minds — that all who attempt to bear the message of the 
Lord, to be his servants, to speak his truth, should be, first of 
all, clean, pure of heart. "Blessed are the pure in heart; for 
they shall see God." Those who are impure of heart will not 
be permitted to see God, either in the literal or in the figurative
 sense. The seeing of God now, the discerning of his character
, the understanding of his plan, diligence in copying him 
— all this comes to us through a purity of heart. The more 
pure in heart we become, the more our intentions are honest, 
true and clean, the more we may understand and appreciate 
our great heavenly Father; for he reveals himself to such, 
and to no others. Hence the work of cleansing and keeping 
clean is of the greatest importance. 

We must attain absolute purity of heart, of intention ; and 
then so far as possible we must keep our words and conduct 
free from sin, free from defilement of any kind. If any regard
 sin in hia heart, God will not hear him. This is the positive
 declaration of his word. (Psalm 66:18) If therefore, 
any neglect to keep himself in the love of God, he will soon 
go into outer darkness, the darkness of the world, the darkness
 of the nominal church. Hence our abiding in the Lord's 
favor and in the light of his truth is made dependent upon 
our keeping ourselves in his love, upon our keeping ourselves 
in this cleansed condition, in purity of heart, and so far as 
possible in purity of word, thought and deed. 


INTERESTING QUESTIONS 


Question: — Explain that Scripture which declares thai 
God repented that he (had made man, and that it grieved him 
at hi9 heart. 

Answer: — 'This question is based upon Genesis 6:6. The 
matter is plain when we see that the word repent may mean 
a change of either conduct or mind, and often refers to a 
change of course as a result of change of conduct or of mind. 
In God'a case it would not mean a change of mind; for the 
Scriptures assure us that he knows the end from the bogfinning
. (Acts 15:18) Hence it means only a change of conduct, 
a change in the divine method of dealing. Up to the time of 
the I>eluge God had pursued but one course with the human 
family; and then he changed from that course to another. The 
wickedness upon the earth grieved our heavenly -Father in the 
sense that he is sympathetic, and therefore would appreciate 
very keenly the troubles coming upon mankind as a result of 
departure from a right course. 


Question: — In Luke 13:24 is there a difference between the 
door and the gate? 

Answer: — The gate ia the way of faith. Our Lord said: 
"Few there foe that find it" Apparently still fewer would care 
to enter it. Those who have gone in have been misunderstood. 
Jesus himself was misunderstood. His motives were impugned
. So also are those of his followers. The Master was 
called Beelzebub; and his followers have been called devils. 
But the time will come when the narrow way to life will be 
done away with, when the door to the high calling will be 
entirely closed; for all who will go into the kingdom will then 
have entered. After that door has closed, people will begin 
to realize much more clearly just what it has meant to be a 
foot-step follower of our Lord, just what the election of the 
church signifies. Then many will ibe anxious to enter. But 
the way of sacrifice will be closed, and a new dispensation 
ushered in. 


JOSEPH SOLD BY HIS BROTHERS 

[The first sixteen paragraphs of this article were reprinted from article entitled, "Hated of Hia Brethren," published in 
issue of April 1, 1907. * The remainder was reprinted from the article, "Hated Without a Cause," published in issue of September
 15, 1901. Please see the articles named.] 


"AND THERE WAS A 

As the green waves bear on their crest 

The foam, and ever shoreward come, 
So, moving surely to our rest, 

Slowly we all like bits of foam 
Oome drifting home. 

He whom we loved has reached the shore 

In peace; and all the ibillows vast — 
The stormy waves of life that bore 

Him on — have ceased their strife at last. 
The storm is past! 

We thought, because the waves of life 
Were high and rough, the end would be 


GREAT CALM" 

'Mid scenes of tumult and of strife, 
As mighty billows of the sea 
Break loud and free. 

But there was calm instead! The waves 
Of life were stilled, and up the strand 

Slipped noiselessly, as ocean laves 
In quietness the silver sand. 
An ending grand! 

How sweet to know his weary life 
At last to rest and quiet wore! 

Oh, may we all through peace or strife 
Be gathered on that silver shore 
For evermore! 


THE VALUE OF DISCIPLINE 


"In the still air music lies unheard; 

In the rough marble beauty lies unseen; 
To wake the music and the beauty needs 
The master's touch, the sculptor's chisel keen. 

"Great Master; touch us with thy skilful hand; 
Let not the music that is in us die. 


Great Sculptor! hew and polish us; nor let, 
Hidden and lost, thy form within us lie. 

"Spare not the stroke; do with us as thou wilt; 

Let there be naught unfinished, broken, marred ; 
Complete thy purpose, that we may become 
Thy perfect image, O our God and Lord!" 


[6351] 

