From Our Readers
Good Times  I agree that there are many safe ways for young people to enjoy themselves, as mentioned in the article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Have a Good Time?” (September 22, 1996) We can go to a museum or a zoo or have a picnic or even a get-together. Even those of us with little financial means can enjoy ourselves by inviting other youths to our home to play games or for a meal.
V. A., Brazil
Heroic Cat  I must let you know just how much I appreciated the article “A Mother’s Bonding With Her Babies,” which appeared in the September 22, 1996, issue. I live in a country where sexual practices are unrestrained and where many young girls do not hesitate to have an abortion. I believe that the mother cat dubbed Scarlett is a fine example of a conscientious mother.
E. B., Mali
I was thrilled to read the story of Scarlett, who showed utter fearlessness in saving her kittens from a burning garage. She impressed me as a cat from which many humans could learn a lot. I think it’s terrific that you publish such articles.
D. W., Germany
Your heartwarming story about Scarlett and her kittens was the most powerful article on abortion that I have ever read.
J. G., United States
I couldn’t help but cry when I read the article. I have always loved animals of all sorts and appreciate the lessons Jehovah teaches us through them. It makes me sick at heart to know that “intelligent” humans do not show the same care and attention to their offspring.
C. C., United States
Tinnitus  Thank you so much for the article “Tinnitus—A Noise to Live With?” (September 22, 1996) I have been suffering from it for six years. I feared that I had an incurable disease because no doctor had been able to tell me exactly what my condition was called. Reading your article has had a calming effect on me. Now I am trying to put up with it as I await God’s new world, where no one will be sick.—Isaiah 33:24.
C. F., Italy
I began experiencing this problem nearly ten years ago. It was terrible to imagine that I would hear this noise constantly! But today, I am learning to live with my noisy ear. I am looking forward to the time when, thanks to Jehovah, I will again hear SILENCE!
J. S., Czech Republic
I have been suffering from tinnitus for the last two and a half years and have undergone all kinds of medical tests, including a CT scan of the brain. Anxiety and tension were frustrating problems in my life. Having read your article, I am learning to live with the ailment.
M. G. T. F., Sri Lanka
My husband suffers from tinnitus. He also suffers from major depression. This information has helped me to have more empathy for him. At times, the noise is very troublesome to him, and I must admit that I have not been as compassionate as I should have been. I sincerely appreciate the logical way in which this article was written. I am sure that it will help many mates of those with tinnitus to be more understanding.
L. F., United States

