Finding a Safeguard in Integrity
DO YOU desire to be safeguarded during these critical times hard to deal with? Do you hope to be safely shielded when Jehovah God rises to devour all wicked men and institutions with the fire of his jealousy? If so, then your prayer and your striving should be in accord with the words of the psalmist David: “Let integrity and uprightness themselves safeguard me, for I have hoped in you.”—Ps. 25:21.a
What does integrity mean? It means wholeness, soundness, completeness, being undivided. Keeping integrity toward God means living up to one’s vow of dedication to do God’s will. To find a safeguard in integrity we must be guided by Bible principles.—Phil. 3:16; Gal. 6:16.
Keeping integrity also means blamelessness of life; completeness of devotion to God. It means keeping our hearts, that is, our motives and affections, pure, loyal and faithful to God, even as did David, and especially as did the greater-than-David, Jesus Christ. He set us a perfect example.
To find a safeguard in integrity we must diligently study God’s Word, becoming familiar with and fond of its righteous principles. The chief principle or rule of action found in God’s Word is that we love Jehovah with all our heart, mind, soul and strength, giving him exclusive devotion. This is but due him as our Sovereign Creator.—Ex. 20:5; Matt. 22:37, 38.
Keeping integrity provides a real test because of inherited inclinations to selfishness and sin. These make it difficult to live by principles and easy to yield to passion. Nor is passion limited to the feeling between sexes. Rather, it is a strong fondness for anything that makes us feel good or is to our personal interests and pleasure without regard for God’s will.—Col. 3:5.
And especially is our integrity tested when Caesar seeks to interfere with our carrying out our prime commission to preach the good news of God’s kingdom. In such a case we have no alternative but to follow the principles enunciated by Jesus Christ and his apostles: “Pay back Caesar’s things to Caesar, but God’s things to God.” “We must obey God as ruler rather than men.” Logically the commands of the Higher Authority and of the Greater Benefactor must take precedence. We must love Him more than ourselves, more than our neighbors, yes, more than a whole nation of neighbors!—Mark 12:17; Acts 5:29.
God’s Word does not explicitly state what we must do in every given situation in order to safeguard our integrity. Rather, it often leaves it up to us, dedicated Christians, to apply its principles. By accepting that responsibility and measuring up to it wisely, we will find a safeguard in our integrity both now and at the end of this wicked old world.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, December 15, 1957.

