From Our Readers
Depression
When I first saw your magazine on “Depression​—You Can Win the Fight!” (October 22, 1987) my first thought was, ‘Oh, no! Not another article about all you have to do is to think happy thoughts, wear a smile, and it’ll be gone.’ I was diagnosed as having S.A.D. (Seasonal Affective Disorder), so when I saw it mentioned in the article, I was elated! Especially thank you for the sentence immediately following its description: “So depression is not always ‘in the head.’”
J. E. G., United States
College Education
I disagreed with the article “College Education​—A Preparation for What?” (January 8, 1987) and also the letter in the August 22, 1987, issue. I personally know young people who have attended college, and they have stimulating jobs as well as strong Christian marriages. Life is not just learning practical things. As we walk in the woods, look at the stars, learn to play tennis, or read a book about art, we are not doing anything practical, but these things can enrich our lives tremendously.
A. J. M., United States
Your article on college education annoyed me. I agree with the reader who said it was unfair and biased, and I also agree with your reply. (November 8, 1987) College has its good points and its bad points. Whether a person succeeds in college or in a religious organization depends on how well he individually applies what he has learned.
T. M., United States
We agree that there are many benefits to be gained from increased knowledge that institutions of higher learning can dispense. At the same time, we do not ignore the benefits society has received from men such as Thomas Edison and Henry Ford, who had little or no formal education. We do not condemn the so-called higher education as such and reaffirm what we have stated before, that going to college is an individual matter. At the same time, we feel compelled to point out the hazards of the college environment.
First, although there may be exceptions, the thrust of college education is generally against faith in God and in favor of humanist philosophies.
Second, college education usually puts the emphasis on getting ahead in the world and attaining material success, contrary to the advice of Jesus and the apostle John.​—Matthew 6:19-21, 25-34; 1 John 2:15, 16.
Third, the usual college environment fosters a spirit of independence and permissiveness, resulting in sexual immorality and drug misuse that may be difficult for many young people to resist. We encourage young people to continue acquiring knowledge, especially that found in the Bible because it leads to gaining everlasting life. (John 17:3) We also encourage them to cultivate the skills necessary to lead a useful, productive life with the emphasis on Jesus’ words at Matthew 6:33, to keep seeking first God’s Kingdom and his righteousness.
And fourth, the time is short. (Luke 21:34-36; Ephesians 5:15, 16) It can be spent most profitably in serving our Creator.​—ED.

