She Reached Her Goal
Many youths today have no purpose in life. In contrast, a teenage girl in Italy set her goal and reached it, and we are pleased to share her experience with our readers.
IN ABOUT a month I will be 14 years old. I am the eldest of four brothers and sisters. My family is spiritually divided, since my father is not one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
My mother became a Witness when I was only a few months old. Right from the start, she took to heart her responsibility to bring us children up in the “mental-regulating of Jehovah.” (Ephesians 6:4; Proverbs 22:6) In fact, as far back as I can remember, she regularly studied the Bible with us, we prepared for the meetings together, and we accompanied her in the house-to-house ministry every week. We also witnessed to our faith at school.
From the time that we were very young, Mom tried to instill in our hearts the desire for the full-time ministry by reading to us the experiences of those Witnesses who had been full-time ministers for many years. Above all, she set an example for us. In fact, Mom never asked us to do something that she herself did not do.
While people may gladly listen to children who call at their homes in the ministry, they are sometimes rude to the adults who accompany them. Once when I was eight or nine years old, I was calling at homes along with an elder. A lady opened the door, and I began my presentation. In a very rude manner, the lady said to the brother: “You even obligate these poor children to preach!” “No, Madam,” I promptly replied. “If I am here, it’s of my own free will!” After that, the lady, speechless, accepted the literature that I offered her.
When I was ten, I shared in the ministry full-time during the school vacation in July, though I was not yet baptized. This involved a small sacrifice, as I had to give up going to the beach. I never regretted it though, because the happiness I felt at the end of that month was indescribable.
I got baptized in June when I was 12 1/2 years old. In the summer of that year, I again shared in the full-time ministry, and later, with the help of a good schedule, I was also able to make the most of the Christmas vacation. I did this because at the beginning of the school year, I had set myself a goal. I had made the decision, and had told Jehovah in prayer, that I would finish that school year with a flourish, gain my third-year high-school diploma, and would enter the full-time ministry.
From the moment I made this decision, I ran into problems. Since I was good at certain subjects, the teachers pressured me to continue my studies. The temptation was very great because I liked school, but I had not forgotten my goal and the promise I had made to Jehovah.
When the news got around among the teachers that I didn’t want to continue my studies, the pressure increased, even on the part of a teacher who had never shown any liking for me. To be on the safe side, nine months in advance I submitted my application form for the full-time ministry to the elders of my congregation. The pressure at school did not let up, but by this time I just wasn’t listening. My determination also helped me overcome pressure on the part of my classmates.
School finally finished in June, and in July, I started as an auxiliary full-time minister. There were many blessings, but then another problem arose. Jobs became available in the factory where my father worked, and he wanted me to go and work with him full-time. I just didn’t know what to do, but Jehovah helped me. I was not yet 14 years old, so they could not give me the job.
Then in August my father said: “In October you’re going to come and work with me.” If I had gone to work in that factory, I would not have had enough time for the full-time ministry, and having to work shifts, I would also have missed meetings. I took the matter to Jehovah in prayer.
Jehovah’s answer was not long in coming​—almost immediately I found a part-time job! And so, happily, on September 1, 1987, I began the regular full-time ministry. I am so happy I just can’t find the words to describe the joy I have. I feel that Jehovah is near to me, and I pray that he will continue to bless my efforts.​—Contributed.

