Vol. XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, N. Y,, DECEMBER 15, 1917 


No. 24 


1917— ANNUAL REPORT— 1917 


When the earnest laborers in the Lord's harvest field have 
carefully considered this report, we believe it will bring them 
joy and encouragement. It has been truly said that "Nothing 
succeeds like success." To succeed in the Lord's work means 
to have the blessing of the Lord; and "The blessing of the 
Lord, it maketh rich, and he addeth no sorrow with it" (Proverbs
 10:22} Therefore the trials which he permits to come 
to us, if properly received, bring a blessing; and hence we 
rejoice in tribulation, thankful in our hearts for all the way 
he leads us. 

The year 1917 has been a strenuous one. The nations of 
earth are in great distress and perplexity as to what course 
shall be taken, and the hearts of men are failing them for 
what they see must be the inevitable result. Those who have 
no faith in prophecy cannot see the rapid weakening of the 
governments. Revolution merging into anarchy is now the 
order in Russia, a condition which is certain to follow in 
the other European nations. The public press quotes Mr. 
Gerard as saying, "When the revolution starts in Germany 
it will be so terrible that it will make the French Revolution 
look like a picnic." Earthquakes, disasters, famine, pestilence, 
etc., are all taking their place in the time of trouble, in fulfilment
 of the prophetic words of the Lord Jesus. Such great 
sorrow, suffering and distress in the world would discourage 
even the Christian, were it not for the assuring words of the 
Master, saying, "When these things begin to come to pass, 
then look up, and lift up your heads; for your redemption 
draweth nigh."— Luke 21:28. 

THE MASTER THE CHIEF BE APE E 

It is the tendency of almost everyone to lean upon some 
other person. Recognizing Brother Russell as the Lord's 


messenger to the Laodicean church and a3 the Lord's chosen 
servant for the period of the harvest, coupled with his strong 
personality, his kind and loving manner, all of the Lord's 
people of the present time who knew him were led to more 
or less lean upon him. He was a wonderful man, and wonderfully
 used of the Lord. It pleased the Lord to take him 
away from the field of earthly activities, and his passing was 
a great shock to others in the harvest field. It was the thought 
of many that his entering the kingdom marked the end of the 
work. 

The year 1917 opened with rather a discouraging outlook. 
Necessarily there were some misgivings, some doubts and 
fears. The trials came thick and fast; but with each trial 
came increased blessing as a further evidence that the Lord 
is still the Chief Reaper, and that the harvest is not the work 
of man, but the Lord's work. True to his promise, he "turned 
his hand upon his little ones," and has "opened the windows 
of heaven and poured out a blessing" upon his people beyond 
their greatest expectations or hopes. More and more his people
 began to realize that the work of the harvest does not 
depend upon any person or persons, but that the Lord is amply 
capable of performing his own sovereign will and accomplishing 
his purposes in his own due time. 

THE WORK AT BROOKLYN 

Shortly before the death of Brother Russell he had determined
 upon a reorganization of the office force; and to this 
end he made several changes and gave directions concerning 
others. These were carried out; and the Lord's guiding hand 
and overruling providences in this behalf .are plainly to he seen. 
The reorganization of the office force upon a strictly business 
and economic basis was completed and is now moving with a 


[6181] 


(371-372) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


BuooxirYW, N. Y. 


smoothness and efficiency that should characterize any wellmanaged
 institution, accomplishing more work with less effort. 
The members of the office force realize that it is a privilege and 
not a right to be in the office; and each one vies with the 
other to do his or her part of the work in an efficient manner 
;tnd to the glory of the Lord. The same may be said of the 
management of" the Bethel Home. Everyone in both the 
home and the office is happy; and "the peace of God which 
passeth all human understanding" is enjoyed by all. 

It took some time, of course, to become accustomed to 
the home and the office without the presence of Brother Russell
, but those having and manifesting the spirit of the Lord 
have learned to lean more and more upon the Lord and to 
strive to be a blessing to others. That Brother Russell on 
the other side the veil has had much to do with the management
 of the office, the home and the work of the harvest on 
this side the veil, we verily believe. These things were dearest 
to hi? heart of all things on earth. He had devoted his life 
to this special work. He had established the Bethel Home 
and the office arrangement. Who would be more interested 
in having these used to the glory of the Lord than Brother 
Russell? It was his interpretation of Revelation 14:13 that 
the saants in glory beyond the veil still participate in the 
work this side the veil during the period of the harvest. Commenting
 upon that Scripture, he said: 

"One by one the 'feet' class will pass from the present 
condition, in which, though often weary and wounded, 
they are always rejoicing, to the other side of the veil — 
'changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye/ from 
mortality to immortality, from weakness to power, from 
dishonor to glory, from human to heavenly conditions, 
from animal to spirit bodies. Instead of the kingdom 
waiting for the living members to finish their course, the 
kingdom work began at once; and the living ones on 
this side the veil are privileged to know 'the mysteries 
of the kingdom* and to engage in kingdom work before 
their 'change 5 ; and as they die will not fall 'asleep/ 
but will be 'changed' in the moment of death, resurrected 
as part of the blessed and holy first resurrection. 

"Their work will not cease with this change; for all 

those who will be counted worthy of that change to glory 

will be already enlisted in the service of the kingdom on 

this side the veil: only the weariness, the labor feature, 

will cease with the change. We may not be able to judge 

accurately as to what features of the great work are now 

being carried on by the Lord and his glorified saints 

beyond the veil; but we may be sure that they are active 

participants in the work assigned to the members of the 

same kingdom class whose course and service are not 

yet ended on this sdde the veil — the harvest work." 

THE FINISHED MTSTEET 

For years Brother Russell held and taught that the church 

nominal^ Catholic and Protestant, would federate; that they 

would be recognized more or less by the civil powers; that the 

church nominal constitutes "Babylon"; that the association 

of the ecclesiastical with the civil powers is an abomination 

in the sight of the Lord; that the members of the church this 

side the veil, particularly during the latter part of the'harvest, 

were typed by John the Baptist; that the "John" class would 

probably give a strong rebuke to "Babylon"; that the rebuke 

would consist of a plain proclamation of the truth, exposing 

the error; and that this work would just precede the settling 

down of the "dark night when no man can work" in the harvest 

field; and that "Babylon" must fall. He was fully convinced 

that such work must be done. At a question meeting held at 

one of the conventions in 1916 by Brother Russell, in answering 

a question concerning the judgment and the binding of kings 

and nobles, he said: 

"The two-edged sword means the Word of God. That 
must mean here [this side the veil], for no one will be 
smiting anything with a two-edged sword over there. 
This two-edged sword in the hands of the saints means 
that while they are resting in their faith, they have the 
Word of God, sharp and powerful, and with it are able 
to oppose everything opposed to the truth. All this 
belongs to this side of the veil. These are the saints who 
are to execute the judgments written. How? I cannot 
give all the details. Undoubtedly there will be a great 
many details when we reach that time. We should be 
ready to take any part which the Lord may give us. He 
will 'give all of his people a share. We shall see what 
this judging may mean a little later on. The river Jordan 
means a judgment, and the smiting of this judgment may 
mean to put the truth in such a way as to do the judging. 
The EHijah will handle this sword." 
Up to the very day of his change Brother Russell was 


bending every effort to prepare for the smiting of "Babylon." 
It should be carefully marked that the message of truth in 
due time constitutes the sharp, two-edged sword; and that 
the an ti typical Elijah class, otherwise designated as the antitypical
 "John" class, would be used of the Lord to send forth 
this message of truth far and wide, that it might accomplish 
the divine purposes. 

Following Brother Russell's "change," an Executive Committee
, composed of Brothers Ritchie, Van Amburgh and Rutherford
, was appointed to manage the affairs of the Society 
until the annual election in January, 1917. Within a short 
time after the creation of this committee, it was brought to 
the attention of its members that Brothers Woodworth and 
Fisher had some understanding and interpretations of Revelation
 and Ezekiel that might be helpful; and since Brother 
Russell had stated that some one else would write the Seventh 
Volume, and since he had stated that the Seventh Volume 
would come to the church, and since the Scriptures clearly 
?ot forth that there must be seven volumes of Studies in the 
Scriptures, the Committee carefully considered the matter 
amd decided to have the two brethren named write manuscript 
and compile what had been written by Brother Russell upon 
the prophecies of Ezekiel and Revelation. No promise whatsoever
 was made by the committee to these brethren as to 
whether the manuscript would be used. 

Early in the summer of 1917 the manuscript was completed
; and after a careful and prayerful consideration, it 
was believed to be the Lord's will that it should be published
 and given out to the church. The readers of Tiil 
Watch Tower are familiar with the fact that it was published
, and about the middle of July was sent to all Watch 
Tower subscribers, and on the 17th of July was delivered to 
the Bethel family. It was prepared under the direction of the 
Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, as will be seen by 
reference to the preface. The name of the Society likewise 
appears on the outside of the cover. Upon the title page 
appears the name of the International Bible Students 
Association, which has likewise appeared on the title pages 
of the other volumes for several years; and the copyright 
was put in the name of the Peoples Pulpit Association. 
Thus it is seen that all three of the corporations, which jointly 
are used to carry on the harvest work, participated in the 
putting out of the hook; and its publication was fully accomplished
 by "the messenger" of Revelation 14:18 — the Watch 
Tower Bible and Tract Society, which is maintained by 
the sacrifice of the saints of God. 

In harmony with the expectation of the Lord's "little 
ones," who had been engaged in the harvest work, this, The 
Finished Mystery, the seventh of the series of Studies in 
the Scriptures, contains a clear exposition of the prophecies 
of Ezekiel and Revelation. Never has there been any publication
 which so clearly defines "Babylon," outlines her wrongful 
course, and exposes her fraudulent practices, as the Seventh 
Volume. This book is designated "the Point of the Sword," 
which is set against the Babylonish systems, and which, cutting 
away the mask, exposes the true nature and foretells the 
imminent fall of Babylon. (Ezekiel 21 :15) The "Point of the 
Sword" is sharp on both sides. It truly represents the testimony
 of the two great prophetic books "of the Bible — Revelation
 and Ezekiel. Can there be a reasonable doubt that the 
message of the Seventh Volume is the instrument in the 
hands of the Lord's consecrated, the antitypical Elijah class, 
with which the smiting is to be done? And since Brother 
Russell stated, "The Elijah class will handle this sword; he 
will give all of his people a share," is it at all unreasonable 
to expect that in due time the truly consecrated and earnest 
workers in the harvest field will grasp the sword, and go 
forth with joyful hearts to the performance of the duties and 
privileges placed in their hands by the Lord? 

ITS PHENOMENAL SUCCESS 

When the book was first published, it was thought that 
less than 100,000 volumes would be required, and a contract 
was made by the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society 
with the printers for the manufacture of less than 100,000 
volumes. This number was soon exhausted, and more were 
ordered. Near the close of our fiscal year the demand became 
so great — colporteurs everywhere reporting so much interest 
manifested by the public, the orders coming in with such 
rapidity — that up to this time we have found it necessary to 
give orders for the 850,000 edition. Many of the classes, following
 the suggestions of The Watch Tower of October 1st, 
have organized for the sale of the Seventh Volume j and 
hundreds of the friends who have heretofore had no active 
part in the colporteur service are now placing many volumes 
in the hands of the people. Many order-loving people, heretofore
 entire strangers to the harvest message, are receiving 


[6182] 


Dbckubkr 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(373-374) 


the message of Volume Seven with gladness of heart. If space would be especially pleasing to the Lord that his people 

would permit we could insert many statements similar to assemble in convention in 1917. 

the following; The Society put forth a strenuous effort to have one 

"It is the most wonderful book 1 have ever read. It has general convention at a central point in the United States, 

shown me clearly what is wrong with the churches and the with a view to having all the friends assemble there who 

clergy; and I don't want to go there any more." could possibly come. So many things interfered with arAnother
 said, "It has cleared all the mists away. No rangements for the holding of such a convention that we came 

wonder 1 could get no satisfaction from the churches!" to the conclusion that it was not the Lord's will to attempt 

Another wrote, "I always realized there was something to have it. We wondered if we could have a convention at 

wrong with the systems, but never could define the trouble all without Brother Russell being present in the flesh, ana 1 yet 

until I got this book. I want to get out of Babylon while we felt sure it would be pleasing to the Lord that his people 

the getting is good." come together. About the time our efforts for this general 

The sale of the Seventh Volume is unparallelled by the convention failed, requests began to pour into the office from 

sale of any other book known, in the same length of time, all parts of the country, asking for conventions to be held, 

excepting the Bible. The classes that are using it as a Bercan Arrangements were made to hold a few conventions. These 

study report wonderful blessings. It is not claimed that the were attended with such manifest approval of the Lord, and 

book is perfect, nor was this claim made for the preceding such a wonderful blessing to his people, that it was determined 

six volumes. No imperfect creature could produce any perfect to respond to the call of the church in so far as possiblo; 

thing. A number of typographical errors have been corrected and consequently the Society responded, arranging the routes 

in the second edition. Others will be corrected as found. It of the traveling pilgrim brethren and others of the office force 

is not claimed that all interpretations are perfect, nor would so that small conventions might be held in various parts of 

such claim be made for any of the series of the seven volumes; the United States. 

but that the hand of the Lord has supervised its publication Since August the first up to this time, twenty-one of these 

and distribution must be evident to all who have been watch- conventions have been held, not one of which was held except 

ing the Lord's direction of the harvest, and who have joy- upon the earnest request of the local classes. Those who have 

fully participated in that portion that has come to them. attended can testify to the wonderful blessings coming to them. 

We are pleased to announce that the translation of the Everywhere the spirit of the Lord has been manifest, and it 

Seventh Volume into Swedish and French has already been is our belief that Brother Russell beyond the veil has been 

accomplished, and both are to be off the press this month, in permitted to have some part in these conventions. Those who 

Europe. As soon as we can fill orders in these or other are privilpged to manage the work of the Society claim no 

languages, announcement will be made in these columns. It credit whatsoever, but numbly and joyfully acknowledge the 

is being translated and published by instalments in the Ger- Lord's favor in having any part in these assemblies which 

man, Polish and Greek Watch Towers. It is being translated have strengthened his people in the hour of greatest stress 

into four other foreign languages, and doubtless will be trans* that has yet come upon the world or upon the church. These 

lated into many more soon. conventions have not only strengthened the faith of the many 

"THIS HOVOR HAVE ALL HIS SAINTS" attending, but have enthused many to lay aside earthly weights 

Brother Russell long ago stated in The Watch Toweb and joyfully enter the harvest field. The requests for such 

that the "penny" of Matthew 20:2-17 constitutes "kingdom conventions continue to pour in, and we take this as an inhonors
," From the quotation above made, he mentions the dication from the Lord that it is his will that the Society 

honor that will come to the kingdom class in binding the kings continue to arrange for them. 

and nobles and in executing the judgments by the sword. He THE PBI0&IM SERVICE 

further stated that the giving of the "penny" surely means j^ has always pleased the Lord to have the message of the 

something that will occur in this present life this side the kingdom proclaimed by word of mouth. The pilgrim service 

veil, and that it would take place at the end of the age; that k a8 been greatly blessed by the Lord since the Society inaugthose
 coming into the harvest field recently have an equal urated it. The meetings held by the various pilgrim brethren 

opportunity with those who have been long in the service in have brought many blessings to the consecrated and to the 

wielding the eword according to the Lord'a appointed pur- public. The greatest number of pilgrims engaged in the work 

poses. Further commenting Upon the "penny," Brother Rus- m 191 6 was 69. Conditions became such that some of these 

sell said: are no longer engaged in the pilgrim service, but the Lord 

"We can think of only one way, and that is to apply seemingly has been pleased to raise up others to perform this 

the parable entirely to present life experiences of the part of his work. At this time there is a total of 93 brethren 

kingdom class, especially those who will be living at the engaged in this branch of the service, which we believe has 

close of the Gospel age, and a3 greater knowledge of not been exceeded during any year of the harvest. Below is 

present truth is now coming as a reward to all who will a brief summary of the pilgrim work for this year: 

labor at all in the vineyard of the Lord, let us not be sur- Engaged in pilgrim service 93 

prised if this should be equally distributed to those who Miles traveled 617,186 

have come in recently with those who have been a long Towns visited 6,672 

time in the Master's service," — Z '14, 171-172. Public meetings 1,956 

It is with sincere joy that we are privileged to report Semi-public meetings 3,287 

that amongst the activities of the Watch Tower Bible and Total attendance 850,734 

Tract Society for 1917 the Seventh Volume of Studies in VOLTOTEER service 

thb Scriptures has been published, and is now going forth, __ * 1.1. T j v j i. i i. 

We count this as another one of the strong proofs t&at the . £** arm f °« the L ?F d ha3 do ™ * *"** volunteer service 

harvest is nearing the end, and that in all probability the > n thls f™^*™**?** *?* B £ thls T m&an th * LP ubhca " 

Spring of 1918 will mark the beginning of the closing up of tian and free distribution of the Bible Students Monthly. 

all activities of the kingdom class on this side the veil Truly J™ ^ onS h * Ve bee " P ubl ^h d ™& districted, aggregating 

the message of Volume Seven has caused a great light to ?^6o,000 copies. The third edition of approximately 

shine upon the pathway of the Elijah class, and with joy they 10.000,000 is now enroute to the classes to be distributed on 

sinsr* December 30th of this year, and the first of January of next 

"And heaven shines clearer ?<*>*- Yl^t had many responses to these papers, testifyAnd
 rest comes nearer in S that thev have * r ° u g h * blessings to many hearts. 

At each step of the way." OTHEB BRANCHES OF THE WOBK 

OONVEOTIOHS OF HIS PEOPLE The PHOTO-DRAMA of Cbeation has been shown during the 

For a number of years it has been the custom of the year at various places, and interest in it still continues, the 

Watch Tower BrBLE and Tract Society to hold one or more total attendance for the year being 292,338. The number of 

general conventions, at which all believers in the ransom sac- productions was 678. The Eureka Drama productions were 

riflce are welcome. It has always been recognized that these 901 and the total attendance €2,483. 

conventions are stimulating, building up those who attend in Since it is contrary to the terms of the Charter of our 

the "most holy faith" and keeping their minds fixed upon Association for the Society to engage in the manufacture 

that great convention of the "general assembly of the church and sale of Angelophone machines, it became necessary to 

of the first borns" to which we have all been looking forward. put this branch of work in other hands, and it is still 

Having in mind that we were nearing the end of the way, continuing. It being entirely in harmony, however, for the 

and desiring to heed the words of the Apostle, "Not forsaking Society to still manufacture and sell the records for tla 

the assembling of yourselves together, as the manner of some Angelophone. arrangements were made with the brother who 

is, but exhorting one another, and so much the more as ye took over the Angelophone Company, whereby the Society 

see the day approaching" (Hebrews 10:25), we felt that it finances the reproduction of the records. These new records 

[6183] 


(3N-J7S) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brookitx, N. Y. 


have nroven ver y satisfactory, and furnish another means 
that the Lord is using to give the message of glad tidings to 
those having hearing ears. 

The pastoral work has been greatly blessed during the 
year. For the year 1916 there were 350 classes engaged m 
the pastoral work. During the first part of the year 1917 there 
was a slight increase, but later in the year more classes engaged
 in it, and the total number engaged in pastoral work 
tor 1917 was 924. The results have been very gratifying, 
many hearing the truth and making full consecration and 
symbolizing this consecration; a number of new Berean .Bible 
classes have been established. 

THE COLPORTEUR WORK 

Many of the dear brethren who heretofore have been engaged
 in the colporteur work were compelled to engage in 
secular business in order to provide themselves with the 
necessities of life. Consequently during the year 1916 there 
were only 372 colporteurs. During the year 1917 this number 
has been increased to 461, regularly engaged in colporteur 
service. Added to this, 355 classes have duly organized and 
are carrying on the special colporteur work. By this means 
the county where the class is located is divided into smaller 
sections, and everyone of the consecrated who desires to have 
a part in this work is assigned to a small district until he has 
finished, and then assigned to another district until the territory
 is entirely covered. Some of the classes have as many as 
100 engaged in the colporteur work, many of whom have 
never before had any experience; but they report some very 
splendid results and many blessings of the Lord. If we count 
10 members as the average of a class doing the ^ colporteur 
work, we have 3550 special colporteurs and 461 regular colporteurs
, which at this time would aggregate 4011 engaged in 
the colporteur work; and from the daily reports coming to 
the office we anticipate this number will more than double 
very shortly. We give below a comparative summary of the 
output of the various publications for the years 1915, 1916 
and 1917: 

1915 1916 1917 

Studies (English and foreign) 362,344 265,495 574,838 

Drama Scenarios (hound books) 55,630 70,000 87,567 
Mannas and other books 53,355 42,000 95,898 

Booklets (English and foreign) 88,447 110,000 191,719 
the watch toweb {24 issues) 1,272,000 1,128,000 1,211,000 
German watch toweb (12 issues) 24,000 24,000 25,000 
Polish watch toweb (12 issues) 24,000 17,000 19,000 
Our correspondence for this year has been unusually heavy. 
We have endeavored with the well-organized office force to 
handle this as rapidly as possible. 
Number of letters received during the fiscal year, 203,686 
*' " " sent out during the fiscal year, 167,154 

ATOITORS' REPORT 

At various times heretofore the books of the Society have 
been audited by a committee selected by Brother Russell for 
that purpose. At a recent meeting of the Board of Directors 
an auditing committee was selected and notified to come to 
the office and make thorough examination and audit of the 
books and accounts of the Society, The report of this auditing
 committee appears below and speaks for itself: 

The undersigned committee, upon request of the President
 and the Secretary-Treasurer of the Watch Toweb 
Bible and Tbaot Society, submit the following report t 
On the 8th day of December, 1917, an examination of 
the books of the Society was made at the office in the 
Brooklyn Tabernacle, 13-17 Hicks Street, Brooklyn, N. Y„ 
said examination covering the period of the fiscal year, 
Nov. 1, 1916 to the close of business, Oct. 31, 1917. 

The books were found in excellent condition, accurately
 kept, with the accounts stated fully and clearly. 
The Society's cash was found to be properly deposited 
in banks, trust companies and safety deposit vaults. 

The system of accounting used in the office seems admirably
 adapted for the purpose of the Society. The 
office has been organized on an excellent efficiency basis, 
the space, material and personnel being used in a manner 
that commands our highest commendation. 

With our knowledge of corporations doing large business
, we doubt whether it would be possible to find elsewhere
 the same amount of business transacted with the 
same number of employes. 

Every feature of the office work, the forma used, and 
the methods employed, bespeak the utmost economy in 
time and money. 

The committee finds the stock of books and other literature
 kept in an orderly manner, and that the amount 
of stock is kept at the lowest point consistent with good 


management, and that the movement of the stock is expedited
 by every known means. 

The transportation of large shipments to various parts 
of the country is made expeditious and economical, whereever
 possible, by forwarding direct from the factory. 

The record of voting shares kept hy the SecretaryTreasurer
 we find to be complete and accurate. 
Eliot H. Thomson, 

General Bookkeeper, Washington Loan & Trust 
Company, .Washington, D. C. 
Hakry J. Aldbich, 

Efficiency Engineer, Spencer Kellogg 3 Sons, 
Incorporated, Buffalo, N. V. 
Clayton J. Woodwobth, 

Vice-President and Auditor, Foster Correspondence
 Schools, Scranton, Pa. 

FINANCIAL CONDITION 
Never during the harvest has the Lord's approval and 
loving kindness been made more manifest in his provision 
for the carrying on of his work than during this year. At 
the beginning of the fiscal year the contributions came rather 
slowly. For the first four months they were about like the 
first part of 1915; but in the latter part of the fiscal year, 
particularly from August until the close of the year on 
October 31st, 1917, contributions to the Tract Fund greatly 
increased, and by comparing this with the previous reports 
published in The Watch Tower it will be seen that for the 
fiscal year 1917 the contributions exceeded any yet in the history
 of the Society, with the exception of the two phenomenal 
years of 1913 and 1914. The zeal and earnestness manifested 
by the friends in sending in their sacrifices has been an inspiration
 to those who have read their communications. We 
append hereto a copy of the financial statement issued by the 
auditing committee, which is self-explanatory: 

The audit of the books of the WAtch Toweb Bible 
and Tract Society for the fiscal year ending October 31, 
1917, is in detail as follows: 

Receipts 
Good Hopes and Tract Fund 

Donations $219,545.41 

^ , . Expenditures 

Pilgrim Service $27,700.63 

Free Literature, Books, etc 54,544.20 

Sent to Foreign Fields 24,512.20 

Pastoral Work 282.24 

Various Conventions 2,866.00 

Repayment of advances made in 
1916 (See Z. '15-373 and '16-389. 
$100,713.09 minus $20,000.00) 80,713.09 
Balance on hand 28,927.05 


$219,545.41 
[Signed] Eliot H. Thomson 
Habby J. Aldbich 
Clayton J. Woodwobth 

It is proper that we mention the fact that by reference 
to the report for 1915 it will be seen that the Society borrowed 
a large sum. It will be observed on the financial sheet of 
1917 that after repaying this amount there is still a balance 
of the approximate sum of $28,000 to the credit of the Good 
Hopes fund. It should be observed, however, that the needs 
of the foreign branches are such that it has been necessary 
for us to remit to them a goodly amount since the close of 
the fiscal year. It is also necessary for us to carry a large 
stock of paper in order that we may have our books and 
tracts promptly manufactured. During the month of November
 alone it was necessary for us to order 18 carloads of paper 
at an average cost of $2,000.00 per car. Paper this year is 
much higher than it has been in previous years. It will thus 
be seen by reference to the financial report that the Society 
is in a healthy financial condition, but as it has always been 
the policv of the Society to use the money as it came in, the 
preparation for the work in the near future will quickly 
absorb the balance to the credit of the Good Hopes fund. Our 
future operations will be governed as the Lord may indicate 
by providing the means. 

We are pleased to announce that the Brooklyn Tabernacle 
and the Bethel Home are free from all debt or encumbrance, 
and since the disposition of the New York City Temple, which 
was heavily mortgaged, the Socihtty has no debts upon which 
it i« required to pay interest. 

For all the Lord's leadings and blessings in this behalf we 
are indeed grateful, and to him we give all the credit and 
praise for every feature of the service. 
REFERENDUM VOTE 

As heretofore announced in Thr Watch Toweb, upon the 


[6184] 


December 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(375-376) 


suggestion of others the classes were asked to meet at their 
respective places of assembly on the 21st day of November, 
and cast a referendum vote as to who should constitute the 
servants of the Society in the capacity of Directors and 
officers for the ensuing year. The following well known 
brethren; namely, K. H. Thomson, Gen. W. P. Hall, and J. T. 
D. Pyles, of Washington, D. C, consented to act as a committee
 to receive and tabulate the vote, and report, Some 
of the classes laboring under a misapprehension, as we are 
advised, neglected to take that vote; but the classes voting 
and thus far reported to the committee, show returns as 
given below : 

Washington, D. C, Dec. 13, 1917. 
To the Officers and Directors of the 

Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, 
Brooklyn, New York. 
Dear Brethren : 

We report herewith the returns from 813 ecclesias 
who have sent to this committee the results of the advisory
 election for Directors and Oihjcers of the Society, 
as suggested in The Watch Tower of November 1, 1917. 

_ _ Sec'yCandidate
 Director 

J. F. Kutnerford 10,990 

W. E. Van Amburgh 10,909 

G. H. Fisher 10,333 

J. A, Bohnet 10 323 

10,204 

9,880 

8,888 

1,776 

680 

548 

469 

459 

444 

342 

293 

181 

143 

126 

100 


A. H. Macmillan 

W. E. Spill 

A. N. Pierson 

C J. Woodworth 

M. Sttirgeon 

A. I. Ritchie 

R. H. Hirsh 

I. H. Hoskins 

J. I>. Wright 

H. O. Rockwell 

R. J. Martin 

W. F. Hudgings 

A. E. Burgess 

P. S. li. Johnson. . . . 

E. W. Brenneisen . . . 

89 others receiving 

than 100 votes . . . 


less 


1,036 


Pres. 

Vice-Pres. 

Treas. 

10,869 

14 

3 

14 

418 

10,700 

4 

395 

30 

1 

126 

4 

2 

1,856 

102 


183 

1 

49 

5,722 

13 

28 

828 

2 

376 

73 

36 

10 

223 

21 

1 

2 

25 

3 

2 

4 

5 

X 

13 

209 

17 

73 

7 


30 

14 


9 

11 

20 

25 

19 

1 

4 

3 

26 

182 

94 


TOTAL. VOTES CAST 11,421 9,680 11,802 

Fifty-live classes reported that they were unable or 
unwilling to vote. 

A final report, to include belated returns from foreign 
points, will be submitted at the annual meeting in January
 next. 

[Signed] J. T. D. Ptles 
W. P. Haix 
Eliot H. Thomson. 

FOREIGN WORK 

The harvest work in the foreign field still has the Lord's 
blessing, notwithstanding the great stress. In Germany the 
pilgrim service, colporteur^ work and the harvest work in 
general are still progressing. The Bible House is maintained, 
but its management from the headquarters is conducted 
through a representative of the Society in a neutral country. 
The work in general is in very good condition, we are pleased 
to report 

The first public meeting held in Holland was in the summer
 of 1913. Considerable interest was then manifested, and 
now we have two representatives in Holland and much interest 
in the Lord's cause is being aroused. 

The condition of the work in other foreign fields will oppear
 from the reports, some of which are published below, and 
others will be published in subsequent issues. 

BEFOET OF BRITISH BBANOH 

Dear Bbotheb Ruthebfqbd: — 

I have pleasure in enclosing a summary of the output of 
books and tracts in the British Harvest Field during the year 
which ended with us on October 31st last, the memorial to 
us of our dear Brother Russell's death. 1 have also the 
pleasure of giving you herewith a brief review of the year's 
work. The year has been in some ways the strangest of 
years for us. We have had our trials and difficulties; and 
these have come in unexpected ways, and from unexpected 
quarters. But the year has been one of the best that we have 
had in the whole of our experience in the harvest work, and 
we have very much for which to .thank the Lord. Looking 
at the figures which we are enabled to report, we are surprised
 that during the third year of the great European war 
we are able to show so good a report. The pressure of the 
Military Service Act began to be felt at the opening of our 
financial year, and it has continued. Our young men, those 
who made in almost every ecclesia the dynamic force of the 
class, have been taken away from us. The Chief Reaper has 
seen fit to take them out of the harvest field, and he has 
placed them in strange situations. Many of them are together
 in various settlements in the country, and they are 
enabled to look back over their experiences, and in many 
cases they are enabled to "try" one another. Also they have 
the privilege of gladly helping each other toward that rounding
 out of the character which the Master desires to have. 
It seems as if the general experience of the. harvest work this 
year has emphasized this latter feature: probably the harvesters
 have more than at any time felt that the benefit of 
the work was for themselves rather than those for whom they 
seemed to labor. 

I will now give you a brief account of the various branches 
of the work, beginning with the 

Pilgrim Service 

In this branch of the work we report with pleasure, and 
with thankfulness of heart to our heavenly Father, a considerable
 increase of activity, . We were, by the favour of 
the Lord, able to use the time and talents of good, loyal 
brethren who had, if not the whole time, at least a considerable
 portion of their time free for thi3 service. The result 
is that there has been more visitation of the British classes 
than at any time in the history of the harvest work. The 
letters from all the classes are full of gratitude and appreciation
 of the labour and ministry of our pilgrim brethren
; and it is abundantly evident that the blessing of the 
Lord has been with us in this branch of the service. There 
is a very close bond of union between the brethren in this 
country at this time; and we believe the Lord will bless us 
even more abundantly. 

Colporteur Work 

The colporteur work has not been so brisk as last year, 
nor indeed as brisk, we think, as it might have been. We give 
all honour to the dear brethren who have continued in that 
work, and who have wrought so hard and so well. Our output
 of books is 62,685, which is only 9,000 less than last year. 
Most of these books have, of course, been put out by the 
colporteurs, and a fair proportion of them have been sold 
in the Drama follow-up work. 

Volunteer Work 
Our output of volunteer literature has fallen considerably. 
There are two main factors in this decline: the fact that our 
workers are depleted — many active young men who engaged 
in this work having been taken away from us — and the shortage
 of paper. In the early part of the year it was almost 
impossible to buy paper, and the price asked was very heavy. 
Then we did not receive our copy from America for quite 
a while, and thus we thought it might not be the Lord's will 
for us to force open a door. However, as soon as the Lord 
gave liberty, we hurried the work forward; and our brethren 
speedily got out a good edition of the "World on Fire," 
B. S. M. No. 91. Altogether a total of 3,300,000 ha-s been 
distributed during the year. Our output of tracts, including 
those to advertise the Drama, is 4,100,000, which may be said 
to be about one- third of a late average good year. 
PHOTO-DRAMA 

The Drama has done well, though we must use that w T ord 
in a comparative sense. It seemed as if it3 days here were 
numbered. There was nothing doing. But in late Spring, 
the Lord opened the way. One of our dear brethren who 
had conditional exemption from the Military Service wrought 
hard and long, and we have been able, by his and other willing 
service, to run one exhibition, as might be said, almost continuously
; that is, we have taken one exhibition to a town, 
evening only, for four days, concluding with the finale on 
Sundays. The results have been very gratifying, almost as 
good as if we had h«d an eight days show with two exhibitions
 per day. Even in this limited way we have had 
over 9,000 names for colporteur calls; and very good results 
have, on the whole, been obtained. It seems as if the Lord 
were about to open the Drama door a little wider, and there 
is a possibility of a good witness yet being given by this 
means. The Photo-Drama is very acceptable everywhere. Any 
town would take it regularly; and it would be a continuous 
attraction, though of course we seek to do that which is best 
in the general interests of the harvest field. 
Fa*tor*l Work 

The pastoral work is new to us this year, and we on this 
side were late in starting. For several reasons it seemed impossible
 to begin until the year was well advanced. The 
number of classes which have taken up this work is seventyeight
; and though our reports are not all that we can desire 
in showing results, yet we know that the Lord has blessed 
the work very much. There are many today who are fully 
consecrated to the Lord but who, before they were visited by 
the pastoral workers, did not know the way of consecration, 
even though their hearts were leaning towards the Lord, and 


[6186] 


(376-377) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


who did not know the joy of his glorious plan. Our hearts keep the Lord's people busy in the harvest field, so that all 

are made glad as we think of the blessings which have come their spare time is devoted to this work. Whenever a new 

through this work. The sisters are rejoicing in their oppor- B. S. M. is issued, the friends hold special prayer meetings, 

tunities of service, and the Lord is blessing them very much. and then on the same day they distribute the good tidings in 

Finance every part of the French harvest field. Thus the work is 

The financial side of the work has been easy; for there supported by the continued prayers of the saints, and the 

ha3 been no difficulty whatever here. The contributions ot blessing has been much greater than ever before. We do the 

the Lord's people to the work have not stopped; and the same f or photo-Drama showings and for public lectures, 
brethren generally have expressed their confidence that the During the year the French work has made much progress, 

office still represented the Lord's work, and\ that the Lord especially in the unity of spirit amongst the brethren. The 

would take care of that which was committed to him. This distribution of free literature is much larger than that of last 

has been shown by an increase of over £1000 compared with year — the ou tput this year having been 210,000 tracts more 

last year, and we have been very thankful for these indica- t h an j aat vear> ^ ie attendance at public leeturee has been 

tions of the Lord's good pleasure. excellent — about 5,000 more than last year. The increase in 

Seventh Volume t* le number of volumes sold was 1,300. This year we are 

There is one feature of the work which remains to be publishing Vol. 3, and Vol. 7 is now on the press. Early in 

mentioned— the Seventh Volume. We should have been very the incoming year we hope to publish Vol. 4 We shall then 

pleased if we could have reported to you that the brethren have all the Studies in the Scriptures in irench. tor this 

had this in hand, and that its message was being spread. As great blessing we are very thankful to the Lord. 
you know we could not get this circulated here because of General Eeport for the Year 

lack of the necessary plates. At the time of writing the Letters and Cards received 3,230 

plates are not yet in hand, and it may be that there will be Letters and Card dispatched 2,147 

difficulties in getting them through the importation burrage. Packages and Parcels dispatched 2,121 

However, this matter is in the Lord's hands, and we quite Scripture Studies sold 2,735 

understand that it is of his providence that the plates are on Booklets sold 3,715 

this side and so near to us. Paper also is a difficulty. We Tracts distributed 418,217 

ordered paper many months ago, but we have not yet got a Total attendance at pilgrim meetings arid at 

delivery of it. However, no doubt the paper will be ready Photo-Drama showings 56,550 

just about the time when the plates are ready; and then ****** Eeport 

when we are through with the printing and other litle dim- p^^ah^^o 

culties— and the printers and binders are very busy with the Receipts bxptn&xturea 

trashy books which fill our book-stalls— we shall hope to put Donations re- * or b o ok s, 

the Seventh Volume in circulation in time to get it into the ceived and tracts, etc. . 30,450.02 Fr. 

hearts of the brethren and into the hands of those to whom stock on Balance 69.86 

the Lord would send it. ha * d • 30,519.88 Fr. « ft «,QB«u-7 

We would urge the dear British brethren who read this oa-i«qqtj. JU,dih.*s *r. 

report, and who have ability to serve in the colporteur work, J?"'?"!-* 58 t r * T 

to consider very specially in the sight of the Lord the privi- With much Christian love I am, -__ 

lege of this work before the hours of service are ended. Those Your Brother and servant m the Lord, A. Feettag. 

who cannot enter into that work directly may still do so by AUSTRALASIAN BBANOH REPOBT 

praying the Lord of the harvest to send laborers into his £>eab Bbethrkn in Uhbist: — 

service; for still it is true the harvest is great, but the j us t one year has passed since we became bereft of our 

laborers are few. dear Brother Russell; and while we still have his beautiful 

The general condition of the country is one of prosperity; words of comfort, revealment of the Scripture and guidance, 

and certainly it is true that there are weary hearts to com- ve t even though so far away from the centre of the work, 

fort, hungry souls to be fed as never before. The devastating h ow greatly have we missed his influence! Yet we realize 

effects of this terrible war are making many long for some- that the Lord has been with us and that while we have not 

thing they feel ought to be there, but which they do not get. p U t 0U £ so man y volumes as previously, yet there has really 

They have asked for bread; they got a stone. We are thank- been mor e interest discovered through the various methods 

ful for signs of a movement towards an increase of work in f WO rk in vogue. 

the colporteur field, and we believe that there will yet be We bave j oa t S( > m e colporteurs through sickness, death 
a good work done. and other circumstances. This accounts for the small output; 
The Watch Toweb continues to be welcomed as always; f 0T BOme f t he wor ]t ers have done better this year than 
and the brethren receive it as they have been accustomed to ever before. At times local conditions have made it difficult 
do, as the channel conveying to them the Lord's blessing. ^ p] ace the volumes in the homes. But generally the people 
We regularly pray that the Lord will bless this channel to have mor e money now than ever, and it is usually easier to 
His people, that they may .be fed and led. The spiritual g e t a hearing and stir interest. We are glad that there is 
health of the brethren continues good. The Tabernacle con- ^m a p r0 spect of more laborers entering the field, and trust 
gregation continues with one heart and mind, waiting upon that much may yet be done in sending out the Tiuth. 
the Lord; and the congregations in the larger centres — Tn e shipping difficulties which interfered with the colGlasgow
, Edinburgh, Liverpool, Birmingham, Manchester, porteur work also interfered with the volunteer work, so that 
Oldham and Bristol — are continuing in the way of the Lord we bave f a u en below the million mark. What has been dene, 
in faith and patient Jabor. The many other classes are labor- however, has been done well. Our work of sending through 
ing as faithfully and patiently, and we should be glad to the post to ajl out-lying towns and districts has resulted in 
mention them all to you. It is a pleasure to us to think that interest being found in parts which could never have been 
you know so many of the British friends, and that you are reached by hand distribution or by colporteurs, 
familiar with British conditions. Classes have been gradually increasing and numbers atIt
 has been a pleasure to me as I have visited the British tending the old established classes have also been added to. 
friends to find them loyal to* r the Society and to yourself as The great distances make it very difficult to operate any f reits
 President elected by the brethren to that high privilege q Uen t pilgrim service, but we have done what we could. The 
of service. Whenever you can find in the Lord's providence ma i n c i asse s have been visited ; and this has meant the travelam
 opportunity of Coming over here, you will he heartily - m g by land and sea of several thousands of miles. We hope, 
welcomed by us all. The London Bethel family send warm however, that this service may be extended if the Lord wills, as 
love to you, and to their brethren in the Brooklyn Bethel; classes are now gathering up a little better to make calls en 
so would all the British friends if they had the opportunity. route t0 tne distant ones. 

Believing that the Lord has much work to be done, I count q uf experience seems to have been in line with yours in 

it a great privilege from the Lord to be enabled to report re gard to the. increase in donations to the Tract Fund, so 

thus to you, and with warm love and loyalty, I am, that you will notice we have been enabled to substantially 

Yours in the Master's grace and service, J. Hesieby, reduce our debt to Brooklyn. This we are sure will be pleasEEPOET
 OP FBBNOH AND SWISS BRANCH ing for many of our friends to know, as there is a general 

Deab Brother Rutherford: — feeling that we should he able to not only pay our own way 

It is a blessed privilege to give here a full report of the but to reimburse Brooklyn for first expenditure, if possible. 
French work — Nov. 1, 1916, to Oct. 31, 1917. Not only have The pastoral work progresses. So far away, we are some 

the ecclesias increased in number during thi3 year, but the months behind in anything started at Brooklyn; and even 
dear friends understand better than ever before the deep yet all the classes have not organized for this work. Melthings
 of consecration to the Lord. It is our endeavor to bourne and Adelaide are the only ones that have sent a 

[6186] 


DecsifBKR 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(377-378) 


general report, though Brisbane is active in the work and 
Sydney ias just commenced. The reports of Adelaide and 
Melbourne indicate that though the work needs great patience 
and plodding-perseverance on the part of the sisters, yet in 
the long run the results are good and well worth the efforts 
of weary feet and patience-tried hearts. 

The Adelaide Friends called on about 1,100 names and 
had 16 chart talks, with average attendance of about 20. Four 
new classes have been started with an average weekly attendance
 of about 35. They had about 29 workers. Many 
of these workers could only give very little time. The Melbourne
 figures are very similar: — 1,200 visited, 18 talks with 
average attendance of about 32. In both cases there are many 
who are now reading the volumes though not able to attend 
the classes. 

The Photo-Drama of Creation has been fairly operative 
in S. A. and Victoria, having been shown at 16 places to 
about 116 audiences, with total attendance of about 37,640. 
We find that some good comes wherever it goes. We have 
been short-handed since Brother Lea left us; but Brother 
Michelmore has managed the whole thing in a most creditable
 manner. The Eureka Drama has also been operated very 
successfully in New Zealand by Brother and Sister Nelson in 
co-operation with the New Zealand classes, who jointly own 
the outfit. Then Brisbane, as well as West Australia, South 
Australia, and Tasmania, have all done good work in the way. 
I have not particulars from all, and time and space prevent 
going into too much detail. 

up to now we have not received our shipment of the Seventh 
Volume and all are anxiously awaiting its arrival. 

Yours in the service of Christ, Australian Branch. 


Annual Statement 1916-1917 
Literature circulated: — 

Studies in Scripture*, Bound Volume* 11,185 

Studies in Scripture, Paper Edition 1/795 


Booklets, and "Hell" Watch Tower*. 


Photo-Drama of Creation Books . . . 
Photo-Drama of Creation Booklets. 


1,149 
445 


12,980 
3,880 


16.860 


Free Literature: — 

"P. P." and "B. S. M." 

Watch Tower' ' 

Free Scenarios 

Correspondence: — 

Letters received 

Letters out 

Tract Fund Expenditure 
£ s d 

Donations 1,846 4 

Subscriptions ' ' P . 
P." 

Donations to Drama 

Subscriptions to Sermons
 in Newspapers
 


1,594 

18,454 

723,500 
6,190 
6,800 

4,859 
4,859 


3 


£ 
.1,852 


124 16 
29 5 


17 


28 16 1 
Deficiency "".".*.". '. '.', 1,223 10 8 


3,252 12 


Deficiency, 1916 

Purchase Printing 
Paper 472 

Pilgrim service, including
 Advertising
: Rent Hall, 
Fares and Personal
 expense 

Postage, Freights ,etc. 

Postage on "P. P.'* 

Printing "P. P.".. 

Photo-Drama Work. 

Expense re Sermons* 

publications 119 18 

Proportion General 
Expense, Gas, 
Rent, &c 75 . . 


3.252 12 


91 15 

5 

67 3 

8 

24 9 

6 

871 11 

2 

177 12 

5 


WALKING TO THE LORD UPON THE WAVES 


"O thou of little faith, wherefore 

Jesus and his apostles had been across the Sea of Galilee. 
A multitude had gathered there; and Jesus was loth to send 
them to their homes; for it was toward evening and they had 
had no food for some time. Therefore he performed a great 
miracle and fed all the people. After this Jesus hade his 
disciples to get into a ship and cross again to the other side 
of the sea. But he himself remained to go into the mountain 
alone to pray. That night the sea became very boisterous and 
stormy. While the boat was rolling about upon the troubled 
sea, the apostles saw Jesus coming toward them, walking upon 
the billows. Some of them cried out in fear, thinking that 
they saw a phantom.' But St. Peter recognized that it was 
the Lord. Suddenly the thought came to him that he might 
also walk upon the water and go to meet the Master. He 
called to Jesus, asking permission. Jesus answered, "Come"; 
and St. Peter stepped out boldly upon the great heaving 
billows. 

This was a sudden spurt of faith, apparently, on the part 
of St. Peter — a wonderful faith it would seem. We wonder 
whether any of us would have thought of venturing out 
upon those waters! If Jesus had said to any of us that we 
might come to him walking upon the sea, would we have done 
so? When St. Peter had gone a little distance from the boat, 
he looked at the boisterous billows and his faith wavered. 
Immediately he began to sink. But he did the right thing to 
call, "Lord, save, or I perish!" It must have been quite a 
severe storm, as the context indicates. Poor Peter was helped 
by the Master, and then he and the Lord were received into 
the ship. 

The disciples had been out for some time tossing about, and 
doubtless were some distance from the shore. But immediately 
they were at the land, as St. John tells us. (John 6:21) Perhaps
 the Master worked a miracle in the boat's coming so 
quickly to land — but no matter. 

Why should the Lord speak of St Peter as having little 
faith ? He showed far more faith than most Christiana would 
exercise. We are inclined to think of the Master's words as 
encouraging the Apostle — "You had a little faith; why did 
you not hold to it? Why did you doubt? If you had continued
 to exercise the faith with which you started out, it 
would have carried you safely over to me." 


didst thou doubt ?"— Matt. 14:31. 

Our admiration for St. Peter is greatly augmented by the 
narration of this incident on the Sea of Galilee. He was ever 
impulsive, but his faith was genuine, and the Lord loved him 
therefor. The Apostle did not sit on the side of the boat and 
wonder if the Lord really meant it when he had invited him 
to come. On the contrary we find that he immediately believed 
the Master's voice and straightway be climbed over the ship's 
side and placed his feet upon the water. He did not question; 
he did not hesitate nor falter. The Master had beckoned to 
him, and it was for him to obey. And he did! Truly he 
possessed faith, real faith, great faith — though "little" in 
comparison to the faith of Jesus himself. Had St. Peter, 
after recognizing the Lord's presence, hesitated or refused 
to heed his invitation, preferring to remain with his companions 
in the sinking ship, the results might have been disastrous. 

We think that we may learn a lesson from this incident. 
More than eighteen centuries ago the Lord left his church. 
Then she started out upon the stormy sea of her experiences 
and has toiled on throughout the night of this Gospel age. 
And now we have about reached the dawning of the Millennial 
morning; and we perceive the presence of Jesus. We see him 
walking on the billows of the world's stormy sea. It is no 
phantom. Our Lord is really with us, and has bidden us to 
come to him over the boisterous waves. It is a time for the 
exercise of faith; it is a time of special testing. 

The storm is now greater than it has been for many years. 
But he calls his faithful to come out to meet him, and thus 
be separated from the majority of people — from the majority 
of those who have named hi'* name, many of whom are merely 
nominal Christians. He has called us to come out of Babylon. 
We are to manifest our faith in kim by prompt obedience. We 
would surely get into trouble if we should lose our faith \ we 
might sink in the storm, The Lord appreciates even the little 
faith we have. He does not reprove us for not having greater 
faith, hut would encourage it and cheer us on to an increase 
and strengthening of it. So we have stepped out upon the 
billows and have met our Lord; we are to be received into 
the ship. The vessel will soon be at the shore. The Master 
is here with us ; and we shall soon reach the glorious kingdom 
— very soon! 


FULFILLED BEFORE OUR EYES 


By God's favor to the living members of the church, the 
time is past when the prophecies of Jehovah have had to wait 
for centuries or millenniums for fulfilment. No longer can 
there be delay, as spake the Lord through the Prophet concerning
 "that proverb that ye have in the land of Israel [the 
whole world], saying, The days are prolonged," — Ezekiel 12:22. 

Noav by his grace, it is not a "time for waiting, but for 


fruition, and for the divine utterance; "Thus saith Jehovah 
God: I will make this proverb to cease, and they shall no 
more use it as a proverb in Israel [throughout the world] ; 
but say unto them, The days ftre at hand, and the effect 
[fulfilment], of every vision. For I am Jehovah; I will speak, 
and the word that I shall speak shall come to pass; it shall 
be no more prolonged; for in your days will I say the word, 


[6187] 


(379-23$) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


BttOOKLVK, N. Y. 


and will perform it, saith Jehovah God. There shall none of 
my words be prolonged any more, but the word which I have 
spoken shall be done, saith Jehovah God." — Ezekiel 12:23, 
25, 28. 

It is something marvelous to us, and a mighty confirmation 
of faith to see the God-given interpretation of Revelation and 
Ezekiel in the Seventh Volume of Studies in the Hcbiptixres 
already in process of fulfilment before our very eyes. 

Concerning the world war, just as the conflict began in 
July, 1914, with only two nations at war, and progressed in 
August and later with many nations involved, so did our 
heavenly Father evidently purpose that the titanic conflict 
should close — not miraculously, all nations at once, but in the 
natural way that Alini^htv God almost invariably does or permits
 things. 

In Volume Seven, page 268, paragraph 3, is written, "The 
close of the war about October 1st, 1917." 

To be fighting h war; to stop righting is peace. The 
fighting actually ceased with the largest nation, Russia, in 
October, 1917; for since October 21st Russia has had peace 
along her entire western front. So far as international conflict
 is concerned Russia ceased her war and passed into peace, 
and now we see the state of peace legally progressing by 
official armistice or treaty. Simultaneously, and overlapping 
the ending of her war, Russia passes into the second divinely 
appointed stage of her trouble — revolution. 

As to other nations, the end of war is not yet. For them 
there is and will be much heavy fighting; but just as some 
were late in getting into the war, some will be late in getting 
into peace. However, peace, the ending of war, began on time, 
according to the divine Word — in the very month indicated 
by our heavenly Father. 

Still another divinely appointed prophecy in Volume Seven 
has seen its fulfilment already. On page 530, in connection 
with Ezekiel 33:21-22, it was written three-quarters of a year 
ago that Ezekiel's dumbness for a year, five months and 


twenty-six days, might be a time feature, to be fulfilled in the 
dumbness of Pastor Russell in death. It was only reasonable 
to make this application, because the Prophet in so many 
respects pictured God's great messenger to the clcsing age 
of the church. Pastor Russell died October 31, 1916, and the 
period indicated will end about April 27, 1918. From the 
language of Ezekiel thi3 is designated as the time of the coming 
of the dread tidings that "the city is smitten"; thit is, that 
Christendom, or ecclesiasticism, is seen to be in desperate 
danger from revolution, if the existing forms o<f government 
shall not by then already have begun to change to such a 
revolutionary, socialistic, or laborite status as is so unhappily 
exemplified in stricken, suffering Russia. 

In Ezekiel 33:22 it is written: "Now the hand of the Lord 
was upon me in the morning, afore he that was e&caped came 
to me in the morning; and my mouth was opened, and I was 
no more dumb." In other words Ezekiel's dumbness was removed
 in the evening before the morning when the tidings 
arrived. "It was," says the Seventh Volume, "on the same 
day, for the evening began the day." This signifies that 
perhaps half a year prior to the general realization of Christendom
's downfall, Pastor Russell, though dead, 3I1 all again 
speak through this, the Seventh Volume of his Studies in the 
Scbipttjbes. Half a year before April 27, 1918, was about 
November 1st, 1917. It was about then, as divinely indicated, 
that the sale of the Seventh Volume began to attain the enormous
 proportions it has reached — over 100,000 copies having 
been distributed during .that month alone I Thus Pastor Russell
 began to speak again to Christendom. 

It is for our encouragement and to lift up our hearts to 
the utmost fullness of confidence in the Word of God, that our 
beloved Father in heaven is giving us a strong witness, in the 
interpretations of both Revelation and Ezekiel, of the divine 
guidance of the church in connection with the Seventh Volume 
of Scbipture Studies, 


JESUS AT WORK 


[The first eight paragraphs of this article were reprinted from article entitled "Laborers in the Harvest/' published in issue 

of February 1, 1912. The remainder was reprinted from article entitled w He Healeth Their Diseases, " 

published in issue of February 15, 1912. Please see the articles named.l 


JESUS BEGINS HIS WORK 


[This article, excepting the paragraphs below, was a reprint of article entitled "Driven Into the Wilderness/' published in issue 

of February 1, 1912, which please see.] 
THE GOSPEL OT THE KINGDOM 


As we saw in our last Study, John the Baptist and his 
disciples had preached and baptized under the announcement 
that the Kingdom of God was at hand, and that all desirous 
of participating in its great blessings should come into full 
harmony with the Mosaic Law, and thus be prepared to be 
transferred from typical Israel to anti typical Israel — from 
membership in Moses the type, to membership in Christ the 
Antitype — the long-promised Seed of Blessing. 

In due time the preaching of John the Baptist was brought 
to a close — when Herod cast him into prison. From that 
time onward Jesus and his disciples became more prominent. 
Their message, however, was the same as John's for we read 
that "Jesus came to Galilee preaching the Kingdom of God 
and saying, The time is fulfilled, and the Kingdom of God 
is at hand. Repent ye, and believe the Gospel." ( Veiaes 14, 15. - ) 
Whoever believed this Message recognized Jesus as the Sent 


of God, the Messiah, who in God's due time will be the King 
of Israel and the Monarch of all the earth. "The time is fulfilled
" meant that the foreordained time had arrived when the 
offer of the Kingdom would be made to the Jewish nation. 

God foreknew, however, that Israel would not be ready, 
that only a few would be prepared to become Messiah's bride, 
his associate in the Kingdom work, and that it would require 
eighteen centuries to select the remainder from amongst the 
Gentiles. Hence in Romans 9. 10 and 11 St. Paul points out 
that the Prophets foretold the stumbling of Natural Israel, 
their temporary rejection as a nation, and the fact that a 
remnant of them would form the nucleus of the bride class, the 
remainder of which would be made up of Gentiles. He also 
shows that the remainder of the Jewish nation would be 
blinded "until the fulness of the Gentiles 'has come in" and 
the "elect" class is completed. 


JOHN PREPARES THE WAY FOR JESUS 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled "Preparation for the Kingdom/' published in issue of January 15, 1906, which please 

see.] 


ENTIRE SUBMISSION 


"God's ways are not as our ways, his thoughts are not as ours ; 
He wounds us sore with cruel thorns, where we have stooped 

for flowers. 
But oh! 'tis from the oft-pierced heart those precious drops 

distil 
That many a life, else all unblest, with healing balm shall fill. 
Then give, oh, give the flower to those who pray it so may be ; 
But I would choose to have the thorns with thee, dear Lord, 

with thee! 


<r Man judgeth man in ignorance; he seeth but in part, 
Our trust is in our Maker, God, who searcheth every heart; 
And every wrong and every woe, when put beneath our feet, 
As stepping-stones may help us on to his high mercy-seat. 
Then teach us still to smile, O Lord, though sharp the stones 

may be, 
Remembering that they bring us near to thee, dear Lord, to 

thee!" 


[6188] 


*7^* I I 




ig^m 




l^TP^2l 


warn 


mv 


2*$* . 


/."'-, 


"V;; 


ROCK : OF ACES 

therfourictation c 

no man lay - 


f/*^ 


-msy.* 


<&.Js&&. 


y t && 


®0U: 


~*r,f? 




[ GW5H?l),lffidS?Jlg{)td^0H9 fl .Zf:iH? 


Val. XXXIX 


No. 1. 


JANUARY 1 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
A. D. 1918 — A. M. 6046 

CONTENTS 

View* from The Watch Tower . , 3 

The Coal Famine . . . .3 

Labor Seeks Control ... 4 

"That International Nuisance ' 4 

Church Federation .... 5 

A Day of Decision . . . • 6 

Prospects Before Us . . . . 7 

"Our King Is Marching On" (Poem) . , 7 

Jesus Forgiveth Sin 8 

Basic Principles gf God's Government . • 8 

Jesus Lord of the Sabbath ... 9 

The Weekly Day of Rest . . .9 

Jesus Chooses the Twelve . . . 10 

Paul Succeeds Judas . . . .10 

Report of South African Branch . . II 

"Come* Follow Me" (Poem) . * ,11 

Some Interesting Letters . . 12 

Good Hopes for 1918 . . , .13 

Interesting Questions . . . . 14 

"7 will stand upon my watch, and will set my foot ut>on the 
Tower, and will watch to see what He will say unto me, and 
what answer I shall make to them that oppose me." — Hab. 2:1. 


•W 




&=? >^7S?== 


r^SV : --. fc S 


Upon the earth distress of nations with perplexity; the sea and the waves (the restless, discontented) roaring: men's hearts failing them for fear 

and for looking forward to the things coming upon the earth (society); for the powers of th e heavens (ecclesiasticism) shall be shaken 

When ye see these things come to pass, then know that the Kingdom of God is nigh at hand. Look up, lift up your heads, rejoice, for your redemption
 draweth nigh, — Luke 21:25-28-31. 


VII— 24 


[6189] 


THIS JOURNAL AND ITS SA CRED MISSION 

This Journal is one of the prime factors or instruments m the system of Bible Instruction, or "Seminary Extension," now 
being presented in all parts of the civilized world by the Watch Toweb Bible & Tkact Society, chartered A. &t 1881, "For the 
Promotion of Christian Knowledge." It not only serves as a class room where Bible Students may meet in the study of the Divine
 Word, hufc also as a channel of communication through which they may be reached with announcements of the Society's 
Conventions and of the coming of its traveling representatives styled "Pilgrims," and refreshed with, reports of its Conventions. 

Our "Berean Lessons" are topical rehearsals or reviews orf our Society's published Studies, most entertainingly arranged, 
and very helpful to all who would merit the only honorary degree which the Society accords, viz., Verbi Dei Minister (V.D.M.), 
which, translated into English, is Minister of the Divine Word. Our treatment of the International S. S. Lessons is specially for 
the older Bible Students and Teachers. By some this feature is considered indispensable. 

This Journal stands firmly for the defense of the only true foundation of tie Christian's hope now being so generally 
repudiated — Redemption through the precious blood of "the Man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a Ransom [a corresponding 
price, a substitute] for all/' {1 Pet. 1:18; 1 Tim, 2:6) Building up on this sure foundation the gold, silver and precious 
stones (1 Cor, 3:11-15; 2 Pet. 1:5-11) of the Word of God, its further mission is to — "Make all see what is the fellowship of 
the Mystery which .... has been hid in God, .... to the intent that now might be made known by the Church the manifold
 wisdom of God" — which in other Ages was not made known unto the sons of men as it is now revealed." — Eph. 3:5-9, 10. 

It stands free from all parties, sects and creeds of men, while it seeks more and more to bring its every utterance into fullest
 subjection to the will of God in Christ, as expressed in the Holy Scriptures. It is thus free to declare boldly whatsoever the 
Lord hath spoken — according to the Divine wisdom granted unto us, to understand. Its attitude is not dogmatical, Twit confident; 
for we know whereof we affirm, treading with implicit faith upon the sure promises of God. It is held as a trust, to be used only 
in His Bervice; hence our decisions relative to what may and what may not appear in its columns must be according to our judgment
 of His good pleasure, the teaching of Hi3 Word, for the upbuilding of His people in grace and knowledge. And we not only 
invite but urge our readers to prove all its utterances by the infallible Word to which reference is constantly made, to facilitate 
such testing. TO US THE S CRIPTURES CLE ARLY TEACH 

That the Church is "the Temple of the Living God" — peculiarly * His workmanship;" that its construction has been in progress 

throughout the Gospel Age— ever since Christ became the world's Redeemer and the Chief Corner Stone of His Temple, 

through which, when finished, God's blessing shall come 'to all people," and they find access to Him. — 1 Oor. 3:16, 17; 

Eph. 2:20-22; Gen. 28:14; Gal. 3:29. 
That meantime the chiseling, shaping and polishing of consecrated believers in Christ's Atonement for sin, progresses; and when 

the last of these "living stones," "Elect and precious," shall have been made ready, the great Master Workman will bring 

all together in the First Resurrection; and the Temple shall be filled with His glory, and be the meeting place between 

God and men throughout the Millennium. — Rev, 15:5-8. 
That the Basis of Hope, for the Church of the World, lies in the fact that "Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for 

every man," "a Ransom for all," and will be "the true Light which lighteth every man, that cometh into the world," "in 

due time."— -Heb. 2:9; John 1:9; 1 Tim. 2:5. 6. 
That the Hope of the Church is that she may be ,like her Lord, "see Him as He is," be "partaker of the Divine nature," and 

share His glory as His joint-heir.— 1 tfohn 3:2; John 17:24; Rom. 8:17; 2 Pet. 1:4. 
That the present mission of the Church is the perfecting of the Saints for the future work of Bervice; to develop in herself every 

grace; to be God's witness to the world; and to prepare to be kings and priests in the next Age. — Eph. 4:12; Matt. 24:14;. 

Rev. 1:6; 20:6. 
That the hope for the World lies in the blessings of knowledge and opportunity to be brought to all by Christ's Millennial 

Kingdom — the Restitution of all that was lost in Adam, to all the willing and obedient, at the hands of their Redeemer 

and Hia glorified Church — when all the wilfully wicked will be destroyed. — Acts 3:19-23; Isa. 35. 

ruBLisHitD by tion. Without doubt, however, most classes will receive the 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY papers on time. In event your shipment is delayed, we sugBrooklyn
, N. Y. f TJ. S. A. g est tnat 7 0U arrange to make distribution on the following 

Sunday after its arrival, making the witness as general and 


The Watch Tower Bditorial Committee: , ^ - , . _„ «„^:wi„ ;„ „«„ a^^ 

This journal is published under the supervision of an Editorial Com- far-reachmg as possib le in one day. 

mittee, at least three of whom have read and approved aa truth each PASTOR BUSSELL'S SERMONS 

S& V7 y r artiq !f appearing in these column* The names of the These are now in stock at our printers, in cloth and leather, 

Editorial Committee are: J. F. Ruthbmord, W. E. Van Amiurgh, ■* „ . „ „i.^«„«4. i n „ M „„„4. * A t»„„~uv™ txt- „„ ' 

R H. Rom son, Geo, H. Fisher, W. E. Pace. wio. a large shipment is now en route to Brooklyn. We are sure 

annual subscription muck $1.00 iw ADVANCE tn « friends will greatly appreciate this volume. Many of the 

send money by express, bank draft, postal order, or regtsterep sermons have never before been published, but were dictated by 

Terms to the Lord's Poor as follows—An Bible Students who, by Brother Russell for personal use on various occasions. The book 

reason of old age or other infirmity or adversity are unable to pay for contains several full-page halftones. Cloth $1 ; leather, $1.50 


thia journal, will be .supplied free if they send a Postal Card each May nnatnaid 
stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are not only willing yv»i-p»*u, 
hut anxioua, that all such "he on our list continually and in touch with These 


aM . MU « ^» „«„- -»- ^ »„„«« ,„ w «...^. Mt ~ iC « w * <,»*, «t * - - VEST POCKET MANNAS 

nutTnxioua" that aTf su'cYlTe" on'our^iirt'coriSnually'and 'In "touch * wit? These seem to have supplied a long-felt want on the part of 

the Studies, etc. the friends. They are only 2%x5^4 in size, and bound in flexiNOTICB
 TO ALL TOWBR SUBSCRIBERS— 'Please remember that ble covers, round corners. Cloth, red edges, 30c; leather, gilt 

as a rule we no longer send a card of acknowledgment for a renewal ed^es 75c nostnaid 

or for a new subscription. Reoeipt and entry, of renewal are indicated 6 ' ^ ^ 


within a month by change in date of expiration of the subscription on TO FBIENDS OUTSIDE THE UNITED STATES 

th %^n V r^ueXg P change of address, please give old address a S well 0i . foreign stamps of all kinds are not usable in the United 

as new. This is very important, saving us muqh time and unnecessary States and must be sold at large discounts, if salable at all. 

correspondence. Therefore do not send us foreign stamps for remittances. 

entered as s eco nu -class mail matter at Brooklyn, n. y„ fosto fitch British Postal Notes are not payable in the United States 

ENTERRn as seconp-class MATTER at the postopeice dept., OTTAWA, CAtf. and must be returned to London for collection. Private cheques 

I, b s. A. CONVENTION are no * collectible and drafts on London banks are subject to 

Pittsburgh, Pa., Jan. 2-fi: This five day convention will be heavy discounts. Remittances by regular Government postal 

served by many Pilgrim brethren. A good attendance is ex- money orders are payable at face value. 

pected. Election of the Society's officers for the ensuing year British friends are requested to send their renewals for 

will be held on Saturday, Jan. 5th. Brother Rutherford 'will The Watch Toweb direct to London office. This saves expense 

address the public in Princess Theatre at 3 p. m., Sunday, Jan. and liability of loss in forwarding to Brooklyn and having to 

6th, on "The Fall of Babylon." Address R. H. Bricker. 1323 be returned again to London. Reports of all subscriptions are 

Goebel St., N. S., Pittsburgh, Pa. forwarded to us promptly from London; hence there will be 

CANADIAN BRANCH ^ut Yerj slight delay in our recording y our subscriptions. 

In view of the disturbed conditions and the difficulty of IN RE PUBLIC MEETINGS 

reaching the various classes and serving them throughout the We strongly recommend the classes everywhere to arrange 

Provinces of Canada, we have decided to open a branch office of for one public meeting when a Pilgrim visits your class. Sethe
 Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society at Winnipeg, cure a well -located hall and announce an up-to-date subject, 

Manitoba. Competent brethren will be placed in charge to man- such as, "THE WORLD HAS ENDED — Millions now Living 

age the work. All Canadian correspondence, orders, subscrip- may never die!" and give a good public witness to the Truth, 

tions to The Watch Towek, etc., will be cared for by that of- Local brethren who are able to give lectures should be used to 

flee. A more detailed statement will be given later. address public meetings on Sundays. Let us give as wide a 

IN RE THE FAXtli OF BABYLON public witness as possible. Evidences are increasing rapidly 

Due to the congestion in both freight and express shipping, that the dark night is fast approaching when no man can work, 

it is possible that some of the friends may not receive their Let each and every one bestir himself, doing with his might 

shipment of B. S. M. No. 99 in time for the Dec, 30th distribu- what his hands find to do while it is yet called day. 