Time to Watch Oneself and One’s Teaching
What does it mean for one who is a Christian to watch oneself?
To watch oneself means to see to it that one’s conduct is in line with Christian principles. Paul asked: “Do you, however, the one teaching someone else, not teach yourself?” (Rom. 2:21) One must be a doer of the Word as well as a teacher of it.—1 Tim. 4:16.a
Being a doer of the Word is more difficult today than ever before because of the extent to which the days are wicked. (Eph. 5:16) Never before have so many hurtful desires been so assiduously encouraged by the world. (1 John 2:16) The Christian must be on guard that he does not pass hurriedly by Jehovah’s unlimited provisions for man’s pleasure and drop down to the product of low-grade thinking of selfish men.
One must also watch oneself so that one at all times displays the wisdom from above, which, among other things, is reasonable. Reasonableness dictates that one does not deprive others of the freedom to which they are entitled. But at the same time one may not slight opportunities to give helpful Scriptural counsel and comfort if these present themselves.—Rom. 14:13; Gal. 6:1; 1 Thess. 5:11.
How should one watch one’s teaching?
One must watch it so that it is always in line with accurate knowledge, in harmony with the Bible and what the “faithful and discreet slave” is bringing forth from Jehovah’s storehouse. (Matt. 24:45-47) To this end one must do one’s utmost to present oneself approved to God, handling the word of truth aright. One will be greatly aided in this by keeping up-to-date with the publications of the Watch Tower Society.—2 Tim. 2:15.
One must also watch one’s teaching so that one makes oneself clear and understood to those whom one would teach. He must communicate! To this end he should see to it that he has an adequate vocabulary, and, as opportunity affords, he should endeavor to increase it. No matter how old one becomes one should keep putting forth efforts to improve ones accurate knowledge and one’s teaching ability as well as to keep up with the increasing light.—Prov. 4:18.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, December 1, 1968.

