A Bible for Serious Bible Students
Writing in the The Classical Journal, Thomas N. Winter of the University of Nebraska recommended The Kingdom Interlinear Translation of the Greek Scriptures to students. “This is no ordinary interlinear,” he said. “The integrity of the text is preserved, and the English which appears below it is simply the basic meaning of the Greek word. Thus the interlinear feature of this book is no translation at all. A text with instant vocabulary more correctly describes it. A translation in smooth English appears in a slim column at the right-hand margin of the pages. . . .
“After examining a copy,” Winter continued, “I equipped several interested second-year Greek students with it as an auxiliary text. No assignments were made in it: the students, combining their wish to learn Greek with a natural interest in the original of the New Testament, dipped into it on their own. They read the Greek (I strongly recommended reading it aloud), picked up the English more or less subliminally, and ended up improving their Greek. . . .
“The text is based on that of Brooke F. Westcott and Fenton J. A. Hort (1881, repr.), but the translation by the anonymous committee is thoroughly up-to-date and consistently accurate. Where both the King James and the Revised Standard, for instance, have ‘wise men’ for the Greek magoi (e.g., Matt. 2:1, Mt 2:7, Mt 2:16), the Kingdom Interlinear has ‘astrologers,’ a more correct and informative rendition. The book has been very carefully compiled and printed.
“In sum, when a Witness comes to the door, the classicist, Greek student, or Bible student alike would do well to bring him in and place an order. Or you can order direct from Brooklyn.”
You can now receive this fine word-for-word translation of the Greek Bible text for only $3 by simply filling in and mailing the accompanying coupon.
Please send the 1184-page, hardcover Bible The Kingdom Interlinear Translation of the Greek Scriptures. I enclose $3 (U.S.). (For prices in other countries, please contact local Watch Tower Society office.)

