The Happiest People on Earth
1 “Happy is the people whose God is Jehovah!” (Ps. 144:15) Those words describe Jehovah’s Witnesses as the happiest people on earth. There is no greater joy than that which comes from serving the only true and living God, Jehovah. Since he is “the happy God,” those who worship him reflect his delight. (1 Tim. 1:11) What are some aspects of our worship that contribute to our being so happy?
2 Reasons for Being Happy: Jesus assured us that happiness comes from being “conscious of [our] spiritual need.” (Matt. 5:3) Continually studying the Bible and attending all our Christian meetings satisfies that need. Learning the truth of God’s Word has set us free from religious falsehood and error. (John 8:32) The Scriptures have also taught us the best way of living. (Isa. 48:17) Because of that, we enjoy wholesome Christian fellowship within our happy association of brothers.​—1 Thess. 2:19, 20; 1 Pet. 2:17.
3 We derive great contentment from obeying God’s high moral standards, for we know that this safeguards us and makes Jehovah happy. (Prov. 27:11) A newspaper reporter noted: “Despite all their strict standards, Jehovah’s Witnesses do not appear to be unhappy. To the contrary. The young as well as the older [ones among them] present an appearance of being unusually joyful and well balanced.” How can we help others to share our happy lot?
4 Help Others Find Happiness: The world is filled with unhappiness, and people generally have a gloomy outlook on the future. However, we have a bright outlook, knowing that one day all sadness will be a thing of the past. (Rev. 21:3, 4) Therefore, we zealously share in the ministry, looking for honesthearted ones with whom to share our hope and our beliefs about Jehovah.​—Ezek. 9:4.
5 A pioneer sister said: “There is nothing more satisfying than helping people to get to know Jehovah and his truth.” Let us do all we can to encourage many more to accept home Bible studies. Serving Jehovah and giving of ourselves to help others serve him produces the greatest happiness.​—Acts 20:35.

