Benefiting Fully From the Theocratic Ministry School
1 The Theocratic Ministry School has been instrumental in training us in the “art of teaching” so that we can convey Bible truths to others in an effective manner. (2 Tim. 4:2) We receive valuable insight into a variety of Bible topics each week. How can we make sure that we are deriving full benefit from the vital instruction this school provides?
2 Pay careful attention to the opening comments of the school overseer as he highlights some of the interesting points you can learn during the meeting. Think about any questions he may raise and how you can apply the answers in your ministry.
3 The instruction talk is not simply a review of the printed material. It focuses on the practical value of the information and how it can benefit you personally. Preparing in advance will help you to concentrate better on the main points and to share in the oral review that follows.
4 Keeping up with the weekly Bible reading can deepen your appreciation of God’s Word. Additional research can reveal an array of new and interesting details that will enhance your understanding of the truth. The presentation of the Bible highlights is more than just a repetition of the Bible account. After a brief overall review, the speaker will highlight outstanding points in the assigned portion and show how they relate to our life and worship. Be attentive so that you can learn how better to apply Bible instruction.​—Ps. 119:105.
5 If you are assigned a student talk, take note of the point of counsel you are currently working on. Read over the suggestions given in the School Guidebook dealing with that speech quality, and try to apply them. When selecting material for your talk, try to emphasize points that will be practical in the field.​—sg pp. 96-9.
6 If you are a sister assigned to give Talk No. 3 or Talk No. 4, try to present the material in a realistic setting. The householder may or may not agree with everything you say; endeavor to show how you would assist the individual to reason on the underlying Bible principles. (sg pp. 153-8) This helps the audience to see how to deal with similar objections encountered in field service. Prepare well in advance, and arrange for an early rehearsal with your householder. It should not be necessary to rehearse after the meeting has started.
7 Students giving talks are encouraged to sit near the front of the hall. This saves time and enables the school overseer to offer his comments in a more personal manner. All can benefit from the kindly, specific suggestions he gives based on the School Guidebook. He may not follow the speech points in the order given on the Speech Counsel slip; he will select a point of counsel based on what you currently need in order to make the best progress.
8 These are all good reasons for us to prepare for and attend the Theocratic Ministry School every week. The instruction we receive can help us to be wise and skillful in our ministry.​—Prov. 1:5.

