Keep Pursuing Theocratic Activities During the Summer
1 Summertime offers opportunities to share in a variety of activities. Most of us like to take advantage of the nice weather by doing something different and relaxing. However, we have to guard against allowing our theocratic routine to be disrupted.​—Phil. 3:16.
2 We eagerly anticipate the district convention every summer. Have you made definite plans to attend, arranging for transportation and accommodations as needed? Have you thought about including someone in your congregation who may need personal assistance? Such a fine gesture of kindness could bring mutual blessings.
3 If you will have time available, such as during a school vacation, have you thought about reaching out for a greater share in the ministry? Many have found this to be a fine time to enroll as auxiliary pioneers. Often this has opened the door to greater privileges of service. Families can experience real joy in spending full days together in the ministry. Whatever the case, can you increase the time you have been spending in service? With nice weather and longer daylight hours, more should be able to reap the benefits of sharing in evening witnessing.
4 How about helping a congregation that needs assistance in covering its territory? There may be others in your congregation who would like to join you in serving for a week or two where the need is greater. If your group is small, perhaps publishers in a neighboring congregation would like to go with you. If you are limited in how far you can travel, the circuit overseer may be able to recommend a nearby congregation that would appreciate your assistance.
5 Are you planning a vacation away from home? If so, are you making plans to attend the meetings where you will be visiting? What about working in the field service with the brothers there? Including this in your vacation can be very rewarding to you and to others. (Rom. 1:11, 12) Also, can you do informal witnessing as you travel? Be sure to take along your Bible and a supply of literature. Use some of your free time to catch up on your reading and Bible study. Remember that although we occasionally need a vacation from secular pursuits, we do not want to take time off from serving Jehovah.
6 Elders should be alert to keep congregation activities well organized. If any elders or ministerial servants are going to be away, arrangements should be made for others to care for their responsibilities. Keeping the presiding overseer advised well in advance of dates when these brothers will be away will aid him in seeing that appropriate adjustments are made.
7 Yes, summertime can be a very busy time. But distractions can easily disrupt your good routine of Kingdom service. Make the most of your summer opportunities. Define wholesome spiritual priorities, and stick to them.​—Phil. 1:10.

