Prepare Bible Students for the Ministry
1 The ultimate goal in conducting Bible studies is to make new disciples, workers who will join us in teaching others. (Matt. 28:19, 20) So the purpose of the study is not just to impart knowledge; it should instill heartfelt faith in our students and prepare them to share their hope with others. (2 Cor. 4:13) In what practical ways can we help them become qualified to teach others?​—2 Tim. 2:2.
2 Set the Ministry as a Goal: From the very start, make it clear that true worship involves “public declaration for salvation.” (Rom. 10:10) Our very name, Jehovah’s Witnesses, implies that we must speak to others. Help them to see that their being taught is not just for their own salvation. When they become teachers themselves, those who listen to them also have opportunity for salvation.​—1 Tim. 4:16.
3 Review What Is Learned: Periodic reviews of what has been learned are a valuable teaching aid. They help the student to grow spiritually as newly learned truths are embedded in his mind and heart. We have experienced this ourselves when answering the review questions that are included in the Watchtower Study. Prepare simple, direct questions for your student to answer in his own words.
4 Your review could take the form of a field service setting. Pose a question or describe a situation commonly encountered when witnessing to others. With you acting as the householder, let your student demonstrate what he would say. Commend him for what he did well, and offer practical suggestions that will help him to be even more effective next time. This training will teach him how to use what he has learned and will develop his skill in using the Bible.
5 Reasoning Book: Make sure your student has a copy of the Reasoning book, and train him to use it. Show how it provides suggestions on starting conversations, answering Bible questions, or dealing with objections. Use the book in the study to demonstrate ways to speak to others in a convincing manner. This book can build his confidence, increasing his initiative to declare the Kingdom message.
6 Stress the Importance of the Meetings: Congregation meetings, especially the Service Meeting and the Theocratic Ministry School, are designed to prepare us for field service. All the fundamentals for effective witnessing are reviewed and demonstrated by those who are experienced and skilled. Emphasize the importance of the meetings, and do what you can to help him to attend. Regular attendance can provide your student the stimulus he needs to become a true disciple of Jesus.
7 Not to be overlooked is your own personal example. Your willingness and regularity in the preaching work show your deep appreciation for the truth. Such a course encourages your student to do more to demonstrate his faith. (Luke 6:40) All of this can help a new person to view the ministry as a privilege and to be grateful to have a share in it.​—1 Tim. 1:12.

