Service Meetings for May
Week Starting May 2
Song 20
 5 min: Local announcements and pertinent Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Review any arrangements to expand field service activities, such as street work or evening witnessing.
15 min: “Keep Pursuing Theocratic Activities During the Summer.” Questions and answers. Relate experiences enjoyed by some while auxiliary pioneering or witnessing informally.
10 min: “Do I Need to Keep Changing?” Discussion between two elders. Emphasize benefits of sharing regularly in field service.
15 min: “Use the Magazines to Share the Truth.” Discuss with audience. Explain what makes our magazines different and why this should motivate us to offer them at every opportunity. Arrange for two brief demonstrations.
Song 128 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting May 9
Song 214
10 min: Local announcements. We should be alert to opportunities to obtain subscriptions. We can offer them to those who regularly accepted and read the magazines in the past. In most cases it is best to offer six-month subscriptions. Explain how to fill out subscription blank.
20 min: “Prepare Bible Students for the Ministry.” Questions and answers. With paragraphs 4 and 5, have brief demonstration showing how to help student prepare to witness at the door. Student begins with simple presentation using Psalm 37:11. Teacher interrupts, saying: “I have my own religion.” Student not sure what to say. Both turn to Reasoning book, pages 18-19, review some suggested replies, and pick out one that student feels comfortable with. Student resumes, gives good response, and feels encouraged with results.
15 min: Kingdom Hall Construction. Discussion between two elders. Review information on the procedure for filling out volunteer forms if one is qualified to work on Kingdom Hall construction. Emphasize (1) the two categories of those who qualify to submit volunteer forms and (2) that all volunteers, including those who had previously volunteered, need to complete one of the new forms. Then review highlights of the work of Regional Building Committees as presented on pages 322-8 of Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Proclaimers of God’s Kingdom.
Song 139 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting May 16
Song 173
10 min: Local announcements. Read accounts report and any donation acknowledgments. Review brochures that might be offered, and call attention to a few talking points.
17 min: “Return Where You Found Interest.” Questions and answers. Have one or two of the suggested presentations demonstrated.
18 min: “Benefiting Fully From the Theocratic Ministry School.” Talk and audience discussion by school overseer. Encourage all to accept and fulfill assignments. Stress importance of keeping up with the weekly Bible reading. Explain how entire congregation can benefit from counsel given to students.
Song 53 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting May 23
Song 192
10 min: Local announcements. Review outstanding articles in current magazines, and arrange for one or two brief presentations. Outline special field service arrangements for May 30.
10 min: “Do You Dignify Others When Offering Counsel?” Talk by elder, based on February 1, 1994, Watchtower, pages 25-9.
25 min: “1994 ‘Godly Fear’ District Convention.” Insert. Questions and answers on paragraphs 1-11, handled by elder. Call particular attention to “District Convention Reminders.”
Song 19 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting May 30
Song 204
10 min: Local announcements. Theocratic News.
15 min: Review literature offer for June: Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? Call attention to appealing illustrations such as those on pages 6, 236, 243, and 245. Have capable publisher demonstrate a brief presentation based on one of these illustrations, using Revelation 21:4. Outline field service arrangements for coming week.
20 min: “1994 ‘Godly Fear’ District Convention.” Insert. Talk on paragraphs 12-25, handled by congregation secretary.
Song 12 and concluding prayer.

