




Cyrus’ tomb





PORTRAITS FROM THE PAST
Cyrus the Great

According to our modern calendar, on the night of October 5/6, 539 B.C.E., the seemingly impossible happened to the city of Babylon, capital of the Babylonian Empire. On that fateful night, the city was overthrown by an army of Medes and Persians, commanded by Persian King Cyrus, also known as Cyrus the Great. His strategy was brilliant.



HOW CYRUS CAPTURED BABYLON

“When Cyrus set his sights on Babylon it was already the most venerable of Middle Eastern cities—perhaps of all cities in the world,” states the book Ancient World Leaders—Cyrus the Great. Babylon sat on the Euphrates River, which also filled moats surrounding the city’s massive walls—a combination of defenses that made the city seem impregnable.
Upstream from Babylon, Cyrus’ men diverted the Euphrates, causing the water level in the city to fall. The soldiers then waded into the river to the city gates, which had been left open, and took Babylon with little resistance. According to Greek historians Herodotus and Xenophon, the Babylonians felt so secure behind their city’s defenses that on the night of the attack, many were feasting, including the king! (See the box “The Handwriting Is on the Wall.”) Moreover, Cyrus’ conquest fulfilled some amazing Bible prophecies.
Cyrus’ conquest of Babylon was foretold in the Bible




AMAZING PREDICTIONS

The prophecies of Isaiah are especially noteworthy because they were recorded about 200 years in advance—perhaps 150 years before Cyrus was even born! Consider the following:
  A man named Cyrus would conquer Babylon and free the Jews.—Isaiah 44:28; 45:1.

  The Euphrates River would dry up, opening the way for Cyrus’ army.—Isaiah 44:27.

  The city gates would be left open.—Isaiah 45:1.

  Babylon’s military would ‘cease to fight.’—Jeremiah 51:30; Isaiah 13:1, 7.





A MIRACULOUS DELIVERANCE

Earlier, in 607 B.C.E., Babylonian armies razed Jerusalem and led most of the survivors into exile. How long would the Jews be held? God said: “When seventy years have been fulfilled I shall call to account against the king of Babylon and against that nation . . . and I will make it desolate wastes to time indefinite.”—Jeremiah 25:12.
As mentioned, Cyrus captured Babylon in 539 B.C.E. Soon thereafter, he released the Jews, who began to arrive in their homeland in 537 B.C.E.—exactly 70 years after their deportation. (Ezra 1:1-4) As for Babylon, it eventually became “desolate wastes”—again confirming the accuracy of Bible prophecy.



WHY SHOULD YOU CARE?

Consider this: The Bible foretold (1) the 70-year exile of the Jews, (2) Cyrus’ conquest of Babylon and key aspects of his strategy, and (3) the ultimate desolation of Babylon. Such advance knowledge could not come from mere men! A more reasonable conclusion is this: “Prophecy was at no time brought by man’s will, but men spoke from God.” (2 Peter 1:21) Surely, the Bible merits our consideration.



QUICK FACTS
  Cyrus, it is believed, was born about 600 B.C.E. He died in battle in about 530 B.C.E.

  Cyrus’ tomb can still be seen in Pasargadae, a city of ancient Persia founded by Cyrus and now an archaeological site in Iran.






The Cyrus Cylinder




  The Cyrus Cylinder, a nine-inch-long (23 cm) clay document, commemorates Cyrus’ conquest of Babylon and the liberation of exiles, including Jews. The cylinder has been called “one of the most important discoveries in biblical archaeology.”

  The Persian people still hold Cyrus in high esteem.




“THE HANDWRITING IS ON THE WALL”





On the night of Cyrus’ surprise attack, Babylonian King Belshazzar was feasting with “a thousand of his grandees” when a hand miraculously appeared. Before the eyes of all, the hand wrote “MENE, MENE, TEKEL and PARSIN” on the plaster of the palace wall.a—Daniel 5:1, 5, 25.
  The prophet Daniel interpreted the riddle to terrified Belshazzar. In brief, Daniel told the king that his kingdom was “finished,” that he had been “weighed in the balances” and found wanting, and that Babylon had been “given to the Medes and the Persians.” (Daniel 5:26-28) Every word came true. Moreover, to this day in some languages, the saying “The handwriting is on the wall” means that catastrophe, or failure, is imminent.


The terms refer to monetary weight. For a detailed explanation, see chapter 7 of the book Pay Attention to Daniel’s Prophecy! published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.


