Fine Opportunities Ahead for the 1975 Service Year
1 As we enter the new service year, we have a feeling of keen anticipation. We are well aware that we are now nearly sixty years into the “conclusion of the system of things,” and that the time remaining is short. None of us know exactly when the “great tribulation” will strike, but we have full confidence that it will come at precisely the time fixed in advance by Jehovah.​—Hab. 2:3; Matt. 24:36.
2 But before that time arrives, we have work to do​—lots of it! This is evident from the numbers of interested persons that show up at our Kingdom Halls. It is shown in reports that during the past year, in one country after another, record numbers of persons presented themselves for baptism as dedicated servants of Jehovah. It is also evident from the number of persons who accept our literature when we call at their homes, and from the worldwide increase in the number of home Bible studies. There is every indication that many more persons will yet come out of darkness into God’s wonderful light.​—Isa. 60:11, 12, 22; compare 1 Peter 2:9.
3 How can we help them? Regularity in the field service will aid us to keep in constant touch with those who are willing to open their hearts to the good news. And when we locate persons who give evidence of sincere longing for the truth, let’s keep in close touch with them, answering their questions and aiding them to see the grand purpose that Jehovah has for mankind. Right from the start, urge them to attend meetings at the Kingdom Hall. There is no time to lose.​—Compare Genesis 19:15-17.
4 No doubt many who attend the special service meeting during the first week of September will also be grateful for your further assistance. Some may need a personal Bible study. Others may be ready for aid in learning how to share in the field service. Certain ones who have known the truth for many years may have problems in their lives that are holding them back from dedication and baptism. Perhaps the elders can help them. Whatever the need, these persons have some interest in the truth. This interest, in some cases only a spark of it, may be fanned into a flame by a personal visit and by the sincere interest we display. Our own depth of love for Jehovah, and the sense of urgency that we feel, may help to infuse in them a desire to move ahead.
5 While we are busy aiding newly interested ones, we need to be careful not to overlook the needs of those who are already our brothers and sisters. (Gal. 6:10) Among them are tens of thousands who, during the past year, have been baptized. There are still many matters in which they would no doubt be grateful for assistance. It would be beneficial for the elders to visit them as they are able to do so. Other publishers, too, can be of help by sharing interesting points that they learn, also by inviting newer publishers to go with them in the field service and by personally helping them to learn how to enjoy activities in which they may not yet be sharing. Aid them to grow in appreciation of the fact that everything that they do in life has a bearing on their relationship with Jehovah, and that the greatest joy comes from the doing of Jehovah’s will.​—Compare Philippians 1:25.
6 As you share zealously in the work of preaching and teaching in the days ahead, keep alert, too, to the importance of strong bonds of love among all of us who are serving Jehovah. As the apostle Peter wrote: “The end of all things has drawn close . . . Above all things, have intense love for one another.” (1 Pet. 4:7, 8) If we do this, rich blessings will be ours during this new service year.

