Teaching at Congregation Book Studies
1 Whether we have been studying the Bible for a few years or many, our knowledge and appreciation continue to grow. The congregation book study has certainly played its part in our spiritual growth. There are times when our discussions center on very deep spiritual matters, which Jehovah has provided in his Word for the encouragement and upbuilding of his people. Are you finding greater delight in the deeper things of the Bible than you did in the past? A positive view of “solid food,” coupled with determination to make it our own, will contribute much to continued spiritual advancement.​—Heb. 5:11-6:1.
2 The book study conductor can, of course, do much in seeing to it that those in his group get the most from the spiritual food. It should be his desire to help all in attendance to progress. To this end, he does well not to dwell too long on a paragraph, trying to draw out comments on everything in each sentence. Those studying will make more progress if there is a reasonable amount of coverage of the book at each study. They will be aided thereby to get a better overall picture of what is being taught, and will avoid drawing wrong conclusions because of treating secondary details as if they were the main points.
3 The best way to ensure a good, effective book study is for the conductor, first, to study the lesson and to have clearly in mind the main points therein. He can also select appropriate scriptures to be read. (If he does not know the answer to a question, he might do research.) Second, those attending should study in advance. Without this, they will miss important points. Their advance preparation will also make their comments more meaningful and helpful to others in attendance. The conductor may, therefore, wish to announce the portion of the material that will likely be covered at the next study.
4 The conductor ought to help the group to appreciate how the material is of value to them. On occasion he might highlight a specific point from the material, making an application for the benefit of the group. Or, he may ask them for comments as to how a certain point on the lesson as a whole affects them personally or could be used to help others to appreciate the truth.
5 However, the conductor should endeavor to keep the study from dragging. People like to feel that they are ‘getting somewhere’ and to see that they are making progress in covering the book. With everyone studying beforehand, this can be accomplished.

