Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 15
15 min: Song 48. Introduction, text and comments. Family group discusses use of “Evolution” book during September. Consider how recent public statements on this subject make it timely to offer the book. Explain how placement of this book relates to building up faith in God and his purpose. Discuss where and how to offer the book.
 3 min: Accounts report.
12 min: Taking it to Heart. Last week we had a special service meeting for all dedicated, baptized publishers. What did we do with the letter after we got home? Have we read it? Did we look up the scriptures? Ask audience: What points in that letter, and in our program last week, did you find to be specially significant? (Have some publishers ready to comment extemporaneously on this; invite others to comment too.)
20 min: “Fine Opportunities Ahead for the 1975 Service Year.” Question-and-answer discussion. Read scriptures as time permits.
10 min: Concluding comments. Include comments on Branch Letter. Encourage all elders to read the article “Recommendations to the Governing Body.” Song 51.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 22
12 min: Song 46. Introduction, text and comments, and appropriate Announcements.
15 min: “How Do You React to Apathy?” Talk using material from article in July 15, 1974, “Watchtower.” Have audience share by looking up and commenting on some scriptures discussed in article.
18 min: “Does God Care?” (Suggested sermon for October in presenting “Awake!” subscription offer.) After each point of sermon is discussed by chairman with audience, interrupt discussion to demonstrate how this point can be used in building coherent sermon. Sermon should not be involved but simple, meaningful and very brief​—one that each publisher would feel qualified to use or adapt for his use.
“I’m calling briefly to discuss a question that seems to be on the minds of good people everywhere. They wonder, ‘Does God really care about man?’ Will God tolerate injustice and human suffering forever, or will he intervene sometime in the future and bring an end to war, corruption, suffering and other bad conditions? I’m sure you have thought about this, too, haven’t you? [Allow for comment.]
“In reading the Bible we see that God long ago promised better conditions for man, but several thousand years have gone by since some of these prophecies were written down. The question presents itself then, It God does care, why does he not bring an end to these bad conditions? Is there some reason why he has not done so before now? Yes, the Bible gives us the answer to these questions. For example, look here at 2 Peter 3:9, where the apostle tells us: [Read scripture.].
“The next few verses show that ‘Jehovah’s day’ will come, at which time this old system of things with its oppressive rule and inadequacies will be destroyed as if by fire. This will prepare the way for God’s new system of things. Note his promise on this at verse 13: [Read scripture.].
“Yes, righteousness is to dwell in the earth when God’s heavenly government removes wicked conditions. But this subject raises other questions, too, doesn’t it? When will this occur? And how can we share in the blessings personally? These and related questions are answered from the Bible in this special issue of ‘Awake!’ We are inviting everyone to subscribe. The cost for one year, with 24 copies coming to you, is $1.50. With the subscription I will be happy to leave this special issue of ‘Awake!’”
Chairman can explain that publishers can further simplify the sermon if desired by using just one scripture text, either verse 9 or verse 13, and then lead into the “Awake!” subscription offer. When a subscription is not accepted, offer the special “Awake!” and “Watchtower” for 10c.
Even after the subscription campaign, you may on occasion want to use this sermon, and then you can offer one of the 25c publications such as the “Truth” book, the “Evolution” book or the “Peace and Security” book, all of which have chapters dealing with why God has allowed wickedness and how it will be eliminated.
15 min: Concluding comments. Include remarks showing how, like Christ, we can gain victory over the world. (John 16:33) Song 49.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 29
12 min: Song 58. Introduction, text and comments, and Theocratic News items.
15 min: Discussion of that part of “Presenting the Good News” dealing with the special “Awake!” Discuss with audience choice points that might be used in presenting this special issue. Audience can make suggestions as to how points in articles can be adapted to local territory needs.
15 min: “Living Amid Turmoil in Ireland.” Talk based on article in September 1, 1974, “Watchtower.” Ask audience how knowledge of faithful example of brothers in Ireland will help us when faced with community pressure to join violent groups. How can we carry on our preaching work in times of violence and distrust? How is a Christian’s being no part of the world a protection?
18 min: Concluding comments. Include appropriate points on need for all to have the evangelizing spirit and to grow in effectiveness in preaching the good news. (See w74 6/1 pp. 335-340.) Many new ones joined us in proclaiming good news during past several years. Commendable that they have shared in tract and magazine distribution. Many are also giving effective sermons. Some still need help. What can be done to help them take the next step in presenting the good news with effectiveness? Perhaps they can now give a one-scripture sermon and present the “Awake!” subscription offer. (Demonstrate how to do this.) Some may wish help to make a return visit in an effort to start a Bible study. Experienced publishers, be sure to lend a helping hand. Song 57.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 6
10 min: Song 63. Introduction, text and comments, also Question Box.
12 min: “Teaching at Congregation Book Studies.” Question-and-answer discussion.
12 min: Reaching Those to Whom Particular Articles Might Appeal. Chairman selects copies of magazines during past few months containing articles that might particularly appeal to groups or individuals in congregation’s territory. He will offer suggestions and get comments from audience on what they found effective. For example, the article on “women’s liberation” in the 7/1/74 “Watchtower” may have been of special interest to some they knew. The increased interest in the occult and exorcism might have opened the way for presenting the 6/1/74 issue dealing with the occult, or the 7/15/74 issue, which discussed under “Questions from Readers” whether Christians have the power today to exorcise demons. Often “Awake!” articles on world affairs, various trades and skills, features of a country, and so forth, will appeal to professional people and others in the territory. When articles are read, think of those among friends, workmates and relatives who might enjoy and benefit from them. Ask for experiences in using the magazines in this way. Also comment on use of October 15, 1974, “Watchtower.” See “Presenting the Good News,” paragraphs 6-8.
15 min: “True Christians Cannot Be Cowards.” Talk based on article in 9/1/74 issue of “The Watchtower.”
11 min: Concluding comments. One or two brief, encouraging experiences. (Select in advance.) Song 54.

