Is Real Reform Possible?
“No one can force another human being to be rehabilitated. Change has to come from within the individual and to be willed.”—VIVIEN STERN, A SIN AGAINST THE FUTURE—IMPRISONMENT IN THE WORLD.
A VITAL key to real reform among prisoners centers on education and a change in values and outlook. Without a doubt, there are sincere individuals who are making efforts to educate and help prisoners. The fine and altruistic work of such people is indeed appreciated by many prisoners.
Some people will argue that the prison system as a whole is beyond reform and that it is barely possible for prisoners to change in such an environment. While it may be true that incarceration alone does not instill new values, Bible instruction has helped some to change their lives. This illustrates that reform is possible on an individual basis.
Today, with help from the Bible, some inmates are making the changes that produce right thinking and conduct. How? By heeding the Bible counsel: “Quit being fashioned after this system of things, but be transformed by making your mind over, that you may prove to yourselves the good and acceptable and perfect will of God.” (Romans 12:2) How is this accomplished?
The Role of the Bible
Many people feel that religion can play a large role in helping prisoners to repent of their previous actions. Of course, a basic problem with this is that any change of character brought about behind bars may vanish once the prisoner has been released. One inmate put it this way: “A lot of people find Christ in this place—but when they leave here, they leave Christ behind!”
Experience has demonstrated that genuine change must occur within—in the criminal’s mind and heart—and that the basis must be sincere repentance for past wrongdoing. A program of Bible education can help an individual to learn how God feels about wickedness and why it is wrong. This can give him strong reasons for not wanting to continue in such a course.
Jehovah’s Witnesses are conducting such a Bible education program in numerous prisons around the world, with wonderful results. (See page 10.) “We have been helped to discover what the Bible says about the purpose of life and the blessings the future holds for mankind,” commented one prisoner, adding: “It’s an incredible education!” Another inmate remarked: “We’re making decisions based on God’s counsel. . . . We see changes in ourselves. We know what life’s priorities are.”
Of course, the need for reform extends beyond prison walls. The true solution to the prison crisis lies in eliminating the need for prisons. One of the glorious Bible truths that has touched the hearts of so many inmates is expressed in God’s promise: “Evildoers themselves will be cut off . . . The righteous themselves will possess the earth, and they will reside forever upon it.”—Psalm 37:9, 29.
When that happens, God’s superior standards will be enforced by an incorruptible government that is both loving and firm, God’s heavenly Kingdom under Christ—the government for which Christians have been taught to pray. (Matthew 6:10) In that new world, every inhabitant will be reformed by learning God’s superior laws. Then it will be true as never before that “the earth will certainly be filled with the knowledge of Jehovah as the waters are covering the very sea.” (Isaiah 11:9) With what result? The law-abiding inhabitants of the new world “will indeed find their exquisite delight in the abundance of peace.”—Psalm 37:11.
[Box/Pictures on page 10]
Opening a Window of Hope
  For more than 20 years, volunteer ministers of Jehovah’s Witnesses have carried out a successful Bible-based educational program in the federal penitentiary in Atlanta, Georgia, U.S.A. During that time, more than 40 inmates have been helped to become baptized ministers of Jehovah’s Witnesses, and more than 90 other inmates have also benefited from regular Bible studies.
  Awake! recently spoke with several Bible teachers who have unselfishly worked in that prison.
▪ Why is Bible education so effective in motivating certain inmates to change their lives?
  David: Many prisoners are people who haven’t been shown love, even in childhood. So when they come to know that God loves them and when they pour their hearts out to him in prayer and then he answers their prayers, he becomes real to them. Their hearts are motivated to love him in return.
  Ray: One of the inmates I studied with was abused as a child. When I asked him what attracted him to Jehovah, he answered that when you learn Bible truth, you find out that Jehovah really understands you. This made him want to learn more about the personality of such a loving God.
▪ Some will say that prisoners cling to religion because of ulterior motives—to reduce their sentence or just to kill time. What has your experience shown you?
  Fred: When the inmates come to our studies, we don’t appeal to their sentimentality. We simply study the Bible with them. In short order, they learn that they’re going to be taught about the Bible and that this is all we do. I’ve had them come to me and ask for help in dealing with their court cases. I’ll not discuss this with them. As a result, the ones who come into the study group and stay there over a period of time really want to learn what the Bible says.
  Nick: One thing I notice is the changes that some inmates make while they are in the penitentiary. Some of them have become baptized ministers and have suffered a lot because of other inmates. That is very hard for them. If the Bible had not touched their hearts, they would not have been able to remain faithful under those circumstances.
  Israel: Generally, they are people with a deep desire to learn about Jehovah, and they express it in a beautiful way. You can see that it comes from their heart.
  Joe: The ones who become true Christians have come to understand why things went wrong in their lives. They also understand that there is hope for change—a window of hope opens up for them. Now they can sincerely anticipate the fulfillment of Jehovah’s promises for the future.
▪ Why cannot the prison system alone change criminals?
  Joe: The purpose of the penal system is, not to rehabilitate, but to keep criminals away from the rest of society. That’s the core of the problem—the mind-set of the prison system toward these men.
  Henry: The prison system is unable to change the offenders’ hearts. Most of these people are going to repeat their crimes when they get out.
[Picture on page 8, 9]
Scores of inmates have been helped to learn the truth of the Bible

