Advocating the Bible
1 Since we in our field ministry encourage others to read the Bible, we should be able to answer “Yes” if questioned, “Have you read it?” Those of us who are new publishers of the good news may not have yet completed reading the Bible in its entirety. However, all of us know that Bible reading is a “must” and should, therefore, take priority over TV or other similar pursuits. (Heb. 4:12) For this reason we do well to include Bible reading in our regular theocratic schedule.
2 The Society appreciates the value of Bible reading. On one of its factory buildings is a large slogan, “Read God’s Word the Holy Bible Daily.” New members of the Bethel family are required to read the entire Bible during their first eight months at Bethel. True, they are kept busy putting in a full day’s work, attending congregation meetings and sharing in the field service. However, with a good schedule they are able to complete their Bible reading, as well as study others of the Society’s publications. After being at Bethel for eight months, they are encouraged to maintain a good schedule for continued Bible reading. Some schedule time before breakfast, whereas others read the Bible while traveling on public transportation or before going to bed in the evening. Of course, the objective in reading the Bible is not just to be able to say, “I have read it.” Rather, we are desirous of establishing and maintaining a good relationship with Jehovah. We know that as we read his written Word we will be able to grow in accurate knowledge, as well as increase our faith.​—Rom. 10:17.
3 During June we are going to have the pleasure of offering the New World Translation, with the book Is the Bible Really the Word of God? We know from our own experience that these can be a real stimulus to meaningful Bible reading, so we will offer them enthusiastically. But many persons to whom we make the offer will decline, saying that they already have a Bible. What then? Should we try to convince them that the New World Translation is better than the Bible they already have? We may find that better success can be obtained by just asking the person to get his Bible. Many persons will be pleased to show us a Bible for which they paid a large sum, or to talk to us about what they themselves have read, if they are Bible readers. We can still give our Scriptural presentation, using their Bible, can we not? And our real objective is to help them to read and understand the Bible, regardless of the translation, isn’t it? Why not try to start a home Bible study using their Bible?
4 To successfully advocate Bible reading, we need to understand why people have certain viewpoints or opinions. This requires that we get the householder to express himself early in our presentation. Let the person tell you whether he has a Bible, whether he feels it truly is the Word of God, etc. To encourage an expression from him, you may find it effective to say what he himself may be thinking, but is hesitant to tell you. You could say, “Many people have sincere questions about the Bible. They know that the Bible has been called God’s Word, but they wonder if there really is proof that it is from God.” Such an approach might encourage him to tell you how he feels. This will afford a good opportunity to direct attention to the book Is the Bible Really the Word of God? Offer it with the Bible. Of course, if he does not want both books, you may offer just the Word of God book for 25 cents.
5 Generally it is necessary to get by common initial objections, such as “I am busy,” before making our Scriptural presentation. Some publishers do this effectively by, first, sympathizing with the householder and, second, inviting him to express himself. Try this for yourself.
6 When we are able to give our Scriptural presentation, we want to help persons to get the sense of the scriptures being considered. (Matt. 13:19) How can this best be done? After reading a scripture, instead of “telling” the person “the Bible says this or that,” why not ask questions to help him reason on what he has just read? Encourage him to express himself as to what he himself sees there in the Bible. If his heart is right, more than likely he will come to the same conclusions we have.
7 What everyone really needs is the truth that is found in the Bible. That is what we advocate, isn’t it? We do it by our example, by the literature we offer and by encouraging others to listen to the good things contained in God’s Word.
[Blurb on page 1]
Work with counselors of the New Order society.

