Presenting the Good News​—As a Vacation Pioneer This Summer
1 The summer season is here! For many this affords a fine opportunity to join the ever-increasing ranks of vacation pioneers. Will you be one of them?
2 For at least two months during summer, schools are on their vacation period. Parents, can you arrange family affairs so that one or more of your young ones can vacation pioneer? Perhaps some can do it for two weeks, others for a month or two. It may be that one parent, or both, can join in doing the same.
3 Vacation pioneering means spending less than half a day in the field service for two weeks, a month or more. And that leaves much time for other things, including wholesome recreation. (Eccl. 3:1, 4) Many young publishers vacation pioneer each summer, having in mind their goal of regular pioneer, missionary or Bethel service upon completing their schooling. Would not such a balanced schedule bring great satisfaction? Those who have already vacation pioneered answer “Yes!” And, does not being a vacation pioneer bring a feeling of accomplishment, as well as help us to improve our ability to present the good news?
4 For example, a publisher in Tennessee writes: “I cannot begin to express the benefits and joys that have come to me from vacation pioneering. But I appreciate at least four: first, thoughts and scriptures come to mind easier through increased use; second, spending much more time giving out the pure waters of truth brings greater happiness; third is the joy in finding and feeding more people and increasing the number of Bible studies I conduct; and last, vacation pioneering acts as a spiritual ‘shot in the arm’ to build me up for the months following.”
5 Others note that their teaching ability has improved and that they are better able to overcome objections and get Bible studies started since having vacation pioneered. It also has drawn them closer to other publishers in the congregation since they can spend more time working with them in the ministry. As one said: “This builds up a relationship that doesn’t terminate at the end of the month.”
6 If you are newly baptized, can you share in this fine feature of service? Yes, you can right after baptism if you have published regularly for six months and have a reputation for good Christian conduct. And if you are not yet baptized? Well, why not go along with others who vacation pioneer this summer to get more experience, building toward the day when you do qualify.
7 So, can you vacation pioneer this summer? Why not talk things over in the congregation and in your family? Most important of all, speak to Jehovah in prayer on this important matter. Many who vacation pioneer find that, as a result, they learn to rely more completely on Jehovah. They realize to a fuller extent the truthfulness of the words: “O Jehovah of armies, happy is the man that is trusting in you.”​—Ps. 84:⁠12.

