Shepherd the Flock
1 One thing Jehovah’s witnesses can give to their brothers that will often help more than anything else is encouragement. Even the brother who is doing excellently in every aspect of his Christian life needs it. Everyone likes to be assured that what he is doing is accomplishing something, also that it is appreciated.
2 Jehovah in his wisdom has provided for that needed encouragement through shepherds appointed to care for his flock. The apostle Paul commanded the shepherd Timothy to ‘apply himself to exhortation.’ (1 Tim. 4:13) The Greek word that Paul used for “exhortation” is pa·raʹkle·sis, related to the word “paraclete” or “helper.” It can also be translated “encouragement.” Accordingly, servants have in mind giving whatever spiritual assistance may be needed, instead of a “pep” talk or “buildup” just to raise a brother’s field service averages. Attention is focused on building up spirituality by means of encouraging and assisting persons to read the Bible regularly along with the Watchtower and Awake! magazines and others of the Society’s publications. With appropriate spiritual assistance being given to fit the needs of an individual, there will not be any problem in getting support at the meetings or in the field ministry in view of what is stated at 2 Peter 1:8, will there?
3 Why is encouragement so much needed by all? Because everyone has his problems and his tests. When a servant meets a brother at the Kingdom Hall and asks him how he is doing, the brother will usually reply, “Fine.” And he may be doing well. But he may have problems and need some encouragement. He may be facing problems, big or small, every day in his secular work. Or he may be getting discouragement from relatives and associates. Again, it may be that he lacks joy because of not getting results from his service in the field. Yet this brother may never complain or say a word about it.
4 Others may feel they are doing quite well, but, without suspecting the dangers involved, are becoming engulfed in a materialistic way of life. Or one may begin to be a complainer. Another may be walking on the borderline of loose conduct. Perhaps those knowing him well can see the danger or the snare imperiling him, although the brother himself does not clearly see it.​—Gal. 6:1.
5 These reasons make it vitally essential that the congregation servant and book study servants, particularly, visit all the brothers, the strongest as well as the newest, in their homes. True, much encouragement can be given when we see our brothers at the Kingdom Hall or share in field service with them. But there is often much that cannot be accomplished in the limited time available on these occasions.
6 These servants must keep in mind their God-given responsibility to shepherd the flock. This they must do even if it costs them personal field service time. But then they are carrying out their duty and can expect Jehovah’s blessing. Actually, the brothers thus encouraged will be impelled by God’s spirit to spend many more hours in proclaiming the good news, and these will be joyful, effective hours.
7 Such visits are not made merely to increase a brother’s field service. They should be truly friendly calls, with genuine interest in the brother’s overall welfare. The object is to get better acquainted, to better appreciate our brothers, as to what they do and the problems they face. Then, when help and encouragement are needed the servant can give what is needed with real understanding. If the brothers are built up spiritually, they will be better representatives of true worship in every feature of their lives​—their homelife, their conduct, their love and their share in encouraging others with the good news.
8 Furthermore, the servants themselves will be spared many problems that may otherwise come up. The spiritual tone and health of the congregation will be much better. Moreover, the servants themselves will benefit greatly from the interchange of encouragement.​—Rom. 1:12.
[Blurb on page 4]
Read the Bible daily.

