Your Service Meetings
Note to congregation servant: One meeting in July will be left open, so you can adjust the program to allow for congregation’s attendance at district assembly. The week after the district assembly, part of the time on the service meeting can be used to review high points.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 13
Theme: Increasing Appreciation for the Word of Life. Song 72.
15 min: Welcome and reading of text and comments. Also, Facts We Ought to Know About the Bible. Handled by questions and answers. Could have a few planned comments from audience, but for the most part it should be spontaneous expressions. Cover the following points (See April 15, 1971, “Watchtower,” pp. 227, 228.): How many books are there in the Bible? (Some are combined in Jewish versions; in some Bibles they are in different order. What is important is what books are included.) Is punctuation part of the Bible as originally written? What about chapter and verse divisions? When did Bible writing begin? When did it end? How many authors did it have? How many writers? In how many languages is the Bible available? Does that mean the entire Bible is available in all those languages? What is meant by “inspiration”? To what extent did God provide details? By what means? What good reasons could you give someone for reading the Bible? (See chapter one of the “Word of God” book.)
18 min: “Advocating the Bible.” Covered by questions and answers. Include demonstration of points in paragraphs 4 and 5, covering just the first part of the presentations. Interrupt presentations to let audience analyze why certain things are said or done. One acting as householder should do things realistically.
12 min: Preparing for the Convention. (Cover material concerning the convention in the May 15, 1971, “Watchtower,” also the June 8, 1971, “Awake!” Stimulate anticipation for it; encourage all to be present. Cover practical points of information that will be helpful to those attending at convention for the first time.)
 3 min: Accounts report.
12 min: Concluding comments. Include Branch Letter and pertinent Announcements. Encourage regular Bible reading program. Consider Psalm 119:97. Song 31.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 20
Theme: Loving Encouragement from Theocratic Counselors. Song 56.
 8 min: Welcome, text and comments. Include encouragement to share in evening witnessing. If persons are not at home on weekends during summer, we cannot change their schedule, but can change ours.
15 min: What Are We Going to Do This Summer? Handle this as a discussion among members of a family group. Include Presenting the Good News. Also, the article, “Can You Make Leisure Time Rewarding?” in the May 15, 1971, “Watchtower.” There should be brief comments about attending an assembly.
15 min: “Shepherd the Flock.” Audience participation.
 7 min: Question Box. Handle as discussion between two book study servants. Do not merely state the points; enlarge on them and emphasize them so that they will be remembered and applied.
15 min: Facts We Ought to Know About the Bible. (Congregation servant; audience participation.) When was the first volume of the “New World Translation” released? On what Hebrew text is the Hebrew Scripture portion of that Bible based? What is the basis for the “New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures”? (“All Scripture Is Inspired . . . and Beneficial,” pp. 308, 309, 323-325) How was it originally determined which books belonged in the inspired Hebrew Scriptures? How was this determined for the Christian Greek Scriptures? What information does the Bible contain that otherwise would not be available to man? What is there about Bible history that wins one’s confidence? (Helpful information can be found in “Aid to Bible Understanding” under “Canon”; also under “Bible.” Also, see April 15, 1971, “Watchtower,” pp. 229, 230, and the “Word of God” book.) Appreciation of God’s Word stimulates us to zealous service.
Congregation is no doubt well acquainted with details of arrangements for meetings and field service. Therefore, meeting can be concluded by simply singing song 20, and prayer.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 27
Theme: While Acquiring Wisdom, Acquire Understanding. (Prov. 4:7) Song 113.
12 min: Welcome, text and comments. Include talk on the theme for month, showing what it means in our lives as individuals. (See Feb. 15, 1970, “Watchtower.”) Discuss what wisdom is and what understanding is. What is the difference between acquiring these and simply finding answers to offer in meetings?
15 min: Youths with Unbelieving Parents Praise Jehovah by Their Faithfulness.
(5 min.) Chairman observes some unbelieving parents are indifferent to truth, others oppose it. Faithfulness vital for Christian youths in such homes. In divided home if father is indifferent, a fine way for younger children to stir up his interest is to ask him to read special articles for parents to read with children. Other methods suggested by experiences. (yb68, p. 150, par. 2; yb69, p. 148, par. 1, to p. 149, par. 2) Faithfulness may stir up interest. (yb68, p. 192, par. 1; p. 185, par. 2) What if there is opposition?
(7 min.) Demonstration. After meeting, servant speaks to two young publishers who seem dejected; parents oppose their serving Jehovah. Servant encourages them, stresses need for faithfulness, endurance. Jehovah will help them to endure. (yb71, p. 169, par. 1) If parents curtail youths’ theocratic activities, prayer, study and incidental witnessing available. (w70, p. 317, par. 10, 11) Youths express appreciation for encouragement and suggestions.
(3 min.) Chairman reviews what can be done to aid unbelieving parents to see the truth, such as for youths to tell parents what they are learning. Main thing: Be faithful to Jehovah whether parents opposed or indifferent. (w70, p. 148, par. 6; yb70, p. 202, par. 1)
 8 min: Talk on confidential matters, based on Questions from Readers in April 1, 1971, “Watchtower.”
15 min: Offer for July. Two families visiting together discuss the offer, how to handle objections, etc.; practice on each other. Interrupt presentation at appropriate points to get suggestions from audience as to what might be said or done, why it might be good to do things in a particular way, etc.
10 min: Concluding comments. Include reminder to bring along June 8 “Awake!” and April 1 “Watchtower” next week. Encourage publishers to use older magazines where persons are not at home. Discuss with and draw comments from audience on (1) how we can sound down information from Bible into our own heart and (2) how the heart of children and interested persons can be reached. Consider Proverbs 4:4, 21. Song 87.
WEEK STARTING JULY 4
Theme: Showing Understanding by Wise Use of Time. Song 46.
 8 min: Welcome, text and comments. Include any announcements that are needed regarding congregation’s activity here instead of at the end of the program.
15 min: Family discussion of the article in June 8 “Awake!” on “Second Thoughts About a College Education.”
10 min: Theocratic News. Cover as discourse and with audience participation.
27 min: Study with the congregation material in the April 1, 1971, “Watchtower” on “Blessings from Taking the Ministry Seriously.” Include experience from “1971 Yearbook” (p. 219, par. 1) as to not-at-home calls; apply this to local needs. Song 115.

