From Our Readers
Balloons  I enjoyed reading the article “The Greatest Balloon Event in the World!” (March 8, 2004) My mom says she would like to ride in a balloon someday, and I would like to ride in one too. When I read the article, I couldn’t believe how many balloons there were! I loved the pictures. I am eight years old.
J. L., United States
Amazing Plant  I’ve never read anything as interesting and remarkable as the article “An Amazing Survivor.” (March 8, 2004) The welwitschia is truly an amazing plant. How does it ever manage to live so long under harsh conditions? Such articles reveal to us more fully the wisdom of our ingenious Creator, Jehovah.
A. C., Russia
I grew up in Angola and had the privilege of seeing the welwitschia a number of times. Each time, I was fascinated by this strange plant. But I wondered about many common beliefs regarding it. Now, 27 years later, I have received the information I desired.
A. O., Switzerland
I have been reading Awake! for more than 15 years. Since I am not in a position to travel, such articles permit me to study Jehovah’s creation in detail. I would never have known about the longevity of the welwitschia were it not for Awake!
L. Z., France
Ireland’s Burren  My husband and I were privileged to visit Ireland last year. So the article “Ireland’s Fascinating Burren” was of special interest to us. (March 8, 2004) Most tour books do not give much information about the Burren. The surveyor Ludlow once called the Burren “a savage land,” but it has a rugged beauty. The most beautiful thing we saw, however, was a group of Jehovah’s Witnesses in the house-to-house ministry. When we identified ourselves as fellow Witnesses, they were delighted. We left Ireland with some new friends as well as memories of the Burren.
B. E., United States
Blood Type  Thank you for the article “The Bible’s Viewpoint: Is Your Personality Determined by Blood Type?” (February 8, 2004) I have been a little troubled about this issue. At school I was told that personality cannot be determined by blood type. I also noticed that in some books, using blood type to determine personality is tied to spiritism. But I know people who often talked about blood type and judged others based on it. Just when I found myself wondering what was right or wrong, this article came out, and I was able to understand the Bible’s viewpoint clearly.
R. K., Japan
The article was interesting to me. People at my school say that a person with type A blood is precise and sensitive and a person with type B blood is gentle. I have often wondered, ‘Am I like that?’ But I was relieved to learn that each person has his own personality. I was also able to recognize that we can change our personality by submitting to the influence of God’s holy spirit.
N. I., Japan
Waterfalls  I would like to express my appreciation for the wonderful article “Exploring Magnificent Waterfalls.” (February 22, 2004) Zambia is blessed with lakes, rivers, forests, and mountains. And the waterfalls are a delight. The article made me thank Jehovah, our heavenly Father, for the things he created.
G. M., Zambia

