The Wonders of Creation Reveal God’s Glory
Many enjoy looking at creation. But few realize that as they do so, they are catching a glimpse into the mind and heart of our Grand Creator. (Rom. 1:20) Long ago, David learned about Jehovah through His inspired Word. But he also “saw” and drew close to Him through creation. (Ps. 8:3, 4) The video entitled The Wonders of Creation Reveal God’s Glory helps us, our children, and our Bible students to take a close look at some of Jehovah’s creation, see the qualities and personality of our Grand Creator, and as a result draw closer to him. After viewing the video, see if you can answer the following questions.
(1) How does the size and order of the physical universe deepen your appreciation of Jehovah? (Isa. 40:26) (2) When we look closer at water, what can we learn about the One who designed it? (Rev. 14:7) (3) How does the earth’s size and proximity to the sun demonstrate Jehovah’s wisdom? (4) What purpose does the moon serve? (Ps. 89:37) (5) How has Jehovah designed humans to enjoy life? (6) What is DNA? (Ps. 139:16) (7) Of all Jehovah’s earthly creations, how are humans different? (Gen. 1:26) (8) What do you look forward to in the new world?
Extra Features: (9) Where do colors come from? (10) How does water overcome gravity to reach the tops of trees? (11) What role does water play within our bodies? (12) Give examples of the harmony that exists between living things. (13) How do creatures know to form partnerships with others? (14) What is the “golden angle,” and how is it displayed in creation?
“Observe Intently” Jehovah’s Handiwork: Jesus encouraged us to “observe intently the birds of heaven” and to “take a lesson from the lilies of the field.” (Matt. 6:26, 28) Doing so can deepen our faith, instill confidence in the Creator, and build appreciation for Jehovah’s wisdom, saving power, and love. Rather than be unduly distracted by the works of this world, make the time and effort to observe the wonders of Jehovah’s creation, and reflect on what it tells us about our God.—Ps. 19:1.

