Witness in Business Territory With Confidence
 1. Why should we not despair if we feel that business witnessing is intimidating?
1 Do you find the thought of witnessing at businesses to be intimidating? If so, do not despair, for even Paul, who was a bold and fearless minister, had to ‘muster up boldness’ in order to preach. (1 Thess. 2:2) Below are some common concerns along with practical suggestions for addressing them.
 2. Why should we not worry about annoying the workers?
2 Will Interrupting the Workers Annoy Them? In many businesses, workers serve the public and expect interruptions. They will often be polite, since they may view you as a potential customer. By dressing in a dignified manner and being warm and friendly, you will encourage respectful treatment.
 3. How can we avoid irritating the customers?
3 Will I Have to Give My Presentation in Front of Many Customers? If possible, choose a time when stores are not overly busy, such as when they first open. Wait until the manager or clerk is alone before approaching him. Make your presentation very brief.
 4. What might we say when working businesses?
4 What Should I Say? Speak to the person in charge if there are several workers. You might say: “It’s hard to find businesspeople at home, so we’re visiting you at your workplace. I know you’re working, so I’ll be very brief.” So that we will not be confused with salesmen, it is usually best not to mention the donation arrangement unless we are asked how our work is financed. Depending on the nature of the business, you may ask the manager for permission to speak briefly to the workers. Repeat your presentation to them. If a worker seems busy, shorten your presentation and leave him a tract. If it is not possible to talk with the workers, perhaps you will be allowed to leave literature in the break room or other common area.
 5. What reasons are there to share in business witnessing with confidence?
5 Jesus and Paul preached to people at their places of business with confidence, and so can you. (Matt. 4:18-21; 9:9; Acts 17:17) Ask Jehovah to help you to have a calm heart and to be bold. (Acts 4:29) Business territory has few not-at-homes, so why not give this productive form of witnessing a try?

