“Keep Doing This”
Memorial to Be Observed on April 5
 1. Why is the Memorial observance important?
1 “Keep doing this in remembrance of me.” (Luke 22:19) With those words, Jesus commanded his followers to commemorate his sacrificial death. In view of all that the ransom accomplished, there is no day more important or precious for Christians than the annual Memorial observance. As this year’s observance on April 5 approaches, how may we show our thankfulness to Jehovah?—Col. 3:15.
 2. How can we demonstrate our appreciation for the Memorial through study and meditation?
2 Prepare: We normally prepare for the things that we consider important. We can prepare our hearts for the Memorial by considering as a family the events that occurred during Jesus’ final days on earth and by meditating on them. (Ezra 7:10) A partial list of scriptures is found in the calendar and in Examining the Scriptures Daily, whereas a more complete listing, along with corresponding chapters from the Greatest Man book, is located on pages 23-24 of the February 1, 2011, issue of The Watchtower.
 3. How can we demonstrate our appreciation for the Memorial by increasing our share in the ministry?
3 Preach: We can also demonstrate our appreciation by having a full share in the ministry. (Luke 6:45) A worldwide campaign to invite others to the Memorial will begin on Saturday, March 17. Could you adjust your schedule to spend more time in the ministry, perhaps as an auxiliary pioneer? Why not discuss it as a family during your next Family Worship evening?
 4. What benefits can we receive from observing the Memorial?
4 How we are benefited by sharing in the Memorial observance each year! Our joy and our love for God increase as we reflect on Jehovah’s generosity in providing his only-begotten Son as a ransom. (John 3:16; 1 John 4:9, 10) This compels us to live no longer for ourselves. (2 Cor. 5:14, 15) It also stimulates our desire to praise Jehovah publicly. (Ps. 102:19-21) Indeed, Jehovah’s grateful servants eagerly look forward to the opportunity we will have at the Memorial observance on April 5 to ‘proclaim the death of the Lord.’—1 Cor. 11:26.

