Announcements
WRITING THE HUMAN RECOMMENDATION LETTER WITH GOD’S SPIRIT—2 Cor. 3:1-3, NW.
Things spoken and heard make an impression on the minds and hearts of listeners. A sort of “writing” may therefore be said to take place, a recording of information and knowledge. It is in a similar sense that Paul speaks of those whom he had taught and guided as being “recommendation letters.” They recommended Paul’s faithful ministry. The writing was effective because of the operation of God’s holy spirit in connection with the preaching of the devoted apostle. The congregations established by Paul were a powerful testimonial to his ordination by Jehovah God. Likewise the ministry of Jehovah’s witnesses has, in its fruitful results, a recommendation letter that cannot be denied. During the present month the witnesses of Jehovah will continue “writing the human recommendation letter” by presenting the message to others in the form of the Awake! magazine. One year’s subscription and three Bible study booklet aids will be the offer on a $1 contribution. Share in this grand work with the local congregation of Jehovah’s witnesses.
THE WAY TO PEACE WITH GOD
World peace is the sincere desire of all honest-hearted men. Whether it can be attained is a question that has been widely discussed. Some insist that it can be achieved only on the battle field, while others believe all differences can be resolved around the conference table. What does the Bible say? For many years now the outstanding exponent of Bible truth, The Watchtower, has proclaimed that peace on earth will follow God’s war in heaven. That war is inevitable. God’s ambassadors of good will, Jehovah’s witnesses, have not been accepted by the ruling powers and the peace terms they have propounded at God’s command have gone unheeded. Now Jehovah God is delivering his ultimatum to the people of the nations. They must individually decide where they stand before the war of God consumes the present system of things and all who side with it. Have you made your choice? You need counsel that comes only from the Bible. It is published twice a month in The Watchtower and is available to you for a year for only $1. Send for it today and find the way to peace with God.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
October 28: Marriage Obligations and Divorce, ¶1-20. Page 585.
November 4: Marriage Obligations and Divorce, ¶21-42. Page 591.
November 11: ‘He That Marries Not Does Better.’ Page 598.

