Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Help for “Thirsting” Ones in Russia
“HAPPY are those hungering and thirsting for righteousness, since they will be filled,” said Jesus. (Matthew 5:6) The following experiences illustrate how Jehovah’s Witnesses are helping to satisfy the spiritual thirst of many in Russia, where religious expression was curtailed for over 70 years.
▪ A woman named Valentina had serious Bible questions that had gone unanswered for many years. For example, she wondered: ‘To whom did Jesus pray?’ She reasoned that Jesus must have prayed to someone higher than himself and wondered about the name of this One.
She visited the Russian Orthodox Church. However, in that religion she did not find the answers to her questions. Not satisfied, she went to a Protestant church but again found no clear answers. Not knowing where else to go, Valentina began to read the Bible, trying to find answers by herself—to no avail. She prayed for help.
Some time later Jehovah’s Witnesses knocked at her door. They showed her from the Bible that God’s name is Jehovah. At last, she learned to whom it was that Jesus prayed! She began to study the Bible regularly with the Witnesses. Often she stayed up all night reading literature published by the Watch Tower Society and looking up Bible texts. Soon Valentina concluded that she had found the truth. Within three months she began sharing in the preaching work, and two months after that, she was baptized. Her prayerful search for truth was rewarded.
▪ A Witness traveled by bus to preach in a remote area. During the trip he spoke to a young woman about the Bible’s promises, but the young woman was not interested. Two months later the Witness made a second trip to the same area to give a public talk. After the talk he approached a visitor and asked him: “Has someone already spoken to you about the good news from the Bible?” The man answered, “Yes, you have.” The Witness thought he was joking. But the young man explained that two months earlier he had overheard the conversation between the Witness and the young woman, during the bus trip. “I wanted to know more, but you got off the bus, and I thought I would never see Jehovah’s Witnesses again. Then at my workplace I met a man who is studying the Bible with the Witnesses. And so here I am!”
The man and his wife began studying the Bible. After a very short time, he could see that his employment was in conflict with Bible principles. Wanting to keep a good conscience before God, he changed his occupation. Now he tells others about God’s Kingdom at every opportunity. His wife is also progressing in her study of the Bible.
Jehovah’s Witnesses in the vast territory of Russia are pleased to have a share in saying to all sincere people: “‘Come!’ And let anyone thirsting come; let anyone that wishes take life’s water free.”—Revelation 22:17.

