VOL. XII. NOVEMBER, 1891. NO. 11. 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

THE HARVEST FIELD ABROAD. 

After all the vicissitudes of our long and 
rapid journey abroad, which included ten thousand 
miles by sea and seven thousand miles by 
land, in and between Europe, Asia, Africa and 
America, we are glad to greet the readers of the 
TOWER again from the home office. We arrived 
just as the last issue of the TOWER was 
ready for press, and therefore had to delay any 
account of our travels for this and subsequent 
issues. 

Toward the close of our journey we had the 
pleasure of greeting about one hundred and fifty 
of the interested ones at London and about the 
same number at Liverpool, who came together 
from various parts of England and Wales. 
The former company was brought together by 
the kindness of Sister Home and others, the 
latter by Brother and Sister Elam. Both were 
precious seasons in which we learned to appreciate 
very highly the depth and earnestness of 
the fellow-members of the body over there. 
You will not be surprised to know that the same 
spirit of the truth (the spirit of love— deep, 
earnest and active) characterizes the saints 
there, as it does all who joyfully and devotedly 
accept the same good tidings on this side the 
Atlantic. These gatherings reminded us of 
those which are held every Spring in Allegheny. 
Love, joy and peace, the fruits of the spirit of 
the truth, were expressed in the faces and by 



the hands as well as in the words of all. And 
fervent and earnest were the prayers of the 
saints there for their dear brethren and sisters 
in America, and for the great work in which we 
are unitedly engaged. In the intervals of the 
public meetings the personal interviews were 
constant and very earnest, disclosing a strong 
under-current of love and devotion to God and 
a longing for still greater usefulness in his 
blessed service. Their prayers and parting 
benedictions will never be forgotten, except in 
the joys of our glorious reunion in the heavenly 
kingdom. O may we each so run as to be 
counted worthy of that blessed consummation 
of our hopes! 

Arriving in New York, we were greatly surprised 
to find that Brother and Sister Fairchild 
had arranged for a gathering of interested ones at 
their home, to bid us welcome to the dear home 
land— the most favored in the world for the 
great harvest work. It was a warm welcome 
indeed, and most beautifully expressed by the 
floral decorations and elegant repast which loving 
hearts had planned and loving hands had 
executed. We greatly enjoyed this privilege of 
meeting and greeting the saints, about sixty of 
whom had gathered, some coming fifty and 
some a hundred miles, a majority of whom 
awaited our arrival. 

Reaching Allegheny early on the following 
Sunday morning, we were again surprised by 
the loved ones. Brothers Bryan and Morrow, 
a delegation of welcome, met us at the depot; 
and on our arrival home, after worship, while 

R1332 : page 146 

we breakfasted, a poem of welcome, written for 
the occasion by Sister Ball, of our household, 
was read to us. 

But our surprises were not yet complete. 
On our arrival at Bible House chapel, we found 
the stand and platform banked with potted 
plants and adorned with flowers, while upon the 
wall, in the rear of the desk, and beautifully executed, 
was the word Welcome. A congregation 
of about two hundred awaited our arrival, and 
Brother Weimar conducted the meeting, whilst 
we were shown seats among the congregation. 
The program consisted of an address of welcome 
by Sister Tuttle who, on behalf of the congregation, 
bade us Welcome Home in no uncertain 
language; and this was preceded and followed 
by the excellent rendering of two very appropriate 
hymns, specially prepared for the occasion 
by Sister Zech. 



Then, an opportunity offering, we responded, 
assuring our dear Brethren and Sisters that we 
heartily reciprocated all the love and tender interest 
which they had so forcibly and elegantly 
expressed toward us. We assured them that we 
accepted these loving expressions of welcome, 
not merely as personal matters, but chiefly as 
expressions of their sympathy and love for the 
Truth and the Master whom we seek to serve. 
We then briefly related some items of interest 
furnished by our journey, and the various evidences 
we had of the Lord's favor and blessings 
upon us and upon our mission abroad, promising 
more anon through the TOWER. 

While we realized that dangers beset us on 
every hand all through the journey, we gratefully 
remembered the prayers of the saints on 
our behalf, and the loving favor of God, whose 
presence was so signally with us all the way, so 
that every hindrance to the accomplishment of 
our mission was removed and our way was continually 
prospered. The seas were smooth and 
quiet, affording opportunities for letting our 
light shine among our fellow-passengers, although 
for a time we had to have a share of the 
discomforts of sea-sickness, which was doubtless 
for our good; and we sincerely hope that some 
lasting impressions were made upon the minds 
of some to whom we bore witness concerning 
our Father's plan. 

On the east-bound journey were some fifty 
Congregationalist ministers, bound for a convention 
of that denomination in London, having 
for its chief object the closer union of 
Congregationalists throughout the world; and 
on our homeward journey was a similar number 
of Methodist ministers, bound for a Methodist 
convention to be held in Washington city. 
On the Black and Mediterranean seas, on board 
a Russian steamer from Odessa to Jaffa, we 
had a fair sample of Jewish exiles and also 
of the Russian hatred of the poor wanderers. 
But all the individual Russians cannot be 
judged by the policy of their despotic government, 
nor by the superstitions of their national 
religion— the Greek Catholic. Among 
them we met persons of both head and heart 
culture and whom we would have reasonable 
hope of converting to the truth under favorable 
circumstances for its presentation. To some of 
these we have promised a copy of THE PLAN OF 
THE AGES in French as soon as it is published. 

On the Mediterranean voyages we also met 
and made the acquaintance of some fair representatives 
of the Greeks, Egyptians, French 
and Italians, and our appreciation of the kindly 



courtesy of these traveling acquaintances 
greatly enlarged our sympathy and love for the 
various peoples whom they represented; and as 
we exchanged cards on parting and wished each 
other a safe and happy journey, we promised 
each a copy of DAWN in German, French or 
English when they were familiar enough with 
any of these to read it. Throughout our journeys 
on the wave the Master's "Peace, be still," 
seemed to echo and re-echo; for though we 
heard of disasters abroad by sea and by land, 
our frail barques were always safely steered to 
their destination; and though all Europe was 
suffering from too frequent rains, and in many 
places damaging floods, we had fair weather 
and clear sunshine from the day we left home 
until our return, with the single exception of our 
last day in London, the rains and storms always 
being either in advance of us or in our rear. 
This, together with our continued physical 
health, notwithstanding the sudden changes of 
climate and the fatigue of constant travel and 
sight-seeing, we could not help marking as specially 

R1332 : page 147 

favorable to our rapid traveling and necessarily 
hasty observations, for all of which we 
sincerely thank God and you, dear brethren and 
sisters, who constantly remembered us before 
the throne of heavenly grace. 

Our travels by land were also blessed by 
numerous opportunities for making the acquaintance 
of representatives of various nations, 
with whom we frequently conversed, sometimes 
through interpreters, all conversation naturally 
gravitating toward the truth. The kind faces and 
cordial hand-shaking and good wishes of these 
traveling companions will long be remembered 
as among the interesting events of our journey, 
as links in the chain of love that binds us to our 
common humanity and as instrumentalities in 
causing our hearts to beat with a quicker impulse 
and a warmer affection for the "whole 
world," whom God so loved as to give his 
only begotten Son for their redemption and 
restitution. 

Yes, our sympathies have been greatly enlarged, 
our love strengthened and our zeal 
greatly stimulated to do our privileged part in 
the furtherance of that glorious plan of God 
which alone is equal to the emergency of our 
fallen humanity's desperate case. Our reason, 
as well as the Scriptures, clearly affirms that all 
efforts not on the lines of God's plan are vain 
indeed, and we long for the consummation in 



the blessed restitution of all things. But, as a 
means to that end, we see that the development 
and exaltation of the Church is of first importance, 
calling, therefore, now— in this harvest 
time— for the concentration of all our efforts 
here, in order that, under the future leading 
and government of the perfected and glorified 
Church, the world may believe.— John 17:21. 

We want to tell you all we can about our 
journey, but it will require time to do so. We 
would now in a word tell you that the Lord has 
greatly blessed us in it to the accomplishment 
of what we contemplated in undertaking it, as 
explained in the July issue. You will be glad 
to know this much briefly now and we will endeavor 
to communicate some particulars in 
which you will be interested in succeeding issues. 
While abroad we not only sought to see 
all that we could for our own sakes, but continually 
remembered that we were seeing for 
you also— as eyes for the body: this time seeing 
earthly things indeed, but seeing these with 
a view to their relationship with heavenly truths 

R1333 : page 147 

and interests. 

In view of certain leadings indicating that 
this journey would be the Lord's will, we did 
not hesitate to use a portion of the Lord's 
money for this purpose, though we felt impelled 
to accomplish the work in the most economical 
way possible, which we did by traveling generally 
in second class coaches, which also brought 
us more in contact with the people, as we desired, 
the first class coaches being very generally 
forsaken except by civil and ecclesiastical 
dignitaries and wealthy pleasure-seekers. We 
also found second class passage on the ocean 
quite comfortable, though not luxurious, and 
gladly availed ourselves of these methods of 
economizing, being pleased also to find that 
our unseasonable visits to Palestine and Egypt 
placed the hotel rates there at half the usual 
prices. Nor did we return home, as is the 
usual custom of travelers, laden with the luxuries 
of the old world, with samples of its art 
works, its rich laces or elegant silks, but we 
trust with a richer treasure of knowledge and 
experience valuable to the dear Lord's work. 
We have said we used the Lord's money, in this 
way, yet would not be understood to mean that 
we so appropriated any portion of the funds 
contributed to the spread of the truth, etc., 
every cent of which, and more too, is applied 
directly to the purposes intended. But we count 



all our private, personal means as the Lord's: 
hence the expression, "the Lord's money." 

When starting out we had specially three objects 
in view: (1) A study of the social conditions 
of Europe with a view to an unbiased 
judgment as to how soon the trouble which 
God's Word predicts may be expected there. 
(2) While so far on the journey we wanted to 
see Palestine and to judge of the fulfilments of 
prophecy and the prospects for the restitution 
work beginning among the Jews, and to meet 
and confer with our Jewish Brother Rabinowitch 
with reference to that phase of the harvest 
work which involves the Jewish question, so that 
these two parts of the work may proceed in yet 

R1333 : page 148 

closer sympathy. (3) While serving these main 
objects we proposed meeting and conferring 
with some of the TOWER readers and workers 
abroad, and from observation throughout the 
entire journey we hoped to see perhaps some 
way of forwarding the spread of the Truth, at 
least to some extent, in Europe. 

But the last and the least of our objects, in 
going on this mission, has turned out to be the 
first and uppermost one in our hearts. Therefore 
this must be the first feature of our report 
to you, viz., the openings and prospects we 
found for the spreading of the harvest truth 
among the Lord's sheep in Europe. 

It did not require long to convince us that 
we had underestimated the intelligence and religious 
fervor of God's people across the deep, 
especially in England, Ireland, Scotland, Norway, 
Sweden and Denmark. As your eyes we 
soon began to study how those members of the 
body of Christ, here, who have been so greatly 
blessed of the Lord by a knowledge of his 
gracious plans (present and future), could assist 
and bless and set free into the same glorious 
light of truth any of the fellow members of the 
same body in "the old world." The Lord 
seemed to say to us, "Lift up your eyes and see, 
for the fields are white for harvesting"— ready 
for the sickle of present truth. 

And now as your eyes we have this report to 
make as to the ripeness of the fields for your 
services and ours as co-reapers with the great 
Reaper in the present gathering of the ripe 
wheat into the great garner of safety, separate 
from the world and the tares and out of the fiery 
troubles which will shortly overwhelm them. 

We saw no opening or readiness for the truth 
in Russia, except on the part of Brother Rabinowitch 



and the Jews whom he is seeking to 
reach. We saw nothing to encourage us to 
hope for any harvest in Italy or Turkey or Austria 
or Germany. The Germans as a people seem 
to have had vital godliness and faith in the Bible 
almost wholly crushed out, and nearly all of the 
intelligent among them are at best moralists 
who reject the Scriptures except in so far as 
they imperfectly express their ideas of right, 
wrong, etc. The majority of Russians and 
Austrians seem to be immersed in superstitious 
formalism, into which intelligent appreciation 
of God and his Word does not seem to enter. 
The Italians have been so long under the baneful 
influence of the Papacy that they, like the 
French, are rapidly turning to open infidelity, 
although many still are blinded by gross Romish 
superstition. 

But Norway, Sweden, Denmark, Switzerland, 
and especially England, Ireland and Scotland, 
are fields ready and waiting to be harvested. 
These fields seem to be crying out, Come over 
and help us! and we know of no more hopeful 
parts in which to thrust in the sickle and reap: 
no, not even in this our favored land of liberty. 
In all of these countries there are hearts hungry 
for the truth and many evidently consecrated 
to the Lord and anxious to prove their devotion 
to him by engaging in what they severally conceive 
to be his work. 

The Salvation Army is engaging the services 
of many of these, and is indeed doing a great 
work in its special line. By self-sacrificing 
methods they are continually planning and laboring 
to lift up the fallen and the degraded, and 
encouraging and assisting them to lead a better 
life. This, like every other humanitarian scheme, 
is a good work; and were we not aware of the 
better plans and ways and means which God 
has arranged for the lifting up and blessing of 
the world, such humanitarian works would have 
a large claim upon us. But we bear in mind 
that the harvest of the age is come and that the 
harvest work of thrusting in the sickle of present 
truth and gathering the elect from the four winds 
(from every quarter of the field) and from one 
end of heaven (the nominal Christian Church) 
to the other (Matt. 24:31) is the seasonable 
work of the truly enlightened now— the Lord's 
work and hence the work of his co-laborers. 

In Great Britain many earnest souls are 
preaching Christ on the street corners without 
waiting for the laying on of clerical hands. 
True, their zeal is coupled with very little knowledge 
of the truth, but their disposition to serve 
the Master is very manifest; and the attentive 



and respectful crowds of orderly, thoughtful 
looking people that gather about them indicate a 
desire on the part of the multitudes for the 
true bread of life. Among thinking Christians 

R1333 : page 149 

there is, too, a growing dissatisfaction with the 
sectarian forms of godliness which so lack its 
vital power, and there is a longing and a reaching 
out for something better. 

In Norway and Sweden there is also a great 
awakening and a growing revulsion against the 
established (Lutheran) church. The Swedes and 
Norwegians are serious, reverent, thoughtful 
people, and many among them are coming to 
realize that it is one thing to be born into the 
nominal Church and quite another to be a true 
Christian, a member of the one true Church 
whose names are written in heaven. But while 
many there are out and coming out of the old so-called 
orthodox ruts and systems and searching 
the Scriptures independently, without sectarian 
names, calling their meetings "Missions," the 
adversary is even there busily seeking to infuse 
pernicious doctrines of error, so that a general 
sifting process is going on among them as 
among us. And there, as here, chief among 
these false doctrines are those which in a very 
subtle manner deny the rock foundation of 
all true faith, viz.: the Ransom— that we were 
bought with a price, even the precious blood of 
Christ. A Mr. Waldstrom is one of the most 
active teachers on this line among them, while 
others strenuously oppose the error and are seeking 
for the old paths of the Lord and the apostles. 
The Danes, too, are in a similar attitude. 

While other parts of Europe have their claims 
upon the gospel, and while the Lord has in all 
probability some precious saints scattered here 
and there all over the world, we surely have 
reason to hope for a larger ingathering from 
these portions of the foreign field than from 
any other. 

And now the question forces itself upon us— 
What can we, who have been so highly favored, 
do for the precious saints abroad? How shall 
we thrust the sickle into these ripened fields? 
How can we bind up the broken-hearted and 
pour in the oil and wine of the Truth? What 
privileges of labor and self-denial will the dear 
Master be pleased to accord to us and to bless, 
for the gathering of his sheep to the green pastures 
and still, refreshing waters of his Word, 
away from the befouled streams of human tradition 
and speculation? 



In the first place, we see the great necessity 
for the translation of these harvest truths into 
the various European languages. The French 
translation of MILLENNIAL DAWN, now under 
way, will serve a good purpose all over Europe, 
as French is very generally understood and 
spoken everywhere, even among many of the 
common people. The German translation already 
completed for Volumes I. and II. is available 
for Germans wherever an interest can be 
awakened, though we can have little hope to 
find any considerable number of the elect in 
the midst of a nation so given up to pleasure 
seeking, beer drinking, military zeal and ambition, 
and where vital godliness has been almost 
crushed out by a cold, formal, state religion. 
The English edition will of course answer for 
England, Ireland, Scotland and for many in 
Wales, as well as for the United States and 
Canada, and for English speaking people scattered 
throughout the world. But there is a 
great need for a Swedish translation and also a 
translation which would serve both the Danes 
and the Norwegians, not only in their native 

R1334 : page 149 

lands, but here in the United States also; for, 
as perhaps few realize, these nationalities have 
millions of representatives here in our midst. 

As yet we see no way open for this part of 
the work, but it is at least our privilege to pray 
the Lord of the harvest not only to send more 
laborers into his vineyard, but also to provide 
what he may deem the necessary equipment for 
the work. We are, however, looking for and 
arranging with persons competent to do the 
work of translating, so that when it shall please 
the Lord to indicate the way or to supply the 
means this work may be expedited accordingly; 
for the Swedish tract is already stirring up considerable 
interest. 

Observation and conference with the saints 
in England, Ireland and Scotland indicate that 
one hindrance to a more rapid spread of the 
truth there is the inability of the interested to 
purchase as many tracts as could be circulated 
to advantage. In all the large cities great freedom 
and often protection from the police is 
granted for holding open air meetings; and on 
Sunday evenings especially, crowds gather and 
discuss religious and socialistic subjects from 

R1334:page 150 

various standpoints— many evidently being dissatisfied 



and truth-hungry. Besides these there 

are Mission and Salvation Army meetings in 

progress, in perhaps twenty places at once, in 

each large city. These afford excellent opportunities 

for the Truth— superior indeed to anything 

of the same sort in this land. The 

Brethren and Sisters there realize these to be 

excellent fields for tracts explanatory of the 

truth, and could judiciously circulate thousands 

more than they have the means to purchase; 

for there, as here, the deeply interested number 

few of the great and rich. 

We left them with the assurance that we saw 
this need and would do what we could to overcome 
the difficulty as the Lord would lead and 
grant the means for us to supply their need. 

We found a number of the friends anxious, 
too, to use their time and energy in the colporteur 
work— selling DAWN. They had learned 
how God has been greatly blessing and using 
this method for reaching many here with the 
truth, and they were anxious to be sharers 
in a similar work of self-denial for the sake 
of the Lord, his truth and his people around 
them. 

They pointed out that a depot for DAWN in 
London was almost a necessity to the work, as 
at present it required nearly a month to get a 
supply of books after they had taken the orders. 
Some, too, assured us that they longed to give 
themselves in this work, but that family obligations 
hindered them, as by it they could not 
earn enough to support their dependent ones, 
even though our recent allowance is admittedly 
liberal. This same difficulty has been encountered, 
too, by many here in America where 
money is less scarce and the sales and incomes 
consequently larger proportionately. 

To overcome the first of these difficulties, we 
made arrangements for a London edition of 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, which, as soon as ready, will 
be duly announced in these columns. And regarding 
the second difficulty we will hope and 
pray that the way may yet open wide enough 
to permit all those to go into the service who 
are now hindered by financial necessities only, 
and whose hearts are filled to overflowing with 
an earnest desire to go forth and reap. 

Among other things we realized the necessity 
for some tracts still different from those already 
published— for The Skeptical Christian, 
for The Consecrated Christian, and one showing 
plainly The One True Church. These ideas 
we will endeavor to put into shape during the 
coming year, as issues of our Old Theology 
Quarterly. We will also get out a new small 



tract corresponding somewhat to the present 
Arp-slip. The latter will be much less costly 
than the others, and may be given away more 
promiscuously, whilst the larger tracts should 
be given only where there is some reason to 
suppose that they will be appreciated. 

Every opportunity for serving the Lord by 
the spread of his Truth means (during this age 
when evil abounds) an opportunity for self-sacrifice 
on the part of his consecrated ones. 
Our Master intends it to be so, because he would 
prove both to himself and to us the sincerity 
of our love. We may think that we love him 
and his Word more than we really do; and these 
opportunities, as they come, serve to show us our 
real attitude— the real depth of our love. And 
those whose hearts are really and fully consecrated, 
if they find a wincing of the flesh when 
an opportunity for sacrifice offers, will be put 
on guard thereby to see that their human will, 
pride, love of self and ease, etc., are more fully 
crucified— to the death. 

Ah! says some one, I have consecrated all to 
the Lord, and would gladly give both time and 
means in his service, but the necessities of this 
life absorb almost all of both, in caring for 
those dependent on me. I wish that I could 
see some way of attesting my love. The "servants" 
under the Law were commanded to give 
a tenth of their increase in the Lord's service, 
and I, a "son" made free from Law, and shown 
the realities of the divine plan, which the "servants" 
saw only dimly in types, feel a desire to 
do more and not less than they. But how to 
do it I find not: there are so many demands 
for every spare hour and every spare dollar. 

To such we believe that the Lord would have 
us deliver the following message which others 
will please not read:— 

Your difficulty lies in trying to do too much 
—more than you have ability to do— and in 

R1334:page 151 

overlooking the little things which are within 
your ability. You would love to preach the 
truth to great audiences with a thrilling "silver 
tongue," but have you such a talent? If not 
you had better begin humbly at home, and in 
a simple, quiet way tell the story of redeeming 
love to such of your family and neighbors 
as are "meek" and have "an ear to hear." 
It is to him who uses faithfully the talents which 
he has that the Lord promises to give greater 
talents and opportunities. Or perhaps, more 
humbly, you aspire to be the most successful 



colporteur or tract distributor— to sell and distribute 
thousands over vast extents— but cannot. 
Then turn and see how faithful you have been 
or can be in the use of opportunities which lie 
just at your hand on a smaller, humbler scale- 
humility may be one of your most needed lessons. 
Or perhaps you are saying, Would that 
I had thousands or millions of dollars, how 
gladly would I spend them in spreading the 
truth. 

You perhaps forget for the moment the great 
Master's remark (Luke 21:2-4), that the poor 
widow's two mites were more in his sight than 
the large bequests made by those who merely 
gave out of their abundance. "The Lord your 
God doth prove you," whether ye do love him 
and his truth supremely; and therefore he permits 
his work often to seem to lag for want of 
means, that the seeming necessity may give us 
the opportunity to deny ourselves in his service 
—for our benefit, our development, our blessing. 
(2 Cor. 8:1-15; 9:5-12.) Many who find 
the spirit willing but the flesh weak forget that 
God's Word takes cognizance of this, and marks 
out a straight path for our weak feet by admonishing 
those who would show their love in this 
way not to tempt themselves, but to adopt a 
regular habit of laying aside, on the first day of 
each week, whatever amount they feel disposed 
to give— according as the Lord hath prospered 
them during the preceding week. (1 Cor. 16:2.) 
How carefully God has provided for 
our guidance upon every subject: The Word 
of God is profitable that the man of God may 
be thoroughly furnished unto all good works." 
-2 Tim. 3:17. 



R1334:page 151 

FURTHER COMPLICATIONS FOR PRESBYTERIANISM. 



Every day may be said to furnish fresh disclosures 
proving the lack of sincerity of ministers 
prominent in various denominations— lack 
of honesty upon questions of doctrine. Their 
hearts are larger than their heads, but their love 
of popularity and a good living proves stronger 
than their conscientiousness toward either God 
or their denominations. 

The following dispatch to the public press 
explains itself: 

NEW YORK, Oct. 17. -"There is some agitation 



in store for President Patton, of Princeton, 
growing out of a speech he delivered to the 
Philadelphia society of Princeton college, on 
March 31, 1887. 

"During that year the controversy at Andover, 
on the question of future probation, was 
agitating the whole religious world. Dr. Patton, 
then professor of ethics in the college, as 
well as in the seminary, was invited by the students 
of the former institution to give an address 
on the subject in Murray hall, Philadelphia. 
A large audience listened to him with the deepest 
interest, his views being supposed to be safe 
and final. Two members of the staff of the 
Philadelphia Magazine, one of them a stenographer, 
reported the speech with care. At 
the request of a member of the faculty, the 
venerable Dr. Duffield, who deemed the address 
'very broad,' one of these students waited upon 
Dr. Patton the following morning, gave him the 
proof of his address and requested his permission 
to insert it in the magazine. To his surprise 
the professor emphatically forbade using 
it, saying that 'he had spoken as Dr. Patton 
and not for the seminary,' and that 'to publish 
his remarks would injure the seminary.' 

"Here is an extract from the Philadelphia 
address: 'We continually see men going into 
the other world imperfect; they must be imperfect 
when they reach there, and need some 
time for restoration or change. 

R1335 :page 151 

'"I am pretty sure that there is no doctrine 
that is put in jeopardy by the simple affirmation 
of this belief,' i.e., future probation. 

"The Presbyterian situation has been curiously 
complicated the last two days, first, by the 
discovery that Prof. Patton, president, of Princeton 

R1335 :page 152 

college, the rival of the Union Theological 
Seminary, and the leader of the anti-Briggs 
forces in the church, privately holds very much 
the same views as Briggs himself in regard to 
the doctrine of probation for the wicked after 
death. The second is that Dr. Hall, a celebrated 
Presbyterian divine of New York, and a 
trustee of the Union seminary, has resigned, 
because, while he did not fear being prosecuted, 
he was afraid to oppose the general 
sentiment." 



At the time of its proposal we pointed out 
sundry incongruities between the portions of 
the Presbyterian Confession of Faith proposed 
to be retained and the amended or altered 
words and sections. We showed that the parts 
of the same Confession thus amended would 
contradict each other. It seems that Presbyterian 
ministers are gradually reaching this conclusion, 
and present prospects are that the revision 
suggested will be rejected. However, 
all are more than ever dissatisfied with the old 
Confession and the result will probably be an 
entirely new Confession. The end is not yet. 



R1338:page 152 
LIVING FOR JESUS. 



"Living for Jesus day by day, 
Following just as he leads the way, 
Never a choice in great or small, 
Doing his will, and that is all. 

"Living for Jesus! All the while 

Hiding the tear with song and smile. 

The world could not feel if it knew the smart, 

And Jesus will comfort the sorrowing heart. 

"Living for Jesus everywhere! 

Dropping a seed both here and there; 

No care for the fruit that will surely come, 

For the Master will gather the harvest home. 

"Living for Jesus in pleasure or pain, 

Joy or sorrow, sunshine or rain! 

Culling rare flowers from the bitter and sweet, 

Learning great lessons the while at his feet. 

"Living for Jesus! Just little things 

In our daily life may take the wings 

Of messengers, swift and strong and brave, 

And— God only knows— a soul may save. 

"Living for Jesus! Living, not dead, 
Drawing rich life from the Fountain-head! 
Quietly watering, though unseen, 
Many a life from the Living Stream. 

"Living in Jesus! Abiding in him, 

His life, peace and rest, atonement for sin— 

All mine in their fulness and richness, replete 



With the joys of the Spirit— the Comforter sweet. 

"Such may life be, O glorious Son! 
Mystical union here begun— 
One with the Father, the Spirit and Thee, 
Living through time and eternity." —Selected. 



R1335 :page 152 

RUSSIA'S CHASTISEMENT. 



Recent dispatches state that a conservative 
estimate of the number of persons in need of 
relief in the famished districts of Russia would 
be 13,000,000; and that diseases superinduced 
by the scantiness of food and by the wretched 
substitute called "hunger-bread," composed 
largely of straw, bran, sweepings, etc., are becoming 
epidemic in some districts. Notwithstanding 
this deplorable condition and the laws 
prohibiting the exportation of grain, thirty-five 
millions more pounds of rye have been exported 
than last year— the attraction being the higher 
prices offered elsewhere. To add to the trouble, 
an unusually severe winter is threatened. 

The New York Times published, Oct. 25th, the 
following dark outlook, written by its London 
correspondent. We hope, nay, we believe, that 
this picture is far too dark— that the facts fall far 
short of the suggestion. It nevertheless gives 
an idea of what is possible. When the great 
trouble does come, we believe it will generally 
be introduced by famine. This at least points 
out possibilities not only for Russia but for the 
world. Starvation will awaken and energize 
people whom nothing else would arouse. The 
article runs as follows: 

"Winter began in Russia on Thursday with 
the first sharp frost. Living men cannot remember 

R1335 :page 153 

any other year in which this simple announcement 

meant what it does now. There 

are literally millions of human beings, at the 

farthest within a six-days' journey of London, to 

whom this frost comes as a sentence of death by 

starvation. Although the censors have forbidden 

the Russian papers to discuss the famine, 

the Novosti ventures the declaration that 20,000,000 

creatures are already without food, and 

that a sum four times greater than the recent 



loan extracted from France is needed to keep 
them alive. 

"Needless to say, no such sum is forthcoming. 
Indeed, in the matter of intelligent relief, 
nothing is forthcoming. Vague figures are given 
of money raised for the sufferers, quite often 
by eccentric emotional devices of self-denial, 
which show the warm-hearted childishness of 
the Slav, but nobody is able to tell how this 
money has been applied. The only intelligence 
which reaches us from the doomed districts is 
of the famine prices put everywhere upon food 
by the Russian merchants, and of Russian usurers 
and small traders who are going about trading 
on the misery of the peasants, buying hair 
from the heads of poor girls for a few shillings 
and stripping houses of every portable article, 
old icons and picturesque costumes handed 
down from mother to daughter, and the like, 
for next to nothing. 

RIOTS AGAINST THE JEWS. 

"In two or three cases the ferment of disorder 
which is seething under this terrible surface has 
broken out in riots directed against the Jews. 
Doubtless there will be more than melancholy 
aggravations of Israel's miseries during the winter 
in localities where a few bad Jews, or the 
even rarer rich Jews, have given the race an 
evil repute. But I risk nothing in predicting 
that if real and widespread violence results from 
the present famine; its force will be almost wholly 
directed against the native Russian officials, 
landlords, traders and village usurers, or Kulaks, 
to whom the peasants, as a rule, understand 
very well that they owe their sufferings. 

"Russian exiles here in London are greatly 
excited by the news they have been getting in 
the recent few weeks from subterranean sources 
inside the empire and from their associates in 
Switzerland and other Continental places of refuge. 
They decline to divulge this information, 
and the few things which have been told to me 
may not be printed, but it can at least be said 
that they expect little less than civil war spreading 
over vast tracts and whole regions of their 
native land. They say frankly that we outsiders 
exaggerate the good nature of the Moujik, 
or, rather, that side by side with that amiability 
in his nature exist possibilities of awful brute-like 
ferocity when the utmost limit of patience 
under provocation is exhausted. They think 
this has been reached, and they say the condition 
of seven-eighths of rural Russia is now infinitely 
worse than that of rustic France on the 



eve of the revolution. They look to see a Muscovite 

reign of terror begun this winter which 

will well-nigh efface from human memory the excesses 

and horrors begun by the fall of the Bastile. 

There are not lacking signs that this may 

be ushered in by striking personal events." 



R1337 : page 153 

FARMERS ALLIANCE CIRCULARS. 



A reader writes us objecting to Bro. Wright's 
statement with reference to the Farmers' Alliance 
and to a circular issued by them and sent 
throughout the country advising all to hold 
on to their grain for higher prices, etc. This 
brother advises us that he is a member of the 
Alliance, and assures us that nothing of the kind 
was done officially; that although such a circular 
as Bro. Wright described had been sent 
out to some extent, it was not an official document, 
and was not circulated by the Alliance 
itself, but by private parties; that no evil is 
premeditated by the Alliance; that its members 
merely desire to secure their own rights and to 
prevent the wealth of the country from being 
absorbed by the few. He says that the unofficial 
circulars were sent out by certain well-meaning 
parties to check the enormous rush of 
wheat and to get farmers to hold their grain 
until prices advance more nearly to what they 
will undoubtedly be in the near future. He 
says in conclusion, "While I have been a 
reader of your writings for the last seven or 
eight years, and believe the universal revolution 
is no great way off, yet I fail to see in this farmers' 
movement, to which Bro. Wright refers, 
much evidence of the great trouble." 

In reply we would say that we do not understand 
Bro. Wright's article to be specially intended 
as a reflection against the Farmers' Alliance, 
but merely a calling of attention to this 
as one of the signs of our times. That the 

R1337:page 154 

farmers are not actuated by any bad motives in 
their combination we do not question, nor do 
we think that other persons who combine, either 
capitalists or mechanics, have bad motives in so 
doing. Each class organizes because it considers 
organization a necessity to preserve what 



it considers to be its rights and best interests. 
The speculator who creates a corner in 
wheat, corn or pork has no ill-will toward the 
rest of humanity— no desire to run up the prices 
of the necessities of life upon the poor— but 
merely desires to conserve the interests of himself, 
his business partners and his family. And 
so with most people who make combines: it is 
not that they hate or desire to injure their 
fellow-men, but that they love themselves and 
their own interests more. 

We do not even say that it is wrong for the 
Farmers' Alliance to suggest to its members 
that they be not in haste to sell their crops for 
too small a sum, but that they seek to hold 
them for a period of greater demand and higher 
prices. We consider this to be entirely their 
privilege, and that in not crowding the market 
with more grain than it is ready to absorb at 
the present time, they would be merely taking 
the proper steps for getting a good market value 
for the produce of their labor. The point to 
be noticed, however, and the one which we presume 
Bro. Wright wished to impress, is that the 
farmers of the country, having organized themselves, 
are beginning to realize what a power 
they have in their hands, and in proportion as 
they come to a realization of this power they 
will be a more formidable party to deal with, 
and under the impression which seems to affect 
so many people of all classes, that "might 
makes right," they will be very apt, sooner or 
later, to come to an extreme in using their 
power, and then the Lord's consecrated people 
among them will surely have trouble to keep 
their conscience clear on the one hand, and to 
remain in the society on the other. 

Certain it is that the work of binding in 
bundles is progressing very rapidly throughout 
Christendom in general, and by-and-by the fire 
of social trouble which our Lord predicted will 
surely be seen. Our advice to all who are fully 
consecrated is, "So far as lieth in you, live 
peaceably with all men." If possible, "Be not 
entangled again in any yoke of bondage." "If 
the Son make you free, ye shall be free indeed." 



R1335 :page 154 

THE BLOOD OF JESUS. 



"For we have not a High Priest unable to sympathize 



with our weaknesses; but one having been tried in all 
respects like ourselves, apart from sin."— Heb. 4:15— 
Diaglott. 

The Apostle Paul here brings clearly to view 
the effect of the Lord's suffering, the just for 
the unjust (1 Pet. 3:18), in qualifying him for 
his work as Mediator, High Priest and Leader. 
(Heb. 2:10; 5:9; 3:1; 5:5,3; 2:17; 6:20; 
8:1; 9:11; 10:21; 8:6; 9:15; 12:24; 
1 Tim. 2:5.) Having met trials and temptations 
of all kinds, apart from those arising through 
sin, he is able, as well as willing, to succor those 
who are tried, but who are not in affiliation with 
sin, and who come in meekness, and yet in boldness, 
to him. (Heb. 2: 18; 4: 16.) What a 
source of comfort and joy it is to realize that 
our Master knows the power of evil by experience, 
and so can fully sympathize through 
knowledge in all our temptations. And what 
added security we feel when we realize that he 
who is our strength was able to, and did resist 
unto blood (Heb. 12:4), laying down his life, 
shedding his blood— dying— rather than to partake 
of sin. What love of righteousness and 
hatred of wickedness!— Psa. 45:6,7; 
Heb. 1:8,9. 

In these last days, when evil men and seducers 
are waxing worse and worse, deceiving and 
being deceived (2 Tim. 3:1,13), those who are 
not ignorant of Satan's ways expect, and find, 
more subtle snares than ever before laid to entrap 
them; and, as ever, the Arch Enemy, and his 
servants— whether wilful or ignorant— in this 
work are presenting themselves as angels of 
light (2 Cor. 11:1-15). Of course, the main 
attack is on the ransom, by which "the man 
Christ Jesus" bought us with his own precious 

R1335 :page 155 

blood, shed on Calvary, as "of a lamb without 

blemish and without spot." (1 Pet. 1:19; 1 Tim. 2:5.) 

So we find Peter's prophecy of false 

teachers mingling among the saints and privately 

introducing destructive heresies, even 

"the having bought them Sovereign Lord denying" 

(2 Pet. 2:1. -Diaglott), fulfilled. And 

doubtless the work will continue and grow. 

We recently saw an article claiming that as 

"The blood is the life" (Lev. 17:11-14), "so, 

as a rule, where the blood of Christ is mentioned 

(in the Scriptures) it should be understood 

as meaning life, not death." Let us examine 

this statement in the light of the Scriptures, 

and not accept it on a mere assertion. If it 



is proven true, be thankful for more light, and 
walk in it; but if untrue, partake of the strong 
meat presented in demonstrating its fallacy and 
be strengthened thereby to resist further attacks 
of the enemy. 

We find the Lord's blood first mentioned by 
the Master himself, in Matthew 26:28, where 
he says, "This is my blood of the new testament, 
which is shed for many for remission of 
sins." Next, in Matthew 27:4, Judas says, "I 
have sinned in that I have betrayed innocent 
blood." Through him "innocent blood" was 
betrayed to death. After Judas had suicided, 
having first thrown the price of the betrayal 
into the temple, the chief priests could not put 
the money in the treasury, as it was the "price 
of blood" shed, or death. (Matt. 27:6.) 
Pilate proclaimed himself "innocent of the 
blood" (shed) or death "of this just person," 
which the people then called down on them 
and their children. (Matt. 27:24,25.) The 
"blood of the new testament... shed for 
many" (Mark 14:24; Luke 22:20) plainly 
presents Christ's death as the means through 
which he gained ability to benefit many. 

R1336:page 155 

The blood mentioned in Acts 5:28, and 
which the Sanhedrin feared, was blood shed, as 
evidenced by verse 30 of the same chapter; and 
Paul's reference to Christ's blood in Acts 20:28 
clearly points to his death, as that was the 
price given for the "Church of God," and also 
for the whole world. (See also 1 John 2:2.) 
Paul says in Rom. 3:24-25 that justification is 
given "freely by his [God's] grace, through the 
redemption that is in Christ Jesus, whom God 
hath set forth to be a propitiation [satisfaction] 
through faith in his blood, to declare his [Jehovah's] 
righteousness for the remission of sins 
that are past." (See also Eph. 1:7.) The Scriptural 
explanation of the "redemption that is in 
Christ" will explain what signification attaches 
to "blood" in this text. In Matt. 20:28, 
the Lord himself settles this by saying that the 
"Son of man came. ..to give his life a ransom 
[the redemptive price] for many." Here 
again, then, "blood" means blood given, blood 
shed, or death. In Rom. 5:9, the statement 
is made that "being now justified by his blood, 
we shall be saved from wrath through him;" 
and the preceding verse explains that "while 
we were yet sinners, Christ died for us." Thus 
again "blood" refers to blood shed as the 
evidence of death. The "communion of the 



blood of Christ" (1 Cor. 10:16) is explained in 

Matt. 26:28 as "the blood of the new testament 

[covenant], which is shed for many for the remission 

of sins," and 1 Cor. 11:25,26 shows 

that in drinking this cup of the new covenant 

we show forth the Lord's death till he come; and 

the context clearly shows that those eating and 

drinking unworthily are guilty of the body 

broken and the blood shed, viz., the death of 

the Lord. The "blood of Christ," bringing 

the Gentiles near to God and his promises, 

mentioned in Eph. 2:13, is explained in verses 15 and 16, 

same chapter, to be the blood of "the 

cross"— shed blood— death. The "blood" mentioned 

in Col. 1:14, being redemptive blood, 

is also explained by Matt. 20:28, and in Col. 1:20 

it is emphasised as the "blood of his 

cross"— death. In Heb. 9:14, we learn that 

the "blood of Christ," who offered himself 

"without spot to God," will purge our consciences 

from "dead works to serve the living 

God," and verses 11,12 and 13, same chapter, 

show that this offering of Christ to God was by 

the shedding of his own blood— death— typed 

for centuries in the Tabernacle services of the 

Jews, by the sacrifice of bulls and goats. 

The 9th and 10th chapters of Hebrews bear 
unwavering testimony to the efficacy of Christ's 
shed blood— death— as man's substitute, to bear 
the sins of many— the world— as a careful reading 

R1336:page 156 

of them will plainly show. Again, Hebrews 13:11,12 

says, "The bodies of those beasts 

whose blood is brought into the sanctuary by 

the high priests for sin are burned without the 

camp. Wherefore, Jesus also, that he might 

sanctify the people with his blood, suffered 

without the gate;" on the cross, shedding his 

blood— entering death. The "blood of the 

everlasting covenant," mentioned in verse 20, 

this chapter, is the same shed blood, causing 

death, from which God brought the "Great 

Shepherd." The "blood of sprinkling," mentioned 

in 1 Pet. 1:2 and Heb. 12:24, is clearly 

the blood of "Jesus, the Mediator of the 

New Covenant," explained fully in Matt. 26:28, 

as "shed for many;" in other words, the 

evidenced death. "The precious blood of 

Christ" mentioned in 1 Pet. 1:18-21 as redeeming, 

was blood shed as that of a "lamb 

without spot," as typed throughout the Jewish 

age. And the beloved disciple John joins 

in the grand song testifying that "the blood of 

Jesus Christ, his Son [the blood shed on Calvary], 



cleanseth us from all sin." (1 John 1:7.) 
The real, literal thing having existed and having 
been shed for many, the Lord explains to us in 
John 6:53-55 that to appropriate it and its 
merits to ourselves, we must acknowledge our 
own helpless and hopeless condition, and rely 
wholly on him and his work for us, thus appropriating 
or figuratively eating his body and 
drinking his blood, or there will be no life in 
us. As fleshly Israel gained a standing before 
God through the typical broken body and shed 
blood of bullocks and lambs, so we obtain 
"liberty to become sons of God" (John 1:12) 
in the merit of the sacrifice of our Redeemer. 

These texts include all places in the New Testament, 
exclusive of Revelation, where Christ's 
blood is mentioned; and thus we learn that in 
every instance it refers directly to the blood 
shed, which was given "upon the altar [shed] 
to make an atonement for.. .souls." (Lev. 17:10-14.) 
Hence we find that the statement 
that, "as a rule, where the blood of Christ is 
mentioned in the Scriptures it should be understood 
as meaning life, not death," is wholly 
without Bible support, being simply the baseless 
assumption of a theorist, which, as we 
proceed, we will see is made to do service to set 
forth Christ's blood as a common, unholy or 
unclean thing. And all who would be true to 
the Lord will beware of any sophistry which 
leads to this fearful apostasy of counting the 
blood of the Covenant wherewith they were 
sanctified an unholy thing— of no more value 
than the blood of any member of the condemned 
race.-Heb. 10:29. 

By comparing spiritual things with spiritual 
(1 Cor. 2:13), we gain a true understanding 
both of type and antitype, and learn that those 
not understanding the Lord's work, and those 
understanding but perverting it, cannot appropriate 
it, but remain in their sins. Yet, thank 
God, the former will have a "due time" to 
learn of and appropriate the good tidings in 
Jesus, and escape all evil, if they will. So 
Christ, the Redeemer and hence the proper 
ruler or "head of every man," will in the times 
of restitution give each man full knowledge and 
ability to come unto him, and only those who 
will "not have this man rule over them," who 
will not obey him, shall be cut off— die the 
second death. We also know from Heb. 6:4-8 
and 10:26-31 that during the Gospel age 
God will "judge his people," and that only 
those who "wilfully sin" after they "have received 
the knowledge of the truth" can "tread 
under foot the Son of God," and "count the 



blood of the covenant wherewith" they "are 
sanctified an unholy thing," and thereby "fall 
into the hands of the living God," who is a 
consuming fire to any who claim his gift of life, 
outside of his appointed way— through Christ 
the Redeemer. 

The death of Jesus— his shed blood— was 
paid to God's exact justice for the debt incurred 
by Adam in his wilful sin, and now 
Adam and all in his loins when he sinned— the 
entire human race— belong to him who redeemed 
them; and when the work of "taking 
out a people for his name" is ended, the highway 
of holiness will be opened up and the redeemed 
of the Lord will walk in it, until all shall 
know the Lord from the least even unto the 
greatest. 

Pending this time those who understand 
Christ's mission and its various phases can consecrate 

R1336:page 157 

to God in him, and become Christians 

—Christ's followers— learn the "fellowship of 

his suffering" and become "conformable unto 

his death." Others may make claims and criticise 

unsparingly the saints who refuse to fellowship 

as Christians with those denying "the having-bought-them 

Sovereign Lord," but the injunction 

to have "no fellowship with the 

unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove 

them" (Eph. 5:11) is plain. Besides, the loyal 

bond-servant, who willingly and gladly enters 

the service of the one having bought him, has 

no basis for fellowship with one who denies that 

the price paid— the ransom, the blood shed, or 

death— has any merit, and who counts the 

"blood of the Covenant" an ordinary or "unholy 

thing." We find ourselves out of harmony 

with such teachings and without basis for fellowship 

with the teachers and holders of such false 

doctrine. 

A few moments study of the Bible, with a 
Concordance as a guide, will convince any one 
that the animal used as a typical sacrifice represented 
the man Christ Jesus, who redeemed 
us with his "precious blood. ..as of a lamb 
without blemish and without spot," by the sacrifice 
of himself and not by having a sinful 
nature and overcoming it— which could not in 
any sense redeem Adam or any of his condemned 
posterity. To support this false theory 
and to offset the scores of plain Scriptural statements 
to the contrary, the poor translation of 
Rom. 8:3 is made to do service. A literal 
translation would read, "God, sending his own 



son in the likeness of the flesh of sin [by a 

sacrifice for sin], condemned sin in the flesh." 

Then again, by artful adulteration, 2 Cor. 5:21 

is made to represent a sinner, instead of a sin-offering 

Read the Diaglott rendition and foot 

note, for full explanation. Besides, the text and 

context in the king James version (especially 

verses 14 and 15) show plainly that Jesus was 

made a sin-offering for us, and not a sinner 

or sin. 

Trusting in him who "knew no sin" and who 
as our substitute suffered death, the "just for the 
unjust, that he might bring us to God" (1 Pet. 3:18), 
and in his precious blood shed for many 
for the remission of sins, we will surely escape 
the "snare of the fowler," and continue to 
abide in "the secret place of the Most High." 
-Psa. 91. 

Injustice, our place was in unending death, 
the wages of sin. But for our substitute, "the man 
Christ Jesus," there could have been no escape: 
to be our Redeemer, this and no less was the 
price; yet it pleased God to lay on him the iniquity 
of us all (Isa. 53:4-10), and he obediently 
consented to the plan. (John 10:17,18.) 
He does not, and never again will, exist as the 
man Christ Jesus (2 Cor. 5:16,17): he is now 
the "express image" of the Father's "person," 
being "made so much better than the angels, 
as he hath by inheritance obtained a more excellent 
name than they." (Heb. 1:3,4; 2:6,7.) 
Having laid aside the glory which he 
had with the Father before the world began, 
where he existed in the form of a God (a mighty 

R1337:page 157 

one), and having taken the form of a servant 
(an inferior one) in which he suffered death, it 
pleased the Father to raise him from the dead 
and give him that grand name (nature) which 
is above every name. (Phil. 2:6-11. See also 
Heb. 10:5 regarding the inferior one). Thus 
the human nature remains forever dead, and 
mankind, having a substitute in death, can justly 
be brought forth from death, and will be, 
in due time— the Millennial or Restitution Age; 
and only those who then fail to obey the 
Great Prophet, then ruling, shall be cut off from 
among the people. (Acts 3:19-23.) Owning by 
purchase the issues or escapes from death, he will 
daily load the obedient with benefits, only wounding 
the head of his enemies— those who still go 
on in their trespasses.— Psa. 68:20,19,21. 

Praise God for such a full and free salvation, 
which in due time shall be witnessed to every 



individual, to equip them for a full escape 
from death. To the overcoming saints of the 
Gospel age, who follow the Lamb whithersoever 
he goeth, are given the exceeding great and precious 
promises, whereby they may, in their due 
time, become partakers in full of the divine 
nature. --1 Tim. 2:4-6; 4:10; 2 Pet. 1:4. 
W. E. PAGE. 
[The strength of the error lies in the fact that 
many who trust in the "precious blood" have 
never philosophized on the subject sufficiently 
to see that blood (shed) always represents death, 
a life given up.— EDITOR.] 



R1337:page 158 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 



Among the interesting letters in the TOWER 
this month, we insert a few of the many received 
while abroad and since our return to America, 
expressing the interest of the scattered household 
of faith in the object and results of our 
journey. And as time will not permit a personal 
answer to the many kind congratulations on 
our safe return and expressions of interest in, 
and prayer for, the prosperity of our mission, 
we take this opportunity to thank you all and 
to assure you of our appreciation of your love 
and fellowship of spirit. 

During all the journey the interests of the 
great work were our constant theme and study, 
and we believe much to our profiting, while the 
expressions of interest in our personal welfare 
proved to us the deep appreciation among the 
saints of the truths which it has been our privilege 
to proclaim and the firmness of that bond 
of love which makes us all one in Christ Jesus 
and in the glorious hope set before us in the 
Gospel. 

London. 

DEAR BRO. and SISTER RUSSELL:-When I 
first heard of your presence in Europe from our 
Brother Carey, it almost took my breath away 
with surprise and joy, although we are told nothing 
is so likely to happen as the unexpected. 

I hastened at once to write to the Poste Restante, 
Berlin, hoping to intercept you before your 
return to London, to offer our house in my 
husband's and my own name, as a resting place 
while in this great town. Then on the 17th 
inst. I received a visit from Brother Babbitt, 



who gave me your letter, which graciously entrusts 
me with the arrangements of meetings, 
etc. May the Lord endow me with all needful 
wisdom for this and every other work, as also 
I ask Him to bless you both and your travels, 
feeding you for both your own and our benefit. 
To-day I have received the ZION'S WATCH TOWER 
for July, explaining the motive of your journey, 
which I sincerely trust may be realized. Brother 
Babbitt [whose acquaintance we made on our 
eastward ocean voyage] took away three copies 
of Vol. I. I felt so overflowing with the news 
of your approach, that I fear I gave him too 
strong a dose of my heart about the truth. The 
result is in the Master's hands. 

Now let me once more request you both in 
the name of my husband and self to make this 
house your home for the four days you are in 
London. Indeed, I have taken it for granted 
that you will, and by general consultation with 
brothers and sisters have therefore decided it 
best to hold the meetings in a hall close by here. 
I need not assure you that we will esteem it 
a great privilege and delight to minister in 
any way to your comfort as a small token of 
gratitude for all the spiritual benefits derived 
through you. I am told that the poorest brother 
or sister among us will gladly make holiday and 
come a distance to greet you, and the fresh 
air of this neighborhood will make a change for 
them, and they can have a walk and refreshment 
between the discourses. 

I often think it will be too wonderful should 
the Lord select me as a member of his body; 
for it seems as if every one of you were more 
worthy than myself, yet I do unfalteringly uphold 
my Father and His beloved Son in my 
heart of hearts as the supreme objects of my 
love and reverence. May they keep me faithful 
to the end and remedy all that is lacking in 
me. The bare thought of living with them 
makes me entirely confused with tears of joy 
and humility at such immense condescension 
and kindness. 

We are all longing to see you, and I for one 
keep conjuring up to my fancy your dear faces. 

Hoping this may reach you safely and wishing 
you every blessing, with Christian love, 
Your sincere sister and servant to the Master, 
Jesus Christ, ELIZABETH HORNE. 



R1338:page 158 

London. 



DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER: - 

You will be at home by this time, and I do 
trust that you are all the better, both in mind 
and body, for your visit to this country, and I 
pray God to spare your life for many years to 
come and to make you both a great blessing to 
many of our fellows, in guiding them into the 
truth. So far God is using your writings to 
open the blind eyes of very many people. These 
two last Sundays have given me proof of it in 
that so many are asking for the books. The 
other day I could have sold over twenty, but had 
only two with me. Sister Home and myself are 
being used mightily in the parks. The people 
are taking a great interest in our teaching, not 
opposing us as at first. A week ago last Sunday 
Sister Home spoke for three hours with good 
effect. You will be glad to know that we now 
have Sister Swartz to help us in the work. 
She took part last Sunday with us in the park. 

Oh! how precious to think that we are counted 
worthy to be co-workers with him and his dear 
son, Jesus Christ, and may our light so shine 

R1338:page 159 

among our fellow men that they with us may 
say, Deliverance is come, and may all who are 
loyal and true to our living Head be ambitious 
in doing all we can to let people recognize and 
accept the finished work of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, to the glory of God the Father. 

My wife and daughter join with me in Christian 
love and best wishes to you both. Believe 
me ever yours in Christ Jesus and his work, 
SAMUEL BATHER. 



Liverpool. 

DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:-Your 
letter of the 1 1th inst. to hand from Queenstown, 
from which we were pleased to learn that 
you were on your way to Palestine. Had I 
known a month earlier I should have been 
strongly tempted to join you. 

We shall be pleased to entertain you while 
in Liverpool, and if you can arrange to prolong 
your stay another week with us we would be 
glad. As to the all-day meeting on the 15th 
Sept., if agreeable to you we will undertake all 
the arrangements and write the friends we 
know in Liverpool and neighborhood, also Manchester, 
Nottingham and Sheffield. Our Mission 
Hall attached to our house, which seats 200 
people, will be convenient, and we think large 



enough, as you know that those who take an 
interest in the King and coming Kingdom are 
but a little flock. We shall be glad to carry 
out any other suggestions you may offer in order 
to make the meetings a success. 

I have just read through Vol. III. of DAWN 
with deep interest and pleasure, and thank you 
very much for the most beautiful unfolding of 
truth which it contains and which the Holy Spirit 
has revealed through you. I have for many 
years taken an interest in the Pyramid. I have 
read something of what has been written on the 
subject by Prof. Piazzi Smyth and others. 

Wishing you and Sister Russell a pleasant and 
profitable journey with a safe home-coming, 
with our united Christian love, ever yours in 
the Lord, CHARLES W. ELAM. 



page 159 



New York. 

MR. C. T. RUSSELL -On board incoming 
steamer, City of New York, Quarantine Station, 
New York Bay. 

DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL-Greeting. 
I intend to meet you at the steamer pier 
on your arrival in New York. We shall expect 
you to come directly to our home and stay with 
us while you are in the city. We have arranged 
to give a reception in your honor on 
the afternoon and evening of Wednesday, the 
23rd. Invitations have been sent to all the 
TOWER subscribers within one hundred and fifty 
miles of New York, and we have invited, in 
addition, a number of our personal friends. A 
number of letters received indicates that many 
will be present. 

Trusting that we shall see you soon, we remain, 
yours very truly, 

MR. & MRS. C. B. FAIRCHILD. 



Canada. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-We are so pleased that 
you are safely back. We are all well and rejoicing 
in the truth. We know how you will 
be pressed with work now, and will not be disappointed 
if you leave us or any communication 
to us until others, weaker in faith, have 
been attended to. Hoping you will be continually 
prospered in your grand "gospeling" 
work, we remain, Yours in Him, 

BROTHERS WEBB & UTLEY. 



Minnesota. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Yours of 30th ult. 
received and read with much pleasure. It 
seems good to know you are among us again, 
and I thank our kind Heavenly Father for his 
mercies to you and us, in returning you to your 
post of service. May your fruitfulness in all 
things abound more and more. In all this, I 
include your esteemed and beloved help-meet, 
Sister Russell. Your thoughtfulness in all your 
pressing cares to write me is especially gratifying, 
but do not again do so until every dragging 
thing is brought up. My heart is all in 
the service, and I pray that the great Husbandman 
may continue to prune me, that my fruitfulness 
may increase. Sister Page grows in 
favor and knowledge, and her mother, who is 
with us and convalescing, is listening attentively 
and seemingly with increasing interest to 
our new things, becoming thereby more firmly 
established in her trust in the ransom, which 
she accepts. 

I enclose an order for DAWNS and Tracts on 
a separate sheet, also a check for the amount. 
Hurriedly, in Christian love, W. E. PAGE. 



N. Carolina. 
DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:-No 
doubt you are in receipt of many letters of 
congratulation from the brethren on your safe 
arrival from your long and tedious, but, it is to 
be hoped, pleasant and instructive journey, 
throughout which you have been followed with 
sincere prayers for divine protection and for 
your safe return to the scenes of your labors 
amongst us, and that your lives may be spared 
to expound the mysteries of inspired revelation. 
I never can express the gratitude I feel 
that ever MILLENNIAL DAWN came under my 

page 160 

notice. It has unfolded and made plain to my 
misinformed mind (for the first time) the glorious 
contents of that Book of books, the author 
of which is God. 

I have read Vols. I. and II. through seven 
times, Vol. III. four times, and I am about to 
start again. "O the depths of the riches both 
of the wisdom and knowledge of God." 

Owing to family afflictions, I feel grieved at 



not being in a position to strike out, sickle in 
hand, into the harvest field. Yet I am endeavoring 
within my limited sphere to do a little 
work. Since my return from England I have 
sold a few volumes of DAWN, and have published 
several letters in our local paper on the great 
subjects therein contained. 

It is now between two and three years since I 
first introduced DAWN to this little town, and, I 
am thankful to say, not without some visible 
fruit. Here, as elsewhere, the opposition comes 
chiefly from interested "Babylon;" but it is 
a great consolation to know that her deleterious 
power has forever passed away, and that she 
has fallen to rise no more, a prophetic fact of 
which she seems to be in sublimed ignorance. 

My own affectionate congratulations for the 
safe return of our dear Brother and Sister to 
their home. R. MARSTON. 



New York. 

DEAR BRO. AND SR. RUSSELL:-We are glad 
to welcome you again, giving thanks, also, that 
the things for which you went abroad prospered, 
the Lord giving you to rejoice in the 
work assigned to your stewardship. 

We have remembered you in your journey, 
and rejoice in the hope of the near reunion of 
all saints to be forever with the Lord. We 
know that when the "topstone" is fitted to 
its place the glory of the Lord will fill his 
temple and the nations shall walk in the light 
of it. O! how very near that day is, and what 
a grand contrast it will be to the darkness and 
tempestuous gloom of the storm now threatening, 
and that will surely overwhelm the earth. 
Accept our heart's welcome, with a hand greeting, 
which we extend to clasp your own, over 
the mountains and rivers between. Your fellow-servants 
in the cross and hope of glory, 

DR. & MRS. A. BOWEN. 



New York. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I am one of the 
little company which met you and Mrs. Russell, 
upon your return from Europe, at Brother 
and Sister Fairchild's residence in New York. 
I have thought many times of the pleasant and 
profitable time we experienced upon that occasion, 
and I wish personally to thank you for the 
very helpful words of cheer and encouragement 
given at that time. They have been to me, at 



least, "meat in due season." The other brethren 
who were present from this city also enjoyed 
the meeting very much. 

It has been my purpose, if the Lord wills it 
so, to be present at the Anniversary Meeting in 
Allegheny next April, and now my desire to be 
there is stronger than ever. I remain yours, in 
faith and fellowship, J. A. MITCHELL. 



Brooklyn, NY. 
DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER IN CHRIST: -I 

have placed the evening I met you both on record 
as one of the happiest events in my life. 
While you were speaking to us of love my mind 
was carried back to a period, I think about eight 
years ago, while I was home in England, when 
a much-worn copy of "Food for Thinking 
Christians" came into my possession. I read 
and re-read that book and gave it a special place 
upon my bookshelf next the Bible. It has 
since been my companion in all my travels. 
While reading it my heart went out towards the 
writer with a warm love because I found that 
he not only loved his Creator and Redeemer but 
his fellow-brethren also. Love naturally begets 
love, so last night, while you were speaking, the 
text came vividly before my mind, "Whom, 
not having seen, ye love." I have been loving you 
all these years for the testimony in that pamphlet. 

Little did I think when I first read your little 
pamphlet that I should ever have the privilege 
and great pleasure of personally meeting you; 
and indeed it was not until I came down here 
from Montreal, Canada, about eighteen months 
ago, that I learned from a fellow-workman that 
you had written other works, and where they 
could be obtained. 

What a blessed thing is personal communion! 
How it strengthens and binds together the hearts 
of those who are kindred spirits! And now, dear 
Brother and Sister in the Lord, may the Lord 
of glory bless you with his fondest, sweetest 
love. Yours in Christ, E.HARRIS. 



Ohio. 
MR. C. T. RUSSELL-DEAR FRIEND: -Please 

find inclosed Post-office money order for four 

dollars and fifty cents. Will you be kind 

enough to send me three sets, of three volumes 

each, of the MILLENNIAL DAWN. I have 

enjoyed each of your books, but the last overwhelmingly. 

Your description of the Great 



Pyramid was a revelation to me. How gracious 
our Father was to confirm his written Word in 
this wonderful manner. I hope you will pray 
for me that the few remaining years of my life 
may be spent acceptably to him, being made 
white with the blood of the Lamb, our Savior. 
Yours in the truth, MRS. E. M. SNOWDEN. 



R1361 : inside back cover 

To MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, SECRETARY 
TOWER TRACT SOCIETY: 

DEAR SISTER:— I have read with interest the account of the openings for the 
TRACT and DAWN work in foreign 

lands and here at home. I need not tell you that I am deeply interested in the 
spread of the Glad Tidings of the 

lengths and breadths, the heights and depths of redeeming love expressed for us 
in God's great Plan of the Ages. 

I am anxious to use myself— every power, every talent, voice, time, money, 
influence, all— to spread to 

others this knowledge which has so greatly blessed, cheered and comforted my own 
heart and placed my feet firmly 
upon the Rock of Ages. 

I have been considering carefully and praying to be instructed how to use 
my various talents more to my 

Redeemer's glory and for the service of his people— those blinded by human 
tradition who are, nevertheless, hungering 

for "the good Word of God," and those, also, who are naked, not having on the 
wedding garment of Christ's imputed 

righteousness, the unjustified who stand at best in the filthy rags of their 
own righteousness. I have decided that so 

far as my "money talent" goes, I will follow the rule so clearly laid down 
for us by the great Apostle Paul (1 Cor. 16:2), 

and will lay aside on the first day of each week, according to my thankful 
appreciation of the Lord's blessings 

during the preceding week. Out of this fund I wish to contribute to the several 
parts of the Lord's work specified 

on the back of this letter. Of course I cannot in advance judge of or state 
particularly what the Lord's bounty may 

enable me to set apart weekly, and hence you will understand the sums put down 
to each object to be merely my 

conjecture or hope, based upon present prospects. I will endeavor to contribute 
more than I here specify; and 

should I not succeed in doing so well, the Lord will know my heart and you will 
also know of my endeavors. 

My only object in specifying in advance what I hope to be able to do in 
this cause, is to enable those in charge 

of the work of publishing and circulating the TRACTS, etc., to form estimates, 
lay plans, make contracts, etc., with 

some idea of what I will at least try to do in the exercise of this my highly 
appreciated privilege. 

Signed 



Post Office State 



(Should you approve of the plan suggested above, please cut out and sign one 
of these letters and forward as per 
directions on the other side, keeping the other for your own remembrance.) 



back cover 

SHOULD YOU APPROVE OF THE PLAN SUGGESTED ON THE OTHER SIDE, ONE OF THESE SLIPS, 
WHEN FILLED OUT, SHOULD BE 
FORWARDED TO 

The Tower Tract Society, 
ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

THE OTHER SHOULD BE PRESERVED FOR YOUR OWN REMEMBRANCE. 

Communications to the TOWER PUBLISHING CO. relative to DAWNS or TOWER may be 
enclosed in the same envelope. 



R1361 : back cover 

To Officers of TOWER TRACT SOCIETY: 

My present judgment is that during the year 1892, by denying myself and 
taking up my cross, I shall be able 

to lay aside on the first day of each week for HOME and FOREIGN MISSION work 
(to assist in putting MILLENNIAL 

DAWN into other languages, and to assist fully consecrated Colporteurs who, by 
reason of family and other encumbrances, 

would otherwise be unable to meet their necessary expenses— in home or in 
foreign fields of labor), for 

publishing the series of OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS quarterly, and reprinting old ones, 
in various languages, and to enable 

large quantities of them to be circulated gratuitously (through the mails as 
sample copies and by the hands of 

brethren who have the heart and the opportunity so to use them), 
dollars cents per week. 

That the work be not hindered, I will endeavor to send you what I shall have 
laid aside for this cause, at the 

close of each quarter. I will secure a Bank Draft, Express Order, Postal Note 
or Money Order, as I may find most 

convenient, and will address the letter to the TOWER TRACT SOCIETY, at above 
address. 



R1339:page 161 
