Are You Ready for School?
 1. What opportunities await you as you begin your schooling?
1 Whether it is your first or yet another year for enrollment, you young Christians face new challenges and pressures. But you also have before you fresh opportunities to “bear witness to the truth.” (John 18:37) Are you well-prepared and ready to give a witness?
 2. In what ways are you ready for school?
2 To help you succeed in every aspect of life, you have received much training from Jehovah, from your parents, and from the faithful and discreet slave. (Prov. 1:8; 6:20; 23:23-25; Eph. 6:1-4; 2 Tim. 3:16, 17) By now you no doubt know what challenges to expect in your school. With godly training and knowledge of the environment you will face, prepare yourself to give a witness. (Prov. 22:3) Give serious consideration to the instruction and helpful Scriptural suggestions found in the two volumes of Young People Ask as well as in related articles published regularly in Awake!
 3. In what ways will you be able to give a witness?
3 Your unique territory will allow you to give a witness in many ways. When others observe your exemplary dress and grooming, your conduct and speech, your respectfulness toward your classmates and teachers, and even your grades, and they sense that you have a solid foundation in life, some may ask, “Why are you so different?” (Mal. 3:18; John 15:19) An opportunity may open up for you to give a witness and explain your convictions. (1 Tim. 2:9, 10) Throughout the year, you will likely face challenges such as nationalistic ceremonies and holidays. If asked why you do not participate, will you just say, “It is against my religion; I am one of Jehovah’s Witnesses,” or will you take the opportunity to give a witness about your loving Father, Jehovah? Good preparation under Jehovah’s direction will make you ready to give a fine witness to teachers, fellow students, and others.​—1 Pet. 3:15.
 4. Why are you confident that you can have a successful school year?
4 Although you may be a bit apprehensive about going to school, know that you have the support of many that want you to have a successful school year. Furthermore, we rejoice with you in the prospects you have to witness to others in your unique territory. Therefore, be courageous and ready for school!

