Meetings for Field Service
 1. Why are we concerned about going out in field service in an organized manner?
1 Jesus set the example of caring for the Kingdom-preaching work in an organized and efficient manner. Likewise today, those responsible for this worldwide Kingdom-preaching campaign are very desirous of seeing this work cared for in like manner. In harmony with this endeavor, congregations worldwide use meetings for field service as one way to organize groups of Kingdom preachers for the field service.​—Matt. 24:45-47; 25:21; Luke 10:1-7.
 2. What is expected at meetings for field service?
2 A Fine Arrangement: Meetings for field service are designed to provide encouragement, practical instruction, and direction for those about to go out in the field ministry. The daily text may be briefly discussed when clearly applicable to the field ministry. At times, reminders from Our Kingdom Ministry, the Reasoning book, or perhaps the Ministry School book are called to mind in order to prepare all present for the work that day. A brief demonstration regarding a publication being offered may also be presented. Before the concluding prayer, all should know with whom they will be working in the ministry and where the territory to be worked is located. Shortly after this meeting of no more than 15 minutes, all should be on their way to the territory.
 3. Who are responsible for the organization of meetings for field service?
3 How Are They Organized? The service overseer, taking the lead, is responsible for the coordination of meetings for field service. Group overseers, or their assistants, are responsible for accompanying their respective field service groups on the weekends. Some overseers or ministerial servants may be able to accompany service groups midweek. Group overseers work closely with the service overseer so as to have sufficient territory for their group to work from house to house on the weekends. During the week, the service overseer will supervise the arrangements for those who will take the groups out for field service.
4-6. (a) What objective do meetings for field service have in relation to the congregation territory? (b) What can be considered to determine the need for meetings for field service?
4 Where and When Should These Meetings Be Held? Rather than having the entire congregation meet in one location, it is generally best for these meetings to be held in convenient locations, usually private homes, throughout the territory with the intent of working the congregation’s territory effectively. Kingdom Halls may also be used for this purpose. Many congregations use the Kingdom Hall to hold a meeting for service shortly following their Sunday public talk and Watchtower Study. Effort should be made to minimize the amount of travel to the territory. Therefore, arrangements can be reviewed periodically to ensure that the current locations continue to be appropriate for working the territory efficiently and completely.
5 The best time for these meetings to be held and how many times they should be conducted throughout the week depend on the makeup of the territory. The following questions may serve as a guide to determine where and when meetings for field service can best be held.
6 What territory needs further attention? What is the best time to work from house to house? Should a time in the evening be scheduled for house-to-house work or to make return visits? All field service arrangements should be placed on the congregation information board. It is the desire of all Kingdom publishers to cover their assigned territory thoroughly to such a degree that we too may say as did the apostle Paul: “I no longer have untouched territory.”​—Rom. 15:23.
 7. What responsibility does the one assigned to take out the field service group have?
7 Conducting Meetings for Field Service: The one assigned to care for this meeting shows deep respect for this theocratic arrangement by preparing well. These meetings should start on time and should be instructive and brief, between 10 and 15 minutes. The conductor should have territory for the group to work before the meeting is started. Although it is not necessary to wait for latecomers after the meeting for field service has ended, leaving a message about where the group will be working can be helpful. All should be on their way to the assigned territory shortly after the meeting has finished. A well-organized and instructive meeting for field service will no doubt provide the necessary direction for all present to carry out their ministry that day.​—Prov. 11:14.
 8. In what ways can those attending meetings for field service cooperate with those taking the lead?
8 Attending Meetings for Field Service: Cooperation is essential. (Heb. 13:17) When possible, the one organizing the group will assist any who need someone to work with. It is good for experienced publishers to be present so as to be helpful in caring for newer and less experienced publishers. Those willing to be assigned to work with someone different, on occasion, may be able to accomplish much good. (Prov. 27:17; Rom. 15:1, 2) All should make a concerted effort to be punctual. Our respect for this theocratic arrangement and consideration for our fellow workers will move us to make the necessary adjustments in this regard.​—2 Cor. 6:3, 4; Phil. 2:4.
 9. In what valuable ways can pioneers support this arrangement?
9 Pioneer Support: Pioneer support at meetings for field service is valuable and encouraging to all. Understandably, pioneers have many responsibilities. Aside from conducting Bible studies and making return visits, their daily schedule may include caring for family responsibilities and secular employment. Thus, pioneers should not feel required to support every meeting for field service organized by the congregation, especially if such are held each day. However, it will likely be possible for pioneers to support at least some meetings for service each week. To some degree, meetings for field service are a training ground, and the spiritual background and experience of the pioneers can be of great assistance to others. Their constant exposure to the field ministry has allowed them to gain experience in the ministry. This can be shared. Their zealous participation in the ministry and at meetings for field service has made them an example to imitate. And their participation at these meetings for service is very much appreciated.
10. Why is it appropriate that all Kingdom publishers give whole-hearted support to this arrangement?
10 As was the case with Jesus and his disciples, a large part of our Kingdom-preaching work is accomplished by witnessing from house to house. Meetings for field service are for the purpose of mutual encouragement and effective participation in this work. All publishers of the good news should be supporters of such theocratic arrangements to the extent possible. (Acts 5:42; 20:20) May all of us give wholehearted support to this endeavor. By so doing, we can be sure of having Jehovah’s rich blessing and can make the heart of our Leader, Jesus Christ, rejoice as we preach the good news of God’s Kingdom.​—Matt. 25:34-40; 28:19, 20.

