Meet the Challenge of Witnessing to Men
 1. What urgent need exists in caring for Kingdom interests?
1 As the Kingdom work continues to increase in these last days, there is an urgent need for spiritually qualified men to take the lead. (Mark 4:30-32; Acts 20:28; 1 Tim. 3:1-13) Yet, in some places fewer men than women are embracing the Kingdom message. In some cultures, men defer to their wives when it comes to spiritual matters and religious instruction for the children. How can we encourage more men to become conscious of their spiritual need and join us in true worship?
 2. How did the efforts of Paul and Peter to witness to men bear good results?
2 Search for Men: When a family head accepts the truth, he often influences others in the family to join him in pure worship. For example, while in prison for their preaching, Paul and Silas witnessed to a jailer. The man and his entire household were baptized. (Acts 16:25-34) As a result of Paul’s preaching in Corinth, “Crispus the presiding officer of the synagogue became a believer in the Lord, and so did all his household.” (Acts 18:8) Peter was used by Jehovah to witness to Cornelius, an army officer described as “a devout man and one fearing God.” Cornelius, together with his relatives and intimate friends, was baptized.​—Acts 10:1-48.
 3. In imitation of Philip, to whom “in high station” can you give a witness?
3 Witnessing to men “in high station” may have far-reaching effects. (1 Tim. 2:1, 2) For example, Jehovah’s angel advised Philip to speak to “a man in power” who was over all the treasure of the queen of the Ethiopians. Philip heard the man “reading aloud the prophet Isaiah” and explained to him the good news about Jesus. This Ethiopian became a disciple and likely spread the good news en route to his homeland. He also may have witnessed to the queen and those in her court, persons who otherwise would have had limited opportunities to hear the good news.​—Acts 8:26-39.
 4. How can we give men more opportunities to hear the good news?
4 Contact More Men: Since men are often at their jobs during the day, could you arrange your schedule to spend more time in the ministry in the evenings, on weekends, or during holidays? Regularly working business territory will give you additional opportunities to witness to men who are seldom at home. Brothers can also make a special effort to witness informally to their male workmates. In the house-to-house ministry, especially in territory that is worked frequently, brothers might on occasion ask to speak with the man of the house.
 5. How should a sister handle the matter when she receives a favorable response to the Kingdom message from a man?
5 A sister who receives a favorable response to the truth from a man should not call back alone. She may take along her husband or another publisher. As the interested person makes progress, it is generally best to turn the call over to a qualified brother.
 6. How may we imitate the apostle Paul so as to “gain the most persons”?
6 Choose Topics That Interest Men: The apostle Paul considered his audience and adapted his approach so that he could “gain the most persons.” (1 Cor. 9:19-23) Likewise, we should consider what topics will likely appeal to the men we may meet and prepare accordingly. For instance, men are often concerned about economic challenges, good government, and caring for the safety and security of their family. They may also be interested in the purpose of life, the future of the earth, and why God allows suffering. Our presentation of the Kingdom message will be better received if we manifest such insight in our approach.​—Prov. 16:23.
 7. How may all in the congregation have a positive effect on unbelieving husbands who attend a meeting?
7 Reach Out to Unbelieving Husbands: While the fine conduct of our Christian sisters often exerts the greatest influence on their unbelieving husbands, members of the congregation can also have a positive effect. (1 Pet. 3:1-4) When an unbelieving mate accompanies his wife to a meeting, the warm welcome he receives from the congregation will be a powerful witness. His presence likely indicates a measure of interest in the truth, and he may be willing to accept a Bible study.
 8. How may brothers reach out to help unbelieving husbands who have demonstrated little interest in the truth?
8 On the other hand, some husbands show little spiritual interest initially but may eventually be willing to discuss the Bible with a brother they feel comfortable with. Brothers in one congregation made a point when occasionally visiting a religiously divided family to chat with the unbelieving husband about things they knew he was interested in. This eventually led to spiritual discussions, and now he is baptized. In another case, a brother helped a friendly unbelieving husband to build a fence around his house. By demonstrating personal interest in this way, a Bible study was started. (Gal. 6:10; Phil. 2:4) If you are a Christian brother, why not reach out to one or more of these unbelieving husbands?
 9. What outcome may training of Christian men have?
9 Train for the Future: Men who respond to the Kingdom message and reach out for privileges in Jehovah’s service may come to be among the “gifts in men,” Christian elders who use their abilities and strengths in behalf of the congregations of Jehovah’s people. (Eph. 4:8; Ps. 68:18) Such men shepherd the congregation willingly and eagerly. (1 Pet. 5:2, 3) What a blessing they become to the entire association of brothers!
10. How did Ananias’ efforts to assist Paul benefit many?
10 For instance, Saul became “an apostle to the nations,” though once a persecutor of Christians. (Rom. 11:13) The disciple Ananias was initially reluctant to preach to Saul because of this. Nevertheless, Ananias followed the Lord’s direction and spoke to the man who became the apostle Paul. Over the years, Paul’s ministry benefited the thousands who heard him preach as well as the millions who continue to benefit from his inspired letters recorded in God’s Word.​—Acts 9:3-19; 2 Tim. 3:16, 17.
11. Why should we make whatever adjustments are necessary to witness to men?
11 May we therefore make whatever adjustments are necessary to meet the challenge of witnessing to men. As we pursue this goal, we are assured of Jehovah’s blessing on our diligent efforts to do his will and care well for Kingdom interests.

