“My Help Is From Jehovah”
Single and Contented in Jehovah’s Service
“SO MANY of us are completely happy even though we are not married,” noted a Christian woman in Spain. What is the reason for her contentment? “We love being free from many anxieties so that we can serve our God, Jehovah, more fully.”
Such feelings harmonize with what God’s Word observes about singleness. When the apostle Paul discussed matters involving marriage, he offered this inspired insight: “I say to the unmarried persons and the widows, it is well for them that they remain even as I am.” Paul himself was not married. But what reason did he give for recommending singleness? He pointed out that the married person is divided, whereas the unmarried man or woman is “anxious for the things of the Lord.” (1 Corinthians 7:8, 32-34) Serving Jehovah is the principal factor that makes a single person happy and contented.
Singleness With a Noble Purpose
Paul’s comments may be puzzling in cultures that place a premium on marriage and the raising of a family. However, Jesus Christ​—himself unmarried but happy and contented—​mentioned a noble purpose for Christians who are single. He said: “There are eunuchs that have made themselves eunuchs on account of the kingdom of the heavens. Let him that can make room for it make room for it.”​—Matthew 19:12.
True to those words, many have found that singleness allows them to serve God without the distraction common to married life. (1 Corinthians 7:35) Thousands of Christians are happily worshipping Jehovah without a marriage mate, and they find joy in actively assisting others.a
Many unmarried Christians realize that happiness is not the prerogative of married people and that unhappiness is not the experience of all single individuals. In both groups, some at times experience happiness as well as grief. Actually, the Bible realistically observes that marriage itself brings ‘tribulation in the flesh.’​—1 Corinthians 7:28.
Single by Circumstance
Many are single not by choice but because of circumstances. They may desire the warmth, companionship, and affection that can be found within the marital arrangement. For some, however, financial or other considerations may at present preclude marriage. Some Christians​—many of them dear spiritual sisters—​have remained single because they are determined to obey the Bible counsel to marry “only in the Lord.” (1 Corinthians 7:39) They loyally seek a marriage mate only among dedicated, baptized worshippers of Jehovah.
At times, some of these individuals are lonely. After admitting that she feels this way, one single Christian states: “We know Jehovah’s law and would not want to displease Jehovah in any way. We may want the companionship of a mate, but no matter how many times people in the world try to ‘fix us up,’ we’re standing firm. We don’t even want to be in the company of unbelieving men or women.” Such Christians are to be commended for applying Bible counsel and maintaining high moral standards so as to please Jehovah despite any emotional distress they may experience.
Generous Divine Help
Jehovah is loyal to those showing their loyalty to him in such matters as refusing to marry individuals who do not serve him. From personal experience, King David could testify: “With someone loyal you [Jehovah] will act in loyalty.” (Psalm 18:25) And to those who faithfully obey him, God promises: “I will by no means leave you nor by any means forsake you.” (Hebrews 13:5) Imitating Jehovah, we can give generous commendation to single Christians of all ages who faithfully stick to God’s Word. We can also pray that Jehovah strengthen them to meet their challenges.​—Judges 11:30-40.
Many single Christians find that engaging fully in Bible educational work fills their lives with meaning. For example, consider Patricia, an unmarried woman in her mid-30’s who is a pioneer, or full-time evangelizer. She says: “Although trials come with singleness, it has afforded me the opportunity to become a regular pioneer. Since I am a single person, my schedule is more flexible, which allows more time for study. I have also learned to lean more heavily on Jehovah, especially through trying times.”
Such sentiments are based on the Bible’s reassuring promise: “Roll upon Jehovah your way, and rely upon him, and he himself will act.” (Psalm 37:5) Indeed, all faithful worshippers of Jehovah, married or single, can find comfort and strength in the inspired words: “My help is from Jehovah.”​—Psalm 121:2.
[Footnote]
See 2005 Calendar of Jehovah’s Witnesses, July/August.
[Blurb on page 9]
“The unmarried man is anxious for the things of the Lord, how he may gain the Lord’s approval.”​—1 CORINTHIANS 7:32
[Box on page 8]
MAKING SINGLENESS REWARDING
Jesus, who never married, stated: “My food is for me to do the will of him that sent me and to finish his work.”​—John 4:34.
Philip’s four unmarried daughters kept busy ‘prophesying.’​—Acts 21:8, 9.
Single Christian sisters who declare the Kingdom message are part of the ‘large army of women telling the good news.’​—Psalm 68:11.

