Centuries of Schisms
THE word “schism” (variously pronounced sizm, skizm, or shizm) has been defined as “the process by which a religious body divides to become two or more distinct, independent bodies.”
330 C.E. “The schism between Greek and Latin Christendom. . . . The founding of Constantinople, the ‘new Rome’ (330), displacing the ‘old Rome’ as imperial capital, sowed the seeds of a future ecclesiastical rivalry between the Greek East and the Latin West.”​—The Encyclopedia of Religion.
330-867 C.E. “From the beginning of the See of Constantinople to the great schism in 867 the list of these temporary breaches of communion is a formidable one. . . . Of these 544 years (323-867) no less than 203 were spent by Constantinople in a state of schism [with Rome over Trinity-related theological disputes and the worship of images].”​—The Catholic Encyclopedia.
867 C.E. “The see of Constantinople maintained its position against Rome during the so-​called Photian Schism. When Pope Nicholas I challenged Photius’ elevation to the patriarchate, . . . the Byzantine patriarch refused to bow. . . . Nicholas . . . excommunicated Photius; a council at Constantinople responded (867) by excommunicating Nicholas in turn. The immediate issues between the two sees were matters of ecclesiastical supremacy, the liturgy, and clerical discipline.”​—The New Encyclopædia Britannica.
1054 C.E. “EAST-​WEST SCHISM, event that precipitated the final separation between the Eastern [Orthodox] Christian churches . . . and the Western [Roman Catholic] Church.”​—The New Encyclopædia Britannica.
1378-1417 C.E. “[GREAT] WESTERN SCHISM​—The period . . . in which Western Christendom was divided between two, and later three, papal obediences [with rival popes located in Rome, Avignon (France), and Pisa (Italy)].”​—New Catholic Encyclopedia.
16th century C.E. “As regards the Protestant Reformation, . . . the Catholic Church mostly uses the term heresy rather than schism.”​—Théo—​Nouvelle encyclopédie catholique.
1870 C.E. “The First Vatican Council, which advocated the ‘infallibility’ of the pope, brought about the schism of the ‘Old Catholics.’”​—La Croix (Paris daily, Catholic).
1988: Schism of Archbishop Lefebvre, who “initiated schism in the Catholic Church by his defiance of the Pope and the spirit of the second Vatican Council . . . who regards Protestants as heretical, who sees ecumenism as the work of the devil, and who is willing to die excommunicate rather than be reconciled to a ‘modernist’ Church.”​—Catholic Herald.

