Announcements
“TRIUMPHANT CLEAN WORSHIP” WITNESSING PERIOD—Jas. 1:27, NW.
“Clean worship” must be directed toward the one true God. Any other worship is idolatrous and unclean, Scripturally condemned. It is vile unfaithfulness on the part of the creature to ignore the Creator and render worship to idols, demons or men. “Clean worship” triumphs over false worship because it is strong, enduring and unshakable. “The fear of Jehovah is clean, enduring for ever.” (Ps. 19:9, AS) That right attitude of deep respect toward God will produce fruit in right works. It will seek to serve others, bringing them the knowledge that has so abundantly blessed the receiver. So, “clean worship” means to care for bereaved and desolate ones, giving them the comfort the truth contains. During December the following offer will continue to be presented to the people: three bound books, What Has Religion Done for Mankind? “Let God Be True” and “This Mean Everlasting Life”, all on a contribution of $1.50. Demonstrate clean worship by presenting this offer to others, and report your activity to the Society at the month’s end. (Address under front cover)
DO YOU HAVE A COPY?
The New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures is widely acknowledged as a splendid translation of the Greek Scriptures in modern English. It is accurate in expressing forcefully and clearly the thought of the original language. Delightfully refreshing to read, this translation helps one to appreciate the wise counsel and instruction of the Lord Jesus Christ and of the apostles. The New World Translation also contains a valuable appendix, providing much additional information on texts often the subject of dispute. A good chain reference enables the student to follow through from book to book on a given subject, word or name. Several maps and diagrams, plus marginal cross-reference notes, further enhance the translation. Measuring approximately 5ʺ x 7 5/16ʺ x 1ʺ, the volume is bound in green leatherette. The cost is $1.50, sent postpaid.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of December 28: In Union with Light.
Week of January 4: In Union with Love.

