Islands of the Indian Ocean Hear the Good News
ARRAYED in an arc relative to Madagascar and spread out over 1.5 million square miles [3.9 million sq km] of the western Indian Ocean are the islands of Rodrigues, Mauritius, Réunion, the Seychelles, Mayotte, and the Comoros. Though covering such a vast expanse, these islands total only about 2,800 square miles [7,300 sq km] in land area. With a population of 2.3 million, they are among the most densely populated islands in the world.
This population includes about 2,900 Witnesses of Jehovah, who work diligently to preach the good news of God’s Kingdom to the islanders. Being isolated, these Witnesses especially appreciate the visits by traveling overseers and the annual assemblies arranged by the branch office of the Watch Tower Society in Vacoas, Mauritius. These are occasions when they can truly savor the meaning of the words of Isaiah 42:10: “Sing to Jehovah a new song, his praise from the extremity of the earth, you men that are going down to the sea and to that which fills it, you islands and you inhabiting them.”
Recently, representatives from the branch office traveled to the islands to visit the congregations and to hold the annual series of special one-day assemblies, which featured the theme “Become Holy in All Your Conduct,” based on 1 Peter 1:15. To cover the vast expanse of ocean, travel was for the most part by air​—sometimes in modern jumbo jets but often in much smaller propeller-driven craft. Schooners and small sailing brigs were also used. Come along with us, and see how the islands in the faraway Indian Ocean are hearing the good news!
First Stop​—Rodrigues
After a one-and-half-hour flight from Mauritius, we sight a coral reef. It marks the outer rim of a large lagoon surrounding a small dot of land in the Indian Ocean. This is our first stop, the island of Rodrigues.
The airport is built on a coral projection from the land, called Point Coraille. In this area the coral is so thick that it can be sawed into blocks for use in constructing buildings. A small bus takes us over a narrow, winding road from the airport to the main town of Port Mathurin. At one point, we can see right across the island to the distant coral reefs, the blue lagoon, and the rocky  shoreline. As the rainy season has just ended, the hillsides are covered with coarse, spongy grass and dotted with grazing cattle, sheep, and goats.
A small, neat Kingdom Hall in the center of Port Mathurin is the site for our special one-day assembly. The work in Rodrigues first opened up in 1964. Now, among a population of 37,000, there are 36 publishers of the good news. What a joy to see 53 persons in attendance and an 18-year-old young man get baptized. His mother, though not able to read or write, accepted the truth in 1969, and she has continued to serve Jehovah despite family opposition. Now two of her children are dedicated to Jehovah.
After the assembly, we spend one week preaching in the island. We speak our Mauritian Creole, as it is the language spoken also here in Rodrigues. A bus ride and a walk take us to our territory​—a green valley sweeping from the upland road down to the sea. What a spectacular view​—the turquoise lagoon, the white coral reef, and the deep blue ocean in the background! Exhilarated by the rich, unpolluted air, we are ready to go.
We follow the small paths through the fields and crisscross a marshy stream to reach the many small homes in the valley. We receive a cordial welcome at each home and are able to talk to the householders about the Kingdom blessings soon to come. Before long we are far down the valley, and it is time to go home. This means more climbing and hours of walking, but the local hospitality comes to our rescue​—we are offered a lift in the back of a jeep.
After that strenuous outing, we are glad to return to the beautiful Bethel Home in Vacoas. Two special assembly days are scheduled at the Municipal Hall. The first day, 760 persons come. They are from half of the 12 congregations on the island. The next day, we share the same program with 786 persons from the other six congregations. Over the weekend, four new ones are baptized. There are 30 special pioneers and 50 regular pioneers who share in bringing the good news to the islanders.
The Faraway Seychelles
It is soon time for us to take flight again, directly north over a thousand miles [1,600 km] of open sea to the island of Mahé in the Seychelles, called Zil Elwannyen Sesel in Creole, meaning “the Faraway Seychelle Islands.” Because of the distance, the branch office can arrange only two visits a year. The special assembly day and the circuit assembly are held on three consecutive days in the spring. The district convention is held later in the year. Now in the middle of October, we are here for the district convention, to be followed by a week’s visit to the congregation. Here again we can use our Mauritian Creole.
The brothers from the nearby islands of Praslin and La Digue have already arrived. How exciting to have 12 nationalities represented! The assembly place is the local Kingdom Hall, a large converted garage at the back of the home of one of the Witnesses. Since only six brothers, including the visitors, are qualified to take part in the program, some have the privilege of giving several talks during the four days. The 81 publishers are thrilled to see 216 present on the final day of the convention.
After the convention, we take a schooner to Praslin, 25 miles [40 km] northeast of Mahé. The 60-foot [18 m] vessel is made from the wood of the tacamahac tree. The graceful vessel can carry 50 passengers and about 40 tons of cargo. As we leave the harbor in Mahé and point our bow toward the outline of Praslin on the distant horizon, we can feel the thrust of the diesel engine aided by the white sails billowing out from the two masts.
Two and a half hours later, we round the rocky headland to enter the calmer waters of beautiful Bay St. Anne. When we step onto the long jetty, we see our brothers waiting. There are 13 publishers on this small island, and 8 visitors came from other parts. So it is with great excitement that we see the small hall filled with 39 persons for the special talk. What a fine potential for growth!
While here in Praslin, we must visit the beautiful Vallée de Mai. This is the home of the Coco-de-mer palm, which bears the biggest seed in the world, each weighing up to 40 pounds [20 kg]. In the cool green shade of the forest, we see these palms at all stages of growth. The official trail notes explain that the tallest one was 102 feet [31 m] high when last measured in 1968. Some of these tall trees are estimated to be 800 years old. It takes 25 years before a tree starts to bear fruit and 7 years for the nut to mature. No wonder the brochure cautions: “Take only photographs, leave only footprints”!
At seven o’clock the next morning, we take a boat to the small island of La Digue. Many small boats are clustered around the jetty. They are the lifeline between the 2,000 inhabitants and the outside world. We are met by an elderly couple from Switzerland who have been in these islands since 1975. Rather than taking the oxcart “taxi,” we walk along the beach with its impressive pink granite rocks worn smooth by sea and rain. After a picnic breakfast, we make our way through the small reserve, where the rare black flycatcher breeds, to the home of some interested people. Thirteen persons are assembled to hear the talk given in Creole. We meet a couple who have made all the arrangements to legalize their marriage so that they can progress spiritually. Truly, Jehovah is bringing in the desirable ones of the nations even in these very remote islands.
Back to Réunion
Réunion is the most highly developed island that we visit on this trip. As we approach land, we see the four-lane highway, choked with traffic coming from the capital, Saint-Denis. High-rise buildings fill the space between the sea and the mountain. This island is the home of some 580,000 people and has proved to be a productive field for Kingdom witnessing. (Matthew 9:37, 38) There are now about 2,000 zealous publishers of the good news in 21 congregations.
The special assembly day is held in a large covered stadium. We are happy to see 3,332 persons in attendance, and what a thrill to have 67 new ones present themselves for baptism! After enjoying association with the missionaries on the island, we are on our way to our next destination.
Mayotte​—The Perfume Island
After a two-hour flight, our 40-seater jet begins its descent to the Pamanzi airport, which is on an islet connected by a 1.2-mile [1.9 km] causeway to Dzaoudzi, the capital of Mayotte. The blue sky, white clouds, lush mountainsides, and deep blue ocean combine to convey the picture of a peaceful tropical paradise. Appropriately, Mayotte is nicknamed Perfume Island because of the delicious fragrance of the ilang-ilang tree. Extract from its flowers is sent to France as a base for world-famous perfumes.
It is but a 15-minute ride on a barge to the main island. After some refreshments at the missionary home, we are invited to a book study 12 miles [19 km] away on the other side of the island. So much for our expectations of a leisurely visit! We climb into the open jeep for a hair-raising ride on narrow roads. It seems that we narrowly miss people, cows, and other vehicles. But our French driver knows the way. Soon, we arrive at Chiconi, where we meet the family in whose house the study is held.
The father, a former Muslim, introduces his eight children. His youngest son, a four-year-old, gives us what we later learn to be the traditional greeting. He places the back of one hand in the palm of the other and stands with them cupped before us. We first try to shake his hands, then my wife tries to place his hands on her head. The little fellow with big round eyes waits patiently, no doubt wondering what we are doing. Finally we get it right​—we place his hands on his head. The study begins with 14 present. Half way through, an interested person comes in and shakes hands with everybody. That too is apparently one of their customs.
On our return trip through the now darkening countryside, we catch sight of huge fruit bats making their way to the trees for their night feeding. We also sense the aroma of the pungent jackfruit that has fallen on the winding road and the sweet smell of mangoes, papayas, and guavas. This is a habitat of the lemurs, the small monkeylike animals with foxlike faces and long, ringed, prehensile tails. As we round the top of a hill, we are treated to a breathtaking sight. The orange-red full moon has just risen over the bay, casting a shimmering reflection in the still waters. Even our driver slows down to admire it. For the rest of the trip, we look for it at every turn of the road.
The next morning we go preaching with the missionaries. First, we visit a young man who is a teacher and speaks good French. He sits on the floor, and we sit on his bed. The next study is also with a young man, and he invites us to sit on his mattress on the floor of his tiny room. After a while we start to squirm, despite trying to ignore the cramps in our legs and the perspiration trickling down our backs. With the radio next door blaring out the latest pop songs, it is not easy to concentrate on the study, conducted partly in French and partly in Mahorian.
Our last call is on a young man from the neighboring Comoros. He apologizes for not speaking French so well, gets out his brochure, and is ready to start. When the missionary continues to explain something to me, he interrupts and says he is going to read the paragraph. He is politely telling us to be quiet. All these people are Muslims, but they really appreciate what they are learning from the Bible.
We wonder why so many young men study, yet so few women or girls do. This, we are told, is the result of social and family traditions. As polygamy is religiously and socially accepted and each wife lives in her own home, the father’s influence is minimal; the mother is the one in control. We also learn that daughters traditionally remain in their mother’s home until marriage. Sons, on the other hand, leave home at puberty and build their own banga, or hut, or live with other boys in a banga. Under these circumstances young men are free to study if they wish, but few girls have such liberty.
Sunday is to be the special assembly day. The weather starts out fine, but by midday clouds begin to gather, and soon sheets of rain start to fall. No one seems to mind much, as it just cools things down. Here again we find bountiful spiritual riches as the 36 publishers and pioneers rejoice to see 83 in attendance and 3 new ones baptized.
The release of the brochure Enjoy Life on Earth Forever! in their language is a major event. It is not just the only Watch Tower publication in Mahorian but also the only publication of any kind so far in that language. It has the Arabic script written underneath the Roman text. People learn the Arabic script in school but not the Arabic language. They can recite prayers in Arabic and read the Koran in Arabic; yet they do not understand what they are pronouncing. As they read the Arabic script in the brochure, they are astonished that they can understand it. What they are reading is actually their own Mahorian language written phonetically in Arabic script. It is a joy to see their faces light up as they get the sense of what they are reading.
Brochures are easily placed with the people. In one of the outlying villages, a man approaches us while we are preaching to a woman. He starts to speak very forcefully to our brother in Mahorian. It appears to us that he is very opposed. The man goes on for some time, gesturing profusely. The brother later explains that the man was complaining: “How can you expect us to remember the things you tell us when you only visit us once a year? How can you? You should come more often to talk to us about these things.”
Those final words express our sentiments too. Jehovah is certainly gathering the desirable things of all the nations by means of the Kingdom good news. Though separated by great expanses of ocean, the islanders are adding their voices to the mighty shout of praise being offered to their Maker and heavenly Father, Jehovah God.​—Haggai 2:7.
[Map on page 21]
(For fully formatted text, see publication.)
SEYCHELLES
INDIAN OCEAN
COMOROS
MAYOTTE
MADAGASCAR
MAURITIUS
RÉUNION
RODRIGUES
[Picture on page 23]
The rocky headland at Praslin, Bay St. Anne
[Picture on page 24]
An oxcart “taxi” at La Digue, Seychelles
[Picture on page 25]
Preaching with the new brochure in Mayotte

