Announcements
“PRAISE JEHOVAH AS KING”
A command to praise the Almighty Creator, Jehovah, is found in the Christian Greek Scriptures at Revelation 19:6, NW, in these words: “Praise Jah, you people.” In response, an ever-increasing crowd of sincere worshipers offer as praise “the fruit of lips which make public declaration to his name”. (Heb. 13:15, NW) The opportunity to thus use one’s lips and take part in this grand proclamation is now here. God-fearing persons, recognizing the fulfillment of Bible prophecies, know that the most important work in this world today is that of rendering praise to the honor and glory of the now ruling King. It is with this group of proclaimers that you are now invited to work, sharing in life-giving praise. During the month of December, the book What Has Religion Done for Mankind? and a booklet will be offered to truth-seeking people on a contribution of 50c. To permit the efforts put forth in this month’s activity to be accurately determined, a report of the time you spend should be turned in to the company of Jehovah’s witnesses in your locality or mailed in to the nearest branch office listed under the front cover of this magazine.
CALENDAR AND YEARBOOK FOR 1952
With the passing away of the old, everyone looks forward to the new. That is true of the year now closing and of the one just ahead, and especially is this so when one considers the work of Jehovah’s witnesses and their activities world-wide. Every day of the year and in all parts of the earth, east, west, north and south, in the heat or cold, they keep on proclaiming the good news of God’s kingdom. You will enjoy reading the 1952 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses as you consider the heartwarming experiences they had in the year 1951 and thrill to the prospects of the coming year, which promises to be even more outstanding for them. A companion to the Yearbook is the colorful 1952 Calendar which displays the yeartext: “Say to the prisoners, Go forth” (Isa. 49:9), and the monthly Scriptural periods and themes. The calendars can be had for 25c, or 5 for $1.00 when sent to one address. The Yearbook, bound in an attractive cover, will be sent on a contribution of 50c.
RENEW YOUR SUBSCRIPTION NOW
Are you a subscriber for the Watchtower magazine? If yes, then your subscription may be one of the more than 1/4-million new subscriptions sent in during the first four months of the 1951 calendar year. In that case your subscription may be nearing the time for renewal. It is well to send in your renewal before expiration, in order to have uninterrupted mailing service and ensure regular delivery of it. Your possessing this journal indicates a desire to increase your knowledge of God’s Word the Bible. Keep on in such a course and be assured of real success and happiness as you continue in the path that leads to life. Whether your subscription is due to be renewed now or in the near future, don’t put it off; send it in immediately. If you are not a subscriber as yet, then why not send in $1.00 for a year’s subscription now?
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of January 6: “Princes Shall Rule in Justice,” ¶1-22.
Week of January 13: “Princes Shall Rule in Justice,” ¶23-25; also Theocratic Organization Re-established.

