Praise Jehovah as King
“HALLELUJAH! Jehovah has taken his rightful power over our earth and has begun to rule as its king. That is a fact of which all peoples of the earth should take serious note during the year 1951.” These were the opening statements of a stirring article in The Watchtower, issue of December 15, 1950. It is well now, a year later, to reconsider these rousing and bold declarations.
The Hebrew word “Hallelu-jah” is literally a command to a large crowd to “Praise Jah”, Jah being an abbreviation for “Jehovah” or “Yahweh”. So when the word “Hallelujah” is translated “Praise Jah, you people”, as the New World Translation does at Revelation 19:6, the expression takes on a much larger meaning. But why is such a command issued?
The rest of Re 19 verse six answers: “Because Jehovah our God, the Almighty, has begun to rule as king.” The very language here used shows that there is a definite and specific time when Jehovah begins ruling as king. For thousands of years prior to Christ’s ministry on earth, faithful men looked for the time when Jehovah’s kingdom rule would begin. Likewise, for the past nineteen centuries faithful Christians have continued praying for that kingdom. If not aware of it, you may be startled to hear that this momentous event occurred A.D. 1914. Not only historical events of the past, but all the accumulated evidence of the last thirty-seven years, proves beyond a doubt that Jehovah has begun to rule as universal king!
At one time there was a typical theocratic government controlling a small portion of the earth, and David “sat upon the throne of Jehovah”. However, because successive rulers over the nation of Israel were grossly unfaithful, Jehovah in due time removed the crown from Zedekiah, declaring that none would rule until he whose right it is should come.
Well, in due time Jesus appeared on the great stage of world events, and prior to his coming an angel made the thrilling announcement: “Jehovah God will give him the throne of David his father, and he will be king over the house of Jacob forever, and there will be no end of his kingdom.” (Luke 1:32, 33, NW) But before Christ’s glorious reign on Jehovah’s throne could begin “the appointed times of the nations”, otherwise called the “Gentile times”, must be fulfilled—something that, according to Bible chronology, was not completed until A.D. 1914.—Luke 21:24, NW.
After so long a wait it is understandable why the hosts of heaven broke forth in one great hallelujah chorus, saying: “We thank you, Jehovah God, the Almighty, the one who is and who was, because you have taken your great power and begun ruling as king. But the nations became wrathful.” Yes, it has been a time of wrath in the earth and woe upon the people since 1914, because Satan and his demons were then cast out of heaven by the newly enthroned king. (Rev. 11:15-18; 12:7-12, NW) However, the raging of the debased Devil and his dictators in the earth has not prevented human creatures who love Jehovah and his enthroned Son from taking up and joining in the coronation song of praise.
For these compelling reasons then, Jehovah’s name-people will enter the portals of 1952 with renewed conviction and determination. Come what persecutions and repressive measures may against their message, Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions will continue praising Jehovah as King!

