Vol XXXIX 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., AUGUST 1, 1918 


No. 15 


OUR DELIVERANCE DRAWETH NIGH! 


''The night is far spent, the day is at hand; let us therefore cast off (he 

of hght." -Hamuli* 12:12. 


icorfcs of darkness, and let us ynt on the, artuor 


We can see only one way in which the Apostle could have 
said in his day that the night was far spent. He evidently recognized
 the period of time since sin had entered the world as a 
time of darkness, of night. In proportion as man became 
alienated from God, the darkness became more intense. As sin 
abounded, many could not see what was right and what was 
wrong. This condition still prevails. So far have they fallen 
from the likeness of their Creator that their minds are benighted
. The Apostle says that because men did not choose 
"to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them over to a 
reprobate mind." (Romans 1:28) Their minds became darkened
, unable to distinguish right from wrong. 

St, Paul tells us that all this is what we might expect 
from a reign of sin — a reign of darkness. Satan's opposition 
to God made him a leader of those men who wmild not have 
God's way; and all down the centuries these have been the 
majority. In their fallen condition their minds were perverted, 
and they became an easy prey to the wiles of the great adversary
. This darkness, which the Apostle styles night, has been 
a period of six thousand years. Now, however, we realize that 
we are in the dawning of a new dispensation. Darkness is giving
 place to light in matters relating not only to the church, 
but aUo to the world. If it was true in the day of the Apostle 
that the night was far spent, how much more forceful is the 
expression in our day! 

SURELY ALL SHOULD BE AWAKE NOW! 

The light of the glorious Sun of Righteousness is even now 
breaking over the lull -tops. It cannot shine upon the whole 
world until all the members of the church of Christ are glorified 
and exalted to power in the Messianic Kingdom. Then the 
darkness of sin, ignorance, superstition and wrong-doing will 
be dispersed. 

In the verse preceding our text the Apostle points out to 
the Church at Rome great responsibility saying: "Knowing 
the time, that now.it is high time to awake out of sleep; for 
now is our salvation nearer than when we believed." But 
how much more significant are these words to ua of today, than 
to them! The Christian is to realize that the whole world has 
been asleep, in a sort of stupor respecting the highest, best and 
noblest things. When the child of God gets his eyes partially 
opened, he begins to weigh and measure matters after a different
 fashion from that of his previous course. As his eyes open 
still more widely, everything takes on a new aspect. He is 
able more than ever before to estimate rightly the value of 
things of this life and finds them not worthy to be compared 
with the glorious things which belong to the life eternal. He 
sees that for six thousand years the world has been groaning 
under the bondage of sin and Satan, but that the blessed 
morning of the great Sabbath of hallowed rest and refreshment 
is about to dawn. 

As the Christian realizes all this, he should feel disposed to 
arouse himself, shake himself thoroughly from the dust of ignorance
, superstition, blindness and sordidness, and to live 
more fully in harmony with the glorious hopes which he now 
entertains — living for the new era, the new dispensation. Instructed
 more fully from the Word of God, he will not expect 
his salvation, his deliverance, except in connection with the 
second presence — the parousia — of our Lord Jesus and the establishment
 of his kingdom. He will see a new force, beauty 
and meaning in the words of the Apostle Peter: "Wherefore, 
gird up the loins of your mind, be sober, and set your hope 
perfectly on the grace that is to be brought unto you at the 
revelation of Jesus Christ."— 1 Peter 1:13, R. V. 

EEIGN OF RIGHTEOUSNESS AT THE DOOR 

The thought of the second presence of the Lord was continually
 before the Apostles ; and our Lord evidently designed 
that it should be a constant incentive to the members of his 
church throughout the entire age. This undoubtedly, was one 
reason why he did not particularly explain the length of time 
that would intervene before the setting up of the kingdom. 
From God's standpoint it would be a short interval; and even 
from the human standpoint it would be short to each individual
, who would have only the few remaining years of his life 
wherein to make ready for the glorious things of the future; 
and "in death there is no remembrance." 

As St. Paul looked back and perceived that in his day about 
4178 years of the reign of Bin and gross darkness, upon the 
world" had passed, he could realize that truly the night was 
far spent, that the blessed day of deliverance was drawing 
nigh. And now we, who live in the dawn of this great day, 


are most highly favored by the Lord. We can see the particulars
 regarding this time, which were obscure in the Apostle's 
time. We are standing at the very threshold of the Golden 
Age! As soon as the harvest of this Gospel age shall be gathered
, the work of change, the transformation from the reign 
of evil to the reign of righteousness, will take place; and it 
is nigh, even at the door. Surely it is now high time that all 
who are truly the Lord's should awake out of sleep, cast off 
all "the works of darkness." and put on the "whelp armour or 
God that Ave shall be aide to withstand in the evil d:iy."- 
Kphesians 0:13. 

"ARMOR OF LIGHT" ESPECIALLY NEEDED TODAY 

Whatever will not stand the fullest investigation in the 
light of this day of Christ, whatever will not win approval in 
the new dispensation now coming in, should be promptly renounced
 by all who hope for the Tx>rd's favor as his children, as 
disciples of Christ. If we really are Christ's we belong to the 
new era, not to the old. We should therefore live in accordance 
with our citizenship and with our responsibility to the prince of 
light and in opposition to the prince of darkness. 

We are forewarned by the Apostle that this period of time 
in which the change from the dominion of the "prince of this 
world" to that of the prince of glory takes place, will be an 
especially "evil day" — a period in which all the children of 
light will be crucially tested. It is a day that is to "try every 
man's work, of what sort it is." It is to be a day of fiery 
trial, through which only the gold, silver and precious stones 
w r ill pass unscathed, in which all the wood, hay and stubble 
of error, sin, human tradition and falsehood will be entirely 
destroyed. We are even now in the fires of this day, in the 
time when the wood, hay and stubble are being consumed ; 
when higher criticism, evolution, Christian science, hypnotism 
(whether known under its own name or whether called mind 
cures), etc., are devouring as a flame all the faith structure of 
those children of God who have not continued faithful to the 
Lord, and who, therefore, have not been kept by his power, 
through the Word and through his providences. 

"WALK AS CHILDREN OP LI0HT" 
All who are truly the Lord's should "walk honestly, as in 
the day." We are not yet fully in the day; but we belong to 
the day, and are therefore to live as nearly as possible up to 
the perfect standards of the future. So to live will mean selfdenial
. It will mean that we shall be misunderstood by the 
world and all who have its spirit. It will mean that we shall 
be thought foolish, that we shall be considered enemies — not 
so much by those who are in gross darkness as by those who 
profess to be the Lord's people, to be children of the light, but 
who really prefer darkness and error to light and truth. 

We are inclined to lay special stress on the word, "honestly
," used by the Apostle, and believe that he used it advisedly
 and in a particular sense. As we look about us today, we see 
that dishonesty is very prevalent. Not merely in the world, 
where we expect to find a certain amount of duplicity, misrepresentation
 and deception, and to see people passing for 
what they are not, do we find this kind of dishonesty very prevalent
, but amongst professing Christians. We have even 
known professed ministers of the Gospel to boast of their dishonesty
 — to declare that they never have believed the creed 
which they have professed to believe and which they have 
vowed that they would teach. Intelligent ministers of all denominations
 are preaching what they do not believe, standing 
for creeds and confessions of faith which misrepresent their 
own sentiments. They are acting dishonestly; they are searing 
their consciences; they are putting themselves into conditions 
where they cannot make progress into the light of truth ; for 
surely God does not purpose to have dishonest people in his 
elect Church, If these do not very quickly change and become 
honest, they will certainly have their portion with the hypocrites
; for it is the hypocrites who are dishonest. 

HONESTY A BASIC TRAIT OF CHARACTER 
Christians, above all other people in the world, should be 
honest and sincere in their professions. They should be honest
 in their dealings with their neighbors, with their brethren, 
and especially in their confessions respecting their Crod and 
their faith. This test must be met by every one who names 
the name of Christ. Those who love the favor of men more 
than the favor of God, who would rather confess and profess 
a lie than to espouse an unpopular cause — even when they 
know it is God's cause — will be given up to their He. Such 
are surely proving themselves unfit for the kingdom, unfit to 


[6299] 


(.'28 229) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, X. V 


reign with Christ, whatever else they may eventually attain, 
if later through stripes and humiliation they take the proper 
course. 

This was the very essence of the Apostle's declaration in 
his second letter to the church at Thessalonica, when he 
spoke prophetically of this piesent "evil day," and the great 
trial that would at this time come upon the church. He declared
 of those who would prove unfaithful that God would 
"send them strong delusions that they should believe the lie" 
— 'because they were not honest — because they did not obey the 
truth in the love of it, but acted deceitful, hypocritically. He 
says of these that God will send them delusions in order "that 
they may be condemned" — not damned, as in the common version
 of the Bible — that they may be condemned to suffer the 
consequences of their dishonorable and disloyal course. They 
will come to the place where they will be greatly humiliated 
before those whose esteem and favor they have so sought to 
retain. They will be seen by all in their true garb, stripped 
of their cloak of hypocrisy. 

Great will be their shame and humiliation then. Through 
tribulation and in difficulty must they retrace their steps if 
they would attain eternal life, would come back to the favor 
of God and of their fellows. But it will be a great blessing if 
they are restored and led into the way of life, even through 
very severe chastisements and afflictions. We may well rejoice
 that so soon all error, dishonesty and fraud, of whatever 
nature, will be exposed and dethroned, and that truth and 
righteousness will be enthroned in their place. 
STABS TWINKLING IN THE NIGHT 
But there has not been utter darkness at any time through 
all this long reign of evil — not the blackness of night. 
Throughout the past six thousand years there have been certain
 lights — like stars in the night-time. I>uring the Jewish 
dispensation, the Law Covenant as a moon reflected the light of 
the glorious Sun of Righteousness, later to dawn upon the 
dark world. Our lord Jesus, when he came, was the bright 
star that heralded the coming morning; for his sacrificial work 
made the morning possible and ensured its dawning. 

Throughout the Gospel age true Christians have been lights 
shining in a dark place. The light that now shines from the 
Lord's true people is not appreciated by the world in general; 
for it is a spiritual light. The light of the law given by 
Moses to the Jews was one which the world could better understand
. It was an earthly light; for it gave earthly rewards
 and earthly punishments* The world cannot understand
 the light-bearers of the Gospel age. They say: "If 
these were children of God, and he were really caring for them, 
he would not permit them to have so many difficulties and 
have such a hard time as they apparently have. They do not 
have any easier time than the world, whom they call sinners; 
and often their lot seems harder. How is this a manifestation
 of the Lord's special favor?" 

But the Word of our God makes all this plain to those who 
trust in him. There we learn that this is not the time to receive
 the rewaxxl. While those who live a holy life do not have 
a very peaceable time as respects their outward circumstances 
and surroundings, nevertheless the peace of God is within, ruling
 in their hearts. It is a peace that is wholly independent 
of outward conditions. 

We know that our own righteousness is but as filthy rags. 
We know that our depravities, while covered by the robe of 
our Savior's righteousness, must gradually be purged away, 
or we could never be fit for the kingdom. All this we see; but 
the world and worldly Christians do not see it. So we must 
not expect to be understood until the new age with its blessed 
light is ushered in and all the vapors of darkness are dispelled
. Then the vail of unbelief and ignorance will be removed
 from the eyes of all. Meantime^ we have a responsibility
 which those who cannot see do not have, and we could 
not excuse in ourselves the manner of life which seems reasonable
 or excusable in others. We know a better way. How 
thankful we should be that the Lord has graciously opened our 
ears to the melodies of heaven, which none others can hear ! 

This "armor of light" which we wear is composed of various 
pieces, each one of which is essential to our proper protection, 
especially in this "evil day." First we wear the robe of Christ's 
righteousness, "the wedding garment." Then, under the other 
figure, we wear the "armor of righteousness," the "armor of 
light," which represents not only our standing in Christ, but 
our spiritual attainments in him. W T e are to have on the 
"breastplate of righteousness," and must carry "the shield of 
fai£h." We must have "our feet shod with the preparation of 
the gospel of peace." We must surely wear also "the helmet," 
the covering of our intellect from the assaults of this "evil 
day"; for we need this protection now as never before. We 
must also have "our loins girt about with truth." We cannot 
serve acceptably and effectively if girded to service with the 


girdle of error and dishonest profession. We must have truth 
in both doctrine and practise, in both head and heart. 

We do not understand that either the putting on of the 
Christian armor or the putting off of the works of darkness 
is an instantaneous matter. We should put these dark works 
off as rapidly as possible, however — as rapidly as we are able 
to see our imperfections and defects. A Christian who has had 
twenty years' experience ought to be able to do much better 
than one w T ho has just started in the way — who has but just 
begun to scrutinize his conduct — his thoughts, words and doings
. It seems to take some longer to make this transfer than 
others. We are all endeavoring, if we are faithful, to put 
off the works of darkness altogether, and to put on securely 
the whole armor, seeking day by day to put on more and more 
kindness, gentleness, meekness, humility, love. 
TH£ TRIUMPH OP 3^0VE 
In the chapter preceding the one from which our text in 
taken, St. Paul has been giving some wholesome counsel concerning
 the proper course of the Lord's people in the everyday
 duties of life. His advice seems to cover a wide range 
of the little vexatious cares and trials that every one must 
meet, and to instruct us how to triumph in them through the 
mighty power of love. He evidently thought of the thin veneer 
of worldly politeness which often covers deep-seated selfishness, 
and showed that the politeness and kindness of manner manifested
 by the Lord's people should be only the genuine article. 
He say3: "Let love be without dissimulation [pretense, hypocrisy
]. Abhor that which is evil [all shams and insincere 
pretensions] ; cleave to that which is good. Be kindly affectioned
 one to another; in honor preferring one another." He 
remembered the temptations and vexations of life, of our business
 relations and intercourse with the world and of its natural
 tendency to engross time, energy and thought. 

The Apostle also remembered the poverty and losses of 
some of the Lord's dear people, and counselled sympathy and 
hospitality — "distributing to the necessity of the saints, given 
to hospitality." He tells us that we should "rejoice with them 
that rejoice, and weep with them that weep" ; that we should 
"mind not high things, but condescend to men of low estate" ; 
that we should "be not wise in our own conceits"; that we 
should "bless them that persecute" us, and "recompense no 
man evil for evil"; that we should "provide things honest in 
the sight of all men" — not only the brethren, but the world 
also. Thinking of the numerous trials of patient endurance 
arising from contact with those of undisciplined hearts, he 
urged, "If it be possible, as much as lieth in you, live peaceably
 with all men. Dearly beloved, avenge not yourselves, but 
rather give place to wrath [get out of its way, do not allow it 
to overtake you] ; for it is written, "Vengeance is mine, I 
will repay, saith the Lord." Therefore, "if thine enemy hunger
, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink; for in so doing. 
thou shalt heap coals of fire on his head." You will make him 
ashamed of his conduct as he sees its contrast with yours. 

Further, he says, "Be not overcome of evil, but overcome 
evil with good." I>o not allow the trials and annoyances, or 
the misunderstandings which sometimes bring us acute pain, 
to make you sour or vindictive or cold or unsympathetic; nor 
the more favorable or prosperous circumstances to make you 
proud or highnxinded or wise in your own conceits; for the 
Lord may try us in both ways as tests of character. 

He also reminds us that we should be law-abiding citizens, 
"rendering to all their dues ; tribute to whom tribute is due ; 
custom to whom custom; fear [respectful deference or submission
] to whom fear; honor to whom honor/' Finally, he 
declares that if there be any other commandment, it is briefly 
summed up in the one word — love. He urges that we be diligent
 in the cultivation of this supreme quality of character — 
this all-embracing grace — '"knowing the season," knowing that 
the time is short in which to build up ourselves in this Godlike
 and Christ-like character. We surely have not a moment 
to lose if we desire to be approved of our God. 

If the Apostle could say to the saints of his day that "now 
it is high time to awake out of sleep," with how much greater 
force do his words apply in these closing days of this Gospel 
age! In the clear light of unfolding time-prophecy, we see 
that we are now living at the very end of the reign of sin 
and death ; that the night of Borrow, pain and tears is almost 
over; that the glorification of the last members of the Christ 
body is very soon to be completed. Yes, beloved, "the night is 
far spent" [about ended] and the glorious day of deliverance 
and blessing is *at hand. Even now the first faint streaks of 
dawn appear. Then let us cast away every encumbrance, everything
 that would hinder us in the slightest degree in running 
•successfully our glorious race. Let us press on with renewed 
vigor, looking neither to the right nor to the left, but keeping 
our eyes "fixed on the glory of tbe prize," and soon, please God, 
the victorv shall be ours! 


[6300] 


EVERLASTING BLESSINGS 


"In the Lord Jehovah trusting, everlasting strength have wo; 
He himself our sun, our glory, everlasting light shall he; 
Piverlasting life is ours, purchased by the life laid down; 
And our heads, oft bowed and weary, everlasting joy shall 
crown. 


"We shall dwell with Christ forever, when the shadows iiee 
away, 

In the everlasting glory of the everlasting day. 
Unto thee, beloved Savior, everlasting thanks belong, 
Everlasting adoration, everlasting praise and song." 


JOSEPH AND HIS BRETHREN 


"Come near to m-e, 1 pray you, . . , lie not gnrrvd 

do urn my father hither. 1 
Wnat story in all the writings of all the nations compares 
in simple pathos with that of Joseph and his brethren! Who 
can read this tale of ancient time and far-off land without 
tears starting to the eye! Yet this fragment of Hebrew history
 is not only a beautiful story, but also a possible prototype
 of things soon to come, wherein the joyous tears of mil* 
lions of people may bring home to the hearts of all true Christians
 the same, yes, greater heights of joy than that which 
moved the hearts of the first lsraelitish family. When the 
whole Israel of God, the true Israel, draw near together, "seeing
 eye to eye" throughout the length and the breadth of the 
earth, the final drama of the Gospel age will have reached its 
climax, preparatory to the grand ingathering into the glories 
of the kingdom. 

The story of Joseph's reunion with his brethren finds its 
setting at a time when "the famine was sore in the land/' 
There had been seven years of plenteous harvest, and food for 
all had been gathered in Egypt; but the brethren of Joseph 
were dwelling in a land where such provision had not been 
made. Already there had been two years of famine, and in* 
the five years to come it seemed impossible for any one to survive
 the dearth of bread. 

These facts may have been designed to picture circumstances
 in the present time. Joseph's brethren, dwelling with their 
father Jacob in the land of Canaan, had all professed faith 
in God, and had dwelt in abundance. Now, too, God's children 
have had an abundance of spiritual food, the Word of God, up 
to the time of the closing of the door of membership in the 
bride of Christ — at or about the Passover of 1918. Abundantly 
did the rain, the present truth, come down from heaven : the 
truth of God descended from the spiritual heavens upon all believers
 everywhere. Suddenly, about Passover, certain divinely 
permitted circumstances stopped the rains from heaven; and 
then the famine set in, a sore famine for the hearing of the 
Word of God. The only real spiritual food anywhere is that 
within the storehouse of the anti typical Joseph— Christ, Head 
and body, on both sides the vail ; and the only way to obtain 
this food is by meeting the conditions set down by Christ. 
BENJAMIN, TYPE OF THE GBEAT COMPANY 
In the picture Cod seems to be depicted in two offices; as 
Pharaoh, king over Joseph (the little flock}, and as Jacob, 
father of Joseph and of Benjamin (the gresut company) and 
of the other brothers (the professedly justified), including Judab
, a class of believers not spirit-begotten but specially loving 
toward Benjamin, the great company. {Genesis 44:14-34) If 
we apply the picture to our dav, the time may be regarded as 
between a year and a half and two years after the spiritual 
famine period began (about April, 1918), or October, 1910, to 
June, 1920. The countries typify, not places but conditions of 
the classes involved. Joseph in kingly power represents Christ, 
Head and body, partly beyond and partly this side the vail, 
also in kingly power. (Psalm 149:5-9) Canaan pictures the 
condition of professed relationship to God; while Egypt appears
 to represent in some respects the kingdom conditions 
since the closing of the door to the high calling. As in all pictures
 of this kind, not every detail may be expected to apply. 
In any interpretation of this nature it must always be understood
 as tentative, until actual experience has proven or disproven
 the correctness of the application. 

The picture relates to the approaching ingathering of the 
great company and other believers into present truth. (Jeremiah
 40:7-12) The Greater than Joseph has been recognized 
as bringing about changes since 1874, but he has not been 
known as Christ; nor have the body or feet members still 
this side the vail been known. "And when Joseph [Christ] 
came home, they brought him the present [consecration! 
which was in their hand [power] into the house, and bowed 
themselves to him to the earth" — worshiped Christ the Head, 
in their trouble and distress. — Genesis 43:26. 

During Christ's presence he has been searching, judging, 
the hearts of believers as to their vital relationship to our 
Father: "And he asked them of their welfare [religiously] 
and said, Is your father [our Father] well [Is it well with you 
toward our Father], the old man [the Ancient of Daysl of 
whom ye spake [preached]? Is he in good health Ta living 
reality* to youl? Then they answered, Thy servant our father 


Haste, and hring 


nor angrif with yourselves. . .. 
" — Genesis 45:4, 5, 13. 
is in good health [It is well with us toward him]. He is yet 
alive. And they bowed down their heads, and made obeisance 
[worshiped Christ the Head]."— Genesis 43:27, 28. 

Christ, Head and body, has considered the great company 
(Benjamin) very favorably, and has often spoken of God's 
graciousness to them: "And he lifted up his eyes, and saw 
his brother Benjamin [the great company], hi3 mother's son 
[both children of the Covenant of Grace], and said: Is this 
your younger brother, of whom ye spake unto me? [All believers
 have m prayer to Christ made special mention of the 
spirit- begotten great company]. And he said, God be gTacious
 [show special grace and favor] unto thee, my son." — 
Genesis 43:29. 

MILLIONS SOON TO EEOEIVE THE TRUTH 
The time will soon have come for the blessing of the great 
company. The feet members of Christ will yearn in love for 
the revealment of themselves to the spiritually-minded, but not 
altogether faithful Christians, soon to be released from blindness
 and from religious bondage. This class will be the little 
brother Benjamin of the Joseph class. The two classes started 
together as babes and children in Christ. It will be in troublous
 times ; but the tears of the little flock will be the tears of 
a holy joy, shed in the secret place, the Holy: "And Joseph 
made haste, for his bowels [heart affections] did yearn upon 
his brother [the little flock w T ill yearn over those dear to them 
and coming soon by millions into the truth], and he sought 
where to weep, and entered into his [secret] chamber and wept 
there."— Genesis 43:30. 

"And he washed his face [the priesthood may; not show 
signs of weeping], and went out ami refrained himself, and 
said, Set on bread [present <ome features of truth 1. And they 
set for him by himself [the feet members u*vd uniqmdv upon <1 ; 
vine truths], and for them by themselves [mere believers assimilate
 the Bible truths intended for them], and for the Egyptians
 which did eat with him by themselves [religious worldlings
 and believers cannot assimilate the same idea si ; for that 
is an abomination unto the Egyptians" — worldlings abominate
 the truths about the blood-bought sacrifice.— Oenesis 
43:31, 32, 

"And they sat before bim [all are before Christ in these 
judgment days], the firstborn according to his birthright, and 
the youngest according to his youth [before Christ all believers
 occupy their true and hence appropriate position] ; and 
the men marveled one at another [at the discerning classification
 of Christians]. And he took and sent messes [measures 
of Bible truth] unto them from before him [all truth comes 
from Christ] ; but Benjamin's mess [the truths of the great 
company] was five [a divine or spiritual number] times so 
much [the great company feed upon spiritual truths] as any 
of theirs [the professedly justified]. And they drank [imbibed 
doctrines], and were merry [happy] with him"— in the truth 
made known to them. — Genesis 43:33, 34. 

THE ANTITTPICAL BENJAMIN'S CTJP 
"And he commanded the steward of his house, saying, Fill 
the men's sacks [vessels, minds] with food [the truth] as 
much as they can carry, and put every man's money in the 
sack's mouth [truth cannot be bought except by consecration]. 
And put my. cup, the silver cup [the Bible truths on spiritual 
subjects], in the sack's mouth of the youngest [great company
], and his corn money. And he did 'according to the word 
tha<t Joseph had spoken. "—Genesis 44:1, 2. 

Then follows the story of the finding of the cup in Benjamin
's sack, representing the general recognition by the great 
company of their possession of the Bible in its spiritual phases. 
(Genesis 44:3-14) The one who has the cup— the spirit of 
the Word — is recognized as facing dea<th. The great company
 members are seen by "Christians" generally to be consecrated
 in a way that will bring about the death of their fle^h: 
"With whomsoever of thy servants it [the cup] be found, both 
let him die. and we [the* professedly justified] also will be my 
lord's [Christ's] bondmen" — servants on the human plane. — 
Genesis 44:0. 

Eventually the class having the antitypical cup is to live as 
the servant of the Greater than Joseph; and the associates of 
the Benjamin class, former persecutors of the Joseph comVII
— 31 


[6301] 


(230 231 > 


(231-232) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Bruoxlvn, N. Y. 


pany, are to be blameless: "He [the great company] with 
whom it [the cup, the spirit of the Word] is found shall be 
my [Christ's] servant [Revelation 7:15]; and ye [once persecutors
] shall be blameless" — after a Millennial age repentance 
and cleansing.— Genesis 44:10; Leviticus 10:26-28, 
ALL CHRISTIANS NOW ON JUDGMENT 

In verses 14-34 Judah represents a specially loving and 
zealous class among the professedly justified believers, such a 
class as might, through a good heart condition, become in the 
earthly phase of the kingdom sons of the ancient worthies and 
gain life with them on some spirit plane* — Ezekiel 46:16, 17. 

It becomes a time of judgment for all the brothers of 
Joseph ; for he says : "Wot ye not that such a man as I can 
certainly make trial?" (Genesis 44:15, margin) The brothers 
then acknowledge their wrong-doing toward Joseph : " And Judah
 said, What shall we say unto my lord? [What can sinful
 nominal Christianity say?] What ehall we apeak? Or 
how shall we clear ourselves? [They cannot clear themselves 
of the charge of persecuting God's elect and of much other 
evil-doing]. God hath found out the iniquity of thy servants 
[through the interpretations of Revelation and ^zekiel and 
through churchianity's manifest persecution of men of God] ; 
behold, we are my lord'3 [Chrises] servants, both we and he 
also [the great company] with whom the cup is found." — 
Genesis 44:16. 

"And he [Joseph, representing Christ] said, God forbid that 
I should do so [only the spirit-begotten can be servants on the 
heavenly plane] ; tout the man [great company] in whose hand 
the cup [spiritual things] is found, he shall be my servant; 
and as for you [the professedly justified], get you up in peace 
unto your father [in the earthly phase of the kingdom]. Then 
Judah, [a specially noble class of mere believers] came near 
unto him [drew especially near to Christ], and said, O my 
lord, let thy servant, I pray thee, speak a word in my lord's 
ears, and let not thine anger burn [as in the troublous days 
here spoken of] against thy servant; for thou [Christ] art 
even as Pharaoh" — all should honor the Son even as they honor 
the Father. — Genesis 44:17, 18. 

FUTUBE WOBK OF THE GBEAT COMPANY 

In Judah's recital (44:19-34) are the following words: 
"We have a father [our Father], an old man [the Ancient of 
I>ays], and a child of his old age [the great company], a little 
one [babes, children, little ones in Christ] ; and hi3 brother 
[the Christ, Head and body] is dead [as dead, outcast as sinners
 to other believers], and he alone [the great company 
alone, as it seems to the Judah class] is left of his mother 
[the Covenant of Grace], and his father [our Father] lovefeh 
him. [How tenderly does God love all his spirit-begotten children
!] If he should leave his father, his father would die [a 
figure of the Father's great love for the great company class] . 
And thou [Christ] sai&st unto thy servants, "Except your 
youngest brother come down with you [learn the present truth 
at the divinely foreknown time], ye shall see my face no 
more" — no kingdom favor can come to the now professedly 
justified unless the great company gain the knowledge and 
character development necessary for its coming great work. — 
Genesis 44:20-23. 

"My father said unto us, Ye know that my wife [the Covenant
 of Grace] bare me two sons [the little flock and the great 
company], and one [the Christ, Head and body] went out 
from me [so it seems to all other believers], and I said, Surely 
he is torn to pieces la living sacrifice] and I saw him no more 
[so it seems to other believers, who have never been able to 
discern the mystery of Christ in us]." (Genesis 44:27, 28} 
"His life [our Father's life, through spirit-begetting] is bound 
up in the lad's life Ithe great company has its spiritual life 
direct from God]. How shall I [noble, but not wholly consecrated
 believers] go up to my father [approach unto God] 
and the lad be not with me?" — Believers depend greatly on the 
great company for spiritual assistance. — Genesis 44:34. 
MANIFESTATION OF THE BODY OF CHEIST 

The divinely appointed time has now about come for the 
mystery, the great secret of God, "hidden from ages and from 
generations/' to be completely and finally finished, and for the 
great company and all other believers to see who are the members
 of the body of Christ. As the narrative proceeds: "Then 
Joseph [Christ, Head and body, including the body members 
still this side the vail] could not refrain himself before them 
all [the time will have finally come, possibly at about thetime
 before mentioned] and he cried, Cause every man [of 
the Egyptians, worldly churchists] to go out from me!" [In 
the final fall of ecclesiasticism, wherein the false followers of 
Christ will be detached from the real. {Jeremiah 23:3!): K/* 1 
kiel 24:21}] And there stood no man [worldling] with him 
[the Christ] when he made himself known unto his brethren. 


[when the truth cornea to the great company and to other believers
 as to who are the real feet members of Christ, whom 
they had Bold into Egyptian bondage and oppression]. "And 
he wept aloud [a great outburst of repressed love on the part 
of the body members] ; and the Egyptians and the house ot 
Pharaoh heard" — it will be manifest even to the worldlings 
who have gone out. — Genesis 45:2. 

"And Joseph [through the Christ, body members] said unto 
his brethren [it will be made known to all believers] 1 am 
Joseph [these hitherto despised and cast out ones are the true 
body of Christ] ; doth my father yet live [is our Father a living
 reality to you] ? And his brethren [mere believers] could 
not answer him [former persecutors could have nothing to 
say] ; for they were troubled [margin, terrified] at his presence
" — in deep trouble because of Christ's second presence and 
especially because of their treatment of his feet members. — 
Genesis 45:3. 

"And Joseph [through the feet members] said unto his 
brethren, Come near to me, 1 pray you [draw near to Christ in 
renewed consecration]. And they came near. And he said 
[through the feet members still on earth], 1 am Joseph [the 
true members of Christ] your brother [all believers are brethren
 on one plane or another], whom ye sold into Egypt" — 
whom ye as believers persecuted. — Genesis 45:4, 

"Now therefore be not grieved, nor angry with yourselves 
[do not weep or gnash your teeth in self-reproach and useless
 regrets] that ye sold me into Egypt [ostracised, misrepresented
, persecuted the feet members] ; for God did send me 
before you to preserve life" — without the help of the feet members
 the great company and other believers would die religiously 
in the stress of troublous times. — Genesis 45:5. 

"For these two years [possibly from the spring of 1918 
to the winter of 1919 or spring of 1920] hath the famine [for 
the truth] been in the land [among professing Christians] ; 
and yet there are five years [to the Bpring of 1925, to the 
resurrection of the ancient worthies] in the which there shall 
neither be earing nor harvest" — no general religions work for 
the world can be done. — Gen, 45:0. 

FEET MEMBERS LIKE POLISHED BRASS 
"And God sent me before you to preserve you a posterity 
in the earth, and to save your lives by a great deliverance 
[first from the bondage of a fallen ecclesiasticism], So now it 
was not you that sent me [the suffering body members] hither 
[to the time and conditions mentioned] but God ['the cup that 
my Father hath poured'] ; and he hath made me a father to 
Pharaoh [Genesis 41:38-45], and lord of all his house ['all 
power in heaven and earth 5 ] and a ruler throughout all the 
land of Egypt" — 'lord of lords.' — Genesis 45:7, 8. 

"Haste ye [the time is short for reconsecration before the 
Gospel age ends] ; and go up to my father [reconsecrate yourselves
] and say unto him Lthank God for the truth revealed], 
Thus saith thy son Joseph, God hath made me lord of all 
Egypt [all the world]. Come down unto me ['thy kingdom 
come'], tarry not [the time for the kingdom is at hand]. And 
■thou [mere believers and great company, and God with them] 
shalt dwell in the land of Goshen [a specially favored condition
 in the world], and thou shalt be near unto me Junto 
Christ, Head and body, including those still in the ilesh], then 
and thy children, and thy children's children [all whom you 
have taught to believe in the Lord] and thy docks and thy 
herds [animals represent the individuals as to the flesh], and 
all that thou hast [everything wholly consecrated to Christ]. 
And there will I [Christ, Head and bodyl nourish thee [mere 
believers and great company, with present truth] for yet 
there are five years [1919 or 1920 to 1924 or 1925] of famine 
[of the truth to the people generally]; lest thou and thy 
household [of faith] and all that thou hast, come to poverty" 
— spiritually. — Genesis 45:9-11. 

"And behold your eyes [eyes of understanding, anointed 
with the word of truth] see, and the eyes of my brother Benjamin
 [spiritual understanding of the great company], that 
it is my mouth [the body members in the flesh are Christ's 
mouthpiece — 'in Christ's stead we beseech you, Be ye reconciled
 to God 5 ] that speaketh unto you. And ye shall tell my 
father [thankfully acknowledge to our Father] of all my glory 
in Egypt [not least of all, Christ's glorious victory over apostate
 ecclesiasticism], and of all that ye have seen; and ye 
•shall haste and bring down my father hither [in your consecrated
 hearts]. And he fell upon his brother Benjamin's neck 
and wept [the blessing of knowledge of present truth and of 
full reconciliation to God will come to the spirit-begotten great 
company, as well as loving fellowship with the body members 
of Christ on earth]: and Keniamin [the gre;it nuiipiirv] wept 
upon his neck" — great joy of the great company over the revealment
 to them "of the Christ in the flesh.— Genesis 45:12-14. 


[6302] 


Atgust 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(232-233) 


"Moreover, he kissed all his brethren, and wept upon them 
[enjoyed the mutual spirit of true reconciliation with all believers
] ; and after that he talked with them" — [the feet members
 will teach present truth directly or indirectly through 
preaching and through print to the great company, and through 
them to all believers during the brief period of opportunity 
after the fail of ecclesiastic-ism].— Genesis 45:lo. 


That it wa3 Pastor Russell's belief that there should come a 
time when the body members on earth should become manifest, 
or show forth the truth to everyone, is apparent from the following
 extract from The Watch Tower of 1916, page 344, in 
comment on Revelation 1:15: "In the end of the age, the feet 
members of the body of Christ will be illuminated by the truth 
and will shine forth as polished brass." 


DIVERSITIES OF OPERATION OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 

11 And there are diversities of operations; but it is the same God which worheth all in all** — 1 Corinthians 12:6. 


Now, as at all times, there is a variety of operations
 of the holy Spirit. This Spirit is holy or divine
 power, the power of God. It is an invisible power, which 
manifests itself in many different ways. God is a Spirit Being
, powerful, yet invisible to human sight. Likewise the 
angels are powerful, invisible beings, and manifest themselves 
by their works, their operations. The only way by which spirit 
beings may become visible to humankind is by the performance 
of a miracle. The spirit must assume a material body for the 
purpose of manifestation to human eyes. 

During the ages preceding the Gospel age holy spirit 'beings 
manifested themselves at various times to godly men and 
women, to deliver messages from the Lord. In the initiatory 
stages of the Christian church, also, in the days of the apostles
, there were angelic manifestations to God's people. But 
after the apostles died and the church became established, 
these manifestations ceased, having accomplished their designed 
end. It is noticeable that whatever angelic manifestations and 
revelations have been received since that time have always been 
misrepresentations, deceptions, leading many away from the revealed
 truth of the Scriptures. At a time when the canon 
of Scripture was almost completed, the Apostle Paul put the 
church especially on guard on this point, declaring that the 
Word of God is sufficient, "that the man 6f God may be perfect
, thoroughly furnished unto every good work," and warning
 that in the latter times "some would depart from the faith, 
giving heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of demons." — 2 
Timothy 3:13 17 ; 1 Timothy 4:1. 

The Apostle is very sweeping in his statement of the allsufficiency
 of the written Word, saying, "All Scripture given 
by inspiration of God is profitable for doctrines, for reproof, 
for correction, for instruction in righteousness." There was 
no need for further revelations. And he said: "But though 
we or an angel from heaven preach any other gospel unto you 
than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed
." (Galatians 1:6-9) Evil spirits, fallen angels, have 
certain powers of manifestation which they received originally 
from God, but which they have misused. Very many have 
been deceived by these angels into thinking they were receiving 
revelations from the Lord; for they often speak in the name of 
the Lord, transforming themselves, outwardly, into angels of 
light, as the Apostle forewarned. (2 Corinthians 11:13-15) 
(See also our pamphlet on "Spiritism is Demonism") To listen 
to any of these revelations, whispering* in the ear, or impressions
 upon the mind, is indeed very dangerous. Every mental 
impression should be tested by the Word of God, written for 
our guidance. Whatever will not stand this crucial test should 
at once be rejected. The delusions of today along this line 
are very subtle, the deluded apostles of the fallen spirits being 
transformed as apostles of light. God's Spirit always operates 
in full harmony with his written Word. 

SPIRIT'S OPERATION IN DIFFERENT AGES 

Every perfect creature made in God's image and likeness is 
possessed of the holy Spirit. Before his fall Adam had the 
holy Spirit — the holy mind or disposition implanted by the 
Creator in the heart of this perfect man. The prophets of old 
had the holy Spirit, and on certain occasions were operated 
upon directly by this Spirit, or power of God, to write and 
speak words that often they did not themselves understand. 
(Ezekiel 20:49; 1 Peter 1:10-12) In this sense they had 
God's holy mind to the extent that they sought to do God's holy 
will; but the operation of the power of God upon them when 
they received divine messages was mechanical. 

Comparing the Spirit's operation in the persons of the 
prophets before Christ with its operation in the apostles during
 our Lord's ministry, we see that some of the same things 
were done by the prophets, though not everything. In some 
instances sleeping ones were awakened from death by the 
prophets; leprosy was healed by Elisha; the widow's cruse 
of oil was supplied by Elijah; bitter waters were healed. In 
all these instances the miracles were wrought in the divine 
name, by the holy Spirit, or power, of God. 


When our Lord Jesus was in the world, the power which 
he communicated to his disciples was a measure of his own 
power, his own spirit. After his resurrection, he breathed 
upon them and Baid: "Receive ye the holy Spirit." In this 
instance there may have been a communication of a measure 
of power at the time, or it may have been a forceful way of 
telling them that they were in a few days to receive this power
, this holy Spirit, in a special way, after he had ascended 
to heaven to appear for them. At any rate it is not to be confused
 with the operation of the holy Spirit at Pentecost. 

The communication of the holy Spirit in the outpouring 
at Pentecost was something altogether new, different from any 
previous manifestation of divine power. The holy Spirit as it 
came upon the church at this time was from the Father. The 
{Father had directly recognized them as sons. The Lord Jesus 
was indeed the agent in bestowing this blessing, but he declared
 that it was from the Father. He had previously told 
them to tarry at Jerusalem until they were endued with power 
from on high — until they should receive "the promise of the 
Father." (Luke 24:49) Some of the outward manifestations 
of the holy Spirit at this time and its after results were the 
same as when Jesus himself had communicated the holy power 
to them during his ministry. 

But a manifestation of the holy Spirit might mean one 
thing at one time and another thing at another time. In the 
ease of the prophets of old, the outward manifestation was 
given in order that the people might notice and therefore give 
the more earnest heed to the message; and the purpose seema 
to have been the same when our Lord sent forth the disciples, 
the twelve, and the seventy, in his name — that his message 
that the kingdom was at hand might be carried all over the 
country, for the purpose of awakening people to the fact that 
Messiah had come. After Pentecost, the message of the disciples
 was that this same Jesus whom the Jews had crucified had 
been raised from the dead. With great power they gave witness
 to this fact. 

The same holy Spirit now operated for a different purpose, 
to convict the Jews and lead them to Christy This same holy 
■Spirit will also operate in the future when it will be poured 
out upon all flesh. Its operation will be manifested in enlightenment
 of the mind, in assistance and instruction, in gradually 
healing the nations — mentally, morally and physically. 

BEGETTING OF THE SPIRIT DIFFERENT FROM ALL 

But the special feature of the holy Spirit's operation during 
this present age is different from any other. It consists of a 
begetting of a new nature, and is accompanied by a supernatural
 illumination of the heart and the mind, enabling one to 
grasp spiritual truths, to see into the deep things of God, never 
seen before. The new mind is small in its beginning, but 
must grow day by day, feeding upon the Word of God, becoming
 more and more able to appreciate and assimilate the things 
of the Spirit, which the natural man perceiveth not. The embryo
 new creature, the babe in Christ, must grow in grace, 
in God's favor and in spiritual strength, becoming more like 
Christ in character, more fixed and established in the truth 
as it i-s in Christ Jesus. 

In John 7:39 we read, "The holy Spirit was not yet given, 
because Jesus was not yet glorified." The Father could not 
give this spirit of sonship to any until Jesus had been crucified
, had arisen and had ascended into heaven, the Moat Holy, 
to present his sacrificial merit on behalf of those who would 
be of the church; in other words, after he had deposited his 
merit in the Father's hands for the benefit of all of this class ; 
for none could receive the spirit of sonship save through the 
Redeemer. 

During this Gospel age, some have had the blessed privilege 
of thus receiving the Spirit, of becoming Bona of God, on & 
spiritual plane; and if this class continue faithful to their 
covenant with the Lord, they shall be bom beings of the divine 
nature. Such an offer was never before made, and never will 
be repeated. This class receive special instruction and guidance
 from the Father through Christ for the high position to 


[6303] 


(234-238) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


which they have been called. No longer, as in the apostles' 
day, do the spirit-begotten receive miraculous gifts of the 
Spirit ; for these are no longer needed. But they have the 
fruits of the Spirit, which have remained, and which are far 
more important than were the gifts. These fruits are to be 
developed in their characters by study of the Word, by prayer 
and by painstaking effort day by day. 

The new creatures in Christ are the anointed class. The 
anointing and the begetting result from the same operation of 
the holy Spirit. The begetting represents our individual start 
in the new life. The anointing represents our coming into the 
body of Christ. When we present ourselves in consecration 
and are accepted, we are at once begotten of the holy Spirit 
and inducted into the body, coming thus under the anointing 
which flows from the ofreat Head, Christ Jesus. The one operation
 of the spirit begins the individual work and also the new 
relationship as one of the anointed company, or body of Christ. 

The various fruits of the Spirit which must be developed 
as we go on in the new life are the most desirable that could 
be imagined. They are enumerated by the Apostles Paul and 
Peter in somewhat different phraseology. St. Paul specifies 
these fruits as love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness
, faith, meekness, self-control. The Apostle Peter lists them 
as faith, fortitude, knowledge, self-control, patience, godliness, 
brotherly love, and lastly the 'broad general love that covers 
all men even our enemies. This list is very comprehensive 
and includes all the fruits of the holy Spirit. If we bear these 
fruits richly, aboundingly, he says, we shall never fall, but 
shall have abundant entrance into Christ's kingdom. 
DEGREES OF SPIRIT'S MAHIFESTATION 

hi considering the fruits of the holy Spirit as given in 
the Word, we must suppose that all of these are fully developed
 in any being who is in the likeness of God and has been 
tested and proven, the difference on the different planes of 
life being not in kind but in degree, according to the capacity. 
Mankind have lost the image and likeness of God to a very 
large degree. Hence in a natural man of today those qualities 
are lacking which would have been present had he remained 
perfect. The members of the Gospel church are put through 
manifold trying experiences designed under divine blessing and 
assistance to develop these very qualities; for as they are, if 
faithful, to be exalted to the very highest plane of being, they 
must develop these spirit-fruits to the highest degree; and supernatural
 illumination is granted them in order thai they may 
be able to successfully accomplish this. 


While we remain in the imperfect tabernacle, the flesh, we 
cannot manifest these precious fruits perfectly, because the 
flesh is unable adequately to show forth the sentiments of the 
new heart, the new mind. Sin has so marred the human brain 
that it will not perfectly respond to the holy mind within. 
For this reason the robe of Christ's imputed righteousness must; 
be supplied to cover our need until our earthly course is finished
. 

VARYING DEGREES OF GLORY 

Considering the restitution of the world in the age just before
 us, we see that God has set aside the thousand years of 
Messiah's kingdom for tne purpose of instructing mankind and 
of bringing them back to full perfection of mind and morals. 
This bringing of men back to the image of God will mean that 
they will become sons of God, and will then possess all the 
fruits and graces of the holy Spirit that the church must now 
develop. What, then, will he the difference between these different
 classes? We answer that as we have stated above, the 
difference will be one of quality and of quantity, not of kind. 
The operation of the holy Spirit in human conditions would 
necessarily be limited; for men will be sons of God on the 
human plane. Similarly, the manifestations of spirit-fruits in 
angels would correspond to their plane of being. 

To illustrate these various differences, we might take some 
of the precious jewels We might let the emerald represent 
human perfection, the topaz angelic perfection, and the diamond
 divine perfection. These are all precious, all beautiful. 
Each is perfect on its own plane, but their planes are different 
one from another. The diamond emits the greatest degree of 
light. Thus it will be with the divine nature. The Lord has 
promised that the faithful church shall have the very highest 
glory and honor — immortality. Hence she will manifest all 
the glorious attributes of perfect character in the highest degree
 of any of Jehovah's intelligent creatures. 

But all of the sons of God, on whatever plane, will have 
God's holy Spirit. None others will be permitted to continue 
their existence beyond the final test to follow the Millennium. 
God will have a glorious universe throughout the ages of 
eternity; and from every inhabited world peeans of praise shall 
rewound, to be taken up and repeated by every loving, loyal 
heart in every part of Jehovah's boundless domain. Existence 
will be sublime in that glad day, for which all other days 
have been made; and the most glorious heritage of all will 
be the heritage of the Christ of God. 


CHRISTIAN GIVING 

[The last two paragraphs of this article were reprinted from Vol. VI Studies in the Scriptures, p. 343, The remainder was 
reprinted from article entitled, "Will a Man Rob God; Yet Ye Have Robbed Me," published in issue of June 15, 1890. Please 
see the articles named. 1 


CONQUERING EVIL 

SEPTEMBER 8. — EPHESIANS 5:11-18. 

LThe first seven paragraphs of this article, as originally published in August, 1918, were reprinted from article entitled, 
"The Sin of Govetousneas," published in issue of July 15, 1898. Paragraphs 8 to 11 inclusive were reprinted from article entitled
, "Aha,b's Sin— -Covetousneas Murder," published in issue of September 15, 1915. The remainder of the article was reprinted 
from article entitled, "Awake Thou That Sleepest and Arise," published in issue of March 1, 1902. Please see the articles 
named. 1 


WINNING THE WORLD TO CHRIST 


September 15. — Matthew 5:13-10, 28: Acts 10:9-15. 

return of christ tlik only hope of the world two thoughts forming the basis of the theory that the world must be 

converted during the gospel age — commission of the church— disciples to be gathered out of all nations-- 
the gospel to be preached world-wide as a witness to the people — this tortion of the work finished. 
"Go ye into the world, and preach the gospel to the whole creation."— Nark 16:1.">. 
From time to time we have demonstrated that there is no been the cord which has drawn hundreds of noble lives to selfhope
 whatever of general world-blessing through Christ along 
the lines commonly held by Christian people; that is, the conversion
 of the world by present-da.y missionary efforts. We 
herewith review this subject, not with the purpose of casting 
disrespect upon all missionaries, but in order to demonstrate 
afresh the fact that this world-conversion-through-foreignmissions
 delusion is doinsr positive and serious harm to the 
Lord's true people by leading to false expectations and, consequently
, to misdirected efforts. 

Foreign missions were undertaken with two convictions, one 
correct, the other false: (1) The correct, scriptural conviction
 that the only name by which any can be saved is the name 
of Jesus — faith in his sacrificial dearth, and obedience and devotion
 to him; (2) The false, unscriptural conviction that there 
is no hope for any who die in ignorance of the only name 
whereby we must be saved. These intertwined theories have 


■sacrifice, especially during the first half of the nineteenth century
. They have been the cord also which has drawn, and still 
draws, millions on millions of money from sympathetic purses. 
And we need not wonder if the money has in turn drawn some 
into the missionary work simply for an honorable and easy living
. 

swoo oi ONnoa Koiiovan 
We are not objecting to the sacrifice of noble lives and of 
consecrated money, however; for we firmly believe that lives 
and money given with sincerity have been ^leasinsr to the Lord, 
even though given under some serious and discreditable misapprehensions
 of the divine chararter and of the plan for 
human salvation. But we hold that this mixture of truth and 
error is very injurious to the people of God, in that it diverts 
their hearts and their efforts away from the truth, away from 
Bible study, away from growth in knowledge and in the graces 

f6304] 


August 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(238 239) 


of the holy Spirit. Moreover, it inculcates instead the thought 
that the chief object of life for all Christians should be the 
snatching fellow creatures from the hands of an angry God 
intent upon hurling them into eternal torment at the hands of 
demons; or, if not this, the making and contributing of money 
to pay the expenses of those who do the snatching. 

As a result Christian people "have no time" to study the 
Father's Word, no time to study the divine plan, no time to 
cultivate their own hearts. They often say to themselves, and 
sometimes unguardedly to others: 'Bible study? Nonsense! 
We already know enough when we know that millions of human
 beings are going down to hell. By and by we hustlers 
who have been 1 less careful for our own spiritual development 
and for Bible study, but more on fire and burdened for souls, 
will have brighter crowns than will these hair-splitting Bible 
students, if indeed they are not rejected from heaven entirely.' 

But with the advance of intelligence a reaction from so unreasonable
 a position was bound to come; and it has come. 
IVople in general no longer believe in the horrible devil-god of 
the past, seeking for any possible pretext for the torture of 
;is many as possible of his creatures. Reason is asserting itsolf
; and man no longer poses as the sinner's only friend to 
save him from a malicious God. Any such proposition is too 
absurd for the enlightenment of the twentieth century. 

But men will have theories; for these are still, as ever, the 
basis of action, the rudder of human effort. It has become evident
 to all thinkers that one or the other of the strands of the 
original mission-cord is false, unreliable, rotten. Question: 
Which of the two strands will they reject? 

We answer that the true one will be rejected and the false 
one retained. Men will continue to believe that all hope ends 
with death; and they will reject the inspired declaration that 
faith in Christ is the only hope, and his the only name. They 
have already concluded, and are becoming more and more convinced
, that although the name of Jesus is a good rallying cry, 
especially when missionary contributions are called for, yet 
it is not the only name for salvation. They have concluded, 
but do not care to declare it in so many words, that education 
and civilization are, rather, the only names for salvation. And 
at home and abroad the term salvation is more and more coming
 to mean, not a personal relationship to him who is the light 
of the world and in whom alone is life everlasting, but social 
progress, municipal and national reform — social uplift. Thus 
lias the false idea of missions and of their conversion of the 
world led God's people farther and farther awfey from his 
Word, which in their zeal without knowledge they reject, 

MISSIONS TO SUCCEED DURING THE MILLENNIUM 

To those who are rightly instructed on the subject by God's 
Word, who lean not to their own understanding, but who daily 
search the Scriptures to be thereby taught of God, the utter 
failure of missions to convert the world to even the imperfect 
conditions which prevail throughout Christendom is faithstrengthening
. This failure demonstrates beyond question the 
truth of the Scripture teachings that God is not yet attempting
 the conversion and salvation of mankind, but is leaving 
that great work for the future, to be accomplished by the Messianic
 kingdom, when it shall be established in power and great 
glory during the Millennium, It corroborates fully the Bible 
declaration that the present work of God is the election of a 
church which, when polished, finished and glorified with her 
Ix>rd and Head, shall by and by bless -all the families of the 
earth as Abraham's seed. (Galatians 3:8, 16. 29} Then will 
be fulfilled the petition of our Lord's prayer: "Thy kingdom 
rome ; thy will be done on earth as it is done in heaven." 

Many students of the Bible derive a wrong thought from 
our Lord's commission to his disciples just before his ascension. 
That commission divides itself into three parts: (1) Making 
disciples of all nations; (2) baptizing them ; and (3) teaching 
them. (Matthew 28: Id, 20) The Greek word which in the 
Authorized Version is rendered teach in verse 19 is altogether
 different from that so rendered in verse 20. (See margin
) The former Greek word signifies to proselyte or make 
disciples ; the latter, to instruct. Thus it will be seen that a 
wrong thought is derived from this text by those who interpret 
it to mean: 'Go and convert all nations.' This is not the 
thought; but rather, *Go ye and gather converts from all nations
, and baptize and teach these converts.' 

This view is in accord with our Master's declaration on 
other occasions, when he testified that the world would not 
be converted at his second coming, but quite the reverse. It 
is also in harmony with his statement in Matthew 24:14: 
"This gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world 
for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come." 


A TRUITFUL SOURCE Or ERROR 

Whoever gets the wrong thought respecting the commission 
of the church is apt to take the wrong course in his endeavor 
to comply with IU Those who have concluded that the Lord 
designed the conversion of the world during the Gospel age are 
led to various subterfuges, in both mind and conduct, in oTder 
to attempt to carry out the commission which they have misunderstood
. This is leading some at the present time to ignore
 the Scriptural definition of the terms of membership in 
Christ's kingdom — to lower the standard of both faith and 
conduct, in order to admit a larger proportion of the human 
family and to convince themselves and others, if possible, that 
the world is growing better and is being converted. 

Furthermore, some not only have concluded that the preaching
 of the cross of Christ and faith in the redemption is unnecessary
, but have even gone beyond this and have claimed that 
even an historical knowledge of Christ is unnecessary, that 
heathen religions are to be esteemed as part of the preaching 
of the Gospel, and that the heathen obedience to their own religious
 customs is to be esteemed as obedience to the Gospel. 
Thus more or less false views of the church's commission are 
leading astray many who see no hope in any other way of ever 
attaining to that which our Lord commissioned nearly nineteen 
centuries ago, and which otherwise they would feel has so far 
failed most miserably and can never be accomplished. 

On the other hand we hold that, rightly read and understood
, the commission has been fulfilled ; that the message of 
Christ and the Messianic kingdom haB been proclaimed, directly
 or indirectly, with more or less force and energy, in 
every nation under heaven, and that as a resist some from 
every nation have been made disciples ; and that incidentally a 
witness has been given to all the peoples of the earth respecting
 the redemption and the divine provision for salvation 
through the Redeemer. Of these disciples gathered out of all 
nations by the Lord's message a "little flock" will be found to 
whom it will be the Father's good pleasure to give the kingdom
, in joint-heirship with Jesus in glory as the seed of Abraham
, through whom during the Millennium all the families of 
the earth shall be blessed. Only from this standpoint can our 
Lord's commission be properly appreciated and its fulfillment 
recognized. 

THE WHOLE CHURCH COMMISSIONED 

That our Lord gave this commission, not merely to the 
apostles, but to all who should believe on him through their 
word, is clearly shown by the words with which he closed the 
commission: "Lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of 
the age." The apostles did not live until the end of the age; 
and hence the Lord's words signify that he will be with all of 
his followers who avail themselves of his commission and endeavor
 to present his message to those having ears to hear out 
of all nations. Of course he did not mean that he would be 
present with them personally; for he had already told them 
that he would go away but would return at the end of the age 
(John 14:2), and his words are not to be understood as contradictory
. In the present instance his meaning evidently was 
that he would supervise their work, would be the real Head 
of the church, would oversee all of their affairs, would be with 
them in the sense of supporting, guiding and counselling those 
who would walk in his way and proclaim his message, in pro 
portion as they were faithful to the charge. 

This assurance of the Lord's presence was designed to give 
the apostles courage for the work which he was committing to 
them. Whih he was with them in the flesh they merely followed
 his directions; and as soon as he was smitten they were 
as sheep having no shepherd. Now he was going away ; but he 
wished them to realize that his power would be with them 
and that his supervising guidance of their affairs would be 
granted them, as surely as while he was with them in the 
flesh, though apparent only to the eye of faith. According to 
their faith it should be unto them a strength, a power. 

All down the Gospel age the Lord's people have similarly 
been required to walk by faith and not by si^ht ; and doubtless 
the lesson has been valuable to them in spiritual upbuilding, 
much more so than had he remained in the flesh with us. If, 
then, the thought of the Lord's spiritual supervision of his 
work was to be a source of encouragement and strength to 
those who would attempt to teach in his name all down the 
age, much more may we of the present time realize his actual 
presence in the close of the Gospel harvest. Although we see 
Jesus with no other than the eye of faith, yet we who believe 
have joy unspeakable and both strength and courage for the 
work; for he is once more present with his church in the harvest
 work, even as he was with the apostles in the sowing of 
the «eed at the beginning of the age. 


[6305] 


INTERESTING QUESTIONS 


Question: — Was Adam foreordained to fall into sin? If bo, 
how could it be said that he had a fair trial T 

Answer: — Adam waa not compelled to sin. God did not 
foreordain that he must disobey the divine command. That is 
to say, Adam was not limited in the exercise of his will. He 
could will to do right or wrong. The decision was left open 
to himself alone. The fact that God knew in advance what 
Adam would do is an altogether different matter. While we 
realize that God is so great that he has power we can neither 
understand nor appreciate, yet the Bible clearly indicates that 
Adam had a free will. If he had not a fair, full chance, then 
he could not have been justly condemned. Therefore the Scriptures
 clearly present the fact that he was not deceived ( 1 Timothy
 2:14) Not only was he created in God's image and likeness
, but he had knowledge and at the time of his deflection 
understood what the penalty for disobedience would be. However
, God evidently had much sympathy with Adam in the fall, 
and did not purpose that this fall should work Adam's eternal 
ruin. Hence the Bible tells us that God had arranged in advance
 that Christ should redeem Adam. Moreover, our merciful
 Creator has also provided that Adam might have more 
knowledge before his final destiny would be fixed. 


Question: — Do we understand that there is a restitution 
call now open to mankind? 

Answer : — Until the glorification of the church there can be 
no individual or personal restitution work. There ie, ( however
, a restoration work beginning so far as the preparing of 
the world is concerned. During the past forty-four years a 
marvelous progress has been made, wonderful inventions that 
in so short a time have made the world rich and have brought 
blessings of comfort and convenience never before dreamed of. 
These great improvements have come because we have entered 
the "times of restitution" mentioned in Acts 3:19-21. But as 
far as mankind is concerned, we understand restitution to human
 perfection is not due to begin until the Messianic kingdom
 shall have been fully established. That beneficent reign 
is in process of establishment now. But not until the last of 
the feet members of the body of Christ shall have passed beyond
 the vail will the work of restoring humanity under the 
New Covenant begin; for that covenant cannot be sealed with 
the blood of Christ until the church has passed into death and 
the merit released for application to the world. Then the covenant
 will begin to operate for the benefit of all the families 
of the earth. 

