page 1 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIV. JANUARY 1, 1903. No. 1 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 3 

New Year Greetings, 1903 3 

New Financial Conditions 5 

Missionary News 5 

Concerning Palestine 5 

Protestant Federation 5 

"Rejoice in the Lord Alway" 5 

Turning the World Upside Down 10 

Questions of General Interest 14 

Christ the First Fruits 14 

The Beginning of Our Resurrection 14 

What Constitutes Chastisement? 15 

page 2 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



TO OUR FRIENDS ON THE LORD'S POOR LIST. 



If you do not wish your TOWER to be discontinued at the 
end of the year, write us a postal card at once, stating your interest 
and desire to have the journal continued. We are glad 
to supply you regularly, esteeming it a part of our stewardship 



from the Lord, but we wish to be assured, at least in each December, 
that you are still interested and enjoy the TOWER visits. 

Occasionally we hear of some one who has been without 
the TOWER for a year or more, because unable to remit for it. 
This grieves us. We wish all the interested to have it regularly 
and the Lord always supplies sufficient funds to meet the expense. 
Any who cannot pay now, but hope to pay later on, may 
order on credit; and then if you are never able to pay, tell us 
so, and we will cheerfully cancel the debt. 

But do let us know at once, for it puts us to extra trouble 
and expense to drop a name and then later reinstate it;— though 
we are always glad to do this, or in any other manner to lay 
down our lives for the brethren. 

POEMS AND HYMNS OF MILLENNIAL DAWN. 



Contains a very choice selection of 160 poems and 333 hymns, 
purged, we trust, from much of the too common erroneous 
hymn-book theology. We have them in good quantities now. 
In cloth binding, only 50 cents. TOWER subscribers supplied 
at the wholesale rate, 25 cents— postage extra, 8 cents. 



R3125 : page 3 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
NEW YEAR GREETINGS, 1903. 



THANKS BE TO GOD that his grace has preserved 
us, "kept us from falling," through another 
year!— that so many of us are still of one 
heart and of one mind in respect to his Word and its 
service! Our appreciation must be increased by the 
remembrance that every testimony of the Word is to 
the effect that the close of the "harvest" time is to be 
a time of special testing to all professing to be the 
Lord's people;— "every man's work shall be tried so as 
by fire." When we remember that the Adversary is 
to be permitted to bring "strong delusions" upon the 
Lord's people for the very purpose of sifting out all 
not truly his,— that they may believe lies and depart 
from the truth and be condemned as unworthy;— 
because they received not the truth in the love of it" 
(2 Thess. 2:10-12)— it surely should call forth our 
thanks to God that the opening of another year 
finds us still standing fast,— appreciating the truth 
and in full accord with all the divine appointments by 
which he has kept us from falling. 

The Apostle reminds us that rejoicings do not belong 
as properly to him that putteth on the armor as 



to him who, having fought the good fight to the finish, 
shall lay aside the armor and put on robes of glory in 
the First Resurrection. (1 Kings 20:11; 2 Tim. 4:7,8.) 
Consequently we must not stop too long even to rejoice 
that we are what we are by the grace of God, but must 
go on! The new year is surely full of blessings for the 
faithful, according to all the precious promises of our 
Father's Word. We must grasp these afresh, allowing 
the Lord's faithfulness of the past to establish 
our trust the more firmly for the future. Without 
faith as the trolley to connect us with the current of 
divine power we will fail to "go on unto perfection." 
"Faith can firmly trust Him,— come what may." 

Love, too, should be stimulated by a retrospective 
glance;— discerning the mercies of the Lord 
toward us should enthuse us with loving zeal for Him 
and his. "We love him because he first loved us!" 
We seek to do those things pleasing to our Lord because 
we love him, and in proportion as we love him 
we will delight in such obedience and service,— even 
at the cost of self-sacrifice. 

Good resolutions and the reexamination of our 
ideal and standards of life are appropriate at this season, 
too. Not that the fully consecrated can add to 
their consecration— for, if proper, it included our all. 
Not, either, that we should have an annual round up 
when we would seek pardon and start out afresh— as 
typical Israel did each "Day of Atonement" at the 
beginning of their new year. Spiritual Israelites, 
rather, are to live a daily, an hourly life of nearness to 
the High-Priest. The blood of the New Covenant is 
to be continually invoked for the cleansing of the 
slightest defilement of conscience, that thus the wedding 
garment of our Lord's imputed righteousness 
may not become bedraggled, but that the slightest 
spot being removed, we may have it "without spot or 
wrinkle or any such thing." 

Nevertheless, self-examinations and good resolutions 
have a value at this season in particular. That 
reviews of business; taking account of stocks; ascertaining 
the profits and the losses of the year; etc., are 
profitable in respect to worldly affairs, all will admit; 
and the much more important affairs of the soul— the 
ascertainment of gains and losses as New Creatures 
and how and when and where these came to us in the 
constant battle with the world, the flesh and the devil, 

R3125 : page 4 

will surely profit all who make such reckonings with 
an eye single to the pleasement of the Lord. 

Let us, then, set our spiritual aims, ambitions and 
endeavors still nearer to the perfect divine standard; 
remembering the while our Lord's words, "Without 
me ye can do nothing," let us be strong and courageous 
in the strength which he supplies and promises 



to increase as we are able and willing to accept it. 



There is nothing specially new to note,— except 
that "all things are onward moving," in the direction 
indicated by the Word. The "churches" are coming 
more and more to favor the combination and trust 
principle and desire to apply it;— seemingly only a 
Morganizer is needed. Then the religious "irregulars" 
will be shamed and discomfited. Capital and 
labor are each fortifying— each preparing for the great 
struggle; yet neither realizes how tremendous the 
conflict will be— nor the results, as we do in the light 
of the Word. Financial prosperity holds the winds 
in "Christendom," though its continuance seems to 
depend on the expenditure of vast sums in outside 
wars. The financial conditions are becoming unfavorable 
in Great Britain, still more so in Germany, and 
yet more so in Russia. 

We have recently noted the rapid progress of Socialism 
in Germany; below we quote from the New 
Orleans Times-Democrat respecting its progress in the 
United States:— 

"What will be remembered as easily the most interesting— 
and we had almost said the most alarming 
—feature in the Convention of the American Federation 
of Labor of 1902, was revealed when the Convention, 
by a vote of 4744 to 4344, rejected this 
resolution:— 

'"Resolved, That this twenty-second annual Convention of 
the American Federation of Labor advise the working people 
to organize their economic and political power to secure for 
labor the full equivalent of its toil, and the overthrowal of the 
wage system and establishing an industrial co-operative 
democracy.'" 

"Although defeated, the resolution is especially 
significant by reason of the great number of votes recorded 
in favor of its adoption. Out of a total of 
9088, the pro-Socialists lost by the exceedingly slender 
majority of 400 votes. In other words, the American 
Federation of Labor, as it is today constituted, 
is almost evenly divided on the question whether or 
not Socialism should be indorsed. To be exact 47.68 
per cent of the Federation is in favor of, and 52.32 per 
cent is opposed to, Socialism. 

"These statistics are of themselves sufficient to 
make labor leaders throughout the country pause and 

R3126 : page 4 

reflect whither they are tending. The speeches made 
in the Convention were overwhelmingly in favor of 
indorsing the Socialistic movement. Delegate Barnes 
compressed into two sentences the creed of the pro-Socialist 
advocates. Let us tell Mr. Morgan,' said he, 



'that, to use his own words, there is nothing to arbitrate. 

We want your (his) mines, and we want your 

(his) railroads for the people of this country.' Delegate 

Layton said that 'the time had come when supplication 

should cease and action should begin.' 'The 

greatest power of the union, or laboring man,' said he, 

'is the ballot. It should be used, and used for the attainment 

of the workingman's ambition.' The note 

sounded in these two speeches was echoed in the remarks 

of other delegates; and but for the vigorous 

speech made by Mr. Gompers the Federation would 

unquestionably have thrown the weight of its influence 

in favor of 'the overthrowing of the wage system and 

the establishment of an industrial co-operative 

democracy.' 

"In straight-flung words, Mr. Gompers pointed 
out that Socialism had more than once been opposed 
to trades unionism; that the socialistic spirit was essentially 
the spirit of negation, and that the Federation 
should shun Socialism as it would leprosy. 'Good 
heavens!' he exclaimed. 'Study Socialism! Why, 
we have graduated from it long ago.' This was Mr. 
Gompers' position; and by taking it promptly he 
stemmed the tide of Socialism that was running high 
in the convention, and contrived to defeat the resolution. 
It required no little courage and no little capacity 
to do what Mr. Gompers did, and his attitude 
and conduct can hardly be too highly commended. 
The victory won by him was, however, dearly bought. 
Above the smoke of the battle, one fact looms large in 
the public eye, namely; that in a deliberative body of 
representative American workingmen, 47.68 per cent 
are in favor of Socialism in the United States." 



Socialism should not be confounded with Communism 
or Anarchism; nevertheless, we believe it 
will surely eventuate in anarchy. Capital— private 
ownership— will not consent to Socialism on a broad 
basis and the conflict resulting will be what neither 
party premeditates or desires. There are really very 
few people sufficiently unbalanced in heart and mind 
to approve anarchy. 

SOCIALIST VOTE OF THE WORLD. 

The Appeal gives the following figures as showing 
the marvelous growth of Socialism all over the 
world: 

United States. Spain. 

1890 13,704 1893 7,000 

1891 16,552 1895 14,000 

1892 21,512 1897 28,000 

1893 25,666 Belgium. 



1894 30,020 1894 334,500 

1895 34,869 1898 534,324 

1896 36,275 Denmark. 

1897 55,550 1872 315 

1898 91,749 1884 6,805 

1900 135,770 1887 8,408 

1902 Est 400,000 1890 17,232 

Italy. 1892 20,098 

1893 20,000 1895 25,019 

1895 76,400 1898 32,000 

1897 134,496 1900 43,285 

R3126 : page 5 

Germany. Austria. 

1867 30,000 1895 90,000 

1871 101,927 1897 750,000 

1874 351,670 France. 

1877 486,843 1885 30,000 

1878 437,158 1888 91,000 

1881 311,961 1893 590,000 

1884 599,990 1898 1,000,000 

1887 763,128 Great Britain. 

1890 1,427,098 1895 55,000 

1893 1,786,738 1902 350,000 

1898 2,125,000 Switzerland. 

Poll 1903 3,100,000 1890 13,500 

Servia. 1893 29,822 

1895 55,000 1896 36,468 

NEW FINANCIAL CONDITIONS. 



The London Spectator, one of the ablest journals 
in the world, remarks:— 

"What a wonderful change has passed over our 
conception of the word 'property.' The writer is old 
enough to remember when nothing except land and 
houses was regarded as true property; but now a man 
may be a millionaire and own nothing that he can see. 
A few pieces of paper in a box at his banker's, or, 
better still, an inscription in a book of which he knows 
nothing, except that it exists, constitute him a man rich 
beyond the dreams of avarice, and, moreover, a man who 
has not to guard his property, and who can realize it 
—which the rich man of old could not do— in half an 
hour. It is a very curious change, and one the full 
effects of which we have yet to perceive." 

This is in full agreement with what we have already 
pointed out— that bonds and stocks are being used 
now as instead of money. This is sure to affect conditions 
during the time of trouble. 

MISSIONARY NEWS. 



The Secretary of "The American Board of Foreign 
Missions" reports $18,369,163 annual summary 
of income for Protestant foreign missions; and additions 
to church membership in all heathen lands for 
the year at 160,000;— the number dying during the 
year is not stated. 

Estimating the births among the 1,000,000,000 
heathens at only one tenth of one per cent, the population 
increased 1,000,000. Question: How long 
would it require to convert heathendom to the present 
standard of "Christendom"? And then,— How long 
would it require to convert "Christendom" to the 
condition mentioned in the Lord's prayer— when God's 
will shall be done on Earth even as it is done in Heaven? 

Thank God for the promised interference in the 
present order of things by Immanuel and his promised 
Kingdom of Heaven;— to bind Satan, open the blinded 
eyes of understanding and heal and bless all the 
families of the earth— forcefully, but lovingly— ultimately 
destroying all wilful evil doers ! 

CONCERNING PALESTINE. 



"Vienna, Nov. 5.— A dispatch from Constantinople 
confirms the statement that the Sultan is considering 
the establishment of a Jewish State in Palestine, 
and that the proposition is opposed by the French and 
Russian legations in the interest of the claims of 
Catholic and Greek Christians to the holy places. The 
dispatch states that if these claims could be arranged 
satisfactorily, the scheme of a Jewish State could 
probably be carried out. The British embassy at 
Constantinople is said to look with much favor on the 
proposition to create a Jewish State in Palestine, and 
if matters should come to an issue, England would 
undoubtedly support the Sultan as against Russia and 
France in giving Palestine to the Jews. A noted diplomat 
is reported as saying: 'The Sultan of Turkey 
could take no wiser step for the maintenance of his 
power and the permanence of his empire than to make 
Palestine a Jewish State. He would thereby attract 
to his empire the friendly interest of Jews throughout 
the world, and the Jewish State would be a bulwark 
for Turkey against Russian aggression in that 
direction.'" 

PROTESTANT FEDERATION. 



"Protestant Christianity is planning to make a 
demonstration. It is to be an outcome of a convention, 



just arranged, to be held in February, 1905, and 

probably in the city of Washington. The national 

federation of churches, at its meeting this year, created 

a committee, whose duty it is to secure representatives 

from all evangelical bodies. This committee 

has met with hearty response. Religious bodies South 

as well as North are taking hold of the idea with interest. 

The highest authorities are naming delegates, 

and these will meet in the proposed convention representatives 

from state and local federations. It is purposed 

by this convention to send forth a joint message 

signed by the chief pastors and addressed to Protestant 

Christianity of the United States. The purport of this 

message will be unity. The plea will be made that 

Christianity has been weakened by divisions and that 

the time has arrived for united action. No attempt 

will be made toward organic unity, but it will be 

claimed that upon a score of important questions a 

common ground exists, that overlapping and duplication 

can be prevented, and that evangelical thought 

can, if it will, make itself felt as it has not done heretofore." 

—St. Louis Globe-Democrat. 



R3127 : page 5 

"REJOICE IN THE LORD ALWAY." 

-PHILIPPIANS 4:1-13-JANUARY 11.- 

THE EPISTLE to the Philippians is one of the most 
loving of all the Church letters written by the 
Apostle Paul. In our last lesson we considered 
the story of the founding of that Church and the cost 
thereof to the faithful Apostle and his companion Silas. 
The Epistle to the Philippians contains no reproofs, no 
chidings, such as appear in others of the epistles, but 
rather it is full of approval, commendation and special 

R3127 : page 6 

love. Apparently, too, this little company of the 
Lord's people loved the Apostle as fervently as he loved 
them. His afflictions on their account bound their 
hearts to him in lasting gratitude. We find that on at 
least four occasions they helped to sustain the Apostle; 
once while at Corinth (2 Cor. 1 1:9), twice while at 
Thessalonica (Phil. 4:16), and once while he was a 
prisoner at Rome. On this latter occasion they sent 
their gifts and expressions of love by a special messenger, 
Epaphroditus who, arriving at Rome in the malarial 
season, took dangerously ill— probably with what is 
termed the Pontine, or Roman fever. It was on the 
occasion of the recovery of Epaphroditus and his return 
to Philippi that the Apostle sent back with him this 



epistle. 

A contemporary writer, referring to the practical 
manifestation of love by the Philippian brethren makes 
the following comment: "The people of Malta were 
the only others recorded who expressed their love in 
this way to Paul. The Ephesians wept over him, but 
there is nothing said of their expressing their feelings 
by aiding him. Perhaps they did." Evidently the 
Apostle needed some such manifestation of affection 
and appreciation of his efforts on their behalf, for his 
own encouragement. It must have been hard, indeed, 
for him to love the Church at Corinth as he did— laying 
down his life on its behalf, as well as on behalf of 
the other Churches— while realizing keenly, as his 
epistles distinctly intimate, that he was but lightly 
esteemed in return.— 1 Cor. 4:7-9; 2 Cor. 10:10. 

In view of this close and dear relationship between 
the Apostle and the Church at Philippi, as between an 
under shepherd, or pastor and the flock, how full of 
meaning the first verse of our lesson! "My brethren, 
dearly beloved and longed for, my joy and my crown, 
—so stand fast in the Lord, my dearly beloved." 
These words from the pen of a conscientious and sincere 
man, such as the Apostle was, are fragrant with 
the very essence of Christian love and fellowship. 
How much they must have been appreciated, and how 
much they must have been deserved! 

But if there was nothing in the condition of the 
Philippians to reprove, they, nevertheless, needed the 
exhortation to stand fast. They had already, by the 
Lord's favor, reached a considerable attainment in the 
graces of the spirit— they must needs be tested, however, 
to prove them, to try them; and for this ordeal, 
which every individual, as well as every congregation 
of the Lord's people must expect, the Apostle wished 
to prepare them— to urge that they do not retreat from 
the advanced steps of love and obedience already taken 
—that they continue firm, not, however, trusting to 
their own strength, but, as he expresses it, that they 
should "stand fast in the Lord," trusting in his 
power, in his grace, sufficient for every time of need. 

Several of the sisters of this congregation appear 
to have been prominent helpers in the work, not only 
when the Apostle was with them, but subsequently. 
Two of these are mentioned by name (v. 2), and the 
exhortation that they be of the same mind in the Lord 
implies that in some respects at least these two were at 
variance. It is well that we note the Apostle's language 
to them very carefully, for there is wisdom in it. 
He does not exhort them to be of one mind in everything; 
quite possibly realizing that because of very different 
temperaments and dispositions, habits of life, 
etc., this might be impossible; but he does urge them 
to be of the same mind in the Lord— to preserve a unity 
of heart and head in all things relating to the Lord and 
his cause. 



It will be of advantage to all of the Lord's people 
to pursue in such matters the course which the Apostle 
here advocates— not to attempt to "harmonize all 
earthly things" under present conditions;— to be content 
that each should have differences of opinion on 
various other subjects, and to insist only on oneness, 
fellowship, union, harmony in the Lord, in the truth, 
in the spirit of love, and toward all the members of the 
household of faith. Insistence on more than this— 
endeavoring to bring all to one view on social, financial 
and other questions— endeavoring to bring all to one 
view respecting dress and food, etc., has caused grievous 
strivings and estrangements between members of 
the household of faith; and all such endeavors should 
be recognized as contrary to the Lord's instruction 
through the Apostle— contrary to the "spirit of a sound 
mind"— contrary to the wisdom that cometh from 
above,— which entreats and exhorts for unity only in 
the Lord and along the line of questions positively settled 
by the Lord in the Scriptures— which generously 
leaves with each full liberty to act and to judge on all 
questions not positively settled by the Scriptures. We 
urge that all of the Lord's dear flock copy the wisdom 
of the Apostle in this matter, and heed his injunction, 
given to these two sisters, to let nothing come between 
them in the Lord. 

In the third verse of our lesson "Yokefellow" 
apparently should be written with a capital, as the proper 
name of a brother in the Philippian Church— not 
only a Yokefellow in name, but as here declared, "a 
true Yokefellow," and, as we might expect, therefore, 
one who would be ready to cooperate with and to assist 
others. In the Apostle's judgment, some others were 
burdened, needing assistance. He specifies Clement 
and the two sisters already referred to, whose differences 
were burdening them. That the differences had 
not yet extended so as to injure them spiritually, the 
Apostle firmly believed, and hence he declares that he 

R3128 : page 7 

still recognizes them as fellow-laborers, still recognizes 

that their names are in the Book of Life. On this account 

they should seek harmony in the Lord, and 

Brother Yokefellow should fulfil toward them the true 

meaning of his name, by helping them over their difficulties; 

helping them to preserve the unity of the 

spirit in the bonds of peace in the Lord. 

There is no room for any of us today to become 
apostles, for there were only twelve of them, and 
never will there be more. (Rev. 21:14.) There may 
not be opportunities for all of us to do great things 
in the Lord's service in this harvest time, either; 
but there are opportunities for every one of us to 
be true yokefellows— to assist the dear brethren and 
sisters with their burdens;— not merely financial 



burdens, or burdens of illness, but sometimes to assist 

them over difficulties and burdens of the kind 

suggested in this lesson— burdens of different temperaments 

and dispositions. Let us each and all 

seek to be true yokefellows to the various members 

of the body of Christ. We may be sure that the Lord 

will highly esteem such service, and that thus we 

will be growing in that grace which he so highly commended 

when he said, "Blessed are the peacemakers; 

for they shall be called the children of God." 

Laying down certain general principles for godly 
living, healthful for New Creatures, the Apostle exhorts, 
—"Rejoice in the Lord alway, and again I say, 
rejoice." This, the Golden Text of the lesson, represents 
the very essence of Christian living. Under present 
conditions it is not supposable that outward circumstances 
will always be favorable to rejoicing, from 
the natural standpoint. He, therefore, who would rejoice 
alway in the Lord must have faith in the Lord,— 
trust, hope, love. Without these he could not so 
appropriate to himself the gracious promises of the 
Word as to be able to rejoice in tribulation and suffering 
and under trials and difficulties, and when falsely 
accused and misrepresented, and when slandered and 
evilly entreated for the truth's sake. The only ones who 
can rejoice alway are those who are living very near to 
the Lord, and who can feel always their oneness with 
him, and that his protection and care are over them, 
and that his promise is sure, that all things shall work 
together for their highest welfare, as New Creatures. 

Others may rejoice today and be cast down tomorrow; 
only the faithful in Christ Jesus are privileged 
to rejoice alway. The thought of the Lord's favors, 
past, present and to come, makes all the trials and difficulties 
of such to appear very light afflictions, as but 
for a moment, not worthy to be compared with the glory, 
honor and immortality promised, and the blessed privileges 
of divine service, both here and hereafter. The 
Apostle emphasizes the matter by saying, "Again I say, 
Rejoice." We cannot have too many rejoicing Christians, 
nor can they rejoice too much, if they rejoice in 
the Lord. This rejoicing is not necessarily boisterous, 
nor of necessity the reverse. It implies serenity, happiness, 
peace, pleasure of soul, however, and does not 
mean that noisy demonstration is essential, as some 
seem mistakenly to think. 

The Apostle further exhorts that the faithful let 
their moderation, their forbearance, be manifested, not 
only toward the brethren, but toward all with whom 
they have to do. The Greek word here rendered "moderation" 
seems to carry with it the thought of reasonableness, 
and of not exacting our rights too rigorously. 
Mercy and leniency are certainly qualities required of all 
who would be members of the body of the Anointed. 
Faithfulness in the performance, as far as possible, of all 
that justice would require of us, and mercifulness in 



respect to all our requirements of justice from others 
should be our rule: so shall we be the children of our 
Father which is in heaven, for he is kind and merciful 
to the unthankful. 

"The Lord is at hand!" The thought seems to 
be that we who are the Lord's are not living for the 
present time. We are expecting great changes to be 
ushered in when our King shall take to himself his 
great power and begin his reign. We are not to be 
struggling for the last inch or the last penny, nor for 
the extreme of our own rights; but, rather, to be so full 
of rejoicing in the good things coming, and already ours 
by faith, that it will make us generous as respects the 
things of this present time in our dealings with the 
brethren and with others. We are not expecting justice 
from the Lord, for nothing that we have or done or 
could do would justly call for such exceeding great and 
precious things as he has promised us. And as we are 
expecting grace or bounty in so large measure we can 
well afford to be generous and liberal in our sentiments 
toward others— especially toward the household of faith, 
because they are our brethren and fellow-representatives 
of the Lord himself, from whom our bounty is to come; 
and toward the world without, because they have not 
the future prospects which we possess, and hence set 
their hearts upon the things of this present time; and 
we can well afford to accord them their full share of 
these or more, since we are so rich through our heavenly 
Father and our heavenly Bridegroom. 

That the Apostle did not mean to be understood 
that the Lord's second advent might be expected momentarily, 
nor before his death, is evident; for elsewhere 
in his epistles he clearly sets forth his expectation 
to die, and to wait for the reward, the crown of 
righteousness laid up for him; elsewhere also he clearly 
intimates that the day of the Lord could not come until 
after the great falling away mentioned in the prophecies, 

R3128 : page 8 

and the manifestation of the Man of Sin, etc. (2 Tim. 3:7,8; 
2 Thess. 2:2-10.) Evidently, therefore, 
his only thought in this exhortation, "The Lord is at 
hand," was, as already suggested— that we are living 
in the close of the reign of evil, that the dawning of the 
day of the Lord is not far distant, and that to the eye 
of faith it is so near that its influence should affect 
even the smallest affairs of the present life. 

"Be careful for nothing" is the next exhortation; 
but since our English word careful has lost its original 
meaning, there is danger of error here. The word originally 
had the thought of being full of care— anxiety, 
trouble. The Apostle's words correspond exactly to 
our Lord's injunction, "Take no thought," and signify, 
Be not anxious, burdened, full of care. It is 
proper that the Lord's people should be careful, in the 



meaning of the word careful as used today. We should 
not be careless, indifferent, loose in our conduct or 
words, but be circumspect. 

Anxiety and burdens are unavoidable to those who 
are depending on themselves, their own wisdom, their 
own strength, their own skill; but the members of the 
body of Christ, accepted in the Beloved, adopted into 
the divine family, sons of God, are assured over and 
over again in the Word that if they abide faithful all 
things shall work together for their highest welfare. 
Why should they be burdened? Why should they 
feel anxious? He who guards their interests slumbers 
not. When Christians find themselves anxious, fearful, 
burdened, the evidence is that they are lacking in 
faith, and the probability is that they have either never 
grown to the point of having the proper faith in the 
Lord, or that they have allowed "earth-born clouds" and 
cares of this life to come between them and the Lord, 
so that they no longer have confidence that they are 
abiding in his love and in his care. All in such condition 
should go at once to the throne of heavenly grace, 
and to the divine promises, and obtaining mercy at the 
former, and feeding upon the latter, they should grow 
strong in the Lord and in confidence in him, and their 
corroding cares will give place to faith, confidence, 
peace of heart, whatever the outward conditions. 

Such is the counsel of the Apostle— that instead of 
continuing in the anxious condition, we should lay all 
of our affairs before the Lord, supplicating his promised 
providential care, acknowledging our own lack of 
wisdom;— and gladly accepting his wisdom and the 
provisions of his love, we should make every request 
in a spirit of thanksgiving. This spirit of thanksgiving 
implies a recognition that the circumstances and conditions 
in which we are, have been supervised of the 
Lord, and that we are appreciative of his care and trust 
it for the future. Thanksgiving for what we have, 
and a full appreciation of the Lord's leadings hitherto 
and now, will preclude any anxiety for the future; for 
the thankful heart will conclude that he who favored 
us and redeemed us while we were yet sinners will 
much more favor and do for us now that we are his 
through the adoption that is in Christ Jesus. 

The question may arise, Why will not God give us 
the things which he sees us to need without our making 
petition to him and claiming his promises? Undoubtedly 
because we need previously to come into the 
proper attitude of heart to receive his favors and to be 
advantaged by them. Even as it is, we may be sure 
that we do not sufficiently appreciate the divine care 
bestowed upon us hitherto and now. Even in the attitude 
of prayer and thanksgiving we probably do not 
discern one-half of our causes for gratitude, as we shall 
see them by and by, when we shall know even as we 
are known. It is the same with natural hunger. Unless 
we were so constituted that the gnawings of hunger 



would show us our need of food we would probably 
appreciate it less, even if we ate as much and with the 
same regularity. 

If we have the foregoing described spirit of rejoicing 
and trust in the Lord, and make all of our requests, 
so far as we are able to discern, in harmony with his 
promise, and accept with gratitude and thanksgiving, whatever 
his providence may send us, then the Apostle assures 
us, "The peace of God which passeth all understanding 
shall guard your hearts and your minds in Christ 
Jesus." The thought here is distinct. It is not our own 
peace that is referred to. We may by nature be more or 
less indisposed to peace, restless, dissatisfied, discontented, 
fearful, foreboding or quarrelsome; but, following the 

R3129 : page 8 

course outlined above, we learn to trust God in all of our 
affairs, and it is the peace of God— the peace which 
comes to us from a realization of God's power and goodness 
and willingness to hold us by his right hand as 
his children— that comes in, to keep us from worry, 
from anxiety, etc. The thought is that this peace 
stands guard continually, as a sentinel, to challenge 
every hostile or worrying thought or fear. It keeps the 
Christian's mind, so that he at heart has peace with the 
Lord, fellowship, communion;— and it guards his mind 
also, his reasoning faculties, instructing him and assuring 
him respecting the divine power and wisdom and 
love. But it does not assure him of anything respecting 
his own perfection or worthiness of acceptance before 
God. This proper peace merely assures us of our 
standing in divine favor through Christ Jesus,— his 
worthiness, his sacrifice, his aid. 

Now we come to the Apostle's grand summing up 
of the way in which the Christian is to set his affections 
—fix them, fasten them, hold them upon profitable 
things; that he may grow in grace as well as in knowledge 
and love of God. The Apostle points out that the 

R3129 : page 9 

will having been consecrated to the Lord, faith having 
been exercised in rejoicing and thanksgiving in all of 
the Lord's providences, the peace of trust having come 
in, the further steps in the development of character 
will be through guarding our thoughts: and this means 
also the guarding of our words and acts, because it is out 
of the abundance of the heart that the mouth speaketh, 
and that the whole course of life is directed. What, 
then, should be the trend of the Christian's thoughts 
after he has reached the grand development already 
outlined by the Apostle? It should be toward things 
that are true, having no sympathy with anything that 
is false or even exaggerated. Whoever sympathizes 
with falsehood or exaggeration is more or less defiling 



himself. Whoever cleanses his thoughts, and avoids 
exaggeration, etc., is in that degree purifying his mind 
and his entire character, and coming the more into 
touch and sympathy with the Lord himself, who is 
"the Truth." 

Nor is it sufficient that we are sure of the truth of 
matters. We are to test them further, and discern to 
what extent they are honorable, noble; for although 
the Lord has accepted us, ignoble and imperfect, and 
has covered the ignoble features of our characters, and 
proposes to cover them to the end with his own merit, 
nevertheless, we cannot be in sympathy with the ignoble 
features of our fallen condition, but on the contrary 
must desire true nobility, and the highest standards of 
honor in our hearts, in our thoughts, in all of our dealings 
with our God and with our fellows. The test of 
honor is therefore to be applied after the test of the 
truth. The thing might be true, but Is it honorable to 
think about it or tell about it? is another question. 

Another test we are to apply is, Are the things 
just? We are not to allow our minds to run along lines 
that would be unjust, and we are to learn to apply this 
test of justice to every thought and word and act of 
ours, while learning at the same time to view the conduct 
of others from a different standpoint;— so far as 
reason will permit, from the standpoint of mercy, forbearance, 
pity, helpfulness. But we cannot be too 
careful how we criticize every thought we entertain, 
every plan we mature, that the lines of justice shall in 
no sense of the word be infringed by us with our hearts' 
approval. 

Purity is another quality to be esteemed by us. 
We are to love and cultivate that which is pure to such 
an extent that that which is impure will become painful 
to us, distressing, and we will desire to drop it from 
memory, and this will only be accomplished by continually 
thinking upon those things that are pure, and 
avoiding the giving of thought to the things that are 
impure. We are to recognize true loveliness, and to 
esteem it. From our standpoint the impure, the unjust, 
the untrue, the dishonorable things, cannot appear 
lovely, desirable, worthy of emulation. When we 
would think on the purest of things we must of necessity 
lift our mental vision to as high a point as possible, 
and, as nearly as we may be able, discern the loveliness 
of the perfect character of our God and of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, and proportionately the loveliness manifested 
in one or another of the followers of Jesus, who 
walk closely in his footsteps. The mind that frequently 
calls up the lovely perfections of the Lord and the truth, 
and is well filled by these, is guarded greatly against 
intrusions of unlovely and unholy things, contrary to 
the spirit of the Lord. The Apostle concludes the list, 
by referring to all things of good repute: things of any 
virtue or value, things in any degree praiseworthy— the 
noble words or noble deeds or noble sentiments of anybody, 



we may safely meditate upon, and as a consequence 
find ourselves growing toward these ideals upon 
which our minds, our new natures, thus feed. We will 
become more and more transformed by the renewing of 
our minds, and approach nearer and nearer to the glorious 
likeness of our Lord and Master, being changed 
from glory to glory, inch by inch, step by step, little 
by little, during the present life; and our thoughts being 
in this attitude and our union with the Lord maintained, 
we shall have part in the First Resurrection, 
which will perfect us forever in the Lord's image and 
likeness. 

How many (how few!) can say what the Apostle 
says in vs. 9? "The things which ye both learned and 
received and heard and saw in me, these things do!" 
This should be the standard of every Christian, because 
they each and all are representatives of the Lord, ambassadors 
for him; hence, so far as in them lieth, their 
conduct and words should be such as would be living 
epistles, read by the brethren and by the world to profit. 
No wonder the Apostle adds that, doing thus, "the 
God of peace shall be with you." So surely as he was 
with the Apostle he will be with all others similarly 
walking in the footsteps of Jesus. 

"I rejoice in the Lord greatly that now at length 
ye have revived your thought for me." These words 
seem to imply that their thoughtfulness for the Apostle, 
and earnestness to improve opportunities to serve him, 
had to some extent relaxed for a time and been revived. 
Then, as though fearful that his words might be understood 
as a reproof, he adds, "Ye did indeed take thought, 
but ye lacked opportunity." How careful was this 
man of God not unnecessarily to wound the feelings of 
the brethren, and how careful we all should likewise be 
to let the love of God extend, not only to the degree of 
giving us liberal sentiments toward the brethren, but 
also to the extent of influencing our tongues and pens 
not to wound unnecessarily even the least of them. 

R3129 :page 10 

The Apostle hastens to point out that he is not 
complaining of want. He had learned to put into practice 
himself the lesson which he was just communicating 
to them, regarding rejoicing in the Lord,— to cast 
aside anxious thought and to approach the Lord in 
prayer and supplication in thanksgiving, and he possessed 
the resultant peace. In this condition of heart, 
however many may have been his necessities, he was not 
in want, for he was satisfied that the Father would provide 
the things which he really needed— and more he 
did not want; for, as he explains, he had learned the 
lesson, "In whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content." 
We are not to be contented after the manner of 
the tramp or the indolent and shiftless, who would prefer 
to "live by faith," at the expense of others who 



"labor, working with their hands." We are not to be 
content to allow the opportunities and talents and privileges 
which the Lord has given us to lie idly by, unused; 
but while using these talents and opportunities 
to the very best of our ability and intelligence, and 
while seeking in prayer and supplication, rejoicing and 
thanksgiving, to use them all as would please the Lord, 
we should be content with the result of such efforts. 

We should conclude that our heavenly Father who 
feeds the sparrows and who clothes the fields with verdure 
is quite able to supply our needs in the manner 
and to the degree that would be for our highest welfare; 
and so, after having done our part to the best of our 
ability, we are to be thoroughly contented with the results 
—even if the results should be the barest necessities of 
life. But we are not to be contented with the barest 
necessities unless these are the best results obtainable 
from a reasonable and judicious use of opportunities 
and talents which the Lord has given us, consistent 
with our consecration to his service. "Be content with 
such things as ye have" does not ignore our talents and 
opportunities, for these are part of the things which we 
have,— the things which, as stewards, we are bound to 
use to the best of our judgments. 

Surely the Lord was fitting the Apostle for a grand 
place in the heavenly Kingdom, when he gave him 
such a variety of experiences as are detailed in the 12th verse. 
Surely, as the Lord was touched with the feeling 
of our infirmities, that he might be a faithful High-Priest 
for the Millennial Kingdom (as well as to us 
now), so the Apostle, by his experiences, evidently was 
being fitted and prepared for a very honorable and 
prominent place in the Royal Priesthood of the same 
Kingdom. And so with us: if we find our experiences in 
life very checkered we may conclude that the Lord sees 
that we need both the heights and depths of prosperity 
and adversity to properly instruct us and qualify us for 
the position he designs for us in the future. Let us, 
then, as the Apostle did, learn how to abound, not allowing 
the abundance of earthly good things to swerve 
us from our consecration vows; and learn also how to 
be in want (need) and yet not to want anything beyond 
what the Lord's wisdom and providence sees best to 
give,— to be content. 

The secret of the Apostle's success is stated in the 
last verse of the lesson. It was his close relationship 
to the Lord, his intimate union with him, his reliance 

R3130 :page 10 

upon him: he was abiding as a branch in the Vine, 
and was strengthened by the same spirit, and thus was 
enabled to do all these things and to pass through all 
these experiences with gratitude, with thankfulness, 
with rejoicing. Let us all thus learn to "Rejoice in 
the Lord alway." 



R3130 :page 10 

TURNING THE WORLD UPSIDE DOWN. 

--ACTS 17:1-12-JANUARY 18.- 

"Thy Word is a lamp unto my feet."— Psa. 119:105. 

WHEN released from the prison at Philippi, Paul, 
Silas and Timothy went about a hundred 
miles direct to Thessalonica, the largest commercial 
city of that district— Macedonia. Nothing 
daunted by their experience at Philippi, apparently 
not even waiting for their backs to thoroughly heal 
from the wounds there received, Paul at once began a 
vigorous presentation of the Gospel. As was his custom, 
he went first to the Jews. The propriety of this 
course is evident: the Jews were familiar with the 
prophecies of the Messiah, and although making their 
home amongst the Gentiles, nevertheless, as the Apostle 
declares, they were continually hoping for the fulfilment 
of the grand promises made to Abraham, confirmed 
unto Isaac and unto Jacob, and that by divine 
oath, or affirmation.— Acts 26:7. 

Not only were the Jews, acquainted with the prophecies 
and looking for their fulfilment in a Messiah, 
better prepared than other peoples for the message of 
the Gospel, but, additionally, it was part of the divine 
will that the first offer of the Gospel should go to the 
Jew, the natural seed of Abraham, who was, by divine 
intention, to have the first opportunity of becoming a 
part of the spiritual seed. Furthermore, the Jewish 
synagogues were ostensibly conducted on a liberal 
plane, anyone of reasonable ability being free there to 
show what he could of the teaching of the Scriptures. 
Thus the Apostle met with the Jews on three Sabbath 
days; and, according to his own narrative, he 
labored with his hands for temporal necessities 
between times. (1 Thess. 2:9.) It was during this 
stay of probably three to six months that he twice 

R3130 :page 11 

received financial aid from the brethren at Philippi. 

The result of his labors was the nucleus of a flourishing 
church, to which two of his epistles were addressed. 
The Apostle's attitude toward these brethren 
may reasonably be taken as the criterion of his general 
attitude toward all of the Lord's dear flock. He dealt 
not with them as a lord or master amongst slaves or subordinates; 
but, using his own words, he was gentle 

toward them, as a nursing mother to her children. (1 Thess. 2:7.) 
He admonished, comforted, instructed 



them, "as a father doth his children." (1 Thess. 2:11.) 
He lived an unblamable, unselfish life in their midst, 
giving them the Gospel, and with it his very life. — 
1 Thess. 2:5-8,10. 

The method of the Apostle's teaching is expressed 
in the statement that he "reasoned with them out of 
the Scriptures," opening and showing forth "that it 
behooved Christ to suffer and to rise from the dead." 
The Greek word used signifies that the teaching was in 
the nature of a dialogue. He appealed to the Scriptures, 
offered explanations of their meaning, pointed 
out how this meaning found its fulfilment in the 
experience of our Lord, and heard and replied to queries 
and objections. Like other Jews, these had, of 
course, thought chiefly on the Scriptures which predict 
Messiah's glory and Kingdom, and the grandeur of the 
position of Israel as his people, dispensing blessing to 
all the families of the earth. The Apostle pointed out 
the other Scriptures which spoke of "the sufferings of 
Christ," and how it was necessary that he should redeem 
the world before he could properly deliver it 
from the power of sin and death. We may be sure 
that he had the prophetic statements well in mind, 
and also the various types of the law, and that these 
were called up in order before his hearers, and the evidences 
adduced that our Lord fulfilled these; and not 
only that his death was necessary, as typified in Isaac, 
but also his resurrection from the dead, that he might 
be the distributor of the mercies of God. The word 
"opening" carries with it the thought that these Scriptures 
had been closed previously, and this is in harmony 
with the statement of Luke, when mentioning 
the Lord's discourse with the two disciples on the way 
to Emmaus, it is declared that he "opened unto them 
the Scriptures," saying, "Thus it is written, and thus 
it behooved Christ to suffer."— Luke 24:26,46; 
IPet. 1:11. 

The work to be done today very closely resembles 
that which was done by the Apostle as here recorded. 
There is need for us to go with the "meat in due season," 
first of all to those who have already been the 
recipients of divine favors and great advantages every 
way, to open to them other Scriptures which are now 
due to be understood;— which show the grand purposes 
of our heavenly Father in connection with 
the blessing of all the families of the earth through 
the Church glorified; and that the glorified Church, 
under its glorified Head, Christ Jesus, is to constitute 
the Kingdom of heaven, the divine agency for the 
blessing of all. It is appropriate that we adopt 
largely the same plan that the Apostle did, and reason 
with people out of the Scriptures, opening them 
before their minds gradually, that they may catch 
some glimpses of the lengths and breadths and heights 
and depths of the divine plan. Nevertheless, we know 
that it will be now even as it was then— that only those 



who have "an ear to hear" will hear, and that the 
others will be stirred up to antagonism, bitter envyings, 
jealousies, etc. 

The Apostle's work was evidently well done, his 
arguments effective— the result was that some of them 
(Jews) were persuaded and took sides with Paul and 
Silas; and of the devout Greeks quite a good many,— 
who had been feeling after God and who probably had 
realized that there was more true religion with the Jew 
than elsewhere,— were now, because of having less Jewish 
prejudice, more ready than their Jewish friends to 
hear and appreciate the Gospel of Christ. Of the chief 
women of the city, too, quite a number were influenced 
by the message, and became followers of Christ. 

Christian people in all denominations today are 
claiming great liberty— that they are not sectarian, and 
that all who love the Lord have fullest opportunity to 
worship with them. But we find that if we take them 
at their word and attempt to reason with them out of 
the Scriptures respecting the things now due to be understood, 
pointing out that we are in the dawn of restitution 
times, that the Millennial Kingdom is about to 
be ushered in, and that Christ is not only the Priest 
who redeemed his people with his blood, but is shortly 
to be the great Prophet and King who is to rule and 
instruct the whole world of mankind, the majority are 
unable to receive this— it is too contrary to their preconceived 
notions. Especially do the leading ones, 
the preachers and elders and Sunday School superintendents, 
feel that they must oppose the truth; that 
they must not admit that there are in the Word of God 
"things new and old— meat in due season for the household 
of faith." Their objections are often inspired by 
jealousy or envy, as they note that the message of grace 
appeals to the hearts of some of the very best of their 
number, and some of the very best outside their number 
—of the world. 

None like to complain, after having boasted of 
Christian liberty and fellowship;— they murmur that 
our preaching of the good tidings of great joy is proselyting 
—"attempting to steal their members," etc. 
They exclaim, "Why do you not go to the slums, instead 

R3130 :page 12 

of coming in amongst us to steal away our best 

members, our ripest wheat?" We answer that a similar 

charge of proselyting might with equal force have 

been brought against our Lord Jesus and against the 

apostles. The Apostle, as we see, wherever he went, 

sought for the most religious and most intelligent people, 

instead of seeking for the most ignorant and the 

most degraded. Why? Because he well knew that 

the Gospel he had been sent to proclaim was not intended 

of the Lord to convert the world, but to gather 

out of the world a "little flock," a people for the Lord's 



name. (Acts 15:14.) He knew that the Gospel he 
had to preach would not appeal to the most degraded 
hoodlums of society; on the contrary, it would appeal 
most to intelligent people,— and he presented it in 
as logical, reasonable and intelligent a manner as it 
could possibly be set forth. It is still proper for us to 
pursue the same course, and the conditions today of 
proclaiming the second presence of the Lord, and that 
the time is at hand for the establishment of the Kingdom 
and for the gathering of the elect wheat into the 
barn, can better be presented now to the intelligent, 
thoughtful, devout people in all the various sects, and 
of the world, than to others. 

Evidently the discussions of those three Sabbath 
days were all that the Jews as a whole could endure; 
—apparently the ministers of the truth, thenceforth excluded, 
went to the house of a prominent believer, Jason, 
and from there continued their propaganda,— possibly 
holding meetings at his house. Meantime the 
opposing Jews at Thessalonica received information from 
their brethren, opponents of the truth at Philippi, respecting 
these servants of the Lord, and the message 
they carried;— and, doubtless, the Adversary persuaded 
them that they were engaged in a noble cause when 
they gathered a rabble of market-loungers, "roughs 
and toughs," to raise a commotion, and as a mob to 

R3131 :page 12 

make an assault upon Jason's house, to take the Apostle 
and his companions before the authorities and have 
their work stopped. So some of a similar class in spiritual 
Israel today feel toward the truth and its servants, 
if we may judge from the epithets sometimes 
used. The inciting of Sunday school scholars to tear 
up religious literature and throw the fragments at the 
distributors is about on a par with the conduct of those 
Jews of Thessalonica in inciting a mob— the difference 
between their day and ours of more general intelligence 
and better police regulations being taken into consideration. 
A disinterested spectator would be inclined to 
query— What can be the evil teachings of the WATCH 
TOWER publications, that would lead a professedly "liberal 
servant of God" today to feel such an animosity 
against them? We would only reply that we know of 
nothing contained in this literature that should arouse 
any but the warmest sentiments of love toward God and 
toward the brethren and toward the world in general. It 
might similarly be questioned in the minds of disinterested 
persons why reputable Jews and rabbis should incite a 
mob against the Apostle and his companions? and why 
the high-priest and Scribes and Pharisees incited the 
multitude against our Lord? Pilate, evidently was in 
this position when he inquired respecting our Lord, 
"Why, what evil hath he done?" It is because the 
Lord's message was one of grace and truth that he was 



hated and crucified. It was because the Apostles 
and their co-laborers were telling forth the same 
message of the grace of God in Christ and the 
blessings yet to come through them, that they were 
maligned and opposed; and it is the same Gospel, 
the same good tidings, the same joyful message, 
of which Christ is the center, the Kingdom and the 
blessings for all the world of mankind the circumference, 
that is hated and maligned today;— not by the 
world, but by those who professedly are God's 
people. 

Not finding Paul and Silas, the mob dragged Jason 
and others of the believers before the rulers. The 
charges were very serious ones— inciting to anarchy and 
treason— turning the world upside down, and teaching 
that there is another king, Jesus, whose kingdom is to 
be universal in due time. While these charges were 
fraudulent as respects the true standpoint, they nevertheless 
had in them a sufficiency of truth to make them 
appear serious. It is true that the Gospel of Christ is 
revolutionary in its character; that whenever it enters 
the heart of a man it keeps turning things upside down 
continually, until it is either ejected or has produced a 
transformation of heart and life. There is no peace 
between right and wrong, or light and darkness, in any 
heart. Peace can be secured only by giving way either 
to the light or to the darkness; either to the truth or to 
the error; and since the error is the more popular, the 
more general, the majority choose peace along that 
line. The Lord's people, however, the sincere lovers 
of righteousness, can have peace on no other terms than 
those of loyalty to the Lord and his Word, and the principles 
of his righteousness. The same is true in respect 
to all the affairs of the world. It is the Gospel of 
Christ, the Gospel which will be a Gospel of peace in due 
time, that at the present time, because of evil and ignorance 
in the world, is setting on fire the very foundations 
of "the present evil world," and will ultimately 
result in the great figurative conflagration which shall 
consume this present order of things, political, financial, 
social, religious,— that upon the ruins of present 
institutions the Lord may shortly erect his Kingdom of 
righteousness— with peace upon proper foundations of 
justice and love. 

R3131 :page 13 

We must not be surprised if this Gospel of peace 
has the same influence today as it had in the days 
of our Lord and of the apostles. Mark the effect 
of the precious message at Thessalonica and at 
Philippi and elsewhere. Mark the effect when the message 
was delivered from the lips of him who spake as 
never man spake, and of whose wonderful words it is 
recorded that "all the people bare him record and 
wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out 



of his mouth." Nevertheless, however graciously 
stated, the truth is a sword which penetrates in every 
direction, and which, as our Lord foretold, frequently sets 
parents against children and children against parents, 
because the darkness hateth the light and opposeth it 
in every possible manner. 

The decrees of the emperors respecting riots and 
treason were very strict, and all rulers were held rigidly 
to account. Hence, when the charges were made of 
anarchy and treason, both the multitude and the rulers 
were "troubled;" the multitude, because more or less 
of a riot had occurred, seemingly because of treason;— 
and this might lead to the taking away of some of the 
city's privileges and liberties, its loss of commerce, etc. 
The rulers were troubled because they were in danger 
of being called to account unless they took active steps 
for the repression of anything resembling treason. 
They knew, nevertheless, that the charges were fabrications, 
and, hence, got out of the difficulty by 
placing Jason and his companions under bonds to 
keep the peace— to see that similar riots did 
not occur again. This necessitated the sending of 
Paul and Silas away as quietly and as quickly as 
possible. 

It need not surprise us to have, at no distant day, 
charges of anarchy, etc., made against those who today 
are proclaiming present truth, the harvest message, the 
establishment of the Kingdom, etc. It might be claimed 
against us that we are not sufficiently in accord with 
Caesar's government, the kingdoms of this world; that 
we do not manifest sufficient interest in the elections, 
nor in the militia, etc.; and that our teaching that the 
Lord is about to establish his Kingdom, and that it 
will be set up at the expense of all present institutions, 
which will fall in a time of trouble and anarchy, implies 
sympathy with anarchy. The charges would be 
no more true in our case than in the case of the Lord 
and the apostles; nevertheless, it may be used as a 
powerful weapon some day, and if it is we must trust 
to the same God who guarded the interests of his cause 
then, and who is equally able to guard it now. We 
may be sure that the door of opportunity for proclaiming 
the good tidings will not close until the true 
"wheat" shall have been found, until the elect shall 
have heard the message that is now due, that they 
should come out of Babylon and be gathered to the 
Lord, instead of being bound to human 
institutions. 

In view of the Lord's teaching regarding this subject, 
and of how the wisest presentation of it may be 
ultimately misconstrued, it behooves everyone who 
would serve the truth faithfully to be as careful as possible 
not to be misunderstood;— to let it be clearly understood 
that we neither participate in nor advocate 
anarchy of any kind; but, on the contrary, are standing 
for righteousness and the highest of all laws, the divine 



law; and that we believe that the poorest of laws are 
better than none, and that the anarchy that will inevitably 
come upon the world, according to divine predictions, 
will be a great curse, a great disadvantage in 
many respects; and that the only reason why we are 
able to look upon it with any degree of complacency is 
because of the assurances given us in the Lord's Word 
that it will be speedily followed by the Kingdom of 
God's dear Son;— in power and authority, to fully control 
all the turbulent elements. 

Leaving Timothy at Thessalonica, Paul and Silas 
journeyed about fifty miles to a rather obscure Grecian 
city, called Berea, and, according to their custom, realizing 
that the preaching of the Gospel of Christ was 
their chief business, they lost no time in engaging 
therein. Again they sought the Jews in the synagogue, 
and this time found some specially susceptible 
to the truth, referred to as "more noble than they of 
Thessalonica." The Greek word used here for "noble" 
seems to imply persons of noble birth, a higher and 
nobler class than those of the more commercial city. 
Nobility of character is favorable, wherever it is found, 
and from whatever cause, and true nobility implies reasonableness, 
as distinguished from prejudice. The 
Bereans were reasonable, professing to believe all that 
was written in the Law and the Prophets; to be looking 
for the Messiah; etc., and they welcomed the servants of 
God who sought to draw their attention particularly to 
the "things written aforetime." With all readiness of 
mind they began to examine the Scriptures, not merely 
on the Sabbath days, but daily,— to see how well the 
Apostle's arguments were supported by the testimony 
of the Law and the Prophets. As we should expect, 
many of so noble a class accepted the good tidings. 
Indeed, the wonder is that any person of noble and 
reasoning mind, once becoming acquainted with the 
glorious message of God's love and mercy in Christ— 
his plan for selecting the Church now, and by and by 
of blessing all the families of the earth through it- 
could disbelieve or could attribute such a Gospel to any 
human source. Surely its internal evidences are convincing 
that it is not of man nor by man, but of the 
Lord. 



R3131 :page 14 

QUESTIONS OF GENERAL INTEREST 
CHRIST THE FIRST FRUITS. 



Question.— Does the word "first fruit" in 1 Cor. 15:20-23 
refer to our Lord Jesus only or to the Christ, 



Head and body? 

Answer— Our Lord Jesus, as represented in verse 20, 
was certainly the first fruit of all. If we were 
speaking of summer fruit and would say that strawberries 
are the first fruit of the season, we could also 
pick up the first ripe strawberry and say, This is the 
first fruit. So it is true of our Lord Jesus, the 

R3132:page 14 

first fruit, and also true of the Lord and the Church 
together, that they are the "first-fruit unto God of 
his creatures."— Jas. 1:18. 

Verse 23 refers to the entire Church (the Christ, 
head and body) as the first fruit, because the discussion 
is with reference to "every man in his own 
order," and not with reference to our Lord Jesus personally. 
The Lord Jesus and the Church, which is 
his body, united in glory will constitute the first fruit, 
the first resurrection (the overcomers being partakers 
of his resurrection. Phil. 3:10; Rev. 20:4. Compare 
2 Pet. 1:4.) "Afterward they that are [who 
shall become] Christ's at [during] his presence;" 
that is, after the close of the Gospel age and the glorification 
of the Christ will come the second order or 
class of those to be "made alive."— Vs. 22. 

Verse 22 takes in all who shall be "made alive;" 
that is, all who shall ever come to perfection of life, 
eternal life. It declares that these shall attain this 
life by virtue of being "in Christ," even as all men 
who were in Adam lost life. 

These verses ignore entirely all who, when 
brought to a knowledge of the truth, reject it and 
wilfully choose sin; and they are in harmony with 
other Scriptures which declare that "He that hath 
the Son hath life, and he that hath not the Son of 
God hath not life. "—1 John 5:12. 

The description of verse 23 relates, therefore, entirely 
to the Millennial age, which will begin with the 
glorification of those who have become Christ's during 
the Gospel age and including the perfecting of the 
remainder of those who shall during the Millennial 
age accept Christ and the life which is in him. Verse 23 
reaches, therefore, down to and beyond the final 
trial at the end of the Millennial age, represented in 
Rev. 20:7-10; and verse 24 represents the everlasting 
condition after the world shall have been blessed with 
the knowledge of the truth, and the opportunity of 
coming into Christ as the "City of Refuge," and after 
all who would corrupt the earth (all not in full accord 
with the divine spirit of truth and righteousness— Satan 
and his servants) shall have been destroyed in the Second 
Death. Then the mediatorial reign of Christ will 
terminate, and he will deliver up the Kingdom to the 
Father. 

Notice that, in harmony with the context, verse 22 



should read, "As all in Adam die, even so all in 

Christ shall be made alive." This passage is very frequently 

misused to prove the everlasting salvation of 

all men irrespective of their acceptance of Christ as 

their Redeemer and King. But, thus translated, this 

passage is in perfect accord with the remainder of the 

Bible, which everywhere declares that, "He that hath 

the Son hath life; he that hath not the Son of God 

hath not life. "—1 John 5:12; John 3:36. The Greek 

text also supports this rendering, and no other view 

of verse 22 could be reconciled with the context, 

verses 23,24. 

The difficulty with many, however, is that they 
have never noticed the full sense of the words life and 
made alive in the Scriptures. The whole world is reckoned 
as already dead— because under sentence of death 
through Adam; and unless they eat (assimilate and 
appropriate by faith) the flesh (sacrificed humanity) 
of the Son of Man, they have no life and can have 
no life. (John 6:53.) And those who do so "eat" 
are said to pass from death unto life now, reckonedly, 
but the actual making alive of such, as stated in our 
text, will be in the Resurrection morning. And so it 
will be with the world in general during the Millennium: 
they will be awakened by the great Redeemer 
in order that each may have the offer of everlasting 
life, on condition of becoming Christ's, accepting his 
gracious work for them in the past and his regulations 
for their future. Thus they may "eat" his flesh- 
appropriating his merit and receiving thereby his 
strength and life. They will be accounted or reckoned 
as beginning to live from the time that they begin 
to "eat," but they will not be fully alive, perfect, 
until the close of the Millennial age of trial or testing. 

THE BEGINNING OF OUR RESURRECTION. 



Question.— In regard to the resurrection of the 
Church, is it proper for us to consider this in any sense 
of the word beginning at the time of our consecration, 
and as progressing during the period of our sojourn 
in these mortal bodies, and as being complete when 
we awake in the Lord's likeness? or should we apply 
the word resurrection as concerns the Church merely 
to that great change which will consummate our perfection 
in glory, honor and immortality? 

Answer.— The Scriptures frequently refer to the 
Church as not only having died to the world and the 
flesh, but as having already been quickened together 
with Christ, as already risen with him to walk in newness 
of life. (Col. 3:1; Rom. 6:11.) This might, of 

R3132:page 15 



course, be considered by many a figurative start to the 
resurrection life, but if we are reckoned as new creatures 
in Christ it implies that the old creature, the old 
nature, is dead, and, hence, that a new will, or nature, 
has been started, begotten— that the new creature 
which God proposes to raise up has started in its upward 
course. This in no sense of the word applies to 
a fleshly resurrection, but merely a rising of the spirit 
of the mind above earthly things to a relationship with 
the heavenly and spiritual, in which it is declared to be 
at rest and associated with Christ in heavenly conditions, 
merely waiting for the new spiritual body, which 
God has promised shall complete the new creation with 
such as are faithful to their obligations as new creatures 
in walking, not after the flesh, but after the 
spirit, to the extent of their ability. 

It is not the flesh, either in the present or the 
future, that is to be raised, but the new creature, 
whose resurrection life is already started, and to which 
God will in due time give a body as it hath pleased 
him. 

WHAT CONSTITUTES CHASTISEMENT? 



Question.— I must ask you to set some of us right 
on the subject of chastisement as recorded in the 
12th chapter of Hebrews. Your writings on the subject have 
been read, yet there are some here who cannot altogether 
harmonize the matter. It is contended on the one 
hand that the chastening of the Lord which we as 
sons must experience, according to your teaching, 
consists in the tribulation difficulties, the spoiling of 
our goods, our names, the breaking of ties of friendship 
which we have enjoyed, the willingness to be 
called fools for Christ's sake,— in short, the enduring 
of all things which Christ endured, and also some 
sickness and pain in the flesh. 

It is contended on the other hand that that cannot 
be construed as the chastening of the Lord, since the 
word chastening means to correct, to set aright when we 
have erred; it is contended that all these things come 
to us because we have taken the right way, and that the 
closer we try to remain at the side of the Lord, and the 
more we cut loose from the world, the severer will be 
the persecutions, the more contempt will the world 
heap upon us, and the more will it scorn us, even as it 
scorned him. It is furthermore contended, that the 
chastening which, as sons of God, we must experience 
is directly of God, since the Scriptures (Heb. 12) declare 
so, and that the things mentioned before do not 
come to us at the hand of God, but are heaped upon 
us by Satan and the world; that these things must 
be expected and must be borne with patience, that thus 
we are polished, and are building character, and are 



being prepared for the place that we shall some day, 
by the grace of God, occupy in his glorious temple. 

Now, all of this, it is contended, is as far from the 
chastening of the Lord as day is from night, since the 
one is from God and the other from Satan. Now, the 
chastening of the Lord is explained thus: the Apostle 
in his writing to the Hebrews (12th chap.) compares 
the spiritual with the fleshly, saying:— "Should 
we not much rather be in subjection unto the Father of 
spirits and live?" It is contended, therefore, that the 
chastening which the sons of God must experience is a 
chastening of the new spiritual being, which is as yet 
only in its embryo, or begotten condition, and is yet to 
be developed. Being weak, it is sometimes overcome, 
but when it regains its position from the error or sin 
into which it had been lured, it is grieved, and as the 
Word declares, it is indeed chastened or corrected, 
causing it sorrow and pain; but which afterwards 
yields the peaceable fruits of righteousness. 

Having come to the Father with grief and tears, 
and finding grace, it returns once more to its journey, 
rejoicing. Having learned the lesson and being rightly 
exercised by its experience it is more watchful and 
prayerful, and in the future yields more of the peaceable 
fruits of righteousness. 

The question is asked: Was the stoning to death 
of Stephen a chastening of the Lord? 

Answer.— Using the word chastisement in its broad 
sense of trial, or trying experience, we should say, 
Yes. Using the word chastisement in its narrower 
sense of penalty or correction for wrong-doing, our answer 
is, No. To my understanding the chastisements 
of the Lord include both of the kinds you specify- 
not only correction when we have erred from the way 
—the Lord's rod and staff disciplining us,— but, also 
the experiences which we receive along life's pathway 
when we are not straying, but seeking diligently to 
learn the lessons necessary to our preparation for the 
Kingdom. The word "chastisements" and the word 
"corrections" amongst mankind generally carry with 
them the thought of previous transgressions, for 
which these are punishments; but this is not necessarily 
the limitation of thought contained in these words. 
As new creatures we are begotten to a new nature, 
which is far higher every way than our present nature; 
so that even if we were free from all human imperfections 
(and we are free to the extent that we are 
covered by the merit of Christ's righteousness) 
we would still need correction, that is, to be made 
right, to be made fit, to be made meet for the 
inheritance of the saints in light— the divine nature. 
These chastisements or corrections are in the nature 
of instructions and tests necessary for our development 
for the higher plane of life to which we have 
been called. Our Lord Jesus, for instance, was a son 



R3133 :page 16 

of God, and, if a son, then, as the Apostle says, he was 
chastened, "for what son is he that the Father chasteneth 
not? If ye be without chastisement,... then 
are ye bastards and not sons." (Heb. 12:7,8.) Our 
Lord Jesus was a true son, and hence had his share of 
chastisements. "The chastisement of our peace was 
upon him, and by his stripes we are healed." (Isa. 53:5.) 
While these chastisements and stripes were 
necessary for our redemption, they were necessary 
also to our Lord's preparation for the high station of 
glory, honor and immortality to which he was called. 
Thus we read that "he learned obedience by the 
things which he suffered." (Heb. 5:8.) The sufferings 
or chastisements or corrections were necessary 
to his glorification. And so it is with us, his brethren: 
our sins are graciously covered through the merit 
of his sacrifice; by faith we are accepted as every 
whit whole, and by faith our sacrifices are accepted, 
"holy, acceptable unto God." (Rom. 12:1.) Our 
chastisements, therefore, are not in the nature of penalties 
for the weaknesses and imperfections of the 
flesh, which Jesus has graciously covered for us; but 
our standing as new creatures is on the perfect plane, 
and the majority, at least, of our chastisements, like 
those of the Master, our elder Brother, are disciplinary, 
and to the intent that we may be ultimately complete 
in him, meet for the "inheritance of the saints 
in light." 



page 17 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIV. JANUARY 15, 1903. No. 2 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 19 

Infant Damnation Still Believed 19 

The Bible Defended 20 

Meaning of Increase in Socialist 

Vote 21 

Roman Catholic Triumphs 22 

What Judge Grosscup Sees 22 

Depicted Horrors of Hell 22 

"There Were Giants in Those Days" 23 

"Hold Fast That Which is Good." 23 

"This Ignorance God Winked At." 27 

Our Earnest Desire 31 

page 18 



LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



R3135 :page 18 

WITHDRAWAL LETTERS. 



Those of our friends who have been considering the propriety 
of their obedience to the call, "Come out of her, my 
people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive 
not of her plagues" (Rev. 18:4; 2 Cor. 6:17; Psa. 50:5), may be 
hesitating in the obedience because of uncertainty as to how 
best to inform their congregational associates of the scriptural 
reasons for their withdrawal from the nominal system. For 
the benefit of these, we have on hand in good supply a form of 
Withdrawal Letter, worded plainly, but kindly, and well calculated 
to arouse greater interest in the same precious truths 
which have made us free with "the liberty wherewith Christ 
makes us free." The letter is so arranged that the addition of 
signature and date makes it a personal one to all to whom it is 
sent. Each member of the congregation should receive one, 
with one or two appropriate tracts, enclosed in a Missionary 
Envelope. We are pleased to supply free plenty of these Letters, 
envelopes and tracts to serve all your friends. 

TO FILL A LONG FELT WANT. 



From time to time friends have enquired whether we supplied 
stationery suitable for correspondence with other friends. 
To meet this demand we have prepared and have now in stock 



a good supply of blue bond letter paper, 8-1/2 x 1 1 inches, with 
appropriate scriptural heading. This we supply at 25c. per lb., 
postage 15c. extra. A pound contains a little over 100 sheets. 
With the Missionary Envelopes this will constitute excellent 
material for correspondence. 



R3133 :page 19 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
INFANT DAMNATION STILL BELIEVED. 



THE movement for Presbyterian Creed revision, it 
should be remembered, is amongst those of the 
Northern Synods only. The Southern Presbyterians 
constitute a totally separate body of Presbyterians. 
(There is only one body of Christ.) In this 
connection note the following comment from the columns 
of the Southwestern Presbyterian in criticism of 
a published communication. The editorial note 
follows:— 

"Note by the Editor in Charge.— The statement 
in the above communication, that 'our church as a 
whole doth verily believe' that it 'is taught in God's 
Holy Word that all infants dying in infancy were 
given by the Father to the Son in the councils of the 
Deity before the foundation of the world, as a part of 
the reward of his atoning sacrifice,' is wholly unwarranted. 
The church's belief is found, not in the deliverance 
of one Assembly, but in its Standards alone, 
and not until these are changed is any one warranted 
in saying that the church believes in the salvation of 
all infants dying in infancy. As the Standards are 
now, they are absolutely silent on that question, because 
the Scriptures are silent on it. We may hope 
that it is so, but the Scriptures do not declare it. 
When the Psalmist says: 'The wicked are estranged 
from the womb; they go astray as soon as they be 
born, speaking lies' (Psalm 58:3), it does seem to imply 
the possibility that the children of the wicked perish 
with their parents. 

"But our Standards do neither affirm or deny it. 
They only affirm, as the Jackson Assembly declares, 
that the elect who die in infancy, 'are saved in a different 
manner from adult persons who are capable of 
being outwardly called by the ministry of the Word,' 
leaving it an open question whether the children of 
the wicked are saved or not, inasmuch as this is one 
of the things of which Moses says: 'The secret things 
belong unto the Lord our God; but those things which 
are revealed belong unto us and to our children, that 
we may do all the words of this law.'— Deut. 29:29." 



Closely in line with the above is the following 
from the editorial columns of the Central Presbyterian, 
(Richmond, Va.):— 

"Presbyterians are becoming united on the old 
subject of limitation of the atonement. In relation to 
the merciful inclination of God, it was unquestionably 
co-extensive with our race. In relation to his justice, 
it was designed for believers exclusively. The whole 
trouble has always been due to our incapacity to reconcile 
the sentiments and purposes of an infinite being. 
The Bible does not confound them. It assures us 
that 'God does not willingly afflict' his people, and 
yet he does afflict them. Of course, he may unwillingly 
destroy his enemies. But we cannot comprehend 
such facts, any more than the modes of divine justice." 

These editors, be it remembered, are advanced thinkers, 
too, as compared with the masses of their readers. 
How sadly they lack the "key of knowledge!" (Luke 11:52.) 
Referring to the Scripture quotations of the 
first (Psa. 58:3.): how evident it is that it is true- 
that heredity marks everybody, more or less, from 
birth! The difficulty is a certain theological theory, 
which has no Scripture foundation— which claims that 
every infant is immortal and that the present life, long 
or short, favorable or unfavorable, constitutes the only 
chance ever to be enjoyed for reforming character and 
becoming fit for a happy eternity, and hence that children 
of the wicked, conceived and born in sin and 
depravity (as are all mankind, more or less), are unprepared 
for an eternity of bliss, and, hence, must 
spend that eternity without bliss— in pain and horrors. 
Grant the false premise and it does not take long to 
reach this conclusion. But let these same reasonable 
men rid their minds of the false premise and go by 
Scripture alone, and they would have no difficulty in 

R3133 : page 20 

reaching a reasonable and Scriptural view of the subject. 
They should note that no infants are born 
immortal, but that the truth is as the Scriptures declare, 
God "only hath immortality." Then they will 
be prepared to see that death does not mean life; and 
that destroy does not mean preserve: that when God 
declared, "All the wicked will he destroy," he meant 
it. When he declared, "The soul that sinneth it 
shall die," he meant it. The penalty upon father 
Adam and through him upon all his race is a death 
penalty; and children and all die because of Adam's 
sin (Rom. 5:12); and the worst, therefore, that could 
befall the children of the wicked would be— death. 

Now, then, what is the Scriptural hope for the children 
of the wicked? We answer that it is exactly the 
same as for the children of the saints, viz., that Christ 
Jesus our Lord tasted death for every man when he 
tasted death for Adam; because all were under Adam's 



sentence of condemnation to death. It was one man's 
sin of disobedience that brought the penalty upon all; 
and, consequently, the ransom of the one was the 
ransom of all; as it is written: "He is the propitiation 
[satisfaction] for our sins [the Church's sins], 
and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the 
whole world." The children of the wicked were, 
therefore, redeemed in the most absolute sense;— from 
the entire condemnation of death. Indeed, none but 
sinners were redeemed, for "Christ died for the ungodly;" 
—all are ungodly, all sinners; hence, all die, 
and all need to be redeemed, else they would have no 
hope of a resurrection. 

In the Millennium (the resurrection age) infants 
of believers would have a little the start of infants of 
unbelievers, in that they will have less depraved organisms 
when awakened; but under the grand raising-up 
processes then at work, such disadvantages would 
soon be overcome, and all will be brought to a full 
knowledge of the truth and to full opportunities for 
complete restitution (Acts 3:19-23) back to all that 
was lost by father Adam for himself and all his posterity. 
In that day it shall no more be a proverb 
that the fathers ate a sour grape [sin] and all the children's 
teeth are set on edge; for then "every man 
[who shall die] shall die for his own iniquity"— "the 
soul [person] that sinneth it shall die."— Ezek. 18:2,4; 
Jer. 31:29,30. 

How reasonable are God's ways! and how plainly 
they are stated in the Word,— for those who have the 
eye and ear of faith;— to those who are hearkening to 
the divine Word rather than to the creeds of the dark 
ages. 

In respect to the second quotation: It shows how 
confusing and unsatisfactory error is to its warmest 
votaries. Honest minds and good hearts strive in 
vain to reconcile the idea of justice and good sentiments 
and purposes with the creating of millions of creatures 
with the foreknowledge that for any cause their existence 
would be everlasting misery,— torture. The 
marvel is that intelligent men will stick to such inconsistencies 
—simply because they are old and hoary. 
Why is it that they cannot go back to the still older 
theory of the Bible,— beautiful, simple, reasonable, 
grand? Is it because Satan is blinding them with 
fear;— fear that good, reasonable, just thoughts toward 
God and interpretations of his Word are delusions 
of the Adversary? Ah, yes; the Lord foresaw 
it all, and declares, "Their fear toward me [is not of 
me; I have neither done nor said anything to merit 
such sentiments, but] is taught by the precept of 
men."— Isa. 29:13. 

THE BIBLE DEFENDED BY PROF. G. F. WRIGHT, LL.D. 



"Since the Bible is a revelation through the 
medium of human language it must be interpreted in 
accordance with accepted literary standards. It is 
addressed to persons who are supposed to have ordinary 

R3134:page20 

understanding and common sense, and who can 
justly be expected to give it the treatment which 
would be considered fair in the interpretation of 
any other literary document. The interest in the 
Bible is largely kept up by the fact that it is so varied 
in form that it never becomes monotonous. We find 
in it not only history, biography and genealogies, but 
poetry, parables, fables, highly-wrought rhetorical 
addresses and appeals and prophetic forecasts of the 
future. 

FIGURATIVE LANGUAGE GENERAL. 

"One of the most important rules of interpretation 
is that ordinary language should be interpreted 
according to the known nature of the subject. It is 
always assumed that the person addressed has a considerable 
amount of knowledge which can be made 
the basis of instruction and further enlargement. 
This can be illustrated by an analysis of almost any 
sentence which can be written. When, for an example, 
the word 'Bring' is used, it has a wide latitude 
of possible meaning, which is limited in each instance 
by the implied but unexpressed conditions known to 
the speaker and the person addressed. If it is said, 
Bring me the book, the book will be brought by main 
force. If the judge says, Bring in the prisoner, the 
sheriff will come in with the prisoner walking at his 
side, impelled only by such show of force as is necessary 
to overcome the reluctance of the prisoner's will. 
If a mother says to her son, Bring your friend home 
with you to tea, he would be a very strange boy who 
should think that, in order to obey the command, he 
must take his friend up in his arms and carry him, or 
gird on a sword and pistol to compel attendance. By 
a simple invitation he will accomplish the purpose. 
All the force necessary is that which will accomplish 
the object. 

"No greater mistake can be made in the interpretation 
of language than always to insist upon the 
strictly literal or etymological meaning of the words. 

R3134:page21 

All language is more or less figurative. Words come 

to mean what usage and the context put into them 

and make them mean. For example, the word 'manufacture' 

literally means made by hand— that being the 



significance of the Latin words composing it. But now 
hardly anything is made by hand. Yet we still go on 
speaking of manufacturing all sorts of goods and wares. 
"A hundred years ago the coats we wore were literally 
manufactured. The wool was shorn from the 
sheep by hand, and our grandmothers carded it into 
rolls, spun it into yarn and wove it into cloth by hand. 
Now, on the contrary, the wool is shorn from sheep's 
backs in Australia by a machine, and is dumped into 
steamers by great hoisting apparatus, and unloaded at 
Liverpool in the same manner, and is thence transported 
by rail to one end of a great 'manufactory,' 
so called, where it is delivered over to machinery of 
various and complicated character, which turns it out 
at the other end cloth ready made for the tailor. He 
would be a dull interpreter and a carping critic, who 
should insist that any one who said that this cloth was 
manufactured by Jonas Barnes & Co., must be supposed 
to mean that Jonas Barnes & Co. actually made 
the cloth by hand. Everybody knows that Jonas 
Barnes can be correctly said to manufacture all the 
cloth that comes out of his manufactory, even though 
he does nothing but sit in his office and issue commands. 
For it is a well known principle of interpretation 
that a person is properly said to do whatever he 
accomplishes by his agents. General Grant captured 
General Lee at Appomattox, though he did not 
himself fire a gun, and was far in the rear of the army 
when the actual capture was made. But he is properly 
said to have done whatever was accomplished by 
the army which he directed. 

BIBLE LANGUAGE FIGURATIVE. 

"Applying these and other similar principles to 
the interpretation of the Bible will at once relieve its 
writers of a great number of absurd charges of ignorance 
and inconsistency, and unfold a profound, harmonious 
and exalted conception of nature which may 
well command the admiration of all classes who are 
privileged to read and study it. 

"The poetical imagery which describes the attributes 
and actions of the Creator is so bold and striking 
that it would seem impossible for any person of common 
sense to degrade it to the low level of mere literality. 
When the sacred writer speaks of the Lord as 
accomplishing something 'by the strength of his right 
arm,' or of his 'causing his face to shine upon us,' 
it would seem impossible that any person of ordinary 
experience in the use of language should insist that 
these expressions necessarily implied that the Divine 
Being exists in human form and actually has a face 
and arms and fingers like a man, even though the 
Psalmist does speak of the heavens as 'the work of 
God's fingers.' With equal reason the mere literalist 
would have to say that the Psalmist thought the 



Lord had feathers and wings, since it is said that he 
shall cover those that trust him 'with his feathers,' 
and shelter them 'under his wings,' while a little before 
in this same Psalm (Psalm 90) it is represented 
that the Almighty has a 'shadow' under which his 
children may abide. 

"All this emphasizes the fact that human nature 
has remained practically unchanged from the beginning. 
The use of language, which is the most characteristic 
peculiarity of man, has been practically the 
same in all ages. In early times, as in the present, men 
knew how to use figurative and rhetorical language, so 
as to make it effective, and it is altogether probable 
that they had that knowledge of the nature of things derived 
from the ordinary experiences of life, which we 
call commonsense, and which enabled them to understand 
that when God is spoken of as their 'Sun' and 
'Shield' and 'Strong Tower' the words conveyed an 
exalted spiritual significance far richer and fuller than 
their mere literal meaning. 

"When, therefore, we approach those portions 
of the Bible which deal more directly and specifically 
with the constitution of the universe and the creation 
of the world, we need not be surprised to find language 
used in the manner which is fitted to give us a 
most exalted conception of the significance of the 
facts without either tying us down to the dull literal 
meaning of words or necessarily conveying false conceptions 
to sincere and thoughtful inquirers." 

MEANING OF BIG INCREASE IN THE SOCIALIST VOTE. 



We clip the following extracts from the Chicago 
Record-Herald:— 

"No one thing in the recent election attracted 
more attention than the great increase in the Socialist 
vote. People of all classes have been asking one another, 
What does it mean? What was the cause 
which led 300,000 people to give their votes for the 
principles of Socialism, and what does it portend for 
the future? The most diverse interpretations have 
been put upon it. To some it is a threatened danger, 
to others a promise of hope. All admit that from now 
on Socialism will be a factor that must be dealt with 
in the political struggles of America. A party which 
holds 300,000 votes and elects five members to the 
legislature in Montana, and three in Massachusetts, 
and comes close to election in a large number of other 
places, and unlike the Populist party and most other 
so-called minor parties, it shows no tendency to concentration 
in special localities, and is certain to be a 
force worthy of consideration. 

"This sudden growth does not owe its origin 
wholly to the active propaganda which has been carried 



on. On the contrary, the growth of this propaganda 
is in itself almost as much a sign of the growth 
of the conditions which produce Socialism as it is the 
cause of the Socialist vote.... 

ENTERS TRADES UNIONS. 

"One of the most striking phases of its recent 
development has been its sudden growth among the 
trades unions. Everyone who has paid the slightest 
attention to events in the labor world must have noticed 
the marvelous increase in the membership and 
strength of organized labor. But step by step with 
this growth in the size and power of the unions has 
gone a corresponding increase of the Socialist sentiment 
within those unions. The declaration of the 
150,000 members of the American Labor Union for 
Socialism at their convention in Denver a few months 

R3134:page22 

ago and the close vote at the American Federation of 
Labor at New Orleans much more recently are two 
instances in point. 

"The Socialist party, therefore, arises as a distinctly 
class party. It does not arise as a result of 
preaching class hatred, as its enemies would declare, 
but arises because capitalism has developed class antagonisms. 
So far from seeking to perpetuate class 
hatred, the Socialist party is the only party which distinctly 
sets itself about abolishing the class antagonisms 
which give rise to class hatred by the only possible 
means— the abolition of the economic antagonisms 
from which these classes arise.... 

GREAT GAINS EXPECTED. 

"The Socialist party may be expected to make tremendously 
rapid gains within the next few years because 
of the fact that the extremely rapid evolution to which 
reference was previously made has caused the economic 
development of this country to run far ahead of 
the propaganda movement of Socialism. The economic 
development has now made the interest of the 
mass of workers identical with the aims and objects 
of the Socialist party. It only remains for the propagandists 
of Socialism to point out and demonstrate 
this fact to this mass of workers to secure their support. 
This it is doing at a very rapid rate. The circulation 
of its publications is growing at an almost 
astounding rate, while the number of agitators grows 
even faster. 

"Moreover, there is this which differentiates the 
Socialist party from every other party, in that practically 
every member is a propagandist and the work 
of carrying on campaigns is not left to the party machine. 



R3135 : page 22 

For these reasons the rapid growth of Socialism 
in the last election is but a foretaste of what the 
future will bring forth." 



The German Kaiser has just surrendered to the 
Agrarian party, and, contrary to his preference, has 
agreed to a tariff on food;— to escape the Socialist 
dilemma and preserve the farming element as his 
friends. 

ROMAN CATHOLIC TRIUMPHS. 



A prominent Protestant writer and church historian, 
Dr. Kolde, discussing the recent progress of 
Romanism, in the Neue Kirchliche Leitschrift (Leipsic), 
says:— 

"Few people, and only those who study modern 
facts in the light of church history, have any appreciation 
of the phenomenal advance made by the Catholic 
Church during the last decades, especially as a power 
in the political world and in the conquests of new 
spheres of thought and life. It is by no means a pleasant 
thing for Protestants to contemplate; but it is 
an undeniable fact that not since the days of Innocent 
III. has the papal system unfolded such splendor and 
power as in the present time. Not the Catholic princes, 
but rather the Protestant rulers are the ones who are 
trying to surpass each other in honoring the shrewd 
sage now occupying the throne in the Vatican, 
although it is this same sage who has repeatedly 
called the Reformation a 'pest.' 

"In other respects the church has grown phenomenally. 
Each year the number of those who swell 
the ranks of the religious orders grows by the thousands, 
and in the German empire alone there are 
now 40,000 of these. Not since the days of the Reformation 
have these orders, especially of the Jesuits, 
developed the strength they evince in our days. The 
Catholics control the parliaments and they make our 
laws, and in countries like Germany, where church 
and state are united, they even pass the laws regulating 
the affairs of the Protestant church. With every 
day the principle is gaining more and more ground 
that it is not ability and efficiency, but the attitude 
toward the Catholic Church, that opens the way for 
candidates for positions in the state service. The 
statesmen of Europe are largely and in many cases 
mostly influenced in their international politics by the 
views that may prevail in the Vatican; and what is 



more remarkable, that which the ambitious Innocent 
III. failed to attain, and that against which even 
Catholic princes and bishops have constantly protested, 
namely, the assigning of the position of judge on 
international difficulties to the Pope— this has been 
first voluntarily yielded to the Vatican by the leading 
Protestant powers of Europe, Prussia and Germany, 
the former of these also having been the first to recognize 
the Curia as a political power on equal footing 
with other powers, by sending an ambassador to 
the Vatican." 

WHAT JUDGE GROSSCUP SEES. 



"It is certain that, as never before in our history, 
there are several millions of men and women brought 
up in the industrial trades who are now without property 
interest in the trades they follow. No less a man 
than Webster said that the freest of governments will 
not long be acceptable if the tendency of the laws be 
to create a rapid accumulation of property in a few 
hands, rendering a majority of the population 
dependent. 

"If this be true, it has come about that the same 
years which brought us riches and greatness as a nation 
have brought with them an internal disorder, 
which, if allowed to go on, will endanger the stability 
of the government itself."— Judge Grosscup at Lincoln, 
Neb. Dec. 15, '02. 

DEPICTED HORRORS OF HELL. 



London, Dec. 7.— A dispatch from Rome to the 
Daily Mail says:— 

"A scene, which few who witnessed will ever 
forget, was enacted at the Church of San Carlo Alle 
Mortelle, in Naples, today. A sermon was preached 
on 'Hell.' The priest in charge arranged a realistic 
accompaniment to the preacher's words, and had men 
concealed in various parts of the church. Some were 
in the sacristy, some in the confessionals, and others 
behind the altars. The church was darkened. The 
preacher depicted in vivid colors the horrors of hell. 
At proper moments there were flashes of blood-red 
light, and the concealed men rattled chains, screamed, 

R3135 : page 23 

howled and made other hideous noises, supposed to 
typify the torture of the damned. The congregation 
was largely composed of the ignorant and peasant 
class. They are superstitious to a degree. The performance 



was entirely too realistic for them. 

"Women began to get hysterical, laughed, cried 
and screamed. Soon the entire congregation was in 
the throes of abject terror. Men, cowering with fear, 
ran to the doors, burst them open and fled. Panic 
then seized all, and a terrific rush was made to the 
streets. Women and children fainted with fright. 
Men and women fought like beasts to escape. Many 
were injured, some seriously. The police were called, 
but the affair had ended. A police order has been 
issued preventing any further sermons on 'Hell' with 
such terrible trimmings." 

"THERE WERE GIANTS IN THOSE DAYS." 



"Who is J. Pierpont Morgan? He is not only 
the world's king of finance today, but the greatest 
financier in all history. 

"He has a voice in the control of properties capitalized 
at $6,488,500,000— more wealth than was ever 
before in the hands of one man. This amount is 
greater by over $1,000,000,000 than the entire annual 
revenue of the 43 principal nations of the world. It is 
greater by almost $2,000,000,000 than all the world's 
gold, coined and uncoined. It is greater by almost 
$6,000,000,000 than the gold coin and gold certificates 
in the United States treasury, and the amount ($550,000,000) 
in that treasury at present is unprecedented. 

"As the head of the world-wide transportation 
trust, with 16 steamship lines and 44 railroad systems, 
with 300 of the largest steamships and 30,000 passenger 
and freight trains, the two branches representing 
a land mileage of 108,500 and a sea tonnage of 12,000,000, 
he is the grand stage-driver and ferryman of the 
world. 

"He is, says the World, the one man on earth 
whose life has been insured by English investors and 
speculators for $2,000,000 who paid therefor a premium 
of 9 per cent. The same fraternity insured the 
life of Queen Victoria for $2,000,000. "-Banking 
World. 



R3135 : page 23 

"HOLD FAST THAT WHICH IS GOOD." 

1 THESSALONIANS 5:14-28-JANUARY 25.- 

OUR LESSON is a summary statement of the 
proper attitude for the Lord's people to maintain 
in order that they may grow in grace and through 
faithfulness finally come off conquerors through their 



Redeemer. Although addressed to the saints at Thessalonica, 

these noble words have been a source of 

strength, encouragement and discipline to the faithful 

in Christ Jesus from their writing to the present time. 

No child of God can afford to ignore nor to neglect these 

words of divine counsel, and in proportion as each of 

us gives heed to them our lives will surely be the more 

Christ-like, and we will thus be the more pleasing to the 

Lord, and eventually make our calling and election 

sure to joint-heirship with him in the Millennial Kingdom, 

R3136 : page 23 

and its glories and its service to the world of 
mankind. Let us take up these apostolic injunctions 
seriatim. 

Not the elders alone are exhorted by the Apostle, 
as though they were a separate class, exercising control 
and treating the brethren as their wards; he addresses 
the "brethren"— the entire Church, including 
the sisters also. But this does not signify that the 
counsel would not apply specially to the elders; because 
they were selected as amongst the brethren 
most advanced in Christian doctrine and practice, and 
as the representatives of the Church, to specially look 
after the interests of the Lord's flock. These apostolic 
words apply to each member of the flock in proportion 
to his capacity and ability, but would naturally come 
with special force to the elders who, under God's 
providence, had the oversight of his Church, "to feed 
the flock." (Acts 20:28.) While, therefore, all the 
brethren are to see to the carrying out of the injunctions 
here given, the elders in every Church should feel a 
special responsibility respecting them— a responsibility 
derived from the position they occupy as representatives 
of the Church,— its standard-bearers. 

The unruly are here contrasted with the feeble-minded 
or faint-hearted and the weak. The divine 
arrangement is full of order as well as full of liberty; 
and, rightly understood, liberty can best be conserved by 
order; and order best be maintained through a reasonable 
recognition of personal liberty. The mistake frequently 
made, not only by earthly law-givers and disciplinarians, 
but also in the Church of Christ, is along 
the line of extremes, either in one or the other of these 
directions. Some misunderstand liberty to mean lawlessness, 
disorder, unruliness. Others with equally 
good intentions, no doubt, are disposed to carry order 
and obedience to rules to such an extent as to dwarf 
the individual liberties of the flock. Great grace is 
needed along this line, to prevent friction amongst the 
Lord's people— to preserve the unity of the spirit in 
the bonds of love and peace. 

We are not to have such false ideas of personal 
liberty as would ignore rules, law, order, in the assemblies 
of the Lord's people; and those disposed to be 



unruly, self-conscious, thrusting themselves forward, 

without the request of the Church, need to be held in 

check— to be "warned"— to be shown that their course 

is contrary to the spirit of the Lord and all the arrangements 

instituted by the apostles, his representatives. 

They need to be "warned" also that their course would 

mean injury to the Church, instead of blessing and peace 

R3136 : page 24 

and joy and development; and injury to themselves, in 

that it would develop in them a combativeness or self-esteem, 

already too large, and might thus not only work 

injury to the cause, but hinder themselves from attaining 

the character-likeness necessary to a share in the 

Kingdom. 

But while some might need thus to be warned and 
held in check, others, faint-hearted and weak, would 
need aid, support, encouragement;— naturally backward, 
diffident, lacking in combativeness and self-esteem, 
they need to be pushed to the front a little, in 
order to bring out what talents they really possess, for 
their own encouragement and for the blessing also of 
the entire household of faith. 

"Be patient toward all" seems to imply that the 
better balanced amongst the Lord's people should look 
with sympathy upon and exercise patient forbearance toward 
the classes above mentioned;— not only toward the 
weak and those who lack courage, but toward all; including 
those who have too much courage and self-push. 
The Scriptures repeatedly admonish us, "Ye 
have need of patience," and day by day the advanced 
children of the Lord realize the truthfulness of this, 
and come to appreciate patience as one of the chief 
Christian graces. (1) Growth in knowledge helps us 
to grow in this grace of patience, for as we appreciate 
more and more the heavenly Father's patience with 
us it helps us to apply the same principle toward others. 
(2) As we come to realize the great disaster that 
is upon our race as a whole— our fallen condition and 
how the fall has affected some more in one manner 
and others more in another— some chiefly mentally, 
some chiefly physically, and some chiefly morally, 
it enlarges our sympathy toward our fellow-creatures, 
and thus increases our patience in dealing with them. 
This is particularly true in respect to the household of 
faith, in which we recognize amongst those whom God 
has graciously called, some more blemished, perhaps, 
than ourselves in some particulars— though we may be 
more imperfect in others. The thought that our heavenly 
Father has favored and called anyone should make 
us extremely careful how we would co-operate with the 
Lord in respect to the call, and be as helpful as possible 
to all those who are seeking to walk with us in the footsteps 
of our Lord in the narrow way. We certainly 
should have special patience, therefore, with the brethren. 



-Rom. 14:15; 1 Cor. 8:11. 

"See that none render evil for evil unto any." 
This exhortation has a special force when we remember 
how much evil treatment was heaped upon the followers 
of our Lord at that time; and that the writer himself, 
as well as those specially addressed, had suffered 
much on account of their faithfulness in dispensing the 
Word of the Lord, the Word of life, the good tidings. 
The exhortation means that the Lord's followers are 
not to attempt to retaliate upon their enemies by doing 
them evil in return, or in any manner to "get even 
with them." The Lord's exhortation is that we seek 
to render good in return for the evil we receive, and 
includes our language as well as our conduct, we 
are not to give word for word, railing for railing, 
accusation for accusation, slander for slander any 
more than blow for blow. It includes also our 
very thoughts, for we are not even to render anger 
for anger, malice for malice, envy for envy. Two evils 
can never make a good— two wrongs will never 
make a right. Our sympathy for our blinded enemies 
is to cultivate our patience and forbearance toward them 
in thought, word and deed.— 1 Pet. 2:21-23. 

The Lord's people, so far from ever turning aside 
to render railing for railing or evil for evil, are uniformly 
to "pursue that which is good"— that which is right, 
that which the Lord approves. This will mean that 
each member of the Royal Priesthood will pursue 
righteousness to the extent of his ability— pursue every 
good and noble sentiment, and seek to live as nearly as 
possible up to the high standard of righteousness, perfection, 
exemplified absolutely in our Lord. This pursuit 
of goodness is to be maintained not only amongst 
the brethren, where all are professing the same pursuit, 
but also toward others— in our dealings with the world. 
Some of the world can learn more of the gospel through 
witnessing our avoidance of evil and our constant pursuit 
of righteousness, than by anything we can say to 
them;— and possibly as they discern the new life in 
us they may gradually come to have "an ear to hear" 
the message of good tidings which has wrought this 
change in us. 

The worldly spirit does not approve this part of 
the Apostle's counsel, but urges, rather, that we should 
treat others as they treat us— that we should "give as 
good as we get,"— meaning that we should give as bad 
as we get. By way of saying as good a word as they 
can in their own favor along these lines they sometimes 
accuse the Lord's followers of cowardice. Courage is 
one of the noble qualities of humanity, and it is quite 
a trial to some to be considered timid or lacking in 
courage; and to such this enjoined restraint of word 
and act is a particular trial. It is not true, however, 
that the Lord's counsel tends to effeminacy or lack of 
courage. This matter is well stated in the language of 
another, as follows:— 



"One feature which stands out clear in the society 
founded by Christ and his apostles is the extraordinary 
heroism which was shown in the face of death and tortures, 
not only by men, but by feeble women and tender 
children. It amazed the heathen magistrates who 
were striving after fortitude by the aid of philosophy. 
It amazed the wild savages, who mistook gentleness for 

R3136 : page 25 

cowardice, when they found it was harder to terrify the 
missionary who came with the Gospel than the invader 
who came in battle array. Quiet endurance may be 
more heroic than violent resistance, and the Christian 
law of bearing personal insults and injuries meekly 
tends to the development of the highest courage and 
truest manliness. There is nothing more courageous, 
more heroic, in all history than living up to this 
precept." 

"Rejoice evermore" is the same exhortation that 
in our last lesson we saw the Apostle sending to the 
Philippians. The Christian's rejoicing is not hysterical, 
but founded on established principles, upon promises 
and comforting assurances of the divine Word 
which stands firm amid all the storms and trials and 
shocks of life. 

"Pray without ceasing. In everything give thanks." 
Only somewhat advanced pupils in the School of Christ 
are prepared clearly to comprehend this exhortation. 
Having surrendered their wills and all of the interests of 
the present life to the Lord, exchanging earthly interests 
for heavenly interests, the Lord's people are less disposed 
than others to pray unceasingly for earthly good things. 
Having set their affections on things above, their prayers 
are in respect to those things,— the heavenly robe, 
the heavenly food, the heavenly favor. Their prayers 
are specially for such leadings of divine providence and 
such assistance of divine grace as will enable them to 
rejoice always in such experiences as their gracious 
Lord may deem best for their spiritual development. 
More and more they find their prayers to consist of 
thanksgiving for blessings already received, as well as 
for those yet to come, which they grasp by the hand of 
faith. 

Their prayers are without ceasing, in that, having 
the condition of heart which is in fellowship with the 
Lord and fully devoted to the doing of his will, they 
not only implore his blessing at the beginning of each 

R3137 : page 25 

day, and present their thanks at the close of each day, 
but in all of life's affairs they seek to remember that 
they have consecrated their all to the Lord, and by 
faith look up to him in all of the affairs of life;— and 
in proportion to the importance of their undertakings 



they, by faith, realize the association of God's providence 
with all the interests of life and give thanks accordingly. 
This is the will of God concerning us;— 
he wills that we live in such an attitude of constant 
regard for his will and for his blessing;— and he wills 
it in respect to us because it will be the condition most 
favorable to our progress in the narrow way, and which 
will best assist us in making our calling and election 
sure. 

Having stated succinctly the Church's proper attitude 
toward the Lord to be one of continued rejoicing, 
prayer and thanksgiving and acceptance of his divine 
providences, the Apostle next briefly admonishes them 
respecting their attitude toward each other in the 
Church, in their feasting together on the Word of the 
Lord;— saying, 

"Quench not the Spirit. 

"Despise not prophesyings. 

"Prove all things; hold fast that which is good. 

"Abstain from every form of evil." 
By following these admonitions, their fellowship 
in the Lord would be the more profitable— they 
would, as a congregation of the Lord's followers, be 
helped onward the more toward the grand standard to 
which we are called. The spirit of the Lord amongst 
his people is compared to "a flame of sacred love" for 
the Lord and all connected with his cause: this flame is 
enkindled through the divine message in each one individually, 
when begotten of the holy spirit, and appertains, 
therefore, to the Church collectively, under the 
guidance of that spirit. In proportion as the church 
grows in knowledge and in love and in fellowship with 
the Lord this "flame of sacred love" will make it a light 
in the world,— as a city set on a hill, which cannot be 
hid. This is a different figure from the use of fire as a 
symbol of destruction. 

True, the flame of sacred love does not consume 
and destroy sin, but sympathy with sin; sin is not 
a part of the new creature, which opposes it and desires 
to have it consumed,— that the light of righteousness 
and truth may shine the more brightly. This "flame 
of sacred love" may, indeed, consume our mortal bodies, 
as living sacrifices in the service of the truth; but 
with such a consumption the new mind is fully in accord, 
and rejoices, realizing that it has in heaven an 
enduring habitation, and counting it all joy to be 
reckoned worthy to suffer for the Lord's cause. The 
more this "flame of sacred love" burns, individually 
and collectively in the Church, the greater will be the 
progress in all good things. Hence we are to be specially 
on guard, that our words and conduct and the 
general management of the interests of Zion in our 
midst shall permit this spirit of love to have free course 
in all our hearts and lives— that it be not quenched 
either with false doctrines or forms and ceremonies, or 
too rigid rules or by worldly spirit or by cares of this 



life or by any other thing, circumstance or condition 
under our control. 

The Church is not to despise prophesyings: the 
Apostle does not mean that we are not to despise the 
prophecies of the holy men of old who spoke as they 
were moved by the holy spirit— it would be unnecessary 
to caution the Church on that subject. The exhortation 
is, not to despise prophesyings that may be 
done in our midst. As we have previously seen, the 
gift of prophecy in the sense of foretelling coming 
events was to some extent in the Church in the Apostle's 
day, as one of the gifts of the spirit, to mark out 

R3137 : page 26 

the Lord's people and to assist in establishing them at 
a time when the inspired messages of the Lord were 
unavailable. We find, however, that the Apostle frequently 
used this word "prophecy" in respect to public 
utterance, declamation, preaching. The early 
churches were accustomed to having general gatherings 
for their mutual assistance and upbuilding, and 
may have been in danger of thinking more of the gifts 
of miracles and tongues than of connected and logical 
discourse respecting the truth. The Apostle points 
out that without discarding the other blessings, this one 
should not be despised— our Lord was a preacher; the 
apostles were preachers, and the Lord has since raised 
up instructors amongst his people. Hence, such service 
should not be despised or ignored. 

We live in a time when the very reverse of this is 
true; when the danger is rather that too much time 
and too much attention may be given to preaching, 
and not sufficient to the other methods of inculcating 
truth and encouraging the Lord's flock, "edifying and 
building up yourselves in the most holy faith"— when 
too much reliance is apt to be placed upon a leader and 
a connected discourse. 

"Prove all things, hold fast that which is good." 
However much they should ever come to respect prophesyings, 
or public preaching, the Lord's people should 
learn proportionately not to receive what they might 
hear without proper examination and criticism: 
they should prove all things that they hear, should 
exercise discrimination of mind, as to what is logically 
and scrip turally supported, and what is mere conjecture 
and possibly sophistry. They should prove what 
they hear, with a view to holding fast everything that 
stands the test of the divine Word, and shows itself to 
be in accordance with the holy spirit; and they 
should as promptly and thoroughly reject whatever 
will not stand these tests. Alas! the Lord's people 
today greatly need to give attention to this exhortation; 
for much is being presented in the name of the Lord 
and as the teaching of his Word that is neither logical 
nor scriptural— that is supported neither by the letter 



nor the spirit of the Word;— much that is not good, 

and should be rejected. With such a discrimination 

prevailing amongst the Lord's consecrated ones, how 

much of the chaff of nominal "orthodoxy" would be rejected, 

and what a hungering and thirsting and searching 

there soon would be for the good Word of God, 

that would stand these tests! Let us diligently heed 

the Apostle's exhortation on this point. 

"Abstain from every form of evil" (Rev. Ver.) 
gives the Apostle's thought. There are various evils 
which present themselves; some in their true hideousness, 
and some under a cloak of hypocrisy— some 
openly and boldly admitting their evil character and 
endeavoring to decoy the Lord's people into sin; others, 
garbing themselves as angels of light, would seek 
to mislead and to deceive. The exhortation is that 
everything that is evil, whether it have a good form or 
a bad form, is to be resisted and opposed. We may 
not say with some, "Let us do evil that good may follow." 
The Lord's people must be loyal to the principles 
of righteousness, under any and all circumstances. 
To do otherwise would be surely to undermine the 
character which they are seeking to build up. 

To abstain from every appearance of evil is another 
thought— a different one from what the Apostle's words 
in the original would warrant; nevertheless, they represent 
a sound principle. We surely should abstain 
not only from evil things, whatever their form or garb, 
but we should abstain so far as possible from doing 
things that we know to be good, which our friends or 
neighbors might misunderstand and consider to be evil 
things. The spirit of a sound mind dictates that not 
only evil in its every form, but everything that has an 
evil appearance, even, should be avoided— that our 
influence for the Lord and the truth may be the 
greater. 

In closing, the Apostle pronounces his benediction. 
It is an invocation— the expression of his heart's desire 
on their behalf— that the God of peace would sanctify 
them wholly. He thus emphasizes the fact that God 
is not a God of confusion, anarchy, turmoil and disturbance, 
but a God of peace; and that in proportion 
as we are taught of him in the School of Christ we will 
become lovers of peace, and the peace of God will dwell 
in us and will abound in us more and more, and cause 
us to be not unfruitful in regard to holy character, and 
will make us advocates and promoters of peace in our 
words and deeds. As it is written, "Blessed are the 
peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of 
God." Peace in the heart, manifesting itself in the 
look and word and conduct, is, as the Apostle intimates, 
an evidence of whole or complete setting apart, 
and that God's spirit has come into such a sanctified 
heart and is filling it with his peace, the peace of God 
which passeth all understanding. 

"And may your spirit, soul and body be preserved 



entire, without blame, at the coming of our Lord Jesus 

Christ." (R.V.) The Apostle could mean this only 

in respect to the Church, as a whole, and not concerning 

the individual members; because he surely did not 

expect the Christians at Thessalonica without exception 

to live until the presence of the Lord, even as he did 

not himself expect to live until that time, and so declared. 

(2 Tim. 4:7,8; 2 Pet. 1:12-15.) The Apostle 

is not, therefore, to be understood as speaking of the 

spirit and soul and body of each individual Christian 

at Thessalonica, but respecting the spirit of the Church, 

R3137 : page 27 

the soul of the Church, and the body of the Church. 

In other words, his desire was that the Church at Thessalonica 

might continue to the full end of the Gospel 

age as a noble and faithful congregation of the Lord's 

body, full of his spirit and courageous in his work. 

As a matter of fact, we know that the Apostle's good 

wishes, or prayer did not come true; for this congregation, 

like the others he planted, died out: not heeding 

with sufficient care his injunctions and exhortations, 

not proving all things, not holding fast the good, not 

abstaining from evil, not being sanctified wholly, the 

spirit of the Lord in their midst was quenched, and as 

a congregation it died, or ceased to be— the light having 

R3138 : page 27 

blessed and confirmed some, passed on to other 
quarters, seeking those "meet for the inheritance of 
the saints in light."* 

"Faithful is he that called you, who will also do it." 
The fact that the Thessalonica Church has not been kept 
in accordance with the Apostle's prayer, is not to be 
charged to unfaithfulness on God's part, but to neglect 
and unfaithfulness on the part of those whom the 
Apostle addressed, or their successors in that congregation. 
So it is with every one of us who has been 
called of the Lord. It is for us to hear and to heed the 
Lord's message through his servants, if we would make 
our calling and our election sure. If not disposed to 
hear his message in the way he has sent it, the fault 
lies at our own door. Faithful is he who called us, who 
would rejoice to do for us abundantly better things 
than we could ask or think, if we accept his provisions 
in faith and follow the directions of his Word. 

"Brethren, pray for us." There was nothing of 
the pope or lord about the Apostle— no feeling of such 
a superiority to the others of the Lord's flock that he 
could pray for them to their advantage, but needed not 
their prayers. Similar is the spirit of all who are in the 
proper relationship with the Lord— a spirit of humility 
and appreciation of all the household of faith, and of 
their petitions at the throne of grace— a realization that 



the humblest of the Lord's people has access to the throne 
of heavenly grace, and may there obtain mercy and 
find strength to help in every time of need. 

"Greet all the brethren with a holy kiss." This 
was the ancient style of greeting, corresponding to our 
present style of saluting with the hand or with the hat 
or by shaking hands. The custom of men kissing each 
other is still followed in eastern countries. The Apostle's 
thought is that there should be thorough cordiality 
amongst all who claim membership in the body of 
Christ, and that this fellowship should be manifested 
by the accustomed form of greeting,— whatever reasonable 
form that might be. Possibly he meant— "I 
greet," etc., implying that he would love to be with 
them and greet them personally, and now did so by letter. 

Before invoking the Lord's blessing upon the 
Church, the Apostle charged most strongly that this 
epistle should not be considered as a private message or 
letter to those in whose care it was sent, but that it 
should be considered as his address to the entire company 
of the Lord's faithful, and should be read to them 
all. The Apostle seemed to fear that there might be a 
spirit of censorship amongst the leading brethren which 
might lead them to preserve his letter to themselves, 
and to dole it out second-hand to the Church, either as 
a whole or such parts of it as in their judgment would 
be prudent. Such a spirit on the part of the elders in 
any Church would be reprehensible. God's Word is 
for God's people, and whoever would hinder its flow 
would surely offend the Master himself. That the elders 
at Thessalonica were faithful is apparent from the 
fact that the epistle was delivered to the Church. Some 
today need caution along this same line: many preachers 
and teachers have discerned in The Plan of the Ages 
the light of the Millennial dawn, but, instead of heralding 
it to others, have sought to hide it from the Lord's 
people that they might use it as a personal illuminant 
to cause themselves to shine before their flocks. They 
consider this cunning,— "wise and prudent,"— forgetting 
that the Lord declares that he hides his deep things 
from the wise and prudent and reveals them unto babes. 
(Luke 10:21.) True to our Lord's words, this class 
rarely makes much progress;— the truth passes on and 
ere long they are in comparative darkness;— because 
they received not the truth in the love of it, but in the 
love of self. (2 Thess. 2:10.) Loyalty to the Lord 
and to his flock and to his Truth, through whatever 
channel it comes, demands that it shall be heralded by 
each of us to the extent of our ability and in its purity 
and as speedily as possible,— consistent with the condition 
and interests of those for whom the Lord intended 
it— his flock. Shepherds who feed themselves and not 
the flock are warned by the Lord of his displeasure, 
and could not be expected to thrive spiritually, or otherwise 
to enjoy the light of the Lord's face.— 
Ezek. 34:2,7-10. 



*What is the Soul, What is the Spirit, and What is the Body 
of Man? is treated in MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. V., chaps. 8 and 12. 



R3138 : page 27 

"THIS IGNORANCE GOD WINKED AT." 

--ACTS 17:22-34-FEBRUARY l.~ 

Golden Text— "He preached unto them Jesus and the resurrection. 

PERSECUTION followed the Apostle to Berea, 

where we, in a previous lesson, left him teaching 

a very noble class of inquiring and searching 

minds. His enemies in Thessalonica discovered 

his whereabouts, and at once began to create a disturbance 

—no doubt believing that thus they were doing 

God service. The Apostle's own experience as a persecutor 

of the body of Christ must have helped him to 

R3138 : page 28 

very charitable views of those who so viciously pursued 
him. The evidences of coming trouble were so strong 
that the Berean friends feared to have him embark at 
a regular port, at which he might have been recognized, 
and the direction of his journey anticipated, and thus 
prejudices might have gone with him or before him into 
new fields; they, therefore, secretly hastened him to the 
near seashore where he obtained coastwise shipping for 
Athens. The Apostle, as the chief spokesman, "drew the 
fire" of his enemies to such an extent that their hatred 
seems to have been confined to him alone— not affecting 
Silas, his companion, nor Timothy, at this time his 
assistant or servant. The latter two were left behind, 
to strengthen and encourage the believers, whose faith 
already had been established. 

Under these circumstances the Apostle arrived at 
Athens, once the world's capital in every sense of the 
word; but still its capital in respect to science and art 
and theology and schools of general instruction— its 
commercial and political influence having gone to Rome 
with the imperial control. To Athens came the youth 
of wealthy families of the world, and many others possessed 
of a special craving for wisdom,— to avail themselves 
of the teachers, studies and lectures— practically 
the only means of instruction at that time. 

Without a miracle no other one of the apostles 
would have been competent to secure a hearing before 
the Athenian Council of the Areopagites— composed of 
the teachers of the various schools of learning, and generally 



speaking, of the reputedly wisest men of the 

world. That the Apostle Paul, without letters of introduction, 

without political or other influence, serving as 

such, should succeed in a few days in obtaining an invitation 

to address this august body of men, indicates 

clearly that he was a man of remarkable talent, as well 

as learning. These natural qualities in him were reinforced 

by the spirit of a sound mind, the spirit of the 

Lord, the spirit of the divine revelation, the true Gospel. 

The Apostle lost no time in beginning his special 

work: true, he first made a general inspection of the 

chief features of the city's attractions, noting its numerous 

public statues to the gods, whose number Pliny 

gives as over three thousand in the time of Nero. It 

was while making this inspection of the city and considering 

how best he could launch the gospel message 

there, that his attention was drawn to one altar erected 

"To the Unknown God." He kept this as a text for 

his principal effort when the time should be ripe, and 

meantime, as usual, he began his ministry by going 

into the Jewish synagogues; but apparently finding 

little interest here he resorted to the public squares 

and markets, and discussed religious topics with the 

numerous students and others who gathered there. 

Amongst those who heard him were some of a cynical 
turn of mind who said, Let us listen to what this 
babbler is saying; the word "babbler" signifying 
seed-picker, inferentially meaning that the Apostle had 
gained a mere smattering of knowledge, picked up some 
seeds of thought from others of the great teachers, and 
was now attempting to set himself up as a teacher. 
Others, disposed to persecute, said, He seems to be a 
setter forth of strange gods;— for to set forth any strange 
gods in Athens was a crime, it being held that they 
already had them in plenty, and that to admit that 
any one could present a new god of which the Athenian 
teachers knew nothing, would be an insult to their 
learning and evidently a fraud. This, together with the 
Apostle's talents, secured for him a hearing before the 
Areopagites, or Council of the Learned. It was this 
Council which had the power to sentence to death anyone 
who should attempt to set forth strange gods in 
Athens; and hence the Apostle's hearing before them 
was probably, more or less, in the nature of a trial for 
life, because he had been preaching Jesus— an unheard-of 
god amongst the Athenians up to this time— and 
the resurrection. 

The Apostle's theme is worthy of our notice. Under 
the divine guidance he seemed to have a way of approaching 
the pith of the gospel most directly, and these 
words of our Golden Text, "Jesus and the resurrection," 
really embraced the whole of the gospel preached. The 
world, under divine sentence, was dead or dying: the 
redemption price, our Lord's ransom sacrifice, had just 
been paid, and the hope to be built upon his work and 
to be announced to the people was the resurrection of the 



dead— that our Lord's death was the purchase price 
for the sins of the whole world, and that as a result, 
in God's due time, an awakening of the dead shall 

R3139 : page 28 

come, and eventually the full raising up to the perfection 

of life of all who will accept the Redeemer as their 

leader and guide. This is the gospel which should 

still be preached, but which, by reason of various 

errors that crept in during the dark ages, has been beclouded 

and forced out of its way to such an extent 

that remarkably few lay any stress whatever upon the 

grand doctrine of the resurrection of the dead; and 

some are even dropping from their teachings "the ransom 

for all" given by Jesus. 

We can picture before our minds the Apostle addressing 
the Council of Mars' Hill, composed of "the 
noblest blood of Athens, the first politicians, the first 
orators, the first philosophers; accordingly the most 
august, not only of Athens, but of Greece, and, indeed, 
of the whole world, under whose supervision 'came the 
transactions of the popular assembly, religion, laws, 
morals and discipline.'" Now the Apostle had use for 
the text he had found. He must prove to these men 
that he was not the setter forth of a new theology, but an 

R3139 : page 29 

old one. He at once brought forth his argument, not 
in the discourteous language of our English Common 
Version, intimating that his auditors were ignorant and 
superstitious, but, on the contrary, in complimentary 
language, which we paraphrase: he said to them;— "I 
perceive that more than others you Athenians have respect 
for whatever is divine. The conviction of this 
came to me as passing through your city I beheld the 
various evidences of your devoutness, and amongst 
other altars noticed one with the inscription, "To the 
Unknown God." Information regarding this God I 
am setting forth. He is the God that made the world 
and everything therein, and is the Lord of heaven and 
earth, too great to dwell in any temples made with 
hands, for he is the Lord of heaven as well as earth; 
neither can he receive service at our hands, for he needs 
nothing which we have to give, but is the author of 
life and breath and all things; who himself created 
every nation of men dwelling throughout all the earth 
—and even all their affairs are subject to his regulations 
and appointments. 

Thus did he set before them the greatness of the 
true God, in contrast with their numerous gods whom 
they feared or hated, reverenced or placated, and 
whose vices and frequent impotency they admitted. 
The Apostle thus brought his teachings within the rules 
and regulations, as being not a new teaching, but a 



fuller declaration of a God already recognized by his 
hearers. And indeed, so high, so noble, so great a 
thought of God, must have impressed his hearers favorably. 
We cannot doubt that the teachings of the 
Jews, supplemented by the gospel presentations, have 
done much to lift the minds of men out of the deep 
degradation which came upon them soon after the flood, 
as explained by the Apostle.— Rom. 1:20-32. 

A God who was not merely the God of one nation 
or of one city or of one precinct, but who had created 
all races and nations, and had had to do with the rise 
and fall of nations, was certainly a very different God 
from anything that had ever been heretofore suggested 
to the minds of these philosophers; for although the 
Jews had preached the same God, undoubtedly their 
presentation of him as the God of the Hebrews must 
have favored the impression that each nation had its 
own god or gods, demanding its worship, reverence, 
sacrifices, etc. 

In vss. 26 and 27 the Apostle implies that the Lord's 
ordering of the national affairs had something to do with 
the propagation of the knowledge of himself, and so we 
find it has been. The bringing of the world under successive 
empires— the Babylonian, Medo-Persian, Grecian 
and Roman— had tended to unify the race to some extent, 
and to make more possible the promulgation 
of the gospel. During the Grecian period the Greek language 
was spread abroad throughout various lands, 
and it still maintained its supremacy as the language 
of the world, although the reins of government had 
passed to the hands of the Romans, under whose pushing, 
warlike power the world in general would be 
brought much closer together than it had ever been 
from the time of the confounding of tongues at Babel. 
All this had occurred at the proper juncture of time as 
concerned God's favor to Israel, according to the flesh, 
the birth of Jesus, his crucifixion and the gathering of 
the ripe "wheat" from that nation, and the scattering 
of the remainder. All these things were, under divine 
supervision, working in the interest of mankind, "that 
they should seek God, if haply they might feel after 
him and find him, though he is not far from each one 
of us." The Apostle would assist his hearers in finding 
this true God, who was to be found of them, and 
whom they had indicated their desire to know when 
they erected the altar referred to. 

Describing the true God further, the Apostle assured 
his hearers that none could live or move or have 
existence, even, aside from the power and good intent 
of this great God. His words are equally truthful, 
whether we restrict them to the imperfect existence of 
the present time and the dying condition of the world, 
with but a spark of life, or whether we apply them in 
the fuller sense to the Lord's provision for the future 
by restitution processes and arrangements. Still wishing 
to offset the thought that his message was a new 



one, the Apostle declares that certain Grecian poets had 
practically expressed this thought in saying, "We are 
also his offspring." Carrying the mind, then, to the 
logical conclusion, he urges that if we are the offspring 
of God our thoughts respecting divinity should not lead 
us to make or to worship images of any kind, all of 
which are professedly of man's device. 

The Apostle's method is worthy of our imitation. 
All wise people distrust novelty, and incline to say 
that whatever is valuable has long been. We, like the 
Apostle, should endeavor to show that the true gospel 
is not a new theology, but the old theology; not a new 
gospel, but the old gospel,— the one foretold to Abraham; 
the one announced by the angels on Bethlehem's 
plains as "good tidings of great joy which shall be unto 
all people;" the one declared by the Lord Jesus himself 
and by all his apostles. In proportion as we would 
show that errors prevail today, which had their origin 
in the "dark ages," we must show that we are not forging 
a new theory equally erroneous, but that we have 
discarded the errors of the dark ages, and have gone 
back to the first principles and precepts and instructions 
of the gospel, as announced by the Lord and his 
authorized representatives, the apostles. 

An explanation was necessary as to why this great 

R3139 : page 30 

God who had created all nations, and was directing 

their welfare, had neglected to send word to the Athenians 

until now. The Apostle did not go into a full explanation 

of the matter, with which his hearers would 

not have sympathy— he did not attempt to show how 

God in the past had merely been giving the world lessons 

in respect to the wages of sin, neither did he mention 

how Abraham's seed had been selected as the line 

through which divine blessings were to be carried eventually 

to all the families of the earth, and that God had 

been dealing with the natural seed of Abraham for the 

preceding eighteen centuries, making types of them and 

through them illustrating the progress of the divine plan 

as it shall ultimately be carried out. He did not explain, 

either, how that Christ offered himself to this nation of 

Israel, and (in harmony with the divine foreknowledge) 

had been rejected, and that now God was seeking 

a spiritual seed of Abraham— spiritual Israelites— 

to take the place of the broken-off branches of the fleshly 

house.— Rom. 11. 

He contented himself with the bare statement of 
the truth, that in times past God had "winked at" or 
overlooked or disregarded and paid no attention to the 
idolatries of the world, but that now the time was come 
for a change of dispensation;— that now God was sending 
his message to them, and to all who had ears to 
hear, commanding repentance from sin and turning 
from idolatries to true worship and righteousness. 



Quite possibly, though the account does not state it, 
the Apostle explained that the foundation or basis of this 
call to repentance was the fact that Christ had been a propitiation 
(satisfaction) for the sins of the whole world- 
clearing men thus from the original condemnation of 
death and alienation from God, and permitting the return 
to his favor of whomsoever would. 

The word "because" commencing vs. 31 has a 
special significance which should not be overlooked. 
God calls upon all men to repent and reform, because 
he has appointed for them a day of judgment— a day 
of trial or testing. Not a trial for testing or judging 
whether or not they are imperfect and fallen, for this 
God already knows, even better than we do, and his 
Word expressly declares that "There is none righteous, 
no, not one." Such a trial, such a judgment day, 
therefore, to see if any were righteous, would be a 
farce. The object of the day of trial or judgment referred 
to by the Lord is totally different from this. 

It is to be a trial day or judgment day to see, to 
test, to prove which of the world of mankind desire 
fellowship with the Lord, desire to be obedient to him, 
desire to walk in his ways. The Millennial Age is this 
trial day, and the Lord assures us that a full opportunity 
shall be granted to each and every member of the 
race to hear, to know, to comprehend his goodness, 
his love, his redemption of the world through Christ, 
and his willingness that they should come back into 
fellowship with him— back to a condition in which he 
could justly accord to them everlasting life. God could 
not reasonably command any to repent and return until 
the ransom was paid at Calvary, because it was his 
own law that had forbidden them to have fellowship 
with him, and that law must first be satisfied; and 
because he could not reward with life everlasting any 

R3140 : page 30 

who would seek his face, until he had made provision 
through the death of Christ for the payment of the 
death penalty against the race and through his resurrection 
for the times of restitution. 

It is a further part of this blessed assurance that 
the judgment or trial of the world will be "in righteousness" 
—under a reign of righteousness when the besetments 
of the Adversary and his deceptions will be at 
an end, and when, therefore, a clear and explicit 
knowledge of the Lord and of the truth will fill the 
earth, as the waters cover the great deep. What a 
gracious gospel the Apostle had to preach! It was so 
good, indeed, that he had to be guarded in his expression 
of it;— too good for his hearers to appreciate, with 
their debauched ideas of the cruelty and perversity of 
the gods— even as it is too good to be appreciated today 
by those whose minds have been more or less confused 
by the horrible theological nightmares coming 



down to us from "the dark ages." 

The Apostle was proceeding logically to show that 
the resurrection of Christ from the dead was God's assurance 
to all that he would ultimately carry out this 
great plan of blessing the world, by granting to each 
member of it an individual trial or judgment for life, 
under the favorable conditions of the Millennium; and 
that the resurrection of Christ was not only God's attestation 
to men that his sacrifice has been satisfactory, 
but was also necessary, that our Lord Jesus as the risen 
and glorified Son of God might exercise in due time 
"all power in heaven and in earth," and thus bring 
about the great Thousand- Year Judgment Day, or 
"times of restitution of all things which God hath 
spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets since the 
world began." (Acts 3:21.) But with this his hearers, 
who must have been amazed with the logic of his 
argument, and must have wondered how their various 
disciples would be influenced by the new teacher, and 
to what extent they would lose caste, as being less logical 
or less lofty in their sentiments, found occasion 
for an expression of dissatisfaction, and of thus logically 
casting aside the entire argument— dismissing it 
as unworthy of further consideration. 

Their objection rested on the resurrection, which 
the Apostle made so prominent, so indispensable to the 
carrying out of the entire plan of God; indispensable, 

R3140 : page 31 

first, as to the Redeemer, that he must rise from the 
dead, ere he could be the agent of Jehovah in prosecuting 
the work of blessing the world; necessary to the 
world of mankind, that they might come forth from 
the tomb and be granted a knowledge and opportunity 
of restitution or resurrection to all that had been lost 
by Adam's disobedience. When the resurrection was 
mentioned the occasion for expressions of derision was 
furnished, as though they would say: We knew that 
there could be no thorough-going philosophy superior 
to our own; we were on the look-out for the weak 
point in the argument of this speaker who sets himself 
up to be a teacher, and now we have found it;— the 
resurrection! Nonsense! Whoever saw or heard of 
a resurrection from the dead? 

Others of his auditors were less violent in their 
expressions, but agreed that they had heard enough for 
the present— implying that the argument was not very 
satisfactory when it needed to be supported by a resurrection 
hypothesis which, to them, seemed very much 
less reasonable than their own philosophies,— that a man 
never died, and that when he appears to die he really 
becomes more alive than he ever was before. From 
their standpoint of view there could be no resurrection 
of the dead, since there were none dead,— all being 
more abundantly alive from the moment of apparent 



death. This has been the point of contest between the 
Scriptures and those who hold to them as the Word of 
God, and all other theories advanced by and backed by 
the Adversary and in accordance with his original deceptive 
statement, "Ye shall not surely die." Those 
who would be on the Lord's side must accept the 
Lord's statement, "Ye shall surely die;" must admit 
that it is true; must admit that it was necessary that 
Christ should die, as our representative and substitute, 
to free us from the condemnation of death, and must 
admit also that only by a resurrection of the dead can 
we come back again to life,— to absolute perfection and 
full harmony with God. 

However, one member of the Council of Mars' 
Hill (the Areopagite Society) had been deeply interested 
in the truth he had heard; also a woman of some 
distinction, and others with them;— for although the 
Society alone occupied the place of prominence in such 
discussions, the people in general were privileged to 
surround the court. The Apostle's experience here, as 
elsewhere, like our own, demonstrates the fact that at 
the present time not many have ears to hear the Word 
of the Lord; not many are seriously "feeling after him 
if haply they might find him." The majority are 
blinded by the god of this world, Satan, through various 
traditions, heathen and Christian, so that they cannot 
discern the lengths and breadths and heights and 
depths of the true gospel. At the present time it is not 
given to all to see and to understand (Matt. 13:11; 
Mark 4:1 1), but we thank God that the time is coming 
when all the blind eyes shall be opened, and all the 
deaf ears shall be unstopped; and then the preaching 
of "Jesus and the resurrection" will mean a great 
blessing, and all shall come to the knowledge of the 
truth, from the least to the greatest, as the Lord, 
through the Prophet, has declared.— Jer. 31:33,34. 



R3140 : page 31 

OUR EARNEST DESIRE. 

All who love the Lord love all who are sincerely 
his brethren— "begotten again" (John 1:13). And all 
who love the brethren have a burning desire to do them 
good— to assist them into the light and joy and peace 
of present truth. Our readers very generally agree 
that the MILLENNIAL DAWN is the best of all helps, 
and next to it ZION'S WATCH TOWER. We use tracts, 
etc., merely with those whose desire for the truth is 
doubtful— to stimulate an appetite for more, and that 
we may learn who they are. These tracts we can supply 
you in any quantity free. But we are specially 
anxious that all of the Lord's followers should read 
the DAWNS and TOWERS. We, therefore, make the 



following offer, good throughout 1903: — 

Anyone on the WATCH TOWER lists may send us 
the addresses of friends who promise to read the DAWN 
if loaned them free of charge, and who promise to return 
it (postpaid) at some time during the year— or to 
pay for it, or to send us a letter stating that they have 
read it with interest and profit and desire to retain it 
for future reading and reference, but are too poor to 
pay for it. In the latter case, we will write them, 
making the book a gift, instead of a loan. We have 
long pursued this plan, except that heretofore we have 
required that the request come direct to us— whereas 
now we propose accepting the request through our 
readers. Furthermore, anyone already on our lists 
may send us in the names of any of their friends who 
will express to them a desire to receive the WATCH 
TOWER for three months, but do not feel that they can afford 
to pay for it. Such of these as you can assure us 
are true Christians and have already manifested interest 
in present truth, we will enter for the balance of 
the year, at your request, free. This differs from our 
ordinary offer, in that heretofore we have required that 
all entered either free or on credit shall write their requests 
directly to us: we find that some have been 
denying themselves the visits of the TOWER because of 
backwardness in asking. Such should be assured that 
we have a Lord's poor fund which pays for these papers 
and that it will afford us pleasure to send it to 
them; that, indeed, it grieves us to learn of any interested 
in "this way" (Acts 9:2), being for any reason 
deprived of the regular visits of the TOWER. 

With these liberal terms at your disposal we surely 
ought to have a list of 30,000 by this time next year. 
Remember, however, that you must write us that these 
friends requested that their names be thus entered— 
otherwise we could not list them. We must live up 
to the letter and spirit of the postal rules. 

Our provision of last year holds good for 1903, 
viz., that any one now on the TOWER list may send us 
four six-months trial subscriptions for one dollar. 

We still advise that subscribers take advantage 
of our special offer of cloth-bound DAWNS postpaid by 
us at 25 cents each. No other books in the world are 
sold at such a price;— any volume, any language. 
This special concession is to offset the fact that adverse 
postal rulings no longer permit us to send the 
paper bound editions singly at less than 20 cents per 
volume, even wholesale. 



page 33 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIV. FEBRUARY 1, 1903. No. 3 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 35 

A Further View of Socialism 35 

Conditions in Germany 36 

About Our Prosperity 36 

Catholicism in the Philippines 36 

Disestablishment in England 37 

The True Fold Not a Pen 37 

Paul at Corinth 38 

"Knowledge Puffeth Up, but Love 

Buildeth Up" 41 

"In My Name" (Poem) 45 

Interesting Letters 45 

page 34 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



CHARTS FOR OUR NEW BIBLES. 



The first lot of these Charts was spoiled by the printers, 
and only now are we prepared to supply them. We advertised 
them at 10c, but find that we can supply them at 5c 
each, postage included, without loss;— hence, that will be 



the price to all. Those who have already sent 10c will receive 
a second Chart. 

This Bible Chart is a reproduction of the 25c Chart of 
the Ages, reduced in size. It is printed on tough blue 
bond-paper, and can be fastened into the New Bible at the 
back. When wanted for reference it can be unfolded 
and studied with the open Bible. Each possessor of one 
of the New Bibles should have one of these Charts. We 
will accept stamps in payment, if more convenient to you; 
or you may order by postal card and include the small 
amount in some future remittance at your convenience. 



THE NEW LETTER PAPER. 



The price of letter paper, mentioned in our last issue, is 
25c per lb., postage 15c extra. This does not include envelopes, 
which we still sell at 25c per 100, postpaid. 



R3141 : page 35 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 

WE LEARN with regret that our reports of the 
progress of Socialism at home and abroad 
have been misunderstood by some to signify 
expectation that Socialism may be the Lord's way of 
bringing in the blessings of the Millennial Kingdom. 
Our position seems difficult for some to understand. 
We believe that many of the ideals of Socialism are 
good;— more than this, that many of those ideals will 
be realized in the Kingdom as they are now realized 
in heaven. But, we dispute the ability of Socialists 
to put those ideals into effect and make them continuously 
operative. 

Why so? Because of sin;— because selfishness, 
the reverse of love, is born with all men;— and because 
nothing but a thorough conversion (such as few experience) 
and subsequent instruction in the School of 
Christ (such as few now enjoy) could possibly so correct 
the natural heart as to make love— the golden 
rule— its law. 

No doubt many Socialists believe that their desires 
for Socialism are actuated by love, and not by 
selfishness; but such should not forget the Scriptural 
declaration that "the heart is deceitful above all 
things." Those clamoring for Socialism are generally 
such as believe that their temporal interests would 
be improved, or, at least, not injured, by Socialism. 
Remarkably few are advocating Socialism or anything 
else to their own disadvantage. We are not finding 



fault with this natural condition; only God's saints 
love to the extent of self-sacrifice for the good of others. 
We are merely pointing to this evidence that the 
advocates of Socialism cannot claim to be actuated by 
love, but by selfishness;— we are merely proving our 
position, that even if Socialism were established it 
could not last, because selfishness would continually 
prompt each to work either for his own advantage, or 
else to work as little as possible. 

Possibly a very few may be found working for 
Socialism and against their own interest: it is not for 
us to decide; but it is possible that ambition or combativeness 
have as much, or more, to do with their 
sacrifices than has love of mankind. The point we 
make is that Socialism is not practicable under selfish 
conditions; and that the voluntary Socialism which 
the Lord will introduce will not be attained until the 
close of the Millennium, when the selfishness of the 
fallen condition will have given place to perfect love 
and the full image of God;— all the incorrigibly selfish 
being destroyed in the Second Death. The Socialism 
of the Millennium will not be voluntary, but 
enforced by the rule of the "rod of iron."— 
Rev. 2:27. 

Our reason for keeping track of the progress of 
Socialism now is, that we expect that it, or something 
akin to it, is about to deceive the world into looking 
for a Millennium of its own, and lead them unconsciously 
to, and then over the brink into the anarchy 
and "time of trouble such as was not since there was 
a nation." We cannot wonder that this "will o' the 
wisp" should attract and ensnare many of "the groaning 
creation" who long for better things for themselves 
and neighbors; and we should and do sympathize 
with such very keenly; but for any one who has 
had his eyes opened to the divine plan for the blessing 
of the world, through Christ and his Church, in the 
Millennial Kingdom (invisible to the world), to be 
attracted to Socialism would be a distinct evidence of 
his going into the "outer darkness" of the world— 
away from the inner light of divine revelation given 
to the Church. 

R3141 : page 36 

CONDITIONS IN GERMANY. 



The London Spectator editorially reviews the German 
situation, and the evidences seen there of a political 
or a social revolution— all, be it marked, based on 
selfishness. It says:— 

"Professor Mommsen, whose opinion has great 
weight in Germany, has issued a remarkable manifesto. 
He says that 'the overthrow of the Imperial 



Constitution is rapidly progressing.' The Reichstag 

and the Emperor alike are being subjected to the absolutism 

of an alliance between the Tory landlords and 

the priests. That is revolution and worse than personal 

government, because the autocrat would be 

impartial. All parties, in fact, are becoming revolutionary. 

The Liberals would like to convert the 

supreme head of the state into a 'first official,' after 

the English pattern, and 'that is revolution.' So is 

the desire of the Centre to reconvert Germany to Catholicism. 

So is the desire of the German squirearchy 

to restore aristocratic rule, and degrade the Emperor 

to be only first among his peers. And finally, so is 

the desire of the Social Democrats that every workman, 

without regard to his work, should receive out 

of a general pot the same quantity of soup as his 

neighbors. The only remedy is for Liberals and Social 

Democrats to unite in resistance; but that requires 

a modification in the ideas of each, which the Social 

Democrats in particular, who seem bent on 'political 

suicide,' will be slow to concede. We are not so hopeless 

as the Professor; but certainly the trend of events 

in Germany is towards Caesarism in the hands of a 

Caesar whose considerable powers of mind are rendered 

partially useless by perpetual hurry." 

ABOUT OUR PROSPERITY. 



The Pittsburg Gazette editorially says:— 
"While the United States is enjoying unexampled 
prosperity, England is feeling the pinch of hard 
times. Accounts agree that in the poorer parts of 
London and in some of the industrial centers in the 
provinces there is an exceptional amount of distress. 
It is admitted that the year now closing has been 
marked by a decline of industrial prosperity and 
that there is an unusually large per centage of unemployed 
workmen, for whose relief during the winter 
special exertions will have to be made. Similar 
news comes from Russia. Famine prevails in the 
province of Finland, and in all industrial centers there 
is great suffering owing to lack of work. It is reported 
that workmen in important towns are glad to get 
work for 35 copecks a day, equal to 23 cents. The 
depression in England is largely a reaction from artificial 
stimulus of war expenditure, and in Russia it is a 
recoil from over production and over trading in connection 
with the rapid expansion of the empire. Germany 
is beginning to emerge from the depression that overtook 
her industries some years ago, but the recent tariff 
legislation hostile to the commercial treaties which 
stimulated her industrial progress, has clouded the 
prospect again. The industrial prosperity of the 
United States is the admiration and envy of the 



world." 



We receive many queries respecting the probable 
duration of present prosperity. That question no 
human being can answer satisfactorily. The world's 
wars being over and the great war expenditures stopped, 
would naturally mean that prosperity has already 
crested and is on the decline. But who knows what 
may come of the Venezuelan trouble or similar difficulties 
with other states, through the new program of 
the great powers that the claims of private bondholders 
against the smaller nations may be collected by 
force? Who knows that this program and the "Monroe 
Doctrine" may not clash so as to bring about one 
of the greatest sea wars of modern times? Or something 
else, of which we as yet have not a surmise, 
may come forward suddenly to give business a fresh 
spurt. 

So far as the Scriptures guide us, we expect the 
climax of the great time of anarchous trouble in October, 
1914. Our opinion is that so great a trouble 
would necessarily last in violent form at least three or 
four years before reaching that climax. Hence, we 
expect strenuous times by or before October, 1910. 
And this agrees well with the corresponding and typical 
trouble with which the Jewish age ended. 

Reasoning backward from 1910 A.D. we are 
bound to assume that the conditions leading up to such 
violence as we then expect would include great financial 
depression which probably would last some years 
before reaching so disheartening a stage. We could not, 
therefore, expect that depression to begin later than, 
say, 1908. Our reasoning is that a depression beginning 
now would culminate too quickly for the dates we 
consider fixed by Scripture, and that there is not sufficient 
time for a depression and then another boom 
and another depression before 1910,— notwithstanding 
the rapid changes of our day. These reasons incline 
us to expect a prolongation of present prosperity for 
a couple of years more. It is because we see no 
other cause than war likely to sustain present prosperity, 
that we are on the lookout for one;— and not 
that we favor or sympathize with wars. 

CATHOLICISM IN THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS. 



Recent reports indicate that the movement among 
the Filipinos to throw off the yoke of the Roman 
Catholic Church is progressing rapidly. They have 
established the "National Filipino Church" modeled 
after the pattern of the Church of England. They 
have chosen as its archbishop "Father Aglipay," an 



excommunicate Catholic priest, and the movement is 
taking well with the people who for so many years 
have been under the oppression of the monks and 
friars, both socially and financially. The latter have 
gotten into their control vast estates and many of the 
most profitable plantations, as well as all the church 
property, schools, etc., with money wrested from the 

R3142:page37 

people for performing funeral and wedding and christening 
services, and for masses and penances, under 
the pretext of saving them from untellable torture in 
the future. 

The people have seized many of the church buildings, 
claiming (we think, properly) that they were 
built with their and their fathers' money and labor 
and belong properly to them; and they are holding 
these by armed force and using them for worship according 
to their lights. Both parties— the people and 
the friars— are appealing to the American Governor 
Taft to decide for them. Neither party seems able to 
understand how church and state are distinctly separate 
with us. The Governor advises both parties that 
he can and will do no deciding of the question— that 
the courts of justice must settle the dispute. Bloodshed 
is feared. 

DISESTABLISHMENT MOVEMENT IN ENGLAND. 



The "Society for the Liberation of Religion from 
State Patronage" is making itself heard. Its Secretary 
recently said:— 

"The education bill and the rapid drift of the 
Anglican church Romeward are the pivotal points of 
the campaign. We contend that the bill is the creation 
of the state-maintained clergy and that it mulcts 
the people for the benefit of a limited class. We also 
contend that such an act would be impossible were the 
religious system independent of the state. The bishop 
of London's vehement protest against Romanist ritualism 
in several Anglican churches comes opportunely 
to aid our agitation. We hold that such 
evils are inherent in an official church which relieves 
the clergy of responsibility to the people and 
insures them life tenure. Unless guilty of gross 
breaches of immorality, Anglican ministers can teach 
anything, from agnosticism to transubstantiation, and 
remain perfectly secure in their clerical strongholds. 
The majority of them are deeply Romanists, but the 
English masses are thoroughly Protestant. When the 
people and not the state have control of the clergy 
the Romeward tendency will cease." 



STATESMEN'S VIEWS ON ZIONISM. 



Lord Salisbury: "Zionism is destined to succeed, 
in spite of the opposition it encounters. The Jews 
are capable of establishing a model government at 
Palestine, and raising the commerce of Asia Minor to 
an unprecedented height. If but forty per cent, of 
the Jews were converted to the project, it would become 
an assured reality. There is no reason why the 
Sultan should object to the establishment of an autonomous 
Jewish government within his dominions. 
There is enough energy and perseverance in the race 
that has resisted oppression for 2,500 years to accomplish 
the purposes pursued by Zionism." 

Ex-Premier Bourgeois: "The Jewish nation is 
too individual, too dissimilar, to other nations, to lose 
itself in assimilation. Zionism is essentially war upon 
Antisemitism— a phenomenon even more injurious to 
the dominant nations than to the Jews themselves, 
for it has a demoralizing effect, fostering hatred and 
checking the growth of the liberal spirit. The Jews 
are now reasserting themselves as a new-born nation 
and vigorously proclaiming their status as one. We 
may expect much from them, as they possess much 
intellectual power. Zionism is to be hailed as the 
solvent of Antisemitism, which will lose its raison 
d'etre with the unification and rehabilitation of the 
scattered and oppressed race." 



R3142:page37 

THE TRUE FOLD NOT A PEN. 

MANY OF THE LORD'S SHEEP are penned 

in behind various creeds of men and thus 

hindered from obtaining the food and exercising 

the liberty which Christ, the great Shepherd of 

the sheep, intended they should have. It is contrary 

to the will of the great Chief Shepherd that his sheep 

should be separated from each other by pens, and hindered 

from the proper liberties of the fold. There is 

one general enclosure behind which all the true sheep 

of this age and flock will be found; and to it the Lord 

informs us there is but the one door— himself. 

We might assume that all know something about 
this one fold and its one door; but this would be a mistake; 
many are so confused by the numerous man-made 
folds of Christendom that they confound these 
with the true. Some "wolves" are disappointed to 
find that the Good Shepherd who gave his life for the 
"sheep" has provided certain limitations beyond which 
the sheep cannot go if they obey his voice (his Word), 



and beyond which they do not desire to go if they are 
actually his sheep. 

Let those who like call this true fold, with its 
well-defined walls, "a man-made pen";— those who 
enjoy its security, enjoy also its liberty. It has one 
and only one wall, great and high, which so far has 
kept out the "wolves," except such as pretend to be 
sheep— who come arrayed in sheep's clothing. This 
wall is faith in Christ as man's ransom-sacrifice— finished 
at Calvary. 

None whom that fence excludes are "sheep." 
And behind that simple, yet strong, creed-fence there 
is all the liberty proper for the Lord's "sheep;"— 
though probably not nearly enough for the "goats." 

Further, while it is wrong for under-shepherds or 
anyone else to erect denominational fences inside this 
true fold, or to entice the "sheep" into them, and thus 
to restrain their liberties within the fold,— it is not 
only proper, but a part of the true under-shepherd's 
duty to protect the flock within the true enclosure 
of the true fold, from the "wolves in sheep's clothing" 
wherever found. No doubt it was as a type of the true 
Shepherd of the Lord's flock, that David [i.e., the Beloved], 
while defending his flocks, slew a lion, and a 
bear, and delivered the sheep of his charge. 

Our Lord, the great Chief Shepherd, set an example 
to the under-shepherds; and all true ones of 
his appointment must needs have the same spirit or 
soon lose their office. It was he who forewarned the 

R3142:page38 

true sheep, saying, "Beware of false prophets [teachers], 
which come to you in sheep's clothing [professing 
to be of the Lord's flock, but in reality not such, 
because they do not trust in the great sacrifice offered 
once for all for their sins], but inwardly they are ravening 
wolves [who would destroy your faith in the 
ransom, and thus destroy you as "sheep"]. But he 
that is a hireling and not the shepherd,. ..seeth 
the wolf [the false teacher] coming, and leaveth the 
sheep, and fleeth; and the wolf [the false teacher] 
catcheth them and scattereth the sheep.... I lay 
down my life for the sheep."— Matt. 7:15; 
John 10:12-15. 

It is not the approval of the "wolves," in sheep's 
clothing or without it, that is to be courted by the 
true under-shepherd. He will, however, have the 
approval of the Chief Shepherd, and of all the developed 
sheep who have their senses exercised by reason 
of use. The Apostle Paul battled hard against 
such false teachers, who affected to be believers, 
"sheep," while they were not such. Speaking on this 
subject he said to the Elders (under-shepherds) of the 
Church at Ephesus:— 

"I take you to record this day that I am pure 



from the blood of all.... Take heed, therefore, 
unto yourselves and to all the flock, over which the 
holy Spirit hath made you overseers [shepherds], to 
feed the Church of God which he hath purchased with 
his own blood [—faith in which purchase constitutes 
them 'sheep']. For I know this, that after my departing 
grievous wolves shall enter in among you [in 
sheep's clothing, of course, otherwise they would not 
be received], not sparing the flock. Also of your own 
selves shall men arise speaking contrary things 
[things different from what I, Paul, have taught] to 
draw away disciples [followers] after themselves. 
Therefore watch, and remember that by the space of 
three years I ceased not to warn every one night and 
day with tears."— Acts 20:26-31. 

The Apostle Peter, too, made a similar appeal 
to the under-shepherds, saying, "The elders which are 
among you I exhort.... Feed the flock of God, as 
much as in you is, taking oversight thereof, not by 
constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of 
a willing mind." "But as there were false prophets 
[in the past— 'wolves in sheep's clothing'] even so 
there shall be false teachers among you, who privily 
[deceptively, covering the real purport of their 
teachings] shall bring in [to the fold] damnable 
heresies [errors leading to condemnation and rejection] 
even denying the Lord that bought them.... 
And many shall follow their pernicious ways; by reason 
of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken 
of."-l Pet. 5:1-4; 2 Pet. 2:1,2. 

The Apostle John also cautions us, saying: 
"Look to yourselves, that we lose not those things 
which we have wrought, but that we receive a full 
reward. ...He that abideth in the doctrine of Christ 
[that the Son of Man came to give himself a ransom 
for all-Matt. 20:28; 1 Tim. 2:6] he hath both the 
Father and the Son. If there come any unto you [as 
a would-be teacher of the 'sheep'] and bring not this 
doctrine [of the ransom, taught by Christ], receive him 
not into your house, neither bid him God speed; for 
he that biddeth him God-speed [or who even indirectly 
helps to spread the 'damnable heresy' that we 
were not bought by the Lord] is partaker of the evil 
work [of him who publicly and openly does so]."— 
2 John 8-11. 

Thus we see that the duty of under-shepherds 
to protect the flock from deceptive wolves, as well 
as to feed them meat in due season, has been recognized 
from the start;— because from the start there 
have been such wolves. And since the holy Spirit 
gave special warnings that in the end of the age "evil 
men and leaders astray" would wax more and more 
bold, and that through their instrumentality Satan 
would propagate error, and affect to be a messenger 
of light, is it not due time for all the sheep to recognise 
these facts, and not to be deceived by "feigned 



words" and "fair speeches"? The true sheep must 
not judge of fellow sheep by the pelt; for a wolf can 
wear a sheep's pelt: they must learn to note the Shepherd's 
voice and manner— directly through his Word, 
and indirectly through those whom he shall use as 
his representatives to "feed the flock over which the 

R3143 : page 38 

holy Spirit hath made them overseers [shepherds]." 

Not only did the Apostle Paul thus direct the 
under-shepherds, but he points out the advisability 
of this to the flock, since it is thus that the Chief 
Shepherd leads and feeds and keeps his flock.— Heb. 13:17; 
Eph. 4:11-16; 1 Cor. 12:27-31; Psa. 91:11,12. 

Let us stand fast, therefore, in that liberty wherewith 
Christ hath made us free;— allowing no one to 
pen us up by human creeds;— neither allowing any 
to lead us out beyond the bounds fixed for us by the 
Chief-Shepherd, into liberties, licenses and speculations 
that he never authorized. Let us abide in Him, 
keeping ourselves in the love of God, as saith the 
Apostle. 



R3143 : page 38 

PAUL AT CORINTH. 

-ACTS 18:1-11-FEBRUARY 8.- 

"Other foundation can no man lay than is 
laid, which is Jesus Christ."— 1 Cor. 3:11. 

ATHENS did not prove to be a very successful 

field for the Apostle Paul's labors. He quickly 

perceived that, although its citizens were 

chiefly engaged in hearing new things and in philosophizing 

on every subject, including religion, nevertheless, 

the tendency of science and philosophy, falsely 

so-called, so occupied their attention and so satisfied 

their minds that they were not as ready for the truth 

as some others less highly educated and less philosophical. 

The Apostle's experience in this respect coincides 

with that of all who, in sincerity, preach the gospel 

of Christ stripped of all human invention and philosophy. 

R3143 : page 39 

His experience illustrates his declaration that 
God does not choose many great or wise or learned, 
according to the course or standard of this world, but 
chiefly the poor of this world, socially, philosophically 
and financially, to be heirs of the Kingdom; because this 
class is more inclined to receive the faith and to become 



rich therein. 

Leaving Athens, the Apostle journeyed about 
forty miles to Corinth, a prominent city of Greece, 
though very different from Athens. It was a commercial 
city, noted for its manufactures, architecture, paintings, 
Corinthian brass, or bronze, etc. It was much 
less moral than Athens, much less refined, much less 
given to the study of religious themes, but, nevertheless, 
a better field for the gospel. Where religious forms 
and ceremonies become popular they are apt to have 
correspondingly the less weight and force. Where sin, 
immorality and irreligion are popular, those minds 
which have a religious trend are apt to be freer, more 
open for the truth, because unsatisfied by formalism, 
and because they more keenly recognize righteousness 
by its sharp contrast with the sin abounding. Similarly 
today, the truth is likely to receive a cooler reception 
amongst those whose religious sensibilities are to 
some extent satisfied by forms and ceremonies: truth 
usually makes better progress today in places where to 
some extent irreligion seems to have the upper hand 
(as in Corinth), and where, therefore, virtue is at a 
higher premium. The heart most ready for the truth 
is the one which is not satiated and stupefied with religious 
formalism; but which realizes to some extent 
the exceeding sinfulness of sin and longs for the righteousness 
which is of God. Hungering and thirsting after 
righteousness is induced by such conditions. Like the 
Apostle, we are to discern the most fruitful fields, and 
spend our energies upon them, leaving the other fields 
for a more convenient season, whether it shall come 
during the present age or during the Millennium. The 
Apostle apparently stayed but a few days at Athens, 
but abode a year and a half at Corinth— the irreligious 
city, where he found many honest-hearted people, to 
whom the Lord directed the gospel through him. 

The Emperor Claudius Caesar was reigning at this 
time, and the historian says that he "drove the Jews 
from Rome, because they were incessantly raising tumults 
at the instigation of a certain Chrestus." This 
was about the year A.D. 52, about twenty years after 
Pentecost, and it is surmised by some that the historian 
wrote Chrestus instead of Christus, a less common 
name, and that his reference was to dissensions 
among the Jews respecting the principles of Christianity, 
which by this time had doubtless reached Rome. 
That Christianity was already established in Rome before 
Paul's going there seems to be implied by his expression, 
"I am ready to preach the gospel to you who 
are at Rome also." (Rom. 1:8-15.) The supposition 
is that Aquila, a Jew, with his wife, Priscilla, a Gentile, 
who were amongst those driven from Rome, had received 
the message of the gospel, and that the Apostle 
going to Corinth found Aquila readily by reason of their 
being of the same craft or trade— tent-makers. 

It was customary at that time that the sons of all 



the upper class of people should learn a trade, however 
well educated otherwise. St. Paul's trade as a tent-maker 
stood him now in good place, enabling him to 
provide for his necessities, while preaching the gospel 
of Christ. From his own explanation of the matter we 
learn that even after a considerable number of believers 
had been gathered at Corinth as a Church, the Apostle 
maintained himself by his trade— not because it would 
have been a sin for him to have received money and 
support from the believers there, but because he hoped 
that the gospel would commend itself more to many if 
its chief expounder were seen to be laboring not for the 
meat that perisheth, nor for wealth, but preaching the gospel 
without charge— laying down his life for the brethren. 
There is a lesson in this for all of the Lord's people 
who have talent as ministers of the Word. Our 
object, like that of the Apostle, should be seen to be 
that "we seek not yours, but you. "—2 Cor. 12:14. 

The Apostle evidently lost no time in showing his 
colors— engaging with as much wisdom as possible in 
the preaching of the gospel to the Jews and Jewish 
proselytes from amongst the Greeks in their synagogue. 
He was not in this an intruder, for such was the custom 
of the synagogue;— that any person of ability had the 
privilege of giving an exposition of the teachings of the 
Law and the Prophets. The Apostle was a man of 
some ability, and apparently in every city he at first 
was welcomed; the subsequent hatred of himself and 
his theme being the logical result of the wrong condition 
of heart on the part of those who heard— their unwillingness 
to receive the truth in the love of it— their 
preference for the traditions of the elders, with their 
more or less error, rejecting the light of the truth as it 
came to them. We find similar conditions today in 
Christendom, and are following the Scriptural precedent 
when we approach as closely as we can to the 
synagogues of our time, and as nearly as possible do as 
the Apostle did,— reasoning with and persuading the 
attendants at divine worship. Under the usages of our 
time it would be improper for us now to attempt such 
a discussion or reasoning inside church buildings. The 
nearest approach we have is through the printed page, 
on the pavement, near the churches,— but far enough 
away to avoid reasonable prejudice and opposition. 
Let it be noticed also that the proper method of presenting 
the truth today, as in the Apostle's time, is not 

R3143 : page 40 

by haranguing, but by reasonable presentation— appealing 
to the testimony of the Word of God in a logical 
and a reasonable manner. Let us rejoice that we find 
ourselves in such good accord with apostolic methods, 
and resolve that we will refrain from any other methods, 
however popular they may be with those who follow 
not with us. 



How long the Apostle continued in this way is not 
distinctly declared, but in his first letter to that church, 
written some time after, he remarks, "I was with you 
in weakness and in fear and in much trembling; and 
my preaching was not with enticing words of man's 
wisdom, but in the demonstration of the spirit, and 
with power, that your faith should not stand in the 
wisdom of men, but in the power of God." The word 
"weakness" in this text may be properly understood 
to imply that the Apostle was physically weak, possibly 
for a time ailing to such an extent as to be unable 
to work at his trade, because, referring again to the 
matter (2 Cor. 1 1:9) he intimates that for a time he 
was in want. This noble soldier of the cross was evidently 
permitted of the Lord to have a little season of 
measurable discouragement, when the sunshine of divine 
favor was to some extent beclouded by temporal 
difficulties: probably his physical weakness to some 
extent produced melancholy— "trembling with fear." 
He had no thought of abandoning the warfare in which 
he had enlisted himself even unto death, but apparently 
his recent experiences at Thessalonica, at Berea and at 
Athens, were causing him to wonder whether or not he 
was too aggressive in the presentation of the gospel— 
whether or not he was inclined needlessly to bring 
upon himself persecution, and was thus perhaps interfering 
with the Lord's work, rather than helping it forward, 
as he desired. Now he was, for the time, at 
least, disposed to be extremely careful how he presented 
the message,— how that, as our Golden Text expresses 
it, there is no salvation, no harmony with God, 
no eternal life by the law, nor by any other means 
than through the Lord Jesus Christ. 

It was about this time that the Lord comforted and 
encouraged the Apostle by the arrival of Silas and Timothy, 
whom he had left in Berea. They brought with 
them not only the comfort and encouragement of a good 
report of the work behind them, the fruitage of his labors, 
but additionally brought presents from the brethren, 
which supplied his necessities, and caused his 
heart to rejoice because of the evidence of their brotherly 
love, and that the gospel had reached their hearts 

R3144:page40 

and even down into their pocket-books. The presence 

of these two fellow-helpers, in whom he had so much 

confidence, was a refreshment of spirit to the Apostle. 

Their coming not only brought physical strength, but 

an energy of spirit— an increased earnestness and force 

to his preaching: he no longer felt so timid, trembling, 

fearful. This is still true amongst the Lord's people— 

the strongest of the brethren need the help, the encouragement, 

the assistance of others. The Lord has so 

arranged it that we may not feel ourselves entirely self-sufficient, 

and that even our proper leaning upon the 



Lord shall seem to require also the co-operation, encouragement, 
sympathy and love of the fellow-laborers in 
the vineyard. 

Who that has borne any measure of labor and heat 
of the day in the gospel service cannot sympathize 
with this thought? Here, then, is a way in which 
many of the Lord's dear people who have not themselves 
the largest amount of talent or opportunity for 
service may be co-laborers and assistants in the gospel 
work. The Apostle mentions these helpers in the 
same breath with the more able servants of the truth, 
saying, "Ye endured a great fight of afflictions, partly 
whilst ye were made a gazing-stock, both by reproaches 
and afflictions, and partly whilst ye became the companions 
of them that were so used."— Heb. 10:32,33. 

Encouraged, revived in spirit, the Apostle was 
bolder now to tell the Jews and Greek proselytes plainly 
that there is no salvation except through Christ. 
The effect of this plain declaration was that he was no 
longer made welcome in the synagogue, and the opposition 
becoming violent, he shook his raiment, as an 
indication that he had nothing further to present, and 
would discontinue the discussion, declaring that their 
responsibility rested with themselves; that he had done 
all in his power to preach the good tidings to them 
first, as was proper; but that now henceforth, according 
to the scriptural declaration, the message should be 
proclaimed outside the synagogue, to any who had ears 
to hear it and hearts to receive it. The new meeting 
was started close to the synagogue, to the intent that 
the message he had already delivered might be impressed 
more and more upon those who had heard it— 
that they should not forget his declaration that the 
promise made to the fathers was in process of fulfilment 
in Christ, and those who accept him. 

One of the chief men of the synagogue, and various 
of the people at Corinth were favorably impressed by 
the gospel message, and the Church of Corinth thus 
took its start in the house of Justus. The believers 
testified their acceptance by baptism— the true baptism 
of consecration, we may be sure, first, but also the outward 
symbolic water baptism, which would be a testimony 
to others and which is referred to in this lesson. 

The Apostle, still meditating the propriety of greater 
moderation in preaching Jesus and the resurrection, 
was by this time, perhaps, feeling fearful of further difficulties 
with the Jews, and the trouble they could stir up 
with the authorities. Doubtless he had in mind previous 

R3144:page41 

experiences, and was debating mentally whether 
or not he should leave before the persecution set in,— 
whether or not it was the Lord's will that he should be 
so courageous in the presentations of the truth as to 
awaken further hostilities against himself and all the 



brethren. The Lord came to the assistance of his faithful 
servant, and instructed him in a dream that he should neither 
leave nor hold his peace— that there were many people 
there of right condition of heart to receive the truth. 

It is an encouragement to us to note this, another 
evidence that the Lord himself has supervision of his 
own work, and guides those who are truly his servants, 
—who seek not their own will nor their own honor, but 
to glorify him in their bodies and spirits which are his. 
The necessity for such admonishing by dreams is less 
today than in the Apostle's day, because the Word of 
the Lord is now complete, and in the hands of his people 
in convenient form, that they can, through the experience 
and instruction of the apostles, know what 
to expect and how to do;— whereas the Apostle was 
treading a new path and needed to be guided therein. 
We of today may know assuredly that it is the Lord's 
will that we should exercise wisdom in the presentation 
of his Word, and that grace should be poured upon our 
lips, that they may minister blessing to the hearers; 
but that we shall not hold our peace nor flee to another 
city until persecution has come to such a pitch as to 
almost necessitate removal. 

We should not dare to say that the Lord might not 
use a dream today to instruct and guide his people, as 
he did the Apostle, but we do say that there is less necessity 
for such special direction, since the general 
directions of his Word are now explicit and amplified. 
We do suggest, however, that as the Apostle says, 
"Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits," 
so we may well say to ourselves, Believe not every 
dream, but test the dream— whether it be of God or not. 
A dream must never lead us in opposition to the written 
Word of God, but if it can be understood in harmony 
with the Word and its reasonable interpretation, 
we should rejoice in it and be thereby encouraged to 
follow the Word. If the dream agree not with this 
Word it is because there is no light in it. (Isa. 8:20.) 
We are confident that many dreams are not of God, the 
majority probably being of indigestion, and some quite 
probably of the evil one. Hence, we have the more 
need of care that we follow not a dream, because it is a 
dream, but at very most permit it to direct us to the 
plain instruction of the Lord's Word. 

The Lord's promise that no man should set on the 
Apostle to hurt was fulfilled; for, although a disturbance 
was created and he was taken before the magistracy, 
no violence was done him, and the case was dismissed 
by the Roman governor. As with the Apostle, 
so with us; in the Lord's wisdom varying experiences 
may be to our advantage. Sometimes it may be advantageous 
to us and the cause that we should seem to be 
defeated and forced to flight. We may rely, however, 
that the Lord understands the situation fully, and will 
not permit his work to be disconcerted and interrupted 
to its real disadvantage. Long ago some one said, "I 



am immortal until my work is finished;" and we may 
rely upon it that this is practically true of all engaged in 
the Lord's service— that "Precious in the sight of the 
Lord is the death of his saints." He will use and protect 
and guide them in their affairs, in ways that will be 
to his pleasement, and eventually to their highest welfare, 
—to the intent that all of his good purposes shall 
be accomplished. 

Why, then, should we fear what man may do unto 
us, or be distressed in regard to the Lord's work, as 
though Satan or any other evil power could prevail 
against it? Nevertheless, it is for us to show our devotion, 
not only by our zeal, but also by our prudence. 
While God knows what will prosper, he declares of us, 
"Thou knowest not which shall prosper, this or that" 
—therefore, we are to proceed in the Lord's work as 
though the entire responsibility rested upon us, but 
in our hearts are to recognize that the entire weight and 
responsibility rests with the Lord. 

Our Golden Text gives us the central theme of the 
Apostle's preaching on every occasion. It would be a 
poor text for Higher Critics, for Evolutionists, for Theosophists, 
for Christian Scientists, and for most other of 
the new gospels so numerous in our day. Let us hold 
fast to the same message which the Apostle preached, 
which recognizes no other foundation than Christ, and 
no other Church and no other salvation than that built 
upon that foundation. Other structures, built upon 
other foundations, are anti-Christian, however smooth 
their philosophy, however arrayed in a garment of 
light to deceive, if possible, the very elect. 



R3144:page41 

"KNOWLEDGE PUFFETH UP; BUT LOVE BUILDETH UP. 

-1 CORINTHIANS 8:1-13-FEBRUARY 15.- 

"Let us, therefore, follow after the things 
which make for peace."— Rom. 14:19. 

ABOUT three and a half years after the Apostle 

Paul left Corinth he wrote to the Church there 

the first Epistle to the Corinthians, and our 

present lesson concerns one of its important topics. 

The question of religious liberty, and the propriety or 

impropriety of eating meat which had been offered to 

idols, might at first seem unnecessary to discuss; but, 

as the Apostle handles the subject in our lesson, he develops 

R3144:page42 

from it a valuable lesson along general principles, 
valuable to the Church now, as well as then, in 



connection with various other matters. 

Some of the Corinthian Church had evidently 
made considerable progress in knowledge, and heartily 
appreciated the fact that since an idol is nothing, meat 
offered to the idol cannot in any sense of the word be 
injured. Nevertheless, in the conference of the apostles 
at Jerusalem it had been specially recommended 
to the Church at Antioch and to all Christian converts 
from the Gentiles "that they should abstain from meats 
offered to idols." Some of the brethren at Corinth 
perceived that there could be no sin in the eating of 
such meat where their consciences were not violated, 
and concluded that the admonitions of the Apostles 
were not a law to the Church, but a recommendation, 
and had proceeded to use their liberties— to eat meat 
offered to idols, thinking, perhaps, thus to show not 
only their Christian liberty, but also that they entirely 
disregarded an idol. 

R3145 : page 42 

It will help us to sympathize with them to remember 
that they were in daily contact with heathen neighbors 
who would repeatedly invite them to feasts, entertainments, 
weddings, etc., at which they were sure to 
be served with food that had been offered to idols, and 
which was supposed to be the better therefor. To abstain, 
under such circumstances, would mean more or 
less of an insult to their friends, and the practical ostracism 
of themselves. Some of the brethren took the 
view that they could partake of such refreshments without 
the least injury to their consciences, and at the 
same time show their heathen neighbors that they 
were not narrow and bigoted, but broad-minded;— or 
perhaps explain the matter by saying, "Your god is 
nothing anyway, and could not injure the meat." 

The Apostle intimates that the majority of the 
Church had such knowledge as enabled them to discern 
that an image of wood or stone, being no god, could 
neither improve nor injure the food in any sense or degree; 
but that this knowledge did not necessarily mean 
a great growth in spirituality. A very small mite of 
soap will make a large air bubble; and so, a comparatively 
little knowledge might puff one up greatly, without 
any solidity of character. He points out the advantage, 
therefore, of measuring oneself by growth in love, rather 
than by growth merely in knowledge— though, of 
course, to be great in both knowledge and love would 
be the ideal condition. The same lesson the Apostle 
inculcates further on (1 Cor. 13:2) asserting "though I 
have all knowledge and have not love I am nothing." 
Knowledge without love would be an injury, and to 
consider it otherwise would imply that real knowledge 
has not yet been secured; but, says the Apostle, to the 
contrary of this, "If any man love God, the same is 
known to him,"— acquainted with him. We might 



have a great deal of knowledge, and yet not know God, 

and not be known or recognized by him; but no man 

can have a large development of true love in his character 

without personally knowing the Lord and obtaining 

the spirit of love through fellowship with him. 

Hence, the getting of love is sure to build us up substantially 

(avoiding the inflation of pride) in all the 

various graces of the spirit, including meekness, gentleness, 

patience, long-suffering, brotherly kindness, 

knowledge, wisdom from above and the spirit of a sound 

mind. 

Having laid down this premise, the Apostle proceeds 
to build his argument thereon, and to show 
that although it is true, as claimed, that the idol could 
do no injury to the food, nevertheless with Christians 
love must have the last word on the matter. Love, 
after securing knowledge and liberty, will look about 
to see what effect the use of liberty might have upon 
others; and would perceive that by reason of differing 
conditions of mental strength, perception, reasoning faculties, 
etc., all could not have exactly the same standpoint 
of knowledge and appreciation of principles. Love, 
therefore, would forbid the use of knowledge and liberty 
if it perceived that their exercise might work injury 
to another. 

True, there is only one God, and idols, therefore, 
are nothing as gods; nevertheless, the appreciation of 
idols as gods had become so ingrained in the thought 
of many that it would be impossible for them fully to 
divest themselves of some respect for the idols— impossible 
for them to eat meat that had been offered to 
idols without the feeling that in some sense of the word 
they had done wrong— had been contaminated or injured 
by the unholy associations. This would be true 
also of food offered to the heavenly bodies worshiped 
as gods— the sun, moon and stars. 

Knowledge is beneficial;— "To us there is but one 
God, the Father;" of, or from whom, as the first cause 
or Creator, all things came, including ourselves; and 
there is one Lord, Jesus Christ, by, or through whom 
all things, including ourselves, have been brought 
into existence. The knowledge which would enable us 
to discern this matter clearly would assuredly be of 
advantage. But some dear brethren did not possess 
ability to reason clearly from this premise, and they 
had a claim upon their stronger brethren under the Law 
of Love. 

We must pause a moment in our consideration of 
vs. 6, not because the Apostle's language is in any measure 
obscure; but because the Adversary seeks continually 
to wrest the Scriptures, and to misrepresent their 
plain teachings, and thus to mislead the Lord's flock. 
We refer to the false teaching abroad today, that this 

R3145 : page 43 



statement, "Of whom are all things," signifies that all 

the sin, all the wickedness, etc., of the world are from 

God; are his direct work, traceable to him as their 

author or fountain. Surely it is nothing short of blasphemy 

for anyone who has first tasted of the good Word 

of God, and been made a partaker of the holy spirit, 

thus to attribute to God the various evils which, throughout 

the Scriptures are uniformly condemned, and which 

God declares he will ultimately— "in due time"— destroy! 

The Scriptures are clear in their statement 

that "all his work is perfect;" that "God is not the 

author of confusion;" that "God tempteth no man," 

and is not in accord with any suggestion to the effect 

that evil may be done so that good results may follow. 

(Deut. 32:4; Rom. 3:8; 1 Cor. 14:33; Jas. 1:13; 1 Pet. 3:11.) 

It is in full agreement with the declaration 

that "all his work is perfect," that having made 

Satan a perfect being, as also he made our race perfect, 

representatively in Adam, God has not hindered his 

free moral agents from taking a course of sin in violation 

of his commands. His wisdom and power are 

such that he will eventually bring a blessing out of 

these evils to those who are not in sympathy with them, 

but the evils themselves, yea, and "all the wicked, will 

he destroy."— Psa. 145:20. 

The Apostle proceeds in his argument to show that 
it is not the food that we eat that makes us acceptable 
to God, neither our abstaining from any particular 
food. Our relationship to God is that of the New Creation, 
a heart relationship; and the blessing which the 
Lord gives us is as newly begotten children,— not along 
the lines of the flesh, but along the lines of the spiritual 
and heart development, which shall ultimately be 
perfected in the resurrection. 

True, "whom the Son makes free is free indeed," 
and we all should "seek to stand fast in the liberty 
wherewith Christ makes free;" but it is also true that 
we need to be on guard lest we use our liberty in such 
a manner as would stumble others more weak than ourselves, 
—not so able to use the liberty of Christ discriminatingly. 
The liberty wherewith Christ makes free 
may be viewed from two standpoints: if it gives us 
liberty to eat without restraint, in a manner that the 
Jews were not at liberty to eat, it gives us liberty also 
to abstain;— and whoever has the spirit of Christ and 
is seeking to follow in his steps has already covenanted 
to the Lord to use his liberty, not in the promotion of 
his fleshly desires, ambitions and appetites; but in self-sacrifice, 
following in the footsteps of the Master, seeking 
to lay down his life, even, on behalf of the brethren 
—for their assistance. How different are these two 
uses of liberty! Its selfish use would mean self-gratification, 
regardless of the interests of others; its loving use 
would prompt to self-sacrifice in the interests of others. 

But why?— what principle is involved that would 
make it incumbent upon one whose conscience is clear 



to consider the conscience of another? Why not let the 

person of the weak conscience take care of his own conscience, 

and eat or abstain from eating as he felt disposed? 

The Apostle explains that this would be all 

right if it were possible; but that the person of weaker 

mind, feebler reasoning powers, is likely to be weaker 

in every respect and, hence, more susceptible to the 

leadings of others— into paths which his conscience 

could not approve, because of his weaker reasoning 

powers or inferior knowledge. One might, without 

violation of conscience, eat meat that had been offered 

to idols, or even sit at a feast in an idol temple, without 

injury to his conscience; but the other, feeling that 

such a course was wrong, might endeavor to follow the 

example of his stronger brother, and thus might violate 

his conscience, which would make it a sin to him. 

Every violation of conscience, whether the thing itself 

be right or wrong, is a step in the direction of wilful 

sin— it is a downward course, leading further and further 

away from the communion and fellowship with 

the Lord, and into grosser and grosser transgressions 

of conscience and, hence, possibly leading to the Second 

Death. Thus the Apostle presents the matter: 

"For through thy knowledge he that is weak perisheth, 

—the brother for whose sake Christ died." 

The question is not, Would it be a sin to eat the 
meat offered to idols? but, Would it be sin against the 
spirit of love, the law of the New Creation, to do anything 
which could reasonably prove a cause of stumbling 
to our brother;— not only to the brethren in Christ, 
the Church, but even to a fellow-creature according to 
the flesh?— for Christ died for the sins of the whole 
world. It is a very serious crime against the law of 
love and against the Lord's injunction, to cause one of 
his brethren to stumble (Rom. 14:13,21; Matt. 18:6), 
but it would also be a crime in his sight for us to stumble 
others,— to hinder them from becoming brethren, 
and of the household of faith. Hence, it is clear that 
although knowledge might remove all prohibition of 
our consciences and all restraints of our liberty, yet 
love must first come in and approve the liberty before 
we can exercise it. Love places a firm command upon 
us, saying,— Thou shalt love the Lord with all thine 
heart, and thy neighbor as thyself. Love, therefore, 
and not knowledge, not liberty, must finally decide 
every question. 

Let us take our stand with the Lord, and determine 
that so far from using our liberties in any manner 
that might do injury to others we will refuse so to use 
them; and will rather sacrifice them for the benefit of 
others;— even as our Master, as our Redeemer, gave 
all that he had. Let us adopt the words of the Apostle 

R3146 : page 44 

in the last verse of this lesson, and determine once for 



all that anything that would injure a brother we will 
not do— any liberty of ours, however reasonable in itself, 
that would work our brother's injury, that liberty 
we will not exercise; we will surrender it in his interest; 
we will sacrifice it; we will to that extent, on his 
behalf, lay down our life for him. 

There is, perhaps, occasionally a danger of misapplication 
of this principle; as, for instance, the Doukhobors 
might say to us, We regard that it is wrong to eat any meat 
and wrong even to use the skins of animals for shoes, 
and you are to condescend to our weak consciences in 
this matter, and ought not to eat meat or wear shoes 
either. We answer that that is not a similar question to 
the one which the Apostle has explained in which we 
should surrender our liberties. On the contrary, the 
Word of the Lord and the customs of society are all 
opposed to these bewildered people, and to yield to 
their mental unbalance on this question would be to 
assist them in a wrong direction. Our abstaining from 
eating meat or from the wearing of shoes would in no 
sense of the word help them to better views; nor does 
our eating of meat or wearing of leather in any sense of 
the word interfere with their consciences. Other brethren 
have an antipathy to the use of instrumental music in 
the worship of God, as there used to be people who objected 
to having meeting places heated and provided 
with comfortable seats. These may sometimes abuse 
the Apostle's argument, claiming that their consciences 
are injured by the liberties of the brethren; and that 
such liberties should be abridged in their interest. Our 
answer to them must also be,— that they misapply the 
Apostle's argument: it is not his meaning that the 
Lord's people are to favor the mental crotchets of each 
other in such a manner as would be to the general injury 
of the Church. Superstitions are not to be encouraged 
in the Church, nor its spiritual advantages and 
liberties sacrificed on account of them. Nevertheless, 
love must always have a voice in all of the affairs of 
the Lord's people; and even such as would mistakenly 
impose upon their brethren upon the score of 
weakness, should be treated with love, and their objections, 
etc., should be reasoned upon. They should see 
that they have full liberty to do any and everything 
that the Lord requires of them, abstaining from every 
appearance of evil, and that their brethren should be 
accorded the same privileges. If they cannot conscientiously 
sing with instrumental music or sing hymns, 
let them keep silence, or for the time do their singing 
at home. Praising God with instruments is a very different 
question from eating in an idol's temple. 

A somewhat similar question to this one which the 
Apostle decided, may come before us today in respect 
to attendance at public worship in the nominal churches, 
Protestant and Catholic— including the propriety of partaking 
of the "sacrament" or the "Mass." On such a 
question each has personal liberty; each should be fully 



persuaded in his own mind, and follow the direction of 

his own conscience. In our judgment it would be a 

much more serious offense to partake of the Mass in 

Roman Catholic, Greek Catholic or High Episcopal 

Church services, than to sit in an idol temple and partake 

of the foods offered to the idols; because the Mass 

is particularly an abomination before the Lord. (Heb. 7:25; 

10:14.) As respects participation in the Lord's 

Supper, as observed by the majority of Protestants: 

We could see no harm in this of itself;— those participating 

might intelligently reverence and worship God 

in such a manner, even though realizing the inappropriateness, 

according to the Scriptures, of such a celebration. 

We would, however, think that a regular 

participation in the services of Babylon and in her misinterpretation 

of the Lord's Supper would be reprehensible; 

—injurious to our own spiritual progress, and 

dangerous also in the stumbling of some weaker in their 

discernments. Our advice, therefore, would be that 

on the one hand we do not feel such a restraint that we 

would fear to enter a nominal church building to hear 

a service there; and on the other hand that we do not 

seem to give our assent to their errors by regular attendance 

and participation— except at such meetings 

as would afford us full opportunity for the presentation 

of the truth. 

Another illustration of this principle in our times, 
is found in the liquor question. There will be no dispute 
that it would be wrong for any man to get drunk 
—to lose his senses, and additionally to render himself 
liable to do injury to others, and surely to dishonor his 
Creator. The question of liberty comes in only in respect 
to the use of liquors in such a manner as would 
work no dishonor to God and no injury either to ourselves 
or to our neighbors. All recognize the fact that 
intoxicating liquors are a dangerous temptation to the 
world in general, and our suggestion to the brethren 
who feel that they have full power of self-control in the 
use of liquors, is that they apply the argument of the 
Apostle in this lesson, and determine whether they could 
not more honor the Lord and help those who are weaker 
than themselves by using their liberty in the direction 
of total abstinence,— sacrifice of rights,— rather 
than by using it in moderate drinking. 

So far as we are able to discern, intoxication is one 
of the most terrible evils scourging our race at the 
present time. Many are so weak through the fall, by 
heredity, that they are totally unable to resist the control 
of intoxicants, if once they yield to them. Is it 
too much to ask of those who have consecrated their 
lives to the Lord, to righteousness and to the blessing 

R3146 : page 45 

of others, that they should deny themselves in this 
matter, and thus lay down some liberties and privileges 



in the interest of the brethren, and in the interest 
of the world in general? 

Similar arguments might be urged respecting the 
use of tobacco, cards and the various implements which 
the Adversary uses in luring mankind into sin. The 
whole, be it noted, is the argument of love. In proportion 
as we grow in the graces of our Lord, in his 
spirit of love, we will be glad, not only to put away all 
filthiness of the flesh for our own sakes, and to be more 
like the Lord, but also, at the instance of love, we 
would desire to put away from us everything that 
might have an evil influence upon others, whatever we 
might consider our personal liberties to be in respect 
to them. 

Our Golden Text is in place here— it appeals to all 
who have become new creatures in Christ Jesus. "Let 
us, therefore, follow after the things which make for 
peace"— for the blessing of others and for our own 
blessing and upbuilding as new creatures in Christ, 
members of his body. 

R3146 : page 45 

"IN MY NAME." 

"There were only two or three of us 

Who came to the place of prayer- 
Came in the teeth of a driving storm; 

But for that we did not care, 
Since after our hymns of praise had risen, 

And our earnest prayers were said, 
The Master Himself was present there 

And gave us the living bread. 

"We noted his look in each other's face, 

So loving, and glad, and free: 
We felt his touch when our heads were bowed, 

We heard his 'Come to Me!' 
Nobody saw him lift the latch, 

And none unbarred the door; 
But 'Peace' was his token in every heart, 

And how could we ask for more? 

"Each of us felt the relief from sin, 

Christ's purchase for one and all; 
Each of us dropped his load of care, 

And heard the heavenly call; 
And over our spirits a blessed calm 

Swept in from the Jasper Sea, 
And strength was ours for the toil of life 

In the days that were yet to be. 

"It was only a handful gathered in 

To that little place of prayer. 
Outside were struggle and strife and sin, 

But the Lord himself was there. 



He came to redeem the pledge he gave- 
Wherever his loved ones be, 

To give his comfort and joy to them, 
Though they count but two or three.' 



page 45 

LETTERS OF INTEREST. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:- 

Greetings! Peace be unto you and to all the dear 
coworkers in the Bible House! We praise God more 
and more for the great privilege of being engaged in 
the colporteur work. We often say that we believe if 
the brethren in England who are able to enter this 
branch of the harvest work could only realize how 
sweet is the work there would be more in it. We can 
live well and cheaply, and can much more than make 
a living, so that we are able to give to him that needeth, 
as well as to give a little to the Tract Fund. But, 
of course, the sweetest joy is singing the song of Moses 
and the Lamb from door to door, day by day. Even 
if at times we do not do so well it is a great satisfaction 
to us in having such a good supply of tracts to 
leave one at each house. They are tracts, too, full 
of good clean provender, food for thinking Christians. 
Praise God for such a good supply! 

We have just been in Bristol three weeks today, and 
already we have found hungry souls. One gentleman 
got tract No. 21 and has sent for more food; he now 
has Vol. I. and has become a subscriber to the TOWER. 
As a result of the first Sunday morning's volunteer 
work, a merchant sent for Vol. I. and tracts, and has 
since sent in several orders and contributions. In his 
last letter he writes, "I am reading Vol. I. with intense 
interest and wish all to enter into its joys. Mr. 
Russell has explained things that have troubled me 
for many years." 

We have been doing very well indeed here in 
Bristol. We were never better received anywhere. 
In Manchester a little mission has, with its three 
leaders (two now TOWER subscribers), heartily accepted 
the truth, and will not have anything but the 
truth spoken from the platform. Before leaving, we 
gave them three talks on the chart, and one of the 
leaders offered us money, which of course we thanked 
him for, and suggested that he send it to the Tract 
Fund, which they did. When they begin to send 
money to the Tract Fund, to our mind, it looks well. 
Another dear soul, a sister, to whom we lent the DAWN 
months ago, called to see us some weeks before we left 

M . She said, "I had been praying for more light, 

and when you came that morning I would not buy or 
order, but I thank God you were patient with me, 



and lent me the book. I promised to read it within a 
month, which I did, and now I have come to encourage 
you, for I believe it to be the truth with all my 
heart." She now has all the DAWNS, is also a subscriber, 
and has bought more DAWNS to send away. 

We praise the dear Lord for these things and take 
courage. There are many other interesting cases in 

M , and we believe that in the Lord's due time 

there will be good results from the spread of the truth 
there. We know that you pray for us that God will 
keep us humble and help us to grow more like him. 
Oh, to be nothing, nothing, and Christ all! We long 
for the time when we shall see him as he is. The 
Lord bless you and keep you in the secret of his presence. 

page 46 

With kindest love from us both to you and all 

the dear ones, we are, Your affectionate and grateful 

brethren in our dear Redeemer, 

ALBERT E. LLOYD and FRANK KITTRIDGE,--England. 



R3146 : page 46 

DEAR AND HONORED SERVANT OF CHRIST:- 

You may recollect having received a letter from 
me about a year ago, when I was in India; also, how, 
after ordering a copy of the MILLENNIAL DAWN, I 
returned it, having given up as darkness what had 
seemed light to me. 

Your kind letter of January 9th, 1902, expressing 
your sorrow that I had turned aside "to the husks, theories 
and creeds of men," caused conflicting thoughts 
to arise in my mind again. Former Scriptures that had 
taken hold of me, revealing the utter destruction of 
the wicked in the Second Death, came with power to 
my soul, and I found myself in doubt concerning the 
"orthodox" view. In this state of conflict I cried to 
the Lord for light. The following verse of Scripture 
caused me to know that God would in his own time 
show me clearly which was truth:— "All Scripture is 
given by inspiration of God and is profitable for doctrine." 
I decided that when I had leisure I would study the 
Scriptures on this point of doctrine, using Dr. Young's 
Concordance only to help me find all verses treating 
on the subject. Just then I was busy preparing to 
return to Ireland for a rest. After searching and 
comparing Scripture with Scripture, I became fully 
convinced of the truth of the Second Death; and of the 
non-existence of the soul of either saint or sinner from 
death till the resurrection. 

I confessed this to the elders of the assembly with 
which I was in fellowship, and to other friends and 
evangelists. They expressed their deep sorrow, and 



some denounced me as a heretic, saying they "believed 
all would accept this doctrine of the devil ere 
the Man of Sin would be revealed." 

The elders (known as "Open Brethren") assembled 
to examine me, and decided that I should be 
excommunicated— delivered over to Satan! 1 Cor. 5:4,5; 
2 John 7-11, were the Scriptures read to exclude 
me from their fellowship. Some were in tears, 
but were obliged to submit to the authority of the 
Brethren, which is equal to the authority of the Church 
of Rome. 

In the midst of these trials the Lord filled my 
heart with his own perfect peace, and saved me from 
having a bitter thought against those whom I knew 
were walking in darkness and therefore did not know 
what they were doing. Since being excluded I have 
met a few Christians who are like-minded, so I am not 
so isolated here as I was in India. One of my sisters, 
a brother and a brother-in-law see the Truth and are 
suffering for it. There are some who are seeking 
more light and in many ways the Lord is opening up 
doors of service. 

The missionary friends had hoped that after a 

rest I would return to N next year. But as I 

have written to these, they also will exclude me from 

R3147 : page 46 

their circle. Still, knowing that I am not the servant 
of man, I am confident that if the Lord wants 
me to go to India again, he can and will prepare the 
way for me. 

I regret having returned the MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
and am now ordering a few books. 

With grateful thanks, yours in the patience of 
Jesus Christ, (MISS) M. A. McBRIDE,-Ireland. 



page 46 

DEAR MR. RUSSELL:- 

On leaving Church (of England) one Sunday 
morning, I met one of my fellow workmen at the top 
of the road, and I asked him what he was doing there, 
to which he answered that he was distributing literature 
belonging to the Watch Tower Bible and Tract 
Society, handing me at the same time a tract on Evolution. 
This I read with interest and asked for more 
reading. I next got the DAWN, VOL. I., and had not 
got far before I saw that was the very thing I was in 
need of, as I was quite puzzled with orthodoxy on 
several important doctrines, which you have made so 
clear to me, so much so that the Bible is now a new 
book. I find it the most interesting study which I 
have yet entered into. I am of a studious nature, and 



after reading Vol. I., I got the remaining four volumes, 
which I have just finished, and there are no 
books in my limited library which I prize more than 
your five volumes. The object of this letter is to 
express to you my feelings of gratitude for the great 
help which you have been able to render me by your 
deep insight and clear reasoning of the Scriptures. I 
need hardly say that I am interesting my friends in 
them. 

The plan that you have set forth in the DAWNS 
is one that appeals to one's reason as being rational 
and in harmony with one's conception of a God. 
Apart from such a plan existence remains a riddle. 

With feelings of gratitude to you, I remain, yours 
affectionately, E. WORSNOP,-England. 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:- 

I was one of those interested ones who asked 
questions when you were in our city last summer. I 
felt so grateful to you for your explanations, and all the 
time I am growing to love this pure gospel more and 
more. Oh, how I do praise the Lord that he has let 
me hear some of the good things that are untainted 
with the world! I was so weary and heart sore to 
see a color of sin in everything, even in the loudest 
religion! I thought death would be the only relief. 
But when divine love touched me I revived and had 
strength enough to rise and be fed of the Lord, like 
Elijah under the juniper tree. And now I am glad 
that the world was not pleasant to me, else I might 
have been satisfied with it. I used to think that I 
was unfortunate, but now I know that it was just a 
working out of his plan. 

Your fifth volume has been such a blessing to me 
in connection with the Scriptures which it unfolds. 
The Bible grows more beautiful to me all the time. 
Now to me it is the Book of all books. I have seen 
the time when I believe I really preferred Shakespeare 
or Goethe or Darwin or Plato. I say it with 
shame. I do not know what that experience was for, 
unless it was to find out that there is nothing in what 
the world calls great. 

I was brought up religiously and taught to regard 
the Word as sacred and to believe in a personal God 

page 47 

and a personal Savior. I had a natural tendency for 

religion, too, and loved church and Sunday school 

work and Bible study from a child until grown. Then 

Evolution and Higher Criticism played havoc with 

my belief and I came to think I had been greatly imposed 

upon by pretentious theologians, and after 

all the whole thing was only a fraud. This darkness 



in which I was for several years, was great, and so 
I appreciated the light and the truth more when it 
dawned upon me. What a relief! what a joy! I had 
never experienced such previously. Your "Plan of 
the Ages" comes in like a great search-light turned 
upon the Word of God and the Truth is illuminated, 
—there can be no mistake. But why am I so highly 
favored? Others right around me and close to me do 
not see it. That is so distressing ! I can seldom talk 
of these things, but can only pray and wait. The 
Spirit of God does not seem to approve of talking 
very much. I am willing to be patient, as I have put 
myself entirely on the altar, that my death may be as 
absolute as his. 

Yours in the bonds of "peace and good will toward 
men." ALICE M. TAIT,-Indiana. 



R3147 : page 47 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:- 

It has been a long time since I have written you, 
and so I thought to drop you a few lines, just to let 
you know that I am still in the "race," striving to 
reach the "mark." Glory to God! 

Acting upon suggestions received from you previously, 
I have now for the second time refused to 
sign petitions for dram-shop license. I wish to state 
first, that I know you instructed me rightly and Scripturally, 
for which I thank you. Added to this, the 
churches here organized quite a temperance movement, 
with which I also would have no connection, but have 
endeavored to occupy neutral ground; and the same 
in regard to politics; seeing that I am an "alien," I 
would not vote. In consequence there is a disposition 
to persecute me— from all sides, seemingly; because 
formerly I was interested in church work, took part 
in politics and signed petitions for dram-shop 
license. But do not think, dear brother, that I am 
complaining. Nay, "I rejoice in the Lord alway!" 
Formerly I was a member of a fraternal organization, 
and because I refused to accept suggestions from any 
of the Masonic fraternity (which includes all men of 
any prominence in our town) to become a member, 
they likewise have transferred their patronage, generally, 
to a competitor. 

I am realizing how, by taking part in a political 
campaign, or other movement, it would be possible that 
I might be found fighting against the Lord, "who maketh 
even the wrath of men to praise him." I am 
realizing more and more the import of our dear Savior's 
words, while praying to the Father, "They are 
in the world, but not of it." Ah, yes ! This means 
much to any consecrated believer. While we are in 
the world, yet we should keep separate from the 



world— not have our robe "spotted" by contact. If 
we would not be worldly minded, it is necessary that 
we have great care how we act in regard to those 
things which at this present time engage the attention 
of the world generally,— reform movements, matters 
of finance, etc. For inasmuch as we give of our time to 
such things (no, not our time, seeing that we have 
consecrated our all unto the Lord) in so much the 
world has a claim upon us, so that while we are in the 
world, we would also be of the world, seeing that that 
which interests the world would also interest us. "The 
natural (worldly minded) man perceiveth not the 
things that are spiritual," and consequently is not 
interested in them; how much more, then, we that 
do see should not mind the things natural or worldly. 
All such movements which are the absorbing topics of 
the day, merely engender "strife, malice, anger, hatred," 
etc., causing all who have connection therewith 
to foster and cultivate an evil disposition, wholly contrary 
to the law of love. 

Praying the Lord's continued blessings upon you 
and all with you, Yours in the one blessed hope, 
A. W. KRUEGER.-Missouri. 



DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

The many spiritual blessings we have enjoyed 
throughout the year increases our gratitude to and 
love for ZION'S WATCH TOWER. We will not be able 
to comprehend, dear brother, how much we owe the 
Lord this side of the "golden city." Until that glorious 
day when we reach the glad home-land,— the fruition 
of all our hopes,— we take much pleasure in manifesting 
the appreciation of which we are now capable. 

The Society's Annual Report filled my heart with 
thanksgiving. There was only one sad note, for 
which I am grieved, and that was the reference to the 
fact that some of the letters received at the TOWER 
office were filled with acrimony. Truly, this must be 
very painful to you. 

Looking back over the old year I can truthfully 
state it has been a blessed year for me. Enclosed 

find money order for $ ; please credit $ 1 .00 on 

TOWER subscription, and balance in Good Hopes for 
1902. You will also find herewith my Good Hopes 
filled out for 1903. 

Wishing you a very merry Christmas and a happy, 
profitable New Year, with much Christian love, I 
remain, yours in the service of our King, 

CARRIE CROWLEY-Missouri. 



The eight-year old daughter of a sister in the 
truth writes the following herself:— 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I had my choice to go to Eden Musee or have the 
50 cents and I want to consecrate it to the Lord. 
Mamma has told me all about how many different 
ways I could give it to the Lord, and I would rather 
have a part in sending the truth to some one; so you 
will please put it in the Tract Fund. I will send it with 
mamma's. 

I send my love to you and hope I shall see you 
some day. God bless and keep you all. 

Your loving friend, RUTH SNOW,-New Jersey. 



From another of the little ones:— 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

As we children have sold our pony, enclosed 
please find eight dollars, which is my share, to be 
used in the spreading of the truth. 

Your sister in Christ, HATTIE E. HUYCK,-Iowa. 



page 49 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIV. FEBRUARY 15, 1903. No. 4 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 51 

About Missions in China 51 

England's Poor Less Prosperous 51 

Financial Prosperity of U.S. 

Churches 51 

Nothing Too Good for God's Service 52 

The Apostle Peter's Exhortation 53 

"Love is the Principal Thing" 55 

Baptism Unto Repentance Not Baptism 

Into Christ 58 

Disciples of Christ 61 

Interesting Questions Answered 62 

page 50 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 



PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



WIDE MARGIN BIBLES GONE! 



The entire edition of 5,000 is completely exhausted. 
We cannot fill further orders. 

ABOUT PILGRIM VISITS. 



Our friends who desire Pilgrim visits for the current 
year are requested to read over again the questions asked 
on page 383 of Dec. 15th issue. It is very important that 
we should have your answers to all queries, as far as possible. 
If a Pilgrim passes your way and makes no call, ask 
yourselves whether or not you have complied with our 
simple request. Requests made for previous years will not 
suffice, as many changes are apt to occur. 

MISSIONARY STATIONERY. 



In consequence of the brisk demand for the letter paper 
announced in issue for Jan. 15, our stock is entirely exhausted. 
We shall have a new supply on hand as soon as 
possible— in about four weeks— and your orders will receive 
early attention then. Missionary Envelopes are entirely 
out of stock. A new lot is under way, and we hope 
to fill all orders in about a month. 



R3147 : page 51 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
ABOUT MISSIONS IN CHINA. 



FRANCIS H. NICHOLS, an American traveler, 
writes in the Atlantic Monthly: 

"Perhaps in the higher sense, that 'no power is 
lost that ever wrought for God,' it is not wholly correct 
to say that efforts to introduce Christianity into 
China have failed. But humanly speaking, in proportion 
to the amount of money, lives and effort expended, 
they have apparently not met with great success. 
The small number of converts after one century of 
Protestant and three centuries of Roman Catholic 
endeavor is the least part of the failure of missions in 
China. All over the empire today there prevails a 
spirit of hatred and antagonism to Christianity so intense 
and so peculiar that a certain brilliant missionary 
in describing it had to coin a new word. He has 
called the feeling of the provincial authorities of 
Shantung toward Christianity 'Christophobia'. Usually 
it is specially stipulated when foreign teachers 
are engaged for recently organized government schools 
that they shall make no reference even in the remotest 
way to the Bible or to anything connected with it. 
In the gradual subsiding of the Boxer storm the one 
kind of foreigners warned to keep away from a troubled 
district are always missionaries. Except in the 
few places where they are numerous enough to form 
a community by themselves, Christian converts are 
ostracized, boycotted, and sometimes persecuted." 

ENGLAND'S POOR LESS PROSPEROUS. 



"It is estimated that 500,000 persons are idle in 
the United Kingdom and the board of trade returns 
show the largest per centage for ten years past of unskilled 
persons out of work, while the proportion of 
skilled men without employment is constantly growing. 
The Woolwich arsenal authorities have discharged 
2,000 mechanics since the winter set in and 
are preparing to let out 4,000 more. 

"To the army of people out of work must be 
added 56,000 members of the army reserve who have 
been released from service with the colors. The worst 
distress naturally is visible in the east end, where thousands 
of unemployed persons daily congregate at the 
dockyard gates, literally fighting for a chance to do a 
day's work. Unskilled laborers are there in strong force, 
and the police find it necessary to escort the foremen 
who distribute the work tickets each morning. 

"A number of newspapers have started subscription 
columns, and daily print harrowing stories of half-clad 
school children, many of whom are without food 
except scanty luncheons furnished by sympathetic 



teachers. A number of the London suburban councils 
are starting public works in order to employ a portion 
of the idle persons. The Canning Town suburb, 
where the distress is keenest, has appropriated $50,000 
for relief work." 

FINANCIAL PROSPERITY OF U.S. CHURCHES. 



The Boston Transcript, reviewing the progress of 
religious matters in the United States during 1902, gives 
the following summary— the many millions of which 
cast quite into the shade our report of last December. 
But the Lord knows how much prosperity the truth 
can bear advantageously and we bow to his wisdom. 
Ere long the change will come— truth will be prospered 
and error will be put to flight. The clipping 
reads: 

"Church interests, maintenance and betterments 
are now costing the people of the United States $260,000,000 
a year. And this vast sum does not include 
$70,000,000 which is given in benevolence, outside of 
government charity, and in sums above $5,000 each 
gift. Of this benevolence $3 in every $4 comes from 
members of churches. It cost to maintain all Baptist 
churches in the United States last year $14,138,195, 
all Episcopal churches $15,184,926, and all Congregational 
churches $10,276,105. Figures for Reformed 
Churches (Dutch) last year are $1,622,696, and for 
Presbyterian (North) $17,080,191. To maintain all 
Methodist churches, South and North, cost last year 
$24,552,800. These figures in every case include betterments. 

R3148 : page 52 

They also include contributions to missions, 
both home and foreign. Financial figures for 
Roman Catholic churches are unobtainable, in great 
part because Catholic officials do not themselves collect 
them." 

HIGHER CRITICISM GAINING GROUND. 



The following dispatch shows the progress being 
made by skepticism— infidelity: 

"London, Jan. 14.— The Times' Berlin correspondent 
says that Emperor William appears to be 
taking a keen interest in what is called the higher 
Biblical criticism. He recently expressed publicly 
views which formerly he was understood to regard 
unfavorably, and spoke of the necessity of further 
development in religion. 

"The Kaiser is on terms of personal friendship 



with Prof. Harnack, the leading exponent of the 
higher criticism, but appears to be influenced even 
more by Prof. Delitzsch, whose lecture, 'Babel und 
Bibel,' he recently caused to be re-delivered to a select 
audience at Potsdam palace. 

"On Monday night the Emperor and Empress 
and other exalted personages listened to a lecture 
wherein Prof. Delitzsch expounded views denying the 
divine origin of the Bible and finding a Babylonic 
source for much of the Old Testament doctrine of 
theology." 



R3148 : page 52 

NOTHING TOO GOOD FOR GOD'S SERVICE. 

"If there be any blemish therein, as if it be lame or blind, or have 
any ill-blemish, thou shalt not sacrifice it unto the Lord thy God." 
-Deut. 15:21.- 

SUCH an injunction to the house of servants under 
Moses is, perhaps, more necessary to the 
house of sons under Christ (Heb. 3:5,6), than 
many are apt to suppose. Inborn selfishness generally 
suggests that it would be a pity to sacrifice the best 
things, which could be used to advantage in so many 
other ways. And it is because this is generally done 
unconsciously that we now discuss this subject, with 
a view of helping the true-hearted out of the difficulty. 
Truly our hearts are exceedingly deceitful and require 
constant watching as respects their real motives, which 
they sometimes hide even from the loyal-hearted sons 
of God. 

How often we have seen Christian parents, lovers 
of the Lord and his cause, who at times would 
bemoan their own inability to be actively engaged 
in the Lord's service, and who loved and admired 
the sacrifices of brethren and sisters in the colporteur 
service, who, to their injury, held back their 
own sons and daughters. Their reasoning seems to 
be that the work of the evangelist, as a colporteur, is 
good enough for those who have no education, or for 
such as are untalented; but they would have their 
children aim higher in life;— they would accept the 
Lord's bounty and expend it upon their children to 
give them an education, and then point them to medicine 
or law or literature or school-teaching as honorable 
and remunerative fields for their talents and 
education. 

What a great mistake! what a sad mistake! How 
ashamed they will feel, if they ever get into the Kingdom, 
when looking back they will see how lightly 
they esteemed the wonderful privilege of being co-workers 
with God in this present time! How vastly 



different will be their views then, respecting the importance 
of medicine and law and schools and literature 
and marriage! How ashamed they will be that 
they ever thought that the lean and the lame and the 
ill-favored were good enough to sacrifice to the Lord! 
—that none should think of colporteuring but those 
who had no capacity for "worldly prosperity!" 

On the contrary the consecrated parent should 
consecrate to the Lord not only his firstborn, 
but all of his children; and from infancy should be 
instilling into their minds and hearts that the proper 
course for all of God's people is to devote themselves 
in largest possible measure to the divine service. 
They should be taught to regard all of life's affairs 
with a view to rendering their all to his service in any 
possible capacity; and to pray that the Lord would 
accept and use their time, talent, influence— all— in 
his service, the most honorable service imaginable, 
and ultimately to be the most highly rewarded. The 
Apostle's teaching respecting marriage (1 Cor. 7:27-40) 
should be brought to their attention with the 
thought of the Apostle that it is not a condemnation 
of marriage in others, but one of the incidental sacrifices 
of those anxious to be most fully used in the 
Lord's service. 

Not only so, but the Christian parent who discerns 
present truth should encourage his child not to 
strive for the higher education, but to be content with 
a common school education; because (1) to qualify 
himself for a profession would be to put before himself 
a temptation in that direction which would last 
through life; (2) because the higher education of the 
present day in all colleges is so impregnated with the 
Evolution theory and Higher Criticism that the strong 
probability is that, like others, he would fall into 
skepticism, which will kill his devotion to the Lord, 
and he could only be induced to serve the Lord, even 
outwardly, by an honorable position and a good salary 
—if, indeed, it left him anything but morality 
as a substitute for religion! 

On the contrary, every man and woman favored 
by the Lord with some knowledge of present truth 

R3148 : page 53 

should at once appreciate the true situation;— that 
the most talented and best educated have nothing 
worthy a place on the Lord's altar,— nothing worthy 
of acceptance in the Lord's service; and, forthwith, 
each should proceed to devote to it, daily and hourly, 
the best that he has and the most that he can, as being 
the greatest privilege that could ever be offered to 
angels or men— to be colaborers with God. Some, 
thus rightly appreciating the matter, are glad to leave 
medicine and business and schools to engage in the 
much grander and more important service of the gospel, 



as colporteur-evangelists;— to carry the printed 
message, of glad tidings of great joy, to all who have 
hearing ears. They rightly feel that they have not 
too much education or talent for so honorable a service 
as ambassadors for the King of Kings, but that if they 
had more and yet more, it would be to the interest of 
the work. 

Would you have a young man or a young woman 
dash all the prospects and ambitions of the present life, 
and enter the colporteur work,— simply because they 
have accepted present truth and because you urge 
them to this service? No, indeed; we hope that none 
so minded will enter the work. The Lord seeketh not 
such for his service and representatives, and, hence, we 
do not seek them in his name. He seeks such as "count 
it all joy" to serve him and his at any sacrifice. Those 
entering the work against their will would, undoubtedly, 
do poor work and soon fall away from the truth. 

But would you recommend a man of means,— a 
business man, for instance,— to dispose of his own 
business and go about colporteuring? living on the 
interest of his money, or, perhaps, on the principal? 
Why not? Should we not all have the Master's spirit, 
expressed by his words: "Wist ye not that I must be 
about my Father's business?" The Lord's true saints 
have no business of their own, for they gave their all 
to the Lord at consecration. Their business they 
manage as trustees for the Lord— not to be turned 
over at their death, in prosperous condition, to their 
children or their friends, possibly to their injury. It 
is to be used by the trustee as wisely as he knows how 
before death; for then his trusteeship ends, and he 
must render his account. (Matt. 25:14-30; Luke 19:12-26.) 
If he can provide for the comfortable necessities 
of the present life for those dependent upon him, 
why should he do more for them, or for any cause 
longer delay to "show forth the praises of him who 
called us out of darkness into his marvelous light" — 
in the best manner open to him? Alas, how few of 
those who recognize their trusteeship are faithful 
to it and will be able to render their report with joy, 
and to hear the Lord say, "Well done, good and faithful 
servant!" 

Before "the harvest is past and the summer is ended," 
let us get awake, dear brothers and sisters, to 
our privileges and opportunities and use them thankfully. 
But let us not be misunderstood as commending 
anything impracticable. Only exceptional ones 
can do more than provide for their own personal comforts 
—even at the very liberal terms granted to colporteurs; 
and "he that provideth not for his own 
household is worse than an unbeliever" is the Apostle's 
argument. Those hampered by family encumbrances 
must show their love and devotion by some other 
form of sacrifice. 

Let us give a concluding word to some of the 



humble and small-talented ones who have engaged in 
this service. They may, perhaps, be inclined to feel 
that they are of the blemished class of ill-favored ones 
represented in our text as unacceptable. But not so, 
dear brethren: the blood of Jesus Christ our Lord 
cleanseth us from all sin— covers all our natural blemishes 

R3149 : page 53 

and makes us worthy and acceptable in the Beloved. 
A cipher alone has no value, but it is a power 
indeed, when it follows 1; and so it is with us when 
we follow Christ— his merit gives us association and 
cooperation with him; gives us weight and influence 
and power for God and his cause. "Ye are complete 
in Him;" "accepted in the Beloved." 



R3149 : page 53 

THE APOSTLE PETER'S EXHORTATION. 

"Wherefore, gird up the loins of your mind, be sober, and hope to the end 
for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus 
Christ; as obedient children, not fashioning yourselves according to the 
former lusts in your ignorance; but as he who hath called you 
is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation; because 
it is written, Be ye holy, for I am holy."— 1 Pet. 1:13-16. 

TO APPRECIATE the exhortations of the apostles, 
we need to become acquainted with their 
several characters; to note their circumstances; 
to mark their zeal and faithfulness; and to remember 
that every word of exhortation addressed to the 
Church has the substantial backing of their worthy 
examples. They endured hardness as good soldiers, 
and suffered much for the privilege of declaring the 
truth. In their writings are blended a high degree 
of the power of logic, eloquence and pathos, combined 
with an inspiring enthusiasm which must awaken in 
every student of their teachings a measure, at least, 
of the same sacred flame. 

Though written so long ago, the above words of 
exhortation lose none of their force to us. They were 
penned for the instruction of the whole Church, down 
to the end of the age. The introductory, "Wherefore," 
refers us to the glorious hope of our high calling, 

R3149 : page 54 

and of the necessarily severe measures required 
to fit us for our exalted inheritance, as mentioned in 
the preceding verses. Peter would have us appreciate 
what it is to be called with such a high calling— to an 
inheritance incorruptible and undefiled and that fadeth 



not away, reserved in heaven for those who are 
kept by the power of God through faith. (Verse 4.) 
He would have us know that, if faithful, we are to 
be made even "partakers of the divine nature," and 
that we are to be joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, of all 
things. --2 Pet. 1:4. 

As the spirit of God draws our hearts into closer 
fellowship and sympathy with the divine mind, the 
value of these "exceeding great and precious promises" 
is more and more fully realized, until there glows in 
our hearts the same holy enthusiasm that so filled the 
hearts of the apostles. And only when our hearts are 
thus warmed and our minds thus awakened, are we 
prepared to understand the Apostle's "Wherefore," 
upon the inspiring comprehension of which depends 
our ability to heed the earnest exhortation which 
follows. 

If our hearts are not duly inspired with this hope 
—if we have begun to esteem it lightly, or to forget 
it, or to think of it as an idle tale— to heed the counsel 
of Peter, here given, will be impossible. If, therefore, 
we realize that a spiritual lethargy has to any 
extent been creeping over us, imperceptibly benumbing 
our spiritual senses, so that the truth is losing its 
inspiring power upon us, our first duty is to betake 
ourselves to prayer and to communion with God and 
his Word, that its sanctifying power may be realized. 

"Wherefore," then, you that discern the prize of 
your high calling, and who are endeavoring to press 
along the line toward the mark, "gird up the loins 
of your mind"— as in the illustration; strengthen and 
fortify your purposes and efforts; renew your determination; 
redouble your diligence; cast aside the 
weights of unnecessary worldly cares; increase your 
zeal; and, as the Apostle Paul also urges, run with 
patience the race set before you. Run, not like one 
who is merely beating the air, but like one who has a 
purpose in view, and who, in desperate earnest, is 
determined to make his calling and election sure.— 
Heb. 12:1; 1 Cor. 9:26. 

Having thus "girded up the loins of your mind" 
for a long, steady and determined effort, he further 
counsels,— "Be sober:" do not allow yourself to become 
excited and, under the spur of excitement, to 
exhaust all your spiritual vitality in a very short time, 
and then to suffer a relapse into coldness or discouragement; 
but thoughtfully to consider and prepare 
for a long and patient endurance of all the discipline 
and trial of faith and patience necessary to prove an 
overcomer and worthy of the blessed reward promised 
"to him that overcometh." The race before us is not 
one to be run by fits and starts, but by "patient continuance 
in well doing." Soberly, thoughtfully, we 
are to weigh and endeavor to realize the import of the 
exceeding great and precious promises and to gather 
from them their invigorating inspiration; earnestly 



we must apply our minds and hearts to the instruction 
of the inspired Word of God, availing ourselves also 
of such helps— of "pastors and teachers" and their 
literary productions— which prove harmonious with, 
and helpful to, the study of the Scriptures; diligently 
and patiently we must submit ourselves to all the 
transforming influences of divine grace and truth; 
and then, loyally and faithfully, we must devote our 
consecrated talents, however few or many, to the 
great work of preaching this gospel of the Kingdom 
to all who will hear. 

Such a sober view of the situation fortifies the 
mind against discouragement, and enables us, as the 
Apostle suggests, to "hope to the end for the grace to 
be brought unto us at the revelation of Jesus Christ." 
Such a sober view keeps Reason on the throne of our 
minds. And Reason says, The divine call to joint-heirship 
with Christ clearly implies eligibility to the 
exalted office; the divine promise clearly insures divine 
grace to enable us to fulfil the conditions; the 
divine provision for my justification, by faith in the precious 
blood of Christ, releases me from the condemnation 
to death; and the righteousness of Christ, imputed 
to me by faith, fully supplements all my weaknesses, 
so that before God I stand approved in him. 
Sober Reason also says, The directions given in the 
Scriptures to those who would run the race are clear 
and explicit, and make plain every step of the way to 
those who are truly and fully consecrated to the Lord. 
The examples of the Lord and the Apostles shine on 
the pathway with a moral luster and glory that cannot 
lead us astray. If we walk in their footprints we 
will assuredly reach the same goal. 

Therefore in this sober view of our high calling 
and its privileges, and the abundant resources of divine 
grace, let us not be discouraged or overcome in 
any way, but let us hope to the end for the grace 
(favor) that is to be brought unto us at the revelation 
of Jesus Christ— at his second advent. The Church 
has enjoyed much of the divine favor all through the 
age of her probation and trial; but the grace to be revealed 
at the revelation of Jesus Christ— when he 
comes to reign in power and great glory— is her exaltation 
with him to sit with him in his throne. This 
glorious consummation, the Church all through the 
age must steadily keep in view: but how glorious is 
the privilege of those of its members living in this end 

R3149 : page 55 

of the age, when already, even before our change into 
his glorious likeness— in a moment, in the twinkling 
of an eye— we begin to enter the joys of our Lord. 

Those who are still sober and faithful, and who have 
not cast away their confidence, have been led into the 
secret of the Master's presence; and they have been 



made to sit down to meat, and the Master himself has 
come forth and served them. Yes, our hearts have 
been made to burn within us while he has opened up 
the Scriptures and made us understand, from the testimony 
of the law and the prophets and the apostles, 
that the time is fulfilled— that the end of the age is 
now here, and that the Lord of the harvest is present 
to direct and supervise the great work of reaping the 
fruit of precious seed long ago sown in tears, and now 
to be gathered with joy and singing; while he has 
opened up to us the treasures of divine wisdom and 
grace displayed in the plan of the ages, which God 
purposed before the foundation of the world, which 
he has been gradually working out in the ages past, 
and which is now nearing its glorious consummation. 

Oh, what feasting, what rejoicing there has been 
around the table of the Lord, as one after another the 
treasures of divine grace have been opened to us, revealing 
the glories of the new heavens and the new 
earth, and the blessedness of all the obedient subjects 
of him who sitteth on the throne to reign in righteousness; 
how all tears shall be wiped from off all 
faces, and how the reproach of God's people is to be 
taken away! Well indeed did Daniel prophesy, saying, 
"Oh, the blessedness of him that waiteth and cometh 
to the thousand, three hundred, thirty and five 
days!"— the days of the Lord's second presence, when 
all that is written to be accomplished by his glorious 
reign shall begin to come to pass. 

Seeing, then, that such are our privileges and 
hopes, "what manner of persons ought we to be in all 
holy conversation and god-likeness?" (2 Pet. 3:11.) 
Being purified by this hope, ought we not, as the 
Apostle exhorts, to fashion ourselves, not according 
to the former lusts (desires and ambitions, which we 
had) in our ignorance, but as he who has called us is 
holy, should not we also be holy in all manner of conversation 
—in all our words and ways? Since it is 

written, "Be ye holy; for I [the Lord] am holy (1 Pet. 1:15,16), 
should not we who are called to be partakers 

R3150 : page 55 

of his own nature and glory be holy also? 

Some Christians have the erroneous idea that God 
does all the fashioning, and that his children are to be 
merely passive in his hand; but Peter does not so express 
it. He exhorts us to fashion ourselves according 
to the divine instructions. There is a work to be done 
in us and about us, and those who are not up and doing, 
but who passively sit and wait for the Lord to 
work miracles in their behalf, are greatly deceived 
and are giving the enemy great advantage over them 
which he will certainly use to bind them hand and 
foot and cast them into outer darkness, unless they 
bestir themselves to work out their salvation with fear 



and trembling, while God, cooperating with their 
earnest efforts, works in them, to will and to do his 
good pleasure. (Phil. 2:12,13.) "Watch and pray," 
beloved, lest any of these snares of the enemy entrap 
you and beguile you of your reward. 



R3150 : page 55 

"LOVE IS THE PRINCIPAL THING." 

--1 CORINTHIANS 13:1-13.-FEBRUARY 22.- 

"Now abideth faith, hope, love, these three; 
but the greatest of these is love." 

IN THE preceding chapter the Apostle has recounted 
the various "gifts" of the holy spirit conferred 
upon the early Church for its establishment and 
development. He closes the chapter with the exhortation 
that while esteeming all of these gifts, each member 
of the Church should covet earnestly the superior 
ones; and then he adds, "Yet show I unto you a 
more excellent way"— something still better than any 
of those gifts of the holy spirit. Our lesson pertains to 
this more excellent ambition which should actuate every 
child of God; viz., the acquisition and development of 
the spirit of love, the spirit of the Lord. In proportion 
as we have the mind of Christ, in proportion as the holy 
spirit dwells in us and abounds, in that same proportion 
our love abounds. 

There are different kinds of love, however, and the 
Apostle is here not speaking of general love, but of one 
particular kind, which belongs to God, and to the New 
Creation begotten of him. There is an animal love, 
such as the brute creation exercises toward its young, a 
love which frequently leads to the sacrifice of life in its 
devotion. This same kind of love inheres in the natural 
man, even in his fallen condition. It is all more 
or less selfish love,— ready, perhaps, at times to rob 
others that it might lavish good things upon those it 
favors. This is not the love which the Apostle describes, 
nor is he addressing his language to the natural 
man. He addresses the New Creation, informing them 
that the natural man will not be able to receive, to appreciate, 
to comply with, that which he presents. In 
order to a clear comprehension of this love, and a 
hearty acceptance of it as the rule of life, it is apparently 
necessary that we be "begotten" from above. 

It seems impossible to describe love itself; the 

R3150 : page 56 

best we can do is to describe its conduct. Those who 
possess a love with such characteristics are able to 



appreciate it, but not able otherwise to explain it- 
it is of God, god-likeness in the heart, in the tongue, in 
the hands, in the thoughts— supervising all the human 
attributes and seeking fully to control them. 

Before describing the operation of love the Apostle 
impresses upon us its importance, assuring us that if 
we possess the very choicest of the "gifts" already explained, 
and do not have therewith love, we will still lack 
the evidence of our being New Creatures in Christ Jesus. 
We should be merely "sounding brass or cymbal" 
—making a noise, but having no acceptable feeling 
or virtue in ourselves in connection with our words. He 
assures us thus that ability to speak fluently on gospel 
themes, even, might not be a proof of our relationship 
to the Lord as New Creatures. The Apostle's declaration 
is introduced with an "if," which might be challenged, 
to a certain extent, by the assertion that no one 
could speak forth with power, with force, the gospel of 
God's dear Son unless he possessed the spirit of love. 
Although we have all met public speakers who could 
deliver very beautiful essays, we have generally perceived 
a hollowness in their teaching unless they spoke 
from the heart, prompted by love of the truth,— not 
by love of applause, nor for love of money. 

Amongst the gifts, prophecy or oratory was one 
which the Apostle commended. Knowledge of mysteries 
of God is also commended, and large faith is 
reckoned amongst the chief of the Christian requirements; 
yet the Apostle declares that if he possessed all 
of these in their fullest measure, and love were absent, 
he would be nothing,— a mere cipher— not a member 
of the New Creation at all, since love is the very spirit 
of the begetting to the new nature. What a wonderful 
test this is! let us each apply it to himself. Whether 
I am something or nothing in God's estimation is to be 
measured by my love for him, for his brethren, for his 
cause, for the world in general, and even for my enemies, 
—rather than by my knowledge or fame or oratory. 
Yet we are not to understand that one could 
have a knowledge of the deep mysteries of God without 
having been begotten by the holy spirit of love; for the 
deep things of God knoweth no man, but by the spirit 
of God; but one might lose the spirit before losing the 
knowledge it brought him. In the measurement of character, 
therefore, we are to put love first, and to consider 
it the chief test of our nearness and acceptance to the 
Lord. 

The Apostle next takes another line of argument: 
his hearers already understood benevolence, alms-giving 
to the needy, to be commendable; and to impress 
upon them the importance of having love as the controlling 
principle of their hearts, the Apostle declares that if 
he should give all of his goods to feed the poor— keeping 
nothing back— and yet do this without proper love 
as the mainspring to the conduct, it would profit him 
nothing. He goes still further and declares, that even 



if he should become a martyr, and be burned at the 
stake, it would not bring him the blessed reward sought, 
unless that martyrdom were prompted, impulsed, by 
love. 

But it may be inquired, How could anyone practise 
such self-denial, such sacrifice, such faith, etc., and 
yet be without love? It is not our thought that they 
could practise these and be devoid of love; that there 
must be some measure of love. We understand the 
Apostle to make this strong statement of the case in 
order to show us that our almsgiving, our sacrifices, 
our knowledge, our teaching, are acceptable to the 
Lord and appreciated by him, only to the extent that 
they have love behind them. If love enters slightly 
into them, then they are slightly appreciated; if love 
enters largely into them, then God appreciates them 
largely. If they are prompted wholly by love, then 
God accepts them fully. If love be only a part of the 
motive power behind our conduct as New Creatures, it 
implies that other motives are active in us, tending to 
neutralize in the Lord's esteem even services and sacrifices 
performed in his name and upon worthy objects. 
Let us be on guard against these neutralizing influences, 
and earnestly seek to be whole-hearted, full of love;— 
that our every service of the Lord and of the brethren 
and of the truth be from a pure heart, free from personal 
ambition, pride, etc. 

Having given us such a conception of the importance 
of love, the Apostle proceeds to describe what it 
is and what it is not— how it operates, and how it does 
not operate or conduct itself. Let us each make a 
practical application of this matter to himself, and inquire 
within: Have I such a love, especially for the 
household of faith, as leads me to suffer considerable 
and for a long time, and yet to be kind? How quickly 
do I get offended? If very quickly it surely indicates 
that I have very little of the spirit of the Lord,— love. 
If I am disposed to resent the trifling wrongs of life,— 
if I have the spirit of resentment, am disposed to render 
evil for evil, and railing for railing,— it marks my 
deficiency in this greatest of all the graces, so essential 
to my ultimate passing, as an overcomer, the divine 
inspection. 

Of our heavenly Father it is said that "he is kind 
to the unthankful." Have I this spirit of kindness— 
his spirit? Am I kind to my friends? gentle? courteous? 
Have I this mark of love pervading my actions 
and words and thoughts— that I think of and am considerate 
of others? that I feel and manifest kindness 
toward them in word, in look, in act? A Christian, 

R3150 : page 57 

above all others, should be kind, courteous, gentle, in 
his home, in his place of business, in the Church- 
everywhere. With the child of God this patience and 



kindness are not merely put on, as grapes might be 
tied to a thorn-bush, but, on the contrary, they are the 
fruits of the spirit— growths from or results of having 
come into fellowship with God, learned of him, received 
of his spirit of holiness, spirit of love. 

Have I the love that envieth not, so that I can see 
others prosper and rejoice in their prosperity, even if 
for the time my own affairs be not so prosperous? 
This is generosity, the very opposite of jealousy and 
envy. The root of envy is selfishness: envy will not 
grow upon the root of love. Love envies not, but rejoices 
in the prosperity of all that is good. 

Have I the love that vaunteth not itself?— the 
love that tends to humility, that is not boastful, not 
puffed up? Some one has truly said, that "love saves 
a man from making a fool of himself by consequential 

R3151 : page 57 

conduct, and by thrusting himself into positions which 
betray his incompetence." Boasting— over self-esteem 
—has led many a man not only into folly, but sometimes 
into gross sins, in his endeavor to make good his 
boasts. The spirit of the Lord is a spirit of a sound 
mind, which not only seeks generously to esteem others, 
but also soberly to estimate oneself, and not to be 
puffed up. 

Have I the love which does not behave itself unseemly 
—discourteously, impolitely? Politeness has 
been defined as love in trifles. Courtesy is said to be 
love in little things. The secret of politeness is either 
a surface polishing or love in the heart. As Christians 
we are to have the heart-love, which will prompt us to 
acts of kindness and courtesy, not only in the household 
of faith, but in our homes and in our dealings 
with the world. 

Have I the love that seeketh not her own merely? 
—that might even be willing to let some of her own 
rights be sacrificed in the interests of others?— or have 
I the selfishness which not only demands my own rights 
on every occasion, but which demands those rights regardless 
of the convenience, comfort and rights of others? 
To have love in this particular means that we 
will be on guard against taking any unjust advantage 
of others, and to prefer rather to suffer a wrong than 
to do a wrong,— to suffer an injustice than to do 
injustice. 

Have I the love which is not easily provoked? 
Indeed, the original omits the word "easily," and 
gives rather the thought that love does not become 
irritated, roused to anger. Love enables its possessor 
to see both sides of a question; it makes of him a veritable 
philosopher; it gives him the spirit of a sound 
mind. He perceives that exasperation and violent 
anger are unbecoming and worse than that, injurious, 
not only toward those against whom they may be directed, 



but injurious in their effect also upon his own 
heart and body. There may be times when love will 
need to be firm, almost to sternness and inflexibility, 
where principles are involved, where valuable lessons 
are to be inculcated; and this might come under the 
head of anger, using that word in a proper sense in 
regard to a righteous indignation, exercised for a loving 
purpose, for doing good— but then only for a time. If 
justly angry we should see to it that we sin not, even 
with our lips or in our hearts, in which at no time may 
we entertain any but loving and generous sentiments 
toward those who are our enemies, or toward those of 
our friends whom we would assist or instruct or 
correct. 

To be easily provoked is to have a bad temper, to 
get worked up into a passion, where evil looks and evil 
words and angry sentiments are involved. This is 
wholly contrary to the spirit of love, and whoever is on 
the Lord's side and seeking to be pleasing to him and 
to attain to an overcomer's position should jealously 
guard himself against this general besetment of our day. 
Those begotten of the holy spirit should all be good 
tempered. In no way can we better show forth the 
praises of him who hath called us out of darkness into 
his marvelous light than by the exhibition of the spirit 
of love in the daily affairs of life. 

Have I the spirit of love which thinketh no evil? 
—which is guileless, not suspicious of evil or looking 
for faults in others, or attributing to them evil motives? 
It is an old adage that "faults are thick where love is 
thin." 

The Revised Version presents a slightly different 
thought here— "Taketh not account of evil"— does 
not charge up the wrong against the evil-doer, as if 
waiting for an apology or a restitution or an opportunity 
to "get even." But while love passes over offenses 
and takes no account of them, holding no grudges, this 
would not mean that love would necessarily treat evil-doers 
in precisely the same manner that it would treat 
its friends. It might be proper or necessary, even, to 
take some notice of the offenses to the extent of not 
manifesting the same cordiality as before, but no hatred, 
malice or strife should be manifested— nothing 
but kindness and gentleness, leaving the door of opportunity 
open for a full reconciliation as soon as possible; 
doing all that could be done to promote a reconciliation 
and evincing a willingness to forgive and forget the 
wrong. 

Have I the love which rejoices not in iniquity (inequity) 
but rejoices in the truth? Are the principles 
of right and wrong so firmly fixed in my mind, and 
am I so thoroughly in accord with the right and so 

R3151 : page 58 

opposed to the wrong that I would not encourage the 



wrong, but must condemn it, even if it brought advantage 
to me? Am I so in accord with right, with truth, that 
I could not avoid rejoicing in the truth and in its prosperity, 
even to the upsetting of some of my preconceived 
opinions, or to the disadvantage of some of my 
earthly interests? The love of God which the Apostle 
is here describing as the spirit of the Lord's people, is 
a love which is far above all selfishness, and is based 
upon fixed principles which should, day by day, be 
more and more distinctly discerned, and always firmly 
adhered to at any cost. 

Have I the love that beareth all things?— that is 
impregnable against the assaults of evil? that resists evil, 
impurity, sin and everything contrary to love? Have 
I the love that believeth all things? that is unwilling 
to impute evil to another unless forced so to do, by indisputable 
evidences?— that would rather believe good 
than evil about everybody?— that would take no pleasure 
in hearing evil, but would be disposed to resent 
it? Have I the love that hopeth all things, that perseveres 
under unfavorable conditions, and continues to 
hope for and to labor for those who need my assistance? 
Have I the love that endureth all things?— 
that is, that continues to hope for the best in regard to 
all and to strive for the best, and that with perseverance 
—not easily discouraged? 

As disciples or pupils of Christ, we are in his 
school, and the great lesson which he is teaching us 
day by day, and the lesson which we must learn thoroughly 
if we would attain the mark of the prize of our 
high calling in all its various features and ramifications, 
is the lesson of Love. It takes hold upon and relates 
to all the words and thoughts and doings of our daily 
lives. As the poet has said, 

"As every lovely hue is light,— so every grace is love." 

Next the Apostle points out that as love is the 
most excellent thing, so is it the most enduring. The 
gift of prophecy would pass away; the value and necessity 
for speaking with other tongues would cease; 
and all knowledge of the present time, imperfect as it 
is, must surely cease to be valuable when the perfections 
of the new dispensation are fully ushered in. 
The very best informed now know only in part; but 
when perfection shall be attained in the Kingdom, and 
under its ministration, all the partial and imperfect 
conditions of the present time will have been superseded, 
and only the one thing may surely be said to endure 
and be everlasting,— and that one thing is Love. 

An illustration of the growth which we must expect 
as between the present knowledge and attainments 
and those of the future, is of the child and the growth 
to manhood. Another illustration is seeing obscurely 
in one of the old-time mirrors, which gave but imperfect 
reflections. With the perfections of the new condition 
we will see perfectly, know perfectly, understand 
perfectly. Just so the gifts which were in the early 



Church were very suitable to it, as fitted to its infantile 
condition; but as it would develop to maturity the 
value of those "gifts" would diminish, and they would 
be no more; but higher developments of divine favor 
were to be expected, faith, hope and love. All three of 
these the Church of God is to cultivate, and to esteem 
as fruits of the spirit, far above the gifts of the spirit,— 
and the greatest of these three is Love. 

Love also is the most enduring; for will not faith 
practically come to an end when we shall see and know 
thoroughly? And will not hope practically be at an 
end when we shall reach the fruition of all our hopes 
and be possessors of the fulness of our heavenly Father's 
promises? Love, however, will never fail, even as it 
had no beginning. God is love, and since he was without 
beginning, so love was without beginning; because 
it is his character, his disposition; and as he endureth 
forever, so love will endure forever. Whoever, therefore, 
learns thoroughly the lessons of this present time 
in the school of Christ, and thus becomes well stocked 
with this wonderful grace of love, lays up treasures 
which may be his to all eternity— a great blessing 
to himself and to all with whom he comes in contact 
now; and a blessing to the world to which he will be 
permitted to minister during the Millennium;— a 
blessing everlasting, because it is a seal of divine 
approval. 



R3152:page58 

BAPTISM UNTO REPENTANCE NOT BAPTISM INTO CHRIST. 

-ACTS 18:23-19:7. -MARCH 1.- 

"If ye, then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, 
how much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy spirit to them 
that ask him?"— Luke 11:13. 

AFTER leaving Corinth the Apostle completed his 
second missionary tour, and returned to Antioch, 
stopping en route at Jerusalem, where he 
greeted the Church and, no doubt, gave them an account 
of the Lord's blessing upon his recent ministries in Europe. 
Aquila and Priscilla went with the Apostle as far 
as Ephesus, and the vessel on which he traveled remaining 
over the Sabbath at the port, he improved the opportunity 
to speak for Christ in the synagogue of Ephesus. 
His discourse was no doubt in the nature of a 
preparation for a future work which he hoped to do 
there. He doubtless spoke only along the lines of first 

R3152:page59 

principles— respecting the glorious prophecies of Messiah, 



and the fulfilment which should now be expected. 
His discourse was well received, and he was urged to 
remain longer, and gave his promise of a later return. 

We are not informed how long the Apostle remained 
at Antioch, but "after he had spent some time there he 
departed and went over all the region of Galatia and 
Phrygia in order, establishing all the disciples." While 
the Apostle was energetic in the establishment of new 
companies of the Lord's people, he was not slack in 
looking out for the spiritual welfare and growth of those 
which he had already established, as is evidenced by 
this statement— this being his third visit to these 
churches. 

When the Apostle returned to Ephesus he found 
that in his absence a Christian brother named Apollos 
had come and had preached eloquently in the synagogue, 
using very close, logical and convincing arguments, 
and securing twelve converts to Christianity. 
He was a Jew, born at Alexandria, one of the chief 
cities of that time, specially noted for its schools of 
learning, and extensive libraries. The common version 
says that Apollos was "eloquent"; the revised version, 
that he was "learned", and the Greek word seems to be 
with equal propriety translatable either way: in all 
probability he was both learned and eloquent. However, 
he was not as thoroughly advanced in the knowledge 
of the Lord and of the truth as were Aquila and Priscilla 
who had for a time companied with the Apostle; 
and as soon as they heard Apollos in the synagogue 
they recognized him as a Christian brother, and took 
him to their own home, where they had good opportunity 
for communicating to him "the way of the Lord 
more perfectly." 

We have here a beautiful illustration of how the 
Lord is pleased to use his consecrated people. He had 
use for the talents and education of Apollos; he had use 
also for the less talented Aquila and Priscilla who, though 
not qualified to speak in public in the synagogue, were, 
nevertheless, used of the Lord to bless his more eloquent 
disciple, and thus to be sharers with him in the 
fruits of his more public ministry. The same is true 
today, as the Apostle explains. (1 Cor. 12:12-26.) No 
member of the body of Christ can say that he has no 
need for another member, and no member may say that 
there is nothing whatever that he can do in the service 
of the body. Under the guidance of our glorious Head 
each member who is filled with his spirit, and desirous 
of serving him, may do so. When the time for rewards 
will come, who knows how much of the usefulness of Paul 
and Apollos may be accredited to some of the humble 
ones such as Aquila and Priscilla, who in various ways 
ministered to and encouraged and supported their abler 
brethren in the Lord's work. The Apostle mentions 
very tenderly some of this class who colabored with 
him, supporting his work by their influence and by 
their means. (Phil. 4:3.) Similar opportunities are 



still open, and no child of the Lord should be content 

to let the days of the present harvest time go by with 

their golden opportunities for service and cooperation 

without seeking each day to lift the royal banner himself, 

and to publicly show forth the praises of him 

who hath called him out of darkness into light, or by 

assisting and cooperating with others whom the Lord 

in his providence has placed in more advantageous positions 

for public service. 

Apollos, hearing from Aquila and Priscilla of the 
glorious work accomplished by the Apostle Paul at 
Corinth, went thither, taking with him a letter of introduction 
from his newly found friends at Ephesus, who 
had so recently left Corinth. Incidently we are told 
that his going to Corinth proved a blessing to the Church 
there, because of his thorough acquaintance with the 
Scriptures and his ability in expounding them, so that 
he could "forcefully confute the Jews, and that publicly, 
showing by the Scriptures that Jesus was the Christ." 
That the Corinthian brethren were greatly pleased with 
the masterful ability of Apollos as a teacher of the 
truth is implied by the fact that some of them were 
disposed to say that they were followers of Apollos, 
while others, also sectarian in spirit, claimed to be followers 
of Paul, and others of Peter— all of which sectarianism 
the Apostle distinctly reproved subsequently 
in his epistle to them.— 1 Cor. 3:3-7. 

There is room for all the ability of all the brethren 
in the Church, and such a thing as rivalry or partisanship 
is entirely out of place. We have one Lord, one 
Head: we all are brethren, and our highest aim should 
be to honor our Head and serve the fellow-members; 
and each one who so endeavors should be highly esteemed, 
whether his talents are greater or smaller than 
those of others. Another lesson here is the importance 
of being well versed in the Scriptures. The sword of 
the spirit is the Word of God, and he who would serve 
the cause best must know how to use this weapon which 
the Lord himself has provided— forcefully, convincingly 
and yet lovingly. The Scriptures with which Apollos 
was familiar were the Old Testament writings, since the 
New Testament was not yet compiled, though doubtless 
a few of its books had already been written. 
Whether Apollos had seen these or not, he had from 
some quarter "been instructed in the way of the Lord," 
before meeting Aquila and Priscilla, and was now, 
through them, still more thoroughly furnished for his 
ministry of the truth. Let us each resolve that by the 
Lord's grace we will put on the entire Christian armament, 
supplied us by the Lord, not neglecting the sword 
of the spirit— the Word. Let us learn, too, to be ready 

R3152:page60 

to accept further instruction as from the Lord, however 
humble may be the channels through which he may 



send it to us. Humility is one of the graces highly 
esteemed by the Lord, and one of the points upon which 
he frequently tests his followers: "Except ye become as 
little children [teachable, guileless], ye shall in nowise 
enter the Kingdom of heaven." 

It was while Apollos was at Corinth that the Apostle 
Paul came to Ephesus, according to promise, and 
began a ministry there which lasted two years (19:10). 
Aquila and Priscilla had seemingly left Ephesus by this 
time, as they are not again mentioned; but the Apostle 
speedily found those whom Apollos' ministry had 
reached, twelve in number. (Vs. 7.) Our Common 
Version would seem to give the inference that the Apostle 
was surprised that these believers at Ephesus had 
not yet received gifts of the holy spirit. But not so; 
he merely wished to bring to their attention the fact 
that such gifts were possible to them, for only an apostle 
could convey the gifts of the holy spirit, as we have 
already seen. (Acts 8:14-17.) The preaching of Apollos 
was merely along the lines of first principles of the 
doctrine of Christ, represented in the baptism of John 
to the Jews, while these believers were, evidently, by 
nature Gentiles. 

Apollos had explained the gospel merely to the extent 
of repentance from sin and faith in Christ as the 
Redeemer. He had no knowledge of the fuller meaning 
of baptism as explained by the Apostle (Rom. 6:3-5) 
—a baptism of consecration, to suffer with Christ 
—to be dead with him, to participate in his resurrection 
to the new nature and to be ultimate sharers with him 
in the heavenly Kingdom. The Apostle explained to 
them this "mystery" of fellowship with the Messiah- 
participation in his sufferings, and by and by in his 
glory (Col. 1:26,27): and when they heard this they 
were baptized into the name of the Lord Jesus— as 
members of his body, to fellowship in his sufferings, 
even unto death. 

How many believers there are today who, like 
these described, are members of "the household of 
faith," but not members of "the body of Christ"— 
who have gone so far as a baptism of repentance and 
reformation, and faith in the Redeemer, but who have 
not been instructed respecting the great privileges 
which belong to this dispensation— that we may become 
"heirs of God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our 
Lord, if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be 
also glorified together!" Wherever we go, let us each 
seek by the grace of God to explain the way of the 
Lord more perfectly to these already partially indoctrinated 
ones. So long as there are a plenty of such to labor 
with, it would be unwise, yea, contrary to our covenant 
and commission, to specially devote our lives and energies 
to the world; for although we are to do good unto 
all men as we have opportunity, it is to be chiefly to 
the household of faith. All around us, in the churches 
of the various denominations, are, we believe, hundreds, 



yea, thousands, who are in the condition of these 
mentioned in the lesson, knowing only the baptism of 
repentance, knowing not the baptism of Christ— the baptism 
into his death, the baptism of full consecration. 
Let us be diligent in this highest department of the work 
of the ministry, feeding, instructing, the Lord's flock. 

R3153 : page 60 

After instructing them thus respecting the true 
baptism, and after performing upon them its water 
symbol, the Apostle laid his hands on the believers and 
they received the holy spirit— that is to say, the "gifts 
of the spirit" were manifested in them— they spake 
with tongues, prophesied, etc., as described in 1 Corinthians 12. 
We have no power to communicate such 
gifts today, nor have others this power. It was an 
apostolic power, not transferable to others, as it was 
not the Lord's intention that those gifts should remain 
with the Church, but merely should be a witness in its 
infancy period;— until the New Testament writings 
should be within reach, and until the fruits of the spirit 
could be developed. 

However, let none envy the primitive Church this 
special blessing, so necessary to its progress and joy; 
but remember that under the Lord's providence our 
conditions in some respects are still more favorable, in 
that we have the written Word for our admonition. Let 
us remember the testimony of the Apostle in our last 
lesson, too,— to the effect that faith, hope and love, 
fruits of the spirit, far excel the tongues and interpretations 
and miracles of the gifts of the spirit: so that, 
as he explained, if one had all these gifts, and lacked 
the one fruit of love, he would be "nothing";— it would 
profit him nothing as respects a share in the body of 
Christ, and in the glorious blessings, present and future, 
which belong to it. 

Our Golden Text evidently refers, not to the miraculous 
gifts of the spirit enjoyed by the primitive 
Church, but to the holy spirit, or disposition, "the mind 
of Christ," the common privilege of all who are baptized 
into Christ's death, and who seek by faith to 
walk in newness of life. The miraculous gifts of the 
primitive Church could come only through apostolic 
hands; but the spirit, in the sense that we still enjoy 
it, the mind of Christ, the mind of God, with all the 
fruits and graces thereof, is still the privilege of the 
Lord's people, and dependent not upon apostolic or 
other hands, but upon our heavenly Father and upon 
the zeal with which we seek by prayer and every endeavor 
to have his mind, his disposition, controlling 
our thoughts, our words, our conduct. It is God's 
good pleasure to give us this spirit of love; but he 
gives it only to those who desire and seek it with patient 
perseverance. 



R3153 : page 61 

DISCIPLES OF CHRIST. 

"Then said Jesus to those Jews which believed on him, If ye continue in 
my word, then are ye my disciples indeed; and ye shall know the truth, 
and the truth shall make you free."— John 8:31,32. 

OUR Lord's preaching always produced two opposite 

effects upon the promiscuous multitudes 

that heard him. It attracted one class and repelled 

another. Those who were full of pride and conceit, 

and who preferred darkness to light because their deeds 

were evil, and because they realized that if they admitted 

the light of truth they must of necessity conform 

their characters to it,— all such were repelled by 

the teachings of Christ. And if the Lord had undertaken 

the work of the ministry according to the methods 

pursued today, depending for support on the good 

will and contributions of the people, that support would 

often have been very meager, or, at least, very fluctuating. 

On some occasions multitudes received his testimony, 

and later deserted him and walked no more 

with him, as he continued to enforce the lessons of divine 

truth. (Luke 4:14,15,22,28,29.) Sometimes 

the multitudes hung upon his words, wondering at the 

gracious words that proceeded out of his mouth; and 

again and again they forsook him, while only a mere 

handful remained. (John 6:60,66-69.) What consternation 

would follow in the various churches of today, 

if the professed ministers of the gospel should 

follow the Master's example in similarly declaring the 

whole counsel of God. How quickly they would become 

unpopular, and be charged with breaking up the 

church. Why, the great congregations that now 

throng the temples of fashion dedicated to the service 

of God and the teachings of Christ would not stand it! 

They go there to be entertained with pleasing and eloquent 

discourses from titled gentlemen who, presumably, 

know their tastes and ideas, and who will preach 

to please them. They are quite willing to pay their 

money for what they want, but they do not want the 

truth. 

Those who followed the Lord only for a little season 
and then forsook him, of course, ceased then to be 
his disciples and were no longer so recognized; nor did 
they presume longer to claim to be his disciples. A 
disciple is a pupil, a learner; and when any man ceases 
to be a student and pupil of Christ, the great Teacher, 
he is no longer a disciple of Christ. This was very 
manifest when the Lord was present, and when his 
name was one of reproach among men; but later, when 
his presence was withdrawn, and when his doctrines 
were unscrupulously mixed with human philosophies 



to such an extent as to divest them of their reproach, 
and to make them really void, then men began to claim 
to be his disciples— long after they had utterly repudiated 
his doctrines. 

The Lord's expression— "disciples indeed"— implies 
a distinction between real and merely nominal 
disciples. And since we desire to continue to be his 
real, sincere disciples, let us mark the expressed condition: 
"If ye continue in my word, then are ye my 
disciples indeed." The hypocrisy of merely nominal 
discipleship is an abomination to the Lord. 

It is a blessed thing to take the first step in the 
Christian life— that of belief in and acceptance of 
Christ as our Redeemer and Lord; but the reward of 
this step depends entirely upon our continuance in his 
Word, in the attitude of true disciples. It is not difficult 
to do this, yet the disposition of human pride is 
to wander away from the simplicity of divine truth 
and to seek out new theories and philosophies of our 
own, or to pry into those of other men, who desire to 
be considered wise and great according to this world's 
estimate. 

The reward of continued discipleship is, "Ye shall 
know the truth"— not that we shall be "ever seeking 
and never coming to a knowledge of the truth." (2 Tim. 3:7.) 
Here is the mistake that many make: failing 
to continue in the Word of the Lord, they delve 
into various human philosophies which ignore or pervert 
the Word of the Lord and set up opposing theories. 
There is no promise, to those who seek for truth 
among these, that they shall ever find it. And they 
never do. Divine truth is never found except in the 
divinely appointed channels: and those channels are 
the Lord and the apostles and prophets. To continue 
in the doctrine set forth in their inspired writings, to 
study and meditate upon them, to trust implicitly in 
them, and faithfully to conform our characters to them, 
is what is implied in continuing in the Word of the 
Lord. 

But the idea is entirely compatible with that of 
heeding all the helps which the Lord from time to time 
raises up from among our brethren in the body of 
Christ, as enumerated by the Apostle Paul. (Eph. 4:11-15; 
1 Cor. 12:13,14.) The Lord always has raised 
up, and will to the end raise up, such helps for the 
edification of the body of Christ; but it is the duty of 
every member to prove carefully their teaching by the 
infallible Word. 

If we thus continue in the Word of the Lord, as 
earnest and sincere disciples, we shall indeed "know 
the truth," be "established in the present truth" (the 
truth due), and be "rooted and grounded in the truth;" 
we shall be "firm in the faith," and "able to give a 
reason for the hope that is in us," to "earnestly contend 
for the faith once delivered to the saints," to 
"war a good warfare," to "witness a good confession," 



and firmly to "endure hardship as good soldiers of 
Jesus Christ," even unto the end of our course. We 

R3153 : page 62 

will not come into the knowledge of the truth at a 
single bound; but gradually, step by step, we will be 
led into the truth. Every step will be one of sure and 
certain progress, and each one leading to a higher 
vantage ground for further attainments both in knowledge 
and in its blessed fruits of established character. 

The truth thus acquired, step by step, becomes a 
sanctifying power bringing forth in our lives its blessed 
fruits of righteousness, peace, joy in the holy 
Spirit, love, meekness, faith, patience and every virtue 
and every grace, which time and cultivation will ripen 
to a glorious maturity. 

And not only shall the true disciple thus know 
the truth and be sanctified by it, but the Lord also 
said, "The truth shall make you free." Those who 
have received the truth know by blessed experience 
something of its liberating power. As soon as any 
measure of it is received into a good and honest heart, 
it begins to strike off the fetters of sin, of ignorance 
and superstition, and of fear. It throws its health-restoring 
beams into the darkest recesses of our hearts 
and minds, and thus invigorates the whole being. Sin 
cannot endure its light; and those who continue to live 
in sin when a sufficiency of light has been received to 
manifest its deformity must inevitably lose the light 
because they are unworthy of it. 

Ignorance and superstition must vanish before the 
light of truth. And what a blessed realization it is to 
be thus liberated! Millions are still under this galling 
yoke. Under its delusions they fear and reverence 
some of the basest tools of Satan for their oppression 
and degradation, because they hypocritically claim divine 
appointment; and they have been made to fear God 
as a vengeful tyrant consigning the vast majority of his 
creatures to an eternity of torment. Thank God, we who 
have received the truth have escaped that terrible nightmare, 
and the bondage of Satan over us is broken! 

We are made free, too, from the fear that we now 
see coming upon the whole world, as the great civil 

R3154:page62 

and ecclesiastical systems that have so long ruled the 
world are being terribly shaken. All thinking people 
are in dread of the possible outcome of anarchy and 
terror. And the alarm of all will increase as we near 
the awful crisis toward which we are rapidly hastening, 
and as the danger becomes more and more visible. 
Yet, in the midst of it all, and with the fullest assurance 
of the infallible Word of God of the terrors of 
the conflict through which the world will have to pass 



within a few years, the true disciples of Christ who 
abide in his Word are not afraid, but rejoice, because 
they know that God's object in permitting the storm 
is to clear the moral atmosphere of the world, and that, 
after the storm, there shall come, by his providence, 
an abiding peace. Instructed in the truth, they realize 
the necessities of the situation, and have confidence 
in the divine providence that can make even the wrath 
of man to praise him. 

Blessed promise!— "If ye continue in my Word, 
then are ye my disciples indeed, and ye shall know the 
truth, and the truth shall make you free." Dearly 
beloved, having received this favor from the Lord, 
shall we not continue in it, giving no heed to seducing 
doctrines? And shall we not be faithful to it under all 
circumstances, defending it against every assault, and 
with it bearing its reproach? Let us prove our appreciation 
of it by our loyalty and faithfulness to it. 



R3154:page62 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS ANSWERED. 
IMMORTALITY AND ETERNAL LIFE. 



Question.— We read in Rom. 2:7 that to those 
who by patient perseverance in well doing seek for 
glory, honor and immortality, God will render eternal 
life. Why this declaration, if immortality is a higher 
and more desirable reward than everlasting life? 

Answer.— It is well that we should notice that the 
Scriptures treat matters from a broad standpoint; 
thus, although those known to us as the great company, 
who come through great tribulation (Rev. 7:14), 
are not called to such a position as they will attain, 
but merely get it as of the Lord's grace after they 
have failed in respect to their high calling; and none 
being called to this favor, it is not specifically mentioned 
in the Scriptures; nevertheless, provision has 
been made for them, and the holy spirit seems to have 
guided the utterances of the apostles in such manner 
that their language includes these as well as the overcomers. 
This class will seek the glory, honor and 
immortality; but through negligence to seek with sufficient 
diligence, and along the lines laid down in the 
Lord's Word, they will fail to attain these chiefest 
blessings, which will go to the little flock. Nevertheless, 
as the Scriptures declare, they and all who seek 
it in the appointed way, will gain eternal life, and 
that, after all, is the chiefest and greatest blessing 
and gift held out before us. 

(2) Question.— Again in John 17:2, our Lord, in 



praying for his Church, says, "As thou hast given him 
(Jesus) power over all flesh, that he may give eternal 
life to as many as thou hast given him." Why is 
nothing here said respecting immortality? 

Answer.— For the same reason as given in the 
preceding answer. Furthermore, the context does 
not particularly state that the elect Church only is 
referred to. Rather the fourth verse indicates the 

R3154:page63 

Sin-bearer's larger work in blessing all the families of 
the earth. By the Father's provision he, by his sacrifice, 
obtained eternal life "for all them that obey 
him"— not only for the little flock of the present 
time, but also for the larger flock of the coming age. 
Additionally, we notice that the eternal life granted 
to the gospel Church is only indirectly the gift of our 
Lord Jesus. As immortality was the Father's gift 
to his Son, so it will be the Father's gift, by and 
through the Son, to those who are members of his 
Body— the true Church. Indeed, the heavenly Father 
specially is declared to be the Father, or Life-giver, to 
all who attain to spiritual conditions, either as the 
Christ, the overcoming Church, or as the great company 
who come through great tribulation. The eternal 
life which our Lord Jesus will give more particularly 
on his own account, will be eternal life to the 
world during the Millennial age— the eternal life 
which he gives to us of this gospel age, reckonedly, 
in our justification by faith, the first step preparatory 
to our being begotten of the Spirit by the Father. 

WILFUL SIN IN THE "BODY." 



Question.— In view of the statements in 1 John 3:6-9, 
may we not reason that if we have God's mind 
in us we, therefore, could not sin? and further, that 
it is impossible for us to sin in the body (of Christ)? 
or that if we commit sin it would imply that we were 
no longer members of his body? 

Answer.— We understand the Apostle to teach 
that the holy spirit of God is opposed to sin; that in 
proportion as we have the mind of Christ we will not 
only love righteousness but also hate iniquity. To our 
understanding the Apostle here refers to sin in its 
fullest sense; viz., wilful transgression of the divine 
law. Such a wilful transgression would imply that 
we loved the sin and hated righteousness; and, hence, 
that if we ever had spiritual life we had lost it, and 
become spiritually dead— "plucked up by the roots." 

We are to remember, however, that there are 
other sins not of this kind— not unto death. There 
are sins in which wilfulness is not complete, since 



they are the results of temptation, and sins that are 

the results of our own weaknesses through the Adamic 

fall. Such weaknesses and such stumblings under temptation 

belong to the flesh which is already reckoned 

dead (in the consecrated Christian) and is not reckoned 

of God as belonging to the new creature. Hence, 

such lapses from rectitude are not here designated by 

the Apostle as sins, nor are they so reckoned of God 

who judges us not according to the flesh, but according 

to the spirit. 

However, as we have heretofore shown, there are 
some partial sins— that is to say, they are not full sins 
in the sense of being thoroughly wilful and intentional 
transgressions of the divine Law— they are weaknesses 
of the flesh, and yet perhaps in those weaknesses 
of the flesh the mind failed to be as strong and courageous 
as it should have been, and to some extent 
yielded to the wrong-doing. Since such wrong-doing 
is not approved by the Christian mind after the brunt 
of the trial has passed, it is not counted sin in the full 
sense of the word. It is, however, a misdemeanor, 
for which a measure of stripes may be exacted according 
to the degree of knowledge, and according to the 
opportunities for resisting the wrong course which 
were left unused. From this standpoint it is evident 
that a full, deliberate sin cannot be committed while 
we are in the body (of Christ), possessed of the holy 
spirit and recognized by the Head. To commit such 
a wilful sin would involve our having left the Head, 
abandoned his teachings and service and love, and 
hence, it would involve our having left the body of 
which he is the Head. 

"THE EARTH ABIDETH"-"THE HEAVENS WAX OLD." 



Question.— How are we to harmonize the statements 
of Eccl. 1:4, "The earth abideth forever," with 
Psa. 102:25,26; Heb. 1:10; etc.? 

Answer.— In both cases the word used indicates 
that the physical earth is meant. We harmonize 
them by understanding that the latter Scripture refers 
to the changes taking place as respects earthly conditions. 
This is signified by the illustration given, as a 
vesture (robe, coat). "Thou shalt fold them up, and 
they shall be changed;" as one would re-make or re-arrange 
the drapery of a gown, so the Lord will change, 
re-arrange, etc., the general matters pertaining to the 
earth. One such change took place at the flood, so 
far as we know, and we anticipate that some other 
change will take place in the near future, making the 
earth more fit than at present for the Millennial Kingdom 
conditions. Additionally, we are to remember 
that the physical earth is used as the basis of a symbol, 
and that the symbolical earth refers not to the 



land, but to the people, the order of society, etc. In 
this view also we expect a great transformation, the 
turning upside down, or changing all round, by which 
the present social order will be transformed into a social 
order more acceptable to God during the Millennial 
age. The time of this change is near at hand, 
and when the present symbolical earth— society— shall 
melt like wax from the fervent heat of strife and anarchy, 
the symbolical heavens, or ecclesiastical powers, 
will also take fire, and pass away with a great noise, 
commotion, disturbance— both to be superseded by 
the new heavens and new earth condition (symbolical), 
the Church, in glory, honor and power, and mankind 
under new social conditions. 



R3151 : page 64 

A PILGRIM VISIT TO JAMAICA. 



Finding that the truth has been making good progress 
in Jamaica, so that at 14 places there are from 3 to 17 subscribers 
to ZION'S WATCH TOWER each, we are sending 
Brother J. A. Browne (colored), who is well educated and 
also well versed in the truth, to strengthen and encourage 
them. He will land at Port Antonio, and all the little groups 
desiring his assistance should address him there at once. 
Mark letters, "General Delivery— Hold until called for." 
He will then arrange dates and send out notifications. 

His expenses will all be defrayed by our Society— except 
that those who can do so may have the pleasure and 
privilege of entertaining him en route. No collections. 



page 65 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIV. MARCH 1, 1903. No. 5 



CONTENTS. 

God's Supervision of His Saints 67 

Reformation Costing Sacrifice 72 

The Riot at Ephesus 75 

The Oneness of the Divine Family 77 

Public Ministries of the Truth 80 

Special Items: 

The Memorial Supper 66 

The Emphatic Diaglott 66 

"Strong's Concordance" 66 

page 66 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THE MEMORIAL SUPPER. 



The date of the celebration this year will be Friday evening 
April 10th— after 6 o'clock. We mention the date thus 
early for the benefit of the brethren afar off. 

THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT. 



Please notice again the new terms mentioned in our issue 
of Dec. 15, '02. The price of the book in cloth remains the 
same, but we give a year's subscription to the WATCH TOWER 
with it without extra charge. This is the same identical book 
which the publishers have been selling for 20 years at $4 each. 
Indeed, we have none of our own edition yet: we had about 
500 copies on hand when the plates were purchased and presented 
to us. You will see, then, why we cannot deviate from 
the liberal terms made;— the order for the Diaglott must always 
be accompanied by $1.50, whether you accept the offer 
of TOWER subscription free or not. 

STRONG'S EXHAUSTIVE CONCORDANCE." 



We fear we did this valuable work an injustice in describing 
it as inferior to "Young's Analytical Concordance." Use 
of a copy during the past year has greatly attached us to it. 
We can supply them at the following established prices (and 
give 3 cloth vols, of DAWN postpaid as a premium): In cloth 
binding, $6; in half leather binding, $8, express prepaid. 



R3155 : page 67 

GOD'S SUPERVISION OF HIS SAINTS. 

"The steps of a good man are ordered of the Lord, and he delighteth 
in his way. Though he stumble, he shall not be utterly cast down: 
for the Lord upholdeth him with his hand."— Psalm 37:23,24. 

CALVINISM has its good features as well as its 

bad ones. Its institution meant the reaction of 

noble Christian minds against a false doctrine. 

The fact that these reactionists went to an extreme 

should not condemn them utterly, nor nullify the good 

features of their teachings. It is customary for the 

pendulum of thought to swing from one extreme to another, 

passing the central point of absolute truth. Indeed, 

we have every reason to believe that this is a part 

of the Adversary's method in blinding the minds of those 

who are seeking truth. He would lead as far away 

from absolute truth as possible, either in one direction 

or the other in every reaction or reform; therefore, he 

seems to have taken an interest to the extent of helping 

the reformers to an opposite extreme. 

During the "dark ages" the central thought of 
our text was lost sight of— the thought of God's care 
for each and for all of his consecrated people. The 
thought inculcated and generally held was to the contrary 
of this; viz., that the average man, even though 
a consecrated believer, is too insignificant for divine 
attention; that God had given over to the care of the 



Pope and the clergy the souls of his people. To so 
great an extent did this teaching prevail that the people 
subject thereto did not think of Jehovah as their shepherd; 
nor even of Jesus as his appointed representative 
shepherd; and did not think of approaching these in 
prayer, nor of having their divine oversight and direction 
in their affairs. On the contrary, if they had sins 
to be repented of, they were to go to the priest, make 
confession, and secure absolution. Had they requests 
to make, they were to ask the priest; or in prayer to 
approach some dead saint, requesting his mediation with 
some of the dead apostles or with Mary, the mother of 
Jesus, that they, in turn, might mediate with the Son 
Jesus, that he, in turn, might mediate with the Father, 
and that thus they might be brought to the attention 
of Jehovah and possibly get some fragmentary blessing 
as a crumb from the table. 

The reaction of Reformation times was against 
all this sort of thing, and the central teaching of Calvinism 
was that God has a direct interest in all those 
who, through the merit of Jesus, become his children 
through faith and consecration. It is difficult to estimate 
how great has been the blessing that has come 
to the Lord's people through the revival of this doctrine 
of the primitive Church. We must ever feel 
grateful to John Calvin and his coadjutors for the service 
they rendered to the household of faith in this 
particular,— even though we must, at the same time, 
thoroughly repudiate that feature of their teachings 
which passed to the extreme of declaring that as God 
had foreknown an elect Church, the special and happy 
object of his care during this Gospel age, and to be 
exalted ultimately to the heavenly state, he had, on 
the other hand, predetermined the torture of all the 
remainder of the race, and had made ample provision 
therefor. God permitted (we may even say, used) 
Calvin and his associates in the presentation of an important 
truth, while at the same time he permitted 
them to attach to it this awful, blasphemous, God-dishonoring 
teaching respecting the non-elect. We 
thank God that, in his providence, we live in the time 
when it is due that his gracious purposes toward the 
non-elect should be clearly seen, and his character 
freed from the evil aspersions of such a theory. 

R3155 : page 68 

Papacy's conception of the insignificance of man, 
even though a good man in the Lord's sight, is much 
nearer to the view of the natural, worldly man, than 
is the thought that all the steps of a good man are 
ordered of the Lord. The natural man finds it difficult 
to believe in a God at all; as he looks about the 
universe his first thought of its immensity and intricacies, 
and of the greatness of the one who created all 
these things is speedily offset by the suggestion that 



possibly there is no God;— possibly there are "laws 
of nature" which form themselves and which operate 
themselves, and under which all things are and shall 
ever be. He is encouraged in this line of doubt by 
the views of some, known as Scientists, Evolutionists 
and Higher Critics. Though none of these have the 
temerity to declare point-blank that there is no God 
but nature, they, almost without exception, show 
that this is the leaning of their minds, the tendency 
of their thought. They have not yet discovered any 
form of life which has not in some sense or degree 
been transmitted from some other living thing. They 
are looking for this, however— earnestly looking for it 
and expecting it, and quite ready, if they can find it, 
to claim that all life, all being, is the result of a law 
of evolution, and needed no interference by a Creator, 
even at the beginning. From this standpoint, and 
especially backed up by the high authorities of our 
day, scientific and religious, the natural man feels 
skeptical about a God at all, and concludes that if 
there is a God he is so concerned and occupied in his 
own personal affairs and in the affairs of other beings 
in other worlds, that the hundreds of millions upon this 
planet are in his sight and estimation but as so many 
mites would be in man's estimation. These are little 
inclined to think that all the steps of a good man are 
ordered of the Lord. 

As Calvin's day was a time of reaction from a 
wrong thought toward a right one in this particular, 
so, today marks another crisis. We are living in the 
time of reaction against the right thought on this subject, 
and in favor of the wrong thought. In early 
times in all the theological seminaries, as well as in 
the great colleges and universities of Christendom, the 
teachings were distinctly adverse to the sentiment of 
our text, and at very most allow that mankind as a 
whole is possibly under some kind of divine supervision 
and care; though the sentiment seems to be that 
God knows and cares much less for the poor groaning 
creation than did its theologians, publicists and 
reformers. 

There is a reason for all this, to be sure. The 
wheels in the divine plan are so large, and the hands 
on the divine clock move so slowly that the natural 
man perceives no movement— fails to realize that God 
is working all things according to the counsel of his 
own will. Lacking the instruction of the divine Word, 
worldly wisdom sees not the purpose of the permission 
of "the present evil world;" nor how the lessons and 
experiences which it is giving to all mankind will 
eventually work out a great blessing, as part of man's 
needed instruction; to be followed by his instruction 
in righteousness in the Millennial age, soon to be ushered 
in. Worldly wisdom sees not the object for which 
the Church is now called out from amongst the world 
and shaped and fitted and polished, by trials and difficulties 



and contact with evil, for the glorious work of 

the future,— of blessing all the families of the earth. 

And not seeing these things,— not seeing the object of 

the permission of evil, not seeing why God has delayed 

the binding of Satan, the overthrow of his power 

and the release of the bonds of superstition and blindness 

with which he has enslaved the masses, it concludes 

that God is indifferent, and that all the provisions 

and arrangements for social uplift depend upon 

the wisdom and the benevolence of men. 

How thankful should be our hearts, as we realize 
the divine favor which has rescued us from this blindness 
which is upon the world, and particularly upon 
the great and worldly-wise of Christendom! The 
knowledge granted us of the plan of the ages saves 
us, not only from the bondage of priestcraft and superstition 
of the "dark ages," but it saves us also from 
the evolutionary unbelief which is now sweeping over 
Christendom, and robbing all who have not the light 
of the present truth of their joy in the Lord, their 
peace, their confidence, their trust in him. 

We thank God for the ability to grasp this blessed 
promise of our text (and scores of others of similar 
import) and to rejoice in them, strong in the Lord and 
in the power of his might; saying, "If God be for us 
who can be against us [to any avail]?" If God so 
loved us while we were yet sinners, much more does 
he love us now that we are his people. (Rom. 5:8,9.) 
He who has begun a good work in us is both able and 
willing to complete it unto the day of Jesus Christ. 
(Phil. 1:6.) Since we are the Lord's, and have these 
various assurances of his Word, "We know that all 
things work together for good to them that love God; 
to them who are the called [ones] according to his 
purpose."— Rom. 8:28. 

Let us not, however, apply our text carelessly; 
let us note carefully that it does not apply to all mankind, 
but to the "good." The thought here is evidently 
in harmony with the statements elsewhere, to 
the effect that God's care is over the righteous, as when 
we read, "The Lord knoweth the way of the righteous, 
but the way of the ungodly shall perish." (Psa. 1:6.) 
"The Lord knoweth them that are his." (2 Tim. 2:19.) 

R3155 : page 69 

Looking about us in the world we inquire: 
Who, then, are the righteous? who are so 
good as to be properly called God's people? Hearkening 
for direction from the Word of the Lord we hear 
the answer, "There is none good, save one, that is 
God;" and, "There is none righteous, no, not one." 
These testimonies of the Word fully correspond to our 
own findings; for in ourselves, as well as in others, 
we find imperfection,— unrighteousness. But how 
can these testimonies of the Scripture be reconciled? 



—that there are none righteous, none good of all the 
Adamic race, and yet that God declares that all the steps 
of a good man, all the ways of the righteous, are under 
his supervision? We answer that the Scriptures 
explain how these statements are in full accord; that 
there is a class of people in the world who, at one time, 

R3156 : page 69 

were children of wrath even as others, but who have 
been reconciled to God through the death of his Son, 
their ransomer. These have come into accord with 
God in the spirit of their minds, in their hearts;— 
their wills are in accord with the divine will. Their 
deficiencies, which are still known to themselves, and 
some of them sadly apparent to their neighbors also, 
are not deficiencies of the will, of the heart, of the 
intention; and the terms of the New Covenant being 
applied to these in advance of the world, their blemishes 
are reckoned as covered in and by the merit of 
their Redeemer's sacrifice. Thus God declares that he 
can be just, and yet be the justifier of him that believeth 
in Jesus— of him who trusts in Jesus, and 
through Jesus, accepts forgiveness of sins and full 
reconciliation to God's will, so that he desires to sin 
no longer. These are the "righteous"; these are 
"his"; these are the "good" of our text. Oh, blessed 
class! Oh, happy people! A peculiar people, 
prospectively a Royal Priesthood unto God— the 
"elect" Church. 

If we call attention to the fact that none others 
than these righteous, good people are under the divine 
supervision, and guaranteed that all things shall 
work for their good, our object is not to discourage 
others; but to rightly inform them of their position, 
and to remove from their minds any false hopes 
and delusions they may have been entertaining— to 
the intent that by proper acceptance of God's favor 
in the ransom, and a full consecration to him, they 
may at once attain to this position of reconciliation, 
and relationship of sonship, and become heirs of this 
and all similar promises. 

Who has not noticed that people who would not 
admit that they are God's children, who are not believers 
in the redemption, and not consecrated to the 
Lord, will in times of trouble go to the Lord in prayer, 
and take from his Word and apply to themselves such 
promises as this of our text? Yet this is all wrong 
if they are still "children of wrath." And if they have 
seen the open doorway by which they might approach 
God and attain to membership in his family, and if they 
have disdained these and neglected them, what effrontery 
it is on their part to approach the Lord in time of trouble! 
and how great is their credulity when they delude 
themselves into thinking that any of these promises 
would be applicable to them! We are not seeking to 



hinder any from coming to the Lord in a proper manner 
in their seasons of distress; but we are wishing to 
be understood that sorrow, even sorrow for sins, is 
not repentance; and that sorrow and trouble do not 
constitute doors of access to divine favor, and that 
then, as ever, no man cometh unto the Father but by 
the Son— "through faith in his blood." We would 
encourage any who, passing through trying experiences, 
and feeling the need of a Savior and a great 
one, come to God in faith and in consecration, and 
thus put themselves under his protecting care; but 
even then we would advise them that it had been better 
had they come to the Lord before the trouble; 
—better had they calmly, deliberately, dispassionately, 
thought over his goodness and greatness, and their 
own insufficiency and need, and the reasonableness of 
their consecration and the privilege of accepting God's 
favor in Christ, and coming thus under his exceeding 
great and precious promises to them that love him. 

Some may here inquire: What constitutes justifying 
faith? We answer: It is a faith in God, based 
upon and in harmony with all that he has revealed. 
Abraham believed God and was justified by his faith; 
yet his faith was far less comprehensive than the faith 
which justifies God's people today; because, in the 
meantime, God has unfolded and expanded his revelation. 
Abraham's faith took in all that God had 
promised; viz., the blessing of the whole world of 
mankind through his posterity; and his faith evidently 
grasped the thought that this implied a resurrection 
of the dead, not one which would concern his posterity 
only, but which would embrace also the families 
of the earth which had already passed into death. He 
could not do more than believe this, and in some respects 
it was a severer test of faith than is our larger 
faith of today. For he could not see how God could 
be just and yet be the justifier of him who believeth 
in Jesus; while we, standing on this side of the great 
ransom sacrifice, can see the modus operandi. Justifying 
faith today, however, must believe the record 
which God has given us of his Son. It is not sufficient 
that we recognize Jesus as one of the noble men 
of our race, nor even that we should recognize him 
as the chiefest member of it. God's revelation is more 
than this, and, hence, our faith must be more. We 

R3156 : page 70 

must grasp by faith that he was "holy, harmless, undefiled 
and separate" from the sinner race;— that he 
left the glory which he had with the Father, and took 
the place and condition of the first perfect man, in 
order that he might redeem him and all of his race 
which had come under his condemnation to death. 
We must believe further, that our Lord Jesus gave 
himself a ransom for all. We must believe, further, 



that this was a satisfactory ransom, or purchase price 
for the world— that it sufficed as an offset for our sins, 
and for the sins of the whole world. We must believe 
that the Father evidenced or testified to this perfect 
obedience, in that he raised him from the dead; 
that he ascended up on high, appearing in the presence 
of God on our behalf, making mediation for our 
iniquities, through the merit of his sacrifice; and that 
we are accepted in the Beloved, whom God has highly 
exalted, and given a name, authority and power above 
every name; and that he is Lord of all; we must accept 
him as our Lord, our Master, and must, to the 
extent of our ability, seek to walk in his ways— not 
after the flesh, but after the spirit. 

But after we have attained this position, and after 
the promise of our text, and all like promises, are 
ours, it requires time and a continual application of 
faith, in order to rightly appreciate God's promises, 
and to appropriate them to ourselves; and this is 
Scripturally called "growing in grace and knowledge." 
We grow in knowledge as we take note of the promises 
of God, and by faith apply them to ourselves, 
and seek to discern in our lives the fulfilment of those 
promises; we grow in grace simultaneously, for unless 
each item of knowledge be received into a good and 
honest heart, and bring forth its measure of obedience 
and righteousness (grace) we will not be prepared for 
the next step of knowledge, and would be thus stopped, 
or possibly turned back. And as a loss of knowledge 
would mean a measurable loss of grace, so also a loss 
of grace would mean a corresponding loss of knowledge; 
—going into darkness, the promises of the Lord's 
Word becoming more and more dim and obscured, in 
proportion as our goodness or grace would be lost in 
worldliness or sin. 

The Christian, as a disciple of the Lord, as a pupil 
in the school of Christ, is being fitted for a place 
in the Millennial Kingdom— for a share in its glory, 
honor and immortality. It is required of such pupils 
that they shall give diligence to learn to appropriate 
the instructions of their teacher, else they will not be 
prepared for the glorious things to which they are 
called— they will fail to make their calling and their election 
sure. Hence, we see the necessity for the frequent 
admonitions of the Scripture, that the Lord's people 
shall be awake;— not of those who slumber; not of 
those who are idle; not of those who are overcharged 
with the cares of this life; but that they be fervent in 
spirit, serving the Lord. Their service toward the 
Lord is primarily the bringing of themselves into as 
close harmony with the Lord's will, and into as 
close likeness to the divine pattern as possible; and 
secondly, it is that by precept and example they may 
help others of the called ones in the same narrow way. 

There is danger that some may misunderstand the 
meaning of our text, and suppose it to teach that 



every incident in the life of God's people is what and 
as he intended it to be;— that God arbitrarily interferes 
in the affairs of his people, sets aside their free 
agency, and forces them to take this step or the other 
as mere machines. This is a serious mistake. No 
such thought is contained in the words. God has 
shown us his good pleasure in such matters; for, although 
he could have made us like wagons or wheelbarrows, 
to be pulled or pushed regardless of any 
ambition of our own, he did not so make us, and 
seeketh not such to be his children— the recipients of 
his favors. On the contrary, he made man a free 
moral agent— in this respect a copy of his Creator, 
free to will as he may please. Although we are not 
always free to do as we may please, we are always 
free to will as we may please, and, as already seen, 
in the present time the Lord is dealing with his 
people according to their wills. And if God respects 
the will of the natural man, much more would he respect 
the will of the new creature in Christ Jesus, begotten 
of the holy spirit. 

Our text presupposes that in the class described 
the human will has been transformed;— that the divine 
will has been accepted as instead of the human; and 
that the child of God is seeking to walk in the ways 
of righteousness, in which he has already started; and 
the proper thought to be gathered is that thus seeking 
to walk in the Lord's ways, God will not permit his 
imperfections of judgment to work him any injury, 
but will supervise his affairs; will overrule so that 
every step he may take, although it be taken of his 
own will, his own volition— his consecrated will, however 
—shall be overruled for his good; for his development 
as a new creature in Christ. If he shall err 
in judgment, and bring upon himself the consequences 
of his error, the Lord's wisdom and power are such 
that he can fulfil all the provisions of this promise, 
and make even his blunders and weaknesses to so react 
as to strengthen his character and establish him in 
righteousness, developing in him by these and other 
experiences the fruits and graces of the spirit, which 
will eventually fit and prepare him for joint-heirship 
in the Kingdom. 

Another Scripture gives us a suggestion respecting 

R3157 : page 71 

our part in the ordering of our steps. It represents 

the Lord's people as praying, in harmony with 

the Lord's provision, saying, "Order my steps in thy 

Word; and let not any iniquity have dominion over 

me." (Psa. 119:133.) This is the proper course for 

the Lord's people; to seek to walk carefully, circumspectly; 

to take heed to the instructions of the Lord's 

Word, so that thus their mistakes, their blunders, 

may be fewer and fewer, as they grow in grace and 



grow in knowledge of the Lord. But meantime, in 
connection with all of the weaknesses and imperfections 
incident to our imperfect bodies, we all have 
need of special comfort and consolation which the 
Lord has provided us in our text. It is the source of 
weakness in many of the Lord's people that they do 
not properly grasp by faith this and similar promises; 
for only in proportion as they have this faith and 
grasp these promises can they be buoyed up by 
this, and be encouraged to press along the line for the 
mark. This means faith toward God, and we readily 
admit that the "babes" in Christ cannot exercise as 
much faith in respect to these promises and experiences 
as can those who are further advanced; and yet 
we see continually that it is not years alone that tell 
in Christian development; that the growth of the 
Christian in grace and knowledge depends chiefly 
upon his faith, his love, his zeal. 

"According to thy Word,"— should not be misunderstood 
to mean that God orders the affairs of his 
people, only in the way of commands and advice given 
them in his Word. Ah! had this been true, how 
many now rejoicing in the light of the Lord's favor 
might have become outcasts long ago! How many 
have failed to take heed to the directions of the Word, 
whose steps, nevertheless, the Lord has ordered or 
directed;— according to his Word;— according to his 
promise! When the wrong path was taken, and the 
Word neglected, and the privileges of Christian brotherhood 
neglected, and thus the way made ready for a 
complete separation from the Lord and the truth,— 
then, perhaps, the Lord ordered the way, according 
to his Word, in sending disappointments, financial 
or social, or sickness of body corresponding to the 
sickness of the heart;— and thus, perhaps, he brought 
back his wandering sheep, "according to his Word," 
making experiences and trials work out for his highest 
good. 

Thus, in his Word the Lord promises the crown 
of life to the zealous soldiers of the cross, and assures 
us that the careless shall under divine providence 
have their steps so ordered that they shall receive 
"stripes," chastisements, to awaken and rescue them; 
—so that they may be "saved so as by fire," and come 
up through great tribulation,— even after they have 
failed to gain the "abundant entrance" of the Kingdom 
class. Let us rejoice in thus having our way 
committed to the Lord; but let us take earnest heed 
to our own steps also, that we may walk in the footsteps 
of our Master in the narrow way, and thus also 
inherit with him the glories promised. 

Likewise we should expect the Lord's guidance 
of our temporal affairs and particularly in respect to 
our service of the truth. We should not only give heed 
to the Word and its spirit, but additionally we should 
keep watch for the leadings of divine grace;— opening 



or closing doors of opportunity, and thus leading us, 
if faithful and obedient, not only into all truth, but 
also into fuller liberties and opportunities for serving 
it to others. 

We must not overlook the latter part of our text 
—the assurance that though the child of God may 
stumble at times in the way, these will never mean to 
him an utter fall, because his hand is still held by the 
Lord! What a comforting thought is here! How 
well calculated it is to deliver the Lord's people from 
utter despondency in respect to themselves and each 
other! The all-important thoughts to be kept in 
mind are, Am I still the Lord's? Am I still trusting 
in the precious blood? Am I still consecrated to the 
Lord and his righteous way? If these can be answered 
in the affirmative we can still realize that we 
are God's children, and that our hands are still in his; 
that the spirit of begetting and adoption, which began 
in us the new life, has not perished; and that it is 
God's will that we should recover ourselves as quickly 
as possible from any stumbling, and looking well at 
the difficulties and trials which led us into it, we should 
fortify our characters against those difficulties as respects 
the future, and thus go on really stronger, because 
of our difficulties, and yet all the while realizing 
that our recovery from the difficulty was not of our 
own strength, but because of our trust in the arm of 
the Lord, to which we are still holding. 

The Scriptures which speak of the natural 
branches of the olive tree, and also the ingrafted 
branches of the wild olive, continuing to be branches 
only so long as they continue in the relationship of 
faith (Rom. 11:17-21), are not to be ignored; neither 
should we forget our Lord's words, when likening 
his followers to the branches in a vine; saying, "I am 
the Vine; ye are the Branches;" he, nevertheless, 
pointed out that "every branch in me" that bears not 
fruit, the Father, the husbandman, taketh it away— 
it becomes refuse, never to be re-ingrafted but 
destroyed. 

These and other Scriptures most emphatically 
teach the possibility, not of our stumbling as of accident, 
and being separated from the Lord, but of the 

R3157 : page 72 

possibility of our being separated from him through 
wilful disobedience and neglect of his Word and of the 
opportunities he has afforded us. He will not let us 
go so long as we are striving to walk in his way; but 
will order our steps so that they shall bring to us the 
best blessing possible, and will recover us and help us 
in our stumblings, because we are seeking and delighting 
to walk in his way. But if we lose this spirit, 
and become of a contrary one, if we fight against God, 
—if we resist the leadings and guidance which he has 



provided in his Word and by his spirit, and if we seek 
to walk contrary to him, he will also walk contrary 
to us, and he will let go our hand; our stumbling 
then would mean our fall— we would be utterly 
cast down, and that beyond recovery, in the Second 
Death. 

We do not, however, address those who are wilfully 
resisting the Lord and seeking to walk after the 
flesh and not after the spirit. We address those who 
are seeking the old paths; seeking to walk in the 
footsteps of Jesus; seeking to know and to do the 
Father's will, and whose discouragements are the 
result, not of wilful wrong, but of the weaknesses of 
the flesh against which they are continually striving. 
These the Lord would have us encourage, and draw to 
their attention the precious promises of his Word, and 
his assurances that "as a father pitieth his children, 
so the Lord pitieth them that reverence him." 



R3157 : page 72 

REFORMATION COSTING SACRIFICE. 

-ACTS 19:11-20.~MARCH8.~ 

"The name of the Lord Jesus was magnified." 

EPHESUS was in many respects the scene of the 

Apostle Paul's most successful work. He 

spent about three years there altogether, accompanied 

by Timothy, Erastus, Titus and, possibly, 

others. The influence of his work, either directly or 

indirectly, extended to other cities round about. It is 

supposed that it was during this stay at Ephesus that 

congregations were started in the nearby places, mentioned 

in Revelation as "the seven churches of Asia" 

(Minor). Our last lesson showed the Apostle beginning 

his work at Ephesus in the synagogue. He continued 

to present the truth until opposition to it became 

quite marked, and certain of the Jewish adherents began 

to speak evil of the teachings and of the believers. 

Then the Apostle and those who believed, unwilling to 

continue a condition of strife, discontinued their attendance 

at the synagogue, and began a separate meeting, 

apparently in a rented public hall, called "The 

School of Tyrannus," because, according to the custom 

of that time, it was used by him for this purpose in the 

forenoons. 

The Apostle probably labored at his trade during 
the forenoon, and daily, during the afternoon, preached 
the message to such as had hearing ears, not only in 
the public hall, but also by visiting those whom he had 
reason to expect would be amenable to the gospel. We 
are supposing a continuance of his usual manner of life, 



described in his first letter to the Thessalonians (2:9), 

"Ye remember our labor and toil, working day and 

night." The Apostle did not belong to a paid ministry. 

He had a message to deliver, which he appreciated 

so highly that he was glad of an opportunity to 

spend his life in its promulgation— using for other 

purposes only so much of time and energy as were necessary 

to procure life's necessities,— waiting for the 

great reward which the Lord has promised to all faithful 

servants of his cause. The Lord's ambassadors 

today can take no better pattern than his, if seeking 

with him divine favor now, and glory, honor and 

immortality by and by. 

Satan's arts, employed in all parts of the world 
from the earliest dawn of history, have been in the 
nature of wonder-workings, magic, etc. The Scriptures 
call our attention particularly to the magicians of 
Egypt, to the soothsayers of Babylon, and in this 
lesson show us that the same practises, the same 

R3158 : page 72 

wily arts of the Adversary, were general throughout 
the Roman Empire, and especially in the wealthy 
city of Ephesus. The Lord performed through the 
Apostle Paul, while at Ephesus, many marvelous 
healings of the sick, and other miracles, as well as 
the casting out of the evil spirits referred to in 
vss. 11 and 12,— doubtless as an offset to the blinding 
influence of witchcraft, magic, black art, etc. We may 
reason that the manifestation of divine power here was 
necessary to the establishment of the Church, and to 
the general influence of the gospel in that region— as 
an offset to the blinding influences of Satan's agents 
and power. The Ephesians were evidently so bound 
by these arts of the Adversary that an exhibition of him 
as the real father of them was almost indispensable. 
Besides, the miracles wrought by Paul served as an 
endorsement of him as an apostle; an endorsement of 
his message of Jesus, the Redeemer; of a resurrection 
as a means of rescue from death, the wages of sin; of 
a Millennial Kingdom as the means, or channel through 
which that rescue would come; and of the calling out 
of the Church as the body of Christ, to constitute that 
Kingdom, when, in due time, complete and glorified. 
Perceiving the Apostle's power to be greater than 

R3158 : page 73 

their own, certain of the magicians essayed to use the 
name of Jesus as a charm or magic word, just as they 
were in the habit of using other magic words in their 
incantations. The effort of some of these, sons of one of 
the principal priests, resulted disastrously to them, and 
beneficially to many others. Addressing the one possessed 
of an evil spirit, they demanded that the evil 



spirit leave the vexed one, "in the name of Jesus 

whom Paul preacheth," as distinguished from others 

of the same name, for the name was at that time a common 

one. The demon not only did not obey the command, 

but using the possessed one, and exercising 

through him demoniacal strength, the seven men were 

wounded and put to flight, losing, at least, their outer 

garments. 

This matter becoming widely known, was a convincing 
argument to those who had long had confidence 
in such wonder-workers, and proved to them that the 
Apostle's teachings were correct— that the black arts 
were of Satan, while the Apostle's miracles were of 
divine power. The resulting increase of interest in the 
truth shows us clearly that the people were previously 
duped and unable to discern the true message of God 
from the spurious teachings of Satan. This reminds 
us of the Apostle's words, "The god of this world hath 
blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest the 
light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image 
of God, should shine unto them." (2 Cor. 4:4.) We 
may safely conclude that the same general principle 
prevails throughout the whole heathen world today, 
and to a considerable extent, also, amongst Christian 
people— that the alienation of many, and their opposition 
to God and his message through the truth are 
probably to be accredited more to ignorance than to 
evil preferences. How blessed is the assurance that 
ere long the Lord's power shall be exercised not only a 
little, as in the case under consideration at Ephesus, 
but universally, to the complete binding of Satan that 
he may deceive the nations no more until the thousand 
years of Christ's reign have accomplished their designed 
work of opening all the blind eyes, and permitting all 
who will to come back into full fellowship with God. 
-Rev. 20:2,3. 

The statement of vs. 18 is capable of two constructions: 
we might consider it as referring to those who 
practised magic, and understand it to signify that they 
confessed certain deceptions connected with their practises, 
and showed their deeds,— how certain tricks had 
been performed; or, (and we think preferably) the 
words may be understood to mean that many believers 
confessed the truth, and publicly showed it in the reform 
of their conduct. The latter view is supported by 
the statement of vs. 19, which seemingly refers to the 
whole number of believers, declaring that "not a few of 
them that practised curious arts brought their books 
together, and burned them in the sight of all."— R.V. 

Satan's method of enslaving mankind seems to 
have been, from the first, largely through superstition. 
Gross superstition and darkness still dominate the 
great mass of mankind, and even where the blessed 
light of the gospel lamp has gone, reproving the darkness, 
and setting forth the true way of life and blessing, 
the Adversary has been enabled to follow, and 



more or less to attach superstitious rites and ceremonies, 
to the gross delusion of many known as civilized. 
We cannot doubt that the Adversary is connected with 
many performances done in the name of Christian 
religion and with many of the miracles wrought by 
"holy nails," "bones," etc., etc., and is generally effective 
in holding the deluded ones back from the study 
of the Lord's Word, and an understanding of the great 
plan of salvation therein so clearly set forth. 

The readiness of the Adversary to use now any 
and every means available to hinder the light of truth, 
or to turn aside those who have already discerned it, is 
very manifest. Almost without exception, all the various 
persons and systems performing the "many wonderful 
works" (Matt. 7:22) of today, directly or indirectly 
antagonize the truth;— the ransom itself, the 
substitution of the life of our Redeemer for the life of 
the world, is generally ignored, if not totally denied by 
them. We are inclined to think that much of the 
mind-healing and hypnotism, coming rapidly into popularity, 
are merely adaptations of our old enemy to the 
new conditions of our day. 

We have every reason to believe that the Adversary 
would be willing to use the black arts today, as in 
times past, in proportion as conditions would be favorable; 
and incantation, by repeating certain seemingly 
meaningless words, is still practised by some; also the 
making of peculiar stews and broths, which are supposed 
to have magical powers, affecting love, hatred, 
etc., and the wearing of charms, the making of the 
sign of the cross in the presence of danger, etc., to 
protect from evil. 

Such mispractises and misbeliefs assuredly have the 
effect of holding their victims in the bonds of superstition, 
hindering them from the proper exercise of the true 
faith in the almighty power of God, by filling their 
minds with errors and superstitions. Even brethren 
who have received present truth are not exempt from 
the Adversary's besetments along this line. A number 
have written us regarding their deliverance from the 
snares of spiritism, and one came very nearly being 
entangled in the black art. He wrote us in substance, 
thus:— 

"Dear Brother Russell:— You will rejoice with me, I 
am sure, that our heavenly Father has been pleased to give 

R3158 : page 74 

me a special and remarkable gift of healing in connection 
with one disease— every case that I have treated since I 
received the gift has resulted in a cure. It requires but a 
few moments in each case, the repeating of a few words. I 
make no charge for the service, as I am glad of the privilege 
of doing good in any manner to my 
fellow-creatures." 
We responded to this, that were glad to know of 



the Lord using any of his people in any manner; nevertheless, 
we felt curious to know what were the words 
used in this simple and effectual operation, and, hence, 
inquired for the formula. The reply came that the 
formula of words, etc., necessary to the performance of 
the cure could not be communicated from one man to 
another, but only from a woman to a man, and from a 
man to a woman— a peculiar restriction, to say the 
least, to apply to anything good. Upon giving the 
name of a lady to whom the formula could be sent, 
we received it, and found that it was simply magic,— 
the using of a few meaningless words in connection with 
apiece of string. 

We wrote the brother at once, that we believed the 
cures he had been performing were not of the Lord, but 
of the evil One, and advised that he discontinue them. 
He responded, thanking us, and assuring us that it had 
never occurred to him that a work of healing could be 
accomplished by any other than divine power, but that 
in the light of our suggestions he saw to the contrary, 
and would use it no more. However, the fame of his 
cures already performed brought him many applications 
from others in the same distress, who were indignant 
when he refused to go to their relief for either love 
or money; and upon his explaining that he believed 
the power he had used was of Satan they declared that 
they did not care, so long as the relief could be had. 
To what lengths the Adversary may carry his delusions 
in this day and by uptodate methods, we cannot surely 
know; but our expectation certainly is that his delusions 
will be numerous, and of the kind that would 
"deceive, if it were possible, the very elect," as our 
Lord foretold. 

The sincerity of some of the converts at Ephesus 
was manifested by the public burning of the books in 
which were recorded the various magic words, and receipts, 
by which incantations could be made, affecting 
and counteracting various of the ills of life. All books 
at that time were precious, as they were made of skins 
instead of paper, and pen-printed instead of printed by 
type; but these books were specially high-priced because 
each possessor of a copy was interested in restricting 
the information and, hence, unwilling to permit 
the copying of his book. Viewed from this standpoint, 
the number of books would not necessarily be very 
great to amount to the considerable figure specified 
—50,000 pieces of silver— about $8,500, a piece of 
silver representing about 17 cents of our money. But, 
if we remember that each piece of silver represented a 
day's wages, it might be considered equivalent to at 
least $1, in our day, and thus the total value of the 
books would be $50,000. 

This considerable sum was freely sacrificed to the 
Lord and to the truth;— not that the Lord accepts as 
sacrifices any evil thing, such as those books were, but 



R3159 : page 74 

that the destruction of the books, representing a considerable 

value, represented also a sacrificing condition 

of heart. The books had a commercial value, and 

could have been sent to some other city and sold for a 

large sum, but this would have been spreading the 

evil which they were recognized as representing, and 

we note with pleasure that they who gave up the books 

were unwilling to sell them, and thus risk injuring 

others, nor did the Apostle suggest that the books might 

be sold and the money turned into useful channels in 

the service of the gospel. The Lord's people are never 

to do evil that good may follow. We are reminded of 

a liquor dealer, who pursued a different course;— concluding 

that his business was dishonoring to the Lord's 

cause and injurious to his fellowmen, he determined to 

abandon it; but instead of destroying the liquor by 

emptying it into the sewers, he sold it. We may be 

sure that he failed to get the great blessing which evidently 

came upon the more proper disposal of the evil 

things, narrated in this lesson. 

The Lord is not poor; all the gold and silver are 
his, and the cattle upon a thousand hills. It is not 
necessary, therefore, to his cause that we shall put into 
it anything that in any sense or degree represents evil. 
In our opinion those who burned the books on "black 
art" were not only more blessed themselves, but they 
more honored the Lord and more advanced his cause, 
by such heroic treatment, than if they had sold the 
books and put the money into the treasury of the Lord. 
Everything throughout the Scriptures seems to teach 
that the Lord specially loves and appreciates those who 
are thorough-going, not only in their zeal for righteousness 
and truth, but also in their opposition to that 
which is unrighteous and erroneous. 

We believe that the same principle applies to the 
sale of books which inculcate Satan's lies, and we 
recommend that if the Lord's people have books of this 
kind, black with false doctrines, misrepresenting the 
divine character and plan, they would do far better to 
burn them, to put them where they will not endanger 
others, than to sell them and to give the proceeds to 
the Lord's work. 

With such a spirit prevailing amongst the believers 
—such a willingness to give up things contrary to 
the Lord, and that at a cost to themselves, involving, 

R3159 : page 75 

no doubt, a change of occupation, we cannot wonder at 
the statement of the last verse of the lesson, that "so 
the word of the Lord Jesus grew mightily and prevailed" 
over the evil influences opposing it. So it will 
surely be with the Lord's people today; where the proper 
zeal for the Lord and for righteousness are in the 



hearts of his people, the effect will be telling upon all 
with whom they come in contact. 



R3159 : page 75 

THE RIOT AT EPHESUS. 

-ACTS 19:29-40.-MARCH 15.- 

"The Lord preserveth the faithful."— Psalm 31:23. 

WHEN Paul had spent nearly three years at Ephesus 
he purposed going again to Jerusalem, 
but before doing so would visit the churches 
of Macedonia— Philippi, Berea, Thessalonica and Corinth. 
He sent two of his helpers, Erastus and Timothy, 
in advance. (2 Tim. 4:20; 1 Cor. 4:17-19.) It was 
this visit to Corinth that he evidently referred to in his 
epistle to them. (1 Cor. 16:1-4.) He proposed taking 
contributions from them to the poor in Jerusalem 
—not as seeking a gift, but as seeking evidence of their 
love for the Lord, in their desire to be helpful to the 
brethren at Jerusalem, who were chiefly poor, and 
greatly disadvantaged by their loyalty to the truth. 
Apparently also the Apostle was planning a later tour, 
which would include Rome— little suspecting that he 
would be sent to Rome as a prisoner. 

About this time occurred the riot described in this 
lesson, which probably would have determined the 
Apostle to leave Ephesus, if he had not already purposed 
so doing. The Lord permitted persecutions to 
drive him out of every place— thus seemingly indicating 
the proper time for terminating his ministry at each 
point. The account says, "There arose no small stir 
about that way." Very evidently the "way" of the 
Lord's people differed decidedly from the ways of others, 
not as concerned their future hopes only, but also 
regarding their course in the present life. All things 
become new to those who receive the new mind of 
Christ; and although their "way" may seem to the 
unbelieving to be a narrow and troublesome one, to 
themselves it is the way of peace and joy and blessing 
and harmony with God, and, ultimately, the way of 
life eternal. And the way is the same to this day, as 
concerns those who are faithfully walking close to the 
Lord and to the teachings of his Word. The difficulty 
with many is that they have gotten out of the way— so 
that nominal church ways are, alas! too much like the 
ways of the world, with very similar hopes, aspirations 
and endeavors. 

In Ephesus there were trades-unions or guilds, 
and Demetrius, the leader of the riot, belonged to the 
guild of the silversmiths— probably its president, or 
chief. There is a stone now in the British Museum 



which was found at Ephesus, on which is engraved an 
inscription concerning a certain Demetrius. It is said 
to belong to about the date of this lesson, between 
A.D. 50 and 60. The name occurs again in 3 John 12, 
where the Apostle mentions the person as a Christian 
of good report. Quite possibly the reference is to the 
person who led this riot, and who may afterwards have 
become an active Christian, as he was at this time an 
active opposer of Christianity, and a supporter of 
Diana;— even as Paul, the zealous persecutor of the 
Church, became its zealous servant. The probability 
that this was the same Demetrius is strengthened by 
the tradition that the Apostle John with Mary the 
mother of Jesus afterward made Ephesus their home. 

Demetrius called together not only the men of his 
own craft, but those also of allied crafts. The finest of 
the shrines, or miniature temples of Diana, were made 
in silver, but others were made of inferior metals and 
of marble, and the cheapest of terra cotta. These 
shrines were manufactured of various sizes and in great 
quantities; not only for the people of Ephesus, but for 
export to various other cities and provinces where 
Diana was worshiped. The business was a profitable 
one, as Demetrius acknowledged; and it was upon the 
selfish instincts of the workmen engaged in this business 
that he based his strongest appeal,— that this Paul was 
turning away much people from the worship of Diana, 
not only in Ephesus but in the surrounding cities and 
provinces. His reasoning was that if the people lost 
their respect for Diana and her temple, they would no 
longer purchase the shrines, and that the falling off in 
demand would mean loss for all engaged in the shrine 
business. 

The argument of Demetrius inflamed the selfish 
sentiments of the allied crafts of shrine-makers— they 
became full of wrath, increasingly as the argument 
went on, and as they seemed to realize the ultimate 
discredit of Diana and ruin of their own business interests. 
They began to shout in a frenzied manner, 
"Great is Diana of the Ephesians!" doubtless inflaming 
themselves and others more and more with every 
shout, until a large mob collected, which they led 
toward the theater, or Coliseum, variously estimated to 
hold between twenty-five and fifty thousand people. 
As they went they seized two of Paul's companions, 
taking them along, as though intent upon bringing 
charges against them, and having them summarily 

R3159 : page 76 

dealt with. Paul, full of courage, would not have been 
willing to allow his companions to endure the brunt of 
this difficulty alone, but would have gone to them and 
endeavored to secure the attention of the mob and to 
reason with them; but leading men of the city, who 
were his friends, cautioned him, in the interests of 



peace, not to do this. 

The uproar and excitement were intense, the majority 
not knowing certainly why they were there, but 
being in full sympathy with the cry, "Great is Diana 
of the Ephesians!" they surmised that some insult or 
opposition to their religion had occurred. It was for 
this reason that when Alexander, motioning to them 
for silence, endeavored to make a defense, the people, 
though they recognized him merely as a Jew, and not 
as a Christian, clamored so as to make it impossible 
for him to speak, realizing that all Jews were opposed 
to their goddess and her worship. The senselessness of 
their proceeding is clearly manifest in the fact that 
they kept up a meaningless shout for two hours! It is 
worthy of note here, that in proportion as people approach 
the proper conceptions of the divine character 
and plan and receive of the spirit of the Lord, in that 
same proportion they have greater soundness of mind. 
Consequently, we see that amongst Christians some 
who have made little growth in grace and knowledge 
are content to spend hours in shouting or talking about 
that which has comparatively little meaning; but in 
proportion as any grow in grace and knowledge they 
become partakers of the spirit of a sound mind, and 
correspondingly unwilling to waste either consecrated 
time or energy senselessly, unreasoningly. In other 
words, rejecting the wisdom of this world, and accepting 
the wisdom from above, they are as a result the 
more reasonable. 

R3160 : page 76 

By this time the town clerk (or recorder or mayor, 
as we might term him) arrived, and quieted the people, 
and made them an address consisting of four arguments. 
First, he appealed to their patriotic sentiments; 
that they were citizens of a great city, and that 
people far and near recognized Ephesus as temple-keeper 
for Diana, and suggested that since this was so 
well established as a fact they ought to do nothing 
rashly, for there could be no necessity for haste. 
Whatever might happen to Diana and Ephesus there 
certainly was no immediate danger. That temple of 
Diana was indeed a wonderful structure. Respecting 
it history says: "The crowning glory of Ephesus was 
the great temple of Artemis, or Diana, one of the 
seven wonders of the world. It glittered in brilliant 
beauty at the head of the harbor, and it was said that 
the sun saw nothing in his course more magnificent 
than Diana's temple. Made of the purest marble, it 
was 425 feet long, 220 broad. Its columns of Parian 
marble were 60 feet high, and 36 of them were magnificently 
carved. The hall was adorned with the most 
wonderful statuary and paintings." 

The town clerk's second argument was that the 
men whom they had brought with them by violence, 



and against whom they seemed incensed, were not bad 
men— they had not been trying to rob Diana's temple, 
nor had they blasphemed the goddess herself. Very 
evidently the prominent men of the city, without accepting 
the gospel preached by the Apostle, had received 
favorable impressions of it, and realized that 
their teachings did not develop bad citizens, but 
that they were, on the contrary, amongst the most 
honorable, peaceable, law-abiding, of the city. His 
words give us another thought; viz., that the Apostle, 
in his preaching, did not specially attack the errors of 
heathendom— idolatry, etc., but that merely denying 
all other gods, he preached the one true God and his 
message of mercy, the gospel— the better "way." 
There is a lesson in this for the Lord's people to this 
day— "Go thou, and preach the gospel." Let others, 
if they will, smash the images and attack the various 
vices in and out of the nominal church systems. In 
preaching the gospel we shall have quite a sufficiency 
to do, so long as this present age continues. 

The town clerk's third argument was that this was 
a quarrel of Demetrius and his fellow-craftsmen, and 
not a quarrel of the public in general; and that if any 
injustice had been perpetrated there was a proper channel 
of redress— the courts of law, attorneys, etc. 

The fourth argument was that if this were not a 
dispute merely between Demetrius and his class and 
the propagators of Christianity— if the assembly had 
any other matter on which to charge them, they should 
bring them at the proper time, and in the lawful manner, 
when regular assemblages were had for the trying 
of cases. (Dr. Hovy remarks, "An inscription found 
in this very theater in which the words were uttered, 
illustrated their technical sense of the word 'lawful'. 
It provides that a certain silver image of Athene shall 
be brought and set at every (regular) assemblage, above 
the bench.") The town clerk pursued this last argument, 
pointing out that the meeting was nothing short 
of a riot, and that if it were reported to the Roman 
authorities and an inquiry made of him, it would reflect 
to the discredit of the city that such a turmoil had 
occurred without reason. His intimation was that there 
might be danger of the city losing a privilege which it 
had long enjoyed— of being a "free city." His speech 
shows clearly that even amongst the unbelievers of 
that time there were men of reasonably sound 
judgment. 

Alas, that there are even today so many of the 
same disposition as Demetrius and his fellow craftsmen! 

R3160 : page 77 

The principal opponents of present truth are 
professed ministers of the gospel; and so far as we are 
able to discern, their opposition is inspired by the same 
selfish spirit which incited Demetrius and his associates 



—their craft is in danger— their salaries are endangered 
—respect for them and their teachings on the part 
of the people is endangered. It will not at all surprise 
us if ultimately their opposition to the truth shall lead 
to something analogous to this riot at Ephesus. Then 
we shall expect that they, like Demetrius, will not set 
forth the real secret of their opposition, but base it on the 
broader grounds of hostility of the truth to the great system 
of errors, misnamed "Orthodoxy," chiefly built by 
Antichrist, and known in the Scriptures as "Babylon." 



R3160 : page 77 

THE ONENESS OF THE DIVINE FAMILY. 

"I pray for them. ..which thou hast given me; for they are thine. 
And all mine are thine, and thine are mine; and I am glorified 
in them."-Jno. 17:9,10. 

THERE is a touching pathos in this prayer of our 
Lord for his disciples as he was about to leave 
them, which draws us very near to his loving 
heart; especially when he adds, "Neither pray I for 
these alone [then present with him], but for them 
also which shall believe on me through their word; 
that they all may be one, as thou, Father, art in me, 
and I in thee, that they also may be one in us, that 
the world may believe that thou hast sent me. And 
the glory which thou gavest me I have given them, 
that they may be one, even as we are one— I in them 
and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one, 
and that the world may know that thou hast sent me 
and hast loved them as thou hast loved me."— 
Verses 20-23. 

As we come to consider this beautiful expression 
of the Lord's sentiments with reference to the Church, 
we catch a glimpse of the glory of the blessed oneness 
of the divine family. It is a oneness of purpose, a 
oneness of confidence, a oneness of sympathy, a oneness 
of love a oneness of honor, and a oneness of 
mutual possession. This oneness our Lord described 
as already existing between himself and the Father, 
but so far as his disciples are concerned it was and 
still is only prospective; and its full accomplishment 
is the ideal goal toward which we are taught to 
aspire. 

But let us study this exemplified oneness more 
closely that we may be enabled the more fully to enter 
into it. In the first place we notice that the one purpose 
which is common to both the Father and the Son 
is the Father's purpose, which was gradually revealed 
to the Son in due time and order, whose it also became 
by adoption. Since Jesus himself said, "Of 
that day and hour knoweth no man; no, not the angels 



which are in heaven, neither the Son, but the 
Father" only (Mark 13:32), it is manifest that the 
revelation of that plan to him was a gradual one; and 
that he was led into the knowledge of its various features 
as they became due to be worked out through 
his instrumentality. Thus he was allowed to grow in 
knowledge; and thus, too, he was spared the sad spectacle 
of subsequent trouble which also lay along the 
pathway of the divine plan. Thus, while he joyfully 
worked out the grand plan of creation (John 1 :3; 
Prov. 8:22-31), he probably knew nothing of God's 
purpose for the subsequent permission of evil and the 
necessity for the great work of redemption. Before 
he came to that test of faith in God his confidence 
in his almighty power, wisdom and love had been 
firmly established by the experiences of the past. 
For centuries he had seen his mighty works, marked 
his wondrous wisdom and experienced his tender 
love. Could he doubt him, then, when another feature 
of his plan made manifest the great work of redemption 
and restitution, and gave to him the privilege 
of undertaking this work also, for the joy that 
the Father set before him? No; doubtless he did not 
at first realize the depths of humiliation and sorrow 
through which he must pass; but, step by step, along 
the painful way of humiliation and suffering, his faith 
in the Father, founded upon his previous experimental 
knowledge, sustained him, as it is written— "By his 
knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many." 
-Isa. 53:11. 

We next notice between the Father and the Son a 
beautiful oneness of confidence. The Son trusted the 
Father fully— at first, because it was easy and natural. 
Created in the likeness of God, trust in the Being who 
brought him into existence was spontaneous, and experience 
served but to develop and establish it. And 
the Father trusted the Son fully— first, because he 
recognized in him the inherent principles of righteousness 
and truth and filial loyalty which he himself had 
given him; and, as the course of time and experience 
developed and the more firmly established his Son in 
righteousness, his confidence in him became firmly 
established. And so strong was the Father's confidence 
in the subsequent fidelity of his beloved 
Son, that he did not hesitate to declare the results 
of his faithfulness thousands of years before he 
even began the work of redemption. He even 
declared all the special features of the work, by 
the mouth of his holy prophets at various intervals for 

R3161 : page 78 

four thousand years before he began the work. And 
still he declares that the work shall in due time be 
gloriously accomplished. How wonderful and how 
beautiful is this mutual confidence! 



We further notice a oneness of sympathy between 
the Father and the Son. The Son glories in the Father's 
plan, saying, "I delight to do thy will, O my 
God." He delighted in it because he discovered 
therein the worthy features of his Father's glorious 
character; and though his faith may have been temporarily 
tested by the permission of evil, his knowledge 
of God's character and resources, and of the 
depth of his wisdom did not permit him to doubt, but 
held him still in loving trust in his infinite goodness 
and grace, and, therefore, in readiness to acquiesce 
fully in the measures proposed for the final triumph 
of righteousness and truth. 

And the Father was likewise in loving sympathy 
with the Son, not permitting him to be tried above 
what he was able to bear; and not leaving him to 
bear any trial alone, but always granting him the 
light of his countenance and a joyful sense of admiring 
approval (John 11:42; Matt. 3:17), except when, 
for our sakes, he permitted him for a moment to feel 
that he was forsaken; when, in the anguish of his 
soul, he cried out at this unusual experience, "My 
God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" 

Now, mark the oneness of love manifested. In 
every act we have already noted we have seen it expressed. 
It was mutual love that delighted to manifest 
and express mutual confidence, that gloried in the 
same loving and benevolent purposes, that sympathized 
fully with each other's thoughts and feelings, 
and that delighted in the close and blessed relationship 
of Father and Son. The Father did not treat the 
Son as a servant and hide his purposes from him; but 
delighted to take him into his confidence in so far as 
his wisdom and prudence dictated— i.e., as the truth 
became meat in due season to him. And, in turn, the 
Son did not serve the Father as a hireling, but as a 
son with a common interest. The Father declared, 
"This is my beloved Son;" and the Son said, "I 
delight to do thy will." 

How blessed the fellowship! It was a fellowship 
of joy and a fellowship of suffering— of joy in a common 
anticipation of the future glory; and of suffering 
in mutual participation of the preliminary trials to 
secure that end. The Son suffered in his humiliation 
and his dying agony; and the Father suffered in giving 
his only begotten Son— an intensity of suffering 
which the loving, yearning hearts of devoted parents 
can best imagine and appreciate. 

There was further a recognized oneness of possessions 
clearly expressed by our Lord, who declared, 
"All things that the Father hath are mine." (John 16:15.) 
And the Apostle says, God hath appointed 
the Son the "heir of all things," and hath "set him 
at his own right hand in the heavenly places, far 
above all principality and power and might and dominion, 
and every name that is named, not only in 



this world, but also in that which is to come."— Heb. 1:1,2; 
Eph. 1:20,21. 

And, lastly, we notice a oneness of honor. In 
honor each seems to prefer the other. The Father 
says: Let all men honor the Son, even as they honor 
the Father. (John 5:23.) God has made him the 
brightness of his glory and the express image of his 
person, and exalted him to his own right hand, to the 
chief seat of power in his kingdom, giving him all 
power in heaven and in earth.— Heb. 1:2,3; 
Matt. 28:18. 

In the work of creation he has set him forth in 
great prominence and glory, saying, "Without him 
was not anything made that was made." In the work 
of redemption and restitution God has set him forth 
so prominently that his name is the theme on every 
tongue, almost to the eclipse of the Father's own 
glory, who of necessity is himself greater than the 
Son (1 Cor. 15:27), and to whom the glory pre-eminently 
belongs, as the Son also declares, saying, "My 
Father is greater than I;" and again, "I can of mine 
own self do nothing;" "the Father that dwelleth in 
me, he doeth the works."— John 5:30; 14:10,28. 

The Son's corresponding anxiety to glorify the 
Father is most marked in the instance when, realizing 
that he was approaching the dreadful hour of his dying 
agony he exclaimed, "Now is my soul troubled; 
and what shall I say? Father, save me from this 
hour? But for this cause came I unto this hour. 
Father, glorify thy name"— even at this cost to me. 
(John 12:27,28.) Again we hear him say, "Father, 
the hour is come; glorify thy Son, that thy Son also 
may glorify thee." (John 17:1.) And when the 
great work of redemption and restitution is accomplished, 
we see him delivering up the Kingdom to 
God, the Father, and subjecting himself to his further 
direction, that Jehovah himself may be universally 
recognized as all in all. (1 Cor. 15:24,28.) And 
we, like him, may surely trust that his purposes for 
the ages to follow will but the further express and 
emphasize the same lines of his glorious character— 
his justice, his wisdom, his love and his power. 

Glorious oneness! who could suggest an improvement 
to its wondrous beauty and completeness? But 
the wonder and joy increase when we learn that it is 
also our privilege to come into this same blessed oneness 
with God. What! we inquire— the very same 
oneness as above described? Yes; undoubtedly it is 

R3161 : page 79 

our privilege to enter into the very same relationship 
and privileges and blessings. To this end consider 
the exceeding great and precious promises and see 
that it is ours to have the same oneness with God— 
of purpose, of confidence, of sympathy, of love, of 



honor and of possession. 

The same plan of God is presented to and adopted 
by us, and we also are invited to become coworkers 
with God in carrying it out (2 Cor. 6:1); and 
in so doing we are counted in with Christ Jesus as 
filling up the measure of the sufferings of the anointed 
body necessary to the accomplishment of that plan. 
Our heavenly Father also similarly manifests his confidence 
in us— in the loyalty of our hearts toward him 
and in the sincerity of our consecration to him— even 
though he recognizes our inherent weaknesses and 
our inability to carry out fully our own determinations. 
But, notwithstanding this, so great is his confidence 
in our sincerity and integrity of heart, that, 
on our profession of faith and consecration, he fully 
accepts us as his sons and heirs, supplementing our 
weaknesses and shortcomings with the all-sufficient 
merit of our Redeemer, in whom we humbly trust. 
And not only so, but as sons, honored and beloved, 
he makes known to us, also, his secret counsels, which 
others cannot know (Matt. 13:11), and invites us to 
confide in him as children, and to speak to him freely 
of all that concerns us, in full assurance of his loving 
interest, even in our smallest affairs. (Psa. 103:13,14.) 
And then he commits a portion of his great 
work to us. He gives us certain talents, certain portions 
of his goods, and tells us to invest them for him 
according to our best judgment as to the profitableness 
of the results, not dictating all the minutiae of 
the management as to hireling servants, but merely 
submitting to us the general principles which should 
govern us. Thus, for instance, he gives us his plan 
as to the work in hand, with such general directions 
as, not to cast our pearls before swine; to be wise as 
serpents and harmless as doves; to give meat in due 
season; to do good to all men as we have opportunity, 
but especially to the household of faith; and to observe 
the times and seasons, and the character of the 
work in each— seed-sowing in the spring, and reaping 
in the harvest time; etc., etc. Thus with general 
directions he sends us forth— not like machines, to do 
a monotonous treadmill service, but as intelligent beings, 
to use our brains as well as our hands and feet. 
So he counsels us to "study" to show ourselves workmen 
approved, and to consider and think, and not to 
be "as the horse, or as the mule, which have no understanding, 
whose mouth must be held in with bit 
and bridle." (Psa. 32:9.) Then, according to our 
zeal and faithfulness, not only in the use of our hands, 
but also of our brains, in the Lord's service, his confidence 
in us increases and we are entrusted with more 
and more of his goods and given a corresponding sense 
of our heavenly Father's approval. And the mutual 
confidence and fellowship of purpose and work, draw 
our hearts closer and closer to the heart of the Eternal, 
and the joyful realization of sonship and mutual interest 



and confidence and sympathy fills our hearts. 

We are also assured of the same love from our 
heavenly Father which he exercises toward our Lord 
Jesus. The statement seems almost startling; but 
yet, hearken to our Lord's prayer— "I pray for them 
...that they may be one. ..that they may be 
made perfect in one. ..that the world may know 
that thou hast.. .loved them as thou hast loved me." 
(John 17:20-23.) In amazement we inquire, How 
can this be? Our Lord Jesus was always in perfect 
harmony with the Father; a son who gloriously reflected 
his likeness; but it has not been so with us: 
we were sinners and had nothing in us worthy of love. 
Yes, but we have been washed and cleansed, and, 
however imperfect our earthen vessels may still be, 
our hearts are perfect in his sight who is able to read 
the heart. And, as he sees us with a perfect heart— a 
perfect purpose and intention— striving to overcome the 
weaknesses and disabilities of our imperfect flesh, and 
with painful, yet determined, effort to do his will, and 
humbly trusting in the provisions which he has made 
for our redemption from the fall, God recognizes in us 
that which is worthy of his love. And so our Lord 
Jesus gives us clearly to understand that the Father 
loves us, even as he loved the Son. 

And not only is this equality of the Father's love 
for us as for Christ Jesus thus declared, but it is also 
manifested; for we are called to be joint-heirs with his 
Son, and partakers of his glory; and even as all 
things are his, they are also said to be ours.— Rom. 8:17; 
1 Cor. 3:21-23. 

While such is the oneness between the heavenly 
Father and all his anointed sons, it is blessed also to 
mark the same oneness between Christ Jesus and his 
anointed brethren. The Lord Jesus does not selfishly 
grasp all the glory and seek to retain it for himself, 
but the rather with admiration he contemplates their 
acquired worthiness and says, They "are mine and I 
am glorified in them" (John 17:10); and he would 
have them all bound up together with himself in the 
Father's love. He would also have them with him, 
beholding and sharing the glory which the Father 

R3162:page79 

had given him from the foundation of the world— the 
glory of his mighty creative works, with all the other 
evidences of his Father's love.— John 17:22-24. 

Thus all the divine family are bound together in 
one bond of love and fellowship and confidence and 
sympathy and harmony and common interest; and 
the honor and glory of one are the honor and glory of 
all. The Lord's prayer abounds with petitions for 
this oneness. Mark the expression (verse 21)— 
"That they all may be one; as thou, Father, art in 
me and I in thee" [thy spirit or disposition and purposes 



and aim being common to us all]. Hence, he 
would have us adopt the same Father's spirit, aim 
and purpose, and devote all our powers with zeal and 
faithfulness to the accomplishment of the Father's 
will. Amen, so let it be. 



page 81 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIV. MARCH 15, 1903. No. 5 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 83 

Ancient Tablets Agree with Bible 83 

A Statesman's Views of Europe's 
Future 83 

Christian Soldiership 84 

The Editor's Visit to Europe 85 

"Whatsoever He Saith, Do It" 85 

The New Life in Christ 88 

Review Lesson 91 

Able to Comprehend With All Saints 91 

Life and Death (Poem) 94 

Letters of Interest 95 

General Conventions, Etc 96 

page 82 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THE MEMORIAL SUPPER. 



The date of the celebration this year will be Friday evening 
April 10th— after 6 o'clock. We mention the date thus 
early for the benefit of the brethren afar off. 

THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT. 



The new rates on the Diaglott brought an extraordinary 
demand and has quite exhausted our stock, before the 
new editions are ready. Have patience and we will have 
plenty for all. 

VOLUNTEER AMMUNITION FOR 1903. 



We are preparing two million tracts for this year's work: 
paper is already ordered and we will be ready to ship the 
tracts we hope by April. Let the captains get ready the 
forces and notify us during March the amounts they will be 
able to use advantageously. 

"STRONG'S EXHAUSTIVE CONCORDANCE." 



We fear we did this valuable work an injustice in describing 
it as inferior to "Young's Analytical Concordance." Use 
of a copy during the past year has greatly attached us to it. 
We can supply them at the following established prices (and 
give 3 cloth vols, of DAWN postpaid as a premium): In cloth 
binding, $6; in half leather binding, $8, express prepaid. 



R3162:page83 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
ANCIENT TABLETS AGREE WITH THE BIBLE. 



IN view of the fact that most lecturers on the Babylonian 
excavations are endeavoring to prove 
that their findings date back thousands of years 
before the flood, and hence are in total disagreement 
with the Bible narrative, the following testimony to 
their corroboration of Scripture is the more appreciated. 
Excavators seem prone to "magnify their 



office" and to make their services and findings more 
wonderful than they really are. 

"Dr. Albert T. Clay, curator of the Babylonian 
department in the museum of the University of Pennsylvania, 
lectured in Widener hall yesterday on 'The 
Old Testament in the Light of Recent Excavations.' 

'"Accounts of the creation and deluge,' he said, 
'have been deciphered from early Babylonian monuments. 
No direct account has been found referring 
to the fall of mankind, although engraved rocks representing 
a man and woman sitting under a tree, with a 
serpent near by, have been found, which undoubtedly 
refer to it.' 

"The lecturer went on to show that the events 
recorded in the Bible had taken place contrary to 
what had been contended by critics of the Old Testament 
in the past few years. He presented a photograph 
of an engraved rock referring to the deluge and 
translated it. Although the period of time which 
elapsed while Noah was in the ark did not exactly 
correspond to the number of days given in the Bible, 
yet the historical significance of the event was corroborated. 
Dr. Clay presented many such photographs, 
all of which had been excavated in Babylonia, and are 
now in the museum. The translations of these were 
parallel accounts to passages found in the Bible. 

"He further said: This work is yet in its infancy. 
Research has not yet come to a limit. The 
lowest excavations show civilization in advanced 
stages and there is every reason to believe that future 
excavations will bring to light the majority, if not all, 
the history recorded in the Old Testament.'"— Philadelphia 
Times. 

A STATESMAN'S VIEW OF EUROPE'S FUTURE. 



A Philadelphia Ledger correspondent writing of 
the eminent correspondent of the Times, M. de Blowitz, 
deceased, says:— 

"Blowitz believed that his own forecast of events 
was more accurate than that of any living statesman. 
He not only placed himself on an intellectual level 
with Bismarck, but he spoke of himself as belonging 
to the same rank. I am not at all sure that he was 
not right, and that if his early lot had been cast in 
high places Blowitz would not have been a greater man 
than Bismarck. He had his faults and vanities, but 
he was a man of extraordinary capacity. 

"His opinions about the future of Europe are 
interesting, because his predictions were so often fulfilled, 
and his views, therefore, on the subject are 
worth consideration. As far back as ten years ago 
de Blowitz held that in the course of a generation 
Europe would be a congerie of bankrupt states; that 



all the national debts in Europe would be repudiated, 
with the exception of Britain's, and that vast social 
changes, involving bloody wars and reigns of terror, 
would come to pass in many countries. He took a 
pessimistic view of the future of Britain, though he 
admired the qualities of persistence and freedom, which 
form part of the British character. 

"He believed that the twentieth century would 
be a century of struggle, and that in Germany and 
Russia especially the development of the industrial 
idea would lead to the evolution of new surfaces of 
society, just as the iceberg which has changed its centre 
of gravity presents a new profile to the spectator. 
If these predictions had been made today no great 
power of discrimination would be credited to the 
prophet. To have formed such views ten years ago 

R3162:page84 

implies the possession of great analytic power, coupled 
with imaginative faculty." 



This is interesting, as showing how the wisdom of 
this world corroborates the forecast of prophecy— the 
revelations of the divine Word. "We have a more 
sure word of prophecy, unto which we do well to take 
heed, as unto a light shining in a dark place until the 
day dawn."— 2 Pet. 1:19. 



CHRISTIAN SOLDIERSHIP. 



We are pleased to credit the following article to 
a secular journal— the Atlanta Constitution:— 

"Endure hardness as a good soldier of Jesus Christ."— 
2 Tim. 2:3. 

"The service of Christ resembles no other so 
much as that of a soldier. There are few life-callings 
among men that demand such absolute self-surrender 
from the recruit as that of the soldier.... 

"In the decision to be a soldier one subordinates 
all other considerations— those of self-will, family supremacy 
and the varied opportunities of the freeman. 
It is to go under a vow of complete, unquestioning 
obedience to the orders of superiors. It is to abandon 
home for the camp, to forego the right of first serving 
the interests of father and mother, wife and children, 
business or friends. It means the entire suppression 
of every selfish interest for the advancement of the 
supreme cause one has contracted voluntarily to serve, 
to follow and for which, if need be, to die. 

"It seems hard to some minds to compare the 
service of Christ with that of a good soldier. Nine-tenths 



of those who call themselves Christians refuse 

to give their service that significance, and mutiny outright 

when called upon to act upon that principle. 

The weakness of the church universal as the leader of 

morals and life culture in the world is due to the fact 

that most Christian men and women serve Christ as 

independent camp followers. They are unattached, 

or uncommanded, or disobedient to the duty of discipline, 

and do as they please rather than as they are 

obligated by the commands and principles of Christ. 

"Goethe said that 'earnestness is eternity,' and 
the spirit of God is the spirit of earnestness. He who 
is informed and inflamed by that spirit will be filled to 
overflowing with zeal, courage, daring, fortitude and 
the faith of conquest. In the fervor and forcefulness 
of these feelings he will serve his Master, as the soldiers 
of Alexander followed unquestioning where he 
led; as the soldiers of Leonidas, who died rather than 
retreat; as the soldiers of Napoleon, who believed 
him invincible always; and as the soldiers of Lee, 
who felt that he could not lead them wrongly or to 
defeat. 

"If Christ possessed in this world today an army 
of men and women one-hundredth part the figures of 
official Christendom, who would follow him— who 
would labor, fight and endure as do the soldiers of our 
American armies— he could not long be kept from his 
world-wide conquest. 

"But he has few real soldiers in his service. 
Most of his followers are pensioners, pleading always 
that he will do something for them— ease their pains, 
disperse their enemies, smooth their paths, increase 
their fortunes and bed them in places of plenty and 
comfort. They are a hungry and a helpless host. 

"One would expect naturally to find in the pulpits 
stalwart captains of the army of our Lord. And yet 
how few are they who do not look more closely to their 
hire than to their opportunities to endure hardness? 
They are eager for rich and easy pastorates, they 
dwell in luxuries and preach as those who make pleasant 
music on a lute. Transfer them to posts of poverty, 
scant rations, hard service among the poor and 
the sick, and they become broken-hearted over their 
lot as soldiers! 

"The true soldier does not debate his cause. He 
is rightly supposed to have settled upon its justice 
and righteousness before he enlisted to serve it. Thereafter 
he avouches it and defies contradiction of it. He 
is ready to spend all and be all spent in its defense. 
He does not fight for the rations that are doled to him, 
but for the great principles and great purposes of the 
cause to which he is committed.... 

"No man should deceive himself in a matter so 
plain and serious as the service of Christ. If he 
doesn't mean to abandon himself to the commands 
and demands of his Master, he ought to be honest 



enough not to offer a hypocritical profession and a 

R3163 : page 84 

treacherous or abortive promise of service. The causes 
of Christ on earth need men who are strong in will, 
courageous of heart and hardened to self-sacrifice, 
sufferings and the perils of conflict and death. None 
other can do the work that is needed to pull down the 
strongholds of sin, rout the enemies of righteousness 
and set forward in hostile territories the standards of 
the Kingdom of Christ. 

"It is glorious to serve Christ in honesty and in 
fulness of fidelity. There is an ineffable joy in being 
on the right side, in knowing that one's service is 
toward victory and that beyond the field of blood 
and the valley of shadows is an abundant entrance 
into the joys and peace of the triumphant King of 
kings. For that hope none should shrink from the 
harness of battle, none quail before the rage of the 
enemy, and none tremble before the certainty of hunger, 
thirst, nakedness, wounds or death!" 

THE EVOLUTIONISTS' TREND. 



The Western Recorder tersely expresses the truth, 
thus:— 

"When a man starts on the line of evolution and 
higher criticism he gives up more and more, and he 
has no logical stopping-place till he has given up everything 
The frantic efforts of those who start on this 
line to hold to 'what is vital,' while giving up more 
and more, are pitiful. Their claiming that 'after all 
we have this or that much left' is simply whistling to 
keep their courage up. They have surrendered everything, 
and have left themselves at the mercy of the 
enemy. As George Adam Smith says, it is left only 
for the critics to fix the indemnity, and to take all 
they want, and everybody ought to have learned that 
they want everything. With them 'progress' means 
to deny more and more. And their work will not be 
done as long as any belief is left." 

R3163 : page 85 

THE EDITOR'S VISIT TO EUROPE. 

For several years the Editor has been promising 
the friends abroad that as soon as the sixth volume 
of MILLENNIAL DAWN series would be ready for the 
press he would comply with their many urgent invitations 
for a visit. From present appearances he hopes, 
by April, to have the manuscript of Vol. VI. in the 
hands of the compositors, with also a sufficiency of 



WATCH TOWER matter to last during the four issues 
of the period of his proposed absence. 

Not only does he anticipate joy in meeting many 
already known through correspondence, and new 
friends in Great Britain, but additionally it is his 
thought that a considerable extension of the service 
of the truth may be possible in Germany, France, 
Switzerland, Holland, Sweden, Norway and other 
European countries. He will make brief visits to 
these various countries, conferring with the friends, 
and ascertaining, so far as he can, the advantages 
and opportunities of the present time. 

Announcements for TWO-DAY CONVENTIONS for 
the trip are as follows:— 

London, England April 25,26. 

Stockholm, Sweden May 2,3. 

Glasgow, Scotland May 9,10. 

Liverpool, England May 16,17. 

Thun, Switzerland May 23,24. 



R3163 : page 85 

"WHATSOEVER HE SAITH UNTO YOU, DO IT." 

-JOHN 2:5.- 

THESE were the words of our Lord's mother to the 
servants, at the marriage in Cana, about the 
time of the beginning of our Lord's ministry— 
our Lord, his mother and his disciples being guests at 
the wedding. There was a shortage of wine, it will 
be remembered, and Mary evidently expected our 
Lord to exercise his power in some manner: although 
just why she should expect this is not evident, because 
we are distinctly informed that the miracle of turning 
water into wine was the beginning of Jesus' miracles. 
(Vs. 11.) And, by the way, this distinct statement by 
the Apostle John, gives emphatic contradiction to the 
apocryphal legends which accredit to our Lord various 
miracles, etc., previous to this time. 

How suitable are Mary's words to all of the Lord's 
people: "Whatsoever he saith unto you, do it!" How 
important that all should learn the lesson that it is not 
merely the hearing of the gospel which brings blessing 
to the heart; but obedience to the glad tidings! Of 
course, it is necessary that we should believe the Master 
before we could be ready to obey him; yet the 
expression, "Whatsoever he shall say unto you, do 
it!" includes a faith in the Lord on the part of all 
those who are obedient. The Christian cannot do 
better than adopt these words as one of the mottoes 
of his life,— Whatsoever my Lord saith unto me, I 
will do it. 

We are not to hear and to obey every voice, but, 



as our Lord himself said, "My sheep hear my voice, 

...and they follow me." (Jno. 10:27.) There 

are many voices in the world (1 Cor. 14:11), some 

calling in one direction and some in another. The 

world calls us, the flesh calls us, the Adversary calls 

us, and the Master calls us. The Christian may 

readily enough discern the voices of the world and 

the flesh, and should be on his guard against their 

seductive influence. But he may have more difficulty 

in discerning between the voice of the Adversary and 

the voice of the Good Shepherd; because, the Adversary's 

method is to simulate, or counterfeit, the voice 

of the Shepherd. His usual methods of deception are 

through false teachings backed by human organizations; 

the whole being made to appear as a message 

of light through messengers of light. (See 2 Cor. 11:13,14.) 

Christians need to be specially on guard on 

this point; many are hearing and adopting the voice 

of the Pope, others the voices of Presbyteries, Conferences 

and Councils, which hinder them from hearing 

and obeying the voice of the Shepherd. They have 

need to remember that the proper course is to "take 

heed that ye refuse not him which speaketh from 

heaven"— "Whatsoever he shall say unto you, do it." 

Hearken to his words! "A new commandment I 
give unto you, that ye love one another as I have 
loved you." (Jno. 13:34.) "If ye love me keep 
my commandments." "He that hath my commandments 
and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me; and 
he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I 
will love him, and will manifest myself to him." 
(Jno. 14:21.) "He that loveth father or mother 
more than me is not worthy of me; and he that loveth 
son or daughter more than me is not worthy 
of me. He that taketh not his cross, and followeth 
after me is not worthy of me. He 
that findeth his life shall lose it; and he that 
loseth his life for my sake shall find it. He that 
receiveth you receiveth me, and he that receiveth me 
receiveth him that sent me." (Matt. 10:37-40.) He 
speaks again and says, "Blessed are the meek, the 
merciful, the humble-minded, the peacemakers, the 
pure in heart and those hungering and thirsting for 
righteousness and enduring persecution for righteousness' 
sake"— "Blessed are ye when men shall revile 
you, and persecute you and say all manner of evil 

R3163 : page 86 

against you falsely for my sake. Rejoice and be exceeding 
glad; for great is your reward in heaven." 
He saith to us again,— "Ye are the salt of the earth 
and the light of the world;" "let your light so shine 
before men that they may see your good works and 
glorify your Father which is in heaven."— Matt. 5. 
From heaven, he continued to speak to us through 



the Apostles to the same effect:— "Present your bodies 

living sacrifices to God, holy, acceptable, your 

reasonable service." (Rom. 12:1.) "Love as brethren; 

be pitiful, be courteous." (1 Pet. 3:8.) "Laying 

aside every weight, run with patience the race set 

before you, looking unto Jesus, the author and the 

finisher of your faith." "Laying aside all malice, 

and all guile and hypocrisies, and envies and all evil-speaking 

as newborn babes, desire the sincere milk 

of the Word, that ye may grow thereby." And 

"giving all diligence add to your faith fortitude; and 

to fortitude knowledge; and to knowledge moderation; 

and to moderation patience, God-likeness, 

brotherly-kindness, love."— 1 Pet. 2:1; 2 Pet. 1:5. 

We have heard his words. They impress us as 
being the very essence of wisdom and righteousness. 
We know that he is faithful who has promised that 
if we do these things we shall never fall, but be granted 
an abundant entrance into his everlasting Kingdom. 
We have taken the first step of belief; we have 
taken the second step of response, and have agreed to 
do these things; the important question with each 
one of us, therefore, must be— Am I obedient to him 
from heaven who speaketh? Am I doing whatsoever 
he says? To whatever extent any shall find shortcomings 
on the line of obedience to the Shepherd's 
voice, to the extent of ability let him beware and 
arouse himself, promptly, energetically to do these 
things; for the Father also saith, "This is my beloved 
Son: hear him!"— Luke 9:35. 

Returning to the narrative: We note our Lord's 
command to the servants to "fill the water-pots with 
water." Remembering the statement of the prophet, 

R3164:page86 

corroborated by our Lord's own words "without a 

parable spake he not unto them," we are inclined to 

surmise that this, his first miracle, contains some spiritual 

lesson for us. Endeavoring to draw such a lesson 

from this miracle, in harmony with the general 

testimony of the Word, we reason thus: The water-pots 

symbolize the Lord's people; their number, six, 

might indicate that it refers to the Lord's people in 

the present time of evil, because the number six is a 

symbol for imperfection and evil condition, as seven 

is the symbol for completeness and perfection. Thus 

six days of the week are set apart for labor, while the 

seventh is set apart for rest and refreshment: likewise 

the six thousand years of the world's history are 

permitted by the Lord to be evil, through man's disobedience 

and fall; while in the seventh thousand God 

proposes to bring in his Millennial Kingdom— his 

reign of everlasting righteousness. 

The water with which the water-pots were commanded 
to be filled, is in Scripture the symbol for the 



truth, the "water of life"; not merely the word of 

truth, but the word accompanied by and infused with 

the spirit of the truth— it is with this that the Master 

commands that we shall be filled. In the symbolic 

miracle the servants obeyed; not doubtfully or slothfully 

did they fill them half full, but, as it is recorded, 

"They filled them up to the brim." So it should be 

with us; having heard the Master's word, "Be ye 

filled with the spirit," we should draw abundantly 

from the fountain of grace and truth, nor cease until 

we are filled with the spirit "to the brim"— completely. 

And if we so do the Master's commands, what 

may we expect as a result? We may expect, as illustrated 

in the symbolic miracle, that the water will 

ultimately be changed into wine— the symbol for unalloyed 

pleasure, heavenly joys. 

In the symbol the miracle of change from water 
into wine came only to those vessels which were filled 
to the brim with water; so, likewise, the Lord has 
promised a still greater change to his faithful followers 
who receive the treasure of divine truth, and its spirit 
into their "earthen vessels," and who are filled with 
it. They shall be "changed" in a moment, in the 
twinkling of an eye, under the sounding of the seventh 
trumpet; they shall be changed from the human 
nature to the divine nature; from earthly conditions 
to heavenly conditions: this greater miracle, yet to 
be accomplished by our Lord, was well symbolized in 
the change of the water into wine— the joys of the 
Kingdom, the joys of the new nature. The Lord's 
consecrated people are symbolized not only by the 
water-pots and by the servants who fill them, but also 
they are symbolized by the bride at the marriage, 
just as the bridegroom is also the one who commands 
that the vessels be filled with the water. The governor 
of the symbolic feast who pronounced the new 
wine to be of the very finest quality, aptly symbolizes 
the heavenly Father who is the great Governor of the 
great feast associated with the union of the heavenly 
Bridegroom with his Bride, and the excellence of the 
wine represents fitly the joys of the Lord with which 
we shall be filled at our "change." Already we share 
to some extent in the blessings of this union; already 
we know something of the joys of our Lord; already 
we taste not only of the cup of his sufferings, but 
also "have tasted that the Lord is gracious." Already 
we partake of the wine on the lees, and the fat 
things full of marrow (Isa. 25:6); but our present 

R3164:page87 

joys are but foretastes of the coming realities— the 
best of the wine comes at the end of the feast, when 
our heavenly Bridegroom shall have changed us to his 
own image and likeness that we may share his glory. 
Oh, how important that we remember the words, 



"Whatsoever he saith unto you, do it!" Tis but a 
little time since we heard his voice directing us how 
our dearth of joy and happiness might be overcome, 
and how, instead of impurities and filth of the flesh, 
we might be filled with the truth, its spirit and its 
joy, and subsequently have the whole instantly 
"changed" to the perfection of joy,— into the divine 
nature. How are we heeding the Master's words? 
To what extent have we gotten filled with the truth 
and its spirit? He will give ample opportunity to 
each of us to be filled, and if any, therefore, is 
only partly filled, it will be because of a lack of the 
proper spirit of obedience. Our vessels may not all 
be of the same size; as with those in the symbol 
which apparently varied in size, holding from two to 
three firkins apiece, so our capacities, opportunities, 
etc., may vary; but, to fulfil the Master's requirement, 
each must be filled full,— no more, no less,— if 
we would experience the desired "change." 

While this lesson evidently applies merely to the 
hearing of the Lord's voice by the Church, during 
this Gospel age, the principle holds good also for the 
Millennial Age. Now, the vast majority of the world 
do not hear the Lord's message of grace, and, consequently, 
are not responsible; but by and by all the 

deaf ears shall be unstopped, and all the sin- and prejudice-blinded 
eyes shall be opened; and the Lord 
shall be recognized as the great Teacher, and all shall 
hear his voice. This is set forth by the Apostle Peter 
(Acts 3:22,23); after picturing the great Prophet 
(teacher), Christ the Head and the Church his body, 
whom God is raising up during this Gospel age, and 
fitting for the great work of the Millennial age, he 
declares, "Him shall ye hear [obey] in all things 
whatsoever he shall say unto you. And it shall come 
to pass that every soul which will not hear [obey] 
that Prophet, shall be destroyed from among the people" 
—in the Second Death. 

If the responsibility of those who will hear during 
the Millennial age is thus prefigured, and declared, 
so as to leave no doubt that "everlasting 
destruction from the presence of the Lord" shall be 
visited upon all who shall then refuse to obey, what 
shall we say would be the result of a refusal now to 
obey on the part of those who hear the Master's 
voice during the Gospel age? We will not say 
positively that there is no hope for such; but we see 
little room for hope for such as, hearing the voice and 
recognizing it, make no effort to obey it. On the contrary, 
we hear the Apostle saying, "If we sin wilfully 
after we have received a knowledge of the truth" 
[heard the Lord's voice], after we have tasted of the 
good Word of God and been made partakers of the 
holy spirit, and [experienced in our justification] the 
powers of the age to come, there remaineth no longer 
a share for us in the great sacrifice for sin; but only 



a fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation 
which would devour us as adversaries who had 
despised the mercy and grace of God.— Heb. 4:6; 
6:4,5; 10:26-31. 

Hearken to the Apostle's words again, "See that 
ye refuse not him from heaven who speaketh." (Heb. 12:25.) 
"We ought to give the more earnest heed 
to the things we have heard, lest at any time we 
should let them slip. "..."How shall we escape if 
we neglect so great salvation." (Heb. 2:1,2.) So 
far as we may judge, the hearing of the Word of the 
Lord in every case brings with it responsibilities; and 
becomes "a savor of life unto life or of death unto 
death." We do not say that those who are partially 
negligent— who fail to fill their "earthen vessels" to 
the brim with the truth and its spirit— will be esteemed 
to have despised the words of the great Teacher; on 
the contrary, the fact that they are seeking at all 
to be filled with the truth and its spirit is an evidence 
that they have respect to the Lord's Word, and do 
not reject nor refuse "him that speaketh from heaven." 
But their failure to give diligence to be filled 
with the truth and its spirit will mean their loss of 
the great prize, the fulness of joy in the "change." 
These are they who neglecting to use their opportunities 
zealously, neglecting to be filled full with the 
spirit of the truth, are correspondingly partially filled 
with the spirit of the world, and not accounted "overcomers" 
of the world. These are they who will 
"come up out of great tribulation," washing their 
robes in the blood of the Lamb. (Rev. 7:9,13-15.) 
Losing the great prize because of a deficiency of zeal, 
these will, nevertheless, get a great blessing because 
they did not refuse "him from heaven that 
speaketh." 

We must remember, however, that the hearing of 
the natural ear is not the only hearing to which the 
Scriptures refer. Hence, the expression, "He that 
hath an ear let him hear;" and again, "Ears have 
they, but they hear not;" and again, our Lord's 
words respecting the multitudes, "To them that are 
without, these things are spoken in parables, that 
hearing they might hear, and not understand." Our 
responsibility is not, therefore, marked by the opportunities 
of the outward ear. Many have heard with 
the outward ear who have never heard in the responsible 
sense of the Scriptures, in the sense that all 

R3164:page88 

eventually must hear;— in the sense of understanding, 
appreciating the message. The responsibility as to 
how we hear, and how we reject, is upon those who 
have an understanding of the Lord's grace. "Blessed 
are your ears for they hear, and your eyes for they 
see." But the blessing can only come to such as 



"refuse not him from heaven that speaketh." Let 
us all, therefore, who have heard the Master's voice, 
strive to remember his Word, as we have considered 
it foregoing: and let each of us seek to live as nearly 
as possible according to that Word. "Whatsoever 
he saith unto you, do it." 



R3165 : page 88 

THE NEW LIFE IN CHRIST. 

--EPH. 2:1-10.-MARCH 22.- 

Golden Text— "By grace are ye saved through faith."— Eph. 2:8. 

IT WAS from his Roman prison that the Apostle Paul 

wrote the Epistle to the Ephesians, one of the 

most beautiful of all his letters to the churches; 

full of deep spiritual instruction. Its keynote is "in 

Christ," this expression, or its equivalents, occurring 

at least twenty times in this Epistle. As the first 

chapter points out that the Church is chosen in Christ 

Jesus, so our lesson shows that we have life in Christ 

alone; and, subsequently, the Epistle shows that all 

of God's blessings and favors toward his people are 

solely upon consideration that they are in Christ Jesus 

—members of the body of Christ, members of the New 

Creation. None can get clear-cut, distinct appreciation 

of the Apostle's meaning except those who clearly differentiate 

between the Church and the world, and discern 

their different hopes, built upon different promises; 

and perceive that in God's plan only the Church 

is being dealt with at the present time— that the world's 

hope is future, and very different from that of the 

Church, now being called as the body of Christ, "members 

in particular." 

Our lesson opens with a dark picture, delineating 
the condition of the whole world through the fall; a 
condition of sin and worldliness under the power of 
Satan; in disobedience to God, under divine sentence 
of death, which has already operated to the extent of 
corruption in matters moral, mental and physical. The 
whole world, although creatures of God, and thus in a 
general sense his offspring, or children, ceased to be 
children of his favor, and became "children of wrath," 
through sin. The Apostle points out to the Ephesians 
that this had once been their wretched and terrible condition 
in common with the rest of mankind. How 
true is the picture even today! But let it be remembered 
that this is not merely the picture of the villains 
and outlaws of the world, but a picture of the world as 
a whole, including its very best representatives. "All 
have sinned, and come short of the glory of God." All 
are "children of wrath"; all are more or less under the 



power and control of the great Adversary; all are more 
or less controlled by the spirit of disobedience common 
to the whole world of mankind. 

The only exceptions to this rule are the few who, 
like those addressed at Ephesus, have escaped this 
bondage, this corruption, this death state, this condition 
of alienation from God;— and surely these are few today, 
as they were in all but a "little flock" in the 
days of the Lord and at the time the Apostle wrote 
these words. 

But the Apostle passes on to note what a great 
change came to the saints at Ephesus, on their acceptance 
of the Gospel; and how glad we are that a similar change 
has come to all who have become the Lord's saints, 
from that day to the present time! The experience of 
passing from death to life is the same in every instance, 
although the circumstances connected with the transformation 
may vary considerably. The steps of grace 
by which the Lord delivered us from being children of 
wrath and under power of the Adversary are set forth 
by the Apostle in the succeeding verses. Let us trace 
these steps, and note to what extent we have taken 
them, and to what extent our experiences correspond 
to those which the Apostle delineates. 

Our recovery did not begin with something in ourselves, 
—good resolutions, good works, etc. We did 
not improve ourselves, and thus commend ourselves to 
God: on the contrary, God was the prime mover in our 
release and recovery. He was inspired to give us aid 
by the benevolence of his character, for he is "rich in 
mercy." He is rich in all of his attributes, rich in 
wisdom, rich injustice, rich in power, rich in love; 
but it is with the attribute of love and its corresponding 
benevolence, or mercy that the Apostle is here 
dealing. How necessary it is for us to get this 
thought of God's richness of mercy well rooted and 
grounded in our hearts— that we may never doubt his 
generosity, his kindness, his sympathy, his mercy toward 
all those who desire and seek to know and to do 
his will! We need great faith in our heavenly Father, 
and it is only as we come to a clear knowledge of his 
glorious plan through the Word that we can exercise 
such a confidence in his love and mercy. The Adversary 
evidently desires that we should misunderstand 
our Creator, and, hence, has in every way possible sought 
to misrepresent his character and his plan;— and so successfully 
has he done so that at this very moment 999 

R3165 : page 89 

out of every 1000 of those who profess his name are 
moved by fear of an eternity of torture, rather than by 
love for him and appreciation of his love for them. 

The Apostle assures us that God had great love for 
us, even when we were dead in sins— when we were 
corrupt. It is difficult for us to think of God's greatness, 



purity and splendor of character, and of man's 
fallen condition— his corruption, mental, moral and 
physical— and then to understand how the holy Jehovah 
could have love for his fallen creatures. We may 
be sure that it was not the love of affection, such as he 
has for us now, as his sons, newly begotten of the spirit, 
but merely the love of sympathy. He beheld our 
miserable condition, and realized that an offer of release 
from our corruption, and of return to holiness and harmony 
with himself, would be joyfully appreciated and 
accepted by some— let us hope, by many;— and it was, 
undoubtedly, in view of such a response to his goodness 
and mercy that our Creator opened up for the 
world of mankind "a new way of life," in and through 
the Lord Jesus and his redemptive work. 

But although this sympathetic love was toward 
the whole world, it has not yet been made generally 
known— it has not yet been practically exercised toward 
the world, but only toward a comparatively small 
proportion of the whole. Here and there the message 
has been sent to a special class— to those who have "an 
ear to hear"— the remainder being left for the present, 
to be dealt with later. (Isa. 35:5.) It is to those 
who had the "ear to hear", and who hearing, have 
responded and laid hold upon the grace of God in 
Christ, that the Apostle is now writing. He calls attention 
to the blessing of such an experience. He 
does not here differentiate between those who have 
taken merely the first step of faith and obedience unto 
justification, and those who have gone on and taken 
also the second step of full consecration to the Lord, 
"even unto death"; but addresses the latter class only 
—those who, having made a full consecration to the 
Lord of their justified selves, have been begotten of the 
spirit, quickened and energized by that spirit as members 
of the body of Christ. The Apostle here interjects 
in parenthesis (2:5) a reminder that all this blessing 
has come to us, not of our worthiness, nor of our work, 
but by divine "grace are ye saved"; we reached this 
position in the new life, this reckonedly saved position, 
by faith;— delivered from the sentence of sin, 
saved from the darkness and delusion of the Adversary,* 
saved from the wrath of God, and brought, instead, 
into his loving favor. Oh, how great is the salvation 
which accompanies a complete conversion and 
full consecration to the Lord! What a wonderful 
change it brings to us, in thought, in word and in act! 
And yet this is only the beginning of our salvation, or 
what the Apostle elsewhere speaks of as being "saved 
by hope." (Rom. 8:24.) While thus saved by grace 
now, we are still waiting for a further salvation, by 
grace— "for the grace [salvation] that is to be brought 
unto us at the revelation of our Lord and Savior Jesus 
Christ"— the First Resurrection. 

All that, by the Lord's grace, we shall ultimately 
have through the "change" of the resurrection as members 



of the body of Christ— all the heavenly things, 

including full fellowship and communion with the 

Father and with our Lord— are reckoned as having 

their beginning in the present life. He, therefore, who 

knows not such a beginning of the new life, and its holy 

spirit now, has no reason whatever to believe that he 

has been begotten of the holy spirit— that he is a new 

creature in Christ. These new creatures are reckoned 

as having been raised up out of the state of sin and 

death into a new condition of life, and love of righteousness. 

Symbolically, they are ushered into the Holy 

of the Tabernacle, where they have the light of the 

Golden Lampstand, and partake of the spiritual Shewbread, 

and may offer the spiritual Incense to God, and 

have fellowship with him "in Christ Jesus"— as members 

of the Ecclesia, "the Church which is his body." 

This is a figurative resurrection from the dead— a figure 

and earnest of the real resurrection from the dead which 

shall come to each of these if they prove loyal to God 

and faithful to their covenant as members of the body 

of Christ— to be dead with their Head, that they may 

also live with him, through participation in his resurrection. 

-Rom. 6:5,8. 

Counting the new life as beginning now— counting 
ourselves as members of the New Creation, which by 
and by is to be glorified, we ask ourselves with the 
Apostle, What great thing must God work, then, in us 
and for us, eventually, if present foretastes of his goodness 
and grace are so superlatively grand? The Apostle 
answers such a query (vs. 7) assuring us that "in the 
ages to come God will show forth the exceeding riches of 
his grace through [in] his kindness toward us [who 
are] in Christ Jesus." He does not attempt to tell us 
what these riches will amount to. He would 
have us see that God is rich in mercy, rich in grace, 



*The Apostle was a firm believer in a personal devil, 
and a Bible study of his teachings on this subject would be 
profitable to many of the Lord's people in the present time, 
when, through Christian Science and other deceptive teachings, 
the very existence of the Adversary is being denied, 
and thus many are the more exposed to his wiles and deceptions. 
Note the following references to Satan by the Apostles: 
Acts 13:10; 26:18; Rom. 16:20; 1 Cor. 5:5; 7:5; 2 Cor. 2:11; 
11:14; Eph. 4:27; 6:11; 1 Thess. 2:18; 2 Thess. 2:9; 
1 Tim. 1:20; 3:6,7; 5:15; 2 Tim. 2:26. Our Lord 
also frequently referred to the Adversary: Matt. 4:10; 12:26; 
25:41; Mark 4:15; 8:33; Luke 10:18; 22:31; John 8:44; 
14:30. 

R3166 : page 90 

and rich in every other grand and estimable quality, 
and he would have us trust that so rich a Father will 



do for his adopted children "exceeding abundantly 
more than we could ask or think." Indeed, he assures 
us elsewhere that it is impossible for him to explain or 
for us to comprehend "the riches of our inheritance." 
"Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered 
into the heart of man the things which God hath 
prepared for them that loved him; but God hath revealed 
them unto us by his spirit."— 1 Cor. 2:9,10; 
Eph. 3:19. 

Nevertheless, the revelation by his spirit is only 
an approximate one. We cannot clearly discern those 
unseen things, we cannot comprehend them with our 
finite natural minds. "It doth not yet appear what 
we shall be;" but with the new mind we can, even 
though but vaguely, grasp the thought of our Heavenly 
Father's riches of grace and love, and can draw analogies 
from the things of this present life, and thus gain 
some idea of the glorious things which await us. As 
we see our heavenly Father's provision for the natural 
man,— a little lower than the angels,— as we look at 
the beautiful flowers of earth, and taste of its delicious 
fruits, it is but another step for the consecrated heart 
to realize that the rich Father who planned so beneficently 
for his human sons, and who permits so many 
of these blessings to come to mankind, even in its 
fallen condition, is no less rich in love and mercy 
toward his spiritual sons, and will make abundant 
provision for them also. And that as he has provided 
harmonies of music for the natural ear, and pleasant 
odors and flavors and scenes for the senses of the natural 
man, so, only on a more exalted plane, there will 
be gratifications for all the high qualities of heart and 
of mind for the New Creation;— there will be what will 
correspond to the present beauties of nature, but higher 
and grander, for those who shall gain the new nature. 
There will be that which will correspond to the flowers 
and the birds, the fields and the trees, the mountains 
and the valleys. There will be that which will correspond 
to the most delightful gratifications of the eye, 
the ear, the nose and the mouth, and to the most pleasurable 
thrills of the heart. Thus does faith, based 
upon a knowledge of the riches of grace and love in our 
heavenly Father, enable the new creature to see the 
things invisible and to rejoice in the wonderful things 
only partially disclosed at the present time. 

From this exalted position and favor and fellowship 
with God, associated in the heavenlies in Christ, 
we are enabled by faith to rejoice in those promises of 
our Father's Word, which assure us that we shall be 
permitted to cooperate with him in the great work of 
the next age, the Millennial Age, in showing forth his 
praises, in lifting up so many as will of the world of 
mankind out of their present fallen condition,— up to 
full restitution of that which was lost in Adam and 
redeemed by Christ. 

We notice (vss. 8-10) how carefully the Apostle 



seeks to guard us against the thought that any of these 

blessings have come to us on account of our own merit. 

He reiterates, "By grace are ye saved through faith." 

And if by grace, no longer of works, as he elsewhere 

points out. (Rom. 11:6.) If of works it would not 

be of grace. As members of the fallen race we were 

incapable of doing any work which our holy God could 

accept— we were dead, corrupted, foul, under condemnation 

as children of wrath, when he had mercy upon 

us, and opened up the way of life. Our present standing, 

therefore, as new creatures, is not the result of anything 

that the old creature did, or could have done. 

It is not of ourselves; it is a gift of God. This lesson 

must be thoroughly appreciated, else we will be continually 

in danger of falling. The grace is not of ourselves, 

certainly, and we may say also that although we exercised 

some faith at the beginning (else we could never 

have come to him at all, to accept his favors), yet the 

faith by which we were enabled to accomplish our consecration 

even unto death, and thus to become new 

creatures in Christ, was not of ourselves— we had no 

such faith when God laid hold upon us. He developed 

in us that faith by the revelations of his love, 

through his promises, through his Word. 

If our present standing were the result of our own 
efforts or "works," there would probably be some 
room for boasting;— it would imply that we were not 
so fallen that we could not have lifted ourselves out 
of the miry clay of sin,— on the line of the Evolution 
Theory. But such theories are not recognized in the 
divine Word and must not be recognized by any 
who would maintain their standing as new creatures in 
Christ. On the contrary, so far from considering the 
New Creature as an evolution of the old creature, the 
Apostle would have us understand distinctly that it is 
a new and separate creation. We were created in Christ 
Jesus, God's workmanship— prepared for good works, 
but not by good works. 

The Apostle assures us that God foreordained that 
this New Creation should progress in good works. To 
become new creatures in Christ we gladly surrendered 
our all to the Lord, that we might know his will and 
do it; and having accepted us in Christ, he informs 
us that it is his good pleasure that our entire life should 
be renewed, that we should discard entirely from our 
hearts, our minds, our wills, everything sinful, everything 
unholy, and that so far as possible our mortal 
bodies should be brought into subjection to our new 
minds, and that we should walk in newness of life, 
even on this side the vail— thus giving evidence of our 

R3166 : page 91 

sincerity, developing character and becoming meet "for 
the inheritance of the saints in light," in glory. Whoever 
is not disposed to walk in the Lord's ways of holiness 



and opposition to sin, and in cultivation of the 
mind, the spirit of the Lord, the holy spirit, surely 
deceives himself, if he thinks he has passed from death 
unto life, and that he is a new creature in Christ 
Jesus. 



R3166 : page 91 

REVIEW LESSON. 

--MARCH 29.- 

Golden Text— "Lo, I am with you alway, even 
unto the end of the world! "-Matt. 28:20. 

REVIEWING the lessons of the quarter, showing 
the missionary labors of the Apostle, and introducing 
to us a number of his colaborers, 

our principal thoughts may well be that the same gospel 
is still being preached— Jesus and the resurrection; 
—that the privilege of being ministers of this gospel, 
and colaborers with our Lord, is still open to us; that 
the rewards of such ministry may still be won by us; 
indeed, it is well that we get the thought that every member 
of the Church glorified will have been an active 
member of the Church militant— warring against the 
Adversary and his works, and influence. Whether our 
warfare be of the more public kind or of the more private 
sort, there must be warfare, and more than this, 
there must be progress and victory, else we can never 
be accepted of the Lord as "overcomers." 

Another thought should be borne in mind by us 
all; viz., that while we have gifts differing one from 
the other, and are, therefore, able to contribute to the 
Lord's cause relatively larger or smaller amounts of 
energy or service or wealth, the Lord in making his 
estimate will take knowledge of the spirit which actuated 
us, rather than of the results secured by our 
efforts; so that of some small talent it may be said, as 
it was said of the poor widow who cast in the two 
mites into the Lord's treasury,— that the smaller gift 
was more appreciated by the Lord than some of the 
larger ones. In view of this, let us see to it, not only 
that we do with our might what our hands find to do, 
but also that our every sacrifice and gift to the Lord 
and his cause is so full of love and devotion that the 
Lord will surely approve it; as done from love for him 
and his, and not from vainglory. 

The Golden Text of this lesson contains a precious 
thought,— that the Lord has been with his representatives 
in all their labors of love and self-denial, throughout 
the entire age, noting their efforts, assisting, encouraging, 
sustaining them, and surely watering and 
refreshing all who are making his service their special 



object in life,— ministering his grace to others, watering 
and feeding them. And if this has been true in the 
past, all through the age, how specially true we may 
realize it to be now, in the end of the age, in the time 
of harvest, in the time of our Lord's second presence! 
How we may realize that he is with us, in sympathy, 
in cooperation, in assistance, in sustaining graces- 
able and willing to make all of our experiences profitable 
to us, and to use us abundantly in showing forth 
the praises of him who has called us out of darkness 
into his marvelous light! 

Let these thoughts quicken us to fresh and greater 
energies, and to an appreciation of the fact that the 
things of this present time are but transitory (both its 
joys and its sorrows); and that the ambitions and hopes 
of the world are not worthy of comparison with these 
noble and laudable ambitions to serve and to please our 
Master, and to have his rewards— the chief of which 
will be fellowship with himself in glory, and the privilege 
of being colaborers with him in the blessing of the 
world,— the grand fulfilment of the heavenly Father's 
gracious plans for the world of mankind. 



R3167 : page 91 

ABLE TO COMPREHEND WITH ALL SAINTS. 

"PROCRASTINATION is the thief of time," is 
an old proverb and a true one: and time lost 
means opportunities lost, and the advantages 
and privileges which went with the opportunities, also 
lost. If Christian people (all the truly consecrated) 
could get the proper view of the divine plan, and could 
see clearly, with the eyes of their understanding, the 
great work which God is now doing amongst mankind, 
and could see their privileges in connection therewith, 
life would become much more real, much more earnest, 
to them than it is. We do not mention the world in 
general, but recognize it as having no hearing and no 
sight for divine things now;— being blinded by the god 
of this world, and deafened by the babel and clamor, 
which he induces and perpetuates for this purpose. 
Thank God for the gracious promises of the Word: that 
in the new dispensation, under Christ's Millennial 
Kingdom, all the blind eyes shall be opened, and all 
the deaf ears shall be unstopped. (Isa. 35:5.) But, 
seeing that the world is blind and deaf, we pause not 
to attempt a miracle with its children; but follow the 
Lord's injunction, and speak, so far as possible, only 

R3167 : page 92 

to those who have ears. "He that hath an ear, let 
him hear." 



Those who have heard in any measure,— who 
have seen to any extent,— who have tasted to any degree, 
that the Lord is graciously extending his favor 
toward all those who come unto him through the Redeemer, 
and who have thus come into the household 
of faith,— are privileged far beyond the masses of our 
race who are still aliens and strangers and foreigners 
to God. But one difficulty is, that through false doctrines 
instigated by the Adversary, believers have 
gained so wrong a conception of the divine plan, and 
of the divine character formulating that plan, that they 
not only do not love God with all their heart, but, on 
the contrary, they desire to have as little to do with 
him as possible;— as little as will secure their everlasting 
escape from an eternity of torture, which they 
have been taught to believe he has prepared for the 
great mass of his creatures. 

We cannot blame people, who view God and his 
plan from this false standpoint, if they take comparatively 
little interest in studying the Bible, which they 
believe is the revelation of these horrible preparations, 
—predetermined before the world was made. Our first 
effort in approaching the average Christian professor 
should be to anoint the eyes of his understanding with 
"the oil of joy," by briefly explaining to him the way 
of the Lord more perfectly. It is well to begin where 
God begins, and where the apostles begin the story of 
salvation; viz., with the cross of Christ. It is well to 
impress, first of all, that as a race we are all under condemnation 
through original sin, and that there is no 
escape for any, except through the Redeemer whom 
God has provided. Next, it is well to show just what 
the penalty is, that it is not eternal suffering,— torment; 
but eternal death, a death from which there 
could be no recovery,— annihilation. Next, it will be 
in order to show God's compassion in providing the 
Savior, who paid for us the very penalty against us— 
that in his flesh he "suffered, the just for the unjust, 
that he might bring us to God" (1 Pet. 3:18): that he 
did not suffer eternal torment, but the very penalty 
against us; viz., eternal death. Next, it will be in order 
to show that although the flesh of Christ was thus 
given up eternally, as man's ransom price, God nevertheless 
raised him from the dead, giving him a new 
life, a new being,— making him a "new creature;" 
and that accordingly he is no longer a man in the flesh, 
but is again a spirit being, now of the divine nature, 
far above angels, principalities and powers.— Eph. 1:21; 
1 Pet. 3:22. 

Next in order it will be proper to show how the 
death of Christ could effect all mankind;— that it was 
because Jesus took the place of father Adam, and thus 
redeemed his life;— and because the whole race was 
condemned in Adam, therefore his personal redemption 
would imply, legally and justly, that the penalty 
was sufficient for the sins of the whole world condemned 



in him,— and not condemned on their own account. 

Next in order we should show that the object 

in this purchase of the world, was, and still is, that 

every member of Adam's race might have an opportunity, 

as Adam had, of showing the Lord his willingness 

to be obedient to him and to his laws, and thus 

to obtain at his hand the great gift of everlasting existence. 

To Adam only this will be really a second 

chance, as his race has had no chance yet;— being born 

in sin and under its penalty of death. 

By this time your hearer should be ready to see 
that the trial which God proposes to give mankind is 
not such a trial as comes to a felon, a convict, before a 
criminal court,— to determine whether he is guilty or 
not guilty; for, on the contrary, in the case of mankind 
God already has determined that "all are guilty," 
that "there is none righteous, no not one." It is 
because such a trial would be a useless mockery, 
that nothing of the kind is proposed by the Lord, 
though this is the unreasonable thought common among 
his people. Seeing that we are hopeless as respects 
clearing ourselves, God has by his own plan and 
arrangement already paid the penalty for every man, 
—through the sacrifice of his Son. Hence, the whole 
world of mankind, when put on trial for life everlasting, 
will not stand trial as convicts, but as redeemed 
freed-men whose release from the original death sentence 
has been fully paid by the ransom-sacrifice of 
Christ. Their trial will be to determine their choice 
of lasting life or death— on God's terms— as Adam 
made choice in his trial;— to determine which they 
would choose after gaining a knowledge of sin and its 
penalty, everlasting death,— and a knowledge of righteousness 
and the reward of righteousness, life everlasting; 
—their choice being indicated by their obedience 
or disobedience to the divine mandates. 

Whoever follows the plan thus far, is prepared to 
see that God has not yet given to mankind in general 
the great trial, or opportunity secured for all by the 
sacrifice of our Lord Jesus,— for testing their worthiness 
or unworthiness of life everlasting. All who are 
not grossly blinded by error and prejudice can see that 
a full, fair opportunity forjudging between right and 
wrong, and for choosing the right and rejecting the 
wrong, has not yet come to the world as a whole. 
They can see that ignorance, prejudice and superstition 
are blinding the world still; and looking back 
along the aisles of history they can see that such blindness 
has been in the world for centuries;— since before 
the redemption price of the world was paid. 

R3167 : page 93 

If your hearer be of an inquiring mind he will now 
be questioning when or how a full knowledge and opportunity, 
or trial will, or could be extended to mankind; 



and this will be the favorable opportunity for 

reminding him of the Apostle's words, "God hath appointed 

a day [still future] in the which he will judge 

the world [not condemn the world, for the world is 

condemned already, for which reason Christ died for 

the ungodly;— but he will judge the world in the sense 

of granting all a trial] in righteousness [under righteous, 

favorable, just, reasonable conditions] by that 

man whom he hath ordained [the great Messiah, the 

Royal Priest, whose reign is to bring blessing and uplift 

to whomsoever will of all the families of the 

earth]." (Acts 17:31.) It is of these times of blessing 

and restitution that the Apostle Peter declares 

that all the holy prophets since the world began have 

spoken. (Acts 3:19-21.) And no wonder, since they 

spoke as oracles of God; for God has had this very 

purpose from the foundation of the world;— knowing 

in advance the course that sin would take, and the 

course which man would take under the delusions of 

sin, because of experience. 

BEGINNINGS OF COMPREHENSION. 

As the mental eyes and ears of the believer begin 
to take in this fulness of God's provision for his creatures, 
his former fears begin to subside; and he begins 
to get a realizing sense of the goodness and love of 
God, as never before. But still he will have queries. 
He will want to know when this day of which the 
Apostle speaks will begin;— the day of the world's 
judgment, or trial in righteousness, under favorable 
conditions. He will want to know why it did not begin 
immediately after our Lord's death and resurrection, 
—if it waited for and was dependent upon his 
atoning work. This will be the proper opportunity for 
opening before the eyes of his understanding another 
department of our heavenly Father's gracious plan; 
—showing him what is so clearly set forth in the Scriptures; 
viz., that the Father has purposed an elect and 
select Church to be as a Bride joined to Christ, her 
Lord and Redeemer and Bridegroom;— as a special illustration 
of divine mercy and goodness, sharing his 
glory, honor and immortality;— "changed" to the divine 
nature in the first resurrection. 

He now will begin to understand faintly what the 
Apostle meant when he declared, "Eye hath not seen 
nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of 
man, the things which God hath prepared [in reservation] 
for them that love him; but God hath revealed 
them unto us by his spirit." (1 Cor. 2:9,10.) He 
will begin to appreciate the fact that when we enter 
the Lord's family and become members of the household 
of faith, we are only on the threshold, of knowledge 
and appreciation, and have need of progress and 
growth. He will begin to understand the force of the 
Apostle's words when he said, speaking to Christians, 



and not to worldly people, "I bow my knees 

unto the Father,. ..that he would grant you... 

that ye, being rooted and grounded in love, may be 

able to comprehend with all saints what is the breadth 

and length and depth and height; and to know the love 

of Christ." (Eph. 3:14-19.) As again he says, "I 

cease not to give thanks for you, making mention of 

R3168 : page 93 

you in my prayers, that the. ..Father of glory may 

give unto you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the 

knowledge of him, the eyes of your understanding being 

enlightened; that ye may know what is the hope 

of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his 

inheritance in the saints."— Eph. 1:16-18. 

It requires time for heart and head so to expand 
as to take in a glimpse of such a wonderful blessing as 
this which God has provided for the "elect." But 
whoever gets even a faint glimpse of the greatness of 
God's favor toward the Church, will not be surprised 
that in the divine plan so liberal an allowance as nearly 
nineteen centuries was made for the calling and 
chastisement and perfecting of the saints for the great 
and glorious work to which they, as joint-heirs with 
Messiah, are called. Neither will they think strange, 
the fiery trials which try all of these whom the Lord 
our God calls, and accepts as probationary members of 
the elect Kingdom class. They will perceive, readily 
enough, that if it was expedient, yea, necessary, that 
our Lord Jesus, with all of his experience in the heavenly 
courts, must "learn obedience by the things which 
he suffered," and prove his loyalty to the Father by 
faithfulness even unto death, much more must his followers 
—whose previous history was that of sinners- 
be tried and thoroughly tested in respect to their loyalty 
to the Lord. 

From this standpoint, the experiences of Christians 
take on a totally new meaning; and those who 
have made consecration of themselves to the Lord realize 
that they are running for a mark, and for a prize; 
—no longer are their steps so unsteady, no longer are 
their hearts so faint and so careless, no longer do the 
world's baubles prove so enticing and ensnaring. God 
is thus working in them through the Word of his 
grace, through its exceeding great and precious promises. 
Through these he works in them to will to be 
faithful to him; and then to do;— conform their lives 
to the requirements of his Word. The same truth becomes 
also a power, a strength of God, in them, enabling 
them more and more to do those things which 
they should— the things pleasing in God's sight. 

In this view, all is clear and plain; not only do we 

R3168 : page 94 



see that God permits evil in the world that the world 
may learn certain lessons of bitter experience, as to 
the natural rewards of evil doing, but we see also a 
ministry of evil in respect to the saints— in their testing 
and polishing and refining; making them ready, 
and proving them worthy, as overcomers, to inherit 
the wonderful things which God has in reservation for 
the faithful. This will be, to the intelligent believer, 
a full explanation of why God has not yet undertaken 
the blessing of the world;— of why the promises, made 
through the prophets, of a coming time when the 
knowledge of the Lord will fill the earth, and the curse 
be rolled away, have not yet been fulfilled. They can 
see that it is the rolling away of this curse, the wiping 
away of all tears, the bringing of blessings to mankind, 
that is the very work for which God has commissioned 
his glorified Son, and for join t-heirship in which he is 
selecting the Bride, the Lamb's wife. 

From such a vantage point of view, the most sluggish 
intellect will catch wonderful and refreshing 
glimpses of glory and blessing that are to follow, as 
soon as the present "ministry of evil" shall have accomplished 
its work. Looking into the future they 
begin to realize something of the lengths and breadths 
and heights and depths of the divine plan, and they 
will be ready to exclaim, "Oh, if God's plan is so great 
that it has required such a broad foundation, such 
great preparation, in the person of our Lord, and in 
the persons of his people who will be joint-heirs with 
him in the Kingdom, how very great must be the 
blessing that shall be ministered to the world through 
these, when the appointed time shall come!" 

At first, the thoughts of the blessing coming to 
the poor groaning creation, and of the glories coming 
to the faithful and loyal and suffering saints, will overwhelm 
your auditor; and he can see and think of nothing 
else, for a while, than the stupendous grace of 
God manifested in this wonderful plan of human salvation. 
But, by and by, he will begin to think of 
himself, and what part he is privileged to have under 
the divine arrangement; and, as he sees a possibility 
of joint-heirship with the Lord amongst the faithful 
overcomers, he will find that all the exceeding great 
and precious promises of God's Word, and the new 
hopes inspired thereby, will be an energy and a power 
in his soul which he never before knew;— a purifying 
energy, a sanctifying power. "He that hath this 
hope in him purifieth himself, even as he is pure." 
Instinctively he will begin to heed the Apostle's exhortation, 
to "lay aside every weight, and the sin 
that doth so easily beset us; and to run with patience 
the race that is set before us in the Gospel."— 
Heb. 12:1. 

Soon after, various exhortations of the Word will 
have a new and a deeper meaning to him. As for instance, 
when he reads the Apostle's exhortation, "Let 



us cleanse ourselves from all filthiness of the flesh and 

of the spirit, perfecting holiness in the reverence of the 

Lord" (2 Cor. 7:1), his words, his thoughts, his actions, 

his clothing, his personal appearance, will all 

come under inspection from a new standpoint;— he is 

no longer a condemned sinner, but a justified and 

sanctified son of God;— his representative;— his ambassador. 

It will be a new thought to him, to some 

extent, that cleansing the flesh is a part of the sanctifying 

work; and that a cleansing of the spirit or mind 

or thoughts or intentions, is equally necessary,— in 

order to the attainment of a condition of heart pleasing 

and acceptable to the Lord. And although he will 

never attain the perfection in the flesh, because of 

inherited blemishes, he will, nevertheless, assuredly 

make considerable progress in this direction; and not 

to see some progress should be a cause of disappointment, 

and should lead to self-examination at the mercy-seat. 

(Heb. 4:16.) He will hear, moreover, the 

Apostle Peter's exhortation to the same class, saying, 

"Add to your faith virtue [fortitude]; and to virtue 

knowledge; and to knowledge self-control; and to 

self-control patience; and to patience godliness; and 

to godliness brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness 

love. For if these things be in you and abound 

they make you that ye shall be neither barren nor 

unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

...For so an entrance shall be ministered unto you 

abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord 

and Savior Jesus Christ."— 2 Pet. 1:5-8,11. 



R3169 : page 94 

LIFE AND DEATH. 

So he died for his faith; that is fine- 
More than most of us do. 

But stay, can you add to that line 
That he lived for it, too? 

In his death he bore witness at last 

As a martyr to truth; 
Did his life do the same in the past, 

From the days of his youth? 

It is easy to die; men have died 
For a wish or a whim— 

From bravado or passion or pride- 
Was it harder for him? 

But to live— every day to live out 

All the truth that he dreamt, 
While his friends met his conduct with doubt, 

And the world with contempt;— 



Was it thus that he plodded ahead, 

Never turning aside? 
Then we'll talk of the life that he led— 

Never mind how he died. —Ernest Crosby. 



R3168 : page 95 

LETTERS OF INTEREST. 

DEAR MR. RUSSELL- 

My sister and I are forwarding our subscriptions for 
the WATCH TOWER for the ensuing year. You must get 
many letters of the sort that I am going to write to you, 
but you can never tire of hearing how our loving Father 
uses you for emancipating and feeding burdened and hungry 
souls such as we were before we read your books. We 
daily bless God for raising you up to be such an unspeakable 
blessing to us. The feast spread before us and the 
light shed upon God's Word almost overwhelms us at times. 
If you had known us two years ago! We were brought 
up with the doctrine of eternal misery of some sort for the 
vast majority, and only a few to be saved, drilled into us. 
We never really accepted it complacently, and in consequence 
we were in bondage for the struggling masses,— but 
I am sure you must understand all that we went through. 
For years we prayed that God would reveal himself in love 
to us but did not understand in the least how he would do 
it; and now he has; and how fully only those who have 
read and love your books know. We love the TOWERS 
and look for them. 

We both do what we can to spread the glorious gospel 
of the love of God, but are most surprised to find that professedly 
Christian, consecrated people will not search the 
Scriptures to see whether these things are so, and have simply 
repudiated the subject. We cannot understand it. We 
have been used of the Lord for ordinary professors of religion 
and for people of the world, and have found some of 
them really hungry. We understand our Lord's words 
now, "Ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make 
you free." Yours in our Redeemer and Lord, 
(MRS.) E. NEWTON-England. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Greetings to you in the Lord! My heart is filled with 
joy over the remarkable attention the Truth has drawn in 
the Carnegie Hall meetings, and what a joy it must be to 
you to be the instrument in the Lord's hands to convey 
the wonderful message to "whosoever hath an ear." May 
God's blessings continue to rest on you richly and abound, 
and on your noble coworkers in the Allegheny Church. 

Just a few words about the class here. I think it is 



because the Lord has been opening my eyes more and more 

each month and filling my heart with heavenly blessings 

that I am able to see the wonderful growth of the others in 

our class. The spirit of love and unselfishness is growing 

very rapidly, for which we greatly rejoice in the Lord. 

We meet every Sunday afternoon for Bible study, and Sunday 

night we use our new Bibles and DAWNS and TOWERS. 

Wednesday evening we have a prayer and testimony meeting, 

and the last Friday evening of each month we meet 

for a song service and a general good talk along the lines 

of the truth. 

There are quite a few getting interested and we feel 
quite encouraged. One of these was a very worldly man, 
and a chance (?) sentence or two of mine one day in the 

R3169 : page 95 

shop raised a question in his mind which I was only too 
glad to answer. The seed seemed to light on good soil, 
and I gave him the first volume to read, then the second 
and third. Of course profanity had to go, and then tobacco 
and so on, and he is really making remarkable 
progress. Your brother in the Lord, 

C. B. SHULL,-Ohio. 



DEAR FRIENDS :- 

Our Volunteer report is tardy, but the churches have 
comparatively few in attendance until the weather begins 
to be unfavorable at the Beaches, at which time also the 
tourists begin to reach here, making it more favorable to 
await. 

We received 14,000 TOWERS for distribution, only 
400 of which are on hand; these remaining ones we will 
see are properly disposed of. 

Our Volunteers have manifested more love and zeal, I 
think, than in the past, and feel they were disappointed to 
find the work completed for this time. We meet more 
opposition than ever in the past. One minister came out 
the church and said he would see to it that there were laws 
passed which would stop this distribution of literature. 
When he left his church his farewell sermon was against 
this truth. In private, this same man said he thought he 
would do God a service to take the lives of such people 
who held such devilish doctrines. 

We served about 1 10 churches in L A and about 

21 churches in surrounding towns. The friends at P 

served their churches alone this year. 

We thank you all for your share in this work, your 
labor of love, and are grateful for the privilege we have in 
service, and trust we may receive more ammunition for future 
work. Sincerely yours in Him, 

ROBT. NAIRN,-California. 



DEAR BRETHREN:- 

I received box of tracts some time ago with joy. It 
gives me joy to read the report in the TOWER at the last of 
the year— to know of the tons of glad tidings going forth in 
search of wheat grains. I have filled out and mailed all the 
addressed wrappers you sent me for India and other foreign 
countries, without the loss of one. I have, by the Lord's 
help, mailed over forty-seven thousand tracts since March 
26, 1901, including the India and foreign mail, besides 
about twelve thousand before that date, while I was not so 
deeply interested. As I am appointed by the community 
of this place and the Post Office Department to hold the office 
of postmaster, the Lord, I think, has opened a way for me to 
work. I wish to use it, so long as it will be opened, for the 
good work, as I fear soon we will not be permitted to distribute 
the glad tidings. The Lord said, "Work while it is 
day, for the night cometh when no man can work." 

Your unworthy servant in the Lord, 

J. L. FREED,— Pennsylvania. 



page 97 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIV. APRIL 1, 1903. No. 7 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 99 

The Groaning Creation 99 

Newer Methods in Winning Souls 99 

The Observance of Lent 100 

Socialists Thank Morgan for Aid 101 

Recent Allegheny "Chart Talks" 102 

Changes in the European Itinerary 102 

Bro. Henninges Goes Abroad 102 

The Responsibilities of Eldership 102 

"Your Labor is Not in Vain" 106 

Interesting Questions Answered Ill 

page 98 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



MISSIONARY ENVELOPES. 



These are now in stock in large quantity. Every letter 
you send through the mail may be a more or less potent 
messenger of the truth, even on its outside, by the use of 
these envelopes. They catch the attention not only of 
those to whom they are addressed, but postmen and others 



have an opportunity, and often the curiosity, to read their 
message of peace,— the gospel in a condensed form. Price, 
25c per hundred, postpaid. 

MISSIONARY LETTER PAPER. 



A new lot of the blue bond letter paper is also ready. 
Size 8-1/2 x 1 1 inches, with Scriptural heading, and WATCH 
TOWER publications notices on back. Price, 25c per lb., 
postage extra, 15c. A pound contains about 100 sheets. 

VOLUNTEER AMMUNITION FOR 1903. 



We are preparing two million tracts for this year's work: 
paper is already ordered and we will be ready to ship the 
tracts we hope in April. Let the captains get ready the 
forces and notify us during March the amounts they will be 
able to use advantageously. 



R3169 : page 99 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
THE GROANING CREATION. 



THE greatest affliction of the world is discontent: 
the great prosperity of the few causes the 
masses to "fret," and the more so as knowledge 
increases. Individually and nationally the world 
is restless. Yet statesmen especially are fearful of 
war— fearful, too, that despite their desire to avoid it 
something may enkindle the blaze which may involve 
all Europe. (1) Trouble is feared in Macedonia, an 
eastern province of Turkey, peopled by socalled Christians 
who are in a state of ferment because of various 
oppressions. The country under the misrule of Turkey 
is, according to apparently reliable accounts, so 
infested with robbers, "brigands," that neither life 
nor property is safe. The Turkish tax-gatherers 
oppress the people. The result is discouragement, 
and anarchy is expected in the spring. This will call 
for Turkish soldiers and a general and terrible slaughter 
is expected. 

(2) The further fear is that Russia will seize such 
an occasion and join in the war;— either because of the 
sympathy of the people of Russia for all Greek Catholics 
or with a desire on the part of their government 
to seize more territory. (3) It is generally admitted 



that this might lead to further strife between the great 

powers of Europe. This might start a flame of war 

which might be difficult to extinguish; for (4) Austria-Hungary 

is in a bad way— almost ready for civil 

war. (5) Italy has a grudge against Austria of 37 

years' standing, which one of her chief ministers of 

state recently referred to publicly. (6) France still 

nurses her grudge against Germany and wants back 

Alsace and Lorraine. (7) Germany is approaching 

some kind of a crisis: Socialism there is growing 

so rapidly that all the other political parties have been 

compelled to unite to oppose it. The three old parties 

have just entered into an agreement that whichever 

party polled the largest vote in each district at 

the last election shall have the support of the others 

as against Socialism. This will probably keep the 

Socialists from gaining full control until the subsequent 

election,— 1908. Then they and the Kaiser will 

have a settlement. 

NEWER METHODS IN WINNING SOULS. 



Under the above caption the St. Louis Globe-Democrat 
publishes the following account of a recent 
discourse:— 

"Dr. David F. Bradley, president of Iowa College, 
Grinnell, la., occupied the pulpit of the First 
Congregational church yesterday morning and evening. 
At the morning service Dr. Bradley spoke from 
John 12:32: 'And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, 
will draw all men unto myself.' 

"Dr. Bradley asked if Jesus expected the fulfilment 
of the prophecy that all men would be drawn to 
him, and if the present indications pointed to its fulfilment, 
answering both questions in the affirmative. 

"The Christian powers, he said, were dominating 
the earth, and this was especially true of the last century. 
St. Louis, with the vast territory of which it 
was the center, a hundred years ago was in savagery, 
but was now dedicated to Christianity. This condition 
was true not only of America, but of other 
countries. 

"Africa, the dark continent of a few years ago, 
was now dominated by Christian countries, and slavery 
in all its hideous forms was rapidly being eliminated 
by the onward march of the Christian religion. 

"The emancipation of Egypt by the occupation 
of the English, and the control of India, with its 250,000,000 
of people, by a monarch who is the sworn 
defender of the faith, were indications that all men 
were being drawn to Christ. 

"Russia, which had reclaimed northern Asia; 

R3170 :page 100 



Japan, which had joined the family of Christian nations, 
and the recent opening of China to the outside 
world, thus bringing one-third of the population of 
the earth in direct contact with the progressive peoples 
of other nations, showed that the fulfilment of 
the prophecy was near at hand. 

"There was a closer unity of the nations of the 
world now than ever before. The introduction of the 
railroad, the telegraph and other facilities which 
bring all parts of the world into closer contact with 
one another, had done much toward spreading the 
teachings of the Christian religion. 

"These facilities had also caused a wider dissemination 
of the English language, which was essentially 
the language of purity. This had done much to 
counteract the effects of the teachings of the native 
languages which were corrupt and unclean. All these 
things had worked for the inculcation of Christian 
ideas. 

"The conditions at home were also more favorable 
than ever before. There was a greater unity 
among the churches. They were working not only 
independently for the regeneration of the world, but 
acting in concert for the same great end. 

"In conclusion, Dr. Bradley said that everything 
was in favor of the optimist's view of the text, and 
pointed to its fulfilment. The time was not far distant 
when all men would be drawn to Christ." 



"Live and learn" is an old proverb; but it will 
take some of us a long time to learn that soldiers, 
steamboats, telegraphs, railroads and other modern 
conveniences are the new missionaries of the cross of 
Christ. It will be a long time before some of us learn 
that Civilization is merely another name for Christianization. 
If it is still true that there is no other name 
under heaven, given among men, whereby we must 
be saved than the name of Jesus— through faith in his 
name and obedience to his Word— then some of us 
will be hard to convince that the millions who are receiving 
the blessings and conveniences of our day are 
thereby receiving Christ. 

How blinding must be the education and title of 
a Doctor of Divinity;— "deceiving and being deceived." 
Others of far less opportunity can see clearly, 
that love of money, selfishness and discontent are 
devouring true religious instincts in all classes, and in 
all quarters. Others can see that, while benevolences 
are increasing and "a form of godliness" is maintained, 
vital piety, sanctity, consecration to God's 
will, as well as faith in the inspiration of the Scriptures, 
are waning rapidly in every direction. 

If the whole world were civilized— as highly as 



the most civilized nations of "Christendom"— how 
far from the true Christian standard of saintship its 
millions would still be. How much need there would 
still be for us to pray: "Thy Kingdom come! Thy 
will be done!— on earth, even as in heaven!" 

THE OBSERVANCE OF LENT. 



The following is from the Pittsburg Post:— 

"The observance of Lent, formerly confined to 
the Roman Catholic, Episcopal and Lutheran churches, 
now extends to the religious public very generally; 
and for the society of fashionable gaiety quite universally 
it has become a period of relative asceticism. 

"This extension of regard for the Lenten fast has 
been coincident with an actual or supposed loosening 
of the hold of religious doctrines on a large part of 
Protestantism, more especially. Whether there has 
been a diminution in the attendance on religious services 
generally during that period of declension we 
have no comparative statistics to enable us to determine, 
though it seems to have been proved that in 
New York at present the great majority of the population 
do not go to church on Sunday— something like 
two -thirds. 

"A similar census in London shows that in 12 of 
the boroughs with a population exceeding two millions, 
only about one in five are church attendants, 
counting the number at both the morning and evening 
services, and only one-half of them at the Anglican 
churches. In New York, out of a total attendance 
of about four hundred and fifty thousand, nearly 
three-fourths were found in Roman Catholic churches; 
and of the rest of the attendance, about 30 per cent, 
was in Episcopal and Lutheran churches. 

"It appears, therefore, that of the people of New 
York who pay heed to religious observances, something 
like four-fifths frequent the churches which 
hold to the celebration of the Lenten fast. But, as 
we have already suggested, some special regard for 
that season is beginning to be paid by Protestant denominations 
which used to look on it as a detestable 
relic of 'Popery.' For example, we find in the Christian 
Intelligencer of the Reformed Church, an appeal 
by the 'National Central Committee of the Twentieth 
Century Gospel Campaign,' a distinctively Evangelical' 
enterprise, that Ash Wednesday be observed by 
the churches as a special day of humiliation and prayer, 
'That the praying may not be general and indefinite, 
the committee suggests the following topics:— 

'"1. For a return of absolute faith in the Bible, as the 
inspired, authoritative Word of God, and as furnishing the 
churches their only credentials and message; and for an 
immediate revival of earnest and systematic study of that 



Word in order to learn what God would have us to do in 
the present conditions. 

'"2. For a quickened sense of the sinfulness of sin, 
and of man's lost and hopeless condition as a sinner in 
time and eternity. 

'"3. For a new vision of the greatness, sufficiency 
and efficacy of the atonement of Jesus Christ wrought on the 
cross, and to be universally proclaimed as the only hope for 
lost man. 

'"4. For an overwhelming sense of the obligations 
and responsibility on the part of every professed follower 
of Christ, for witnessing to the lost soul nearest him— and 
to all lost souls he can reach— of the dying love and saving 
power of Christ, and urging the immediate acceptance 
of salvation by his blood. 

'"5. For an immediate entrance of all Christians 
upon a campaign of personal work in seeking and winning 

R3170 :page 101 

lost souls, "beginning at Jerusalem"— at home— and reaching 
out to the uttermost parts of the earth. 

'"6. For a mighty outpouring of and enduement 
with, the holy spirit, that the church throughout the entire 
nation may, by his enlightening influence, be brought to 
understand these life and death truths and be guided in meeting 
these awful and inescapable responsibilities.'" 



We read the above six topics with interest 
amounting to amazement. Whoever drafted that list 
was either "not far from the Kingdom" and "an Israelite 
indeed," or else he was a hypocrite. We should 
be glad to learn that the entire committee agreed to 
the topics heartily and intelligently— appreciating 
specially the features which we have italicized. Our 
best wish for all the people of New York and of the 
whole world would be that all or at least some of them, 
may observe Lent and join in such petitions heartily: if 
but one in a hundred of those who will observe the 
Lenten season will do so, it will surely mean a great 
revival in their own hearts. 

To us who observe the Memorial Supper on its 
anniversary only, the occasion is one of the greater 
solemnity, and may well be approached with the greater 
reverence. We commend to all of "this way" 
(Acts 9:2) that the interim between now and the 
Memorial (April 10th) be specially a season of prayer 
and fasting— drawing near to the Lord. (1 Cor. 7:5.) 
True, the Lord's consecrated people are continually 
to live as separate from sin and from the mind of the 
flesh as possible, and are to "pray without ceasing"; 
but, as the Apostle intimates, there may profitably be 
special seasons of this kind; and surely none more 
appropriate than this Memorial season. The fasting 



which we urge may or may not affect the food and 
drink, according to the judgment of each, respecting 
what diet will best enable him to glorify God and to 
keep his "body under." We refer specially to abstention 
from all "fleshly lusts which war against the 
soul"; these appetites always under restraint with 
the saints, may well be specially mortified at this time. 

SOCIALISTS THANK MORGAN FOR AID. 



The following we clip from the North American, 
a thoroughly reliable journal:— 

"The State committee of the Socialist party of 
Pennsylvania has instructed its secretary to send a 
letter to J. Pierpont Morgan to thank him, as the 
representative of the trusts, for the aid which monopolies 
are giving to the Socialist movement in the 
United States. 

"According to the letter, Mr. Morgan does not 
know anything about Socialism, and does not see what 
propaganda work he is doing in furtherance of the 
cooperative commonwealth— the Socialist ideal. 

"The great trust-maker is frankly told that he 
cannot help his actions as a Socialist agitator, being 
moved thereto by certain inevitable laws of economic 
development over which he has no control. The letter 
says the trusts have demonstrated the wastefulness 
of competition and the practicability of combination 
on a large scale. While the Socialists say they press 
forward toward that goal where the nation will own 
the trusts, they are careful to say that they are not 
adverse to taking remedial measures, en route, such as 
shorter hours, more wages, factory regulations, etc. 

"Following is the letter in full:— 
'"J. Pierpont Morgan, New York City. 

'"Dear Sir:— As a preface to this letter and as an 
excuse for the liberty we take in addressing you, we desire 
to say that we consider you one of the most notable characters 
the world has seen. At the same time we cannot 
forbear adding that we are of the opinion that you are 
an unconscious tool in the hands of natural forces, a chief 
factor in certain social and economic tendencies, whereof 

R3171 :page 101 

you know not the meaning and of which you cannot see 
the end. You are the leader of the great modern so-called 
trust movement, which is doing more to prepare civilized 
countries for the advent of Socialism than all the feeble 
efforts of us working-men. We know, or at least have good 
grounds for supposing, that you honestly dislike Socialists 
without exactly knowing why. We cannot blame you for 
this, because you unwittingly manifest the feeling of your 
class. As your friend, Emperor William, frankly said, 



you know nothing about Socialism— "the great question 
of the day"— but then a man in your position does not, in 
the nature of things, have time to study social science. 

'"Political economy, as taught in all the schools today 
is an anachronism, holding that competition is the best means 
of advancing the welfare of society; whereas the successful 
operation of the trust has demonstrated at once the practicability 
of cooperation and the impossibility of a continuance 
of competition. The Socialists have maintained this 
for the last fifty years, in proof of which we refer you to the 
predictions of Karl Marx in Das Kapital. 

'"For years the recognized intellectual class has told 
us that production on a national or world-wide scale was 
impossible; that one man or group of men could not conduct 
such vast enterprises; that they would break down of 
their own weight— in short, that they were an ephemeral 
phase of economic development. We could not convince 
the intellectuals to the contrary; but the stern logic of 
events has proved the correctness of our position. The 
trust convinces the most obtuse. 

'"Our position, in brief, is as follows:— 

"In the United States, as in all other civilized countries, 
the natural order of economic development has separated 
society into two antagonistic classes— the capitalistic, 
a comparatively small class, the possessors of all the means 
of production and distribution (land, mines, machinery 
and the means of transportation and communication), and 
the larger and ever-increasing class of wage-workers who 
possess no property at all. This economic supremacy has 
secured to the dominant class the full control of the government, 
the pulpit, the schools and the subsidized press. It 
has thus made the capitalist class the arbiter of the fate of 
the workers, whom it is reducing to a condition of dependence, 
economically exploited and oppressed, intellectually 
and physically crippled and degraded. Under these 
conditions their political equality is a bitter mockery. 
The present government is a conspiracy of organized and 
incorporated wealth, hiding behind and secretly manipulating 
the political machine. 

"The contest between these two classes grows ever 
sharper. Hand-in-hand with the growth of monopolies 

R3171 :page 102 

goes the annihilation of small industries and of the middle 
class depending on them. Ever larger grows the multitude 
of destitute wage-workers and of the unemployed, and 
ever fiercer the struggle between the class of the exploiter 
and the exploited. 

'"Socialists demand that this struggle shall cease, but 
it will cease only with the elimination of its causes. To 
eliminate these causes it is necessary to abolish the private 
ownership of the modern tool of production— the trust— 
and place its ownership in the hands of the people. To 
accomplish this, it is necessary to arouse the wealth producers 
to a recognition of their class interest and weld 



them into a compact political force. This Socialists are 
doing, and the development of the trust constantly accelerates 
the movement. 

'"Our ultimate goal is the cooperative commonwealth, 
but in striving for it we do not hesitate to seize any 
opportunity to improve the condition of the working class, 
such as securing a shorter workday, increased wages, child 
labor laws, factory regulations, employers' liability acts, 
etc. 

'"The Socialist vote in the United States now numbers 
one-third of a million; in industrial Pennsylvania, 
28,000; in intellectual Massachusetts, 40,000. These few 
facts, Mr. Morgan, constrain us to acknowledge our indebtedness 
to you and your class for demonstrating the practicability 
and inevitability of Socialism. 

'"Yours truly, FRED LONG, Secretary. 

'"By direction of the State committee." 

RECENT ALLEGHENY "CHART-TALKS." 



Replying to many letters of inquiry, we report to 
all friends of the cause that the six meetings held 
here recently in Carnegie Music Hall— instead of in 
our usual chapel— to afford opportunity for the public 
—were quite successful, so far as human judgment 
can determine. The attendance was good; at the 
first meeting at least 600 and at the others 800 or 
over, each. The audiences were not aristocratic, but 
very intelligent, and almost exclusively of the middle 
aged and elderly. The closest of attention was given, 
although the discourses were three or four times as 
long as many of the auditors were accustomed to. 

We cannot doubt that some prejudices and misconceptions 
were removed; and we certainly trust 
that some were led to clearer views of our gracious 
heavenly Father and his plans for man's salvation. 
Let us hope also that some who heard will be drawn 
by the cords of love nearer to the Lord. We can only 
do our best and leave all results with the Lord. It is 
his work specially, and ours only as his mouthpieces 
and representatives. The speaker and all of the Allegheny 
Church were surely blessed in the efforts put 
forth to reach with the truth "brethren" still in 
"Babylon." 

CHANGES IN THE EUROPEAN ITINERARY. 



We are advised by our Swiss brethren that arrangements 
have been made for a General Convention 
of German and Swiss friends, to be held at Zurich, 
Switzerland, May 31 and June 1, at which a large 
number of friends is expected. We, therefore, change 



the date of the Editor's visit in that vicinity to conform 
with this arrangement, and announce that he will 
be at Zurich May 3 1 and June 1, instead of Thun, May 
23 and 24. 

In view of increasing interest in Ireland, we have 
decided to include that country in the visit, and, if the 
hoped-for arrangements for public meetings are made, 
they will be as follows:— 

Dublin May 21, 22. 

Belfast May 24. 

In all these places he will be very pleased to greet 
the interested, and trusts that as far as practicable, 
these will make themselves known to him. 

BROTHER HENNINGES GOES ABROAD. 



Believing that the general interests of the work 
hoped to be accomplished through the Editor's visit 
abroad will be thereby advanced, it has been decided 
that Brother E. C. Henninges shall go, too. Indeed, 
he goes before— hoping to assist in making arrangements 
for the meetings and in gathering information 
necessary to the determining of the further course of 
operations in various parts of Europe. He is sure of 
a cordial welcome, and looks forward with pleasure to 
meeting the friends of present truth in London on April 
5th, and also on the Memorial occasion, April 10th, 
and to accompanying the Editor, as above. 



R3171 :page 102 

THE RESPONSIBILITIES OF ELDERSHIP. 

-ACTS 20:28-38. -APRIL 5.- 

"Remember the words of the Lord Jesus how he said, 
It is more blessed to give than to receive." 

THE Apostle Paul, on leaving Ephesus after the 
rioting there, determined to visit Jerusalem 
again, but first would visit the European 
churches— of Macedonia and Greece. It was while in 
Macedonia that he is supposed to have written his second 
letter to the Corinthians; and, on this tour, while 
in Corinth for about three months, he is supposed to 
have written his epistle to the Romans. At this time 
Nero, aged 21, was Emperor of Rome, and the Apostle 
Paul was about 56 years of age— in the full prime of 
his Christian life and experience. 

Our lesson finds the Apostle en route to Jerusalem, 
on a trading vessel which was detained at the port of 
Miletus, about thirty miles distant from Ephesus. The 



number of days the vessel would be detained, changing 
cargo, etc., was uncertain; hence, the Apostle, instead 
of going to Ephesus, sent word to the elders of the 
Church there that they might come to him at Miletus 

R3171 :page 103 

—that thus he might have as long as possible 

with them, without missing his vessel when it would 

be ready to start. The elders came, and our lesson 

records the Apostle's address to them. They may 

have stayed several days in his company, and probably 

he said much more, but the final words evidently, in 

the mind of Luke, who chronicled them, were an epitome 

of the entire address, which is generally esteemed 

as both eloquent and touching. It is an address from 

a general overseer to local overseers, and to be appreciated 

must be viewed from this standpoint. 

"Take heed unto yourselves": well did the Apostle 
realize that those who do not keep guard over their 
own hearts can not faithfully serve the interests of the 
Church in general. Piety, as well as charity, should 
begin at home. Along this line John Calvin said, 
"No one can successfully care for the salvation of others 
who neglects his own, since he himself is a part of 
the flock." This thought is brought out by the Apostle, 

R3172:page 103 

also, saying, "And [take heed] to all the flock, 

over the which the holy spirit hath made you overseers" 

—more properly, "in the which," as in the 

Revised Version; for the overseers are not to be considered 

lords over the flock, but members in it who 

have a responsibility respecting fellow-members. The 

care of the overseer should not be confined to the well-favored 

members of the flock, financially, socially, 

educationally or otherwise; but as the Apostle declares, 

should be general "to all the flock"— including 

the poorest as well as the most uncouth naturally. 

The elders were not necessarily aged men, according 
to the flesh; for in the Church of Christ the flesh 
is reckoned as dead;— their age, their maturity, their 
eldership, is as New Creatures. Although the chosen 
representatives of the Church, they were to esteem 
their responsibility as coming from on high;— however 
earthly influences had been associated with their appointment, 
their obligation was really as representatives 
of the Lord, through his holy spirit. The word 
"Elders" here is the same as Presbytery in 1 Tim. 4:14; 
and the word "overseers" is the same elsewhere 
in the Scriptures rendered "bishop," signifying 
one charged with a duty respecting others. We 
thus see that this word bishop, or overseer, has in 
modern times been divested of its original simplicity. 
The elders of the Church of Christ are its overseers, 



and should realize the responsibility of the position 
they have accepted. The Apostle Paul was an overseer 
in a general sense; as he himself expresses it, he 
had "the care of all the churches"— particularly of all 
those which, in the Lord's providence, he had been the 
means of establishing in the truth, or who accepted his 
ministry, either in person or by letter. While the holy 
spirit has the supervision of such matters, it, nevertheless, 
remains for the congregation of the Lord's people 
to note the leadings of the spirit in the appointment of 
overseers, and to accept such, and only such, and so 
much overseeing and supervision as they believe to be 
of the Lord's providence. 

Mr. Thompson-Seton, the renowned student of 
wild animals, relates in his work, "Lives of the Hunted," 
that "the leaders of the flock gain and hold their position 
as leaders, not from any authority over the flock, 
but from the fact that they have shown themselves 
wisest in finding the best pastures and the most successful 
in guarding against enemies,— the flock having 
learned to trust them." This furnishes a good illustration 
of what the attitude of the Lord's people 
should be toward those whom they accept as superintendents, 
overseers, elders,— according to the Scriptures. 
But alas! we find in the church nominal many 
leaders who seem to be nearly devoid of the proper 
qualities of leadership here referred to by the Apostle: 
(1) to oversee, or look out for, the interests of the 
flock in general; and (2) to feed them. It should be 
observed that the position of a bishop gives no authority 
over the Church, except that which properly comes 
from great piety, wisdom and experience. The flock 
is to be guarded against errors of doctrine, and from 
false teachers, and to be guided into the richest pastures 
of the Word of God, and into the brightest Christian 
experiences, and into the fields of greatest 
usefulness. 

A prominent writer on this subject says:— 

"Mr. Ruskin, in his Sesame and Lilies, commenting 
on the strange phrase, 'blind mouths,' in Milton's Lycidas, 
says: 'Those two monosyllables express the precisely accurate 
contraries of right character in the two great offices of 
the Church— those of bishop and pastor. A bishop means a 
person who sees; a pastor means one who feeds; the most 
unbishoply character a man can have is, therefore, to be 
blind; the most unpastoral is, instead of feeding, to want 
to be fed. Nearly all the evils of the Church have arisen 
from bishops desiring power more than light. They want 
authority, not outlooking. It is the king's (Christ is our 
King) office to rule: the bishop's office is to oversee the 
flock, to number it sheep by sheep; to be ready always to 
give full account of it.'" 

The Apostle states the grounds for so earnest an 
exhortation: (1) The Church which they were overseeing 
and feeding was to be recognized as God's 
Church, "purchased with the blood of his own [Son]."* 



*This is not be understood as conflicting with other 
Scriptural statements to the effect that our Lord Jesus 
"bought us with his own precious blood." Both thoughts 
are correct: though they view the subject from two different 
standpoints. From the larger standpoint, God is the 
originator of the entire plan of salvation— from start to 
finish he is thus the Savior. But he accomplishes the salvation 
through the Son: he laid help [for us] upon one 
who was mighty to save— fully qualified. (Isa. 43:11; 1 Tim. 2:5; 
4:10; Psa. 89:19.) Thus every feature of our 
salvation is of the Father, though by the Son, as the 
Apostle clearly points out.— 1 Cor. 8:6. 

R3172:page 104 

That which God so highly valued, and purchased at so 
great a price, is to be esteemed very precious by all 
who would be his servants and its servants. (2) Because 
dangers and foes would arise; and while these 
could not come without divine permission, it is a part 
of the divine will that they shall serve as tests of faith 
and loyalty of the entire flock, including the elders, 
overseers, pastors. The energy necessary to such resistance 
of evil would tend to develop character which 
God desires each member of his flock to have. God 
would not suffer them to be tempted above that they 
were able, but would with every temptation, or trial, 
provide a way of escape; but he would have them learn 
to trust him, to exercise faith and obedience and vigilance 
and resistance of evil. 

The Apostle evidently knew by inspiration of some 
kind that he would never see these dear brethren again 
—that his mission in this field was at a close, and as a 
true under-shepherd he was looking out for the interests 
of the flock. He knew, probably from the 
prophecy of Daniel, that a great falling away was to 
come;— that the Adversary was to be permitted to develop 
a great antichrist system,— as he subsequently 
wrote to the Church at Thessalonica; and he wished 
the local overseers to realize the responsibility of their 
position, and to be vigilant. "Grievous wolves shall 
enter in amongst you, not sparing the flock;"— ambitious 
for power, influence, etc., they would not hesitate 
to barter the interests of the flock for their own 
advancement. Another source of danger would be 
from within— "of your own selves" some would rise 
up— be puffed up with ambition, to have followers, 
adherents, and would lead them into false doctrines, 
to the injury of themselves and those misled by them. 

The knowledge of these things was to keep them on 
guard continually, not only as against wolves from without, 
but against the rising of ambitious ones amongst 
their own number— not necessarily watching each other 



merely, but rather each specially watching and guarding 

his own heart against the insidious attacks of the 

Adversary along the lines indicated,— too great self-esteem 

or desire to be great. The Apostle, we may be 

sure, was glad to be able to point to his own course in 

their midst, as an example of proper humility of spirit, 

and of zeal for the interests of the flock. "Remember 

that by the space of three years I ceased not to warn 

[admonish] everyone day and night with tears." The 

secret of the Apostle's zeal lay, evidently, in his appreciation 

of the fact that he was God's ambassador, and 

that the work of the Lord in which he was privileged 

to be a coworker, is a most important one— relating 

first to the salvation and perfecting of the saints, the 

elect, and ultimately through them to the blessing of all 

the families of the earth. Had the Apostle, during those 

three years, been neglecting the spiritual interests of the 

flock, he could not have made such an address as this 

to the elders. It would not have done to have said: 

Ye remember how many entertainments of a frivolous 

character I attended with you and helped to arrange; 

the oyster suppers and peach-and-cream festivals; the 

private theatricals, charades and tableaux, and general 

fun- and money-making schemes which we entered 

into. The Apostle's appreciation of the fact that he 

was an ambassador for the King of kings, was ever present 

with him and lent a force and earnestness to his 

entreaties on behalf of righteousness and spirituality, 

which, with his tears, were much better backing than 

frivolities of any kind. 

Turning from the darker picture of coming trials 
and difficulties, the Apostle commended the brethren 
to the Lord, who loved his Church so as to purchase 
it, who watches over its interests, so that the Adversary 
cannot harm those who faithfully follow the Captain 
of their salvation,— assuring them that this grace 
of God might be expected to come to them through his 
Word. The Apostle had nothing to say against colleges 
and seminaries and worldly sciences of themselves; 
but when he would mention the power that is to keep 
the Lord's people against the wiles of the Adversary 
it was not to these that he pointed his colaborers, but 
to the sword of the spirit, which is the Word of God. 
We of the present time may well lay this testimony 
to heart; for today we see foes assaulting the Lord's 
flock on every hand; wolves who, in the name of science, 
would not spare the flock, but dash to pieces the 
faith, the hope, the trust, of the Lord's people, giving 
them nothing substantial in return; "higher critics" 
vaunting themselves upon their superior learning and 
their ability to distinguish between inspiration and 
non-inspiration, and who offer to select for the sheep 
an occasional blade of grass from the Word of God, 
which, however, they assure the sheep, requires much 
scholastic learning to make nutritive. 

Today, also, we see in every direction this same tendency 



on the part of some amongst ourselves to arise and 
to seek to draw away disciples after them; and we need 
to remember that the defense of the sheep is not to be 
found in worldly wisdom, but in the power of God, as 
represented in the Word and plan of God. As the 
Apostle said to these elders of Ephesus, so we may hear 
him say to us, that the Word of God is able to build 
us up substantially, to make us "strong in the Lord 
and in the power of his might," and to give us eventually 

R3173 :page 105 

"an inheritance amongst all them which are 
sanctified." 

It is worthy of note here that all the inheritances 
and eternal rewards held before the Lord's people in 
the Scriptures are to the "sanctified"— none of them 
are promised to any other class. One of the Society's 
colporteurs recently wrote us that when about to deliver 
a volume of the DAWN series to a person who had 
subscribed, the lady made objection, and declined to 
take the book, saying that she understood it denied 
that the Scriptures taught a hell of eternal torture; and 
that she was sure to the contrary, and that if there is 
no such place there ought to be. The colporteur replied 
by inquiring who she believed would be saved, 
and she answered, "The holy, the sanctified," the 
ones mentioned by the Apostle in this lesson. The 
colporteur asked the lady if she claimed to be one of 
the consecrated saints of God. She answered, "No." 
He then replied, "You are expecting, then, to spend 
eternity in torment?" 

The lady saw at once the force of the erroneous 
argument, and said she would take the book, concluding 
that if all were to go to eternal torment who were 
not of the sanctified class the outlook for the future 
would be horrible, for almost the entire race. What a 
relief we find in the clearer knowledge of the divine 
plan, which shows us that the inheritance of the sanctified 
is to be the Kingdom, at the second advent of 
our Lord; and that the Kingdom then to be established 
is to be the divine agency for blessing the world 
of mankind with a clear knowledge of God, and a full 
opportunity to accept his grace and mercy and blessing 
unto sanctification and everlasting life through our 
Lord Jesus. 

Having commended them to the Word of God, the 
Apostle draws attention to his own mode of life, while 
with them, as a proper illustration of the effect of the 
Gospel in a sanctified heart— as a proper example of an 
overseer and elder in the Church, which they should seek 
to copy. He could speak of these things now, to these 
fellow-elders, in a manner that he probably would have 
hesitated to speak of them to the Church at Ephesus 
while still ministering to them, as, by some, it might 
have been considered boasting. He would have these 



brother-elders and overseers note that in his ministering 
to the Church at Ephesus he had not coveted their 
silver or gold or apparel, but instead had labored with 
his own hands, and had thus in all things set before them 
an example of how they also as elders (presbyters) and 
overseers (bishops, episcopos) ought to help the weak 
and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how he 
said, "It is more blessed to give than to receive." 

The Apostle could point thus to himself as an example 
of a proper servant of the Church, because he 
had so closely followed the example of the great Head, 
Jesus. It is blessed to receive, but still more blessed 
to give. God himself is the great Giver, continually 
bestowing favors upon us, and not upon the good only, 
but also upon the evil— even providing a ransom for 
all, to be testified in due time. These words of our 
Lord ("It is more blessed to give than to receive") 
are not recorded in any of the Gospels. Dr. Philip 
Schaff tells us that "outside the inspired memories of 
the Gospels we possess the record of some twenty sayings 
of Jesus which have floated down to us." This 
quotation by the Apostle Paul is one of these, of whose 
authenticity we can have no doubt; and surely it is in 
full accord with our dear Redeemer's conduct. He 
emulated the Father in that he continually gave, gave, 
gave to others. He did not selfishly see how much 
comfort and ease and honor he could secure for himself, 
but made himself of no reputation, for our sakes, 
daily giving his life for the assistance of others in matters 
temporal, as well as spiritual, until finally he completed 
the sacrifice at Calvary, having given on our 
behalf all that he had. 

If all the elders of the Church of Christ could thoroughly 
take to heart these noble examples of Jesus 
and of Paul, and could become so thoroughly enthused 
with the Gospel message and with the privilege of being 
coworkers with God that they would entirely forget 
themselves, it would be a great blessing for them as 
well as for the various little companies of the Lord's 
people over whom, in the Lord's providence, the holy 
spirit has made them overseers, to watch out for the 
interests of the flock and to feed them. We are not 
meaning to say that there are no earnest brethren today. 
Quite to the contrary. But we do mean to say 
that it is well for us to lay to heart the Apostle's earnest 
exhortation, that we all may be more and more 
faithful, more and more copies of God's dear Son, more 
and more like the great Apostle as regards self-sacrificing 
devotion to the interests of Zion. 

At the close of the conference, when we may suppose 
the sailing of the vessel was announced, the Apostle 
knelt with the brethren from Ephesus, in prayer, 
the tenor of which may well be imagined. Then the 
parting took place, and doubtless the dear brethren began 
to realize more fully than they had ever done before 
what great blessings God had bestowed upon them 



through the Apostle's ministries, and the thought that 
they should never see him again filled them with sadness, 
and they wept as they accompanied him to the 
ship. 

Doubtless the Apostle consoled them with the 
reflection that the time of partings would soon be over 
and the blessed eternity of union and fellowship soon 
begin, when they would meet not only one another, 

R3173 :page 106 

but above all meet the Redeemer himself and all 
the faithful in Christ Jesus. So our Lord also expressed 
himself on this matter, "a little while." The 
eighteen centuries intervening would have seemed a 
long while had any lived from then till now,— but 
since their "sleep" would be an unconscious interval, 
it was well that God kindly veiled their eyes and 
merely comforted them from his own larger standpoint 
of "soon," "quickly," "a little while." But now 
that the Kingdom is nigh, even at the door, our hearts 
no longer cry, How long, O Lord? but, Hallelujah! 
the day star is risen— the morning is here! 



R3173 :page 106 

"YOUR LABOR IS NOT IN VAIN." 

-1 COR. 15:20,21,50-58.-APRIL 12.- 

"Now is Christ risen from the dead, and 
become the first-fruits of them that slept." 

VERY appropriate to its date, this is a lesson on 
the resurrection. There are few features of 
truth on which Christian people in general seem 
to have greater need for Bible study than that of the 
resurrection. There are many systems of religion in 
the world, but none but Christianity teaches a resurrection 
of the dead. We mean true Christianity— the 
Bible teaching; for alas! with deep regret we write it, 
Churchianity does not believe in the resurrection of the 
dead: it has adopted the heathen theory that the dead 
are not dead, but alive; hence, whatever resurrection 
it teaches is along that line— of a resurrection of the 
living. Its claim is that at death something leaves the 
body (although they have not the slightest evidence of 
such departure, except that breath and vitality leave 
it); they claim that dying is a release, a benefit, an 
advantage; an unprisoning of the one who appeared to 
die, but who, they claim, is really more alive than ever. 
However, finding the doctrine of resurrection in the 
Bible, they do not wish to ignore it entirely and, hence, 
teach that its beneficiaries, whom we will call "shades" 



or "ghosts" have hankerings after their bodies— which 
continue persistently after centuries of experience without 
bodies— although they perhaps had only a few years' experience 
in bodies. This hankering for a body (which 
they claim is unnecessary to existence and happiness) 
God proposes to gratify, and by and by the resurrection 
of the bodies will take place. They anticipate a grand, 
glorious time in getting back into bodies which they 
describe much after the manner of present bodies, 
which they say are "prisonhouses." Surely there is 
inconsistency enough in such a theory to nauseate almost 
anybody, and it is not surprising that great confusion 
prevails throughout Christendom on this subject 
which, as we shall see in examining our present lesson, 
finds so prominent a place in the Scriptures. 

The Scripture teaching is most explicitly to the 
contrary of the above, but seems obscure, because of 
certain doctrinal errors which the great Adversary has 
introduced. One of these is a confusion of thought respecting 
what constitutes a soul. Churchianity's view 
of a soul was expressed by a Methodist bishop in these 
words: "It is without interior or exterior; without 
body, shape or parts— and you could put a million of 
them in a nutshell." The bishop's definition of a soul 
would be a proper definition of nothing, and one could 
just as readily put ten thousand millions of nothings in 
a nutshell,— and have room left. In the Bible, the 
word "soul" is used to signify being, or person; and 
a human being, or human person, is made up of two 
parts; viz., a body and its vitality, otherwise called 
the spirit of life, or breath of life. The body is not 
intelligent of itself, neither is vitality intelligent; but 
when the two are brought together, intelligence, being, 
or soul, commences. So it was with Father Adam: 
the Lord formed his body, but it was not a soul,— it 
was merely so much organized matter in good form. 
Next God "breathed into his nostrils the breath of 
lives"— the vitality common to all living creatures, but 

R3174:page 106 

not a soul. It was when these two things, organism 
and vitality, were properly united that man came into 
existence, a living, thinking being— "man became,— 
a living soul." (Gen. 2:7.) We must notice carefully 
that the lesson is not that man has a soul, but 
that man is a soul, or being. 

Let us take an illustration from nature— the air we 
breathe: it is composed of oxygen and nitrogen, neither 
of which is atmosphere, or air; but when the two 
combine, as they do in proper chemical proportions, 
the resulting thing is atmosphere. Just so with soul. 
God speaks to us from this standpoint, of our being 
each a soul. He does not address our bodies nor our 
breath of lives, but he does address us as intelligent beings, 
or souls. In pronouncing the penalty of violating 



his law, he did not address Adam's body specifically, 
but the man, the soul, the intelligent being: 
"Thou ! " "In the day that thou eatest thereof thou 
shalt surely die." "The soul that sinneth it shall die." 
-Gen. 2:17; Ezek. 18:20. 

When we perceive, then, that it is the soul that 
dies, we perceive also that it is the soul that will need 
the resurrection from death. Death is the dissolution 
of the union between organism and vitality, whether it 
be in man or in beast, in fish or in fowl. Scientists 
agree that a general repair of the tissues of our bodies 
is continually in progress; some elements constantly 

R3174:page 107 

sloughing off, and new ones as constantly being added; 
they assert that this process renews the body every 
seven years. If, therefore, God had pronounced the 
death sentence merely against Adam's body, it would 
have been paid within seven years. But the penalty 
was not against Adam's body, but against Adam himself, 
the soul, the ego, the being, and hence, the 
sloughing off of the atoms of his body did not pay 
the penalty. It required the sacrifice of another soul 
to redeem him. Hence, we read that our Lord Jesus 
made "his soul [being] an offering for sin"; that he 
"poured out his soul unto death."— Isa. 53:10,12. 

The Apostle Peter points out that the soul of our Lord 
Jesus was not left in death— in hades— and he quotes 
from the Prophet David in corroboration. David declares, 
"Thou wilt not leave my soul in sheol [Greek, 
hades— the death-state]." The Apostle explains that 
David was a prophet, and spoke, not of himself, but of 
the Lord Jesus, that "his soul was not left in hades." 
(Acts 2:25-32.) This constituted the Apostle Peter's 
argument regarding the resurrection of our Lord— that 
his soul was not left in hades— in the death-state; that 
God raised him up by his own power. And this is the 
proper thought respecting all death and all resurrection 
from death. It is the soul that dies— the being is dissolved 
by death. Then the body, subject to corruption, 
returns to dust. If it was our Lord's soul that died 
and was raised, and if he gave himself a ransom, a corresponding 
price, for soul-Adam (and his race in his 
loins at the time of his transgression) the thought now 
must be that all the souls of Adam's race are to be recovered 
from that death penalty;— and that the resurrection 
is for the purpose of restoring these souls of 
Adam's race, who have been bought back from destruction 
by the soul of the Redeemer. 

Let us now look at the words of our lesson, and 
see that they are in full accord with what we have here 
set forth to be the Scriptural teaching. Vs. 20 mentions 
the dead as asleep, and declares that Christ was 
the first one to experience a resurrection from death. 
Let us note these two points: (1) In what sense is 



death a sleep? We answer that really, actually, death 

is an extinction of the soul; but that God, having purposed 

our redemption from before the foundation of the 

world, purposed also, as a result of that redemption, 

the calling of us back to being again in his own due 

time, by a resurrection of the dead: as it is written, 

"Thou redeemestmy life from destruction." Psa. 103:4; 

34:22.) In view of this the Lord speaks of death 

as a sleep, and his people are similarly justified in using 

this term "sleep." Abraham, Isaac and Jacob 

and the prophets, and the kings, good and bad, are all 

declared to have "fallen asleep," "slept with their fathers," 

etc. 

The New Testament records our Lord's words respecting 
the maid whom he called back from death: he 
said of her, "The maid is not dead, but sleepeth." So 
of Lazarus he declared, "Our friend Lazarus sleepeth," 
and when his disciples understood not the meaning 
of his words "then said Jesus unto them plainly, 
Lazarus is dead." The plain statement is death; the 
proper figure of death, in view of the divine purposes 
and promises, permits it to be called by the more comforting 
term, sleep, which expresses at the same time 
both our hope for the dead and our faith in God. The 
record of Stephen's death is that "he fell on sleep;" 
and the apostles, in writing to the Church regarding, 
not only the brethren of the household of faith, but all 
their dear friends who go into death, speaks of them as 
"them that sleep in Jesus," while of the Church he 
declares that they are "dead in Christ." Only the 
members of the "body" can be said to be in Christ, or 
to have any hope of sharing with him in his resurrection. 
(Phil. 3:10.) But, it was "the man Christ 
Jesus, who by the grace of God tasted death for every 
man," and thus, in harmony with the divine plan, 
turned what would have been death for every man, 
into a sleep from which all will awaken at Christ's 
second advent,— after he shall have established his 
Kingdom. Respecting this awakening, and the place 
from which the dead will come forth, he says, "All 
that are in the grave shall hear the voice of the Son of 
man and shall come forth."— John 5:28. 

(2) This statement that our Lord was the firstfruits 
of them that slept is in general accord with the testimony 
of the Word, "that he should be the first that should 
rise from the dead"; and also that he should be the 
"first-born [from the dead] among many brethren." 
(Acts 26:23; Rom. 8:29.) Our Lord, as the Head of 
the Church which is his body, was raised from the 
dead by the Father's power, on the third day after his 
crucifixion; but the body, the Church, will not be 
raised up until the time of its completion, in the end 
of the Gospel age. When raised up it will, as his 
"brethren," or the members of "his body," share in 
"his resurrection"— his kind of a resurrection— a chief, 
or superior resurrection; not a resurrection in flesh 



and as human beings, but, as we shall see shortly, to a 
spirit nature, with a spirit body. Our Lord was not 
only the firstfruits from the dead amongst the brethren, 
the Church, but the first to arise from the dead in 
every sense of the word, none having preceded him. 

What, then, becomes of the theory that the dead 
are not dead, or that their resurrection to a higher life 
took place at the moment of their dying? We answer 
that these theories have no foundation whatever in 
Scripture. They are the vaporings of those who have 
learned in the school of Plato science falsely so-called, 

R3174:page 108 

and who have not on this subject, at least, been taught 
of God in the school of Christ. Mark the words of the 
Apostle Paul on this subject. He did not claim that 
our Lord arose from the dead the next instant after he 
expired on the cross, but plainly declared that he "rose 
from the dead on the third day." Incidentally, too, Peter 
refers to the prophet David, and while speaking of him 
in most respectful terms, as a prophet of the Lord, he 
declares, "David is not ascended into the heavens."— 
1 Cor. 15:4; Acts 2:34. 

The Apostle balances this question of life and death 
in the 21st verse, declaring that death passed upon all 
by a man's transgression, and that the resurrection provision 
is for all, through the obedience of the man 
Christ Jesus,— who "poured out his soul unto death" 
on behalf of our race. There could have been no resurrection 
without this redemptive work, the substitution 
of our Lord's soul for the soul of Adam. It was a 
man who had sinned; and only the life of a man could 
meet the penalty prescribed; hence, as the Apostle 
says, the blood [death] of bulls and of goats could 
never take away sin (Heb. 10:4); and we might add 
that likewise the death of angels or archangels could 
never take away sin,— because of this divine arrangement 
of a life for a life, a man for a man. (Exod. 21:23-5; 
Lev. 24:12,17-22; Deut. 19:21; Matt. 5:38.) 
Hence, the necessity that our Lord should leave the 
glory of his spirit condition, which he had with the 
Father, should humble himself, and take a lower nature, 
—the human,— in order that he, by the grace of 
God, should taste death for every man. He gave his 
soul, his being, all that he had as the man Christ Jesus 
—he kept nothing back— the price has been paid fully 
and satisfactorily. The evidence of its satisfaction to 
God is doubly attested, (a) by the fact that he raised 
our Lord Jesus from the dead— giving him a new life, 
—life on a new plane of being, far above angels, and 
principalities and powers. (Eph. 1:20,21.) (b) It 
is also attested by the giving of the holy spirit at Pentecost, 
after our Lord had ascended up on high and had 
presented the merit of his sacrifice on our behalf. 

Having thus established the general principle of a 



resurrection, and its applicability to all mankind, because 

the redemption was "a ransom for all" (1 Tim. 2:6), 

the Apostle proceeds to discuss particularly the 

First Resurrection, in which the Church is specially 

interested (he was not addressing his words to the 

world, but to the "sanctified in Christ Jesus"— 1 Cor. 1:2). 

His words, found in vss. 42-44, describe, as 

clearly as it is possible for us to understand things so 

far beyond our plane of existence, the grandeurs and 

perfections of being which shall be ours when we shall 

have experienced this great change of the First Resurrection: 

we shall no longer be weak and imperfect, 

with dying tendencies and with animal bodies; but 

shall be incorruptible, powerful, and have spiritual 

bodies. "We shall be like him, for we shall see him 

as he is." (1 John 3:2.) We will not discuss these 

R3175 :page 108 

verses particularly here, as they are not made a part 
of this lesson, and as we have treated them at length 
previously. 

When, in the 50th verse, the Apostle declares that 
flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, 
we are not to delude ourselves, as some dear Adventist 
friends are inclined to do,— by saying that "flesh and 
blood" cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, but flesh 
and bones can. We are to recognize that the Apostle, 
in the use of these words, "flesh and blood," signifies 
human nature, as when our Lord Jesus, for instance, 
said to Peter, "Flesh and blood [humanity] hath not 
revealed it unto thee." The Apostle's declaration thus 
properly understood, is that human nature cannot inherit 
the Kingdom of God. This is in full accord with 
his own statements and the statements of other apostles, 
to the effect that we must become "New Creatures 
in Christ"— "partakers of the divine nature," if 
we would be sharers with our Lord in the coming Kingdom, 
and its great and glorious work. Our Lord's 
words to Nicodemus are in full accord with this, when 
he declared, "Except a man be born again [begotten 
now to a new nature, and born in the resurrection] he 
cannot enter the Kingdom of God," and cannot even 
see it. (John 3:3.) Earthly beings of human nature, 
flesh and blood, can see earthly beings, but as "no 
man hath seen God at any time, likewise no man can 
see the glorified Son of God; and for similar reasons 
none will be able with the natural eye to see the glorified 
Church— for all these in their resurrection change 
will be spirit beings, and like their Lord, "the express 
image of the Father's person." We must keep in 
memory the fact that the Church is entirely separate 
and distinct from the world; and that the hopes of the 
Church are to be differentiated from those of the world 
in every particular. 

"Neither doth corruption inherit incorruption": 



this word "incorruption" (aphtharsia) is the same that 

is rendered "immortality" in Rom. 2:7, and in 2 Tim. 1:10. 

It is rendered incorruption in vss. 42,53,54 of 

this chapter. The thought is that our flesh is subject 

to decay; but that the new body which all who participate 

in the First Resurrection shall receive, will be 

an incorruptible one— one that cannot decay, that cannot 

die. This incorruptibility, or immortality, to be 

attained in their resurrection by the faithful of the 

Lord's disciples of this Gospel age, is to be applicable 

to all who will have a share in the Kingdom; and now 

the Apostle notices what might be a difficulty in the 

minds of his readers. He imagines them asking the 

R3175 :page 109 

question, How will it be with those who will be alive 
and remain at the time of the second coming of the 
Lord and the setting up of his Kingdom, and the 
awakening of these sleeping brethren to immortality? 
Will the living ones pass over into the Kingdom with 
flesh and blood and inferior bodies? 

The Apostle undertakes to clear up this mystery; 
but although he handles his subject with lucidity the 
matter is not clear to the majority of the Lord's people. 
We may presume that the Lord intended it to remain 
more or less of a "mystery" until now, in the due time 
for its fulfilment, it should be understood. The Apostle's 
plain declaration is that "we shall not all sleep," 
but this is misunderstood by many to mean, "We 
shall not all die." There is a vast difference between 
dying and sleeping. We die in a moment, in an instant; 
it is the period of unconsciousness that is styled 
sleep, and the Apostle's declaration, therefore, is that 
we shall not all pass through a period of unconsciousness, 
"but we shall all be changed." It will be as 
impossible for the human nature, flesh and blood, of 
those living at the close of the Gospel age, to participate 
in the spiritual Kingdom which Christ will then 
establish, as it was impossible for any of the brethren 
of the past to do so. How, then, will these get rid of 
their flesh and blood, their human nature? We answer, 
that the Scriptural declaration is most explicit, 
that all who will be partakers with Christ in "his resurrection,' 
must be sharers with him in "his death." As 
he himself expressed it, "Be thou faithful unto death, 
and I will give thee a crown of life." It was not sufficient 
that our Lord should merely consecrate himself, 
nor that he should merely sacrifice portions of his time 
and energy in the service of the truth;— it was necessary 
that he should complete the matter of sacrifice in 
literal death. And so it must be with every member 
of his body; as it is written, prophetically of the 
Church, "I have said, Ye are gods, all of you children 
of the most High; but ye shall die like men, and fall 
like one of the princes"— not like Prince Adam, a convict, 



but like Prince Jesus, in sacrifice— filling up that 

which is behind of the afflictions of Christ.— Psa. 82:6,7; 

Col. 1:24. 

The change from corruptible to incorruptible, from 
mortal to immortal, from weakness to power, from ignominy 
to glory, from human nature to divine nature, 
in the case of these last members, will be so sudden as 
to occupy no appreciable space of time, and to be illustrated 
only by the twinkling of an eye;— the instant of 
their dying will be followed the next instant by their 
"change." 

The thought of some, that resurrection "change" 
has come to each individual at the moment of dying 
throughout the Gospel age— that resurrection has all 
along followed the dying of all, is abundantly contradicted 
again, when the Apostle definitely fixes the time 
of the First Resurrection of the Church, the body of 
Christ, to be "at the last trump"— when the seventh 
trumpet shall sound— then "the dead [in Christ,— his 
members] shall be raised incorruptible, and we [of them 
then living] shall be changed; for this corruptible 
must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on 
immortality"— there can be no doubt that the present 
bodies would be wholly out of place in, and unpermissible, 
—impossible, to the Kingdom. 

After this change of the Church has been completed 
—after this First [or chief] Resurrection has been 
accomplished— "Then shall come to pass the saying 
that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory." 
Here again the Apostle's statement is generally misunderstood: 
most readers get the impression that he 
means that the victory over death and the grave is 
already accomplished; and a few nearer the truth infer 
that the "victory" will be fully accomplished in 
the "change" of the Church, the body of Christ, in 
the First Resurrection. However, neither of these 
views meets the scope of the statement. On the contrary, 
the First Resurrection, the "change" of the 
Church, will be but the beginning of the great victory 
which Christ is to achieve over death and the grave. 
This will be merely the bringing forth of the "first-fruits," 
as the Apostle declares: "A kind of firstfruits 
unto God of his creatures." (James 1:18.) This is 
the force of the Apostle's expression, "Then shall be 
brought to pass;"— that is to say, then this prophecy 
of victory over death will begin to have its fulfilment. 
It will require all of the Millennium to accomplish the 
victory over death; and Christ and the glorified Church 
will be the victors, as it is written (vss. 25,26), "He 
must reign until he hath put all enemies under his feet; 
the last enemy that shall be destroyed is death." To 
accomplish this complete victory over death and the 
grave will be the very object of the establishment of 
the Kingdom, and will require a thousand years; as it 
is written again, respecting the reign of those who have 
part in the First Resurrection, "They lived and reigned 



with Christ a thousand years."— Rev. 20:4. 

This First Resurrection glorifies the Kingdom 
class; and forthwith the Kingdom will be set up— 
"The mountain [Kingdom] of the Lord's house" will 
be established in the earth. This agrees with the statement 
of the prophet, from which the Apostle quotes, 
"In this mountain [Millennial Kingdom] shall the 
Lord of hosts make unto the people a feast of fat things, 
a feast of wines on the lees, of fat things full of marrow, 
of wines on the lees well refined; and he will destroy 
in this mountain [Kingdom] the face of the covering 
cast over all people, and the veil that is spread over all 

R3175 :page 110 

nations. He will swallow up death in victory; and 
the Lord God will wipe away tears from off all faces, 
and the rebuke of his people shall he take away from 
off all the earth; for the Lord hath spoken it." (Isa. 2:2; 
25:6-8.) How much of the beauty and fulness 
of the divine Word has been hidden from our eyes by 
reason of the errors introduced into the creeds of 
Christendom by the great Adversary for this very 
purpose! 

The Apostle, glancing down to the grand culmination 
at the close of the Millennium, exclaims with poetic 
fervor (vs. 55), "O death, where is thy sting? O grave, 
where is thy victory?" The thought is: Death has 
been stinging our race, blighting it for six thousand 
years, and sending it ignominiously to the tomb; but 
God, who justly condemned us as a race, has looked 
down in compassion, and beheld our impotence, and 
has provided a Savior and a great one— Jesus, the 
Head, his only begotten One, our Redeemer, and the 
Church, his body, whose Kingdom shall destroy, at 
one and the same time, death and the grave, and their 
power over all who will obey the requirements of the 
Kingdom— completely delivering such from their power. 
Adamic death is to be utterly destroyed— not a 
soul of Adam's posterity is to be left therein,— for those 
who will not accept the grace of God when offered to 
them will be destroyed utterly, not for Adam's transgression, 
but for their own transgression,— not, therefore, 
by Adamic death, but by Second Death.— 
Ezek. 18:2-4,20. 

This utter destruction on account of personal, wilful 
sin is Scripturally known as the Second Death, 
which is nowhere denominated an enemy. On the 
contrary, it is the friend of God,— his servant, to "destroy 
those who [would] corrupt the earth." It is the 
friend of all who love righteousness, and desire peace, 
joy, blessing, in harmony with the divine will. It is 
not even the enemy of those whom it will destroy— the 
wicked— because it is better that they should be destroyed 

R3176 :page 110 



than that they should be permitted to institute 
another reign of sin and death out of harmony with the 
Lord's righteous arrangements. It is Adamic death 
that our Lord Jesus will destroy; and it is denominated 
an enemy, because it came upon Adam's posterity 
contrary to their wills, and because some, at least, of 
the thousands of millions under its control, are disposed 
to be perfect and righteous, and are hindered by 
the weaknesses and restraints imposed by the great 
enemy in whose clutches they were born. It will be 
the "last enemy" to be destroyed, because other evils 
will be brought into subjection early in the Millennium; 
but men will get the victory over death only in proportion 
as they obey the voice of the great Teacher, Priest and 
King, and gradually rise, inch by inch, through restitution 
processes, up, up, up, out of death, until finally, 
at the close of the Millennial age, they shall reach 
life in its full, perfect degree. When all shall have 
become thus released from death to life, or else transferred 
to the Second Death,— then this enemy, death, 
—Adamic death,— will have been vanquished; its victory 
over all who long for righteousness and life eternal 
will be at an end. 

It will be noticed that the translators of the Revised 
Version have usually avoided the use of the word "hell" 
throughout the Scriptures, substituting therefor in the 
Old Testament the Hebrew word "sheol," and in the 
New Testament the Greek word, "hades." Evidently, 
in view of the meaning attaching to the word "hell" 
the translators could not conscientiously so render 
sheol and hades and, therefore, avoided any translation; 
—not wishing to translate these words "grave," for fear, 
perhaps, that the public should quickly see that they 
had been hoodwinked on this subject for many years. 
We much prefer not to think ungenerously of men of 
such great scholarship, but circumstances certainly 
point in this direction. One of these pointers is found 
in vs. 55, where, instead of translating hades "grave," 
as in the old version, or leaving it untranslated, hades, 
as in most other places in the Revised Version, they 
have translated it "death." 

What was the object of this deviation from the general 
usage? We can only surmise that it was to help 
keep the public in the dark respecting the true sentiments 
of the Word of God. Had they rendered the 
sentence, "O hades, where is thy victory?" it would 
have given some, doubtless, the thought that hades, 
whatever it is (hot place of torture, or the cold grave), 
would finally yield to this triumph of the Lord Jesus, 
which will begin as soon as his Church shall be 
"changed" and his Kingdom established. 

The Apostle continues his argument and shows 
that the victory will not be completely brought to pass 
until the end of the Millennium. He declares that 
the sting of death is sin, and the power of sin is in the 



law. Under Christ's Millennial Kingdom the sins of 

the past will be forgiven, because of the atonement accomplished; 

and the perfect Law of God, having been 

met by the Mediator, will be applied to the ransomed 

race only in such proportions as they can receive it— 

in proportion to their knowledge and ability to obey. 

Thus the Mediator of the New Covenant will ultimately 

bring off conquerors all who will obey him. 

The Apostle next turns back the line of his argument 
from the future time, when men will be actually 
lifted up out of sin and death and imperfection, to the 
present time in which this is reckonedly accomplished 
for the Church, the body of Christ, through faith. His 
words are, "But thanks be to God, which giveth us 

R3176 :page 111 

[now] the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ." 
Although as yet we see none of these things accomplished; 
although we have not our spiritual bodies, 
incorruptible and powerful; although we still have the 
treasure of the new mind in the earthen vessel; although 
we see nothing of the Kingdom's establishment; 
—nevertheless, God giveth us victory through 
Christ, by faith; so that even now we can "rejoice with 
joy unspeakable," and can so confidently look forward 
into the future as to claim a share in the victory over 
sin and death and the grave, through him who loved 
us and bought us. 

The closing argument is that on this account— because 
we see these things so clearly with the eye of faith, 
we should be "steadfast, unmovable, always abounding 
in the work of the Lord, knowing that our labor is not 
in vain in the Lord";— realizing that it is God who is 
working out this great plan of salvation, through our 
Lord Jesus Christ, and supporting all those who are 
seeking to walk in his steps, and to come off conquerors 
through him. Death and the grave may still seem to 
be gaining victories over us. But faith sees the matter 
from the other side, from the standpoint of accomplished 
victory in the future; and even now it exults 
and rejoices in the privilege of colaboring with the Redeemer, 
and realizes that time and energy and life so 
spent are spent "not in vain," because we confidently 
hope for, expect and wait for the glorious First Resurrection 
"change" and the glorious privileges of association 
with our Master in his Kingdom and work. 



R3176 :page 111 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS ANSWERED. 
HOW SHALL WE VIEW SUICIDE? 



Question.— How shall we view suicide? How 
serious is this matter? Should it be considered a 
crime? 

Answer.— Suicide should be considered a very 
serious crime, unless it be the act of a deranged mind 
whose responsibility in the sight of God and men 
would, thereby, be considerably lessened. 

Since the greatest gift of God is eternal life, 
through Christ, we may reason that life in any measure 
is an inestimable boon, privilege. For any sane 
mind, enlightened by present truth, to contemplate 
suicide would be unthinkable. We, above all others, 
realize the value of the present life: we see through 
it a special opportunity for the development of character 
along the lines of divine instruction. We see that 
the development of such character is essential to a share 
in any part in our heavenly Father's plan; we see, then, 
that whatever would prematurely take away our life 
privileges would be that much working against us, 
and our highest and best interests. We have faith 
to believe that our heavenly Father will even protect 
our lives so that nothing could happen to cut them 
off up to that point where we shall have had the full 
privilege and opportunity of character-development— 
making our calling and election sure. Any attempt 
on our part to cut short our own privileges would 
mean not only a rebellion against the divine will, but a 
folly as regards our own interests, incomprehensible, 
as we have just said, except under some mental 
delusion. 

The Lord's people, especially in the light of present 
truth, should be overwhelmed with the privilege 
of living at such a time as this, as well as with the 
privilege granted to us of making our calling and our 
election sure to a share in the Kingdom honors. 
There is no antidote for despondency so good as the 
medicine of the Lord's Word— its assurance that our 
Savior loved us so as to purchase us with his own 
blood, and his assurance, in turn, that "the Father himself 
loveth us," and the additional assurance that "all 
things shall work together for good to us because we 
love God and have been called according to his purpose." 
"He that hath this hope in him purifieth 
himself," and has with the hope a ground for joy and 
peace and trust and contentment which the world can 
neither give nor take away. Alas, poor world! We 
wonder that more of its number, without God, without 
hope, without intelligent knowledge of the divine 
plan working out blessing for the groaning creation, 
should not be tempted to do away with the present 
life— seeing in it no special value, no special blessing, 
no special opportunities, such as we see and enjoy and 
hope to realize. 



"WHO IS BLIND, BUT MY SERVANT?" 



Question.— To what or whom does Isa. 42:19-21 
refer? Is it applicable to our Lord Jesus? 

Answer.— This Scripture seems to apply to our 
Lord Jesus, and incidentally to the Church which is 
his Body. These are to be blind to some things- 
blind to earthly ambitions and prospects and worldly 
wisdom, to the intent that they may the more diligently 
render obedience to their high calling which 
leads them to ignore present advantages,— to sacrifice 
them all, laying down even life itself in the service of 
the truth. It is not the blindness of ignorance, as is 
indicated by verse 20, "Seeing many things ["but" 
omitted], thou observest not [heedest not: it is not 
that we do not see earthly advantages, but we purposely 
reject, close our eyes, to all such earthly allurements.]" 
The word "perfect" in v. 19 has the 
significance of surrendered or devoted. With this 
blindness Jehovah is well pleased; he accepts it as 
the atonement sacrifice, and thereby his law is proven 
to be reasonable, possible to be kept by a perfect man; 
yea, indeed, it is multiplied and shown to have a 
still higher and deeper scope than was ever previously 
comprehended. 



page 113 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIV. APRIL 15, 1903. No. 8 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 115 

Kaiser William's Theology 115 

Religious Freedom Granted by 
the Czar 116 

Trust Methods in Church Work 117 

Gen. Chaffee Startles Methodists 117 

The Memorial Supper 118 

"Lest Ye Enter Into Temptation" 118 

Obligations of a Christian 119 

"Love as Brethren" 124 

An Interesting Letter 127 

General Conventions, Etc 128 

page 114 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 



--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



CONCERNING CORRESPONDENCE. 



During the Editor's absence in Europe our friends will 
remember that he cannot be reached by correspondence, and 
that matters intended for his special consideration should be 
deferred until his return. 

In general, communications concerning business, subscriptions, 
orders, Tract Fund remittances, Pilgrim visits, 
etc., should be sent to "Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society," 
and letters concerning doctrinal and personal matters 
to the Editor. 

THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT. 



Many friends have overlooked our previous announcement 
that our stock of this work is entirely exhausted, and 
orders are continuing to pour in. We are entering these in 
order of receipt, and all will be filled in rotation when the 
new editions are ready. We hope to have both leather and 
cloth editions on hand in about eight weeks. 

ABOUT PILGRIM VISITS. 



Our friends are again reminded that routes for Pilgrims 
are made up months ahead, and that we cannot insert 
places after announcements have been made. If you desire 
a visit, answer the questions of Dec. 15 TOWER (or so many 
as you can) and send us word promptly. 



R3177 :page 115 

KAISER WILLIAM'S THEOLOGY. 



ABOUT a year ago, at the German Emperor's 
instance, Professor Delitzsch delivered an 
address at the palace. He spoke on recent 
excavations in Babylon; attempting to show that the 
findings entirely discredited the Bible and proved that 
the Hebrews' intelligence of religious things came to 
them from the Babylonians. The impression went out 
that the Emperor was much pleased with that discourse, 
and evidently had lost his respect for the Bible. This 
greatly distressed some of his orthodox subjects, and 
encouraged the Socialists, many of whom are reputed 
to be unbelievers— agnostics. To offset this, the Emperor 
has recently invited Prof. Harnack to address 
his court on the same theme;— Prof. Harnack being 
rated as "orthodox." 

(We, however, could not rate the Professor as 
orthodox or Biblical. He holds that the Babylonian 
findings confirm the Bible records in some respects; 
viz., that there is a sufficient agreement between these 
witnesses and the Bible to prove that the Bible is not 
a fable,— that it records some facts of actual occurrence. 
However, Prof. Harnack does not accept the 
Bible as of divine origin as do we and, hence, discredits 
its dates, and accepts instead the uncertain decipherings 
of hieroglyphics relating to many dynasties 
(which may have existed contemporaneously) and by 
stringing these out one after the other, he and his 
associates count thousands of years which the Scriptures 
do not allow.) 

Additionally, the Emperor prepared a letter 
which, as was intended, has been made public. In it 
he sets forth his religious views and, it is said, has 
quite satisfied his people. In this connection it should 
be remembered that the Emperor is summus episcopus 
of the Prussian Protestant Church— its chief bishop, 
or overseer. 

Commenting on the Emperor's action, the London 
Times correspondent says:— 

"Orthodox Protestants seem to have apprehended 
that the foundations of the State, as well as the 
Church, would be undermined if the summus episcopus 
encouraged heterodoxy. The question has a deep 
political bearing also, because the Social Democrats 
are professedly anti-Christian in a doctrinal sense, 
and because nearly all the Liberals are freethinkers. 
The Conservative press is satisfied that the Kaiser 
holds to the essentials of orthodox Protestantism, 



and the Liberal press is pleased because the Kaiser's 
statement upholds the freedom of research and speculation 
for scholars. 

"The Catholic Kolnische Volks Zeitung sees danger 
in this distinction between the learned and the 
'people,' and the Radical Berliner Tageblatt comes to 
the far-fetched conclusion that the Kaiser's fearless 
initiative will produce the greatest and most triumphant 
impression in England and America, and may 
help to inspire friendlier feelings there for 'our Germanic 
cousins.'" 

The "orthodox" are evidently easily satisfied. 
We trust that readers of ZION'S WATCH TOWER have 
a much more distinct idea of the inspiration of the 
Bible writers— the apostles and prophets— than has 
the Kaiser. We cannot with him count Moses in 
along with Shakespeare and the Kaiser's grandfather 
and Homer and Charlemagne. Moses was both a 
prophet and a type of the great Prophet and, hence, to 
us, belongs to an entirely different class from the 
worldly-wise and great. We quote a portion of the 
letter:— 

"I distinguish between two different kinds of 
revelation— one progressive, and, as it were, historical; 
the other purely religious, as preparing the way 
for the future Messiah. 

"Regarding the former it must be said, for me it 
does not admit of a doubt, not even the slightest, that 
God reveals himself continuously in the race of men 
created by him. He breathed into man the breath of 
his life and follows with fatherly love and interest the 

R3177 :page 116 

development of the human race. In order to lead it 

forward and develop it he reveals himself in this or 

that great sage, whether priest or king, whether 

among the heathen, Jews or Christians. Hammurabi 

was one; so was Moses, Abraham, Homer, Charlemagne, 

Luther, Shakespeare, Goethe, Kant and Emperor 

William the Great. These he sought out and 

endowed with his grace to accomplish splendid, imperishable 

results for their people in their intellectual and 

physical provinces, according to his will. How often 

my grandfather pointed out that he was only an instrument 

in the Lord's hands.... 

"The legislative act on Sinai, for example, can 
be only regarded as symbolically inspired by God. 
When Moses had to reburnish well-known paragraphs 
of the law, perhaps derived from the code of Hammurabi, 
in order to incorporate and bind them into the 
loose, weak fabric of his people, here the historian 
can perhaps construe from the sense of wording 
a connection with the laws of Hammurabi, the 
friend of Abraham. That is perhaps logically correct. 
But that will never disguise the fact that God incited 



Moses thereto and in so far revealed himself to the 
people of Israel." 

The Emperor has evidently become quite tinctured 
with higher-critic infidelity. If Moses concocted the 
Law with the assistance of a heathen legend which 
had been extant several centuries before he was born, 
he perpetrated a fraud at Mt. Sinai,— a stupendous 
fraud— when he represented that it was directly God-given. 
Was our Lord also deceived respecting Hammurabi's 
law, palmed off by Moses as of divine origin? 
And were all the Jews, including the apostles, deceived? 
Hear our Lord's words, "Did not Moses give you the 
Law?" (John 7:19.) When our Lord, after his resurrection, 
would establish the faith of the disciples on 
the way to Emmaus, we read: "Beginning with Moses 
and all the prophets he expounded unto them the 
Scriptures," etc. (Luke 24:27.) Did he begin by 
quoting a fraud, a deceiver who had palmed off Hammurabi's 
law for a new divine code? Whoever believes 
so, cannot believe in our Lord's claims to Messiahship; 
for surely Messiah could not be inspired to 
know what was in man and yet be deluded as present-day 
wise men claim. 

If these men are right Stephen, the first martyr 
to follow the Lord in death, for his sake, was deceived 
also. See his testimony concerning Moses in Acts 7:35-44, 
noting specially vss. 38 and 44. 

Who that believes Moses a deceiver and a fraud 
could longer accept the inspiration of the words of the 
Apostle Paul on any subject, after noting his eulogy of 
Moses and the Law of God given by his hand? He says: 
"It is written in the law of Moses." (1 Cor. 9:9.) Again 
he recites an incident of Moses' presence in Mt. Sinai, 
not as a part of a stupendous fraud, but as a fact; 
saying, "Moses. ..put a vail over his face." (2 Cor. 3:7-13; 
Ex. 34:29,30,35.) Again he ascribed 
that law to God, declaring it so "just and holy and 
good" that no fallen man could keep it. (Rom. 7:9-12.) 
He even recites circumstantially the giving 
of the Law Covenant at Sinai, pointing out that this 
was a type of the ushering in of the New Covenant. 
-Heb. 12:18-26. 

"The Law was given [of God] by Moses, but 
grace and truth came by Jesus Christ." "Moses verily 
was faithful, as a servant over all his house"— he 
was, therefore, not a fraud.— John 1:17; Heb. 3:5. 

The great and worldly-wise are all to stumble into 
just such unbelief respecting God's Word, but the 
faithful are to be kept by the power of God through 
faith and by assistance divinely granted in this "evil 
day." "A thousand shall fall at thy side, but it [the 
pestilence of infidelity] shall not come nigh thee." 
The elect will stand on a sea of glass, as it were mingled 
with fire, and be able to sing intelligently "the 
song of Moses, the servant of God [not a fraud], and 
the Lamb."— Rev. 15:3. 



Quoting further from the war-lord-bishop we are 
touched to sympathy by his "blind unreason" in the 
following "most orthodox" sentence,— in which he attempts 
to discuss what he, evidently, in no sense understands. 
How true that "the natural man receiveth 
not [comprehendeth not] the things of the spirit of 
God: neither can he know them because they are spiritually 
discerned." (1 Cor. 2:14.) He says:— 

"Christ is God, God in human form. He redeemed 
us and inspires us, entices us to follow him. 
We feel his fire burning in us. His sympathy 
strengthens us. His discontent destroys us. But, 
also his intercession saves us. Conscious of victory, 
building solely upon his Word, we go through labor, 
ridicule, sorrow, misery and death, for we have in him 
God's revealed Word, and he never lies." 

RELIGIOUS FREEDOM GRANTED BY THE CZAR OF ALL 
THE RUSSIAS. 



St. Petersburg, (Press Cable).— The Czar has 
issued a decree providing for freedom of religion 
throughout his dominions, establishing to some degree 
local self-government and making other concessions 
to the village committees. 

Among the measures outlined by the Czar for the 
attainment of these ends is reform of the rural laws, 
which is to be effected with the advice of persons who 
possess the confidence of the people. The system of 
administration in the various governments and districts 
is to be examined by representatives of the different 
localities concerned, with the view of effecting 
the necessary amendments. Measures are also to be 
taken to relieve the peasantry of the burdens of forced 
labor. 

The decree, which was issued in commemoration 
of the anniversary of the birthday of Alexander III., 
is considered to be the most significant act of state 
since the emancipation of serfs. The public hails it 
as the proclamation of a new era, opening up bright 

R3178 :page 117 

prospects of the early improvement of Russian internal 
administration. 



All who love righteousness and freedom will rejoice 
in the news conveyed by the above dispatch. 
However, it would not be wise for us to expect great 
and speedy changes as a result of this decree. It is 
almost forced upon the Czar by the poverty and discontent 
of the people; and it may be a considerable 



time before the promised reforms are realized. Powerful 
nobles are opposed to reform, and many of the 
evils are deeply entrenched in the customs of the land. 
As yet it is only a paper reform; but it is an illustration 
of the melting of the mountains [kingdoms] predicted 
by the prophet— Psa. 97:5. 

The extent to which this decree will affect the 
political or religious liberties of Jews is doubtful; we 
expect little from it to their advantage. 

TRUST METHODS IN CHURCH WORK. 



We quote below from the Chicago Inter-Ocean. 
Where the matter may end is difficult to determine 
now, but that it is along the lines of higher-criticism, 
and therefore opposed to real Bible study, from the 
standpoint of faith, is never to be forgotten. Extracts 
follow:— 

"The purpose of the new organization, which will 
be known as 'the Religious Educational Association,' 
is to bring about a greater unification of religious interests, 
irrespective of denomination or creed, and to 
disseminate religious education through the various 
mediums outlined in the constitution and by-laws 
adopted by the convention at the afternoon and closing 
session of the conference. 

"President William R. Harper of the University 
of Chicago, in his address before the convention, gave 
a comprehensive and detailed outline of the real scope 
and purposes of the new organization. All of Dr. 
Harper's suggestions concerning the new work were 
adopted by the convention. 

'"The new organization will be something of a 
clearing house for religious thought and work,' said 
Dr. Harper in his address. He urged the necessity of 
cooperation among the various religious bodies in stimulating 
and carrying on the work of the Sunday school 
and church. 

'"There is a great waste of effort for the lack of 
co-relation,' declared Dr. Harper. 'The new organization 
will undertake to render service in stimulating 
present agencies to greater effort, such aid being furnished 
through suggestion, through the publication 
of information concerning the work at large, through 
the provision of larger and better opportunities for 
these agencies to confer together, and through the 
help derived from personal contact with each other of 
those interested in the same divisions of work.' 

"Departments and committees represented in the 
various organizations were named in the constitution 
adopted by the convention to carry on the work of the 
organization:— Universities and colleges, theological 
seminaries, churches and pastors, Sunday schools, 
secondary public schools, elementary public schools, 



private schools, teacher-training, young men and young 
women's associations, young people's societies, the 
home, libraries, the press, correspondence instruction, 
religious art, and music. 

"Three classes of members are to be admitted. 
These are active, associate and corresponding. 

"The new organization will include the establishment 
of a central board of trustees or directors, 
which will constitute the executive body of the association, 
and as such arrange the programs of special 
and general conventions, secure by proper means the 
coordination of the work of the departments, and carry 
into effect the decisions of the association. 

"The members of the board will represent the 
various countries, states, territories and districts furnishing 
the membership of the association; also the 
various religious denominations and the various schools 
of opinion recognized as Christian; and still further, 
the various divisions of Christian activity, educational, 
evangelical and philanthropic. 

"The principal address of the afternoon was made 
by the Rev. Frank Gunsaulus. He declared it was 
not the intention of the new organization to interfere 
with the work being done by the various lines of religious 
organizations, but to aid these in securing better 
results. He said that the field was sufficiently wide 
to permit the exercise of the very best energies of all 
who desired to engage in the work. He predicted a 
useful future for the new organization, and closed his 
address with an eloquent plea for church unity in educational 
work. 

"President Charles J. Little of Garrett Biblical 
Institute said he regretted that the Catholics and Jews 
were not included in the new organization. 'They 
exclude themselves from conferences of this kind, but 
I sincerely hope that the day will soon dawn,' declared 
Mr. Little, 'when we can all get together on 
common ground.'" 

GEN. CHAFFEE STARTLES METHODIST SOCIAL UNION. 



New York, March 20.-Maj. Gen. Chaffee told 
the members of the Methodist Social union tonight 
that he never met an intelligent Chinese who expressed 
any desire to embrace the Christian religion.— 
Pittsburg Gazette. 



General Chaffee has been in China for a considerable 
time, and is widely recognized as a moderate man, 
whose general sympathies are with the Christian religion; 
hence, his opinion is weighty. It attests the 
wisdom of God in passing by the Chinese and sending 



the gospel to the European barbarians eighteen centuries 
ago. Evidently there will not be many representatives 
from China in the "elect Church," "the bride, 
the Lamb's wife." 

Thank God for the good hopes inspired by the 
great oath-bound promise made to Abraham, of which 
we, the Church, are heirs (Gal. 3:29)— that all the 
families of the earth shall yet be blessed with a knowledge 
of the Lord and with an opportunity for applying 
that knowledge, so as to return to God's favor and 
life everlasting. 



R3179 :page 118 

THE MEMORIAL SUPPER. 

ON Friday evening, April 10th, we celebrate the 

greatest event of this world's history: the 

death of our Lord Jesus, the Redeemer of 

Adam and his race from the death sentence of the violated 

law of God. "Christ our Passover is slain, 

therefore let us keep the feast.. .with the unleavened 

bread of sincerity and truth." Elsewhere we 

have explained why this Memorial supersedes the typical 

Passover lamb, etc., and on the same date annually; 

and the meaning of the bread as the emblem of 

our Lord's body, "holy, harmless, undefiled, separate 

from sinners," and the "cup" as representing his 

sacrificial death, etc.— See our issue of March 1, 1898. 

We earnestly desire that all interested in the divine 
plan of the ages, trusting in the precious blood 
and consecrated to the Lord's service,— even unto 
death— may appreciate the great privilege and blessing 
of this service;— wherever they may be and however 
few may be their collective number. Surely 
nothing shall separate us from the love of Christ our 
Lord and, likewise, nothing shall hinder us from thus 
confessing his great work for us and our great reliance 
upon him and our respect for his words, This do 
ye [as often as ye do it] in remembrance of me;— 
annually. 

The Allegheny Church cordially invites all of the 
class described who can make it convenient to celebrate 
the Memorial with us in the Bible House Chapel 
at 7:30 p.m. on the date named. However, we urge 
that so far as possible each little group usually meeting 
together do so on this occasion,— after the custom 
of our Lord's time,— each family by itself,— each 
group of the Lord's children by itself. 

We trust for a great blessing upon us all in connection 
with this service, and are praying for it as one 
of the things that the Father would be pleased to have 
us ask for. We hope to hear from the various gatherings 
by postal card as quickly as possible after the 



celebration;— the number present and the degree of 
blessing experienced. 



R3178 :page 118 

"LEST YE ENTER INTO TEMPTATION." 

"Watch ye and pray, lest ye enter into temptation."— Mark 14:38. 

IT seems peculiar that there should be greater liability 
of falling into sin at one season than at 
another; but, nevertheless, we have noticed for several 
years, and have before called to the attention of others, 
the peculiar force of temptations at the time of the 
Passover, every Spring. Year after year at this season 
we have noticed special liability of many or all to 
stumble, or "be offended." Let us, therefore, take 
earnest heed to our Lord's words, and earnestly watch 
and pray for others and for ourselves; and let each 
one be on his guard not to cast a stumbling-block before 
his brother. -Rom. 14:13; Heb. 2:1. 

It was at the Passover season that our Lord said, 
"I am the living bread which came down from heaven: 
if any man eat of this bread he shall live forever: and 
the bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will 
give for the life of the world." Then many of his 
friends and followers said, "This is a hard saying; who 
can hear it?... and walked no more with him. Then 
said Jesus unto the twelve, Will ye also go away?" 
-John 6:4,51,60,66,67. 

It was at the Passover season that Judas bargained 
for the betrayal of our Lord,— and a little later on accomplished 
it. 

It was about the Passover season that our Lord 
said, "My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto 
death." (Matt. 26:38.) "I have a baptism [death] 
to be baptized with, and how am I straitened till it be 
accomplished!"— Luke 12:50. 

It was about the Passover season that our Lord 
took the disciples and began to explain unto them 
that the Son of Man must be delivered into the hands 
of the chief priests and scribes and be put to death 
(Matt. 16:21); and then Peter was tempted to forget 
that he was the disciple, and took the Lord and began 
to rebuke him, saying, "Be it far from thee, Lord. 
This shall not be unto thee." Thus also he tempted 
our Lord to repudiate his sacrifice, and brought upon 
himself the rebuke— "Get thee behind me, Satan: thou 
art an offense unto me: for thou savorest not the things 
that be of God, but those things that be of men."— 
Verses 22,23. 

It was while met to eat the Passover that the 
twelve got into a dispute as to which of them should 
be greatest in the Kingdom. They thus brought upon 



themselves our Lord's just rebuke, and induced the 
illustration of humility on his part by the washing of 
their feet. 

It was when they had sung a hymn and gone out 
from the Passover that our Lord used to them the 
words at the head of this article, "Watch ye, and pray, 
lest ye enter into temptation;" while he himself was 
in an agonizing battle, and with bloody sweat submitting 
his will to the will of God; and, praying earnestly, 
was strengthened.— Luke 22:39-46. 

It was but a little later that the emissaries of the 
High Priest came upon them and the eleven all forsook 
the Lord and fled (Mark 14:50): the temptation, the 
fear they could not resist. 

It was but a little later that Peter and John, bolder 

R3179 :page 119 

than the others, went with the crowd into Pilate's 
court to see what would befall the Master; and Peter, 
being recognized as one of Christ's disciples, was 
tempted to deny the Lord with cursing.— 
Mark 14:68,70,71. 

It was at the same time that our Lord was tempted 
before Pilate, but victoriously "witnessed a good 
confession."— 1 Tim. 6:13. 

The temptations of our Lord followed rapidly. 
When his foes spat upon him, and crowned him with 
thorns, and reviled him, saying, "Let him save himself, 
if he be Christ, the chosen of God," he could 
have smitten them with disease or death; but, as a 
sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he opened not 
his mouth. He overcame, and prayed for those who 
despitefully used him.— Isa. 53:7; Luke 23:33-37. 

He might even have concluded that he would not 
be the Redeemer of such thankless beings; but, while 
realizing that he could even then ask of the Father 
and receive the assistance of twelve legions of angels 
and overcome his enemies, he resisted the temptation. 
He gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due 
time. 

The death of our Lord was a great trial of faith 
to all the disciples, who straightway were tempted to 
go again to their old fishing business, and neglect the 
fishing for men.— John 21:3-17. 

Paul and the other apostles subsequently had special 
trials at this special season also. See Acts 20:16; 
21:10,11,27-36. 

In view of all this in the past, as well as in view 
of our own experience since the present harvest began 
in 1874, we feel specially solicitous for the Lord's 
sheep every Spring; and this Spring is no exception. 
What may be the character of the temptations, we 
may not clearly discern until they are upon us; for if 
we knew all about them in advance they would be but 
slight temptations. Watch, therefore, and pray always; 



for the only safe way is to be prepared; because 
your adversary, the devil, is seeking whom he 
may devour. He knows your weak points, and is 
ready to take advantage of them. We will each need 
the graces of the spirit in our hearts, as well as the 
Lord's "grace to help in time of need" if we would 
overcome. "Watch ye, and pray, lest ye enter into 
temptation!" 

"My soul, be on thy guard, 

Ten thousand foes arise; 
The hosts of sin are pressing hard 

To draw thee from the prize." 



"Whosoever will live godly shall suffer 
persecution." 

"They have called the Master of the house Beelzebub. 
...The servant is not above his Lord." 

Our Lord said to Pilate, "Thou couldst have no 
power at all over me except it were given thee from 
above." The same is true of every member of his 
body. 

"A man's foes shall be they of his own 
household." 

"They shall say all manner of evil against you 
falsely for my sake. ...Rejoice and be exceeding 
glad, for great is your reward in heaven." 

"The god of this world. ..now worketh in the 
children of disobedience. "..."We are not ignorant 
of his devices." 



R3179 :page 119 

OBLIGATIONS OF A CHRISTIAN. 

--ROMANS 13:7-14.-APRIL 19.- 

"Love worketh no ill to his neighbor; therefore, 
love is the fulfilling of the law." 

SOME one has well denominated this 13th chapter of Romans 
"The Christian Citizen's Chapter." 
We might consider it remarkable, almost to the 
extent of amazement, that every feature of Christian 
life, duty and character is set forth somewhere in the 
apostolic writings, did we not remember that the apostles, 
as the stars, or bright ones, of the Church, were 
specially held in the hand of the Lord; specially guided 
in their utterances, that they should set forth the 
whole counsel of God, that the man of God might be 
thoroughly furnished unto every good word and work. 
There is a vast difference between the governmental 
conditions of the present time and those which prevailed 



at about the time of the writing of this epistle. 

Monarchs are no longer absolute; and it is difficult for 

us to conceive the condition of things in which an emperor 

had authority not only to set apart culprits as 

victims for death in public spectacles, but after these 

had been destroyed, had the authority also to instruct 

his servants to select further victims from amongst the 

audience. It is when we get before our minds this view 

of atrocious government which prevailed in the Apostle's 

day that we get the full scope of his injunction, 

"Let every soul be subject to the higher powers; for 

the powers that be are ordained of God." It is comparatively 

easy to be subject to the higher powers in 

civilized lands today, for although absolute justice 

might not be meted out in every instance, there is at 

least an endeavor to render a show of justice, such as 

the world has never before known. We should be very 

thankful that our lot has been favorably cast in this 

respect. In declaring that "the powers that be are 

R3179 :page 120 

ordained of God," we are not to understand the Apostle 
to mean that they are endorsed by God, nor that 
their decisions, rules, etc., are approved by him or are in 
harmony with his rules and laws. The Apostle's intimation 
means simply that in divine providence things 
are as they are, and our God, who knows all the circumstances 
and conditions, permits them to be as they 
are, though he could overthrow and overturn and substitute 
his own Kingdom of righteousness. Nevertheless, 
this is not his plan; but rather for the time being 
he permits the kingdoms of this world, whose rulers 
are under the prince of this world, and largely blinded 
by his deceptions, to take much their own course- 
subject only to certain limitations by which the Lord 
hinders Satan and any of his misguided dupes from 
doing real injury to the best interests of the Lord's 
people or to the thwarting of the divine plan. His divine 
power overrules the wrath of man and makes it to 
praise him, and the remainder, which will not accomplish 
anything of good, but which would be subversive 
of the divine arrangements, he will restrain.— 
Psa. 76:10. 

"Render, therefore, to all their dues"— to all men 
as well as to all rulers— in financial as well as political 
matters. A great mistake, we believe, is being made 
along these lines today. The general sentiment amongst 
Christian people is that Christian citizenship implies 
engaging in political strife— and endeavoring to determine 
who shall be the rulers, striving to better the 
laws and have them obeyed, and putting forth efforts 
to oppose and rebuke bad laws. It will be noticed that 
the Apostle gives no such advice. On the contrary, he 
elsewhere declares, "Your citizenship is in heaven." 
(Phil. 3:20, R.V.) We are strangers and foreigners 



in the kingdoms of this world. Our Kingdom is yet 

to come; it is promised, and we are praying for it, 

"Thy Kingdom come; thy will be done on earth," 

and we are expecting it; but meantime, as foreigners, 

"not of this world" (John 18:36), it is our business 

to render obedience to the laws, customs, usages, of this 

world, in so far as these do not infringe upon our conscientious 

obligations to the Lord and the truth; but 

this does not mean that we are to become partizans in 

political strifes, and contentions amongst men. Let the 

world elect its own rulers in whatever way it sees best; 

we put up with whatever it provides with thankfulness, 

with gratitude to God for whatever may come, with the 

realization that he will guide and care for us under all 

circumstances, and that in any event our highest interests 

are being conserved. Obedience to the laws of the 

land might at some time oblige us to bear arms, and 

in such event it would be our duty to go into the army, 

R3180 :page 120 

if unable in any legal and proper manner to obtain exemption, 

but it would not be our duty to volunteer. 

We are soldiers in another army, which battles not 

with carnal weapons, and whose contests are from an 

entirely different standpoint and in an entirely different 

spirit. There could be nothing against our consciences 

in going into the army. Wherever we would 

go we could take the Lord with us, the Captain of our 

salvation, and wherever we would go we could find 

opportunities to serve him and his cause. If it came 

to the point of battling we above all others need have 

no fear of death, but we, assuredly, would be obliged 

to draw the line when commanded to fire, and we could 

not, in harmony with the divine program, fire upon a 

fellow-creature with the intention of taking his life. If 

we fired we should be obliged to fire either into the air 

or into the ground. All this army service would come 

in under this heading, "Render to all their dues." 

The governor of the state has the right, under the laws, 

to call for and to conscript, if necessary, soldiers for 

the defense of the state and of the nation; and if such 

requisition be enforced upon us we must render our 

dues and take our share in the trials and difficulties of 

the service, whatever they may be. The Apostle, however, 

stipulates more particularly what he means by 

dues, showing that he does not mean that we owe it to 

others to vote, to participate in political strifes. He 

had particularly in mind the paying of tribute, custom, 

fear, honor, to whom these are due. Tribute was the 

tax payable by a subject nation to the principal power, 

as, for instance, by the Jewish nation to the Roman 

Empire while its vassal. Custom is a tariff duty, or tax, 

levied in one form or another for the support of government, 

by a tax upon imports or exports or by direct 

taxation. Fear, or reverence, is differentiated from 



honor, or respect, in the sense that it may be the duty 
to salute an officer or representative of the government, 
by baring the head or bowing the knee, or otherwise, 
thus showing him honor or respect, not necessarily as a 
man, but as an officer, regardless of his personal character. 
The fear that is to be rendered is in the sense 
of obedience, as we elsewhere read, "Fear the judge." 
The commands of the judge or court are to be obeyed 
—whatever others might be disposed to do, Christians 
are never to be found in contempt of court, but are to 
obey its rules to the very letter, whether they consider 
them just or unjust, because the judge is the representative 
of the law, and God permits the law and the 
judge, and commands us to be subject to whatever he 
permits. If, therefore, as our Lord explained, some 
one shall sue us at the law, and take away our coat, or 
if it include our cloak also, all that we had, we are not 
to resist; we are to be obedient to the powers that be. 
This does not mean, however, that we shall willingly 
submit to the coat or cloak or other articles being taken 
from us illegally or unjustly without process of law. 

R3180 :page 121 

Having thus considered the Christian's obligation 
to the government, the Apostle next passes to the consideration 
of the Christian's obligation to his neighbors. 
He is to owe no man anything. This does not necessarily 
mean that he must not, under any circumstances, 
borrow, but that if he borrows with a specific understanding 
respecting the time of return of the money or 
goods, he shall be prompt to meet the obligation. And 
unless he is absolutely certain of his ability to meet the 
obligation, or can give security such as a mortgage, he 
should not borrow. There is, however, the standing 
advice of the Word of God that the children of the 
great King should be lenders, and not borrowers. "Do 
good and lend." Indeed, we believe that it would be 
to the advantage of every child of God if he would put 
in practise the Apostle's words in this lesson in the 
most absolute sense, and never borrow anything; never 
owe anything; paying for what he needs at the time of 
purchase, or else waiting for it until, in the Lord's 
providence, he is able to pay for it in advance. 

There is one thing, however, the Apostle implies 
we are continually owing to our fellow-creatures, not 
only to the members of our own family and our own 
neighborhood, but to all men; viz., love. We owe them 
this, under the divine law, and it is a part of Christian 
duty to discharge this obligation daily. A parent or 
member of the family is to see that he does his part in 
support of the home and its comforts and privileges and 
quiet and harmony, that his influence in his neighborhood 
amongst his friends and acquaintances shall be 
for good and not for evil, for peace and not for strife. 
And as the Apostle elsewhere remarks, if he is to do 



good unto all men, as he has opportunity, and because 

he loves all and desires their welfare, much more especially 

is he to have such sentiments and conduct toward 

those of the household of faith. (Gal. 6:10.) 

He is to be ready to do good at the expense of his own 

time and convenience, to all men, but he is to be ready 

to lay down his life for the brethren— he is to seek opportunities 

for laying down his life day after day, in 

the sense of giving his time to the communication of the 

truth, or helping the Lord's brethren in any manner, 

to put on the whole armor of God, and to stand in the 

evil day. 

The Apostle calls attention to the comprehensive 
statement of the Law set forth by our Lord; viz., that 
love is the fulfilling of the law, and that, therefore, love 
for the neighbor signifies that the law of God is fulfilled 
toward our neighbor. It will be remembered, 
however, that the law of love is divided into two parts; 
first, love to God; second, love to our fellows; and the 
loving of our neighbor would, therefore, be only a part 
of the fulfilling of the entire love to God. After loving 
our neighbor, and even laying down our life for him, 
we would need to see to it that we do not neglect the 
first feature of this law; viz., that we should love God 
more than our neighbor and more than ourselves, so 
that every human interest and matter would be sacrificed 
gladly in response to our conviction of the divine 
will. 

Going on to speak of the fulfilment of this second 
part of the Law of Love— the duty toward the neighbor, 
—the Apostle enumerates the essence of some of 
the commandments respecting murder, adultery, false 
witness, theft, covetousness, and all other commandments 
that relate to our fellow-creatures— they are all 
met by the Law of Love to our neighbor. The commandments 
of the Decalogue were all of a negative 
character, "Thou shalt not" do this or that which 
would be injurious to thy neighbor. But the new Law 
of Love is positive, and declares, upon the other side of 
the question, "Thou shalt love" thy neighbor. Love, 
therefore, meets all the requirements of the "shalt 
nots" of the Ten Commandments and much more. 
For whosoever, in obedience to this Law of Love, is 
seeking to do good to his neighbor, will surely not slander 
him nor murder him nor steal from him nor covet 
his goods, nor otherwise do, or wish to do him injury, 
or even to think of him with unkindness. 

Having considered these two points; viz., duty to 
rulers and duty to neighbors, the Apostle next turns to 
the Christian's duty toward himself, declaring, "Knowing 
the time, that now it is high time to awake out of 
sleep." The Christian is to realize that he, and in general 
the whole world, has been asleep in a sort of stupor, 
in respect to the highest and best and noblest 
things. Now having gotten the eyes of his understanding 
opened, and being, at least, partially awake to 



righteousness, he begins to weigh and measure matters 
after a fashion different from his previous course. He 
begins to estimate rightly the things of this present life, 
as not worthy to be compared with the glorious things 
which belong to the eternal life. He begins to realize 
that the world has now been six days (a thousand years 
each— 2 Pet. 3:8) under the reign of sin and death, 
and that the morning of the great Sabbath of refreshment 
and blessing and rest is at hand. As he realizes 
this he should feel disposed to arouse himself and shake 
himself thoroughly from the dust of ignorance, superstition, 
blindness and sordidness, and to live in harmony 
with the glorious hopes he now entertains— living 
for the new era, the new dispensation, which he sees is 
approaching, realizing that day by day since first he 
believed, his salvation is drawing nearer. Instructed 
by the Word of God, he will not expect his salvation 
except in connection with the second coming of our 
Lord Jesus and the establishment of his Kingdom; as 
the Apostle in another place declares, "The grace that 

R3180 :page 122 

is to be brought unto you at the revelation of our Lord 
and Savior Jesus Christ."— 1 Pet. 1:13. 

The thought of the second coming of the Lord was 
continually before the Apostles; and our Lord evidently 
designed that it should be constantly an incentive 
to all the members of his Church throughout the 
age. This, undoubtedly, was one reason why he did 
not particularly explain the length of time that would 
intervene— it would be a short time, from God's standpoint, 
and even from the human standpoint it would 
be a short time to each individual who would have 
only the few remaining years of life wherein to make 
ready for the glorious things of the future; since "in 
death there is no remembrance of thee; in the grave 
who can give thee thanks?"— Psa. 6:5. 

Looking back, and perceiving that about 4178 
years had already passed in sin and gross darkness 
upon the world, the Apostle realized that the night was 
surely far spent, and the day not far distant. And now 
we, living eighteen centuries nearer to the day, are 
highly favored by the Lord in this due time, in that 
we are permitted to see the particulars that were 
obscure to some extent in the Apostle's day. We believe 
that the day is actually at hand; that we are now 
living in the early dawn of the new dispensation, and 
that as soon as the harvest of this Gospel age shall be 
gathered, the work of change, or transformation, by 
which the kingdoms of this world shall, in a great time 
of trouble, become the kingdom of our Lord and his 
Christ, is nigh, even at the door. 

What is the force of the Apostle's argument to 
those who see as he did the approaching Kingdom of 



R3181 :page 122 

light, that shall banish all the darkness of sin, ignorance, 
superstition, etc.? It is expressed in his words, 
"Let us, therefore, cast off the works of darkness, and 
let us put on the armor of light." The works of darkness 
would be any works whatsoever that would not 
stand the fullest investigation; that would not stand 
approval in the light of the new dispensation, if it were 
already fully ushered in. Let us remember that we 
belong to the new dispensation, and not to the old, and 
should, therefore, live in accordance with our citizenship 
and our responsibilities toward the Prince of light 
and in opposition to the prince of darkness, his works 
and his ways. 

We have elsewhere considered this matter of putting 
on the armor of light; and the necessity, as expressed 
in the Apostle's statement, that the particular 
period of time in which the change from the dominion 
of the prince of this world to the Kingdom of God's 
dear Son will be a specially evil day— a day, a period, 
in which all the children of light will be crucially tested; 
such a day as will try every man's work and faith 
what they are; a day and a fiery trial through which 
only the gold, silver and precious stones will pass unscathed, 
and in which all the hay, wood and stubble 
of error and sin and human tradition and falsehood will 
be entirely destroyed. No wonder, then, that the 
Apostle repeatedly urges us to put on the armor of 
light— preparation by the Lord's people for the trials 
of this particular time, which we perceive is now just 
upon us— in fact, we are already passing into these very 
fires of this day of trial. We are already in the time 
when the wood, hay and stubble is being consumed, and 
when Higher Criticism, Evolutionary theory, Christian 
Science, Hypnotism, under its own name and known as 
Mind Cures, etc., are devouring as a flame all that are 
not fully devoted to the Lord, and, therefore, specially 
kept by his power through his Word and providence. 

Let us walk honestly, as in the day. We are not 
yet fully in the day, but we belong to the new era, and 
are, therefore, to live even in this present time as nearly 
as possible up to the perfect standards of the future. 
So to live will signify self-denial— will imply that we 
will be misunderstood by the world; will imply that 
we will be thought foolish, and that we will be considered 
enemies, not only by those who are in gross darkness, 
but particularly by those who profess to be the 
Lord's people, children of the light, but who really prefer 
darkness and error rather than light and truth. 
We are inclined to lay special stress on this word "honestly," 
and to believe that the Apostle used it advisedly 
and in a particular sense. 

As we look all about us we find that dishonesty is 
very prevalent; not merely in the world, where we 
expect a certain amount of duplicity and misrepresentation 



and deception, and people passing for what they 

are not, but we find this kind of dishonesty very prevalent 

amongst professing Christians; yea, we have 

known ministers to boast of their dishonesty— to declare 

that they never did believe the creed which they 

had professed to believe and vowed they would teach 

to others. Intelligent ministers are today preaching in 

all denominations what they do not believe, standing 

for creeds and theories which misrepresent their true 

sentiments. They are acting dishonestly; they are 

searing their own consciences; they are putting themselves 

into a condition where they cannot make progress 

into the light of the truth; for surely God does 

not want dishonest people in his elect Church. Surely, 

unless they become honest, they will have their portion 

with the hypocrites, for the hypocrites are the dishonest. 

"Let us walk honestly," appeals to every true 

child of God. 

Each one should see to it that he is honest, not 
only in matters of dollars and cents, but honest in his 
treatment of his neighbors, in his treatment of the 
brethren, in the Church, and above all, honest in his 

R3181 :page 123 

confessions respecting his God and his faith. The test 
is being made along this line, and those who love the 
favor of men rather than the favor of God, and who 
dishonestly are willing to confess and profess a lie, will 
be given up to their lie, will be permitted to blight 
their eternal interests, will be proving themselves unfit 
for the Kingdom— whatever else they may ultimately 
become fit for. This is the very essence of the Apostle's 
declaration in his letter to the Thessalonians (2 Thess. 2:11), 
when speaking of this evil day, and the 
great trial that would come upon the Church, he declares 
that God will send them strong delusions that 
they might believe a lie— because they were not honest 
—because they did not obey the truth in the love of it, 
but acted deceptively, hypocritically, two-facedly. 

Our translators seem to have forgotten that these 
epistles were written to "the saints" (Rom. 1:8), and 
not to the world, hence, when speaking of certain sins 
they used English words, which would be applicable 
to the most depraved class in describing the crimes and 
wrong course— instead of using such language as would 
properly represent the misdemeanors that might be expected 
amongst the saints. There is an illustration of 
this in our lesson (verse 13), where the Apostle is represented 
as saying to the saints that they should not 
indulge in rioting, drunkenness, chambering and wantonness. 
It is true that the saints should not indulge 
in any of those things; but it is true also that no saints 
would think of indulging in such orgies. 

The Apostle's meaning, to our understanding, is a 
much more refined one than these words would represent. 



He urges us that in view of the time, and that 
we are children of the day, that we should not engage 
in worldly revelries, time-killing pleasures, harmless 
though they be, and that we should not be intoxicated 
with the spirit of this world. As, for instance, some 
have an intoxication for money, wealth; others an 
intoxication for business; others for dress; others for 
music; others for art; but as the Lord's people, who 
have got a glimpse of the new day, and the great work 
of God which is to be accomplished in that day, our 
hearts should be so absorbed in the work of God that 
these matters, which would be thought proper enough 
and right enough in others, worldly people— because 
they are not awake as we are, and because they see not 
the future as we see it— should be far from our conception 
and our course. 

In urging the saints to avoid chambering and wantonness, 
we are not to understand the Apostle to mean 
fornication and adultery, and general lasciviousness, as 
he might warn the most depraved and most benighted 
of the children of this world. We are to understand 
him to address these words to the saints, urging them 
to continence in their social relations— urging that the 
thoughts of the Kingdom shall lift their minds and 
disengage their affections to a large extent, at least, 
from the earthly affections and the lawful sexual congress. 
This is a statement to the Romans of the same 
thing that he mentions to the Corinthians (1 Cor. 7:29); 
"Brethren, the time is short; it remaineth both 
that they that have wives be as though they had none, 
...and they that use this world as not abusing it." 
The Apostle, however, puts limitations to this counsel, 
as expressed in vss. 5-7 of the same chapter. This interpretation 
of the Apostle's sentiments is fully corroborated 
by the concluding words of this verse (13). By 
the general rules of language he would not begin his 
argument with the grosser sins, and end with the less, 
but reversely, conclude with the stronger argument. 
Here he concludes with the exhortation that the 
saints, in watching as in the day, shall avoid strife 
and envy. 

The other difficulties would be comparatively their 
own concern— their participation in revelries might do 
no harm to others, their being overcharged with a 
spirit of intoxication for wealth or fashion or art or 
music, might do no injury to others, their inordinateness 
in lawful sexual matters might do no injury to the 
cause in general; but when he comes to strife and 
envy he notes two qualities which reach out and would 
not only imply a wrong condition of heart on the part 
of the transgressor, which indulged would ultimately 
bar him from the Kingdom, but would represent also 
elements of character which would be injurious to the 
whole body of Christ, which is the Church. And be it 
noticed that these various dispositions, carelessness of 
life, the overcharged, or drunken condition, as respects 



earthly affairs (Luke 21:34), and lack of self-restraint 
in connubial relationship, would be very apt to go hand 
in hand with a wrong spirit in the Church— a spirit of 
strife, contention, wilfulness— not submitting to the 
divine Word and providence, but, on the contrary, the 
arousing of jealousies, ambitions, on behalf of self or 
others, for prominence in the body. 

To the contrary of all this, the saints are to seek 
more and more to put on the Lord Jesus Christ— to 
take each to himself the characteristics of the Lord Jesus 
—his meekness, his patience, his gentleness, his 
forbearance, his love, his willingness to be servant of 
all, his temperateness and moderation in all things, his 
complete devotion to the Father, his complete submission 
to the holy spirit in all of his affairs. 

In thus seeking to be like the Lord the saints are 
to "make no provision for the flesh, to fulfil the lusts 
thereof." They will find the flesh continually insisting 
that it be recognized, that it be not mortified, that 
plans and arrangements shall be made for its comfort, 
pleasure, gratification. The saints, however, are to 

R3181 :page 124 

make no such provision; they are to ignore the flesh, 
to the extent they are able; they are to consider its 
tastes, appetites and preferences, as generally depraved 
and improper to be gratified. They are to do this so 
thoroughly that they will make no provision for it, but 
merely provide for the doing of the will of the Lord in 
all things, whether the will of the Lord be pleasant or 
unpleasant, agreeable or disagreeable to the flesh. 



R3182:page 124 

"LOVE AS BRETHREN." 

-ACTS 2L1-12.-APRIL 26.- 

Golden Text.— "The will of the Lord be done."— Acts 21:14. 

BROTHERHOOD in Christ is the closest of all 

relationships, and many incidents in the 

Apostle's journey from Ephesus to Jerusalem 

illustrate this brotherhood relationship most beautifully. 

In a preceding lesson we had the account of 

the parting of Paul and his company from the elders 

at Ephesus, and of their loving demonstration and tears 

and prayers. The first verse of this lesson says, "After 

we were gotten from them," etc.,— the words "gotten 

from" signifying, torn ourselves away, as though the 

hearts of all were so thoroughly united that the separation 

meant the breaking of very tender ties. And so 

we find it to be today, with the Lord's similarly consecrated 



people. They become attached to each other in 
a manner that formal creeds and confessions in earthly 
bundles, or denominations, do not bind. Each one 
who is united to Christ feels a special interest in, and 
sympathy for, each fellow-member, so that, as the 
Apostle says, if one member rejoice all are glad, and if 
one member be in trouble or affliction or sorrow all are 
sympathetically affected. This will be noticeable in 
proportion as the law of love develops and abounds in 
each member. The little love in the beginning of 
Christian character will expand and deepen, filling all 
the avenues of the heart, and sanctifying them in a 
pure, unselfish, holy love. 

The voyage from Miletus to Patara was probably 
in a small coasting vessel. At the latter port they 
found a larger seagoing vessel, on which they made the 
through journey to Tyre. At the latter place the 
Apostle and his companions hunted up some believers, 
whom they previously knew resided there. This is 
another evidence of affection and interest. Apparently 
the number of the interested was small, just as today; 
the twos and threes, sixes and sevens, are much more 
numerous than larger companies. The fewness did 
not hinder the Apostle from seeking them out, that he 
might encourage and strengthen them. Rather, we 
may say that in some respects the appreciation of the 
fact that the Lord's jewels are not numerous makes 
them all the more precious. In this little church were 
some who evidently had the gift of prophecy, as it was 
granted in the early church— foretelling future events, 
just as with the prophets of old, Isaiah, Jeremiah, etc., 
except that those of the earlier dispensation spoke evidently 
in a more public manner, while these latter had 
messages especially for the Apostle and the Church. 
The message that came to them was to the effect that 
the Apostle at Jerusalem would be caused to suffer; 
would be imprisoned, maltreated, etc., and on this account 
they urged him not to go. The Apostle tells us 
previously, that the spirit witnessed in various places 
that bonds and imprisonment awaited him; but, nevertheless, 
he understood it to be the divine will that he 
should go to Jerusalem, and that, hence, he would not 
hesitate, knowing that the Lord was able to work out 
his own good purposes, if he were obedient. We are 
not to understand this testimony of these local prophets 
to be a contradiction of the Apostle's understanding of 
the same holy spirit's leading; the one teaching him 
that he should go to Jerusalem, the other teaching that 
he should not go to Jerusalem. We are rather to understand 
that these prophets merely had from God a 
revelation to the effect that Paul would suffer violence 
in the city of the great King, and that on the strength 
of this information they themselves advised the Apostle 
not to go. But Paul, without disrespect, or in any 
degree impugning the truthfulness of their message, 
drew a different lesson from it— understood the Lord's 



message differently. He saw that this meant a trial of 
his faith, his zeal, his perseverance, and that for him to 
yield to these suggestions, through fear, would have 
been an evidence of his lack of confidence in God, since 
the Lord had himself revealed to him that he should 
go up to Jerusalem. 

It may be wondered why the Apostle would feel so 
urgently desirous of going to Jerusalem, knowing in advance 
what to expect. We reply that he evidently realized 
that the work amongst the Gentiles was growing 
considerably, and that there was a feeling that there was 
a more or less clearly defined separation of interest and 
sympathy as between believing Gentiles and believing 
Jews, and that part of the Apostle's object in this visit 
was to counteract this tendency and to help cement the 
Church as one. He was taking with him contributions 
from the various churches amongst the Gentiles to the 
poor of the larger congregation at Jerusalem, a thank-offering 
to the Lord for the good things which had been 
sent to them through their Jewish brethren. These offerings 
would attest the love and fellowship of the Gentile 

R3182:page 125 

believers, and help to convince the brethren at Jerusalem 
that those abroad had one and the same spirit as 
those with whom they were better acquainted in Palestine. 
Then again, in Paul's company were several 
Gentile representatives, as it were, of the grace of God 
amongst the Gentiles— noble brethren, whose meekness, 
patience, gentleness, long-suffering; brotherly 
kindness and various fruits of the spirit fully attested 
the work of grace amongst the Gentiles to be the same 
as amongst the Jews. Furthermore, the Apostle realized 
that some had, intentionally or unintentionally, 
misrepresented his position— claiming that he was an 
opponent of the Law and of the Jews. He was an 
opponent of neither; he loved the Jews as his brethren, 
and he loved the Law of Moses, realizing that it 
was just, perfect and good, and so great and wonderful 
a law that no fallen human being could possibly live up 
to all of its requisites, and that, therefore, whoever 
would be justified could not be justified by the Law, 
through obedience to it, but must be justified according 
to God's arrangement— justified by faith. During this 
visit he hoped to be able to show that he had no disrespect 
for the Law, but that as Jesus magnified it, held 
it up, and showed how great and wonderful a law it 
was, he, Paul, magnified the Law of God, the Law of 
Moses, and showed that it could be kept only reckonedly, 
by any of the fallen race, and then only by those 
who could have imputed to them the righteousness of 
Christ to make up for their blemishes and 
shortcomings. 

Furthermore, he foresaw the complete fall of his nation 
from all divine favor into unbelief and a great time 



of trouble, just at hand, and he, doubtless, desired to 

make one further effort amongst the Jews to give a 

final testimony that might be helpful to some, hoping 

that his experience in the many years amongst the 

Gentiles might have brought him greater wisdom in 

knowing how to present the gracious message. We 

know that these were his sentiments respecting the condition 

of the Jews, because his Epistle to the Romans 

had already been written— after he left Ephesus, presumably 

at Corinth,— and in that Epistle to the Romans 

it will be remembered that in the ninth, tenth 

and eleventh chapters the Apostle clearly sets forth the 

stumbling of the whole Jewish nation, only a remnant 

taking hold upon the Lord Jesus, the rest being blinded 

until the fulness of the Gentiles should be come in. 

We remember his explanation of the olive tree, whose 

root was the promise made to Abraham, and whose 

branches were the individuals of the Jewish nation. 

The breaking off of these branches from divine favor 

left opportunity for grafting into this olive tree— of divine 

favor and participation in the covenant made with 

Abraham— of all of the Gentiles who should heartily 

accept the Redeemer. The Apostle had all these 

thoughts, then, clearly in his mind. He had no expectation 

of being able to turn Israel as a nation, but 

he did wish them to discern his love for them, and his 

earnest desire to assist them, that peradventure he might 

remove from the minds of the Apostles not only any prejudice 

they might, as Jews, have had against the Gentile 

converts, but that, additionally, he might assist 

some who had not yet made a decision, not yet gone 

into the condition of darkness, stumbling, etc. Here 

again love as brethren is manifest. The Apostle loved 

the Jewish nation with an intense love, as is witnessed 

by his declaration, "I could wish myself accursed from 

Christ for my brethren, my kinsmen according to the 

flesh." (Rom. 9:3.) Not that he would wish to suffer 

eternal torture for them, nor yet that he would 

wish to be cut off in the Second Death for them; but 

that he was willing to be cut off from participation in 

the glories of the Kingdom, as a member of the body 

of Christ, if thereby he could have brought his nation 

into that glorious position, the first right to which belonged 

to them as a people, until they rejected it. 

The stay with the little company at Tyre lasted 
seven days, while their vessel was unloading its cargo 
and reloading another. As we read the account of how 
the disciples at Tyre, with their wives and children, 
accompanied the Apostle and his companions to the 
ship, and all kneeled in prayer on the shore, we say to 
ourselves that the spirit of discipleship was evidently 
the same everywhere in the early Church— just as warm 
and just as expressive among these probably less cultured 
ones at Tyre, as it was with the elders of the 
Church of Ephesus at Miletus. And we are glad to say 
that the household of faith today has many of the same 



characteristics of intense love for the brethren, even 
though they have not previously seen each other. 
We frequently think of this striking likeness when some 
of the friends, and sometimes their children, accompany 
us to the railway station to say "Good-bye." 
Truly by one spirit we are all baptized into the one 
body, and whoever lacks this spirit of fellowship, of 
oneness, is quite likely to become more and more cool 
and indifferent, until he loses the truth entirely; and 
whoever cultivates this spirit of fellowship and love for 
all the members of the body of Christ will find it growing, 
intensifying. 

"Blest be the tie that binds 

Our hearts in Christian love; 
The fellowship of kindred minds 

Is like to that above." 
Mrs. M. J. Preston has put into poetic form the 
thought that we should speak our kind sentiments, and 
look them, and perform our kind services to one another, 
while we have the opportunity— and not let these 

R3183 :page 126 

opportunities go by, and leave our expressions until 
our friends are cold in death. She says:— 

"What use for rope if it be not flung 

Till the swimmer's grasp to the rock has clung? 

What help in a comrade's bugle blast 

When the peril of Alpine heights is past? 

What need that the stirring paeon roll 

When the runner is safe within the goal? 

What worth is eulogy's blandest breath 

When whispered in ears that are hushed in death? 

No, no ! if you have but a word of cheer 

Speak it while I am alive to hear." 
Leaving Tyre their vessel soon came to Ptolemais. 
There were a few friends at Ptolemais, and the day was 
spent in their company, and probably the partings 
again were full of expressions of sympathy; and then 
Caesarea, the Roman capital of Palestine, was reached. 
Philip the evangelist, one of the seven deacons originally 
appointed at Jerusalem, and who did a good 
work, it will be remembered, with the Ethiopian eunuch 
and at Samaria, was at this time apparently making 
Caesarea his home. We have no definite statement respecting 
the number of believers at the place, but evidently 
most of these groups of the Lord's people were 
few in number. Five of the Church, at least, were of 
Philip's own family, for he had four daughters, who 
are spoken of as unmarried sisters which did prophesy. 
It is difficult for us to determine whether or not they 
prophesied of future events, because this word "prophesy" 
is also used to designate public speaking without 
reference to foreseeing. Apparently the Apostle's company 
tarried more days at Caesarea than they had intended, 
for finding that they would not be in time for 



the Passover the Apostle and his company were 
not in special haste to reach Jerusalem before the 
Pentecost season. It was while they tarried in the latter 
place that Agabus, a brother in the Lord, who had 
delivered important prophecies of future events, came 
to Caesarea and finding Paul took his girdle and therewith 
bound his own feet and hands, and declared that 
thus Paul would be bound and delivered to the Gentiles. 
This form of prophecy, illustrating by signs, 
was not uncommon to the Jews. It will be remembered 
that Isaiah and Jeremiah and others of the prophets 
similarly acted out parts of their messages— thus, 
doubtless, making them more impressive. 

This last testimony from Agabus seems to have 
affected all of Paul's companions who, taking a view 
similar to that taken by others, now joined in a general 
appeal to the Apostle not to go further on the journey 
—to give it up, not to run foolishly into danger. His 
reply shows us how thoroughly convinced he felt that 
it was the Lord's will, and that his dear friends were 
conscientious, he does not for an instant dispute. His 
words are most touching: "What mean ye to weep and 
to break mine heart?" Here again we are reminded 
of the words of the poet:— 
"We share our mutual woes; 
Our mutual burdens bear; 
And often for each other flows 
The sympathizing tear." 

But the Apostle was firm. He had not started on 
this journey without the full conviction and assurance 
that it was in the Lord's providence that he should 
take it; and he was not to be daunted by any of the 
circumstances that might arise. He well knew that all 
the powers of darkness would assail him in vain, except 
as the Lord should permit, and he well knew also 
that the Lord would permit nothing to occur that 
would be to his real disadvantage. He would, therefore, 
go on conscientiously and courageously, and finish 
the work that the Father had given him to do. He 
would be sustained by his faith in the divine supervision 
of all his affairs, just as our Lord Jesus was; who, we 
remember, said to Pilate, "Thou couldst have no power 
at all against me, except it were given thee from above." 
-John 19:11. 

There are few such noble characters as Paul's, unmoved 
by threats or fears, strong in the Lord and in 
the power of his might, and ready not only to be bound 
for Christ's sake, but to die, if such should be the arrangement 
of the Lord's providence on his behalf. Let 
us each and all emulate this noble example of one who 
followed so closely in the footsteps of our Lord and 
Master. Let us be strong, not only in our consecration, 
but also in the taking of all the steps that the Lord's 
providence may lead us to take. 

The Apostle's argument was successful. He infused 
new courage into the hearts of his colaborers, and 



they apparently resolved that if he were about to die 

or suffer they, too, would rejoice if the will of God respecting 

them eventuated in their death; and if they 

did not suffer personally they would, at least, have the 

honor of being companions of those who were misused 

for Christ's sake, and thus be to some extent the sharers 

in the blessing promised. (Heb. 10:32,33.) The Apostle's 

companions saw the matter as he did, that it was the 

Lord's will; and they resolved to bow to it, notwithstanding 

that the Lord had given them information in 

advance which would have permitted them to turn 

back, or seek to save their lives. There is a very valuable 

lesson for all of the Lord's dear people in this 

word, "The will of the Lord be done." We should 

each seek to know the will of the Lord. If first of all 

our consecration be complete, even unto death, it will 

mean that we are seeking to know what the will of the 

Lord is respecting us, and it will mean that as we learn 

his will we will do it at any cost. It will mean that 

we will be on the outlook for the Lord's providences in 

all of our affairs, realizing that nothing happens by 

chance to those who are in covenant relationship 

with God, as members of the body of Christ,— that all 

R3183 :page 127 

things must work together for good to them. A fuller 
realization of the divine care over the elect would, 
doubtless, often guide our steps aright by directing 
the eye of faith to expect the Lord's leadings and to 
look for them in all matters that are of any 
importance. 



R3183 :page 127 

AN INTERESTING LETTER. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:- 

In the late fall of 1899 a young woman stopped in my 
house long enough to sell my wife a Volume I., M. DAWN, 
for which she was canvassing. My wife, being of the Roman 
Catholic faith, hesitated to read the book, and, knowing 
my irreligious disposition, feared to inform me of her 
purchase, thinking I might ridicule her action; so the book 
lay untouched for some months. After Christmas my wife, 
while engaged in making up a parcel for my relatives in a 
distant city, bethought herself of the book and an easy 
way to dispose of it, by sending to my grandmother, and 
thus also relieve herself one of the perplexities of Christmas 
giving, the religious nature of the book appealing to her 
idea of an aged person's disposition. I came into the room 
at this juncture, and, noticing the book, questioned her 
concerning it. On learning her intention, I explained to 



her the conception she had of my grandparent's disposition 
was erroneous, and that, instead of appreciating the gift, 
an opposite effect would be the case, as, to one of the old 
lady's temperament, it would imply that as she was now in 
the evening of life we felt it were best for her to prepare for 
the end by becoming religious. My wife saw the point, and 
the book was not sent, its pretty cover alone saving it from 
destruction as useless. 

During the long winter evenings, being a voracious 
book-worm and tiring of the mechanical and scientific 
works which were my usual bent, I took up the volume of 
DAWN, more out of curiosity and want of something else, 
apparently. On reading the preface I was very favorably 
impressed by the utter absence of the ego most authors infuse 
into this portion of a book, and naturally desired to 
read further in the writings of so unusual a person. My 
mind must have been in relation to the volume in about 
the same condition that a soft veinless piece of marble is to 
a sculptor, for each statement left an impression, each opposing 
thought being readily and reasonably answered and 
dispelled. I read on long past the usual hour for retiring, 
not heeding repeated admonitions from my wife that I would 
be late to work next morning. This continued each evening 
as opportunity offered, taking up each volume, (having meantime 
procured the same), to the entire neglect of my usual 
studies, and becoming more deeply impressed and enlightened 
as I progressed. It was truly a coming "out of darkness 
into his marvelous light," and the thoughts and feelings 
inspired in me by the reading of these volumes cannot be 
described; they are beyond words. It was all so grand, 
so reasonable, so completely filling my heart with love for 
the great One who alone could devise such a wonderful 
plan; it was so natural to believe these writings, and in all 
my studies from Vol. I. to V. not once did a serious doubt 
arise in my mind but that each statement was absolutely 
true, for the God of the writer was different from the horrid 
monster my childhood's teachers had told me of, who 

R3184:page 127 

could torment eternally those he loved, and was otherwise 
so contrary and inconsistent. 

Meanwhile Satan had endeavored to draw me aside, 
and, by the conciliatory efforts of a Roman Catholic clergyman 
to induce me to join myself to that faith, as well as 
the promise of family peace and worldly prosperity, lure me 
from the high calling toward which I was progressing. But 
I can with much fervor thank my heavenly Father that I 
had read enough from M. DAWN, as well as some timely 
advice from yourself, to be ably fortified against Satan's 
advances, and, with the "spirit of a sound mind," I could 
combat his sophistry. Now, since the light has become 
brighter to me, I can clearly see that God's overruling 
power was exerted in every instance just where I could 
not help myself further, and would have fallen but for his 
aid. Praises to his love! 



Of course I could no more keep to myself these glorious 
tidings than a freshly opened bottle could retain the 
effervescent liquor that fills it. I must tell someone, and, 
as my dear wife not only refused to listen but opposed me, 
I had to try elsewhere. In a fellow-employee, Sister Kestner, 
I found a ready listener, and the volumes sold to me 
were of double service, for her experience was but a repetition 
of my own. Each now was alert to spread to others 
the knowledge we enjoyed. Bro. Bird we found hungering 
and thirsting after righteousness and we proceeded to 
cooperate in filling him, while he, on imparting to his 
sister Mary what he had learned, was surprised to find that 
she had a set of the DAWNS, but being somewhat bound by 
sectarianism had not as yet mustered sufficient courage to 
make a bold stand for the truth and put into practice the 
suggestion of complete independence pointed out to present 
day footstep followers of Jesus as scriptural and necessary. 

Sister Grebe became a fellow-employee, and it was but 
a short time till Sister Kestner had succeeded in bringing 
her into a study of God's Word as made clear by the 
DAWNS. We five, now all fully consecrated to God, and 
having publicly signified such fact by water baptism, acknowledging 
no Head but Jesus, are gladly working in his 
harvest field at whatsoever our hands find to do under his 
guidance; and we can with certainty attest that having 
tasted and seen that God is good, there is no peace or 
blessedness except in him; and within sound of our Shepherd's 
voice there is only gladness. 

We have another young student with us now, and we 
six have been banded together in the Volunteer work this 
year. God's blessing has been with us and we have succeeded 
in reaching all the churches assigned to us, 62 in 
all, as well as giving our help in other parts of the city 
after our district was finished. We have received abundant 
evidence of our Master's kind approval of our feeble efforts 
to spread the glorious message of our Redeemer's second 
presence and to call his little ones out of Babylon, by the 
growth in Christian characteristics of love and forbearance, 
through the experiences while serving the brethren, also in 
the occasional permission to view some of the good results 
of our labors. 

By the gracious permission of our heavenly Father we 
were last summer enabled to inaugurate mid-week meetings 
at my residence (we being so situated that it is not possible 
to attend the uptown meetings except on Sundays). Each 
one of our little class can testify to the wonderful help we 
receive in our daily walk up the narrow way, as a result of 
following the kindly suggestions which are given in the 
WATCH TOWER, and it is a sore trial if one of our number 
misses a meeting. 

I close with a prayer for God's blessing on your every 
effort, through our blessed Redeemer's name. 

Yours in Christ, JAS. LOCKWOOD,-Missouri. 



page 129 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIV. MAY 1, 1903. No. 9 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 131 

An Astrologer's Outlook 131 

Preparations for the Millennium 131 

Only a Form of Godliness 131 

Peculiar Views of Heathens 132 

A Seasonable Word on Christian 

Science 132 

A Christian Science Prayer 136 

A United Presbyterian View 136 

Suffering as Christians 137 

"The Lord Stood by Him" 140 

Interesting Questions Answered 142 

page 130 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



R3185 :page 130 

THE ATLANTA CONVENTION. 



This Convention was, we feel sure, a great blessing to 
many. One dear old brother, when bidding the Editor 



"Goodbye" at the train, said, "This Convention has been 
a great blessing to me: I am a poor man, Brother Russell, 
but if it had cost me $1000 to attend I would not begrudge 
it." All faces told much the same story of appreciation 
of brotherly fellowship. We trust that the result will be 
permanently beneficial, not only to those who attended, 
but also to those at their homes whom they represented, 
and to whom they carried back some of the Convention's 
fullness of joy. 

The attendance from outside Atlanta was good, especially 
for the South,— about 100. The largest attendance 
was on Sunday afternoon, when about 600 were present at 
the Grand Opera House. Nineteen symbolized their immersion 
into Christ on Saturday. 

page 130 

CONCERNING CORRESPONDENCE. 



During the Editor's absence in Europe our friends will 
remember that he cannot be reached by correspondence, and 
that matters intended for his special consideration should be 
deferred until his return. 

In general, communications concerning business, subscriptions, 
orders, Tract Fund remittances, Pilgrim visits, 
etc., should be sent to "Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society," 
and letters concerning doctrinal and personal matters 
to the Editor. 



R3184:page 131 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
AN ASTROLOGER'S OUTLOOK. 



WE seriously question all the claims of Astrology; 
yet the following— from whatever source the 
suggestions come, even though of the Adversary 
himself— seem remarkably true to our expectations 
based upon the Word of the Lord. For this 
reason alone we present them here,— as follows:— 
"Saturn is the representative of the great motive 
power that has dominated the mind of man up to 
the present time. The great organizations of Capital, 
attracting now so much attention, are in reality the last 
great struggle of this Saturn-god to save his throne. 
But his efforts will be futile, yet far from useless, for 
he is blindly doing service for a still greater God in 
the same way as the other planets have contributed 
blindly to Saturn's glory. 



"Jupiter, representing law, religion and morality, 
has been perforce subservient to Saturn's greater 
and more potent force. It explains why the church, 
the law, the charitable and educational institutions 
have contributed to increasing the power and prestige 
of the worldly and material Saturn, whose selfish monopolizing 
material nature must be disposed of and 
made tributary to a higher, nobler force that will carry 
out the work of human evolution. 

"Jupiter must also transfer his allegiance from the 
grasping Saturn to the newly discovered factor that 
stands for universal brotherhood; namely, Uranus. 
When Uranus and Jupiter meet in the humane sign 
of Aquarius in 1914, the long-promised era will have 
made a fair start in the work of setting man free to 
work out his own salvation, and will insure the ultimate 
realization of dreams and ideals of all poets and 
sages in history. 

"Uranus is preparing the way for Neptune, who 
symbolizes Love in its very highest form— the fulfilling 
of the law. By this, we see that Socialism, or 
whatever the new order may be called, will not and 
can not be the rule of the common or ignorant masses, 
but the leadership of the very highest developed members 
of the human family. 

"In 1903 Jupiter will be in the Sign of Pisces- 
sign of the feet, or understanding, and the synthesis of 
the new religion is Love;— Love, that words cannot 
define. We are nearing a condition where "masters" 
will be unknown— where humanity will instinctively 
conform to the injunction, 'Call no man master, 
neither be ye called master.' 

"Note— Uranus: Great commotions are expected 
when it shall take its ascendancy over Saturn." 

PREPARATIONS FOR THE MILLENNIUM. 



Polar ice, both arctic and antarctic, seems to have 
been steadily decreasing, and it may be that these 
frigid deserts shall once more blossom as the rose— 
Isa. 35:1— literally. 

The ice from both poles seems to be drifting toward 
equatorial regions, to such an extent that, in 
the north, it has become a menace to commerce, and 
it may be a work preparatory to the "times of 
restitution." 

ARCTIC ICE A MENACE TO OCEAN STEAMSHIPS. 

"Philadelphia, March 18.— (Press dispatch.)— 
Navigators of the North Atlantic are worried about 
the manner in which the arctic floe ice is drifting 
south, directly in the pathway of steamships. Captain 
Beavis of the Philadelphia Trans-Atlantic line 



steamship East Point, which arrived here today from 
London, reports passing tremendous quantities of field 
ice in latitude 43 deg. 43 min., and longitude 49 deg. 
21 min. Owing to the obstruction Captain Beavis 
found it necessary to alter his vessel's course and steam 
60 miles to the southward to avoid contact with it." 

ONLY A FORM OF GODLINESS. 



Rev. J. B. Hastings, D.D., of Edinburgh, Scotland, 
explained not long ago his views respecting the 
generally acknowledged loss of religious interest, as 
follows:— 

"Our worship in many cases has become a mere 
form. There is little apparent hungering for the 

R3184:page 132 

bread of life; and only in rarest instances a crying 

out of the heart and flesh for the living God. Not that 

there is an open antagonism to religion. There have 

been periods within our own recollection when there 

was much more of direct opposition. But there is an 

alarming deal of that subtler, deadlier quantity known 

as simple indifference, which is playing melancholy 

havoc among ever-enlarging sections of the population. 

Outside our churches there is a great army of 

men and women who have become sadly estranged; 

who have been so long away from the ordinances of 

public worship that it will be next to impossible, by 

ordinary methods, to bring them back. And inside 

our churches there are many who feel that something 

needs to be done to make our public worship more interesting 

and edifying and directly helpful to the religious 

life.... 

"I believe that the root of the whole matter lies 
in a widespread practical disbelief in the supernatural. 
There is no realization, on the part of the multitudes, 
of the spiritual world, and of the God with whom they 
have to do. There are so many interests in this material 
life that the things of the spirit are simply given 
the go-by. The whole atmosphere of God's house 
has become so foreign to the experience of their everyday 
lives, that they are no longer interested, and, as 
a matter of course, have ceased to attend. It is sad to 

R3185 :page 132 

think that so many young men and women in our 

populous cities are in this position. With churches 

galore, of all sorts and conditions (in one of which 

they could surely find congenial worship), they are 

yet standing without, spiritual starvelings, children 

merely of time, practical unbelievers in God and immortality, 



moving on their light-hearted way to the 
judgment throne and the eternity beyond." 

PECULIAR VIEWS ON HEATHENS. 



"Munich.— (Press cable.)— The papal nuncio at 
this court has ordered the Catholic papers to stop publishing 
an open letter by Bishop Pelkman, Lahore, 
East India, as it would 'distress the holy father very 
much to see the right reverend gentleman's peculiar 
views in print' 

"The paragraph in the bishop's letter to which 
exception is taken reads as follows: 

"Twenty -one thousand three hundred and eighty-nine 
persons have died of the plague; wonderful are God's 
ways! One is almost persuaded to think that the Lord 
sentenced the heathen adults to die that their children 
might fall into the hands of the missionaries and be educated 
as good Christians. The last two famine periods 
brought us several thousand new adepts.'" 



R3185 :page 132 

A SEASONABLE WORD ON CHRISTIAN SCIENCE. 

-FROM BRO. W. E. PAGE.- 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Meeting so much 
"Christian Science" out this way, I was led to 
investigate the basis of its claims by the lamp of 
the Word, and I find it a most noxious weed. First, for 
my own profit, I wrote out what I found, and have since 
remodeled and chiseled it down. You may find good use 
for it as it is, or can use it as a foundation for a criticism 
in the TOWER upon this most manifest perversion. I send it 
to you for such use as you deem best. Put it in the waste 
basket if that is the best place for it, and do not hesitate a 
moment to tell me so, if these articles bother more than 
they help. I only want to do good work, but with our 
weak judgments we cannot always discern where we help 
and where we hinder. 

The Lord is gracious to us, bearing with us in our infirmities, 
and ever and anon giving us deep draughts at the 
fountain of truth, and its blessings of peace and love in 
justification and sanctification. Oh, that this year may 
prove the one of most sincere consecration and abundant 
zeal to us all, who are of this way! 

May grace and mercy and peace be multiplied to you 
and your household, the brethren and sisters with you. 

Yours in fellowship, W. E. PAGE. 



When presenting various features of the Father's 
great "Plan of the Ages," we have not infrequently met 
professed believers in Christ who seemed to accept the 
truth, and apparently warranted expectations of full 
fellowship. However, as the acquaintance grew, an 
almost indefinable barrier to communion would arise; 
and being anxious to receive those whom the Lord 
sends (Matt. 10:40), and desiring to esteem all professed 
brethren as most worthy (Phil. 2:3), we have 
often been perplexed and in straits as to what course 
we should pursue in our association with them. The 
grounds of the older sects are so well defined that we 
have but little difficulty in understanding our proper 
attitude toward them; nor is there particular danger 
of confusion from those forms of error which plainly 
and fairly present their teachings in well defined 
terms. Since our eyes were anointed that we might 
understand present privileges and labors (Rev. 3:18), 
we have been most perplexed and confused by the 
newer forms of doctrine which, on investigation, we 
find deny the Lord that bought them (2 Pet. 2:1), 
while with much feigned reverence and humility they 
profess allegiance to him, thus falsely presenting themselves 
as angels of light— messengers of truth. (2 Cor. 11:13-15.) 
However considerate we may desire 
to be, when we meet such false, seductive teaching, 
we must, without strife and to the best of our ability, 
unmask it (2 Tim. 2:24-26), and be careful neither 
in word nor deed to wish it God-speed (2 John 9-11), 
remembering that it is required in stewards that a 
man be found faithful.— 1 Cor. 4:2. 

One of the most widespread of these later forms 
of subtle error that we meet is "Christian Science." 

R3185 :page 133 

Many of its votaries are kind, well-intentioned 
people, but they are completely blinded by the perversions 
of the system; and we believe that many 
such will gladly free themselves from this dominion 
of the Devil, when the shackles of ignorance and 
prejudice, which now bind them, are stricken off in the 
advancing light of this dawning day. As our conclusions 
and the grounds for them may be of use to 
some others of the brethren who may be perplexed as 
to the proper attitude they should assume toward this 
heresy, we have decided, with the Lord's help, to 
present what we have found. Our quotations on the 
subject are wholly from the writings of Mrs. Eddy, 
who is the chief apostle of the various forms— which 
are legion— of this doctrine. 

When setting forth to those entangled in this 
doctrine, our faith regarding the "restitution of all 
things," and God's wonderful plan for selecting the 
"Seed" which is to bless all nations, we almost invariably 



meet with the claim, "That is just what we 

believe; you must be a Scientist." The claim is so 

sincerely made that we are led to hope that we have 

met with another grain of wheat. To make sure of 

our ground, we present the ransom and its necessity, 

which seems to meet with their approval, yet from 

various remarks, especially those made in a general 

way, we are conscious of a vital disagreement, somewhere, 

on the fundamental principles of the Lord Jesus' 

work. A short investigation into Mrs. Eddy's 

work disclosed the cause for this, and developed the 

fact that her teachings are based upon private meanings 

put upon words. Hence, when we present our views 

to one of her followers, the words we employ do not 

convey our meaning to them, and until we learn this, 

and find out what interpretation they put upon our 

words, we are sorely perplexed. Mrs. Eddy very cunningly 

lays the foundation for her master-piece of 

word-jugglery as follows:— 

"Aside from the opposition to what is new, the 
greatest difficulty in introducing our metaphysical 
system is to express metaphysics in physical terms 
and then be understood physically. This difficulty is 
overcome by teaching the student the metaphysical meaning 
of terms in common use." 

What a preparation to deceive! Surely any 
teaching that must rest on special meanings placed on 
"terms in common use," should arouse the suspicions 
of those who are sincere and pure in heart. The Master 
did not find it necessary to employ so questionable 
a course, but so taught that the "common people 
heard him gladly." 

In examining Mrs. Eddy's teachings, we do not 
follow the order of her books, but take up the essential 
truths she perverts, as seems best. Among Webster's 
definitions of person we find, "A self-conscious 
being;" and being is defined as "existence, opposed to 
non-existence; that which exists in any way, whether 
it be material or spiritual;" and we submit that the universally 
accepted meaning of person today is a "self-conscious 
being." Again, we submit that to the unprejudiced 
and candid reader the unqualified teaching of 
the Bible, in language in common use, is that God is 
the great and only self-existent, "self-conscious 
being." 

But Mrs. Eddy says, "Jehovah is not a person. 
God is principle." How elusive and vague this is! 
The first meaning in Webster given to principle, and 
which is marked obsolete and rare, is, "beginning, 
commencement;" second, "hence, a source, or origin; 
that from which anything proceeds; fundamental 
substance or energy;" and third, "an original faculty 
or endowment of the soul." Ah, yes! "The 
serpent was more subtle than all the beasts of the 
field." (Gen. 3:1.) How this cunningly-laid perversion 
illustrates his full subtlety! While we stand 



aghast at the bold belittling of the great Jehovah, we 
cannot but wonder at the consummate skill shown. 
(Read Ezekiel 28:12-19.) We know that God is the 
source of all good things: he from whom every right 
thing proceeds: the self-existent, "self-conscious being," 
possessing and originating all qualities of moral 
perfection. Owing to the inexactness of language, 
the wedge of error here introduced (if, as common 
people, we follow Webster) is very slim, and not readily 
detected at first glance. If not detected, the next 
step will entangle the unwary very seriously. To the 
alert, however, the danger is not so great as it seems; 
for Mrs. Eddy does not accept the common meaning 
of the word principle, but proceeds to put a private 

R3186 :page 133 

interpretation upon it. Following her statement regarding 
Jehovah, she defines principle as, "life, truth, 
love, substance and intelligence." These (in language 
in common use) are all qualities or attributes 
of beings; and thus God is reduced to the position of 
the sum of certain qualities of conscious existence, 
and is dethroned from his rightful position as the Creator 
of all these qualities. Those misled by these 
teachings are speedily so befogged that they are utterly 
unable to discern between honest treatment of 
the Scriptures and this woful perversion of them. 
Having dethroned God, the next natural step is 
the deification of man; and this work these teachings 
do in a less subtle form, and in one more easily followed, 
although the word-twisting is dexterously 
kept up. Webster defines entity as "a real being, 
whether in thought or in fact: being, essence, existence." 
Mrs. Eddy says, "Entity signifies the particular 
nature of being; and God, without the image and 
likeness of himself, NAMED MAN, would be nonentity" 

R3186 :page 134 

—without existence. Following this we give from 
her book a series of quotations deifying man. 

"God cannot destroy man, because he is the reflection 
of God." "The science of being reveals man 
perfect, even as the Father is perfect." "If man 
went out for a single instant in death, or sprang from 
nothingness into existence, there was an instant some 
time without man, when Jehovah was without entity, 
and there was no reflection of Mind, or Soul, and Principle 
had no idea." "God, Soul, is and was, and 
ever will be; and man is coexistent and eternal with 
this Soul." "The science of man, understood, would 
have eradicated sin, sickness and death in a less period 
than six thousand years." 

Surely pride and boastfulness could assume no 
more than is here claimed. None of the "meek" would 



arrogate such position and virtue to themselves. To 
show the foolishness and the fruit of such exaltation 
of man, we quote the following:— 

Man is "the infinite idea of infinite Spirit,... 
the spiritual image and likeness of God,. ..the full 
representation of Mind; hence, the idea of Principle, 
not person. [Man is] the compound idea of God, including 
all other ideas, the generic term for all that reflects 
God's image and likeness. ...Woman is the highest 
term for man.. ..[Man is] the conscious identity 
of being as found in Science, where man is the 
reflection of God, Mind, and, therefore, is eternal; that, 
which hath no separate mind from God; that which 
hath not a single quality underived from Deity; that 
possesses no life, intelligence, or creative power of his 
own, but reflects all that belongs to his Maker." 

'"And God said let us make man in our image, 
after our likeness: and let them have dominion over 
the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and 
over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that 
creepeth upon the earth' (Gen. 1:26)— what is incapable 
of sin, sickness and death, in so much as it derives 
its esse from God, and possesses not a single 
original, or underived power: hence, cannot depart 
from holiness. Nor can God from out himself, whence 
man was evolved, engender a capacity or freedom to 
sin. In divine science God and man are inseparable, as 
PRINCIPLE AND ITS IDEA." 

Of course the enthronement of man necessitates 
a perversion of the entire Scripture teaching regarding 
his creation and fall. To allay the suspicions that 
might arise if this work were too abruptly done, the 
approach is very gradually made, and the error introduced 
under high pretentions to spirituality and learning. 
As a sample we quote the following:— 

"As crude forms of mortal mind yield to higher 
significations, the metaphysical Genesis of the Scripture 
will be hailed with head and heart. The following 
brief comments are the spiritual, or scientific, version 
of the text." 

Space forbids full quotation, and we simply give 
the "spiritual, or scientific, version" of the fall, set 
forth by Mrs. Eddy as the true meaning of the account 
in Genesis 3:1-5, as follows:— 

"The serpent is introduced into the Scriptural 
record without any specified origin; but some maintain 
he was a veritable demon, even the climax of 
subtlety and falsehood, created by a perfect and divine 
spirit.. ..Adam, or error, even the belief of mind 
in matter, began this reign of mortal man somewhat 
mildly, increasing in jealousy and falsehood until his 
days were numbered by the law of Truth, and the 
mortality of error made manifest. The garden was a 
term used to signify the body, in the first records of 
Mythology; sexuality and self-abuse the forbidden 
knowledge. Man was not to presume upon the prerogatives 



of his Creator, but to recognize God, the Father 
and Mother of us all.— Compare with 
Genesis 3:4,5. 

"This Allegory represents error in every one of 
its beliefs, always asserting itself as Truth and over 
Truth: and giving the lie to Truth, saying, I can 
open your eyes, I can do more for you than God 
(good) has done. Bow down to me, have other gods, 
admit I am right, and more real to the senses, pleasant 
to the eyes and more to be desired than Truth. 
The history of Adam, or error, is a dream without a 
dreamer; first, a supposition of assertion; secondly, 
that nothing says, I am something; and third, that 
something springs from nothing, and is life, substance 
and intelligence. The order of the allegory describing 
the mythological creation, even a creation springing 
from dust instead of Deity, is maintained in about this 
form. Mortal man, starting from chaos, or old night, 
from the lowest propensities; non-intelligence becoming 
intelligence; the basal portions of its formations of 
mind indicating the appetites and passions; its upper 
portions the sentiments, implying the hope that mind 
will sometime escape from matter, giving a material 
sense of things as the sense of mind, and matter 
having dominion over mind: body originating in non- 
intelligence, and mind afterward inserted, the creation 
a propagating principle in vegetable and animal, alias 
God in matter, or matter without God: a man's life 
consisting of the things that he eateth, and having no 
connection with God, Spirit; his senses unable to 
perceive Spirit, and matter dooming them to die. This 
mythological history of man, so unlike the scientific 
record of man as the image and likeness of God, having 
dominion over the earth, and whose Mother is 
Spirit, first creates man of dust, and without a Mother, 
afterwards giving him a Mother, who is governed 
by mesmerism, controlled by a belief called 
serpent, her origin a rib, her capacity for knowledge 
gathered through material sense and from the tree of 
knowledge, whereof if a man eat he shall die, and her 
progeny, self-constituted suicides, hastening towards 
death in pursuit of life. The word Adam, divided 
into two syllables and reading A-damn, indicates more 
closely the character and the curse of the divine spirit, 
or Mother of man bestowed upon it." 

The fall being "spiritualized" out of existence, 
and man being "perfect even as the Father," there is 
no necessity for a man, Christ Jesus, to give his "life," 
a ransom— a corresponding price—" for the life of the 
world," and to redeem the race with his precious 
blood. Hence, Christ Jesus, the Anointed Savior, simply 
becomes a fine example, a "good man." We quote 
again from Mrs. Eddy:— 

R3186 :page 135 



"Jesus was the son of a virgin mother by whom 
scientific being was so far understood that she knew 
that God was the Father of man, and man the offspring 
of a divine Principle. Jesus was the name of 
the man, and Christ but another name for God, the 
Principle and creator of that man. The signification 
of God being 'good' (?!), the term Christ Jesus may 
be rendered as good man, or God-man." 

Christ not being a ransom-sacrifice, no atonement 
work was done by him, and a new signification must 
be found for the Scripture teaching that he is the 
"propitiation [satisfaction] for the sins of the whole 
world." (1 John 2:2.) To keep the case clearly before 
us we will give Webster's definition of atonement, 
and then its "spiritual" signification as given by Mrs. 
Eddy. 

"Atonement (Webster): Reconciliation after enmity 
or controversy. Satisfaction or reparation made 
by giving an equivalent for an injury." 

"Atonement (Mrs. Eddy): The teachings, demonstrations 
and sufferings of the man Jesus, when 
showing mortals the way of salvation from sin, sickness 
and death. ...Soul's triumph over material 
sense. The supremacy of spirit asserted, man reassuming 
the image and likeness of God in his scientific 
atonement with him. Jesus of Nazareth gave the all-important 
proof that when God is understood, it will 
be seen that Soul creates its own body, and cannot for 
the smallest instant do without a body. This divine 
Science overcame death and the grave, and was Jesus' 
final demonstration that the body is the same after as 
before death: hence, there is a state of probation and 
progress, whereby to grow out of a material and into 
the spiritual sense of existence beyond the grave. 
The meek, mighty Nazarene exhibited a material 
body after the crucifixion, to show his followers the 
great need there is of spiritualizing thought and action 
to make man God-like before death, that after it 
he may be fit for the higher school of the just made 
perfect. Not death, but the understanding of Life, 
God, spiritualizes man, and determines forever his 
progress and the state of his body. Mortality disappearing 
and immortality coming to life. Self-abnegation 
and love blessing its enemies. Not blood flowing 
from the veins of Jesus, but his out-flowing sense of 
life, truth and love, so much higher, purer and more 
God-like than mankind's, shedding its hallowed influence 
on the whole human race and marking out the 
only way to heaven. Not the death of the cross, but 
the cross-bearing deathless life, that Jesus left for the 
example of mankind, ransoms from sin all who follow 
it." 

Salvation from the present "evil world" Mrs. 
Eddy thus makes a matter of works, and is not 
through faith in Jesus, as taught by the apostles. 
Thus the Adversary again undertakes to set forth 



"another gospel, which is not another."— Gal. 1:8,9. 
Again she says:— 

"The way is strait and narrow that leads to the 
understanding that God is life. It is warfare with the 

R3187 :page 135 

flesh whereby we conquer sin, sickness and death, now 
or hereafter; but certainly before we can reach the 
goal of Spirit or Life, which is God. The truth of 
man makes a new creature. Old things have passed 
away, behold all things become new. Passions, 
selfish appetites and every sensuality yield to spirituality, 
and the balance of being is on the side of God. 
Christian perfection is won on no other basis. The 
scientific unity between God and man must be wrought 
out in demonstration." 

Man being "coexistent and co-eternal with God," 
death must be an illusion, and is so set forth:— 

"Death: an illusion; there is no death. Matter 
has no life, hence, it cannot die, and mind is immortal. 
The flesh warring against spirit frets itself free from 
one belief only to be fettered by some other one, until 
all belief yields to the understanding of God. Any 
material evidence of death is false, for it contradicts 
the spiritual facts of life. The unreal and untrue. 
The opposite of God, or life." 

The fall and death being done away with, there 
cannot, of course, be any resurrection from among the 
dead, or raising of the race up to something lost in 
Adam. Hence, in this new "Science" resurrection 
becomes mere development. We quote her definition 
of resurrection as follows:— 

"Resurrection: spiritualization of thought; a 
new and higher idea of immortality, or spiritual existence. 
Material belief yielding to spiritual 
understanding." 

Those taught of God can have no difficulty in 
tracing the sinuous course of that "old dragon," in 
these unstable and unlearned perversions of Scripture, 
which soon cause their teachers to become "raging 
waves of the sea, foaming out their own shame." 
Those who have watched the effect of these doctrines 
upon those proclaiming them readily discern that the 
"evil tree" is yielding its proper fruit. 

Again, Mrs. Eddy sets forth her claimed many 
miracles of healing as the basis of her religion, and 
the proof of its divine origin. To those uninstructed 
in the way of truth, this claim is very weighty, and 
many are ensnared by it. These, seeing no wisdom 
in the permission of evil, and having no conception of 
the great things God has in store for those who, under 
the severest tests, maintain a love for righteousness 
and a hatred of wickedness, quickly fall in this evil 
day of subtle sophistries. Supposing "Godliness to 
be gain"; i.e., a means to secure present temporal 



ease in finances or social life, freedom from aches and 
pains, etc., some, in their eagerness to escape from 
the hardship of enduring unfavorable conditions, are 
blinded to the opportunity for discipline thus offered, 
and rush headlong into any specious promise of relief 
that is made, without applying the rules and tests 
provided in the "sure word of prophecy," and are 
quickly ensnared by the Adversary. Being one of the 
highest order of God's created beings, who wilfully 
left his first estate and does iniquity (Ezek. 28:12-15), 
the devil can loosen the bonds of suffering on those 

R3187 :page 136 

who give heed to his seductive teachings, until he 
gains full and complete control of their moral powers, 
and can thus use them as his pliant, even if unsuspecting, 
tools, simply releasing them temporarily to 
gain his own purposes. When these are served, or 
when the time for binding him has fully arrived 
(Rev. 20:2,3), he will execute his full malignity, 
not only upon his own willing coadjutors, but also 
upon those who have been his dupes. We unhesitatingly 
brand this whole system of Christian Science, 
so-called, as another form of spiritualism put forth 
by the father of lies, who was a liar from the beginning. 
That there is a power, even superhuman, in 
it, we admit; but we believe it is the power of Satan, 
the great deceiver of men, which will be used only for 
the destruction of man. 

[Satan's dominion is a dominion of death, and 
he undoubtedly has the power slightly to relieve the 
sick when his delusive purposes and doctrines would 
be best served thereby. (Heb. 2:14.) The fact that 
Satan's kingdom and its methods are thus divided 
and in opposition— working evil, sin and death, as 
ever, and at the same time turning in to heal the sick 
in order the more securely to bind and blind his dupes 
in subtle errors— shows that the "god of this world" 
realizes that his reign of sin, ignorance, superstition 
and death is nearly at an end.— EDITOR.] 

Let God's children beware lest they be entangled 
by this siren song. The system perverts everything 
it touches, and not even the Lord's prayer escapes its 
contamination. For the information of the brethren, 
we give the following "spiritualized" version of it:— 

"Principle, eternal and harmonious, 

Nameless and adorable intelligence, 

Thou art ever present and supreme. 

And when this Supremacy of Spirit 

Shall appear, the dream of matter will disappear. 

Give us the understanding of truth and love; 

And loving we shall learn God, 

And truth will destroy all error, 

And lead us into the life, that is soul, 

And deliver us from the errors of sense, 



Sin, sickness and death. 
For God is life, truth and love forever." 
Trusting completely in our Lord, the Anointed 
Savior, who has bought us with his precious blood, 
we can quickly escape this evil, and enter into and 
retain a present rest in Christ, and be prepared for 
that perfect and everlasting rest that "remaineth for 
the people of God."-Heb. 4:9,10; Isa. 26:3; 
Psa. 91. 

A CHRISTIAN SCIENCE PRAYER. 



The Insurance World says:— "It seems almost 
incredible that the following formula called a prayer, 
repeated by a person sick of dyspepsia is alleged by 
Christian Scientists to have a curative effect. The 
exact words read:— 

'"Shining and Glorious Verity, we recognize the 
great and splendid FACT that the moment we really believe 
the Truth, Disease ceases to trouble us; that the 
Truth is that there is no Disease in either real Body or 
Mind; that in the mind what seems to be a disease is a 
False Belief, a Parasite, a hateful Excrescence, and that 
what happens in the Body is the shadow of the LIE in the 
Soul. Lord help us to believe that All Evil is Utterly 
Unreal; that it is silly to be sick, absurd to be ailing, 
wicked to be wailing, atheism and denial of God to say, 
'I am sick.' Help us to stoutly affirm with our hand in 
Your hand, with our eyes fixed on Thee, that we have no 
Dyspepsia, that we never had Dyspepsia, that we will never 
have Dyspepsia, that there is no such thing, that there 
never was any such thing, and that there never will be any 
such thing. Amen.'" 

A UNITED PRESBYTERIAN VIEW. 



To what extent the Adversary's messengers in 
garments of light can deceive, note the following by 
Rev. A. K. Duff, a U.P. minister, published without 
criticism in the United Presbyterian. He says:— 

"In forming our judgment of Christian Science, 
the Savior's question will be suggestive, 'Think you 
that they are sinners above all others?' There is a 
basic principle of truth in the pope, faith cure, Christian 
Science, mind cure, osteopathy, etc., and only 
the wilfully blind, or unfair and dishonest writer will 
attempt to conceal it. If it were entirely false there 
could be no danger. To say that Christian Science is 
the work of the devil because it is the revival of black 
art, is all rot. It degrades the ministry in the eyes 
of well-thinking scholars of today that such utterances 
emanate from the pulpit. To assume that faith 



has no power in the healing of disease is to discredit 
a cardinal principle of the gospel. Distinction against 
Christian Science must be finely woven, and in argument 
cautiously drawn out. 

"This school of faith was organized in 1879 and 
now numbers 800 churches, 80 educational institutes, 
one million members and another million adherents. 
They have eight churches in New York city, and all are 
crowded Sabbath mornings and evenings. Last year 
they built one church in New York city costing $500,000, 
and every dime was raised before a pick was 
struck in the ground. This year they are building 
another in the same city, costing $600,000. They 
openly boast that they have no poor people, and we 
all know that hundreds of the ripest scholars in the 
land are among them. College graduates, lawyers, 
physicians, popular authors and even clergymen join 
them. 

"Here is the leading error. They say 'the Bible 
does not sanction physicians, nor recognize the beneficial 
effect of medicines,' when the opposite is true. 
'They that be whole need not a physician, but they 
that are sick' is positive endorsement of medical treatment. 
The many references to the healing virtues of 
plants and herbs, the 'balm in Gilead and the physician 

R3187 :page 137 

there,' prove beyond a peradventure our practice 
of medicine." 



Note the fact that these shepherds (preacher and 
editor) in Israel nominal are either ignorant of "the 
doctrines of Christ," "the faith once delivered unto 
the saints," or else are blinded by the "dust" of falsities 
and meaningless language. Note the words— their 
"leading error" is the denial of physicians! How 
about their denial of sin,— of a fall,— of a redemption 
from sin and death by the precious blood of Christ;— 
their practical denial of God except as general and 
particular goodness or utility— as there is good or 
usefulness in a tree, in that it bears fruit or yields 
shade or can be used to construct a house? 

These blinded men close their exhortation by 
implying that Christian Science would benefit all 
U.P's. and add,— 

"I have studied them for five years, and I never 
found such a uniformly good people in my travels. 
They are purely Christ-like. They are all willing 
to endure stripes, and go naked and hungry, if by any 
means they may save some." 

The befogged writer forgets, evidently, that in a 
previous paragraph he has set forth "that they have 



R3188 :page 137 

no poor people." How, then, did this gentleman, 
after studying them for five years, learn about their 
willingness to endure hunger and nakedness on behalf 
of others? Their efforts have evidently been chiefly 
among the well-to-do; and thus they have avoided 
their burdens and been rather un-Christ-like. 

Let us not be entrapped by Satan's deceptive garments 
of light intended to deceive, if possible, the 
very elect. Let us remember how our Lord associates 
his Word and doctrine with true discipleship, saying, 
"If any man will do his [the Father's] will, he shall 
know of the doctrine;" and again: "Ye shall know 
the truth and the truth shall make you free;" and 
again: "If they speak not according to this Word 
[but handle the Word of God deceitfully] it is because 
there is no light in them."— John 7: 17; 8:32; 
Isa. 8:20. 



R3188 :page 137 

SUFFERING AS CHRISTIANS. 

-ACTS 21:30-39.-MAY 3.- 

"If any man suffer as a Christian, let 
him not be ashamed."— 1 Pet. 4:16. 

WHEN the Apostle Paul and his companions arrived 

at Jerusalem they were cordially received 

by the brethren— they had further 

manifestations of the same loving brotherhood specially 

noted in our last lesson. The Church was called together 

that the Apostle might make a general and 

public report, and might turn over to the proper authorities 

the funds donated for their poor by the churches 

amongst the Gentiles. Apparently several of the Apostles 

still resided at Jerusalem, "James, our Lord's 

brother," being in some particular sense the leader or 

chief spokesman. Tradition tells us that the different 

apostles ultimately scattered in different directions, 

preaching the Gospel— Andrew to Cythia, Jude to Assyria, 

Thomas to Persia and India, Peter to Babylon 

and Rome. We infer, however, that they had remained 

at Jerusalem up to this time, since Paul seems 

to have been the leader in the work amongst the Gentiles; 

quite probably his report of the Lord's blessing 

upon his efforts, in conjunction with the subsequent 

persecutions at Jerusalem, led the other apostles to go 

into the foreign fields of service. 

It was now but twelve years before the destruction 
of Jerusalem, and less than half that time before the 
beginning of the factionalism and anarchy which led 



up to that destruction. The apostles quite probably 

in due time bethought themselves of the Lord's injunction 

that they must ultimately flee out of Jerusalem 

before it would be encompassed with armies and 

escape be impossible. We today are living within a 

corresponding twelve years of utter overthrow of churchianity, 

and must not be surprised if in the Lord's providence 

the bitterness and opposition against the present 

truth should become more and more open and violent, 

thus hindering our efforts amongst the professed people 

of God today, and compelling us to go more particularly 

to those who make less boast of their loyalty to 

God. 

The apostles and brethren at Jerusalem were fully 
in sympathy with the Apostle Paul, though evidently 
their minds did not grasp so clearly as did his the complete 
breaking down of "the middle wall of partition" 
which previously had separated Jews from Gentiles, nor 
did they appreciate so fully as he that the Law was merely 
a pedagogue, a servant, to lead to Christ— to his school. 
Practically the Jerusalem friends said to the Apostle: 
We are in full accord with you and the noble work 
which you have been prosecuting, and we perceive the 
Lord's blessing upon it, and recognize the true Christian 
spirit in these brethren who have come with you, 
as representatives of the work of the Gospel amongst the 
Gentiles. However, you know how great is the opposition 
here; how bitter is the hatred of the Jews, and 
that they have heard of you. Jews who have come 
from Ephesus and Corinth and other places, evidently 
misunderstood some things that you taught there, or 

R3188 :page 138 

at least misrepresented your teachings. They have 
heard that you are an enemy of the Law, while we know 
that you believe that "the Law is just and holy and 
good," and full of shadows of better things to come. 
But now, as an offset to their pernicious presentations, 
and as an object lesson to some of our own brethren 
who are not just strong along this line, and for the benefit 
also of some whom we are endeavoring to interest 
in the Gospel of Christ, we have something to propose 
to you, and to these brethren: it is that you go into 
the Temple, as a worshiper, and associate yourselves 
with some of the rites and ceremonies there in progress, 
that thus all may know that you are not disrespectful 
toward Moses or the Law or the Temple,— that their 
misapprehension and evil-speaking may be counteracted. 
Amongst us are three brethren who have made 
certain vows to the Lord, called the vows of the Nazarites, 
and we suggest that you show your sympathy with 
them and with the arrangements, acting as sponsor for 
them— paying for the sacrifices which, according to the 
Law, they must offer, etc. Thus you will be seen with 
them, and in performance of certain ceremonies, for 



about a week, in the court of the Temple known as the 
Court of the Women, and we hope that much good 
will result therefrom, and much misapprehension be 
abated. 

We can easily imagine that the bold champion of 
the truth in foreign lands would never have chosen 
such a course of his own volition, and that when the 
suggestion came to him it was not enthusiastically received. 
Nevertheless, since it seemed to be the judgment 
of the apostles and brethren in general— seemed 
to be in their interest and according to their view of 
advantage to the general cause, the Apostle yielded his 
own preference. We cannot suppose that he yielded 
to that which was wrong, yet we can easily imagine 
some one inquiring, Would it not be sin for the Apostle 
or other Christians to participate in any measure in 
sacrifice in the Temple?— were not all these sacrifices 
done away in Christ, and henceforth abominations in 
the sight of God,— sacrilegious? 

We answer, No, not at all. The sacrifices which 
pointed to Christ, and which he fulfilled, were no longer 
proper, but these sacrifices which the Nazarites offered 
in connection with their vows did not typify 
Christ's sacrifice, but rather the consecrations and devotions 
of the people, the antitypes of which will prevail 
during the Millennium. It was no sin, therefore, 
on the Apostle's part to join in this procedure, and 
yet we incline to doubt the wisdom of the course pursued. 
We incline to believe that it was rather a temporizing 
acknowledgment of the dignity of the Temple 
and its services; whereas by this time the real Temple 
and the real service had been inaugurated;— for the 
Church itself is the antitypical Temple in which God 
has been present by his holy spirit since Pentecost. 
Although it is not distinctly so stated, we incline to believe 
that the Apostle Paul and all of his associates in 
this matter took a different view of it subsequently, as 
being a compromise which, without being sinful, was 
not advantageous, and reflected no special credit upon 
any connected with it. Perhaps such a lesson was 
needed by the apostles and the Church at Jerusalem, 
that they might learn to be the more courageous in 
their presentations of the truth— that they might be less 
fearful of the Jews, more bold in their presentations of 
Christ and the New Covenant arrangements in his 
blood— the better sacrifices, better vows, etc. 

It was while the Apostle and these brethren, who 
were really Jews by nature, but who saw beyond the 
types and symbols, and appreciated the antitypes, were 
engaged in the performance of the typical, or symbolical 
rites, that the Jews recognized Paul and one of his companions, 
and became furiously incensed, either believing 
or claiming to believe that the Apostle was attempting to 
do the very reverse of what he and the Jerusalem Church 
intended— that he was attempting to discredit the Law 
and dishonor the Temple by violating, and getting others 



to violate, its holy precincts. As the excited shouts 
arose in the air a mob was quickly gathered; and as 
in Ephesus "the mob ran together, the greater part not 
knowing wherefore," so here again the mob merely 
knew that some of its leaders were frantically indignant 
at the Apostle Paul, and believed that he should be 
killed. He was dragged out of the Temple, and immediately 
the great doors of the Beautiful Gate of the 
Temple were closed— that no rioting or bloodshed 
might occur within the sacred enclosure. 

The Tower of Antonia was close by the Temple 
Court, and steps connected the two. In this castle a 
band of Roman soldiers was quartered— evidently several 
hundred, because each centurion was a commander, 
or captain, of a hundred men. The riotous commotion 
brought forth the garrison, which appeared at just 
the proper time to deliver Paul from his enemies, who 
were beating him. 

The chief captain, Claudius Lysias (Acts 23:26), 
caused the arrest of Paul and commanded that he be 
chained to two of the Roman soldiers— much after the 
manner in which now a culprit is sometimes handcuffed 
to an officer. Each Roman soldier carried, as a 
part of his outfit, an iron chain and a leather thong, for 
use in just such an emergency. While this handcuffing, 
which fulfilled the prophecy of Agabus, was in progress, 
Lysias made inquiry respecting the Apostle and 
the crime which had occasioned the commotion and 
indignation of these religious people. As a Gentile, he 
would naturally suppose that such a commotion 

R3189 :page 139 

amongst religious worshipers must have been incited 

by some atrociously evil conduct, some villainy or sacrilege, 

or that a disguised robber or assassin had been 

discovered. The multitude shouted out its various 

conjectures, and, it being impossible to judge the case 

at the time on such evidence, he commanded that Paul 

be brought into the prison. 

Lysias, the foreign officer, had probably a very 
imperfect knowledge of the language spoken by the 
Jews, which was either Hebrew or Syriac, his own 
language being the Greek. Knowing this, the Apostle 
spoke to him in the Greek language, and with such 
fluency as to cause the commander great surprise. 
From the account, he evidently had confounded the 
Apostle with an Egyptian leader of an insurrection of 
some time previous. Paul's request was that he be 
permitted to speak to the people, who were in such 
commotion and crying out, "Away with him!" He 
evidently thought that he might correct some false impressions 
and pacify the multitude. At any rate he 
would lose no opportunity for declaring the gospel of 
Christ. The Lord influenced the heart of Lysias to 
grant the request. The people quieted as they perceived 



that the commander had permitted the prisoner 
to make them an address from the stairs leading to the 
castle. Here was a most excellent opportunity for presenting 
Christ before a large number of seemingly devout 
people— Temple worshipers. Undoubtedly there 
were some grains of "wheat" in that multitude, though 
evidently the great mass was "chaff." The Apostle's 
words would be a blessing to the wheat, and serve to 
test, prove, demonstrate, that the others were without 
the real kernel of truth in their hearts, although they 
had the outward appearances of being devout worshipers 
of the true God. 

It is worthy of remark that the Apostle never allowed 
opportunities to pass by him without doing all 
in his power to use them in the Lord's praise and for 
the forwarding of the truth. The majority of us, probably, 
would have been so affected by the excitement of 
such an incident and by the bruises resulting from the 
beating, that we would perhaps have forgotten all about 
the greatest and most important work of all committed 
to our care, and might have been much less prompt 
than the Apostle to seek an opportunity to testify to the 
Lord's praise and for the opening of the eyes of any 
who might be his people amongst our assailants. Let 
us learn this lesson: let us be instant in season and 
out of season, so far as our own convenience and feelings 
are concerned, if only we can find opportune seasons 
for reaching others. The Apostle here illustrated 
his advice to Timothy, "Be instant in season and out 
of season,— preach the Word." It was in season for the 
multitude, because they were gathered there, and their 
attention was riveted upon him. Had he consulted his 
own convenience he would have said that it was very 
much "out of season" for himself;— that he was in no condition 
to speak, his nerves were excited and his body was 
bruised. But thinking of the convenient opportunity he 
spared not himself. In this he had the spirit of the Master, 
that he himself admonished us to have, saying that 
as Christ died for us we ought also to lay down our lives 
for the brethren— in season or out of season, so far as 
our own convenience is concerned. 

In a few well-chosen words he told the people the 
story of his own experience: he had, like themselves, 
been an opposer of Jesus, a persecutor of all the followers 
of the Lord; how he had been miraculously 
interrupted in this work, and led to consider the claims 
of Jesus from the standpoint of the Word of God— the 
Law and the Prophets; how he had become fully convinced 
that Jesus is indeed "the Lamb of God, who 
taketh away the sin of the world," the deliverer who 
should come out of Zion, and through whom a blessing 
should come to all that would receive his message. 
He then proceeded to tell them what should have 
brought joy to their hearts; viz., that the Lord sent 
him to be a messenger to the Gentiles, to tell them of 
the good tidings, that they also might participate, as 



well as the Jews. But their hearts being evil and selfish, 

this mention of divine favor and mercy going to 

others incensed them; they heard the Apostle in peace 

and with profound attention up to this point, and then 

all their prejudices seemed to be aroused with the 

thought that this man claimed and taught that Gentiles 

could have favor with God equal to that bestowed 

upon the Jews. They cried out against him in much 

the same language that they had used against the Lord, 

"Away with such a fellow from the earth, for it is not 

fit that he should live;" and while they thus cried out 

and threw dust in the air, and gesticulated with their 

arms, and threw their garments about, they made a 

wild, weird picture. The Roman commander, not understanding 

the Hebrew language, had not been able 

to follow the Apostle's discourse, and considering it 

evident that after he had had so quiet and orderly a 

hearing for a time, and now there was such a wild 

burst of indignation at what he said, it implied something 

very deep and treacherous and evil in the man, 

else his words would not thus arouse the passions and 

malice of religious people. He, therefore, ordered the 

Apostle to be scourged to make him tell a true story 

of his differences with the Jews. 

Matters are somewhat the same today, though on 
a different plane. A stranger or worldly person, hearing 
some sectarian Christian animadvert against some 
one who has been preaching the true gospel of the Lord 
Jesus, would be inclined to suppose that the message 

R3189 :page 140 

must contain something very vicious, very terrible indeed, 
else it would not so arouse those who have outwardly 
so much "form of godliness." And if, as in the 
case of the Roman officer, an audience be granted, and 
the truth be presented in their hearing, they cannot 
understand it;— that is to say, "the world by wisdom 
knows not God," knows little of his plan, understands 
little of the language of his Word— it is a different language 
from that to which they are accustomed. And 
when, after a presentation of the truth, they find bitter 
opposition and invective against it on the part of religious 
teachers— modern scribes and Pharisees and doctors 
of divinity— we must not be surprised if they are 
the more inclined to side with those who represent 
popular theology— so-called "orthodoxy," and assume 
that the true gospel, because believed and taught by 
so few and opposed by so many of influence, must 
necessarily be something very evil. 

Nevertheless, it is for us to take the Apostle for 
our guide, and to be faithful in the use of every opportunity 
to let the light shine forth, even though it arouse 
the bitter opposition and persecution and prejudice of 
darkness. The darkness hateth the light, because it is 
reproved thereby, is our Lord's explanation. Nothing 



seemed so much to incite the scribes and Pharisees of 
eighteen centuries ago as the reasonableness of the true 
gospel. The common people heard it gladly, unless 
intimidated by their religious rulers, and led to doubt 
those who had been teaching them to the contrary. 
Hence, the rulers were incensed against the gospellers: 
"They were grieved because they [the apostles] taught 
the people." They held, on the contrary, that only the 
scribes and Pharisees, the doctors and leaders, should 
be taught, and that the people should simply follow 
them blindly, and without requiring a reason and a 
"Thus saith the Lord" for their faith. 

Our Golden Text for this lesson is well chosen. 
Paul's experience illustrated it; he was suffering as a 
Christian— because he was loyal to the Lord and his 
Word. He was not suffering because of having followed 
the admonitions of the brethren in going into the 
Temple, for very evidently the hatred that was against 
them in the hearts of his enemies would sooner or later 
have manifested itself anyway, and they would have 
sought his life, as on previous occasions. We merely see 
in this incident that the attempt of the apostles to create 
a favorable impression toward the Apostle Paul and his 
work amongst the Gentiles failed, and probably brought 
the matter of his arrest, etc., more quickly to the front 
than would any other course have done. 

The Apostle was not ashamed of his sufferings, because 
he realized that they were endured for Christ's 
sake. Any man or woman would feel and should feel 
deeply pained at a public arrest and imprisonment as 
a felon, as a violator of the law. But when these things 
are experienced, and we can realize that they are coming 
to us because of our faithfulness to the Lord, in following 
in his footsteps, we may rejoice in ignominy, 
rejoice in things which otherwise would be shameful 
and detestable. If, therefore, in the Lord's providence, 
arrest or imprisonment or scourging should come to any 
who read this article, and if they can directly or indirectly 
trace their tribulation to faithfulness to the Lord 
and his truth, let them not be ashamed; let them glorify 
God on this behalf, rejoicing that they are accounted 
worthy to suffer for the name of Christ, and remembering 
that even thus also it was with our Lord 
Jesus. He was placed under arrest; he was bound; 
he was scourged; he was publicly insulted; he was 
even crucified as a blasphemer against God.— 
1 Pet. 4:16. 

Another lesson which we may learn here is, not to 
trust too implicitly in the voice of the multitude, and 
if we find the rabble shouting against any one, either 
orally or through the press, we should not unquestioningly 
accept their verdict. We should remember the 
experiences of Jesus, the experiences of Paul, and of 
the other Apostles, and how the multitude cried out, 
"Away with them!" The Christian whose mind is 
thus relieved of prejudice is the better prepared to judge 



wisely respecting whatever may properly come under 
his observation or criticism. And then, if he have similar 
experiences himself, he will be the better prepared 
for them. 



R3190 :page 140 

"THE LORD STOOD BY HIM." 

-ACTS 23:ll-22.-MAY 10.- 

"The Lord stood by him and said, Be of good cheer." 

AFTER the exciting experiences of our last lesson 

the Apostle must have felt somewhat depressed 

in spirit and discouraged. True, he 

had passed through equally great trials amongst the 

Gentiles, but here, amongst his own people, and in the 

City of the Great King, the opposition to the gospel 

would be much more inclined to make him heart-sore. 

Besides, he evidently had come to Jerusalem full of the 

thought that under the Lord's providence he might accomplish 

a considerable work amongst his kinsmen 

according to the flesh, and rescue some of them before 

the great overthrow which he realized was impending. 

It was in this time of great mental stress that the 

Lord so graciously communicated with him by a dream, 

R3190 :page 141 

as declared in the first verse of our lesson. What an 
encouragement it must have been! and the fact that it 
was given is an assurance that it was needed; for the 
Lord very rarely indeed interposes miraculously in the 
course of events unless there is special necessity. On 
two other occasions, when the Apostle was in straits, 
the Lord manifested his favor and encouraged him in 
like manner-Acts 18:9,10; 27:24. 

How much the Apostle must have felt strengthened 
by this vision, and assurance of divine care, we 
can well imagine. Nevertheless, the Lord was as truly 
with him and as fully caring for his interests as on 
other occasions, when no vision attested the fact: and 
he is with us, his followers of today, in like manner; 
and doubtless the visions granted to the Apostle were 
destined of the Lord to be an encouragement for "all who 
should believe on him through their word." The Apostle's 
visions serve us as they served him— assuring us 
also that the Lord is with his people, and is able to 
care for and protect and guide and bless our efforts today, 
as eighteen centuries ago. But to have the Lord 
thus with him and to feel good cheer in the Lord's 
presence implied the fullest sincerity and zeal on the 
part of the Apostle to do and to be all that would please 



the Master; and similarly we can enjoy his presence 
and appropriate to ourselves the message, "Be of good 
cheer," only in proportion as our hearts can realize 
that, however imperfect our labors for the truth and for 
the brethren, they are done "as unto the Lord" and to 
the best of our ability. 

The day before this vision, by order of the Roman 
commander, the Apostle was brought before the Jewish 
Sanhedrin, of which the high priest, Ananias, was president. 
The Apostle was permitted to address the Sanhedrin, 
and began by declaring himself a Jew, who 
had always lived in full harmony with the laws of his 
country— an honorable citizen. It was at this time, it 
will be remembered, the high priest, possibly thinking 
this language a reflection against himself (for he had 
an unsavory reputation), ordered an attendant to smite 
the Apostle on the mouth— an insult not at all uncommon 
in the East at that time, and, to some extent, 
even to this day. The Apostle, justly indignant, exclaimed, 
"God shall smite thee, thou whited wall; for 
sittest thou to judge me after the law, and commandest 
me to be smitten contrary to the law?" One who 
stood near him replied, " Answerest thou God's high 
priest so?" and the Apostle replied, "I wist not, brethren, 
that he was the high priest; for it is written, Thou 
shalt not speak evil of the ruler of thy people." It is 
uncertain what the Apostle meant by this language. 
It may be his defective eyesight did not recognize Ananias. 
Or, possibly, he meant to be understood as 
questioning the right of Ananias to the title of high 
priest. Or, in view of the fact that the antitypical 
high priest is the Lord Jesus, and that the typical priesthood 
came to an end at the time of Christ's glorification, 
the Apostle may have had that in mind. However, 
he acknowledged the teaching of the law in respect 
to the officers of the government, to render honor to 
whom honor is due; and there is a lesson here for all 
of us in this day, when we find so many disposed to 
"speak evil of dignitaries," and bring railing accusations 
against them. The attitude of the Lord's people 
should be a very conservative one in such matters— in 
harmony with Michael's words to the Adversary, "The 
Lord rebuke thee!" 

Reasoning that he would have scant courtesy from 
such a tribunal, and knowing that its members were 
about equally divided as between Pharisees and Sadducees, 
and that the high priest was a Sadducee, the Apostle 
appealed to the Pharisees that it was a case in which 
the Sadducees were trying to do him injury because of 
his religious faith, much of which was shared in by the 
Pharisees; and that a Sadducee, in violation of the Law, 
had just caused a Pharisee to be smitten in the mouth. 
He thus to some extent gained the sympathy of the 
Pharisees by declaring that he was a Pharisee, the son 
of a Pharisee, and that the real animus of the opposition 
against him was on the score of the resurrection of 



the dead— for the Pharisees believed in a resurrection 
of the dead, but the Sadducees denied it. Immediately 
there was a contention in the Sanhedrin, the Pharisees 
to some extent espousing the Apostle's cause, as against 
their adversaries, the Sadducees. The meeting broke up 
in disorder, the Roman commander, Lysias, rescuing 
Paul and removing him, and thus causing the excitement 
to abate. 

The honesty and propriety of Paul's claim to be a 
Pharisee has been questioned by some, but we regard 
their contention as without foundation. The Apostle 
was a Jew; so were the Pharisees, and a Jew may 
have either more or less piety without its affecting his 
nationality. The Pharisees claimed to be strict believers 
of the Law of Moses— believers in all that Moses 
and the Prophets did write, the name Pharisee signifying 
holiness or completeness in the observance of the 
Law. Paul had all his life been zealous for the Law of 
God and for its complete observance, and he was no less 
so as a Christian. Indeed, he was more so, for, having 
realized his own inability and the inability of all men 
to keep the Law, he had laid hold upon Christ, the sent 
of God, as the one through whom alone he would be 
able to keep the Law perfectly, wholly: as he expressed 
it, "The righteousness [the full, whole, complete meaning] 
of the Law is fulfilled in us [holiness people, complete 
in Christ] who walk not after the flesh, but after 
the spirit." All true Christians today could make a 

R3190 :page 142 

similar claim to that of the Apostle— that we are Pharisees 

—holiness people— keepers of the divine law— observers 

of it in every particular to the extent of ability, 

and with all shortcomings and deficiencies made up for 

us by our Lord Jesus. We are not under the Law Covenant, 

for it has given place to a better one, the original 

one; but as for the Law itself, it is God's Law, "holy, 

just, good," and can never pass away. It is recognized 

by us as much as it was recognized by the holiness 

people of old, and more so; for we discern, not 

only its letter, but its spirit— love for God and love for 

fellow-men. 

The Jews must have realized that their case against 
the Apostle would appear very poorly in the eyes of the 
Roman commander, seeing that they were doing the 
rioting on both occasions, that the Apostle was the 
more sedate and willing to reason his cause, and that 
some of those supposed to be his accusers had turned 
to his defense. Meantime the sympathy of the Pharisees 
for Paul doubtless cooled off. At all events, during 
that night more than forty of the deluded religious 
enthusiasts bound themselves to God with a curse 
that they would kill Paul. Such an anathema was in 
effect, "May the divine curse be upon us if we do not 
effect the death of this man, whom we believe to be an 



enemy of God and of our religion, and whom we believe 
it to be our duty to destroy." 

They laid a plot, as follows: They would have the 
high priest send word to the Roman commander that 
the Sanhedrin desired a fresh examination of the prisoner 
on some other charges, the intention being that 
while the soldiers would be bringing him these forty 
men would assault and risk their lives to assassinate 
Paul. The matter was evidently not kept as secretly 
as they supposed, for one of Paul's relatives learned 
the particulars. Indeed, we know that it is impossible 
to keep anything from God, and that the most 
secret engagements are, therefore, powerless to do injury 
to the Lord's people. Nevertheless, when the 
information reached the Apostle he did not say to himself, 
God knows all about this matter and will take 
care of me, and, therefore, I have nothing to do in respect 
to it. On the contrary, he arranged matters so 
far as he could to defeat the plot— just as though the 
entire responsibility for his preservation rested upon 
himself. There is a lesson in this which many of 
God's dear people need to learn, viz., that each of the 
Lord's followers is a colaborer with the Lord in every 
good work. It is our duty to do all that we know how 
to do in proper self-defense and in protection of one 
another from the wiles of the Adversary and in the 
defense of the cause we serve; but, having done all in 
our power, having exercised all the wisdom and prudence 
we can command, we are to rest our hearts in the 
knowledge that the Lord will take care of all that is 
beyond our power to control, so that all things shall 
work together for good to them that love God. 

There is another lesson for us in the fact that, although 
the Lord promised Paul that, as he had been 
faithful in testifying of him at Jerusalem, he must also 
preach the Gospel at Rome, nevertheless this latter prediction 
was long deferred of realization. It was over 
two years before he reached Rome, and then as a prisoner. 
We also need certain lessons of faith. We not 
only need to believe that the Lord is with us, and has 
the care of our affairs, but have need of patience and 
perseverance in faith and hope and love; and ofttimes 
with us, as with the Apostle, the Lord defers for a 
long time to complete our deliverance from adverse 
conditions— defers for a long time the opening of 
the desired door of opportunity in his service. We 
are to remember his wisdom as well as his love 
and power, and to rest contentedly therein after doing 

R3191 :page 142 

all within our power. In Paul's case it may be that 
conditions at Rome would be more favorable to his ministry 
later than they were at this time. It may be also 
that the Lord had a work for him to do in the interim 
as a prisoner at Caesarea,— amongst the Romans. And 



so in our affairs: we are to look for the opportunities 

of service as they come, and leave to our Lord the supervision 

of our life as a whole. 

As a result of the communication of the plot to the 
Roman captain, he sent the Apostle under a strong military 
escort to the Roman capital of Judea,— Caesarea. 
There the Apostle, although kept a prisoner, was 
doubtless made comfortable, awaiting the trial before 
the Roman governor, Felix. The essence of this lesson 
as a whole, in its application to us, is expressed in the 
Apostle's words, "If God be for us who can be against 
us?" 



R3191 :page 142 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS ANSWERED. 

WHICH WERE THE MORE RESPONSIBLE; JUDAS OR ANANIAS 
AND SAPPHIRA? 



Question.— What difference should we recognize 
as between the condition of Judas Iscariot and his 
crime, and Ananias and Sapphira and their crime? 
The one sinned before the holy spirit was dispensed 
at Pentecost; the others subsequently. If Judas' case 
merited the verdict of Second Death, would not the 
others merit the same? If Ananias and Sapphira did 
not sin the sin unto death, how should we regard the 
case of Judas? 

Answer.— There would appear to be considerable 

R3191 :page 143 

difference between these two cases. Both crimes were 
committed against much light; both were reprehensible; 
but that of Judas seems to us to be much the 
more serious of the two. While he lived prior to 
Pentecost, we are to remember that he was one of the 
twelve upon whom Jesus had specially conferred a 
measure of his spirit— such a measure as permitted 
him, with the others, to perform miracles of healing, 
casting out of devils, etc., as recorded. His position 
was one of special closeness to the Lord and his personal 
instruction, both by precept and example. We 
remember our Lord's words to the disciples, "To you 
it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom; but 
to them that are without these things are spoken in 
parables." All this privilege, opportunity, knowledge, 
contact, made Judas specially responsible. Then, too, 
his crime would have been bad, wicked, had it been 
against any ordinary person; but was seriously intensified 
by being a crime against him who spake and acted 



as never man spake or acted before. It is from this 
standpoint that our Lord's declaration, that he was 
the son of perdition, seems to have special weight, or 
import, as implying that he had enjoyed a sufficiency 
of light and knowledge of righteousness to constitute 
a trial, and that his deliberate sin against such light 
and knowledge meant the Second Death. 

In the case of Ananias and Sapphira they were 
beginners; they had not been long in the Church; 
they never met the Master, and had not known the 
apostles a great while. They saw others consecrating 
their goods and noted that they were correspondingly 
appreciated in the Church. They wished to have such 
an appreciation, and wished to do some good with their 
means; but a selfish feeling, combined, perhaps, with 
a feeling of caution, ensnared them into a wrong 
course of conduct which the Apostle Peter denominates 
"lying unto the holy spirit." We do not positively 
say that they will have any future or further 
opportunity for gaining everlasting life; we know of 
no Scripture which guarantees to us that they will 
have any such; yet it seems to us not improbable 
that they will have a further opportunity in which 
they will have greater light, and greater knowledge 
of right and wrong, and of the results attaching. 

SHALL WE USE THE TERM "EVOLUTION," ETC.? 



Question.— I note your opposition to the Evolution 
theory; yet in MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. I., page 31, 
you remark the possibility that something of an evolutionary 
development was used by our Creator in 
bringing the various species of animals each to its own 
perfection. Let me ask, then: Cannot we Christians 
hold to the word "evolution" with propriety? and 
may we not even think of Adam as having reached 
human perfection by a process of development as one of 
the species animal? 

Answer.— No; to both questions. We regard the 
words Evolution and Evolutionist as now definitely attached 
to a particular theory. These words belong 
wholly to those who invented and now have them, 
and we believe that, as Christians, we would do well to 
avoid them thoroughly, as the thought connected with 
the word is a mechanical one, pure and simple, as in 
opposition to a creative one. We would hold that 
God did develop different species, each to its perfection, 
and that he developed these, either by a long or 
a short process, from the earth itself; but we cannot 
admit, as evolutionists would claim, that this was 
merely a development which needed not the Life-giver 
to start it, and to maintain and direct it. We 
would claim that God is the director of all the forces 
of nature, and that they are all of his own creation, and 



results, therefore, of his direct creation in every instance 
—fish, fowl, brute, man. 

It would not strike us as reasonable to suppose a 
gradual development of a perfect man by an evolutionary 
process without his having some measure of 
responsibility added at some stage of his career before 
he reached perfection. Neither would it be reasonable 
to suppose the evolution of a man from a lower 
order of being to absolute perfection of his own kind, 
without a history, literature, etc., etc.; neither would 
it be reasonable to suppose a human being so evolved 
from a lower order of being to human perfection, as being 
in ignorance of good and evil up to the time that he 
reached perfection. If we who are in a fallen condition 
are held to be responsible to divine law, would 
not those of the human family who had not yet reached 
full perfection, but who had considerable intelligence, 
be reasonably amenable to law also?— supposing your 
theory to be true. 

From whatever standpoint we would view the 
matter we can find no ground whatever for supposing 
that Adam ever had a human father, either perfect or 
imperfect in the flesh. Much more would we disbelieve 
that he ever had a father of a lower order of being, 
who could give him life in the divine likeness, in 
heart and head. Furthermore, to suppose such a possible 
evolution of a man to perfection from a condition 
of imperfection, would be to suppose that man, in the 
present-time imperfect condition, is his own savior, 
and could re-commence a process of evolution just as 
well as he could have carried on such a process before 
reaching perfection. If such a proposition should be 
considered true, it would negative all the Scriptural 
teachings we have respecting the necessity for a Redeemer 
and for his interference in order supernaturally 
to bring about times of restitution of all things. 



page 145 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIV. MAY 15, 1903. No. 10 



CONTENTS. 

"Looking for that Blessed Hope" 147 

They Knew Not and Received Him 

Not 147 

The Hidden Mystery 148 

Errors Becloud Truths 149 

This Hope Purifieth 150 

Few Know of our Lord's Parousia 150 

The Memorial Celebration 151 



Volunteer Work for 1903 152 

Paul Before Felix 153 

"Almost Thou Persuadest Me" 156 

Public Ministries of the Truth 160 

Special Items 146 

page 146 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THE EDITOR IN EUROPE. 



Bro. Russell has arrived in Europe, having left New 
York on April 15. We are sure the prayers of all the 
friends are with him for the divine blessing upon his efforts 
to establish a larger work in foreign lands. Bro. Henninges 
reached London in good season to celebrate the Memorial. 

THE ARTICLE ON "CHRISTIAN SCIENCE." 



We have issued a specially large edition of our May 1st 
number, in view of the special need for dissemination of 
the Scriptural view of Christian Science error, which is 
rapidly growing. Order as many free sample copies of this 
issue for your friends as you can make use of judiciously. 

THE NEW EDITION OF DIAGLOTT. 



We have just received a consignment of 1,000 copies 
of the cloth edition of the Diaglott, and will fill all orders 
at hand promptly. Further orders will have immediate 
attention. The leather edition is promised within another 
month. 



R3191 :page 147 

"LOOKING FOR THAT BLESSED HOPE." 

"I will come again and receive you unto myself; 
that where I am, there ye may be also."— John 14:3. 

WHAT joyful hopes, what exuberant anticipations, 

cluster around this promise, in the hearts 

of the Lord's faithful! In a few words it sums 

up all the good things that God hath in reservation 

for them that love him. But not all mankind have 

such feelings in respect to this subject;— not all are 

aware of the gracious blessings held in store for the 

world, awaiting that auspicious time for their dissemination; 

and not all mankind are in such a condition 

of mind and heart as to be able, with joy, to anticipate 

meeting the Lord. We can readily surmise that 

not only a large proportion of nominal Christendom, 

but a comparatively large proportion of true Christians, 

are not living in that attitude of heart and daily 

life which would permit them to anticipate this meeting 

with sentiments of pleasure. 

Not only do false doctrines hinder a joyful anticipation 
of this great event, but sin, likewise, hinders 
such joyful anticipation, induces shame and fear,— 
knowing that even those conditions of heart which may 
be hidden from fellow-servants cannot be hidden from 
the Master. We pray with the prophet, "Cleanse thou 
me from secret faults, keep back thy servant also from 
presumptuous sins," and to the extent that this is the 
desire of our hearts, and the effort of our lives,— to 
the extent that the testimony of God's Word dwells 
in us rightly, and enables us to recognize the lengths 
and breadths of divine love and compassion covering 
unintentional shortcomings,— to this extent the Lord's 
faithful ones are able to rejoice in this promise, and 
to look forward with joy not only to the meeting 
with the Lord, but also to their abiding everlastingly in 
his presence and companionship. But to all others 
—to all who are not living up to their privileges as 
children of God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ 

R3192:page 147 

their Lord,— to all who are not seeking to walk circumspectly 

in the footsteps of Jesus, the words of the 

text come bringing only a measure of joy, a measure 



of hope, and not an exuberant overflow. 

THEY KNEW NOT AND RECEIVED HIM NOT. 

Looking back to the harvest of the Jewish age, 
we readily perceive that the difficulty in the way of 
God's ancient people— the direct cause of their stumbling 
—lay in their failure to appreciate the fact that 
the coming of Messiah, for which they had so long 
waited and prayed, was a compound event, having its 
beginning in their day in the advent of Jesus in the 
flesh, and having its consummation now, in our day, 
in the advent of Jesus, a spirit being in glory. The 
prophecies do not clearly distinguish between the sufferings 
of Christ and the glory to follow; and it is 
not for us to blame unduly the poor Jews for seeing 
with hope and joy the ultimate blessings which Messiah 
would bring, and overlooking the trials, sufferings 
and death which must necessarily precede the 
glory. The Apostle assures us of their expectant 
attitude; saying, "Unto which promise our twelve 
tribes, instantly serving God, hope to come."— 
Acts 26:7. 

We inquire, Why were they permitted to stumble 
through the misconception of the prophecies? Why 
was it not explained to them clearly and definitely 
that the Messiah should first come as a man of sorrows 
and acquainted with grief, to be a sin-offering 
for the sins of the whole world; and that subsequently 
he would come as the King of Glory to deliver and 
bless the possession purchased with his own precious 
blood? We answer, Because the Lord did not wish 
to draw all Israel into the Gospel Church. He wished 

R3192:page 148 

to draw only a certain special class; hence, as the 
Prophet foretold, he spoke unto the people in parables 
and dark sayings, that hearing they might hear and 
not understand, and seeing they might see and yet 
not believe— lest they should receive Jesus, lest they 
should accept him as their King. God's dealings in 
this matter would be inscrutable, unjust, unloving, 
unfair, were the ordinary conception of his plan the 
correct one;— if, for instance, all those who rejected 
Jesus were to be sent to eternal torment. 

But we have already seen that this was not a part 
of the divine plan, and that while only the elect class 
of Israel received the Lord, or were able to appreciate 
him and to accept his invitation, the remainder of that 
people were merely blinded, and that, as the Apostle 
tells us, for a time only,— until the elect class should 
be completed by selections from the Gentiles also, and 
then divine favor shall return to them, and all Israel 
shall be saved from that blindness which there came 
upon them. The eyes of their understanding shall 



be opened, and the Lord in glory, speaking to 
them at his second advent, will no longer hide his 
meaning under parables and dark sayings, but, on the 
contrary, shall cause the knowledge of the Lord to 
fill the whole earth, so that no man will need say unto 
his neighbor, Know the Lord— because all shall know 
him, from the least of them unto the greatest of them. 
-Jer. 31:34. 

If such were God's dealings with the natural Israelites 
—if the matter of the sufferings and glory of 
Messiah, and the relationship of these two features of 
his coming were hidden from natural Israel, how has 
it been with nominal spiritual Israel?— with those who 
from amongst the Gentiles have to some extent accepted 
God and Christ? Has this subject of the manifestation 
of Messiah been clearly discerned by nominal 
Christendom throughout this Gospel age? We 
answer, No; although the blindness to the subject is 
from a somewhat different standpoint. The Jews 
through their traditions were blinded to the sufferings 
of Christ, and looked only for the glorious empire 
which he would establish for the blessing of the world; 
while Christians, generally, see matters only from the 
reverse standpoint— see merely the first advent of 
Christ, its sufferings, the redemptive work, and fail 
to discern the Kingdom and the blessing of all the 
families of the earth, which are to result from its establishment 
at the second coming of our Lord. 

What is the source of this error, this blindness 
to the facts so clearly enunciated in prophecy, that the 
Apostle could declare that the times of restitution 
which shall come at the second coming of our Lord, 
had been "spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets 
since the world began"? Why do not Christians 
see this? We answer, Because they are blinded in the 
same sense that the Jews are blinded, although with 
a different form of blindness. But as the "Israelite 
indeed" amongst the Jews was not suffered to be 
blinded on the subject, but was clearly instructed by 
the Lord, guided into the truth, so that all the wheat 
of that nation were brought to a knowledge of Messiah, 
and only the chaffy element failed to discern 
him; so now, amongst the wheat and tares of this 
Gospel age we find the Scriptures clearly teaching 
that all who are of the wheat class will have the light 
of life; and all who are of the tare class will, just as 
surely, be left to grope and stumble in darkness, as 
did their prototype in the end of the Jewish age. 
Why? For the very same reason. Because the Lord 
is still seeking not for masses; not for numbers; but 
for peculiar characters— for those who are in heart-harmony 
with him;— for the pure in heart, in motive, 
in intention— the honest, the sincere. These will as 
surely be guided by the Lord into a knowledge and 
appreciation of the second advent of Messiah and of 
the Kingdom glories, as were those of the similar 



class in the end of the Jewish age— even though, as 
in the case of Saul of Tarsus, it should be necessary 
to strike them down in the way with some exhibition, 
or demonstration, of the truth. 

THE HIDDEN MYSTERY. 

There is a secret connected with this subject 
which the Apostle repeatedly calls the "Mystery" of 
God (Rom. 16:25,26; Eph. 3:9; 5:32; Col. 1:26; 
Rev. 10:7). This mystery, as he explains, relates to 
the Gospel Church;— the peculiar relationship between 
the Gospel Church and its Head and Lord is 
not intended to be understood by the world or by the 
nominal Christian nor by even the true Christian who 
is not in a proper attitude of heart and fully consecrated 
to the Lord. 

When we catch a glimpse of this "mystery" it 
explains the whole situation. It shows us that from 
the divine standpoint, the promised Messiah, the Deliverer 
of the world from the bondage of sin and death 
—the Restorer, the great Prophet, Priest and King, 
whose Millennial reign as "the seed of Abraham" is 
to bring blessing to all the families of the earth— is not 
our Lord Jesus alone, but also with him, and under 
him as its Head, the entire Church of God— the faithful 
in Christ Jesus— the "little flock," whom God is 
selecting from amongst men during this Gospel age, 
—these, unitedly, are the Christ, the Messiah which 
God promised and is providing for the deliverance of 
the world. 

Grasping this "mystery," it shows us that the 
first advent of Christ— in the flesh— for the suffering 

R3192:page 149 

of death— has been in progress for nearly nineteen 
centuries. First came "the Lord Jesus, the only begotten 
of the Father, full of grace and truth," who 
was the forerunner; none could precede him, all who 
would be associated must be followers and under his 
control and direction, for he is the "Head over all, 
God blessed forever." (Rom. 9:5.) He learned certain 
lessons which would qualify him to be the great 
High Priest for the world, as the Apostle declares, 
"Wherefore in all things it behooved him to be made 
like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful 
and faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God, 
to make reconciliation for the sins of the people." 
-Heb. 2:17. 

Additionally, through the sacrifice of himself, 
this Chief of a Royal Priesthood bought the world, 
thus making possible the restitution of as many as 
will in due time receive the blessing of God at his 
hands, and at the same time making possible the invitation 
of some of them, some of the redeemed, to become 



joint-heirs with himself in his Kingdom. But 
if it was necessary that the Head of the priesthood 
should be tested in all points, and should learn obedience 
by the things he suffered, it was certainly not 
less necessary that all who would be members of the 
Kingdom class with him, after being redeemed by his 
precious blood, should be exercised, tried, tested, 
proven— "made meet for the inheritance of the saints 
in light." So how plain it is, that the Head having 
been manifested in the flesh, seen of men, testified of 
angels, etc., all the members of his body should likewise 
be manifested in the flesh; because, as the Apostle 
declares,— "As he was, so are we in this world." 
-1 John 4:17. 

Looked at from this standpoint, we see that the 
first advent of Christ— in the flesh— has been a gradual 
one, covering a period of nearly nineteen centuries. 
We see that the Master has acknowledged these 
members of his body, made them his ambassadors, 
and through them has borne witness to the world, and 
in their sufferings he has suffered; for, as the Apostle 
declares, "We fill up that which is behind of the 
afflictions of Christ." (Col. 1:24.) The Apostle 
Peter declares, that the prophets "spake of the sufferings 
of Christ [which, as we have seen, have extended 
over a period of nearly nineteen centuries] and of the 
glory that should follow"— as soon as the sufferings 
are completed. (1 Pet. 4:13.) The sufferings evidently 
did not end at Calvary, else the glory would 
have begun long ago. The words of our text are in 
full harmony with this; for the Master addressed not 
the world, but this very class, his brethren, his Church, 
the members of his body, "you." His declaration 
implies that when all of this "you" class shall have 
been found, tested, tried and approved— when the 
elect company shall be complete, the Head, who meantime 
passed into glory, will reappear to be then and 
ever afterward associated with the members of his 

R3193 :page 149 

body in glory— "in power and great glory"— a spiritual 
company. And for what purpose? 

We answer that God is "the same yesterday, today 
and forever"; and his plan is an unchangeable 
one; hence, all this preparation of the Messiah, Head 
and body members, is part and parcel of the original 
plan. This implies that when this great Messiah, 
Head and body, changed and glorified, no longer in 
the flesh, but in the spirit, no longer of human nature, 
but of divine nature, shall be complete,— then shall 
come the time in which all the gracious promises of 
ancient times shall have fulfilment,— "times of restitution." 
Then Israel's blindness shall be turned 
away, and the blindness of the Gentiles also; for is it 
not written that "all the blind eyes shall see out of 



obscurity" and "all the deaf ears be unstopped," and 

that Satan, the god of this world, shall be bound, and 

deceive the nations no more? The Apostle declares 

that he has blinded the world; and doubtless Satan supposes 

that he is interfering with the divine plan; but 

behold, as the mists clear away, we perceive that the Almighty 

has made use of his unwitting servant, to keep 

secret the mystery which he did not intend should be 

understood except by the faithful, until the great day 

of revealing. Then the whole world, released from 

its bondage of ignorance, superstition and blindness, 

shall be again made to see, and assuredly many will 

shout for joy, "Glory to God in the highest,"— giving 

thanks for the gracious plan of God in which they 

will be participators, and which will be carried out 

through the agency of the glorified royal priesthood 

of which our Lord is the Head and Chief and 

Redeemer. 

ERRORS BECLOUD TRUTHS. 

False doctrines have beclouded this subject of the 
second coming of the Lord in the minds of many. 
(1) First came the wrong thought that the Church in 
its present condition, in the flesh, was to accomplish 
the promise of God made to Abraham,— to bless Israel 
and all the families of the earth. How false this 
conception! It is true that some blessing has followed 
the promulgation of the Gospel, even when sadly 
mixed with the traditions of men; it is true also that 
a measure of civilization and enlightenment has followed 
in the wake of the testimony of Jesus, even 
when uttered through imperfect lips and in distorted 
form; but this is not the blessing which God has promised; 
this is not the "restitution of all things spoken by 
the mouth of all the holy prophets." In no sense of the 
word is it the blessing of all the families of the earth. 

R3193 :page 150 

At no time has even this measure of blessing reached 
more than a tithe of the living generations and nations 
—to say nothing of the generations of all nations 
which have passed into the great prison house of death. 
What a shortsighted interpretation it is that could 
apply to the Church in its condition of humiliation, of 
the past nineteen centuries, all those glorious promises 
of power and glory and majesty, and earth-filling 
knowledge, and victory over evil, sin and ignorance, 
and Satan; and the blessing and uplifting of all mankind; 
—so clearly stated by all the holy prophets since 
the world began! 

(2) Another false doctrine which has helped to 
becloud the minds of many is the theory that those who 
die do not die, but are, on the contrary, when dead, 
more alive than ever before— that they merely seem to 



die— that in reality they are in the moment of dying 
clothed upon with immortality, and as spirit beings, 
pass into an eternity of either bliss or torment. This 
unscriptural teaching makes void the Scriptural promise 
of a resurrection of the dead by claiming that none 
are dead; and it makes void also the lesson of our text 
and hundreds of others like it; for why should those 
who believe such things have any interest in such a 
promise as this text presents— "I will come again and 
receive you unto myself"? 

In proportion as the doctrine of the second coming 
of Christ, and the resurrection of the dead then to 
take place, have been lost sight of from either of the 
above causes, in that same proportion blindness and 
darkness and lack of spiritual life have surely resulted. 
By the lack of spiritual life we do not mean lack of 
excitement, "revivals," "vanity fairs," "church 
work," etc.; but we do mean lack of piety, lack of 
deep Christian experience, lack of the fruits of the 
spirit and the joys thereof. And be it noted now, 
that those Christians who hold this hope of the second 
coming even though bound with various false doctrines, 
receive a blessing from it that is not fully 
counteracted by the false traditions of men which they 
have wrongly associated with it. Indeed, this must 
be true in respect to every feature of divine truth;— 
every item of it has its power as a sanctifying medium, 
as explained in our dear Redeemer's prayer— "Sanctify 
them through thy truth, thy Word is truth." 
Whoever has even one item of truth to nine items of 
error, has to the extent of that one item, a sanctifying 
power; whoever has five parts of truth and five parts 
of error has a considerable measure of sanctifying 
power; and whoever, by the grace of God, can get rid 
of all the error, will have the tenfold power of the 
truth working in him to will and to do God's good 
pleasure— sanctifying him. 

These ten various points of truth are not alike 
powerful either, and amongst them all we know of 
none which has greater purifying influence than this 
one referred to in our text— "that blessed hope"— the 
appearing of our glorious Lord. 

THIS HOPE PURIFIETH. 

"He who hath this hope in him purifieth himself, 
even as he is pure." (1 John 3:3.) He who has not this 
hope in him may purify himself in some measure from 
other motives, but is not at all likely to be purified to 
the same degree as he would be purified by this hope. 
Indeed we may be sure, on the other hand, that none 
but the pure in heart can honestly and truly entertain 
this hope; to the impure of heart it must rather be a 
dreadful thought that, shortly, he who can read the 
very thoughts and intents of the heart will be present; 
and that all shall appear before him— that all shall be 



open and naked before his sight. The illiterate and 
uncultured and morally impure would feel sadly out of 
place if found in the midst of the pure, the noble, the 
refined, even for an evening; much more would the 
matter be distressful to them if the prospects were 
that they must be thus associated forever. And so it 
is with the immoral and impure of heart in respect to 
the second coming of our Lord, and the prospect that 
all the pure in heart shall be there with him,— the 
impure cannot covet a place in such a gathering, nor 
could they rejoice in the hope of such a companionship. 
Indeed the thought of such associations everlastingly 
would to such be unendurable. 

When we speak of the pure in heart who alone 
can rejoice in this promise, we are not to be understood 
as meaning perfect men and women according to 
the flesh, in every word and act acceptable to the Lord. 
We have God's own assurance that there are none 
such— "There is none righteous, no not one"— all 
come short of the glory of God, the majority very far 
short. But the Lord knoweth our frame, he remembereth 
that we are dust, that we were born in sin and 
shapen in iniquity, that all the children's teeth were 
set on edge by the sour grapes of sin of which our 
first parents partook. Those who rejoice in the promise 
of our text were "children of wrath even as others," 
and the difference now is that they have been 
reckonedly justified— their sins are covered by the 
merit of the great redemptive sacrifice, they have a 
new standing with the Lord as "new creatures"— not 
sinners, but friends— accepted in the Beloved; accepted 
not according to the flesh and its imperfections, 
but according to the new mind, the new heart, and its 
new divine aspirations and endeavors. 

FEW KNOW OF OUR LORD'S PAROUSIA. 

Let us, dear brethren, keep well before our minds 
the Master's promised return, and now in the time of 

R3193 :page 151 

his "parousia" (invisible presence), let it have its full 
weight and influence upon our every word and act; 
yea, upon our very thoughts. Let the hope that we 
shall soon experience our resurrection change, and be 
made like our dear Redeemer, and see him as he is, 
and share his glory in the great "epiphania," or shining 
forth of the Sons of God in the glory of the 
Kingdom, enthuse us;— let this energize our hearts, 
loose our lips, and strengthen us for every duty, 
privilege and opportunity— to serve our Master and 
the household of faith. If this hope has been an 
anchor to the Lord's people for so many centuries, 
how much more does it mean to us who are living 
now in the very time of his presence, waiting for his 



"apokalupsis"— his revealing in the glory of the 
Kingdom! 

It is only in accordance with what we have seen 
respecting the heavenly Father's dealings in the past, 
that we now perceive that there are various matters 
connected with our Lord's second advent which are 
inscrutable to the natural man, and can only be perceived 
by the faithful, and that under the guidance of 
the spirit in the understanding of the Word. As we 
saw previously that the Jews failed to grasp the facts 
connected with our Lord's presence at the first advent 
—except those who were Israelites indeed, and they 
but a handful in comparison with the nation,— so here, 
may we not expect that even amongst those who today 
are hoping for the Master's return, only a comparative 
remnant, a handful, will be in such a condition 
of heart as to permit them to discern clearly and 
distinctly the manner of the second advent? The 
presence of our Lord, invisible to men, is for the gathering 
of the wheat into his barn and the tares for 
burning; and, subsequently, the manifestation of the 
complete Christ, Head and members, in the glory of 

R3194:page 151 

the Kingdom, as the Sun of Righteousness will be for 
the healing and blessing and restoring of all mankind 
then willing to accept the blessings of the Lord on the 
terms of righteousness. 



R3194:page 151 

THE MEMORIAL CELEBRATION. 

GOOD, heart-cheering reports are at hand from 
various quarters, showing that the Memorial 
Supper was this year an occasion of great interest 
and spiritual profit to the Lord's people scattered 
abroad. It surely grows in meaning to us as we 
grow in the knowledge of the divine plan, and as we 
come closer and closer into accord with the great Fount 
of every blessing. 

Three hundred and thirty devoted souls gathered 
at the Bible House Chapel, Allegheny, and after a 
review of the meaning of the emblems, the bread and 
the cup, partook of them with hearts overflowing with 
gratitude (1) for the forgiveness of sins and reconciliation 
to God, already effected for all of the "church 
of the firstborn"; and (2) for the inestimable privilege 
of participating with our dear Redeemer as members 
or parts of the "one loaf"— the one body;— and 
as participators in the "one cup" of our Lord's sufferings, 
even unto death, as the Apostle explains. 
(1 Cor. 10:16,17.) Three baptism services witnessed 



to the consecration of eighteen, and made deep 
impressions upon those who had already witnessed 
the same good confession. 

We have reports before us which indicate that a 
much larger number participated this year than ever 
previously. All report showers of refreshing. Some 
of the leading companies numbered as follows:— 
Boston, 142 communicants, 32 baptisms; Philadelphia, 
130 communicants, 14 baptisms; Chicago, 125; 
New York, 71; Indianapolis, 80, immersions 11; Washington, 
D.C., 67; Toronto, Ont, 57; Cleveland, O., 54; 
Columbus, O., 25; Houston, Tex., 30; Toledo, O., 37; 
Richmond, Va., 35; Brantford, Ont., 28; Tiffin, O., 35; 
Atlanta, Ga., 22; Buffalo, 27; Cincinnati, 46; Baltimore, 
26; Dayton, O., 32; Lynn, Mass., 27; Auburn, 
R.I., 35; Scranton, Pa., 33; Minneapolis and St. 
Paul, 37. 

page 151 

We give below a few sample reports:— 

DEAR BROTHER:-The Philadelphia friends enjoyed 
a blessed meeting together to commemorate our Lord's 
death. There were one hundred and thirty present, and 
fourteen immersions. 

Your brother in Christ, H. P.,— Philadelphia. 



DEAR FRIENDS, -This has been a blessed Memorial 
season to the Church at this place. Sunday, April 
5, we had a grand discourse by Bro. O. on baptism, followed 
by the immersion into Christ of 1 1 brothers and 
sisters, Bro. W. officiating. After a season of study, 
prayer and praise on Thursday afternoon and night, we 
met to partake of the emblems of our Savior's blessed broken 
body and shed blood. Owing to age and sickness the 
sacrament was administered at two homes to four. At 
our regular meeting seventy were present. Such a solemnly 
sweet festival! The holy spirit was manifest and 
we were blest indeed. 

With love and prayers, E. W.,— Indianapolis, Ind. 



MY DEAR BROTHER:— In compliance with your request 
I report our deeply interesting service of last night. 
You will rejoice with me in that, instead of nine or ten, 
as before this, we had around the table last night thirty-five 
—one not in present truth, but we do not exclude any 
who think themselves Christians; so, to be accurate, say 
thirty-four— who we trust discerned the Lord's body. 
The service was deeply interesting and strengthening, 
especially to the new brethren. There appeared to be unusual 
oneness and flow of love. I regard the service as 



page 152 

being the means of the greatest blessing the Church has 
ever received here at the Memorial Supper, and others are 
almost persuaded to take hold of present truth. 
Lovingly, M. S.,— Richmond, Va. 



DEAR FRIENDS:— Sixty-seven persons here partook of 
the emblems of sacrifice this year as against fifty last year 
and twenty-six the year previous to that. We were spiritually 
blessed by this service and remembered you and all the 
dear ones everywhere likewise assembled in our prayers. It 
was indeed good to be present to share each other's sorrows 
and the joys combined. 

Faithfully yours, J. B.,— Washington, D.C. 



DEAR FRIENDS, -The Church in Denver celebrated 
the Memorial of our Lord's death last evening; thirteen 
were present, six sisters and seven brethren. Some were 
hindered on account of sickness. The occasion seemed to 
be greatly beneficial in a spiritual way to all present, and 
the absent ones were remembered in our petitions to the 
throne of the heavenly grace. 

Yours in Christ, F. H.,— Denver, Colo. 



DEAR CO-WORKERS : -Twelve in Chetopa commemorated 
that great event, the celebrating of our dear Redeemer's 
death. Very much interest was manifest. Our 
dear Lord's presence was felt forcibly as our dear Brother 
Draper spoke briefly of the significance of the loaf and the 
cup, after which we partook of the emblems. With Christian 
love to all from the Church here, I am, 

Yours in the love of the truth, P. Z.,— Chetopa, Kan. 



PRECIOUS FRIENDSr-Christian greetings to all! The 
household numbering 20 (all could not attend on account 
of illness) assembled here at 8 o'clock last night to commemorate 
the Passover; and how truly can we say, "Sweet 
the moments rich in blessing" ! Oh, the sweet precious 
moments we experienced, each one feeling greatly repaid 
for coming and renewing our consecration vows, and 
each feeling more fully determined to press on. Pray for 
us, dear brethren, that we may grow much fruit. 

Truly, your colaborer, I. Z.,— San Antonio, Tex. 



DEAR BRETHREN,— Thirteen of us met last evening to 
partake of the emblems of bread and wine, symbolizing the 
broken body and shed blood of our dear Lord and Savior, 
Jesus Christ. We pledged ourselves anew to be "broken with 
him," to "drink the cup" which he drank, asking a continuance 
of his blessed love and care, that at all times "his grace 
might be sufficient for us," and oh, dear brethren, what a 
rich blessing he poured out upon us, filling our hearts with a 
blessed sense of peaceful calm and rest and fortitude for 
the trials which are yet to come! We do most gratefully 
testify to the fulness of that grace and blessing. "What 
shall separate us from the love of God?" With love, 

Your fellow-members of his body, 

THE CHURCH AT DUBUQUE,-Iowa. 



Following is a sample of many of the reports received. 
The solitary ones fellowshiped in spirit with 
the groups everywhere:— 

Have just partaken of "the Memorial" alone, in my 
room. What untold joy is ours, to know the soon fulfilment 
of "drinking it new in the Kingdom" with our Lord. 

Your brother, J. C. E.,— Wyoming. 



FROM GREAT BRITAIN. 



DEAR BRETHREN:-It is with much gratitude to our 
heavenly Father that we report at this time general evidences 
of his favor. The Memorial season has been a time 
of blessing, of encouragement and realization of the grace 
of God. Reports from various gatherings have been received, 
each telling of progress made, both in the deepened 
spiritual life in the Churches, and in the numbers of 
those who are rejoicing in the truth. In London, E., 104 
partook of the emblems of our Lord's death and our participation 
therein, and 26 were immersed; in Sevenoaks 16; 
in Sheffield, 17; in Manchester, 100, while 30 were immersed; 
in Glasgow, about 70, and in Liverpool, 63. 
Besides these there were many other gatherings of both 
large and small numbers, particulars of which have not 
yet reached us. As we, here in London, were gathered 
together we remembered all the dear brethren of like precious 
faith, especially those lonely ones who were "alone 
with the Lord." With love, 

Yours sincerely in Him, J. HEMERY. 



R3196 :page 152 

VOLUNTEER WORK FOR THE SEASON 1903. 



FOR several years the dear friends of the cause in 
all parts of the United States and Canada have 
industriously circulated on Sundays, at church 
doors, various of the WATCH TOWER publications. 
Good results have come— though far less than we 
hoped for from the vast quantity of printed matter 
thus circulated. We can only trust that some 
of the seed has fallen into good ground, and is 
bringing forth fruitage quietly, which will later be 
manifest. We believe that on the whole a general 
modification of the views of Christendom is in progress, 
and that the tendency is in two directions— the 
majority toward infidelity, higher criticism, etc., and 
animosity toward the truth; and a minority toward a 
proper appreciation of the Word of God and its teachings. 
We are thus encouraged to go on in the good 
work while it is called today, realizing that a dark 
night of unbelief is rapidly settling over our dear 
brethren and sisters still in Babylon, and that those 
whom we would rescue must be reached speedily, if at 
all, before the great time of trouble shall have closed 
the door to the high calling. 

We propose that the Volunteer work this year be 
varied a little from the methods of previous years— to 
the extent that the tracts we are expecting shortly to 
furnish be circulated from house to house, on Sunday 
forenoons, instead of being circulated at church-doors. 
We advise that foreign quarters, and especially Roman 
Catholic quarters, be avoided, as the circulation of 
tracts there would mean a loss of time, effort and 
means. Our thought in making this change for the 
current season is that there may be people who would 

R3196 :page 153 

thus be reached who have not been reached by the 
church distributions of the past. We find that there 
are today quite a number of thinking people who rarely 
go to church, sometimes for one reason and sometimes 
for another. Amongst these are some of the most 
conscientious, God-fearing and well-disposed, who 
should be amenable to the influences of present truth. 
We have found it so. 

Our arrangement with the printers is that the two 
tracts which shall constitute the "ammunition" for 
this year shall be put up, mixed alternately, in bundles. 
The thought is, not to give two at each house, 
but one, that neighbors may possibly exchange with 
each other, and thus a greater variety of reading matter 
be utilized. 

This new method of distribution will render useless 
the information secured by the various captains 
during former seasons, but will, nevertheless, give 
them plenty to do in districting their cities and towns 
so that every house in proper districts shall be reached 



and served, and so that the workers shall not lap upon 

each other's territory. We recommend that the circulation 

take place on Sunday mornings, at such hour 

as seems to the friends at each place the most convenient 

one, least likely to inconvenience those who 

rejoice to give their time in this service. 

It may be possible that some of the friends will 
find a week-day more convenient than a Sunday, and 
if this be so we advise that their wishes for territory 
and tracts be granted. On the whole, however, we 
rather think that Sunday will be the most advantageous 
and convenient day. We are not to think of 
this, nor will other right-minded people think of it, as 
being "labor," and in violation of Sunday rest. The 
walking will be no more than would ordinarily be 
done in going to church, and the labor would be considerably 
less than in the preaching of a sermon, while 
the printed sermons thus delivered will, in the judgment 
of the distributors, be superior, of course, to 
what would be generally obtained. 

FOR THE GERMAN WORK. 

We are preparing this season to do some Volunteer 
work amongst the German Protestant churches, 
and will be pleased to fill requisitions for "ammunition" 
in that language. We advise that this material 
be served on Sunday in the way the English churches 
were served in previous years, as it would be difficult 
to locate the Germans otherwise. 

We hope that all orders will be with us promptly, 
and as soon as possible we will have the tracts shipped. 
We remember daily in prayer the dear brethren and 
sisters engaged in this, as well as in every branch of 
the service of the Lord, that his rich blessing may go 
with the efforts put forth, to the awakening of the true 
ones of the flock. May grace, mercy and peace abide 
with all in your loving efforts to cooperate in the 
spread of the glad tidings. 



R3194:page 153 

PAUL BEFORE FELIX. 

-ACTS 24:10-16,24-26.-MAY 17.- 

"I will fear no evil: for thou art with me."— Psa. 23:4. 

FIVE days after Paul's arrival a prisoner at Caesarea 
the Chief Priest, Ananias, accompanied by a 
public advocate and a deputation from the Sanhedrin, 
also appeared in the city to make charges 
against Paul, and the trial at once took place. The 
advocate, Tertullus, began his case by making very 



flattering allusions to the governor— very hypocritical 
allusions, as we know from secular histories of the time. 
"Both Josephus and Tacitus represent him as one of 
the most corrupt and oppressive rulers ever sent by the 
Romans into Judea." 

Flattery of this kind, undeserved praise, is extremely 
reprehensible; totally contrary to the principles 
which govern the Lord's followers. It is dishonesty, 
hypocrisy. Nevertheless, flattery is a very powerful 
weapon, which the unregenerate have little scruple in 
using, and it frequently gives them a decided advantage 
in worldly affairs, in opposition to the Lord's 
faithful, who are restrained from such flatteries, being 
obliged to consider truth and honesty in all their words 
and dealings. Some of the Lord's people are, on the 
other hand, inclined to carry honesty in such matters 
to an extreme: many in Paul's stead would have felt it 
their bounden duty to have upbraided Felix roundly. 
It is no more obligatory upon the Lord's people to denounce 
every wrongdoer whom they may meet in the 
street than it is for them to tell all homely persons they 
may see of their lack along the lines of beauty. The 
Apostle's course in this case is an illustration of the 
possession of the spirit of a sound mind. When it came 
his turn to address the governor he neither upbraided 
nor reproved him, nor did he utter any words of flattery. 
The introduction to his defense was every word 
true in the fullest sense, and yet it was framed and presented 
in courteous and agreeable language. 

Politeness is always a part of Christian character. 
In the world it may be polish, but in the Christian it 
is not merely a veneer, but represents the true sentiments 
of the heart, developed along the lines of the 
spirit of life— love. Love leads to gentleness, patience, 

R3194:page 154 

kindness, etc., and even in the case of disobedience it 
will hesitate to utter an unkind word, and will avoid 
the same so far as duty will permit. 

The advocate, or attorney, Tertullus, made serious 
charges against the Apostle. He would have him appear 
to Felix as more or less a conspirator against the 
Roman government— at least a raiser of tumults and 
seditions amongst the people. This charge was made 
broadly, applying not only to the present instance, the 
tumult at Jerusalem, but that everywhere, throughout 
the provinces of Rome, wherever he went, tumults 
arose amongst the people. It did not seem to occur to 
this attorney that the tumults might be caused by evildoers 
in their endeavor to stop the progress of righteousness 
and truth; the thought he endeavored to present 
to Felix was that whoever occasioned tumults, 
regardless of his plea, was to be considered an enemy 
to good government, law and order. The same arguments 
are powerful today with those who do not appreciate 



the true principles of justice and liberty. It will 
not surprise us at all if by and by the enemies of present 
truth take a similarly unjust stand against us, who 
are seeking to walk in the footsteps of the Apostle- 
seeking to present the truths of a new dispensation to 
our brethren in Babylon, who are not only themselves 
unwilling to hear, but are easily aroused to anger, vituperation 
and persecution, that they may prevent others 
from receiving the good tidings of great joy which shall 
be unto all people. 

When the charges had been preferred, Paul was 
permitted to speak for himself, and did so to good effect. 
He showed (1) that he had but recently arrived 
in Jerusalem; that he had raised no riot or commotion, 
but that, on the contrary, at the time of his arrest he 
was quietly worshiping God in the Temple— disputing 
with nobody and interfering with nobody's rights. 
(2) He challenged his accusers to produce proofs of 
the truthfulness of their charges— denying their ability 
to prove them; and thus in a most reasonable and 
legal way showed that the burden of proof was upon 
his accusers, and not upon himself. (3) He did confess, 
however, that there was some ground for the animosity 
manifested against him, and this was that his 
fellow-Jews charged him with believing and teaching 
heresy— a split-off from the Jewish religion. It was 
his answer to the charge that he was a ringleader of the 
sect of the Nazarenes; he denied that it was heresy 
against the Jewish religion, and a sect, or split-off party. 
It was his enemies who called Christianity heresy, and 
separation from Judaism, but their charges were false 
from the Apostle's standpoint. Christianity, instead 
of being split off from Judaism, was the natural outcome 
and proper development of it— the fulfilment of 
the promises of God upon which the hopes and prospects 
of Judaism were all built. The Apostle shows 
this matter most distinctly in his letter to the Romans 
(chap. 1 1), where he pictures the Jewish nation as the 
olive tree whose root was the Abrahamic promise, and 
whose branches were the people of Israel. He does not 
picture Christianity as another tree, nor yet as a new 
shoot out of this original olive tree, but he does picture 
it as the fuller development of this tree, representing 
all Jews refusing to progress and to accept of Christ, as 
branches that were broken off— all the true Jews who 
continued to be recognized of the Lord,— all the Israelites 
indeed,— were the Christians who from Pentecost 
onward have been known as spiritual Israelites. 

Progressing, the Apostle justified the claim which 
he made at his hearing before the Sanhedrin; viz., 
that a serious part of the objection raised against him 
by his countrymen was his belief in the resurrection of 
the dead, which some of them also allowed, or believed,— 
"that there should be a resurrection of the 
dead, both of the just and the unjust." 

That the Apostle preached a gospel in many particulars 



different from the general belief of our day, is 
quite evident from this presentation of it— the making 
prominent of the doctrine of the resurrection of the 
dead. True, some might claim that it is unnecessary 
to make this doctrine prominent, because there are few 
Sadducees today— few who deny the resurrection of the 
dead. We answer that there are few who believe that 
there are any dead. The vast majority of mankind, 
Christians as well as heathen, have adopted the theory 
that none are dead— that those who appear to die really 
become more alive than ever. Not believing in anybody's 
being dead it would be impossible for them to 
believe in the resurrection of the dead. Instead, another 
thought prevails now; viz., a resurrection of the body— 
the person or soul, it is claimed, does not die, but merely 
sheds the body as an old garment, and at some future 

R3195 :page 154 

time is to have it back. But it will be conceded that 

if this were all that the Apostle meant by the resurrection 

of the dead,— if he really meant a "resurrection of 

the body," his argument was a weak one. It would be 

foolish to waste much time or breath or energy in discussing 

such a proposition as would have no particular 

advantage or merit, even if it were proven. 

The Apostle had a totally different thought: his 
preaching was to the effect that death is a real penalty 
for sin, and that there never could be life or consciousness, 
except by a resurrection of the dead, and that a 
resurrection of the dead could only come by divine 
favor in the accomplishment of a redemption of all 
that had been condemned to death. In preaching the 
resurrection, therefore, he was declaring not only his 
faith that Christ Jesus was not dead, but also his faith 
that God would in due time grant the world a resurrection. 

R3195 :page 155 

Thus Jesus and the resurrection constituted the 
sum and substance of the gospel hope from the Apostle's 
standpoint and— because we take his— from our 
standpoint also. 

The question may occur to some— if resurrection 
(anastasis) means a full, complete raising up out of 
death conditions into perfection of life conditions, how 
could the Apostle here speak of the resurrection "both 
of the just and unjust"? 

How shall we understand this, and harmonize it 
with other Scriptures which declare that only the justified 
shall attain full perfection of life?— that he that 
hath the Son may have life, and he that hath not 
the Son shall not see life— in its perfection?— that he 
that will not obey the great Prophet shall be cut off 
from amongst his people— cut off from life, in the Second 
Death? 



We answer that the Apostle is not carrying his 
argument down into the future, declaring that in the 
future the just ones shall attain to the full perfection of 
life and the unjust ones also; he is merely referring to 
those who in the present time are just and unjust. The 
just of the present time are "justified by faith," and if 
faithful to the conditions of the call are to have part in 
the First Resurrection. The unjust of the present time 
are the unjustified, the unbelievers, and the Apostle 
explains that they believe not because the god of this 
world hath blinded their minds. (2 Cor. 4:4.) However, 
as the Scriptures distinctly show, it is to be the 
special work of the next age to open all the blind eyes 
and to unstop all the deaf ears, and to cause the knowledge 
of the Lord to fill the whole earth, to the intent 
that those now unjustified, unjust, may be just before 
God, and thus share in the resurrection which is provided 
for all, and which will accomplish the resurrection 
of all except as its gracious provisions are individually 
rejected. 

Having stated thus his belief in a future life, by a 
resurrection, the Apostle declares that his present life 
was being used in accordance with that hope of a future 
life— with a conscience that controlled his thoughts 
and words and deeds in relationship to God and 
men. 

Can we wonder that Felix, perverse though he was, 
himself felt disinclined to yield so noble a prisoner to 
death, even to accommodate and please the flattering 
attorney and the influential high priest, whose favor 
he would undoubtedly prefer to hold? The record 
leads us additionally to infer that Felix considered that 
in Paul he had a good opportunity for receiving a bribe 
for the performance of justice; for in his narrative the 
Apostle proceeded to show that so far from seeking to 
do injury to his fellow-creatures, he had brought with 
him from foreign cities large sums of money. Felix 
thus perceived that the prisoner, who had liberal education 
and talent and Roman citizenship, had friends 
not only in Jerusalem, but abroad. He doubtless concluded 
that they would be quite willing to make him 
a handsome present to effect the Apostle's release. 
This is the suggestion of the 26th verse. 

Apparently Felix was considerably interested in 
his prisoner, and mentioned him to his wife, a Jewess: 
he was called before them, that they might know further 
respecting this new teaching. His curiosity was 
evidently soon more than satisfied, as the Apostle proceeded 
with his subject, showing the plan of God, the 
righteousness of the Law, the inability of fallen man 
to fully meet its requirements, that Jesus became the 
Redeemer of those condemned by the Law, and that 
now salvation and life eternal are open to as many as 
will obey the gospel— forsake sin and lay hold by faith 
upon the Redeemer. The Apostle proceeded to show 
that righteousness was the reasonable requirement of 



the divine Law, and that the acceptance of God's favor 
in Christ led to self-restraint and opposition to natural 
tendencies, and that there is a judgment day to come, 
in the which all deflections from righteousness will be 
rewarded with stripes proportionate to knowledge. 
The governor trembled; his own wicked life and licentious 
course stood out before his mental gaze, and he 
realized that, according to the standards presented, he 
would have many stripes to bear in the future. His 
wife, Drusilla, was really the wife of King Azizus; but 
her conscience, evidently more seared than his, seems 
not to have been in the least agitated. Felix suggested 
that at a more convenient season he would hear further 
of the gospel; but we doubt if ever he called for any 
further explanations— he already had enough, more 
than he was willing to obey. His course is one too 
frequently imitated since. Many who tremble as they 
think of their sins, hope that a more convenient time 
for breaking off may come to them; but a convenient 
season for abandoning sin— when sin indulged in our 
members will make no objection to being ousted— will 
never come. He who would become a follower of the 
Lord Jesus, must courageously accept of Christ, the 
power divine for the breaking of the shackles of his 
slavery to sin— must first love the liberty wherewith 
Christ alone can make us free. Those who have not 
this craving will remain slaves of sin until the glorious 
Millennial morning shall break, until after the completion 
of the election Church of "overcomers"— until the 
dawning of the Millennial morning, when the overcomers, 
with Christ at their head, shall break all the 
shackles of sin and set all prisoners free, and command 
all to render obedience to the laws of the Kingdom of 
God, inflicting stripes of punishment proportionate to 
their present wilfulness in sin, with a view to their recovery, 

R3195 :page 156 

and for restitution to all that was lost in Adam 
and redeemed with the precious blood. 

A good lesson may be learned from the Apostle's 
method of presenting the truth to Felix. He did not 
attack the governor's character, nor berate him for his 
sins. He did better than this. Ignoring the individual 
entirely, he lifted the mirror of the perfect law of 
love and liberty and righteousness before the governor, 
and let him see for himself how far short he came of 
the perfect standard which alone God can approve. 
Would that all of God's children could learn thus to 
reprove sin— by letting the light of truth and the corroboration 
of the same in their own conduct shine out 
—their words, and no less their conduct, being epistles 
of the grace of God and his gracious arrangements, both 
for rewarding those who seek him and for chastening 
and correcting those who require it! 

The courage of the Apostle in holding up the truth 



before one who so largely had to do with the decision 
of his own case is remarkable and commendable. It 
is in full agreement with the declaration of our Golden 
Text. Those who are on the Lord's side, and who, 
therefore, have the Lord on their side, in all of life's 
affairs, need fear no evil. This absence of fear, however, 
should not in us, any more than in the Apostle, 
lead to bravado or discourteous manner or language. 
The divine rule is, as expressed by the Apostle, that 
we should speak the truth in love.— Eph. 4:15. 

Another lesson taught us by the Apostle's experiences, 
yea, by all of the Lord's notable children, from 
the Master down, is that the assaults of calumny, slander, 
etc., can do them no lasting harm. Look at the 
Captain of our salvation, against whom all manner of 
evil was said and done falsely, even to the extent of 
calling him the prince of devils, and crucifying him as 
a blasphemer of God. How those assaults of the great 
Adversary, through his deluded children of disobedience, 
serve now to make the Lord's character and conduct 
the more transparent and resplendent! So also 
it is in respect to the Apostle Paul's experiences— they 
all reflect grandly upon his character today. Bunyan's 
"Pilgrim's Progress" gives a scene which illustrates 
this feature of our lesson and encourages all of us to 
disregard the slanders and evil speakings of the present 
time, if so be that we can continually realize the 
divine favor and blessing with us and upon our efforts 
to serve the Lord. We give an extract from Bunyan's 
writings as follows:— 

"Then the shepherds had the pilgrims to another 
place, called Mount Innocence, and there they saw a 
man clothed all in white, and two men, Prejudice and 
Ill-will, continually casting dirt upon him. Now behold, 
the dirt, whatsoever they cast at him, would in a 
little time fall off again, and his garment would look as 
clean as if no dirt had been cast thereat. Then said 
the pilgrims, 'What means this?' The shepherds 
answered, 'This man is named Godly-man, and this 
garment is to show the innocency of his life. Now, 
those that throw dirt at him are such as hate his well-doing 
but, as you see, the dirt will not stick upon his 
clothes; so it shall be with him that liveth innocently 
in the world. Whoever they be that would make such 
men dirty, they labor all in vain; for God, by that a 
little time is spent, will cause that their innocence shall 
break forth as the light, and their righteousness as the 
noon-day.'" 



R3196 :page 156 

"ALMOST THOU PERSUADEST ME.' 
-ACTS 26:19-29.-MAY 24.- 



"Having therefore obtained help of God, I continue unto this day. 

PAUL remained a prisoner at Caesarea two years 
—until the recall of Felix to Rome. According 
to history, the latter had given ground for 
much complaint by the use of his office, and in order 
to placate the Jews, and to avoid further animosities, 
he left Paul a prisoner, instead of doing him the justice 
of acknowledging that he had committed no crime and, 
therefore, had full right to his liberty. It is impossible 
for us at this distance even to surmise with any accuracy 
what may have been the Lord's object in permitting 
his faithful representative to be thus isolated, and 
debarred from the privileges of service. On the one 
hand, it may have been to give the Apostle rest, quiet, 
opportunity for further study of the truth. On the 
other hand, it may have been to teach him a lesson of 
patience, submission and confidence in God;— that his 
services were not indispensable; that while the Lord 
had not let go of him, and would ultimately deliver 
him, he was not indispensable to the divine plan. 
These are important lessons for all of God's people to 
learn, and particularly all who are in any prominent 
way identified with his service. 

On the other hand, it may be that the Lord had 
a work for the Apostle to do at Caesarea, where possibly 
he had contact with the officers of the garrison— 
and where they would have opportunities for observing 
the man and appreciating the power of God to uphold 
him in his adversities. We may be sure that the Apostle 
let his light shine on every proper occasion, and we 
may be sure also that his labor was "not in vain in the 
Lord," whatever it was, and however it was accepted 
or made useful in the interests of others. If, even, he 
had no opportunity for serving others, and the work 
of grace were accomplished in his own heart, it was not 

R3196 :page 157 

in vain, and faith commands us to accept the matter 
without doubt respecting the wisdom of the 
arrangement. 

Festus, the successor of Felix as Roman governor, 
was of a totally different character from his predecessor. 
The Apostle styles him "noble Festus," and history 
confirms the appellation. The Jewish rulers, 
taking advantage of the fact that a new governor would 
naturally desire to make a favorable impression in respect 
to prompt dealing with prisoners charged with 
sedition, rioting, disloyalty, etc., quickly brought Paul's 
case to the attention of Festus. Doubtless their charges 
were the same as those made before Felix, coupled with 
suggestions, perhaps, that Felix had been rather lax 
in his dealings, and that they doubted not that the new 
governor, appointed by the emperor as a more capable 



person, would, on the contrary, show his thoroughgoing 

character by bringing all such offenders to justice. 

Apparently, however, they realized that it would be 

useless to attempt to try the case before the governor, 

since they had no witnesses to any wrong-doing which 

he could recognize as against Roman law or the privileges 

of a Roman citizen. Apparently their explanation 

was that the Apostle's conduct had been an assault 

upon their religion, along lines which the Roman governor, 

unacquainted with their religion, would not be 

prepared to appreciate. They therefore asked that the 

prisoner be tried before the Sanhedrin. The governor 

acknowledged his ignorance of the religion of the Jews, 

and made no objection to the trial of the prisoner by the 

religious court of his countrymen; but the Apostle was 

a Roman, and since he claimed Roman citizenship it 

was not permissible to turn him over to his countrymen 

for trial unless with his consent. The matter, 

therefore, was appealed to the Apostle: was he willing 

to be released as a Roman prisoner, and to be turned 

over to his countrymen for trial, according to their 

usages in religious matters? The Apostle promptly 

replied that he would not consent to this; that as a 

Roman citizen he had a right to Roman privileges, and 

therefore appealed his case to Caesar's court at the capital 

city. He well knew the animosity of his countrymen, 

and that those who were ready to assassinate him two 

years before were probably still unchanged in heart. The 

Apostle's course furnishes a good example for all of the 

Lord's people in similar circumstances. It is a mistake, 

made by some well-meaning members of the Lord's 

family, to suppose that the Master's teaching of nonresistance 

means that they should put forth no efforts 

on their own behalf. It is our privilege to avail ourselves 

of every right granted to us by the laws of the 

country in which we live. It is proper for us to appeal 

to higher or better courts if we can, to obtain that justice 

which might not be obtainable in lower courts. But 

having exhausted all such legal resources and remedies, 

R3197 :page 157 

the Lord's people are to be submissive to the results— 
not anarchists, not grumblers, not resisters of the decisions 
of the law. Another matter worthy of notice is 
that, so far as the records show, the Apostle did not 
berate or calumniate his people, the Sanhedrin or others 
associated as his prosecutors and persecutors. The 
lesson for the Lord's people today is to speak evil of 
no man; take advantage of every legal right and privilege 
and opportunity, and accept the final results as 
the providence of God. 

Festus was placed in a peculiar position; in sending 
the Apostle to Rome, as he was obliged to do in 
the case of appeal of a Roman citizen, he must of necessity 
send some charges, and being a just man he desired 



that the charges should be truthfully stated. Confessing 
himself to be ignorant of the Jewish religion, he 
asked King Agrippa and his wife, Bernice, who were 
nominal Jews (really Edomites), to hear the Apostle's 
explanation of his case, that he might advise him respecting 
how serious were the divergencies between 
Christians and Jews in doctrine. 

The invitation was accepted, and the Apostle began 
his address before the king and queen and the Roman 
governor, and, doubtless, quite a retinue of officers 
and soldiers. Here was an opportunity for preaching 
the Gospel to the people, whom the Apostle could 
otherwise never have expected to reach. He appears 
to have appreciated the occasion thoroughly, and made 
a stirring address, his text being the circumstances of 
his own conversion— narrated here for the third time. 
We cannot doubt that he was guided of the Lord in 
the matter, and it offers the suggestion to all ministers 
of the truth that nothing is apt to appeal more quickly 
to others than those things which have appealed to 
ourselves. Every minister of the truth, to speak heartily 
and forcefully, should speak from conviction, and 
the conviction should be backed by reasonable and positive 
evidences. Nothing could appeal to his hearers 
more strongly than the fact that he admitted that he 
had been a persecutor of the Christians himself, before 
he saw the way of the Lord more perfectly, and that 
now, seeing the Lord's way, he was sacrificing all that 
man could hold dear in his service of the truth. 

The fact that the Apostle was addressing royalty did 
not hinder him from bringing out the salient features of 
the gospel, and these are, we fear, too frequently forgotten 
by many. (1) Repentance from sin; (2) turning 
to God to seek his favor, to know and to do his 
will; (3) the doing of good works, and thereby showing 
that repentance was sincere. Because our present 
work is very largely that of "reaping" rather than 
"sowing," we have less need to appeal to those who are 
living in sin and alienation from God, and needing 

R3197 :page 158 

reformation of life; but whenever we have occasion to 
present the message of the Lord to some or to any 
whom we have reason to believe are not living in harmony 
with the requirements of the gospel along these 
lines, we should be careful, as the Apostle was, to leave 
no room for misunderstanding— no room for thinking 
that the gospel of Christ is sympathy with uncleanness, 
impurity of heart or life, sin, selfishness or evil deeds. 

We are here informed, though not elsewhere, that 
the Apostle had at some time in his experience preached 
the gospel throughout all the country of Judea— evidently 
before he went to Antioch and engaged in the 
general work amongst Gentiles— possibly during the 
two years prior to his first going to Antioch. The 



Apostle thus showed his auditors that his work had not 
been exclusively to the Jews nor exclusively to the Gentiles, 
but to both according to opportunity. It is for 
this cause, he declares— because realizing the change 
of dispensation by which God's grace was not confined 
any longer to the Jews only— that the Jews specially 
hated him and seized him in the Temple, and attempted 
to kill him. It was the selfishness on the part of 
the Jews that made the Apostle specially obnoxious 
to them. They were opposed to Jesus, but specially 
opposed to the giving of his gospel to the Gentiles— the 
teaching that the Gentiles might now, in any sense of 
the word, enjoy equal privileges with the Jews in respect 
to God's favor, etc. 

In referring to the preservation of his life, the 
Apostle does not give credit to Lysias, the commander 
of the garrison at Jerusalem, but declares that he obtained 
help of God, by whom he had been sustained 
to the time of his speaking. Doubtless on a proper 
occasion the Apostle would have been quite willing to 
have given Lysias full credit for promptness in preserving 
his life; but speaking from the highest standpoint 
of his own appreciation and ours, he gave the 
credit for his deliverance to the Lord. There is a good 
lesson in this for all of the Lord's people. How apt 
many are to give credit to "luck" or "chance" or human 
instrumentality, overlooking the fact that the 
Lord's saints are the special objects of his care, and 
that the angel of the Lord encampeth round about 
them and delivereth them. 

The next sentence intimates that during the two 
years of the Apostle's imprisonment he had been witnessing, 
preaching the gospel, both to small and great 
—such of the soldiers or servants or commanders of the 
camp as seemed to have a hearing ear undoubtedly 
were communicated with. We may be sure that the 
Apostle slackened not at any time his endeavors to 
serve the great Master, the Captain of our salvation, as 
a true soldier and faithful servant. So, too, should we 
continue to serve, even when apparently the most favorable 
opportunities are withheld from us. "Thou 
knowest not which shall prosper, either this or that." 
-Eccl. 11:6. 

We should notice what the Apostle specially testified, 
and consider it a clue to our most favorable testimonies 
in the interest of the same cause. He doubtless 
presented the subject from various standpoints at 
different times; but the essence, the substance, of his 
message on all occasions was the death and resurrection 
of Christ, as the one in whom were fulfilled 
the types of the Jewish Law and the declarations of 
the prophets. He did not stop with declaring the 
death and resurrection, but pointed to the ultimate 
legitimate results of these— that they meant that 
eventually the true light should shine unto all the 
Jewish people and also to the Gentiles— "This is the 



true light that lighteth every man that cometh into the 
world." It is in vain that we attempt to preach any 
other gospel— no other will be considered acceptable 
by him whom we would serve. We find, on the contrary, 
some today preaching a coming blessing of a new 
age and its light and favors to mankind, but denying 
the Scriptural foundation for such hopes— the death of 
Christ as our redemption price, and his resurrection, 
that he might be our Helper and Deliverer. Others, 
too, state the matter from a different standpoint, claiming 
that the favor of God and the blessing of forgiveness 
through Christ is to extend even to the heathen— 
but without light; that they will be saved in their 
darkness and heathenism. Let all who would ultimately 
hear the Master's words, "Well done, good and 
faithful servant," be careful to preach the same gospel 
that the Apostle proclaimed; viz., the one based upon 
the ransom sacrifice of Christ, attested by his resurrection, 
on account of which the Lord is yet to be (during 
the Millennial age) the true light that will lighten 
every man, every member of our race, and bring to 
each and to all not only the blessings of opportunity 
but also tests and proportionate responsibility. 

King Agrippa was evidently considerably informed 
along the lines of the teaching of the Law and the 
Prophets, for the Apostle appealed to him as able to 
corroborate his presentations respecting the Law and 
the Prophets; but Festus the Gentile, who had no 
knowledge of Jewish hopes and promises, was astounded 
as he heard the Apostle's line of argument— doubtless 
much more extended than is presented in the 
record. Interrupting the Apostle by speaking still 
louder than he, Festus cried, "Paul, thou art beside 
thyself! Much learning doth make thee mad!"— your 
head is turned; you are painting fancy pictures when 
you tell us of a great God, our Creator, and that he 
cares for us, his creatures, and has provided for our 
redemption through the sacrifice of his Son, and that 

R3197 :page 159 

he has raised him from the dead, and is ultimately to 
send a blessing to every member of our race. Surely 
this is your own imagination! It is a wonderful picture, 
astounding to me who, as a Gentile, never had so 
connected a presentation respecting any of the deities 
of whom I have heard by the thousand. 

Truth is stranger than fiction, and it is no wonder 
that some today, like Festus of old, find it hard to believe 
in the goodness and wonderful provision that our 
heavenly Father has made for his creatures. Today, 
if some of our worldly friends note our enthusiasm for 
the Lord, his brethren and his truth, it all seems very 
different from any religious sentiments or feelings, 
hopes or ambitions they have entertained, and they 
are inclined to say of us also that our heads are a little 



turned. They think it not strange if men become 
enthusiastic about politics or money-making, because 
such enthusiasm is common to men; everybody is 
more or less excited and interested in money-getting 
and in politics. But when it comes to religion, they 
say to themselves, no one knows anything about this 
matter; it is all pure speculation, and these people 
must be crazy when they think of their religion as being 
tangible, worthy of self-denial and the enduring of 
persecutions. We admit that no romance of earth ever 
equaled this one of the divine arrangement for man's 
salvation:— the fall; the calamity of death and disease, 
mental, physical and moral; the sending of God's 
own son; his offering of himself as the sin-offering on 
our behalf; his resurrection and ascension to glory, 
honor and power; the gathering of a little flock to be 
his Bride and joint-heir in the Kingdom; and, by and 

R3198 :page 159 

by, the establishment of a Kingdom for the blessing 
and enlightenment of all the families of the earth. No 
novel, no plot of human concoction, could ever equal 
this one. It is the Lord's doing, and it is marvelous 
in our eyes. We cannot wonder if those who see from 
the outside— who do not see the strength and beauty 
and consistency and harmony from the inside standpoint 
—consider that we who see matters from the right 
standpoint are too much enthused. They cannot appreciate 
the fact that we accept gladly the privilege of 
self-sacrifice, in order thereby to attest our love and 
devotion to the Lord and to be accounted worthy a share 
with him as members of his Church, his Bride. 

The time will come, and it is not far distant now, 
when many who are now highly esteemed amongst 
men for their wisdom, will be seen to have been foolish, 
and many who are now esteemed fools for Christ's 
sake and for the gospel's sake, will be seen to have 
been truly wise in choosing the heavenly things and in 
being willing to surrender the earthly things for the 
attainment of the heavenly, because it is impossible to 
serve God and Mammon. 

The Apostle's answer to Festus was not flattery, 
but Christian courtesy. Festus was a noble man, and 
it is not improper to speak the truth in reasonable 
language, and to give a merited compliment. "I am 
not mad, most noble Festus, but speak forth words of 
truth and soberness." So, when we answer the world, 
let us remember the difference of standpoint, and that 
our privilege of seeing the deep things of God is the 
result of our having been accepted of him through consecration 
and obedience, receiving the spirit of the 
Anointed, whereby we can know the things freely given 
unto us of God. 

The Apostle appealed to the king for corroboration 
of the things he declared, evidently well assured that 



the declaration of the gospel had created so much commotion 

amongst the Jews that the king had heard 

thereof repeatedly. The thing was not done in a corner; 

it was a public matter of general knowledge, and 

had Festus been living in the country he would not 

question the facts. 

The Apostle appealed to Agrippa in a most earnest 
and dignified tone. "King Agrippa, believest thou 
the prophets? I know that thou believest." The 
intimation is that the Apostle had in this discourse set 
forth the fulfilment of the prophecies so fully, so explicitly, 
that anyone believing them to be inspired 
could not doubt that Jesus was the Messiah. This led 
to the notable words of Agrippa, "Almost thou persuadest 
me to be a Christian." 

The New Testament revisers evidently considered 
this language ironical, but it does not so seem to us. 
The Apostle's rejoinder seems to contradict that thought, 
"I would that thou wert not only almost but altogether 
such as I am— except these bonds." It is presumed 
upon reasonable grounds that, although Agrippa 
did not become a Christian, this knowledge of the principles 
underlying Christianity remained with him and 
influenced him during the remainder of his life. History 
tells us that in the subsequent persecutions that 
arose in connection with the trouble coming upon the 
Jewish nation Agrippa received and kindly entreated 
the Christians who fled to him for protection. 

How many there are in Christian lands who have 
heard the gospel message more or less distinctly, and 
have been "almost persuaded" to lay hold of the grace 
of God, but neglect opportunities of action and have 
lost the appreciation of the privilege. These, like 
Agrippa, will have comparatively small conception of 
the wonderful things they came so near to grasping and 
yet missed. When they shall come forth from the 
grave and enjoy the great privileges of the Millennial 
Kingdom it will amaze them to know what great opportunities 
they had to become members of the little 
flock, the Lord's associates on the throne. 



page 161 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIV. JUNE 1, 1903. No. 1 1 



CONTENTS. 

The Editor on His European 

Journey 163 

The Royal Priesthood 164 

No Condemnation and No 

Separation 167 

"The Body is Dead" 171 

"Thy Kingdom Come" (Poem) 173 

"God Moves in a Mysterious 

Way" 173 

Public Ministries of the Truth 176 

Special Items: 

Volunteers, Attention! 162 

Zion's Glad Songs 162 

page 162 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



VOLUNTEERS, ATTENTION! 



The new ammunition is now being sent to all who have 
ordered consignments. Larger orders go by freight and 
the smaller ones will reach you by express or mail. Remember 



that we prepay all charges, and that you should 

not pay anything to the railroad or express company delivering. 

Those who have not ordered should write us at 

once. 

ZION'S GLAD SONGS. 



We have this booklet of spiritual songs in large supply 
again, and orders can be filled promptly. While it is not 
expected that the "Songs" shall take the place of the noble 
hymns in the book POEMS AND HYMNS OF DAWN, they 
will be found appropriate for social meetings and praise 
services. The price is 5c each, postpaid; 60c per doz. 

POEMS AND HYMNS OF DAWN. 



This work contains a very choice selection of 160 poems 
and 333 hymns, purged, we trust, from much of the too 
common hymn-book theology. In cloth binding only, 50 
cents. TOWER subscribers supplied at the wholesale rate, 
25 cents. This price now includes postage. 



R3198 :page 163 

THE EDITOR ON HIS EUROPEAN JOURNEY. 

U.S.M.S. "NEW YORK." 

GREETINGS to "the Children of the Morning" 
—of the Dawn— of the Light:— 

On board the Steamship "New York" I am 
nearing Great Britain and the dear brethren there 
whom I know by correspondence and so dearly 
love, and whom I hope soon to greet personally. 
Nevertheless, all the dear readers of the WATCH 
TOWER are before my mental vision, and I take this 
opportunity for sending you a message of love and 
fellowship. It is a source of great pleasure and encouragement 
to me to realize that your love and prayers 
are with me on my journey; and I well know that 
every feature of my experiences will be of interest to 
you. 

Just a week ago (on April 14th) I bade farewell 
to a goodly company of the Church at the railway 
depot in Pittsburg. On the previous Sunday I said 
"Goodbye" to the Church at Allegheny as a whole, 
shaking hands with about 300 personally; but I was 
cheered, nevertheless, by the final parting at the train. 
Next morning I was met at New York depot by representatives 
of the Churches of New York, Brooklyn, 



Yonkers, Jersey City, Perth Amboy and Philadelphia, 

who saw me on board my steamer and tarried until 

the starting of the vessel,— then from the pier waved 

me their love and good wishes as they assured me previously 

that I had their prayers. 

I was not so vain as to accept these love-tokens 
as personal tributes; but received them, on the contrary, 
as expressions of devotion to the Lord and 
appreciation of his truth, with which in his providence 
I had become associated as a servant;— a minister of 
the Lord, a minister of his Word, a minister of his 
people. All may be sure that my heart fully reciprocated 
the kind wishes and blessing accepted from these 
dear friends, who in a still larger sense represented to 
me all of the dear WATCH TOWER readers of America 
who rejoice to send me, with their prayers and love, 
as their representative for a few weeks to those of 
like precious faith in Europe. 

Our steamer has had a quiet voyage, and in many 
ways I have been "kept" by divine providence— so that 
I have had no seasickness since the first two days out, 
and was able to respond to the invitation of our captain 
to assist in conducting the usual Sunday morning 
services of the vessel— including an address of about 
thirty minutes on the Hope that is the anchor to our 
souls, both sure and steadfast.— Heb. 6:19. 

I had no reason to hope that among the passengers 
would be many with "an ear to hear"; nor could 
I expect, in so brief a space, to do more than sound 
one chord on our precious Harp (the Bible). Committing 
results to the Lord, I pointed out the great Covenant 
Promise which our heavenly Father gave to 
Abraham and his seed: that it was, "In thy seed shall 
all the families of the earth be blessed"; that the natural 
seed, Isaac and Jacob and the nation of Israel, 
held fast the promise but never inherited it; that 
the true Seed only began to come in the person 
of the Lord Jesus; that the true Church, the true 
members of the body of Christ, are members of 
this "Seed" and heirs according to that original 
promise which has not yet had its fulfilment, but 
awaits the completion of the Seed— the completion 
of "the Church which is his body." "If ye be 
Christ's then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according 
to the promise."— Gal. 3:29. 

Briefly noting that this is the Christian's hope of 
our text, and that it is still unfulfilled, we saw that it 
is still to be striven for by all who would make their 
calling and election sure; and that in the light of this 

R3198 :page 164 

promise and hope all true Christians should recognize 
present experiences, trials, etc., as so much of their 
education in the school of Christ,— in preparation for 
their work in the coming age— the work of blessing 



the families of earth during the promised Millennial 
Kingdom. 

Only five of the passengers have had either interest 
or curiosity sufficient to lead them to converse 
with me on the subject,— and only two of these with 
earnestness; but if two or even one should ultimately 
develop as a ripe grain of "wheat" how glad and 
thankful we would be. So far as I can ascertain, about 
one-half of the passengers are professing Christians, 
and about two-thirds of these Episcopalians— of whom 
not one has seemed interested. Of the two manifesting 
interest one is a Baptist, the other a Methodist. 
A Baptist minister aboard declared himself an Evolutionist 
and in full sympathy with "higher criticism" 
—denying that the Lord bought us. When pressed 
with Scripture he denied the authority of Paul and the 
other Apostles, and claimed to hold to the life and 
words of Jesus only. When confronted with our Lord's 
own words to the effect that he came to "give his life 
a ransom for many" he avoided further discussion. 

More and more it becomes evident that we are in 
the great trial -day of the Christian faith, and that it is 
not so much a question of Who will fall? as of "Who 
shall be able to stand?" (Rev. 6:17.) The prophet 
declared, "A thousand shall fall at thy side" (Psa. 91:7), 
and so we find it. So far from glorying in the 
evidences that many are falling from the fundamental 

R3199 :page 164 

faith, and that many have already fallen, we are pained. 
Nevertheless, recognizing this as one of the signs of the 
close of the present dispensation, we can rejoice that 
the Millennium of blessing will ere long be ushered 
in;— when dim faith will be swallowed up in the sunlight 
of truth;— when "the knowledge of the Lord shall 
fill the whole earth as the waters cover the great deep;" 
when "the wayfaring man though a fool need not err." 
-Isa. 9:11; 35:8. 

I seal and mail this when near the British shore, 
where (Southampton) Brother Henninges is expected 
to meet me and accompany me to London. Continue to 
remember me in your prayers, that our Father and 
Elder Brother may direct our every word and act to 
his glory and to the profit of our dear brethren on this 
side of the world— of various tongues but of one spirit 
—in as well as outside of Babylon. 

Faithfully, your brother and servant in the Lord, 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL. 



R3199 :page 164 

THE ROYAL PRIESTHOOD. 



"Ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a 
peculiar people; that ye should show forth the praises of him who hath 
called you out of darkness into his marvelous light.. ..Ye have 
tasted that the Lord is gracious, to whom coming as unto a living 
stone, disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of God and precious, 
ye also as living stones are built up a spiritual house, 
an holy priesthood, to offer up sacrifices* acceptable 
to God by Jesus Christ"-- 1 Pet. 2:9,3-5. 

AT no time in the Church's history has our great 
Adversary been so active in multiplying false 
doctrines and in diverting attention from the 
truth by introducing unprofitable and irrelevant questions 
as at present. Just when the exaltation and 
glory of the Church are soon to be accomplished, and 
when the faithful are about to be received into the joy 
of their Lord, every device is resorted to to beguile 
them of their reward and to frustrate this feature of 
the divine plan. To really frustrate any part of the 
divine plan is impossible: God has purposed to take 
out from among men a "little flock," "a people for 
his name," a royal priesthood; and such a company 
is assuredly being gathered; but whether all those now 
in the race for the prize will surely be of that company, 
is still an open question. Take heed, beloved, that 
no man take thy crown. (Rev. 3:11.) If any come 
short of their privileges and prove unworthy of the 
rich inheritance, there are others who will quickly fill 
their places. 

We beseech you, brethren, as you value the glorious 
hope set before you in the gospel, that you give 
no heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of devils, as 
the Apostle terms them (1 Tim. 4:1); but that, with 
fixedness of purpose, you apply yourselves to the one 
thing you are called and are privileged to do as prospective 
members of that Royal Priesthood. Let us 
never forget that we are a "peculiar people," separate 
from the great body of nominal Christians, as well as 
from the world, having higher hopes, aims and ambitions 
and favored with a clearer insight into the deep 
things of God, having been called out of our former 
darkness into his marvelous light. And if thus separate 
from the world and from Christians who partake 
largely of the worldly spirit, what wonder if we find 
them all out of harmony with us, and either ignoring 
or opposing us. 

Such opposition is to be expected and will, doubtless, 
continue until we finish our course in death. To 
submit patiently to this opposition is to sacrifice our 
own natural preferences for the friendship and the pleasures 
of the present life, and to endure hardness as 
good soldiers for the truth's sake, in whatever shape 
that hardness may come, in our effort to do the Lord's 
will and work of advancing the interests of his Kingdom. 



*Sinaitic MS. omits spiritual before sacrifices. 

R3199 :page 165 

This is what is meant by the presenting of our 
bodies living sacrifices in the divine service. To be 
really in this service involves: first, the careful and 
continual study of God's plan; second, the imbibing 
of its spirit; leading, thirdly, to an enthusiastic zeal 
for its accomplishment, and to activity to the extent 
of ability in its service, at whatever cost or sacrifice 
it may require. 

If we are faithful in this service we have no time, 
nor have we the disposition, to give heed either to 
false doctrines or to other themes which have no bearing 
on the one thing to which we have solemnly dedicated 
our lives. Our time is not our own if we have 
consecrated all to God; and consequently, we have 
none to spare for the investigation of fanciful false 
theories, built upon other foundations than that laid 
down in the Scriptures; nor have we time to devote 
to the ideas and pursuits which engross the world's 
attention, many of which are harmless in themselves, 
but would be harmful to us if we were to allow them 
to occupy consecrated time and to divert our attention 
from the one thing we ought to be doing. The Apostle 
warns us "to shun profane babblings, for they will 
increase unto more ungodliness;" but adds, "Study 
to show thyself approved unto God, a workman that 
needeth not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word 
of truth." "Teach no other doctrine: neither give 
heed to fables and endless genealogies, which minister 
questions rather than godly edifying which is in 
faith."-2 Tim. 2:15,16; 1 Tim. 1:3,4. 

Each consecrated believer should ask himself, How 
carefully have I studied that which I have clearly recognized 
as divine truth? and how fully capable am I, therefore, 
of handling the sword of the spirit? Few indeed 
are those who can say they have fully digested 
and assimilated all they have received; that they have 
let none of these things slip from memory; that they 
have so treasured it up in their hearts that it is their 
meditation by day and by night; that they have a 
ready answer— a "Thus saith the Lord"— for every 
man that asks them a reason for the hope that is in 
them, concerning any point of doctrine; that they can 
clearly and intelligently portray the divine plan, quote 
the divine authority for each successive step of it, 
and, if need be, point out its place in the divine system 
of types. To gain such proficiency in the Word 
is indeed the work of a lifetime; but every day should 
see a closer approximation to that proficiency, and 
will, indeed, if we are faithful students and faithful 
servants of the truth. 

If all the consecrated were thus busily engaged 



putting on the armor of God, and in proving it by 

actual use in zealous endeavors to herald the truth 

and to help others to stand, there would indeed be no 

time left for disputings on the Anglo-Israel question, 

or whether the earth is a plane instead of a globe, or 

whether the principles of socialism would be advisable 

among Christians in the management of their temporal 

affairs. Nor would there be time for politics, 

nor even for the good temperance-reform work, nor 

the work among fallen women, nor among the slums 

of the great cities, nor even for preaching the doctrine 

of divine healing. All this is work which can and 

will be effectually accomplished in "the Times of Restitution," 

now in the near future; and, besides, there 

are others interested in these works (and we are glad 

of it and bid them Godspeed), while we recognize and 

seek to accomplish the work set before us in the divine 

plan. And if, indeed, we have no consecrated 

time for these things which are only side issues and 

not harmful in themselves, except as they divert attention 

and consume valuable time which has been 

consecrated to another and higher use, surely there is 

none whatever for giving heed to false doctrines such 

as so-called Christian Science and the various no-ransom 

or Evolution theories, all of which are attempts 

to show men how to climb up to everlasting life by 

some other way than that which the Scriptures point 

out; viz., by faith in the precious blood of Christ 

shed on Calvary for our redemption. He that climbeth 

up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber 

(John 10: 1); and we are commanded to have no 

fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but 

rather to reprove them.— Eph. 5:11. 

How narrow this way! say some, contemptuously, 
of those who, like Paul, devote their energies to the 
one thing— the service of the truth. Yes, that will be 
the verdict against you, of all except the few who, 
like yourself, have carefully sought out this "narrow 
way," and who are determined to walk in it, regardless 
of the reproach it brings. The way to the mark 
for the prize of our high calling is not wide enough to 
admit all the vain philosophies and foolish questions 
and babblings and speculations of science, falsely so 
called. It is only wide enough to admit the Lord's 
plan and those who are willing to discard all other 
plans and projects and questionings and to devote 
themselves fully and entirely to its service, and who 
are quite willing to bear any reproach it may bring. 

Consider your calling, brethren, for ye are a chosen 
generation, a royal priesthood to offer sacrifices 
acceptable to God; a holy nation, a peculiar people, 
that ye should show forth the praises of him who 
hath called you out of darkness into his marvelous 
light. The very object of our being called into this 
light is that we may let it shine. If we do not let it 
shine we are unworthy of it, and the treasure will be 



taken away and we will be left in darkness. If indeed 

R3200 : page 166 

we have received the light and have consecrated 
ourselves fully to God, let us ask ourselves. What am 
I doing to show forth the praises of him who hath 
called me out of darkness? Am I going forth with 
these tidings to my neighbors near and far? Am I 
busy from day to day in seeking to vindicate the divine 
character, and to make known God's righteous 
ways? Am I economizing time and means, and so 
arranging my temporal affairs as to give as much time 
as possible to the work? And, then, am I diligently 
studying to make myself thoroughly familiar with the 
truth, so that I may indeed be a living epistle known 
and read of all men within the circle of my influence? 
—a workman indeed that need not be ashamed? Can 
I truly affirm that I am 

"All for Jesus, all for Jesus- 
All my being's ransomed powers; 
All my thoughts, and words, and doings, 
All my days and all my hours"? 

If so, then we are just narrow-minded enough to 
say, This one thing I do; and I make everything else 
bend to this one thing of showing forth God's praises 
and helping others into his marvelous light. And to 
this end I cultivate and use what talents I possess as a 
wise steward of my heavenly Master. 

Dearly beloved, we impose no vows or bondage 
upon each other, but the call has its own limitations: 
the Master has directed us, saying, "Go ye and teach 
all nations [for the gospel is no longer confined to the 
Jewish nation], baptizing them in the name of the 
Father and of the Son and of the holy spirit, teaching 
them to observe all things"— concerning our (questionable) 
Anglo-Israelitish origin? No.— All things 
concerning the shape of the earth? No.— All the 
vain philosophies of men who have erred from the 
truth, and all the subtle sophistries by which they 
make void the word of God? No.— "Observe all 
things whatsoever I have commanded you."— 
Matt. 28:19,20. 

This is just what the apostles did. There were 
plenty of errors and side issues in their day; but, ignoring 
them, they resolutely devoted themselves to the 
promulgation of the truth. Paul paid no attention to 
his fleshly genealogy, because he recognized himself as 
a new creature in Christ Jesus. It was easier for him 
to prove his fleshly origin as an Israelite than for any 
of us to do it; but he cared nothing for that. He did 
not care whether he was of the ten tribes or of the two 
tribes; for he had on none of the tribal righteousness 
of the Law. His only ambition was to be found "in 
Christ, not having on his own righteousness, which is 
of the Law, but that which is through the faith of 



Christ— the righteousness which is of God by faith." 

(Phil. 3:9.) He says (verses 3-7), "We [new creatures 

in Christ] are the [real] circumcision, which 

worship God in spirit and rejoice in Christ Jesus and 

have no confidence in the flesh [or the fleshly relationships], 

though indeed I have had confidence also 

in the flesh. If any other man thinketh that he hath 

whereof he might trust in the flesh, I had more: Circumcised 

the eighth day, of the stock of Israel, of the 

tribe of Benjamin, an Hebrew of the Hebrews; as 

touching the Law, a Pharisee; concerning zeal, persecuting 

the Church; touching the righteousness 

which is of the Law, blameless. But what things were 

gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ." 

Hear him again in his zeal for this one thing to 
which he had devoted his life: "And I, brethren, 
when I came to you, came not with excellency of 
speech or of wisdom, declaring unto you the mystery of 
God; for I determined not to know anything among 
you save Jesus Christ and him crucified. [I riveted 
your attention on this one thing ! I kept this one 
thing continually before you.] And my speech and 
my preaching were not with enticing words of man's 
wisdom, but in demonstration of the spirit and power 
[of the truth], that your faith should not stand in the 
wisdom of men, but in the power of God."— 
1 Cor. 2:1-5. 

Paul was a plain uncompromising teacher. When 
he knew he had the truth, he spoke it with confidence, 
and boldly declared that everything contrary to it was 
false doctrine; and he taught his disciples that it was 
not only their privilege, but their duty also, to be 
established in the faith and to know, on the evidence 
of God's Word, why they believed, and to be able to 
give to every man that inquired for it a reason for the 
hope that was in them. 

There is among Christians today a great lack of 
established faith on any point of doctrine. They say, 
"I think," "I hope," or "Perhaps it may be so, but 
this is only my opinion, and it may be right or it may 
be wrong. I have charity, however, for your opposing 
opinion, and for every man's opinion; for who 
knows which is right? I'm sure I cannot say; but, 
nevertheless, I have great faith and charity (?). I 
shake hands with every body and call him brother if 
he claims to be a Christian, no matter what he believes 
and teaches, whether he is pointing to Christ as the door 
to the sheepfold, or whether he is trying to teach men 
how to climb up some other way. In Christian love I 
bid them all Godspeed and pray for the success of all 
their teachings, no matter how antagonistic they may 
be to each other or to the Scriptures as I read them." 

All this passes among Christians generally for 
large-hearted benevolence and personal humility, while 
in fact it is an ignoble, compromising spirit that is 
unwilling to forego the friendship of those who oppose 



R3200 : page 167 

the Lord by opposing the truth; and which would 
rather see the truth suffer, and those weak in the faith 
stumbled, than that they should bear the reproach of 
Christ. Those who have real and sincere faith in God 
are willing to take him at his word; and with these 
the first principles of the doctrine should long ago have 
been established; much of the superstructure of gold 
and silver and precious stones should already be erected, 
and the work be steadily progressing. Such are 
able, if they are loyal and true to God, to discern between 
truth and error. The Apostle John, recognizing 
this ability, says, "If there come any unto you and 
bring not this doctrine, receive him not into your 
house, neither bid him Godspeed; for he that biddeth 
him Godspeed is partaker of his evil deeds." (2 John 10.) 
We ought to know what we believe and why we 
believe it, and then should be bold and uncompromising 
in declaring it; for "if the trumpet give an uncertain 
sound who shall prepare himself to the battle?" 

Again says the Apostle (1 Cor. 2:6-10), "However, 
we speak wisdom among them that are perfect 
[developed; we are not to cast our pearls before 
swine]; yet not the wisdom of this world, nor of the 
princes [the popular leaders and teachers] of this 
world, that come to naught. But we speak the wisdom 
of God, which was hidden in a mystery, which 
God ordained before the world unto our glory; which 
none of the princes of this world knew. ...Eye 
hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into 
the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared 
for them that love him. But God hath revealed 
them unto us by his spirit; for the spirit [or mind of 
God in us, is so anxious to know his truth, that 
it] searcheth all things; yea, the deep things of 
God." 

The princes of this world do know something of 
astronomy and geology, and have their ideas of the 
shape of the earth, etc., but they have not known this 
hidden wisdom of the divine plan, which maps out a 
destiny so glorious to the faithful saints who will constitute 
the royalty of the age to come. Let the world 
speculate as it may about its own themes of interest, 
but let us devote ourselves to the one thing in hand, 
avoiding foolish questions and genealogies and contentions, 
...for they are unprofitable and vain. (Titus 3:9.) 
Let us be faithful to our commission to preach 
this gospel to the meek who are ready to hear it. (Isa. 61:1.) 
Let the bride of Christ be diligent in making 
herself ready (Rev. 19:7), for the marriage of the 
Lamb is the event of the very near future. 



R3200 : page 167 

NO CONDEMNATION AND NO SEPARATION. 

--ROM. 8:1-14.-MAY 31.- 

"For as many as are led by the Spirit 
of God, they are the sons of God." 

THE chapter of which this lesson forms a part is 

unquestionably one of the most precious in the 

entire Bible. It begins with the assurance that condemnation 

has passed, and concludes with logical proofs 

of everlasting divine favor toward those who become 

"New Creatures" in Christ Jesus. In the preceding 

chapter the Apostle specially points out condemnation 

and imprisonment upon the whole race of Adam as sinners 

under the divine Law— and especially upon the 

Jew, additionally under the Mosaic Law. He points 

out the utter hopelessness of those who attempt to 

escape the penalty of death by self -justification through 

"works of the Law." After thus showing the bondage 

of all, he points to the door of salvation— the redemption 

in our Lord Jesus: saying, "I thank God, through 

Jesus Christ our Lord." It is to this class, which gets 

the victory through Christ, that there is no condemnation, 

and can be no separation from the divine love and 

favor, so long as they abide in him as the branch in 

the Vine. 

This lesson is well fitted in, as giving us a glimpse 
of the Apostle's spiritual liberty and relationship to 
God at the time of his imprisonment at Caesarea. Once 
he had had his liberty according to the flesh, and in 
his ignorance and blindness had done many things contrary 
to the Lord, not properly appreciating his liberty 

R3201 :page 167 

nor knowing how to use it aright. Now, although a 

prisoner and outwardly restrained, he had gained great 

liberty and blessing, and also freedom from divine condemnation, 

with assurance of hope toward God, not 

only respecting the present life, but also the one to 

come. 

In the first verse the word "therefore" carries us 
back to the preceding argument, and shows us that our 
freedom from present condemnation is the result of our 
Lord's sacrifice on our behalf. (Rom. 7:25.) It is 
because we appreciate the fact that justice provided a 
redemption price for our sins, and because we have 
availed ourselves of the terms offered its beneficiaries, 
that we realize that the condemnation of the divine Law 
no longer holds as against us. In his preceding argument 
the Apostle had clearly shown that the difficulty 
did not lie in the Law itself; that God could not give 
an imperfect or, in any sense, an evil Law. The Law 



was just, perfect and good; the difficulty was in us, 

that through the inheritance of sin and its weaknesses 

we were unable fully to comply with the requirements 

of the divine Law. How, then, do we escape its condemnation? 

R3201 :page 168 

The Apostle answers that we reached the 

present standpoint of release— freedom from condemnation 

—when we came into Christ. Others, out of Christ, 

are still under the condemnation. It is an important 

question, therefore, for each to decide for himself, 

whether or not he has taken the step which alone can 

bring him into this happy condition. The Apostle, in 

a previous chapter (5:1), marks the first step out of 

condemnation and into Christ as being justification, 

which brought peace with God, the covering of the sins 

that were past; but this was not enough, for if all the 

sins that were past were cancelled, and no arrangement 

was made for our daily imperfections of word and deed, 

we would quickly be again condemned. Hence, to those 

who would be entirely freed from condemnation, another 

step was necessary— a step into Christ. These 

two steps should not be confounded; it is one thing to 

get out of responsibility for past sins, and quite another 

step to get into Christ, and under the full covering of 

his merits as respects all the remainder of life. The 

two steps are mentioned in Rom. 5:1,2: faith in the 

redemption brings justification from past sins and peace 

with God; but by it also, as the Apostle explains, we 

have access into this grace (the favor of sonship, membership 

in the body of Christ) wherein we stand, rejoicing 

in hope of the glory of God (because glory and 

honor and immortality are promised to every member 

of the New Creation— every member of the body of 

Christ). 

The last clause of this verse, "who walk not after 
the flesh, but after the spirit," is properly omitted by 
the Revised Version, because not found in ancient 
MSS. The thought, however, is correct enough, and 
these very words are found in the conclusion of verse 4. 
The words do not properly apply in verse 1, for 
that describes those who are in Christ, as members of 
his body, and none are counted as in him except those 
who are walking after the spirit— not after the flesh. 

The Apostle calls our attention (vs. 2) to two laws 
in operation. We were under one of these, which sentenced 
us, as sinners, to death. We got out from under 
that law entirely when we got into Christ Jesus, as members 
of his body. Our Redeemer kept the Law, was 
blameless; then gave his blameless life as a redemption 
price to purchase us who had been the slaves of sin and 
death from that slavery. We were redeemed by his 
precious blood. As he was raised to a new nature by 
the Father's power, we now are invited to become associates 
with him in that new nature— to be counted in 



as members of his body, under him as the Head. The 
whole transaction is one of faith; faith first in his sacrifice, 
and God's acceptance of it, and our justification 
thereby. Secondly, faith in our call to membership in 
his body; faith that our consecration in response to 
that call made us acceptable with the Father and recorded 
our names in the Lamb's book of life as children 
of God upon this new plane. All who can realize 
that they have taken these two steps may, therefore, 
realize that from God's standpoint they are no longer 
thought of nor treated as members of the human family, 
but as members of the new order— members of the 
body of Christ. 

Hence, they may realize themselves as entirely 
freed from the condemnation that was against them as 
human beings, and as having come under a new law, 
a new arrangement, which in Christ guarantees them 
life everlasting. The new law judges us as new creatures 
in Christ, according to the spirit, the mind, the 
intention, in righteousness, and not as human beings, 
according to the flesh and its weaknesses and 
imperfections. 

The Law of God,— strict justice without mercy,— 
represented in the Mosaic Law and its covenant, could 
not help the weak, fallen race, because the easiest requirement 
it could make would be perfection toward God 
and toward men, and our race being fallen was unable to 
comply with its demands. It was, therefore, "weak" 
(powerless) for our deliverance, because we were weak 
on account of the imperfect, fallen flesh. But God, 
through Christ, made an arrangement for us which does 
not violate his own Law— sending his Son to accomplish 
our redemption— the payment of our penalty. 
God's Son was not sent in sinful flesh, but "in the 
likeness," or nature of our flesh, which had become 
sinful,— he, the while, being holy, harmless, separate 
from sinners. The object of his coming in our likeness 
is set forth; viz., as an offering for sin— a sin-offering 
and atonement-sacrifice on our behalf. 

This course in no sense of the word justified sin- 
in no degree made sin right, or declared it proper. On 
the contrary, the very means which God adopted for 
our relief, at the same time "condemned sin in the 
flesh." Thus at the same time that the door of salvation 
was opened to us we were most emphatically 
assured that there was no hope in any other 
direction. 

Notwithstanding the great clearness and explicitness 
with which this doctrine of the necessity for a sacrifice 
for sins is set forth in the Scriptures,— in the Old 
Testament as well as in the New— it seems remarkable 
that some still stumble over it. There is no avoiding 
the conviction that there is something wrong with their 
hearts, else their heads would not thus become confused 
respecting a matter which is so explicitly set forth 
in the Word. The Apostle points out that it was so 



with the Jews as a nation. They stumbled over the 

cross of Christ;— they then admitted and still acknowledge 

that Jesus was a great Teacher. Rabbis all over 

R3201 :page 169 

the world today are claiming Jesus as a great Jew, 
whose teachings have blessed the world in great measure. 
Their dispute is with the cross of Christ,— that 
they were sinners who have no way of escape except 
through an atonement on their behalf, and that Christ's 
death constituted the sin-offering, through faith in 
which alone any may become acceptable to God— justified. 
The same objection exists in the heart of the natural 
man who is not a Jew. He prefers to climb up 
some other way, rather than to go through the door; 
he would use the teachings of Jesus as a ladder to get 
into the sheepfold; but declines to enter through him 
as a door, and to acknowledge himself condemned of 
God and irretrievably lost, except as the great sacrifice 
for sins and the merit of the Redeemer are applied on 
his behalf. Nevertheless, those who refuse God's way 
will find that it is unalterable, and that "there is none 
other name given under heaven or amongst men whereby 
we must be saved." Those who will not enter by 
this door, those who will not accept the forgiveness of 
their sins through the merit of Christ's sacrifice, cannot 
have the divine favor, cannot be considered members of 
the body of Christ nor heirs with him— they are not in 
Christ Jesus— they are yet in their sins, because they 
believe not God's testimony. Some are now in this 
attitude who were once in the light of truth on this 
subject; who once had on the wedding garment, but 
took it off— rejected the robe of Christ's righteousness, 
and are attempting to stand before God in their own 
righteousness, merely accepting Jesus as a Teacher and 
not as a Redeemer. We consider the condition of such 
to be most dangerous. We cannot feel sure that they 
will ever have an opportunity to accept again the merit 
of the precious blood which they once enjoyed and 
spurned, "counting the blood of the covenant [the 
death of Jesus] wherewith they were [once] sanctified 
an unholy [common] thing," thus doing despite unto 
the spirit of grace— despising, disdaining, repudiating 
the favor of divine forgiveness through the blood. So 
rejecting the Redeemer, they take their cases out of the 
hands of the Mediator of the New Covenant. Thus 
they fall at once into the hands of the living God, and 
are subject to the full requirements of the absolute Law 
without mercy— because all of God's mercy extended 
to sinners is in and through him who loved us and 
bought us with his own precious blood. We do not say 
that all who reject the blood of the covenant do so thus 
to their everlasting loss, but are glad to believe, on the 
contrary, that many of them have been so blinded by 
the god of this world that they have never seen clearly 



and, hence, never rejected entirely the blood-bought 
robe of righteousness. For all such we shall expect 
that the light of the new dispensation will show them 
the divine plan clearly, and we shall trust that many 
of them will be ready humbly to accept God's grace 
upon his own terms. 

The Apostle points out (vs. 4) that this Law of the 
spirit of life in which we as new creatures in Christ rejoice 
is really the same Law that once condemned us— 
that the change from condemnation to death to justification 
to life signifies no change in the Law, but a 
change in our position. It is a law of life to us, because, 
by God's grace through Christ, we have come into a 
place where we are able to comply with the requirements 
of the Law and to fulfill them. It is not our flesh 
that has been changed, so that it is perfect and able to 
obey the Law, but that as New Creatures the flesh is 
reckoned dead, and we are reckoned according to the 
spirit or mind; and with our minds, or spirits, or wills, 
we are able to keep God's Law perfectly— that is to say, 
we can will to do right, we can endeavor to do right, 
we can strive to please God, and so long as God accepts 

R3202 : page 169 

the will, the intention, the endeavor, and ignores 

our flesh and its uncontrollable weaknesses, that long 

we can realize that the divine Law approves us; and 

that will be just so long as we abide in our present position 

as members of the body of Christ, and we are privileged 

to remain members of the body of Christ just so 

long as our desires are for righteousness and in opposition 

to sin. The New Creature does not love sin, but, 

instead, loves righteousness, the very reverse. If the 

will, the heart, should turn again, so as to love unrighteousness, 

so as to desire to do the things that are 

contrary to the Lord's will, it would mean that we had 

died as New Creatures, and become alive again as fleshly 

creatures, to mind the things of the flesh, to have its 

hopes, its aims and its objects. In that case we should 

come again under the law of sin and death, and be 

judged again according to the flesh, the sentence, as 

before, being, "The wages of sin is death." Moreover, 

such a turning, as a sow to wallowing in the mire, and 

as a dog to his vomit, would, in the case of those who 

have become New Creatures in Christ and so passed 

out of Adamic death, mean the Second Death— the result 

of their own wilful rejection of God's favor through 

Christ, which they spurn after having once enjoyed. 

It will be seen, then, that there are two ways of rejecting 

God's grace; one by turning to sin (not merely 

by being overcome of the weaknesses of the flesh temporarily, 

but by a deliberate choosing of sin, and intentional 

abandonment of righteousness); the other by a 

mental rejection of the conditions of favor— a mental 

repudiation of the blood of the New Covenant. These 



two forms of committing the sin unto death— unto Second 
Death— are clearly set before us by the Apostle in 
Heb. 6:4-6; 10:26-31. 

There is force, then, in the Apostle's explicit definition 
of the class justified under the Law of the spirit 

R3202 : page 170 

of life— that it is those who are in Christ, and who walk 
not after the flesh, but after the spirit— who are not 
seeking to satisfy the cravings, appetites and desires of 
the flesh, but are seeking to control these, and to keep 
them in subjection to the new mind, to their utmost 
ability. Walking after the spirit does not necessarily 
mean walking up to the spirit. Only the Lord Jesus 
could walk up to the spirit of the perfect Law of God; 
but all the members of his body, all who are in Christ 
Jesus, may walk after the spirit— as nearly up to it as 
may be possible for them to do. Such a walk is acceptable 
to God, in the case of all those who are abiding 
in Christ, through faith in his blood. If, by reason 
of weaknesses of the flesh, through an unfavorable 
heredity, they be very degraded and weak, and able 
merely to hobble along with difficulty and slowness 
after the spirit, they are nevertheless counted as though 
they walked up to the spirit perfectly. In other words, 
God's arrangement for accepting the will, the intention, 
of the members of the body of Christ, instead of their 
actual performances, meets every requirement, and justifies 
freely, fully, completely, all who are in Christ— 
not one of whom could have been justified by the Law 
under the Jewish covenant or otherwise. 

The Apostle answers a supposed question as to how 
we may know those who are New Creatures in Christ 
and walking after the spirit, from others. This 
is a difficult question. There are some not in Christ 
whose flesh is much less depraved than that of some 
who are in Christ; hence, if they were measured by 
the deeds of the flesh, the one in Christ might appear 
to less advantage than the one out of Christ. The 
Lord, therefore, exhorts his people to judge not by outward 
appearance merely, assuring them that some are 
hypocritical, and that God looketh on the heart, the 
intention. So again the Apostle enjoins us, saying, 
"Henceforth know we no man after the flesh." He 
did not mean that we should pay no attention to the 
shortcomings of the flesh, either in ourselves or in other 
members of the body. All fleshly weaknesses should 
be striven against, and they may frequently demand 
rigorous treatment in the interest of the New Creature; 
but, nevertheless, we are to distinctly differentiate between 
the New Creature and his weak mortal body, 
and are to love and sympathize with the brother, while 
it may be necessary for us, in his interest, and also in 
the interest of the Church, to reprove or rebuke or 
otherwise correct his wrong course. The Apostle's definition 



of how we are to know the two classes apart is 

(vs. 5) that the unregenerate will mind the things of 

the flesh, while the regenerate will mind the things of 

the spirit. There is a great gulf fixed between these 

two classes, and there should be no need that any one 

should long be in doubt on the subject of whether he 

is or is not a member of the Church, the body of Christ. 

If he is in Christ he has the new ambitions, the new 

hopes, the new aims, and however short he may at 

times come of realizing these aims and ambitions, his 

heart being right it will always revert to the divine 

standard. His affections are for the things that are 

just and pure and good, however he may find the law 

of sin and death assailing him, through the weaknesses 

of his mortal body. He is not to be content with 

merely this condition of mental preference for the right 

and having his heart solicitous for righteousness, experiencing 

grief if he finds himself overcome by temptation; 

but, as the Apostle elsewhere enjoins, he is to 

be so deeply in earnest about the matter that he will 

not only do his best to right every wrong, but will continue 

seeking for grace at the heavenly throne, that he 

may be more and more able to overcome, that he may 

grow stronger and stronger in spirit, and that the power 

of his flesh may be correspondingly weakened. The 

Apostle exhorts such to make straight paths for their 

feet, for their weaknesses, for their lameness, according 

to the flesh— to avoid the ways of temptation and weakness 

as they discover them, and thus show their hearts' 

desires for righteousness. He urges again that all keep 

continually setting their affections on things above, so 

that the things of the earth may have less and less influence 

and control over them to hinder them in their 

course. He urges that the heart, the mind, the lips, 

the conduct, that are filled with the Lord's truth and 

service, will be thus sanctified and separated so that the 

Wicked One will find less and less opportunity to take 

the advantage. 

The matter is set forth in still different terms in vss. 6,7. 
We are to distinguish the mind of the flesh from 
the mind that is in accord with God, for the one is at 
enmity with God and the other in harmony with him. 
The mind that is in harmony with God finds delight 
in his Law, in righteousness, purity, goodness, peace, 
faith, through the promises of God, and looks forward 
with joy to the glorious realization of all the wonderful 
hopes inspired through those promises. The fleshly 
mind (however polite or polished or well educated and 
decorous and under control of the mortal body) is not in 
accord with God; it has its own ambitions, its own 
plans, and takes pleasure in these, and is grieved if 
they are thwarted; builds its hopes and aims chiefly 
upon what can be attained in this present life; is not 
in accord with God, nor disposed to accept with gratitude 
whatever he may be pleased to send; but rather 
is full of choice and self-will— not subject to divine 



control, nor can it be, because it is fleshly, and because, 
at the present time, all mankind is in a state of sin, 
alienation from God, etc. These two conditions of 
mind are contrasted, and the Apostle assures us that 

R3202:page 171 

the one is death; that it means death; means that the 
person who has that mind is still in the death condition, 
has not received Christ as the Life-giver. "He 
that hath the Son hath life," and may have, too, a 
joy and peace of the new mind in Christ; but he who 
has not the Son, he who has not surrendered his will, 
is still in death, still under condemnation, still an 
alien from God. 

This does not mean that those whom we are unable 
to bring now under the scope of the gospel of Christ 
may never become amenable to it. It does not mean, 
either, that the flesh itself is opposed to God, and 
God opposed to the flesh. The word "flesh" here 
is used in the sense of sinful flesh, because all mankind, 
through the fall, has become sinful. Originally, 
however, as represented in Father Adam before the 
fall, the flesh was pronounced very good, and God's 
own workmanship, in his own image, was not opposed 
to the Law of God, but in full accord with it. The 
divine Law was written in the very organism of our 
first parents; the difficulty is that through the fall this 
divine Law has been very considerably obliterated, and 
instead the law of selfishness— which includes all evil 
—has been engraven upon the hearts of their posterity. 
Hence the proposition of the Lord for the world is that 
he will restore all mankind to that primeval condition, 
for which times of restitution have been provided and 
promised by the mouth of all the holy prophets. (Acts 3:19-21.) 
It is in full accord with this that the Lord, 
speaking of the operation of the New Covenant, declares 
that under it (Christ being the minister of that New 
Covenant and its administrator during the time of its 
operation) he will take away the stony heart of selfishness, 
and will make a new heart of flesh, tender, sympathetic, 
generous, God-like. In other words, he will 
re-write in the organism of mankind, by the processes 
of the Millennial age,— the times of restitution,— all 
the original character and God-likeness and law which 
he possessed as originally created. When perfection 
shall have thus been accomplished for so many as will 
receive the Lord's favor on his terms of love and 
hearty obedience, it will no longer be true that the 
mind of the flesh will be at enmity with God, as it 
was not true originally, when Adam was in accord with 
God. 

To understand the Apostle it must be kept clearly 
in mind that he is writing these words, not to the world 
nor about the world, but to the saints and about the 
saints. He is describing the condition of those who 



have passed from death unto life, who have become 
New Creatures, contrasting them with the world, still 

R3203 :page 171 

in sin and divine disfavor. They that are in the flesh, 
living according to their own wills, who have not heard, 
or, hearing, have not accepted God's grace in Christ, 
cannot please God, cannot be said to be acquitted, cannot 
be considered as under divine favor. 

Turning to the Church, the Apostle points out, 
"Ye are not in the flesh, but in the spirit, if so be that 
the spirit of God dwelleth in you." The Apostle here 
indicates what it is that constitutes us New Creatures. 
We are New Creatures because begotten again; because 
begotten of the spirit of God. We were not thus begotten 
until first we had been justified by faith in the 
blood of Christ, and then had heard the invitation to 
present our bodies living sacrifices, and then had complied 
with that invitation and consecrated our all 
upon the Lord's altar. Then we received the spirit of 
God; then we were recognized as New Creatures in 
Christ— as no longer flesh beings, but as spirit beings. 

Here, then, is the test. Those who have the spirit 
of Christ must have been begotten to it; those who 
have not the spirit of Christ are not his. Thus we are 
to judge ourselves, and thus we are to judge of the 
brethren— by the spirit, the intention, the will, and not 
by the success, not by the flesh. Oh, how generous 
this would make us in our judging of the brethren! 
If they profess and give any evidence of loving the 
Lord, trusting in the precious blood, loving holy things, 
loving the brethren, loving the word of grace and truth, 
and of seeking to develop the fruits of the spirit, they 
are surely brethren, surely "in Christ." If they have 
not this spirit, love the world, prefer worldly company, 
give themselves wholly to worldly ambitions, pride of 
life and self-gratification, we have strong reason to 
doubt their relationship to the Lord, no matter what 
they may profess. And this feature of the matter 
should be especially applied by each one of us to himself, 
as an individual test of his relationship to the 
Lord, and each one who finds the spirit of worldliness 
growing upon him should feel that he is losing ground, 
should seek afresh to set his affection on things above 
and to grow in grace. 

"THE BODY IS DEAD." 

The Apostle explains that in the case of these New 
Creatures in Christ, from the divine standpoint the 
body is treated as dead, but the spirit, or mind, is 
treated as alive. It is the New Creature which God recognizes, 
to which he purposes to give a new spirit-body 
in due time— in the first resurrection. It is necessary 
that this thought be clearly fixed in our minds, in order 



that we may continually realize our peace toward God 

and his favor and sympathy toward us in Christ. If 

we lose sight of the fact that God regards us from the 

standpoint of the will, if we get to thinking of ourselves 

and God's estimate of us as according to the flesh, we 

are sure to get proportionately into darkness and confusion 

and discouragement. But let us not forget, on 

the other hand, that the spirit, or will, is counted alive 

R3203 : page 172 

because of its righteousness, because it is in harmony 

with God. Let us, therefore, never be slack in respect 

to the will, or intention, governing the conduct of our 

lives, but remember that any laxity will mean the proportionate 

loss of spiritual life. To will right is always 

possible to us, and nothing less than an absolutely 

loyal will could be acceptable to God in Christ. 

However, as the Apostle explains in vs. 11, if God's 
spirit animates us, the result will surely be that these 
bodies which we reckon dead, and which God graciously 
reckons dead, will be so quickened, so energized, 
so controlled by the new mind, the holy mind, 
the spirit of our new nature, that they will become actively 
"quickened"— toward righteousness, toward the 
service of the Lord, the service of the truth— in doing 
good unto all men as we have opportunity, especially 
to the household of faith. This is only what we should 
expect, too, for the spirit of God is powerful in whatever 
way it be applied. As an illustration of its power, 
the Apostle points us to our Lord Jesus and his literal 
death, and how God's holy spirit raised Jesus from the 
dead in his resurrection. The thought is that this 
power of God thus exercised on behalf of the Lord 
Jesus, and which he promises so to exercise in the 
close of this age on behalf of all the faithful members of 
the body of Christ, indicates a power of God by which, 
if we avail ourselves of it, the new nature will find 
strength to conquer, to keep the flesh under, and, more 
than this, to make it active, energetic in the service of 
righteousness. The Apostle is not here speaking of 
the future resurrection of the just— the completion of 
the first resurrection as spirit beings. He is speaking 
of the figurative resurrection, which the Lord's consecrated 
people experience in this present time. As he 
elsewhere expresses it, "If ye then be risen with Christ, 
seek those things which are above;" and again, "You 
hath he quickened [made alive, resurrected figuratively] 
who were dead in trespasses and sins, ...and 
hath raised us up together, and made us to sit together in 
heavenly places in Christ Jesus."— Col. 3:1; Eph. 2:1,6. 

The sum of the matter, then, is that we who are 
New Creatures find that we do not owe anything as 
New Creatures to the flesh; that all of our advantages 
and blessings have come to us along other lines. We 
ought, therefore, to ignore the flesh and its desires and 



appetites, and ought to walk as strictly after the spirit 

as possible in all of our affairs. Do we ask why? One 

answer is here given (vs. 13), "If ye live after the 

flesh ye shall die." We who have received the grace 

of God, who have heard of his mercy and love, and 

have been accepted in the Beloved, have counted all 

our earthly interests as sacrifices, that we might have 

share with Christ in the sufferings of this present time 

and in the glory that shall follow. For us to live after 

the flesh would mean to die in the most absolute sense 

—the Second Death— because we have had the full benefit 

of the ransom already imputed to us. There is 

hope for the world, which knows, as yet, comparatively 

little or nothing of the grace of God, which has not 

tasted, has not seen, etc.— there is hope for the members 

of this class that under the Kingdom rule they will be 

caused to see clearly, and may then respond obediently 

to the divine arrangement; but if we sin wilfully after 

that we have received a knowledge of the truth, there 

remaineth no more sacrifice for sins for us— therefore, 

there would remain no future hope for us. But, on the 

other hand, let us hope that few of those who have 

accepted the grace of God are disposed to draw back 

unto perdition; but are rather disposed to go on and to 

secure the end of their faith,— glory, honor and immortality, 

joint heirship in the Kingdom. To us who are 

thus minded the Apostle's words are encouraging, when 

he says, "If ye, through the spirit, do mortify the 

deeds of the body, ye shall live." The condition upon 

which we may continue our relationship to the Lord, 

and our hope for a share in the glories of the first resurrection 

are thus definitely stated to include mortification 

of the deeds of the body— restraining the fleshly 

inclinations, putting them to death, crucifying them, 

using them up in the service of the Lord and his cause. 

Such mortification of the deeds of the body, such a battle 

against the weaknesses of the flesh, is what the 

Apostle elsewhere speaks of as the "warfare," when he 

tells us that the flesh warreth against the spirit, and 

the spirit in turn warreth against the flesh, for the two 

are contrary, and will be opponents to the end of life; 

and if the spirit has been willing, and has fought to the 

best of its ability against the weaknesses of the flesh, 

the Lord will count the victory complete, through the 

merit of the Redeemer. 

We are not to think of this as being the warfare 
of a fleshly will against a spiritual will, nor the battling 
of the old nature against the new nature. These 
are erroneous conceptions, not in accord with the Scriptural 
delineations. We cannot have two wills and yet 
be in Christ. We cannot serve two masters. The matter 
must be decided— it must be settled before we are 
accepted to membership in the body of Christ. Hence 
it is, that a full consecration of all that we have and 
are is necessary to membership in Christ. Henceforth 
there is only the one will, the will of Christ. As for the 



will of the flesh, we do not own it to be ours; we ignore 
it, we oppose it— we are the New Creatures; the will 
of the flesh and, in general, the flesh, are contrary, and 
thus reckoned by the Lord as well as by us as dead; 
we must keep the body under— keep it dead; we must 
not allow a fleshly will to assert itself in us. This 
does not mean that we can hinder a fleshly desire, but 

R3203 : page 173 

there is a vast difference between a desire and a will. 

Our flesh may desire various things which we believe 

the will of God would oppose, but our wills will not consent. 

Even though through weakness of the flesh an 

error might have been committed, the will could not 

have consented so long as it was loyal to the Lord. The 

new will may have fallen temporarily into a stupor 

and so have come under the power of the flesh for a 

time, but as surely as it was the new will it never consented 

to sin and never approved of it. 

This, then, is the guide by which we may know 
our true position, not only at the beginning of the race, 
but to the end of it; viz., if we are led by the spirit of 
God— if that is the direction in which we are following, 
if that is what we are seeking— then we are sons of God; 
he owns and accepts all who have come unto him 
through Christ, and who are trusting in the merit of the 
wedding garment, and who continue in this attitude of 
heart. These will continue to be owned of the Lord as 
sons to the end of the present journey, to the end of the 
present time of sacrifice; and beyond he will own them 
as his sons in the first resurrection, giving them the 
suitable spirit bodies he has promised them.— Rom. 8:14; 
2 Tim. 2:11,12; 1 John 3:2. 



R3204 : page 173 

"THY KINGDOM COME!" 

"For as the earth bringeth forth the bud, and as the garden causeth 
the things that are sown in it to spring forth; so the Lord God will 
cause righteousness and praise to spring forth 
before all the nations."— Isa. 61:11. 

Thy Kingdom come! Give ear, O King of ages! 

This earnest prayer is knocking at thy door; 
The Church of God with one accord engages 

In hopeful pleading till the night is o'er. 

Thy Kingdom come! We wait the promised glory 

That, like the sea, embraces every shore. 
We wait the time proclaimed in psalm and story, 

When strife shall cease and nations war no more. 



Thy Kingdom come, and bring its feast of gladness 
To groaning creatures wasted by despair; 

To dry all faces with the breath of gladness, 

And soothe our sorrows with thy love and care. 

Thy Kingdom come! To darkened minds revealing 
The blissful springs of gratitude and praise. 

Come, Sun of righteousness, with beams of healing; 
Dispense thy light in universal rays. 

Thy Kingdom come! O, haste the Bride's appearing; 

Let every soul her wand of healing feel,— 
While all the ransomed of the Lord, revering, 

Adore Jehovah, and in homage kneel. — G.M. Bills. 



R3204 : page 173 

"GOD MOVES IN A MYSTERIOUS WAY." 

-ACTS 27:33-44. -JUNE 1 .- 

"Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, and he 
delivered them out of their distresses."— Psa. 107:6. 

NOT long after Paul's discourse before Festus and 

Agrippa, opportunity offered for sending him 

a prisoner to Rome, in accordance with his 

own appeal. He was not sent alone, but in company 

with other prisoners and under a strong guard. The journey 

from Caesarea to Rome was by water on merchant 

vessels, and was probably in the fall of the year, when 

the storms on the Mediterranean are frequently very 

severe, sometimes lasting for several days, as in the 

case mentioned in this lesson. The storm lasted for 

fourteen days, and was evidently unusually severe. 

The dangerous season for navigation was reckoned from 

September 14 to November 14, at which time all navigation 

in the open sea was suspended for the winter. 

It is presumed that this storm occurred about September 

25. 

Doubtless, were we able to look at affairs from 
God's standpoint, as we will be able to view them by 
and by, we should see more reason than we now are 
able to discern why the Apostle's journey to Rome 
should have been attended with such trying experiences, 
mental and physical, as were incidental to the 
shipwreck, wintering on the island of Malta, etc. Possibly 
the Apostle's faith was being tried; possibly it 
was being rooted and grounded by these experiences. 
The Lord had distinctly informed him in a vision that 
he should go to Rome as his ambassador. He was now 
on the way, and on several occasions matters looked 
serious; it seemed as though he would never see the 
capital of the world; never have the privilege of presenting 



the truth to the brethren residing there, to 
whom he had already sent the Epistle to the Romans; 
never have the opportunity of laboring in their midst, 
as he had hoped and promised to do. 

When in port at Crete a conference was held 
respecting the wisdom of wintering there or of going 
on, and the Apostle gave his opinion that it would 
be unsafe to go on. This may have been the result 
of some inspiration, but quite possibly was merely 
the result of his own judgment of the weather, etc. 
He had already had large experience in seeing disasters, 
as we are informed in one of his epistles written previous 
to this time: "Thrice I suffered shipwreck, 
a night and a day I have been in the deep." (2 Cor. 1 1:25.) 
Besides, his trade as a sail-maker would 
naturally bring him in contact with sailors, and interest 
him in all matters pertaining to the craft. Those 
in command, however, decided to proceed on the journey, 
and encountered the disastrous storm of our lesson. 
During those fourteen days the Apostle had 

R3204 : page 174 

abundant opportunity to fear and doubt and question 
the Lord's providences, and apparently it was not until 
the night of the thirteenth day of the storm that the 
Lord sent an angel to the Apostle, with the consoling 
message that he should not fear— "Fear not, Paul; 
thou must be brought before Caesar; and lo, God hath 
given thee all them that sail with thee." (Vs. 24.) 
We may safely assume that the Apostle, during these 
testing days, remained heartily loyal in faith toward 
God, and that this message at the close was in the nature 
of an encouragement and an expression of 
approval. 

We may draw a good lesson from this incident, not 
only in respect to our own affairs in life,— that the Lord 
may lead in mysterious ways regarding our temporal 
matters and our service for him and his cause;— but 
we may additionally apply the lesson in a general way 
to all spiritual testings and trials. The Lord gives us, 
for instance, assurances of his love and care, and of the 
ultimate outcome of the narrow way to all who faithfully 
follow in the steps of Jesus; but meantime he 
may permit trials and difficulties of various kinds to 
come as storms upon us, threatening our very destruction, 
threatening the overwhelming of our spiritual 
life, darkening the sky of our hopes with the thunderclouds 
of our enemies' threats and Satan's roarings. 
Our duty is to let the eye of faith be undimmed by 
these various terrible conditions,— to let our hearts be 
firmly fixed upon him who has promised, and who is 
able also to perform. Thus, 

"When the storms of life are raging, 
Tempests wild on sea and land, 



I will seek a place of refuge 
In the shadow of God's hand. 

"Enemies may strive to injure, 

Satan all his arts employ; 
God will turn what seems to harm me 

Into everlasting joy." 

The expression, "God hath given thee all them 
that sail with thee," is very meaningful. It reminds 
us of Abraham's prayer for Sodom— peradventure there 
were even five righteous persons, God agreed to save the 
city. There is no suggestion in these words of the 
"fatherhood of God, and brotherhood of men," as that 
false teaching is now advocated by many who have a 
noble impulse. The thought, on the contrary, is that 
there was only one man on that ship who was in personal 
relationship to God. The others, whatever their 
natural traits of character, had never come into personal 
relationship with the Father. Another thought from 
the words is that the divine care going with the 
saints may prove a great blessing to their companions, 
even though, as in this case, they be worldly and unregenerate. 
This thought is particularly applicable in 
the earthly families of God's people. The believing 
consecrated father or mother is the direct subject of 
divine care; for of the angels it is written, "They are 
ministering spirits, sent forth to minister unto those 
who shall be heirs of salvation," and, in ministering 
to these, very frequently (indeed, we may suppose generally) 
those of their families who have not come into 
full relationship with the Lord are to some extent included 
under the protecting care. Elsewhere the Apostle 
points out that in some respects the believing wife 
has a blessed influence over her husband; or the believing 
husband a favorable influence over the wife 
in regard to the children, else the children would be 
accounted unholy. (1 Cor. 7:14.) This is another 
illustration of the same general lesson that divine care, 
though specially for the saints, includes all of their 
interests of every kind. This does not necessarily imply 
earthly prosperity, wealth, preservation from accident, 
shipwreck, etc., as in Paul's case, and yet it does 
always mean, in some sense and in some degree, an 
advantage. Let us take from this thought all the comfort 
we can. All things shall work together for good 
to the Lord's saints, and those who are nearest and 
dearest to them will surely be participants to some extent 
in their interest and in the divine care. 

Promptly after receiving the assurances of the 
safety of all on board, the Apostle made the matter 
known to the ship's company, and manifested his own 
faith in the message by cheerfulness and breaking of 
his fast, and advising all the others to do likewise. 
His spirit was contagious; they were all cheered, and 
doubtless they were all impressed not only by the fact 



to which the Apostle called their attention— namely, 
that this disaster had come upon them by their failing 

R3205 : page 174 

to follow his advice— but also by the evidence of God's 

special favor toward him in connection with the knowledge 

of their ultimate rescue. So it should be with us: 

whatever we know that is good or comforting or refreshing 

to ourselves, we should dispense to others. 

Had the Apostle kept this good news to himself, it 

would have implied one of two things; either that he 

did not have faith in its fulfilment, or that he was selfish; 

but having the Lord's spirit of generosity, as well 

as large trust in the Lord, he did not hesitate to make 

known the coming deliverance; and he glorified God 

in that he did not claim to have this knowledge of himself, 

but credited it to a revelation. Evidently the 

prisoner had produced a deep impression upon many 

of the soldiers and sailors. Who can say that at some 

future time the Apostle's brave and noble conduct may 

not have influenced some of his two hundred and seventy-six 

companions— possibly eventually drawing some 

of them to the Lord? So it should be with each of us; 

we should be prompt to tell to others the best tidings 

we have; sympathy with the groaning creation in the 

R3205 : page 175 

various trials of life should lead us to point to the 
Lord's promises respecting the coming Kingdom and 
the blessings that should then be to all the families of 
the earth. Whoever does not thus proclaim daily, on 
every suitable opportunity, gives evidence either of lack 
of knowledge or of faith in the revelation or of selfishness, 
which the Lord can not approve, and which, persisted 
in, will ultimately debar him from a share in the 
Kingdom. 

Another thought properly connected with this lesson 
is the absence of any suggestion of a revival service being 
held on board the boat. Neither Paul nor Luke nor Aristarchus 
are reported to have made the slightest effort, 
except as their lives were living epistles. It is barely 
possible that religious services may not have been permitted 
on the vessel; but, anyway, we know from the 
Apostle's general course of conduct, that he did his 
fishing for men amongst rather different classes. As 
we understand the matter, the seamen of that day were 
of a coarse and ignorant class. We cannot doubt that 
the Apostle would have been glad indeed to have served 
any of his companions had he found in them the hearing 
ear— according to the Master's words, "He that 
hath an ear to hear, let him hear." That the sailors 
were not in a condition to receive or appreciate the gospel 
is evident from the lesson; because they were 
selfishly intent upon using the only small boat available 



for their escape, and premeditated leaving the soldiers 
and the prisoners on the vessel. We mark the spirit of 
selfishness as totally unbecoming in anyone begotten of 
the spirit of God, and contrast it with the spirit of the 
Apostle, as generous, loving, considerate of others. A 
similar test shows us that the soldiers in general were 
not of a class likely to have a hearing ear, because, 
when perceiving that the vessel would go to pieces, and 
that thus some prisoners might escape, they counselled 
their destruction. "The liberal heart deviseth liberal 
things," and all of the Lord's consecrated people should 
not only have the noble impulses coming to them because 
they are the Lord's and because they have tasted 
of his grace, and been made partakers of his spirit, but, 
additionally, they should see to it that this spirit prevails 
in them; that it is manifest in all the affairs of 
life. They should see to it that they do not crush out 
the noble impulses which would properly come to them; 
that, on the contrary, they foster them and encourage 
them and develop them more and more. Thus we 
grow in grace as we grow in knowledge, by obedience 
to the things which we learn. 

The centurion alone seems to have profited by the 
experiences. He alone seems to have read the Apostle's 
living epistle to any advantage, and upon him it did 
make an impression, for while he would not have objected 
so much to the killing of the other prisoners, 
who probably were seditious characters and worthy of 
death, he saw no way to make an exception of Paul, 
and for Paul's sake, therefore, all the prisoners' lives 
were spared. 

Notwithstanding the Apostle's assurance of the 
Lord that the lives of the entire ship's company were 
given him, that all would be saved, he realized the propriety 
of using all proper diligence in cooperation with 
the promise. Hence, when he discerned the evident 
intention of the sailors to escape in the small boat, 
leaving the passengers, unable to guide the vessel, at 
the mercy of the sea, he communicated the facts to the 
centurion, pointing out the necessity of compliance with 
reasonable precautions to insure the fulfilment of the 
divine promise. So we all should understand that we 
have something to do in realizing the gracious promises 
of God to us. In connection with the affairs of this 
present life he has promised that our bread and water 
shall be sure, but this does not imply that we shall 
neglect reasonable opportunities for securing these. He 
has promised us also a share in the Kingdom by and 
by; but it is for us to make our calling and our election 
sure. God is thoroughly capable and thoroughly 
willing to perform all of his part in connection with 
every matter, but it is to our advantage that he calls 
upon us to show our faith by our works— by our cooperation 
with him in all reasonable ways. He does not 
expect us to perform miracles; but he does expect us to 
do what we are able to do both in respect to present 



things and eternal matters. By and by the Apostle's predictions 

were fulfilled, and the entire ship's company, 

some by swimming and others by floating on wreckage, 

reached the land. We notice again that the Apostle did 

not propose, on reaching land, to have a general revival 

service; he was not bent on exciting men's minds, but 

was practising the same gospel methods which the 

Master taught him; viz., "Let us reason together"— 

sit down first and count the cost of discipleship, and, if 

willing to pay the price, "Come, take up thy cross, 

and follow me." If this, the Lord's method for gathering 

his people from the world, were still pursued, 

there would be many fewer nominal Christians; but 

we believe there would be no smaller number of the 

genuine ones. The time for bringing in the world is 

not yet; hence the Master's words in prayer, "I pray 

not for the world, but for those whom thou hast given 

me out of the world, that they all may be one... 

that [ultimately, 'in due time'] the world may believe." 

The gathering of the elect class for the Kingdom 

is under disadvantageous conditions which will 

thoroughly test them, and make their way so narrow 

that few will find it, and still fewer make progress in 

it. When God's time for dealing with the world shall 

have come, the powers of heaven and of earth will 

cooperate with the glorified Church in making the gospel 

so plain that a wayfaring man, though a fool, need 

not err therein. 

So far as the record shows, the Apostle and his 
companions did no mission work amongst the barbarians 
of the island on which they were wrecked, nor 
amongst the soldiers and sailors, their companions during 
that winter. They left no Church there;— we may 
safely presume that they found no hearing ears. The 
lesson to us from this should be that we are not to expect 
the conversion of the world nor anything akin to 
it. We are to expect that the Lord will find with the 
truth a sufficient number to complete the elect Church, 
and then, with the power and the authority of the Kingdom, 
establish righteousness and cause the knowledge 
of himself to fill the earth and bless the whole world 
through the Church. -Gal. 3:29. 



page 177 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIV. JUNE 15, 1903. No. 12 



CONTENTS. 

Conventions Across the Sea 179 

The Editor on His European 



Journey 179 

The Apostle Paul at Rome 183 

Paul's Charge to Timothy 186 

Quarterly Review 191 

Public Ministries of the Truth 192 

The Editor's Return 192 

General Conventions, Etc 192 

Special Items: 

Corrected Bible Prices 178 

page 178 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



CORRECTED BIBLE PRICES. 



We are obliged to announce that the two cheap Teachers' 
Bibles mentioned in our list in Dec. 15 issue as Nos. 
8301 and 04403 have advanced in price. They will hereafter 
be sold at 90c. each; postage, 25c. extra. Thumb 
Index, if desired, 25c. 

ZION'S GLAD SONGS. 



We have this booklet of spiritual songs in large supply 
again, and orders can be filled promptly. While it is not 
expected that the "Songs" shall take the place of the noble 
hymns in the book POEMS AND HYMNS OF DAWN, they 
will be found appropriate for social meetings and praise 
services. The price is 5c each, postpaid; 60c per doz. 



POEMS AND HYMNS OF DAWN. 



This work contains a very choice selection of 160 poems 
and 333 hymns, purged, we trust, from much of the too 
common hymn-book theology. In cloth binding only, 50 
cents. TOWER subscribers supplied at the wholesale rate, 
25 cents. This price now includes postage. 



R3205 : page 179 

CONVENTIONS ACROSS THE SEA. 
--THE EDITOR ON HIS EUROPEAN JOURNEY. - 

DEAR WATCH TOWER READERS :- 

I posted my previous letter just as our 
vessel, the New York, reached Southampton. 
As I stepped ashore I was met by Brother Henninges, 
and a little later, on arrival at London, by a delegation 
representing the London Church. Assuredly our 
greetings all around were most cordial, and unitedly 
we thanked God for a safe journey and asked divine 
blessing upon our mission. 

Five meetings were held in London. The first 
on Saturday afternoon was a greeting and salutation 
meeting, and in the course of my remarks I mentioned 
the cordial greetings sent with me by the brethren of 
the Allegheny congregation; assuring the friends that 
those greetings well represented the sentiments of all 
the dear brethren and sisters of America. They in 
turn wished me to tell you all of their love and to give 
you their greetings in the Lord, and to testify to you 
that the Lord's people, though separated by oceans, 
are of one spirit— begotten of the one Father. 

The evening session lasted from 7 to 9; the attendance 
being about 400 (about the same as in the 
afternoon). My text was Heb. 6:13-17— respecting 
the hope that is an anchor to our soul and that is based 
upon God's promise to Abraham, which he confirmed 
with an oath; so that not only Abraham might have 
"strong consolation," but we also who look back to 
that oath-bound Covenant, expecting its fulfilment and 
trusting by God's grace that we may be heirs of that 
Covenant's provisions— as Abraham's spiritual "seed." 
Our hearts rejoiced in the Apostle's assurance, "If ye 
be Christ's (members or bride) then are ye Abraham's 

R3206 : page 179 

seed and heirs according to the promise." (Gal. 3:29.) 
We saw clearly that if we are heirs of that 



promise it is still unfulfilled, and our faith laid fresh 
hold of the promise and oath of God, and we assured 
ourselves not only that it could not fail of fulfilment, 
but that our Lord's glorification as the Head of the 
"seed," as the antitypical Isaac, was an additional 
guarantee that soon the Church, as the antitypical 
Rebekah, would be united to him and the promise proceed 
to complete fulfilment— the blessing of all the 
families of the earth under the Millennial 
Kingdom. 

On Sunday we had three sessions: at 1 1 a.m., 
3 p.m. and 7 p.m. The attendance in the morning 
was estimated at 400, in the afternoon at 600 and in 
the evening at 800. The dear friends of the N. London 
congregation provided a bountiful luncheon at 6 
p.m. on Saturday as well as Sunday: all were cordially 
invited to partake. The number participating 
on Sunday evening— about 300— fairly represented 
the deeply interested of London and surrounding cities 
and towns. 

Our text on Sunday morning was Phil. 4:8,7. 
The Church rather than the public was addressed, 
and the "way of the Lord" made as plain as possible: 
(1) The way in which we first saw ourselves to be 
sinners. (2) Our first view of Christ as our Savior, 
and our justification through Christ in his blood. (3) 
Our consecration, begetting to the new nature as members 
of the elect. (4) Our experiences after we thus 
as New Creatures entered the school of Christ. (5) 
The trials and polishings by the way to fit and prepare 
us for the Kingdom— to polish us as the Lord's jewels. 
(6) The assistance of the brethren in the good 
way by words and example— our Elder Brother's being 
first and Brother Paul's next. 

The afternoon session was devoted to questions: 
this being deemed the most practical way of reaching 
topics in which the brethren were most deeply interested. 
Two hours were thus spent— profitably, we 

R3206 : page 180 

trust, to all. Many of the questions indicated deep 
thought on the subjects dear to us all. 

The closing session of the London Convention 
was well attended— notwithstanding an all-day rain. 
The interest was excellent, as indicated by the close 
attention given for two hours by people of whom 
nearly one-half had little or no previous knowledge of 
the truth. 

Our topic on this occasion was: "Millennial 
Hopes and Prospects." At the close nearly an hour 
was spent giving and receiving cordial farewells and 
good wishes. Would that our pen were capable of 
delineating the words of earnest greeting— the loving 
glances of the eyes and the earnest pressure of the 
hand. We assured the dear friends that we accepted 



their warm words and many kind acts as first of all to 

the Lord, who has given us all the precious truths 

which so rejoice all who have the hearing ear of faith. 

That, secondly, I was welcomed and loved as a representative 

of the Lord's people rejoicing in present 

truth— not only in America but throughout the world. 

That, thirdly, I accepted a portion of their love and 

greetings personally— as a servant and representative 

of the Lord and his people. (And this is uniformly 

my course and view.) 

On Tuesday (April 28) we took up our journey 
for Denmark and Sweden— a journey of over two 
thousand miles— to meet our dear Scandinavian 
friends, whom not having seen we loved as brethren 
in Christ. Representatives of the London assembly 
escorted us to the railway depot and bade us Godspeed, 
hoping to see us yet again before our return to 
America. Brother Henninges accompanies me and is 
a real comfort and true yokefellow in every way. 
The Lord reward him! 

Our first stop was at Copenhagen: We were met 
at the depot with a most cordial welcome and escorted 
to comfortable lodgings. The notice of our coming 
had brought brethren and sisters from various directions 
who awaited our coming and, with the local 
brethren, almost overwhelmed us with the evidences 
of their love and fellowship. Although our communications 
were through a brother who served as interpreter, 
yet eyes and hand-clasps added emphasis. 

We had three meetings in this great city— two of 
these were semi-public, including not only the friends 
of the truths represented by ZION'S WATCH TOWER 
publications, but their Christian friends whom they 
had been endeavoring to interest. The largest attendance 
was about 200— very good indeed for a mid-week 
meeting. 

Continuing our journey we reached Stockholm 
on Sunday morning, May 3— the dear leader of the 
Danish meetings accompanying us. As we alighted 
from the train we were met by about ten Swedish 
brethren— amongst them the two dear brethren who 
for some time past have been colporteuring in these 
parts and whose efforts God is blessing. A hasty 
wash and we were off for the meeting place, where 
we found a crowded roomful of Swedish brethren and 
sisters singing most heartily an old and familiar tune 
in words which we could not understand. But the 
circumstances and earnestness and illuminated faces 
all told us that the unknown tongue gave praise to the 
same God, inspired by the same hopes built upon the 
same promises. We began at once our address— a 
dear brother (once a minister in the Swedish State 
Church) serving as interpreter, repeating our words 
in Swedish, sentence by sentence. 

For two hours we discussed the oath-bound covenant, 
hope in which constitutes the anchor of our 



faith as the Lord's brethren and joint-heirs. The 
moist eyes and nods of assent told clearly that the 
truths were recognized and appreciated and that many 
of those present were sincerely desirous of making 
their calling and election sure as "heirs according 
to the promise," as joint-heirs with Christ Jesus our 
Lord.-Gal. 3:29. 

Our second public meeting was at 5.30 p.m. Sunday, 
and lasted until nearly 8 o'clock. About 250 were 
present and the closest attention was given to our 
presentation of the "Millennial Hopes and Prospects." 
Some of the audience— about one-half— were outsiders 
not fully committed to present truth. They were seemingly 
sincere Christians, however, and we may reasonably 
hope that some of them may yet be blessed by the 
Lord through these or other instrumentalities;— that 
they may be enabled to "comprehend with all saints 
the lengths and breadths and heights and depths of 
the love of God which passeth all knowledge."— 
Eph. 3:18. 

Monday's meetings at 1 1 a.m. to 1, and 3.30 to 
6, were attended by about 100 each. These doubtless 
are all deeply interested, even though some may not 
as yet be fully committed. The topics of these meetings 
related to the steps of discipleship; the conditions 
for entering and continuance in the narrow way 
to "glory, honor and immortality." Our heart was 
much encouraged by hearing from two, who could 
speak English, that they had discerned the way they 
had long been seeking, and had made a full consecration 
of their all to the Lord and were rejoicing 
accordingly. 

We may hope that there were more, for some of 
the dear friends spoke most eloquently with their 
eyes, and by all their actions indicated that they longed 
to talk with us. One dear brother caught our hand 
in both of his and looked us in the face with moist 

R3206 :page 181 

eyes, and then, pointing to his mouth, shook his head; 
then he pointed to his eyes and then to his forehead; 
—then he looked heavenward, then pressed our hand 
afresh in both of his. Thus he told us, as forcibly 
as could words in any language: I cannot speak to 
tell you of my joy of heart, but the eyes of my 
mind have been opened and now I can see our heavenly 
Father in his true light and can understand his 
wonderful plan, and I want to thank you because it 
was through your instrumentality that our Father 
sent me this priceless blessing. 

We have just left these dear brethren and sisters 
on our return journey to fill appointments in Great 
Britain. About 25 or 30 came to the depot in the 
rain to see us off. Impressive were the handshakes 
of these dear friends who, though poor, purchased 



railway tickets so as to get on to the platform to see 
the last of us. Through the interpreter they said, 
We fear that we do not and cannot show you how 
much we love you in the Lord and how much we 
appreciate the privileges of this Convention. 

One dear Swedish sister, a school teacher (able 
to speak English), who has had the truth for only 
about one year and a half, but during that time has 
done much to present it to others, came to meet us 
at Copenhagen, went with us to Stockholm and returned 
with us to Copenhagen and went home after 
seeing us off. As we finally parted, she handed us some 
flowers, saying, "These are not from me but from all 
the dear Swedish friends of the truth. I was the first 
of them to meet you and now I am the last of them to 
bid you farewell and Godspeed— so accept these flowers, 
please, as a token of our Christian love for you and 
the work the Lord has given you to do." This dear 
sister, a hard worker, traveled in all over 700 miles to 
enjoy and feast upon the truth and to show her love 
for it. Can it be wondered if I write now: I shall 
never forget my visit to Scandinavia, and shall ever 
pray and seek for the Lord's blessing upon his work 
there. 



Journeying from Stockholm by rail to Malmo 
(375 miles) and by sea (15 miles) brought us back to 
Copenhagen, where we again bade good-bye to our 
Danish friends. Thence by rail we reached Korsor 
(70 miles), where we again took ship for Kiel (100 
miles). Here we saw the German Emperor's war 
yacht and about 24 German war vessels, and rejoiced 
in spirit that ere long they will be remelted, that their 
tons of metal may be used in peaceable pursuits under 
the administration of the great Prince of Peace. From 
Kiel a rail journey (500 miles) brought us to Flushing, 

R3207 :page 181 

where we again took steamer (115 miles) to 
Queensboro pier and were again on British soil. The 
rail journey to London (50 miles) was through the 
most highly cultivated country we saw on our entire 
journey or anywhere. It seemed a picture of what 
Paradise restored will shortly be. 

On our first arrival in England we added to our 
itinerary several intermediate appointments. One of 
these was Leeds, our next stopping place, which we 
reached after a journey of 250 miles. The dear 
friends met us at the depot, greeting us most cordially; 
—our arrival was delayed, and they had waited all 
afternoon. The weather was damp and chilly, but 
not so their ardor, nor ours. We felt at home with 
them at once. After tea we proceeded to the Y.M.C.A. 



hall and for an hour and a half addressed a 

very intelligent audience of about 125 on "The Oath-bound 

Covenant" of Heb. 6:17. A special supper 

had been arranged, at which a goodly company gathered, 

and after a refreshing night's rest we started for 

Glasgow (200 miles)— a happy party escorting us to 

the train and sending kindest greetings to the "brethren 

in America." 

Glasgow was one of our stopping places in 1891, 
when we hunted up some six TOWER subscribers. 
Now, on the arrival of the train, 30 dear brethren 
and sisters were on the platform and greeted us 
most enthusiastically— assuring us of the love of others 
not able to be present. We had heard that the 
Scotch were undemonstrative, and very averse to 
"wearing their heart on their sleeve," but the warmth 
of our reception convinced us that the Scotch had been 
misrepresented, or else that the "love of the truth" 
had greatly transformed these dear friends, who, by 
their hands and faces, no less than by their words, so 
enthusiastically welcomed us. We were most hospitably 
entertained, and pray for the divine blessing 
upon our hosts and their families. This was Friday 
evening, and the Church's committee of arrangements 
(8) called on us to submit suggestions of details for 
the Convention, not previously arranged by mail. 
Our fellowship was most pleasant and both opened 
and closed with prayer. 

The Saturday morning program consisted of interesting 
reports from various little companies of believers 
in Scotland presented by representatives. They 
were most interesting and showed clearly that not 
only in Glasgow, but in every direction thereabouts, 
the truth is extending and under God's blessing is 
finding the Israelites indeed. We addressed the dear 
friends briefly on this occasion, congratulating them on 
the many evidences of God's favor and blessing upon 
them, pointing out that the keynote of the present 
movement is, "Gather together my saints unto me: 
those who have made a covenant with me by sacrifice." 
We rally not around a sectarian standard or 

R3207 : page 182 

name or creed, but to the Lord. We who are united 
to Christ need not creeds or other human bonds to 
unite us— our union with the Head means union with 
all united to him and love for all such in proportion 
as each has or attains the Lord's spirit. We assured 
the dear friends that we brought greetings to all of 
like precious faith from brethren in America, and 
that your thoughts and prayers were surely with us. 
The afternoon discourse was on "The Oath-bound 
Covenant" (Heb. 6:13-17), and that of the evening on 
"The exceeding great and precious promises." (2 Pet. 1:4-1 1.) 
These we showed to be the Church's 



share in the Abrahamic Covenant. The attendance for 
a week-day was excellent— about 400 at each session. 

Sunday was the great day of our spiritual feasting 
with our Lord (in prayer and praise and the study 
of his Word) and with each other as fellow-heirs 
of the promises. The opening session was a general 
testimony meeting. One after another told 
the story which we all know from experience, but 
which we are always glad to hear afresh— of God's 
grace and providential leading into the clearer light 
of present truth. Several of the dear Colporteurs 
were heard from at this meeting, and their testimony 
was like that of all others,— of their own blessing, and 
of their joy in the service notwithstanding occasional 
discouragements. We took occasion again to express 
our joy that the Lord had been pleased to use our 
humble efforts, but gave the glory to the Lord, pointing 
out that "of his fullness have all we received, and 
favor upon favor;"— that the due time had come for 
the fuller light to illuminate the divine Word and 
therefore it was sent of the Lord for all Israelites 
indeed; and that any little trials and sufferings and 
sacrifices which had come to us incidentally to the 
serving of the truth to the household of faith had 
been far more than compensated for in the blessings 
and favors and privileges granted us in the present 
time, besides the promised share in the Kingdom 
glories. The discourse following was on the greatness 
of God's power working in his saints. (Eph. 1:19.) 
We saw the divine power exercised through the 
Word of promise and his grace sufficient for all trials 
and to bring off conquerors all his faithful. We saw 
also his power to do for us and with us in the future 
—raising us up to glory and using us then to bless 
the world. 

At the Sunday afternoon session Brother Henninges 
addressed the Convention, his topic being "Consecration," 
from Prov. 23:26. Close attention was 
given while he pointed out the consecration of Abraham 
and the other worthies of the past, and then that 
of our Lord and his apostles, and brought home the 
lesson to all that only by full self-surrender to the 
Lord can any hope to attain divine favor and everlasting 
life. 

The Sunday evening service (from 6.30 to 9 p.m.) 
was the most largely attended session of the Convention 
and its closing one. About 1,000 were present, 
and the close attention given by many for so long a 
session leads us to hope that some hearts and heads 
were reached by the truth. We cannot hope that all 
or even many of those who heard had an "ear to 
hear" or "an understanding heart"; but we do hope 
that audiences so remarkable for intelligence as were 
these of Glasgow received some thoughts respecting 
the divine plan of salvation which they will never 
forget, even though but few of them may be finally of 



the very elect who shall eventually as "overcomers" 

"make their calling and election sure." Quite a number 

of medical men were present, doubtless through 

respect to one of the brethren, who is a very prominent 

physician— a professor in the medical college 

here and one of the two chief surgeons in the Glasgow 

hospital. 

Monday was spent with friends in the suburbs 
of Glasgow most delightfully, resting and attending 
to correspondence. In the evening we were 
joined by over sixty of the Glasgow Church, who 
spent three hours with us— a sociable and farewell 
visit which closed with prayer for the Lord's continued 
favor upon the Church here and upon us in our 
further journeying and ministering and upon all the 
dear Israel of God— known to us and unknown. The 
dear friends requested us to extend their greetings and 
hearty good wishes to the Allegheny Church and to 
all the "brethren of like precious faith." About 28 
of the Glasgow friends intend an (80 miles) excursion 
to Edinburgh to visit the Church there at the time of 
our visit— there to bid us a final goodbye. They 
urge, however, that we come again when the seventh 
volume of DAWN shall have been prepared,— for we 
assured them that we could not at present consider it 
the Lord's will that we should make so long a journey 
until the DAWN series is completed. Having a 
day at our disposal, we have accepted an invitation 
north, at Dundee, prior to our Edinburgh engagements 
—Wednesday and Thursday, May 13 and 14. 
En route to the railway depot we met "Aunt Sarah," 
who wished us to visit her "shop," in the rear portion 
of which the Glasgow Church had its start in a 
Dawn Circle of about four to six persons. We took 
a cup of tea there and ate some of a fruit cake baked 
for us by another sister upon the first TOWER announcement 
of our visit. Some who could not come 
to Edinburgh gathered at the depot to bid us farewell 
(30). As the train started they were still singing— 
"God be with you till we meet again." Our hearts 

R3207 : page 183 

and theirs were full. We remembered our Lord's 
promise in Matt. 19:29, and realized its fulfilment 
afresh. Praise his name! 

At Dundee station we were met and heartily welcomed 
by six of the friends— just one-half of the total 
number interested. Sixty-one gathered for the one 
meeting which our time permitted there. Close attention 
was given us for two hours while we endeavored 
to show the exceeding riches of God's grace to usward, 
set forth in the Oath-bound Covenant. We 
hope later to know of some fruitage. We were most 
hospitably entertained and started early the following 
morning, May 13th, for Edinburgh. 



We reached Edinburgh shortly after noon and 
were met at the station with a most cordial welcome 
by representatives of the Church. The grand city 
was in commotion and gala dress in honor of a state 
visit of the King; nevertheless our first evening session 
was well attended and close attention was given 
to our presentation of "The Oath-bound Covenant." 
The meeting on Thursday at 3 p.m. was chiefly for 
the deeply interested. Our topic was, "The Losses 
and Gains of Christ's Followers," from Phil. 3:7-14. 
Then followed a luncheon— sandwiches, cakes and tea 
—served by the Edinburgh Church and shared by 
nearly a hundred. Next came our closing public service, 
the topic being "Millennial Hopes and Prospects." 
At 9.45 we were at the railway station 
with a delegation of the local church to bid farewell 
to the 34 visiting Glasgow brethren and sisters. This 
was a general farewell and again "God be with you 
till we meet again" was sung with zest. We will 
never forget our Scotch brethren and their urgent request 
that we come again. As evidencing the zeal of 
dear friends here we mention that quite a number 
came as much as 400 miles journey to attend this convention; 

R3208 : page 183 

and one dear sister (from Shetland Islands, 
north of Scotland) when bidding us good-bye, said, 
"I am sure that not many came so far to see the 
King as I have come to meet you; I have travelled by 
land and sea for two days and two nights to get here, 
and now it will take two days and two nights to reach 
home again." We assured the dear sister of our deep 
appreciation of her Christian love, and that we accepted 
the compliment not personally, but as a mark 
of her love for the great King of kings, who has honored 
us in permitting us to dispense present truth— 
the harvest message— now in its due time. 
Faithfully, your brother and servant in the Lord, 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL. 



R3208 : page 183 

THE APOSTLE PAUL AT ROME. 

-ACTS 28: 16-24,30,31. -JUNE 14.- 

Golden Text— "I am not ashamed of 
the Gospel of Christ."— Rom. 1:16. 

DOUBTLESS the favorable impression made by 
the Apostle Paul upon the centurion who 
brought him prisoner to Rome— the evidence 
which the latter had on the journey, in the storm, in 



the shipwreck, and subsequently during the stay at 
Malta— combined with the favorable letter sent by 
Festus to Caesar explaining that the charges against the 
Apostle were evidently the results of religious hatred, 
etc., secured for him very different treatment from that 
usually accorded to prisoners sent to Rome. He was 
treated as a prisoner to the extent that he was continually 
chained to a guard, a Roman soldier, responsible 
for his appearance whenever demanded. These guards 
were changed every few hours, so that, on the whole, 
probably a considerable number of the garrison had personal 
contact with the Apostle, knew his manner of 
living most intimately, and many of them must have 
heard his teaching and preaching to the numbers of 
Jews and Christians who visited him. It is surmised, 
—not without grounds, we think,— that some of these 
soldiers, who were subsequently sent to Great Britain, 
carried the gospel thither. Certain it was that the 
Apostle's life was a living epistle which cannot have 
been without its effect, either for the blessing or the 
hardening of those with whom he came in contact— to 
some a savor of life unto life; to others a savor of death 
unto death— according as they received or rejected the 
knowledge and light. The same should be true of all 
the Lord's followers to the extent of their abilities 
and opportunities; each should let his light so shine 
as to glorify the Father. Business acquaintances, social 
friends, neighbors, relatives,— all should know 
exactly where we stand on all questions of righteousness, 
as well as what is the foundation for our faith and 
hopes. 

We are informed that Paul dwelt in his own hired 
house— more properly apartments, not necessarily an 
entire building. The expenses of maintaining such a 
residence, where numbers of people could be invited, 
must have been considerable, and evidently the 
Apostle did not here continue his trade of tent-making. 
It is possible that his necessities were supplied 
by his friends at Rome and elsewhere: it is possible 
also that by this time, in the Lord's providence, 
he had inherited a considerable patrimony from his 
father's estate. The lesson in this particular is that God 
is able to supply all of our real needs in one way or 
another. It is for us to do with our might what our 

R3208 : page 184 

hands find to do, using our time and strength and talents 

in the Lord's service to the best of our judgment, 

and leaving all arrangements as well as results in his 

hand. No doubt it was to the Apostle's advantage 

that for a time he was left in penury and found it necessary 

to labor, working with his hands for life's necessities 

while he was preaching the good tidings. Thus 

he demonstrated his loyalty to the Lord, to the truth, 

to the brethren, to principle; and thus he set us an 



example along these lines which, doubtless, has since 
been profitable to many of the Lord's followers. 

Paul had a considerable number of kinsmen and 
acquaintances in Rome, the number of whom we know 
was at least over thirty-two according to the salutations 
of his epistle written to them previously at Corinth. 
(Rom. 16:1-15.) Doubtless these were informed of 
the Apostle's arrival and visited him speedily. But 
our lesson calls our attention particularly to the Apostle's 
energy in seeking to be about the Master's business, 
—seeking to make known the good tidings to 
those who as yet had not heard it. Three days after 
his arrival in Rome he sent forth an invitation requesting 
the leading Jews there to visit him. We can learn 
a good lesson from this in harmony with the Apostle's 
words, "Not slothful in business, fervent in spirit, 
serving the Lord." Our chief business, like his, should 
be the Lord's service; the comfortable fixing of our 
abode and our fellowship with our friends and relatives 
should not occupy the most important part of our 
time. We should remember the Apostle's words, 
"This one thing I do"; and applying them to ourselves 
we should be "instant [unceasingly] in season 
and out of season [when convenient and when inconvenient 
to ourselves]" in our service of our Lord and 
his cause. 

The Jews accepted the invitation and visited the 
Apostle: doubtless they came readily for several reasons. 
First, all the Jews residing in Rome had been 
subject to persecution, which had some three years previously 
driven Aquila and Priscilla from the city. This 
persecution had now to some extent abated, but doubtless 
it had left the hearts of the Jews in a much humbler 
condition than they would otherwise have been. Persecutions 
certainly have their value to the Lord's people; 
they help to make us tender-hearted, compassionate 
and sympathetic with others, as well as help to 
polish and develop us in Christian character. Secondly, 
the Jews were, doubtless, interested in a fellow-countryman 
in distress, and specially interested in one whom 
they found to be so peculiarly treated by the Roman 
government— one granted so great liberty as Paul 
enjoyed. The Lord's providence was certainly in this 
matter, and the Apostle's peculiar form of restraint was 
evidently favorable to the cause he represented. The 
Jews would certainly beware how they would raise a 
commotion against one who, though a prisoner, was 
treated with such consideration, and one who was 
under the direct protection of a soldier, and for violence 
to whom they would be directly responsible to Julius, 
who is supposed to have been the perfect of the Praetorium, 
or "captain of the guard," of that time— a 
man of good repute. It was while a prisoner in his 
own house that the Apostle found favorable opportunity 
for writing several of his epistles— to the Philippians, 
to the Galatians, to the Ephesians, to the Colossians. 



Doubtless the two years spent in prison in 
Caesarea were valuable to the Apostle himself, as giving 
him more abundant opportunity for further study of 
the divine plan than he could have enjoyed while engaged 
continually in the mission work. Now this 
added experience and grasp of the gospel found their 
expression in the epistles referred to, and were communicated 
to the Church at Rome. We should remember, 
too, that Rome was the very center of influence at that 
time, that from its influences radiated in every direction. 
Thus we see the Lord's guidance in the Apostle's 
affairs, and applying the lesson to ourselves it impresses 
upon us his assurance that "all things shall 
work together for good to those who love God, to the 
called ones according to his purpose." Consoled with 
this promise we can endure trials and disappointments, 
even though at the time we cannot see how such experiences 
will ever work good. Thus we learn that 
"Faith can firmly trust him, 
Come what may." 

To the chief Jews who visited him the Apostle 
explained briefly the cause of the opposition of the 
Jews, the necessity of his appeal to Caesar and the 
assurance that he had naught whereof to accuse his 
own nation. His nobility of character is prominently 
before us at every turn of his affairs. How many less 
noble minds would have felt embittered against their 
own nation! How many would have charged the rulers 
of it in immoderate terms for their injustice, hypocrisy, 
etc.! We love the Apostle all the more because 
we discern in his course the true, noble, Christian 
spirit and principle. Let us seek to emulate his 
example, not only in respect to what we shall say of 
earthly laws and rulers, but let us also apply the same 
rule to all who seek to do us injury; let us not render 
evil for evil and railing for railing, but let us remember 
how it is written of our Lord that "when he was 
reviled he reviled not again." 

Mark the wisdom of the Apostle in handling his 
subject: He not only showed no unkindness of sentiment 
toward those who had been the cause of his imprisonment, 
but he declared to his hearers that he was 
bearing his bondage because of the hope of Israel. He 

R3209 : page 185 

was not seeking for their sympathy; he was seeking to 
turn their hearts to the Lord. Hence, as soon as possible 
in his narrative he directed their attention to this 
central fact, that Israel had a hope, and that it was 
because of his loyalty to Israel and Israel's hope that 
he was suffering imprisonment. 

Kindness often begets kindness (though not always), 
and the Jews responded in most considerate 
terms that they knew nothing against the Apostle and 
that they would be pleased to hear his story from his 



own lips. They admitted, however, that they had 
some prejudice against the doctrines he advocated because 
they had heard unfavorable reports concerning 
Christianity— that "everywhere it is spoken against." 

The nearer we approach to the truth the more 
likely we are to find numerous enemies. Good men 
and bad men may have both friends and enemies, but 
it is reserved to the pure gospel and those who uphold 
it to be everywhere spoken against— to have few zealous 
friends outside its own little consecrated band; but it 
will not always be so. It is so now because we are still 
living in an epoch known spiritually as "this present 
evil world" (Gal. 1:4), and because Satan is the god 
of this world, who now worketh in the children of disobedience, 
blinding their eyes to the truth and constraining 
them to hate the light and oppose it. By and 
by Satan will be bound, and his deluded subjects will 
have the eyes of their understanding opened (Isa. 35:5; 
Rev. 20:1): "then shall ye return"— turn about— 
see things from the divine standpoint, and discern between 
him that serveth God and him that serveth him 
not— discern a marked difference from the present 
time— that evil doers will suffer, and that those who 
do the will of the Lord will be greatly blessed and no 
longer be everywhere spoken against. 

The Apostle did not attempt to preach the gospel 
at this first interview, but simply introduced himself 
and his message and made an appointment for a future 
meeting, at which, according to the Greek text, a great 
number gathered, to whom he expounded the matter, 
testifying the Kingdom of God and persuading them 
concerning Jesus— from morning until evening. We 
can imagine the substance of this long discourse: it 
evidently was along the same lines as our Lord's words 
to the two with whom he went to Emmaus after his 
resurrection, when he opened unto them the Scriptures 
—showing the types of the Law, the necessity for 
an antitypical sin-offering and the necessity for an 
an ti typical Prophet, Priest and King; the predictions 
of the Prophets concerning these things; the words of 
David, of Isaiah, of Jeremiah, of Zechariah, Joel, etc., 
etc. Doubtless, too, the Apostle gave an account of 
the purity of our Lord's life and teachings, and narrated 
the facts proving his resurrection, and his own 
witness that the Lord was no longer a man, but a glorious 
being, whose presence when seen by the Apostle 
shone above the brightness of the sun at noonday. 
Doubtless, too, he pointed out the high calling of the 
Church, and that this opportunity for becoming spiritual 
Israel was accorded first of all to fleshly Israel; 
and that the Gentiles, nevertheless, according to the 
words of the prophets, would be called in to fill up, to 
complete the elect number that God had predestinated 
to this glory. Doubtless he showed that the call involved 
suffering, sacrifice and self-denial now on the 
part of those who would share in the glories of the 



heavenly Kingdom as it will be established at the second 
coming of Messiah, and the resurrection of the 
Church, which is his body. 

As is always the case, the truth proved a separator, 
and we are not surprised to find that among those 
who were interested enough, and curious enough, to 
desire to hear the Apostle, some believed and some 
disbelieved. The truth in the harvest time of this age 
has a similar effect: it is a sickle which both gathers 
the wheat to the garner and separates the tares. Paul 
was not responsible for the effect of the truth upon his 
hearers. He earnestly desired to do them good, and 
used his very best endeavors to present the truth wisely, 
but the responsibility lay then with the hearers, 
not with Paul, nor with the Lord. It is the Lord's 
intention that the truth shall attract only the one class 
—the pure in heart, the Israelites indeed— and that it 
should separate and antagonize those who are not in 
the right condition of heart, but are moved even in 
their religious devotions by selfishness. So we find 
matters today; not all are ready for the present truth. 
Some who are noble and generous in many respects 
have a prejudice of mind, or heart, which hinders them 
from being able to receive the good tidings. With 
some it is love of the sect, or party, with which they 
are identified, and whose teachings must be more or 
less antagonistic to the truth because of the error they 
contain; with others the difficulty is the fear of man, 
which bringeth a snare— the fear of greater unpopularity 
and the realization that faithfulness to the Gospel 
of Christ would mean self-sacrifice. The Lord is using 
just such testings now as then to separate the wheat 
from the tares, the gold from the dross. We can not 
expect that he will do otherwise for us or for any, and 
our prayers and endeavors must be in the direction of 
thorough honesty with the Lord, with the brethren 
and with his truth— the love of the truth being above 
all things else. The Lord's declaration respecting the 
class that will fall in this time of testing is that he 
will send them strong delusion, that they will believe 
a lie, because they received not the truth in the love of 
it.-2Thess. 2:10,11. 

R3209 : page 186 

The good work thus promptly and thoroughly 
begun, we doubt not, was continued by the Apostle 
with fervency during the remainder of the two years 
he was a prisoner. He was not privileged to go out 
and make public discourses in Rome, for at that time 
the Emperor was not only the head of everything social 
and political, but also the ecclesiastical head of the 
world, and any new religion would be under special 
restraint in Rome, the seat of the imperial government. 
Hence, in all probability Paul's condition as a prisoner 
—at liberty to receive all who would come to him— 



was the best not only for him, but for the cause he 
represented. We are reminded here that some are 
kept prisoners at home by family duties, or illness, or 
other bonds of obligation or necessity, and that where 
such conditions prevail the Lord's people should both 
pray and expect that the Lord would bring to them 
such as might be benefitted by their ministries of the 
truth. Let us each be zealous to use our opportunities, 
whether our advantages be great or small, and let us rely 
upon it that the Lord knows our condition and is able 
to change it according to his good pleasure and wisdom. 
Under the existing conditions, no one was able 
to forbid the Apostle, or to restrain him, from speaking 
with the utmost confidence and boldness the truths 
pertaining to the Lord Jesus and the Kingdom of God 
which he would establish at his second advent— the 
present Gospel age being for the selection and polishing 
and testing of those who will be joint-heirs with 
him in that Kingdom. Let us be faithful and let us 
see to it that our ministries, both public and private, 
be along these lines— that we do not permit any other 
gospel to take the place of this one which the Lord has 
committed to us. We note incidentally that we are 
living in a day of many gospels— the gospel of socialism, 
the gospel of health by proper living, the gospel 
of faith cures, mind cures, hypnotic cures, etc.; the 
gospel of various sciences; the gospel of the power of 
the will, etc., etc. Whatever their advocates may 
say about these gospels, let us remember that none of 
these is the gospel which the Lord and his apostles 
committed to us; let us inquire for the old paths and 
let us keep them faithfully until by and by we shall 
hear the Master's words, "Well done, good and faithful 
servant, enter thou into the joys of thy Lord." 
Then we shall know as we are known; then we shall 
understand much better than the various theories of 
the present time could possibly instruct us. If we win 
the great prize it must be, in any event, at the cost of 
our present earthly lives; and, hence, the gospel of 
health is in some respects in direct antagonism to the 
gospel of sacrifice which we preach. By this we do 
not mean that the Lord's people should be negligent 
of health; but we do mean that it should in their estimation 
be so secondary to the gospel of God's dear 
Son and the glory to be attained through him 
and through association in his sacrifice, that earthly 
life and earthly health and earthly physical development 
should be loss and dross in comparison. 

Here the narrative of the Apostle's work ends. 
Tradition tells us that the Apostle was liberated at the 
end of the two years; that he again visited the churches 
of Asia Minor and, subsequently, made a visit to Spain, 
preaching the gospel; and that later on he came to 
Rome again a prisoner without favor, and that he suffered 
martyrdom after spending a considerable time 
imprisoned in the Mamertine prison, a dread dungeon 



in Rome. Tradition says that his Roman citizenship 
saved him from crucifixion, and that he was, instead, 
decapitated. St. Paul's Cathedral at Rome is said to 
have been built near the site of his execution. 

It was probably during this latter imprisonment 
that the Apostle wrote his epistles to Timothy and 
Titus, in one of which (2 Tim. 4:7,8) he declares, "I 
have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I 
have kept the faith: henceforth there is laid up for me a 
crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous 
Judge, shall give me at that day: and not to me only, 
but to all them also who love his appearing." As we 
note the noble character of this dear brother in the 
Lord, we all desire to emulate it and thus to be copies 
of the Lord Jesus. And now we have approached, 
we believe, close to the termination of the narrow way, 
close to the time when we hope to hear the Master's 
"Well done, good and faithful servant: thou hast been 
faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over 
many things; enter thou into the joy of thy Lord." 
Let us, therefore, be encouraged the more to buckle on 
tightly the armor, and to fight the good fight faithfully 
to the close, that we may with the Apostle share the 
crown of rejoicing which the Lord has promised to all 
who love him supremely— even unto death. 



R3210 : page 186 

PAUL'S CHARGE TO TIMOTHY. 

-2 TIM. 3:14-4:8.-JUNE 21.- 

"There is laid up for me a crown of righteousness." 

A DREADFUL conflagration burst forth in the 
City of Rome a few months after Paul was 
set at liberty, which laid waste a large area 
of the city during the six days it continued. Nero, the 
Emperor, "enjoyed the dreadful sight from a turret of 
his palace, singing and dancing the mime of the 'burning 
of Troy' during the progress of the national catastrophe.' 
It was rumored that Nero himself caused 

R3210 :page 187 

the fire, and to avert suspicion he had it charged to 
innocent Christians, of whom, it would appear, there 
was a considerable number by that time. Christians, 
being unpopular with their heathen as well as their 
Jewish neighbors, were made the scapegoats, and they 
suffered dreadfully. One very careful account says: 
"Multitudes of every age, of every sex, were arrested. 
They were slain with the sword; they were exposed 
in amphitheaters; they were covered with the skins 



of wild beasts to be torn to pieces by dogs; they were 
wrapped in sheets of pitch, tied to stakes and set on 
fire. Nero drove among the people in his chariot, 
lighted by the flare of these hideous human torches." 

The Lord's faithful of today ought to be prepared 
to suffer similarly for the truth, whether called upon to 
do so or not. It seems improbable that anything so 
dreadful should occur in our enlightened day; and yet 
we have various Scriptural reasons for expecting that 
within ten years all who stand faithfully and boldly 
for the truth will suffer to a considerable extent— some 
of them quite probably even unto death. What charge 
could be brought against them? We answer, the same 
charge that could be brought against their brethren of 
Paul's day— they are unpopular; the world hates 
them; their loyalty to truth and principle will hinder 
them from being highly esteemed among men, and 
probably make them the scapegoat of evil-doers. 

It was about two years after this conflagration and 
persecution that the Apostle was arrested, imprisoned, 
and, very shortly after, beheaded; and it was while 
waiting in his prison that he wrote his second epistle 
to Timothy, who was, apparently, at the time with the 
Church at Ephesus— where tradition says he remained 
until his own martyrdom, which probably occurred 
about thirty years later, in A.D. 96. Our lesson is 
based upon extracts from this letter to Timothy; it 
urges him with Mark to visit him at Rome, but he was 
beheaded before they reached there. The grandeur of 
the sentiments expressed, the confidence and hope, 
can be appreciated only when we remember the circumstances 
bearing upon the Apostle at the time they were 
written. Realizing that he had come to the end of his 
own course, he sought to impress as much as possible 
of his own spirit and zeal upon Timothy— that he might 
be the more faithful and efficient servant of God. The 
exhortation is specially applicable to all who seek in 
any manner to minister to others— and this really includes 
all of the Lord's people, each one of whom 
should be a living epistle showing forth and speaking 
forth the Lord's message as his ambassador. Let us 
each apply to himself the words of this lesson. 

Timothy is first reminded of how great his privileges 
had been— that he was well born, under religious 
instruction from his infancy. He is reminded, too, in 
a most modest manner, of how he had received his understanding 
of the Scriptures through the Apostle, and 
had been assured that the instructions were of God- 
that the Apostle spoke as an oracle of God; "He that 
heareth us, heareth God." The Apostle points to the 
Word of God as a great light, or lamp, able to make 
wise unto salvation. He must have referred chiefly to 
the Old Testament, since the New Testament was not 
yet completed; but no one will doubt that if the Old 
Testament is valuable for the instruction of the Lord's 
people, the New Testament is still more valuable as its 



key and elucidation. The Apostle's words give the 

thought that these divine instructions are for the purpose 

of making the Lord's people wise unto salvation, 

—of showing them how they may please God and be acceptable 

to him under the terms of his covenant. However, 

the Apostle carefully guards the matter by indicating 

that such wisdom cannot be unto salvation except 

through the faith that is in Christ Jesus. Christ Jesus 

must be recognized as the antitypical Prophet, Priest 

and King, and must have reverence and obedience as 

such to the extent of our ability, else there can be no 

salvation. Ours is not a gospel of works merely, but a 

gospel of faith, which acknowledges that we cannot perform 

the works which we recognize to be perfect, but 

must needs have the merit of our Redeemer imputed 

to us. 

We live in a time when the Bible is more generally 
in the hands of the people than ever before, but in 
a time when its inspiration is more generally doubted 
than it has been for centuries. Only a short time ago the 
opponents of the Bible, Paine, Voltaire, Ingersoll, et 
al., were called infidels; but today its opponents and 
traducers are found in the majority of the pulpits of 
Christendom, and in the Professors' chairs of nearly all 
its colleges and seminaries. This recent view holds 
the Bible to be worthy of reverence because of its age, 
but not as a revelation from God; it places the Bible 
alongside of Shakespeare, and draws comparisons in 
favor of the latter; it attempts to question not only the 
inspiration of the book, but even its reliability as history. 
So virulent is this attack that the faith of all 
Christendom is being shaken to its foundation, and our 
expectation is that within ten years there will be a distinct 
cleavage between those who accept the Word of 
God and those who reject it, and that amongst those 
professing the name of Christian the unbelievers will 
be an hundred-fold more numerous than the believers. 
This will form a part of the great falling away predicted 
for that day: "Let him that thinketh he standeth take 
heed lest he fall." 

The best proofs respecting the inspiration of the 
Scriptures are to be found on the inside— in the divine 
plan of the ages which it records with such grand harmony. 

R3210 :page 188 

The trouble with the higher critics is that they 

do not see this internal evidence, but, on the contrary, 

have accepted the incongruous and unreasonable theories 

of the dark ages which misrepresent the real teachings 

of the Bible, and these higher critics are now showing 

the book (which they believe to be full of inconsistencies) 

from the outside— endeavoring to prove that 

it was not written by the people whose names are 

attached to its various parts. To those who see the 

divine plan which the book contains, these arguments 



of the higher critics respecting the authorship of the 
parts are of little weight; for it matters not to us who 
wrote the books, so long as we see they contain the 
elements of a divine plan so stupendously grand that 
we are confident no human mind conceived it or 
could have depicted it. 

That the Apostle was a firm believer in the inspiration 
of the Scriptures is evidenced by his declaration, 
found in this lesson, to the effect that "all Scripture 
[holy writings] given by inspiration of God, is profitable 
for teaching, for reproof, for rebuke, for correction, 
for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God 
may be perfect [complete], thoroughly furnished unto 
all good works." 

In harmony with this testimony of Paul respecting 
inspired writings, we have the words of the Apostle 
Peter assuring us that holy men of old spoke as they 
were moved by the holy spirit. (2 Pet. 1:21.) It 
seems difficult for some to understand how this inspiration 
could be, and yet the individuality of the writer 
be maintained. The matter, however, becomes very 
clear and simple when we consider that God was able 
to inspire the sentiments and leave much of the clothing 
of those sentiments to the judgment and taste and 
mannerism of the prophet, merely overruling where 
necessary to hinder any misstatement which might 
prove injurious, and to secure an exactly proper statement 
of a necessary item.* 

How true are the Apostle's words that the teachings 
of this wonderful book are profitable! What other 
book ever so inspired us with hopes and joys eternal, 
and of newness of life in order to attain this? What 
other book ever proved valuable to so large a number 
for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness? 
—None. The value of all other books is in proportion 
to their fidelity to the teachings of this Book of 
books. What is true of teachers is true also of books 
written by teachers: "If they speak not according to 
this Word, it is because there is no light in them."— 
Isa. 8:20. 

Not only can no man of God be "complete and 
thoroughly furnished unto every good work" without 
the assistance of the Bible, but it is admitted even by 
worldly men that no man's education is complete 
without a considerable knowledge of this wonderful 
Book. The Lord's people who are growing in grace 
and in knowledge are daily becoming more convinced 
of their need of the instructions which flow from this 
Book, by whatever silver tongues and helping hands of 
explanatory writings the interpretation may come. 

After thus laying down the foundation of Timothy's 
established faith, and after thus urging him to 
abide, or continue, in those things which he had 
learned, the Apostle proceeds to deliver his dying 
charge. He sets the matter forth in a most solemn 
form, according to the Greek— "I adjure thee [I most 



solemnly urge upon you, therefore] before God and 
the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and 
the dead at his appearing and his Kingdom." We may 
accept these urgent words from the Apostle as applicable 
to ourselves. We, also, stand before God; we, 



*We refer the reader to MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. I. 
especially to Chap. 3, "The Bible as a Divine Revelation, 
Viewed in the Light of Reason." 

R3211 :page 188 

also, are trusting in his favor for eternal life; we, also, 
are adopted into his family, and as sons are hoping to 
have such experiences as will fit and prepare us for the 
glorious things the Father has promised to them that 
love him. We, also, have respect to the Lord Jesus and 
his appearing and Kingdom— hoping to have a share 
with him in those future glories and grand opportunities. 
We, also, remember that that Kingdom is to 
judge the world, and to judge the fallen angels— the 
latter, the quick, the living, who have never passed 
into death, but are restrained by chains of darkness 
unto the judgment of the great day; the former, the 
race of mankind to which we belong by nature, children 
of wrath even as others, all of whom are dead, 
under sentence of death. Hoping for a share in all these 
glorious privileges, what manner of persons ought we 
to be! Let us hearken to the charge further:— 

"Preach the Word!" All of the Lord's people 
are teachers; as it is written, "The spirit of the Lord 
God is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach 
the good tidings," etc. This anointing of the spirit 
which came upon our Lord, the Head of the Church, 
comes down to, and covers every member of the body, 
anointing each one similarly to preach the good tidings, 
the Word of God's grace and mercy and peace through 
Jesus— to all who have an ear to hear. The 
Christian washerwoman is to preach this message; so 
is the Christian business man and laborer and housewife, 
each according to his opportunities— and there 
are surely some opportunities for all. All should be 
able to show forth the praises of him who hath called 
us "out of darkness into his marvelous light" (1 Pet. 2:9); 
—should be living epistles known and read of all 
men. We are to consider the preaching of the Word 

R3211 :page 189 

to be the chief business of life, and the earning of a living 
and keeping ourselves in comfort to be secondary 
and incidental to the one vocation to which we are 
called of the Lord. He who would hold back the 
word of truth must surely do so for a reason, and the 



reason cannot be a proper one. If he has received the 
truth in the love of it, he will love to tell it forth; and 
any restraint will, therefore, indicate either that he is 
subject to the fear of man or ashamed of the Lord and his 
Word; and the Master has declared that such are not 
fit for the Kingdom— not fit to be of the Bride class, 
whatever else they may be fit for.— Luke 9:62. 

"Be instant in season and out of season." This 
cannot mean that we are to violate the laws of reason 
and decency by intruding the good tidings upon others 
at times inconvenient and unseasonable to them; 
but it does mean that we are to have such a love for 
the truth, such an earnest desire to serve it, that we 
will gladly accept the opportunity to do so, however 
inconvenient it may be for ourselves. It is the chief 
business of our lives, to which life itself even is subservient, 
and hence, no opportunity for service must 
be laid aside. 

"Reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long-suffering 
and doctrine." This part of the exhortation is not 
alike applicable to all; too many feel at liberty to reprove 
and to rebuke. Doubtless many need reproofs 
and many need rebukes, but how few are able to administer 
these to profit and not to injury! The Apostle 
addressed these words in a particular sense to Timothy 
as an experienced elder in the Church of Christ, 
and to some extent an overseer amongst the elders. It 
would be a great mistake to apply these words in general, 
and for each of the Lord's people to see to what 
extent he could administer reproofs and rebukes to his 
brethren. Rather should sympathy go out to such an 
extent that reproofs and rebukes would be avoided, 
except as duty, because of responsibility in the Church 
of God, should necessitate this. Even so experienced an 
elder and overseer as Timothy must see to it that his 
reproving and rebuking and exhorting should be done 
with all longsuffering— with patience, gentleness and 
forbearance, and with doctrine (2 Tim. 4:2); showing 
clearly wherein the principles of righteousness were 
infringed and pointing out distinctly the Word of the 
Lord concerning the same. This duty still rests upon 
those who occupy places of prominence in the Church 
to which they have in the Lord's providence been 
appointed; and in proportion as they are filled with 
the Lord's spirit of love and gentleness and meekness 
and patience and forbearance, they will strive to perform 
this delicate and unpleasant business of reproving 
and rebuking, where necessary, in most modest language 
and under the most favorable conditions. 

Without knowing how long it would be from his 
day until the harvest, the end of the age, the Apostle 
did know distinctly from the Scriptures that a great 
falling away would come and that the end of the age 
would be a period of special trial amongst the Lord's 
people, when every man's work would be tested; as 
he elsewhere wrote, "The fire of that day shall prove 



every man's work of what sort it is." In verses 3 and 4 
of our lesson he describes the conditions which prevail 
today in the nominal churches. The time has 
come when sound doctrine is not endured, when the 
faithful ministers of the Word are considered back 
numbers, and when up-to-date higher critics are wanted 
for all the high-salaried pulpits. The Revised Version 
says, "Having itching ears will heap to themselves 
teachers after their own lusts [desires], and will turn 
away their ears from the truth and turn aside unto 
fables." How true to the facts! In scarcely any of 
the pulpits of Christendom are the truths of God's 
Word set forth. The great mass of preaching is largely 
composed of anecdotes or delineations of science, often 
falsely so called, or essays on politics, social uplift, etc. 
The preaching of the Lord is obsolete because the hearts 
of men have been turned largely from the Word of God 
to the great Adversary's deceptions— putting darkness 
for light and misrepresenting the Bible through the 
creeds of the various churches. 

But what should be the attitude of the true soldier 
of the Cross at such a time? The faithful ministers of 
the truth, whether they teach merely by example or precept, 
or by the printed page or orally,— what should be 
their attitude? It is clearly pointed out by the Apostle 
saying, "Watch thou in all things, endure affliction 
[suffer hardships], do the work of an evangelist, make 
full proof of thy ministry"— demonstrate what you 
have professed and what you know to be the truth, 
that you are a servant of God and not of man, that 
you are loyal as an ambassador of the great King in 
delivering none other than the message he sends. 

As clinching this earnest appeal for faithfulness to 
the Word of the Lord, the Apostle refers to himself— 
that he must give up the fight; that the end of his life 
course was apparently in sight; the time of his departure 
from life was at hand. How we can rejoice that 
he could and did write the burning words of verses 7 and 8, 
"I have fought the good fight, I have finished 
the course, I have kept the faith," etc. As we glance 
through the Apostle's history we concur with his judgment, 
and see that he was not boasting; but was a 
faithful follower in the footsteps of Jesus; that he did 
make a good fight for right, for principle, for truth, for 
the Lord against sin and selfishness; that notwithstanding 
its narrowness and ruggedness, he did run faithfully 
over the course from the time that he started in 

R3211 :page 190 

it; that he did keep the faith to the close, at the cost 

of self-denial, of self-sacrifice, hardships and persecutions. 

And here we must remember that keeping the 

faith is not merely keeping it in us, but is in the sense 

of faithfully declaring it; for whoever does not declare 

the good tidings to others will soon lose the faith himself. 



Let us press along the line toward the same mark 
for the same prize of joint-heirship with the Lord; and 
if when we come to the close of life we can say, as did 
the Apostle, that we have fought well all along the 
course and kept the faith, the Lord will not say to us 
that we did not do as much as the Apostle Paul or as 
much as the Lord Jesus, but having done what we 
could, having been faithful in the few things and in the 
small talents entrusted to us, we will hear the welcome 
words, "Well done, good and faithful servant, enter 
thou into the joys of thy Lord." 

These joys of the Lord the Apostle refers to as a 
crown of righteousness. The Apostles James and John 
speak of the same crown and call it the crown of life. 
(Jas. 1:12; Rev. 2:10), and the Apostle Peter speaking 
of the same calls it the crown of glory. (1 Pet. 5:4.) 
The thought at the bottom of each of these expressions 
is evidently the same; namely, the custom 
in olden times of running races and the giving of a 
crown to the successful runner at the end of the course. 
As it was not sufficient to enter a race, or start to run, 
but it was required that the race be run faithfully and 
perseveringly to a conclusion, so with this race which 
we are running as followers of Jesus, it is essential not 
only that we shall make consecration to the Lord, but 
that we persevere to the end, and our reward will be 
the crown of life in the sense that we will get life on the 
highest plane, inherent life, immortality. It will be a 
crown of righteousness in the sense that only those who 
are approved of God as righteous will thus be rewarded 
and glorified; and our hope is, therefore, that we may 
be accepted in the Beloved; that the righteousness of 
the Lord may be fulfilled in us who walk not after the 
flesh but after the spirit; and that the rewards which 
God has promised to those who love him and serve 
him will be granted to us. The crown of glory is 
another name for the same grand reward— the glory of 
the Kingdom, the glory of immortality, the glory of 
the Father's favor, the glory of being joint-heirs with 
Christ in his Kingdom. 

The Apostle declares that his crown is laid up for 
him; he did not claim to possess it at the time, except 
by faith, and he had never seen it except by the eye of 
faith. This laying up of crowns is an expressive figure. 
The Scriptural thought seems to be that when justified 

R3212 : page 190 

believers make a full consecration to the Lord and are 
accepted as members of the body of Christ, their names 
are written in the Lamb's book of life, and crowns are 
set apart for them. If they are faithful their names 
will never be blotted out and their crowns will never 
be given to others, but if unfaithful others will be permitted 
to take their places upon the roll of honor and 
attain to their inheritance to the crown, their share in 



the Kingdom.— Rev. 3:11; Rev. 3:5. 

The Lord, the righteous Judge, will determine the 
matter of unworthiness for the crowns. The Apostle's 
language elsewhere in this letter seems to imply that 
some who did have confidence in him had lost their 
confidence, and in the heat of trial had deserted 
him. "At my first defense no one took my part, 



PETER AND PAUL. 

"In the Vatican library at Rome is preserved a bronze 
medal with the heads of Peter and Paul, which was found 
in the cemetery of Domitilia, one of the Flavian family, 
and if genuine is no doubt the earliest portraiture known 
of the two great apostles. The medal is referred to the 
close of the first century or the beginning of the second, 
and at this early period the features of the two apostles 
must have been faithfully preserved. Both heads are full 
of character, and that of Paul in particular is distinguished 
by solemnity and dignity, and the thoughtful and wrinkled 
brow indicates the high intellect that so remarkably characterized 
the man." 



but all forsook me: may it not be laid to their 
charge." (2 Tim. 4:16.) He here intimates that he 
cannot even accept the judgment of the brethren 
respecting his faithfulness, but that he has appealed 
his case in the fullest sense of the word to the great 
Lord and Judge who shall finally determine these matters 
for him and for all. He is a righteous Judge and, 
therefore, will not condemn any who are seeking, to 
the best of their ability, to serve and praise him. He 
will approve such, but being a righteous Judge none 
may venture to hope that he will approve that which 
is evil, unrighteous, unfaithful; hence, if our hearts 
condemn us not we may have peace with God. 

The Apostle was not expecting his crown of righteousness, 
the crown of life, the crown of glory, at the 
moment of death; but pointed Timothy forward to the 

R3212:page 191 

second coming of Christ, and the general giving of rewards, 
as the Lord has promised, "at that day." We 
rejoice to believe that we are living "in that day," and 
hence that the Apostle is no longer waiting, but has 
received his crown during this harvest time, and we 
expect that those who are now alive and remain need 
not wait, but that when the hour of death shall come 
to them there will be no need of sleeping to wait for a 
future time, but the death change will mean the immediate 
entrance into the glorious conditions referred to 



by the Apostle. 

The Apostle distinctly points out that although 
he, with the other apostles, occupied a high position 
in the Church of Christ, this did not signify that only 
the Lord and the apostles were to be crowned as victors; 
on the contrary, he includes all of the faithful 
ones of this Gospel age; saying that the crown of righteousness 
is not for him only, but "for all those who 
love his appearing." Ah! the loving of his appearing 
is indeed a close test, whether applied now or in the 
Apostle's day! The Apostle himself could not have 
looked forward with joy to the day of Christ's revelation 
in Kingdom power and glory, if he had not felt that 
he had fought a good fight and kept the faith courageously; 
and so it must be with all others who have 
named the name of Christ and started to run in this 
Gospel race for the heavenly prize. If they are overcharged 
with the cares of this life and the deceitfulness of 
riches in any sense, they will put far from them the 
thought of the Lord's presence and Kingdom; they will 
not be looking for it and longing for it; they will not 
be loving it. Those who love the Lord's appearing 
must of necessity love the Lord himself, and this will 
mean that the love of Christ will constrain them to endeavor 
to serve him and those who are his. John Calvin 
remarks, "Paul excludes from the number of the 
faithful those to whom Christ's coming is a source of 
terror." 



R3212:page 191 

QUARTERLY REVIEW. 

-JUNE 28.- 

Golden Text: "The Lord shall deliver me from every evil work, 
and will preserve me unto his heavenly kingdom."— 2 Tim. 4:18 

IT will, undoubtedly, be advantageous to us to glance 
back in review over the wonderful experiences 
covered by the Sunday School lessons of the ending 
quarter. They extend over a period of about thirty 
years— from the resurrection of Jesus to the end of 
Paul's imprisonment in Rome, about A.D. 62. The 
dominating thought through these lessons is the earnestness 
of the early Church in the service of the Lord, that 
earnestness being based upon the strong conviction that 
Christ's death had been the redemption-price for mankind; 
that the Church was now being called out to be 
members with Christ in his Kingdom; that the necessary 
experiences for participation in the Kingdom 
would be such loyalty to the Lord and to the truth and 
to the brethren as, under present conditions of sin, 
would lead to suffering and self-sacrifice on the part of 



all the faithful; and that the Kingdom to be especially 
for the blessing of all the families of the earth would 
bring to the faithful suffering ones of this present time, 
glory, honor and immortality, which would much more 
than compensate them for every sacrifice, every trial 
and every sorrow. 

Another of the important lessons of this quarter, 
repeatedly clinched in the various experiences of the 
Apostle Paul, is expressed clearly in the Golden Text— 
namely, the Lord's ability to deliver his people from 
all the machinations of the Adversary and his blind 
emissaries. He who was faithful in the Apostle's case 
is none the less so today in respect to our affairs. Furthermore, 
the Golden Text suggests to us the very 
happifying thought that our Lord is not only 
able to deliver us from all these human enemies 
and from the Adversary, but that he is able also to 
preserve us from the last enemy— death. The Apostle 
at the time of writing these words was in almost hourly 
expectation of martyrdom— that he would go down 
into the portals of the tomb— yet he had confidence in 
the Lord that he would not leave his soul in Hades; 
he had confidence in our glorious hopes in respect to 
all the members of the Church, expressed in the words, 
"The gates of hell [Hades— the state of death] shall 
not prevail against it." The grave has prevailed 
against the Church, not only against the great Head of 
the flock, but against all the members of his body, 
and the Adversary has seen to it that many of them 
came to death ignominiously, as malefactors, as deceivers, 
although true. But we have the Lord's assurance 
for it that this was not the end— that in due time, in 
the resurrection morning, all who have gone down into 
death will be delivered; that he, the Son of Man, 
would take unto himself his great power, and open the 
prison doors and set at liberty the captives of death, 
his own loved ones being the first to participate in the 
First Resurrection to glory, honor and immortality, 
and then being used of him as his co-laborers in the 
great work of delivering all the captives of the tomb, 
bringing all to the knowledge of the truth, and permitting 
as many as will to come back to life everlasting, 
perfection. 

In this way the Apostle expected the Lord to preserve 
him, to keep him unto his heavenly Kingdom: 
he had no thought of death being an utter extinguishment 
of life; he had full confidence in the resurrection 
promise, and that the Lord was able to keep that which 
he had committed unto him against that day— that 

R3213 :page 191 

glorious Millennial morning— that glorious resurrection 
morning when the Kingdom would be established, and 
when the blessings of the Lord would be conferred first 
upon his faithful, as shown in the parables, and that 



subsequently all the families of the earth should be 
blessed through that Kingdom. --Matt. 25:1-30; 
Luke 19:11-27. 



page 193 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIV. JULY 1, 1903. No. 13 



CONTENTS. 

Conventions Across the Sea 195 

Completion of the Editor's 

Journey 195 

"Grow in Grace" 199 

Unfavorable Answers to Prayer 201 

Choosing a King 204 

Interesting Questions Answered 207 

God's Providence Over the World 207 

Who are our Brethren? 207 

General Conventions, Etc 208 

Special Items: 

The New Volunteer Method 194 

page 194 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THE NEW VOLUNTEER METHOD. 



Evidently it will not be wise to adopt the proposed 
new method of house-to-house Volunteering in all cities. 
The old method will evidently still be the best for such 



cities as New York, where a number of families reside in 

one house, and for places where the population is not generally 

English-speaking and Protestant. 

ZION'S GLAD SONGS. 



We have this booklet of spiritual songs in large supply 
again, and orders can be filled promptly. While it is not 
expected that the "Songs" shall take the place of the noble 
hymns in the book POEMS AND HYMNS OF DAWN, they 
will be found appropriate for social meetings and praise 
services. The price is 5c each, postpaid; 60c per doz. 

POEMS AND HYMNS OF DAWN. 



This work contains a very choice selection of 160 poems 
and 333 hymns, purged, we trust, from much of the too 
common hymn-book theology. In cloth binding only, 50 
cents. TOWER subscribers supplied at the wholesale rate, 
25 cents. This price now includes postage. 



R3213 : page 195 

CONVENTIONS ACROSS THE SEA. 
-COMPLETION OF THE EDITOR'S TOUR.- 

DEAR WATCH TOWER READERS :- 

At Edinburgh was our last stop in Scotland, 
our next Convention having been arranged for 
Liverpool, England. On our arrival we were met by 
six representatives of the local Church, who greeted 
us warmly in the name of our King, and made us 
comfortable. After a refreshing sleep, we were ready 
for the Convention sessions of Saturday and Sunday 
(May 16, 17)— five well-attended sessions, beginning 
with 300 and ending with 600, and averaging 400. 
Of these, probably 80 were friends from cities we did 
not have the time to visit— some of them coming considerable 
distances. Our topics were the same as at 
other points, except that on Sunday afternoon we had 
a Question and Answer meeting, lasting from 3 to 5. 
A free luncheon was served between the afternoon 
and evening sessions on both days, and was enjoyed 
by about 150. It is our hope that some good was 
accomplished by this Convention also; that some who 
came from curiosity were deeply interested; that some 
already established were encouraged to "press on"; 
that some partially convinced were helped to full conviction 
respecting the great divine plan and the grand 



privilege of participating in it— now, in sufferings and 
reproaches, and hereafter in glorious services in the 
Kingdom; and that some of those already clear in the 
truth were encouraged and more firmly established, 
and incited more than ever to "lay aside every weight, 
and the sin which doth so easily beset us [in some, 
one weakness; and in others, another]," and to "run 
with patience the race that is set before us in the gospel." 
If kind words and fervent wishes and earnest 
hand-shakes speak of love and zeal, then surely we 
had abundant testimony of the devotion of the Liverpool 
Church. The next morning thirty gathered at 
the depot, leaving other concerns in order to bid us a 
final adieu and to urge that we come again before 
long. Again, as we parted, the song-prayer was lifted 
heavenward— "God be with you till we meet again!" 

Our next appointment was Birmingham, where 
we arrived about noon, and were met and welcomed at 
the depot by representatives of the local Church. We 
could stay but the one day here; but had two sessions 
—3 to 5 and 7 to 9. At the afternoon session 
we spoke of the oneness of the Church, the body of 
Christ, and the terms of our relationship to our Head; 
and saw that in no sense are we gathered to men or 
organizations, but to the Lord himself. "Gather my 
saints together unto me; those that have made a covenant 
with me by sacrifice." "They shall be mine, 
saith the Lord of hosts, in that day when I make up 
my jewels." About 20 WATCH TOWER readers from 
outside cities attended. After a free luncheon, in 
which 55 participated, came the evening session- 
more particularly for the public— the topic being, 
"The Oath -bound Covenant." Next morning we 
bade final farewells and resumed our journey. 

Manchester was our next appointment. We 
reached there by noon and at 2.30 p.m. began another 
happy Convention, in the usual Salford meeting room. 
The attendance (about 125) represented the deeply 
interested of that vicinity and of neighboring towns. 
The closest attention was given us while we endeavored 
to stir up the pure minds of all, by pointing out 
the oneness of the Church as the members of Christ's 
body, and that we must all be "beheaded"— must all 
lose our own headship and self-will, in order that we 
may be acceptable as members of Christ's body, over 
which he is the only Lord and Head, and his will the 
only law or control. A free luncheon was then 

R3213 :page 196 

served— participated in most joyously by about 100. 
Then came our public meeting in the Town Hall, 6.30 
to 8.45. Here a very intelligent audience of about 
500 gave close attention for nearly three times as long 
as is their custom. We trust that some received the 
lesson of "The Oath-bound Covenant" into good and 



honest hearts, and that thus started, they will begin 
to read and to study the literature, without which 
there is little hope for full development under the 
blessings and privileges of the Lord's people in this 
"harvest" time. 

The next day we had three sessions. At 1 1 a.m. 
and 3 p.m. we addressed the Church on the necessity 
for putting on the whole armor of God, that we may 
be able to stand in this evil day. We pictured the 
race-course, called attention to its various degrees of 
progress in the fulfilling of the law of the New Creation 
—namely, Love. Our evening session at 6.30 
was again a public one in the "Pendleton Town Hall." 
Again we had the intelligent audience of the previous 
night, and again they gave closest attention till 8.40, 
when we were obliged to close with prayer, without 
taking time for a closing hymn, and to hasten to our 
train, connecting with the steamer for Dublin, Ireland. 
But the audience was loth to leave even then, and, 
while we put on our wraps to leave, stood singing: 

page 196 

"God be with you till we meet again! 

By his counsels guide, uphold you; 

With his sheep securely fold you; 
God be with you till we meet again! 

"God be with you till we meet again! 

'Neath his wings protecting hide you; 

Daily manna still provide you; 
God be with you till we meet again! 

"God be with you till we meet again! 

When life's perils thick surround you 

Put his arms unfailing round you; 
God be with you till we meet again!" 

R3213 : page 196 

Before the train started, fully sixty of the friends 
had gathered around our "carriage" door. For the 
third and fourth (and, by some of them, for the sixth) 
time, our hand was clasped in a fervent good-bye, and 
the hymn-prayer went up from all our hearts, as with 
bared heads we unitedly sang: 
"Blest be the tie that binds 

Our hearts in Christian love." 

Dublin was reached in due course— May 21st. Our 
first meeting was a public one the same evening, 8 to 
9.40, in Rotunda Hall. Our audiences were very attentive, 
though less enthusiastic than those of England 
and Scotland— owing, no doubt, to the fact that "present 
truth" is newer there, has been less studied and is 
less clearly comprehended. Our first topic was "The 
Oath-bound Promise," and it is our hope that some of 



the dear people who listened so intently may be awakened 

to the necessity of studying the divine plan 

as set forth in MILLENNIAL DAWN. Some so resolved, 

and made the start the same evening, as we happen 

to know. 

Friday's meetings were held in the same place 
from 4 to 6 and 8 to 10. Some interest was awakened, 
but how much or how deep, who can say? We are 
hopeful, however, of the future work here— especially 
if the city can be systematically colporteured. 
We hope that two or three of the brethren will see 
their privilege and undertake the work. We know of 
no service open to so many of the Lord's people and 
offering such abundant return of sheaves, as well as 
of joy to the reapers. 

Saturday morning started us for Belfast, where an 
evening meeting with an interested group of fifteen 
was enjoyed. Our hearts burned with love for the 
Lord and for the brethren, as we called to mind that 
"The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, 
and he will show them his Covenant." (Psa. 25:19.) 
We noted also the words, "None of the wicked shall 
understand," remarking the impossibility of interesting 
such in present truth; and that any once sanctified 
and blest are sure to lose their interest in the deep 
things of God if they "return to their wallowing in 
the mire" of sin. We called attention to the fact that 
murderers and criminals in general profess faith in the 
eternal torment doctrine, and have mostly been trained 
to it from infancy, while we who know the Lord and 
his plan of mercy and love are constrained, not to license 
sin, but, reversely, to copy the divine character. 

Sunday's public meetings in Belfast were from 
3 to 5 and from 7 to 9.15. The interest, indicated 
by the close attention given for lengthy sessions, was 
excellent. Here we parted company with Brothers 
Hemery (the London representative, who joined our 
party at Glasgow) and Henninges, who returned to 
London, via Liverpool, where the latter met Sister 
H. on her arrival from America. The Editor took 
ship next morning for Glasgow, bidding good-bye on 
the wharf to six very earnest brethren who assured 
us of their full consecration to the Lord and the truth, 
and their intention to serve it henceforth with renewed 
energy. They urged us to return, as the Lord's 
providence might lead, and wished us to remember 
them to those of like precious faith in America. Our 
duties required but a brief stay in Glasgow, and we 
took the night train for London, en route for Germany, 
etc. 

At London we parted company with Brother 
Hemery and were joined by Sister Henninges from 
the U.S.A. She brought us the kind greetings of 
the Buffalo and the New York City Churches, which 
were greatly appreciated. 



R3214 : page 197 

About 65 of the London friends had gathered at 
the railway station to bid us a final adieu— too many 
to gain admission to the train platform, so we bade 
them "Good-bye" in the station, where we joined 
them in the well-known verse: 
"Blest be the tie that binds 

Our hearts in Christian love; 
The fellowship of kindred minds 
Is like to that above!" 

The scene was one long to be remembered, for our 
hearts felt the meaning of every word we uttered. In 
answer to queries we again promised to return whenever 
the Lord's providences seem so to direct. 

A rail journey to the sea, a night on the boat and 
then seven hours by rail, brought us to Elberfeld, Germany 
—already decided upon as the most appropriate 
location for the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society's 
branch for Germany, France, Switzerland, Italy, 
Denmark, Sweden, etc. We made this selection because 
of the character of the population— religious 
and independent. Our contact with the people has 
seemed to confirm this. 

Our first attention was given to searching for 
suitable apartments. We obtained from a renting 
agency the addresses of eight places, and on going to 
the first of these we felt that the Lord's providence 
had directed us to it; and after looking at the others 
we felt convinced of this, and rented it. It has a large 
room, suitable for meetings, with three smaller rooms 
connected, suitable for light housekeeping, one of 
which can be made into one with the large room (by 
opening four large doors) should this ever become 
necessary. It would thus accommodate 150 persons. 
There is also a basement for the storage of tons of 
tracts, DAWNS, etc. The location is fine— near the 
post-office and railway station, and with an electric 
car service to every part of the city. And, an important 
item, the rent is cheap. 

The next day we met with the dear friends of 
Barmen-Elberfeld and vicinity. In the afternoon we 
had a social and question meeting with the deeply 
interested numbering about 35. In the evening we 
had a public meeting, attended by about 100, of whom 
probably one-half were in sympathy with present truth, 
and the remainder their friends who are inquiring. 
We spoke on "The Oath-bound Covenant," endeavoring 
to stimulate the faith of all in that promise, and 
urging all to lay firm hold of the great promise and to 
seek earnestly to make their calling and election sure 
to a membership in the Church, the Body of Christ— 
the Seed of Abraham that is so soon to engage in the 
grand work of blessing all the families of the earth, 
distributing the divine favors legally secured by the 
sacrifice of God's dear Son, our Lord. 



After a night's rest we arose at 5 a.m. and took 
an early train for Mulhausen (in company with three 
brethren, also bound for Zurich). We arrived at 5 
p.m. and received a hearty greeting at the station. 
Being thus refreshed in spirit, and subsequently with 
substantials, we were pleased to address 50 brethren 
and friends from 8.15 to 10.15— speaking, as at the 
previous place, on the Oath-bound Promise, which 
cannot fail, and which means so much to us, the 
Church, and also to the world. 

At noon on the next day (May 30) we left for 
Basle, Switzerland, where during three hours between 
trains we made the personal acquaintance of 
the brethren there, and sought to encourage them to 
run the heavenly race with patience. Our arrival at 
Zurich was late at night, but a dozen of the brethren 
awaited us at the depot and gave us hearty greetings, 
which we as heartily reciprocated. Our stay of 
two days at Zurich was interesting and, we trust, not 
without profit. We got personally acquainted with 
170, previously known only through correspondence, 
mostly Swiss, but a goodly number from France and 
Germany, besides two from Hungary and two from 
Italy. 

Our stop at Thun was only a short one, but gave 
us the acquaintance of still others of the household of 
faith. Here we parted company with Brother and 
Sister Henninges, who returned to Elberfeld and the 
new work there, while we hastened on— stopping at 
Neuchatel, Switzerland between trains. Here the 
friends, as per previous arrangement, met us at the depot 
and escorted us to a nearby park, where we had a 
twenty-five minutes talk, through two interpreters, 
on the things pertaining to the Kingdom. Two of 
the fourteen present were Germans. 

By appointment with Bro. Hemery, the Society's 
British representative, we stopped two days 
in London— not to meet the Church, but to seek a new 
location for the Society's London office. The matter 
is not yet settled, but the splendid prospects for the 
work in Great Britain appeal to us strongly for a 
more central location than the one which has served 
us so well for the past three years. We are looking 
for the leadings of divine providence in this matter 
and will report on it later. 

Our return journey was by the same splendid steamer 
in which we went away,— the "New York." The 
Lord furnished an opportunity for the distribution of 
tracts and also for a Sunday afternoon service (in the 
second cabin)— as a result of which we hope for the 
garnering of at least two grains of "wheat." On 
board was a polite minister of the Episcopal church, but 
conversation revealed the fact that, like the one we met 
when outward bound, he is not a Christian— not a believer 

R3214 : page 198 



in the fall and, consequently, not a believer in the 
redemption from the "curse," or condemnation, of the 
fall— not a believer in the atonement. The evidences 
multiply that the falling mentioned by the prophet is 
well advanced: "A thousand shall fall at thy side." 
Evidently the leaders of Christian sentiment and 
ceremony have already fallen from the faith. 

We were amazed at the lack of interest in religious 
themes amongst the passengers. An extensive library 
on board was well patronized for works of fiction, but 
no one seemed to care for religious matters— especially 
amongst the upper class. They have lost their fear 
of eternal torment, and neither have, nor seek, anything 
to take its place. The rejection of "hell" means 
to them a rejection of absolute faith in the Bible as 
God's inspired Word. (What a great injury that unscriptural 
theory has worked!) They satisfy the 
cravings of their minds with morality and forms of 
godliness. We are glad that it is so, rather than the 
reverse,— that they should be steeped in immorality 
and ungodly practises. But how we long for ability 
to open the eyes of their understanding that they 
might rejoice with us in the divine "plan of the ages" 
and in the love toward God which it inspires! Thank 
God the powers of darkness will soon be scattered by 
the glories of the Millennial morning, when many of 
these fine, noble people will see out of obscurity, and 
rejoice to avail themselves of the restitution privileges 
then prevailing ! 

As our vessel reached its dock we were greeted 
by thirteen of the dear friends of the New York 
Church— first with waving handkerchiefs and hats, 
and later with fervent hand-clasps. The busiest afternoon 
of the week was sacrificed to do honor to the 
cause we represent. The Lord, we are sure, will reward 
their love. (Heb. 6:10.) One dear brother 
remarked, "Brother Russell, we remembered you in 
prayer every day; and I believe it was so with the 
dear friends everywhere. I am confident that no pilgrimage 
ever made was accompanied by so many 
prayers." We answered that we had greatly enjoyed 
and been encouraged by the thought that at least 
20,000 of God's people were thus remembering us 
almost daily. 

As we neared Pittsburg on Sunday morning, two 
of the brethren boarded our train at an outer station 
to be first to welcome us home, and later at the depot 
we were cordially welcomed by a delegation from the 
Allegheny Church. One of these dear brethren had 
come all the way from Canada to participate in this 
greeting. We were escorted to the large sitting-room 
of the Bible House (Allegheny). Entering, 
we found the office-workers gathered— each with a red 
rose on his bosom, emblematic of Christian love. 
After greetings, a rose was pinned to our coat lapel, 



too, and then the entire company joined in a hymn of 
welcome composed for the occasion, after which one 
of our number rendered our united acknowledgments 
and thanks to God. The hymn follows— the first verse 

page 198 

representing the sentiments of the returning one:— 

"Home again! Home again! 

From a foreign shore, 
And oh! it fills my soul with joy 

To meet you all once more. 
Here I left the friends so dear, 

To cross the ocean's foam; 
But now I'm once again with those 

Who kindly greet me home." 

Welcome home! Welcome home! 

This our happy strain; 
For God in love has overruled, 

And brought thee home again. 
Day by day our earnest prayers 

Were with thee o'er the sea, 
That God would bless his work abroad, 

And gently care for thee. 

Happy hearts, happy hearts, 

Join in grateful praise 
To him who guides and guards his own 

Throughout their earthly days. 
Cords of love our hearts entwine, 

Sweet love that shall not fail; 
'Twill firmly bind us while on earth, 

And reach beyond the vail. 

Happy hearts, happy hearts, 

Join in grateful praise 
To him who leads the happy throng 

To everlasting days. 

R3214:page 198 

Notwithstanding the fact that it rained, and that 
it was generally expected that we would not arrive 
until Monday, and a reception had been arranged for 
Monday night, the Bible House Chapel was full 
(about 300) for our usual Sunday afternoon service. 
For this occasion, and for the Monday night reception, 
many of the dear friends had sent in floral offerings, 
and the Chapel platform was resplendent as never 
before with roses and lilies and ferns. At first our 
"bump" of economy was disposed to chide our dear 
friends for their generosity, and to say, "Wherefore 
this waste! The money represented in these flowers 
might have been better spent in publishing tracts, etc., 



to assist our poor blinded brethren." But we remembered 
that it was Judas, and not our Lord, who voiced 
those sentiments. So we accepted all as done unto 
him who loved us and bought us with his own precious 
blood (Eph. 4:2), and said not one word to mar the 
joy of the dear company, who, after our discourse on 
Isaiah 55:8-1 1, pressed our hand, assuring us of their 
joy in welcoming us home. We assured them that, 
although we had met and become personally interested 
in many dear brethren and sisters on foreign shores, 
our heart was proportionately enlarged, so that it meant 

R3214 : page 199 

no diminution of our love for the dear saints in America, 
and, in an especial sense, the Church at Allegheny. 

Monday night's reception brought together a 
splendid company of the Lord's consecrated children 
—adorned with the fruits and graces of the holy spirit, 
"the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which in 
the sight of God is of great value." (1 Pet. 3:4.) 
Quite a number came from surrounding cities and 
towns— and more flowers came, too; "alabaster boxes" 
of sweet odor to the Lord, because really rendered 
unto him, and to us merely because he had been 
pleased to use us as his mouthpiece in proclaiming 
his great plan of the ages in this his due time for revealing 
it. It is not possible to describe the pleasures 
of our fellowship in Christ that evening, and we will 
not try. But it is safe to say that with all the secret 
of joy was in the Lord's great plan and in what we 
can see of its prosperity. 

Faithfully, your brother and servant in the Lord, 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL. 



R3215 : page 199 

"GROW IN GRACE." 

"Ye therefore, beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware lest 
ye also, being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from your 
own steadfastness. But grow in grace, and in the knowledge 
of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ. To him be glory 
both now and forever. Amen."— 2 Pet. 3:17,18. 

THERE is a touching tenderness in the epistles of 

the aged Apostle Peter to the household of 

faith, showing that, while he realized that the 

time of his departure was drawing nigh (2 Pet. 1:14; 

John 21:18,19), his solicitude for the growth and 

development of the Church was increasing. Accordingly, 

he writes two general epistles, not so much 

to advance new truth, as to call to remembrance 

truths already learned and fully received (2 Pet. 1:12-15), 



and to counsel all to faithfulness and to 

growth in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord 

and Savior Jesus Christ. 

In the preceding verses he has been calling to 
mind some of these truths, and he recognizes the fact 
that those addressed are already established in them; 
but, in view of his knowledge that false teachers 
would arise to pervert the truth, he counsels special 
watchfulness against being led away from their present 
steadfastness by the error of the wicked. That 
this counsel of the Apostle has a special fitness to the 
Church in the last days, our days, and was evidently 
so designed by the Spirit of God, is clear from verse 
3— "There shall come in the last days scoffers," etc. 

Let us observe the manner in which the Apostle 
would have us guard against being led away by the 
error of the wicked. Is it by a careful investigation of 
all the claims which every new false prophet that arises 
may intrude upon our attention, thus giving heed to 
every seducing spirit (1 Tim. 4:1)? No: that would 
be quite contrary to the teaching of "our beloved 
brother Paul," to whom Peter so affectionately refers, 
and whom he so fully endorses; for Paul had given 
no uncertain counsel on this subject; saying, "Shun 
profane and vain babblings; for they will increase 
unto more ungodliness, and their word will eat as doth 
a canker;" and "I entreat you, brethren, to mark 
those who are making factions and laying snares contrary 
to the teaching which you have learned, and 
turn away from them; for they that are such are not 
in subjection to our anointed Lord, but to their own 
appetite [for honor and praise among men, as great 
teachers— 1 Tim. 1:6,7]; and by kind and complimentary 
words they deceive the hearts of the unsuspecting. 
...I wish you to be wise with respect to 
that which is good, and harmless with respect to that 
which is evil. "-2 Tim. 2:16,17; Rom. 16:17-19. 

Peter felt the force of Paul's wise and earnest 
counsel, and with emphasis re-echoed the same sentiments. 
To give heed to such seducing doctrines, contrary 
to the doctrine which we have already received 
from the Lord and the apostles, argues a lack of faith 
in those doctrines. Such a one is not established in the 
faith. And indeed there are those— and such is the general 
sentiment among the teachers of false doctrine— 
who think that it is not either necessary or advisable to 
be established in the faith. To be established is to 
be a bigot, is the idea they advance. And so it is, if 
one is so unfair in mind as to accept and tenaciously 
hold that which he has never proved either by sound 
logic or Bible authority. But he is not an unreasoning 
bigot who, in simple faith, on the authority of 
God, accepts the Word of God. And such, and only 
such, as do so are established in the truth. The difference 
between the strong and steadfast Christian 
and a bigot is that the one is established in the truth, 



while the other is established in error. The former 
knows the truth, and the truth has made him free 
from all doubts and misgivings, and from all desire 
to delve into the muddy pool of human speculations. 
To all such Paul says, "As ye have therefore received 
Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him, rooted and 
built up in him, and established in the faith, as ye 
have been taught [by us, the apostles], abounding 
therein with thanksgiving."— But, "Beware lest any 
man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit 
after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the 
world, and not after Christ."— Col. 2:6-8. 
With these sentiments of "our beloved brother 

R3215 : page 200 

Paul," Peter's counsel is in fullest harmony, his 
advice being, not to waste valuable time in investigating 
"the errors of the wicked;" but, on the contrary, 
to endeavor the more earnestly to "grow in grace and 
in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior, Jesus 
Christ," who is the way, the truth and the life. The 
more thorough our knowledge of the Lord and the 
more intimate our acquaintance with him, the more 
secure we are in our own steadfastness. 

But what is it to grow in grace? It is to grow in 
favor with the Lord through an intimate personal 
acquaintance and fellowship of spirit with him. It 
implies, first, a knowledge and recognition on our part 
of our redemption through his precious blood and a 
personal faith in and dependence upon all the promises 
of the Father made to us through him, and then 
an intimate communion with him in our daily life of 
prayer, and of observation of his will and obedience 
to it. If such be our constant attitude of mind and 
heart, there must be a constant ripening of the fruits 
of the spirit, rendering us more and more pleasing and 
acceptable to our Lord. A sense of the divine acceptance 
and favor is given to us from day to day in 
increasing measure, in fulfilment of that blessed promise 
of our Lord, "If a man love me he will keep my 
words; and my Father will love him, and we will 
come unto him, and make our abode with him."— 
John 14:23. 

This, as nearly as words can express it, is what 
it is to grow in grace; but the full and blessed understanding 
of it is best appreciated by those who from 
day to day walk with God in faith and obedience and 
love. 

To grow thus in grace and not grow in knowledge 
is impossible; for the very object of such communion 
is to build us up in a more perfect knowledge and 
acquaintance with the Lord— to bring us into closer 
fellowship with the divine plan, and to give us the 
privilege of being "workers together with him" in 
executing that plan. If, therefore, we love and obey 



the Lord and desire to grow in his favor, his written 
Word is our daily meditation and study; and thus we 
grow in knowledge: not, however, by finding out each 
year that what we learned last year was false, but by 
adding to what we learned last year, by putting on 
more and more of the armor of God until we realize 
its glorious completeness in the full discernment of the 
divine plan of the ages. We are then ready to do 
valiant service for the cause of truth in withstanding 
the encroachment of error (Eph. 6:10-13), being established, 
strengthened and settled in the faith (1 Pet. 5:10.) 
But even to those thus established in the faith 
there is abundant opportunity to grow in knowledge; 
for while they will see nothing new or different in 
outline or design, they will be continually charmed 
and cheered with newly discovered lines of harmony 
and beauty in the divine drawings of the wonderful 
plan of the ages. As pupils we may ever study the 
master workmanship of the Divine Architect, 
"And still new beauties shall we see, 
And still increasing light." 

Our beloved brother Peter, zealous for our growth 
in knowledge, endeavors to inspire us thereto, by calling 
our attention to the wonderful events and the 
close proximity of the day of the Lord; saying,— 

"The day of the Lord will come as a thief [unobserved 
by the world], in the which the heavens 
[present ecclesiastical powers] shall pass away with a 
great noise [tumult and confusion], and the elements 
[the various parties and sects composing it, split and 
torn by discordant views] shall melt with fervent 
heat [the heat of public discussion and investigation]: 
the earth also [society as at present organized under 
civil and ecclesiastical authority] and the works that 
are therein shall be burned up" (destroyed, in the 
strife and friction caused by increasing knowledge 
combined with selfishness. This will not be a literal 
fire, but, as described by the prophets, the fire of 
divine jealousy -Zeph. 1:18; 3:8). (2 Pet. 3:10.) 
Already the noise and tumult, which shall thus eventuate 
in world-wide anarchy, are distinctly heard in 
every nation: for the day of the Lord has indeed begun, 
and the heat of human passion is growing more 
and more intense daily, and the great time of trouble 
is very near. 

"Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved 
[seeing that present arrangements and institutions 
shall all go down], what manner of persons 
ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness, 
looking for the coming of the day of God, wherein 
the heavens [the present ruling powers] shall be dissolved, 
and the elements shall melt with fervent 
heat?" Let us indeed lay to heart this solemn question, 
for we stand in the very presence of the Judge 
of all the earth. These words, while addressed to 
God's people eighteen centuries ago, and serving a 



purpose for good all along down this Gospel age, are 
specially meant by the spirit for us, who are living in 
this very Day of God. 

"Nevertheless, we [we who have come into covenant 
relationship with the Lord— we, unlike the 
rest of the world, know of the divine plan and], according 
to his promise, look for new heavens [the 
Kingdom of God— to be established in power and 
great glory] and a new earth [a new organization of 
society under the rulership of Christ and his glorified 
bride, the Church] wherein dwelleth righteousness." 
Blessed assurance! how favored are we above the 

R3216 : page 201 

people of the world who have not this 
knowledge! 

"Wherefore, beloved, seeing that ye look for 
such things, be diligent that ye may be found of him 
in peace, without spot, and blameless." (2 Pet. 3:11-14.) 
And Jude (24) reminds us that the Lord, in 
whose grace and knowledge Peter desires us to grow, 
"is able to keep you from falling, and to present you 
faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding 
joy." Amen. 



R3216 : page 201 

UNFAVORABLE ANSWERS TO PRAYER. 

-1 SAM. 8:1-10. -JULY 5.- 

Golden Text:— "Prepare your hearts unto the 
Lord, and serve him only."— 1 Sam. 7:3. 

THE International Lesson course now turns again to 
the Old Testament. Six months ago we considered 
the child Samuel, his parentage, training, 
acceptance with God, etc. The present lesson takes up 
the thread of history in Samuel's old age. There is not 
a suggestion anywhere of disloyalty to the Lord or to 
the people of Israel on the part of this great prophet 
Samuel; the Lord's love and favor continued with him 
to the very close of his life and made it useful to the 
very end. As he advanced in years, and as the nation 
of Israel advanced in numbers, it seemed a proper thing 
that, in addition to the court of justice presided over by 
the prophet, there should be another court, especially 
on the southern boundary of Palestine, at Beersheba; 
and having sons, it was but natural that the 
prophet should expect of them considerable ability, 
discretion, wisdom and integrity in serving the Lord 
and his people according to the example which he had 
set them. Where could he expect to find more competent 



assistant judges for service in Beersheba than 
his own sons? 

We perceive that integrity of character, although 
transmissible to a certain degree, cannot be fully relied 
upon in the children, however noble and God-fearing 
the parent. The heart, the will, of each individual, is 
independent; training may indicate to it the proper 
course, but full consecration to the Lord is essential 
to the full, ripe development of character. Samuel's 
integrity is shown by the fact that when it was 
proven to him that his sons were guilty of accepting 
bribes to pervert justice, he promptly removed them 
from their positions of influence. Doubtless he had in 
mind the course of his predecessor, Eli, who was too 
lax in his dealings with his own sons, and thus permitted 
great calamities to come upon them and upon the 
people. The nobility and integrity of Samuel's course, 
which so commends itself to all lovers of righteousness, 
was no doubt to some extent guided by the lessons of 
the Lord exemplified in Eli's case. Certain it is that 
Samuel continued in the divine favor to the end of his 
course. 

As we have already seen, there were elders, or 
judges, in all the tribes, whose business it was to conduct 
and adjudicate the smaller matters of the people 
of their own tribe. It was probable, therefore, that 
only the larger questions were brought before Samuel 
and his sons, who constituted, we might say, a kind of 
superior court— Samuel, as a prophet and judge of 
divine appointment, representing the Lord. The government 
of Israel was different from that of every other 
government in the world. God was their real King, 
and in his providences, according to the covenant he 
had made with them, he supervised their affairs— 
whether by permitting them to go into temporary captivity 
to their enemies, because of sins and unfaithfulness 
to him, or by prospering the nation and delivering 
them and guiding their efforts favorably when living in 
obedience to him. Under the judgeship of Samuel 
they had no king, no emperor, no one except the 
Lord, to hold an autocratic position, and whose word 
would be law— the judges raised up for them from time 
to time being providentially guided by the Lord. The 
government was not a republic in the present day understanding 
of that term. The people did not choose 
their own head, or president, or judge; they merely 
looked for the leadings of divine providence and accepted 
such judges as the Lord raised up for them. 
Their condition was a most happy one in many respects: 
how much better to have the Lord's providential 
guidance in all our affairs than to trust in our own 
wisdom or in the wisdom of some other man or some 
royal family! 

As the Elders of Israel perceived that the sons of 
Samuel were not to be relied upon to follow in the steps 
of their father, and to be faithful and impartial judges, 



seeking to know and to judge amongst the people according 

to the divine will, they became fearful; they 

forgot— or perhaps never fully recognized— that God 

was their real Judge, their King, and that Samuel was 

only his representative and mouthpiece. They forgot 

that although Samuel was growing old, the Lord was 

"the same yesterday, today and forever," unchangeable, 

and able to raise up for them, in his own due 

time, a judge of the kind best suited to their necessities. 

The anxious Elders of Israel consulted together and concluded 

that they would feel better satisfied if they were 

permanently tied up to some autocratic ruler— if they 

became the servants of some one of their number, and 

permitted his family in a line of succession to be their 

masters, their kings. Doubtless, too, they did not 

R3216 : page 202 

realize that, personally and nationally, they were on a 

higher plane than the nations around them that had 

kings; they felt, on the contrary, that they were "out 

of style"; and, as people are very apt to do, they concluded 

that the majority must be right, and probably 

felt somewhat ashamed to speak of their tribes as a 

nation without a king, without a master, without a visible 

lord, claiming allegiance merely to the invisible 

Jehovah. Kitto tells us of a somewhat similar sentiment 

springing up amongst the Dutch when the latter 

had a republican form of government: 

"When the English and Dutch were plotting for power 
and influence in the East, the English, in order to damage 
their rivals, industriously circulated the dangerous secret 
that the Dutch had no king. The oriental mind was puzzled 
and perplexed by the indication of a condition so utterly 
beyond the scope of its experience and comprehension. 
The Dutch, alarmed for the effect of this slur upon 
their respectability, stoutly repelled the charge as an 
infamous calumny,— affirming that they had a very great 
king, and exalted, for the nonce, their Stadtt to the higher 
rank." 

Influenced by this servility to custom, the Elders 
of Israel brought their petition, or prayer, to Samuel 
that he, as God's representative, would anoint for them 
a king— a special ruler over them, and make them as a 
whole a nation of servants to one of their own nation. 
It is hard for us to sympathize with such ignoble sentiments, 
such prayers for their own degradation. Samuel 
seems to have viewed the matter from this standpoint, 
and, perhaps, also regarded it as a personal slight 
to himself. However, he very properly took the matter 
to the Lord in prayer. It was not for him to decide 
what and how— he was merely the Lord's mouthpiece 
and representative to speak to the Israelites in the 
name of the Lord whatever message he should receive. 
Ah, how grand it would be if the whole world could 
be under such a rule,— heavenly wisdom directing, and 



incorruptible earthly judges communicating and enforcing 

the divine message and law! And this, the 

Scriptures inform us, is what will come to pass eventually, 

the Lord's declaration being, "I will restore thy 

judges as at the first, and thy counsellors as at the beginning." 

(Isa. 1:26.) However, before that grand 

condition— of which the Jewish law-givers and judges 

were merely the crudest types— can be realized, it will 

be necessary for the great King Immanuel to take his 

great power and reign and subdue all things unto himself. 

Then, "Thy people shall be willing in the day 

of thy power"— they will be ready to hearken to the 

voice of the Lord through those whom he will eventually 

appoint and recognize as his mouthpieces. 

The Lord's answer to Samuel was that the prayer 
or petition of the people through their elders would 
be granted; but directed that he should, nevertheless, 
explain to them what this answer to their prayers, this 
fulfilment of their desires, would mean— that it would 
mean the surrender of their liberties and rights; that 
the rule of a king would be more or less despotic, 
tyrannical and selfish; that their sons and daughters 
would be taken to be servants in various capacities; 
that a large portion of their substance would be 
taken as taxes for the support of royalty, and that they 
would be subject to the whims of these masters whom 
they were desiring, whose pride and ambition would 
some time lead to rivalries and warfare, in which the 
whole people, as their servants, would suffer with them. 

The elders heard all this delineation of the unwisdom 
of their course, but were, nevertheless, well satisfied 
to make the experiment— they wanted to be like 
the nations around them. How strong is the influence 
of imitation in all mankind! how necessary that all 
should have before their minds true standards, true 
ideals of greatness of liberty or of righteousness,— of 

R3217 : page 202 

that which is really advantageous! Herein the Lord's 

people have his wisdom, his spirit— have a standpoint 

of observation superior to that of others, and possess 

the spirit of a sound mind proportionate to their education 

in the school of Christ. He has an education in 

the school of the Lord which gives him a finer acumen 

in respect to all the things of this present time, which 

seem comparatively insignificant to him in comparison 

with the things of the future— the eternal things. As 

the Apostle says, "He that is spiritual judgeth [understandeth] 

all things, yet he himself is judged 

[understood] of no man."— 1 Cor. 2:15. 

The Lord pointed out that the people were not 
rejecting Samuel, but were rejecting him. Indeed, 
that they had not rejected Samuel was evident from the 
fact that they came to him with the request. It was 
their lack of faith in the Lord that led them to fear 



what would happen after Samuel should die, or when 
his usefulness should become impaired through old 
age. The Lord points out that this had been the attitude 
of Israel from the first— "all the works that they 
have done since I brought them up out of Egypt even 
unto this day, wherein they have forsaken me and 
served other gods,— so do they also unto thee." They, 
of course, forsook Samuel as their judge; for the king 
whom he would anoint would be the judge instead. 
But the discredit to Samuel was nothing in comparison 
to their discrediting and rejecting the One whom he 
represented. 

The Lord's people of today may draw from these incidents 
a valuable lesson in connection with the divine 
supervision of spiritual Israel. The Lord organized the 
Church very much along the same lines as he organized 
natural Israel. He is the Head of the Church— the 
guide and director and instructor of the Church. He 
guarantees that all things shall work together for good 

R3217 : page 203 

to those who love him and follow his guidance. For 
a time the Lord's people were content with such leadership 
as he raised up for them in his own way, content 
that the Lord should direct through the leaders 
of Zion and that no man should be called lord, or 
master, or king. For a time spiritual Israel looked 
only for such instructors, lawgivers, judges, teachers 
and assistants in the spiritual way as the Lord in his 
providences raised up for them. But, by and by, there 
came a time when they said, Let us make us a king- 
let us have a head in the Christian Church such as there 
is in all the heathen religions around us. The Lord 
had already pointed out to his people a great Leader 
by whom he had made them free; that they all were 
brethren, and that only one was Lord and Master; 
that they should recognize no man as lord, and should 
recognize each other only as servants; and that the one 
who served most thoroughly— through the Lord's 
supervision— was to be esteemed as raised up and provided 
by divine providence for the service, and to be 
esteemed in proportion to his humility and loyalty to 
the Lord and his Word. 

The spirit of subserviency and the desire to have a 
head led, first, to a division amongst the Lord's people 
into two classes called clergy and laity, a division not 
recognized nor sanctioned in the Word of the Lord; 
and, secondly, amongst the clergy it led to the exaltation 
of some, called archbishops, to the position of lordship 
over districts; and, thirdly, it led to the choice 
amongst the archbishops of one to be a chief, or pope; 
and ultimately it led to this chief being considered infallible 
and a divinely appointed king over spiritual Israel. 
As there were some better and some worse amongst the 
kings of natural Israel, so there were some better and 



some worse amongst the popes who ruled in spiritual 
Israel for centuries. Finally, as there was a split in the 
kingdom of Israel between the ten tribes and the two 
tribes, so there came in time a split in spiritual Israel 
nominal, and Protestantism arose, no longer recognizing 
the popes as kings in spiritual Israel. However, the 
spirit of subserviency being still present, and the spirit 
of liberty wherewith Christ had made his people free being 
still lacking, the Reformation movement led to the 
appointment and recognition of numerous petty kingdoms 
in spiritual Israel— the Lutheran house and the 
Episcopal house and the Presbyterian house and the 
Methodist house, etc., etc., with their various ecclesiastical 
princes and potentates, doctors of divinity, etc.— 
lording it over God's heritage.— 1 Pet. 5:3. 

It is time for the establishment of the true kingdom 
—it is just at hand. It is time for the gathering 
of the elect out of every quarter, every district of this 
figurative Babylon in which the Lord's people are captives 
to these devices of Satan; it is time for a reassertion 
of the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free; 
it is time that the Lord's people should recognize him 
as their only King and Director; it is time for them to 
hear the words, "Cease ye from man, whose breath is 
in his nostrils, for wherein is he to be accounted of?" 
(Isa. 2:22); it is time for the Lord's people to realize 
that the Lord is entirely competent to conduct his own 
work in the way most pleasing to himself, and most 
advantageous to those who are truly his; it is time for 
them to look to the Lord to see what agents, what 
channels of truth, what ministries of service in spiritual 
Israel he has provided or is providing. When we come 
to realize the situation, we find that all this matter of 
recognizing popes, cardinals, bishops, doctors of divinity, 
etc., is contrary to the divine arrangement— in 
direct antagonism to the same; but that, nevertheless, 
it has not hindered, and will not be permitted to hinder, 
the accomplishment of the Lord's work and the 
gathering of the true Israelites, the elect, the precious, 
the Lord's jewels, out of nominal Israel. This work of 
the Lord is going gradually on, regardless of what the 
people in general may do. 

We have considered this lesson under the head of 
"Unfavorable Answers to Prayer," because it furnishes 
an excellent illustration along this line. What might 
have been the condition of Israel had they not prayed 
for a king, we cannot know particularly; but we can 
know, on the strength of the Lord's Word, that it would 
have been more favorable to them if they had been in 
a condition of heart which would have led them to 
thank God for his care, and to rejoice in him as their 
King, and to have made no such petition for an earthly 
monarch as is here recorded. The Lord through the 
Prophet Hosea (13:9-11) intimates that the answer of 
this prayer for a king was disadvantageous to the nation; 
saying, "O Israel, thou hast destroyed thyself; 



but in me is thine help. I will be thy king: where is 

any other that may save thee in all thy cities? and thy 

judges of whom thou saidst, Give me a king and 

princes? I gave thee a king in mine anger, and took 

him away in my wrath." The king whom the Lord 

intends to give to Israel and to the world is Messiah. 

In due time the Lord will set his king upon his holy 

hill Zion; the law shall go forth from Mount Zion, 

and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem; in his day 

the righteous shall flourish and evil doers shall be cut 

off. The Lord took away the kings of Israel when the 

people went into captivity to Babylon; there have 

been no independent kings of their nation since. Today, 

after centuries of experience without a king of 

their own, and under various kings of various nations, 

they are probably in a better condition of heart than 

ever before to receive the great blessing which God intends 

to bring to them first amongst the nations of the 

R3217 : page 204 

world. The prophet declares of them respecting Messiah's 

Kingdom, that they shall be ready to hail it and 

shall say, "This is our God, we have waited for him 

and he will save us." They certainly had serious experiences, 

not only under their own kings, but under 

all the kings of the earth; they certainly should be 

glad that the time shall again come when the Lord will 

be King over them— and over all the earth; when he 

shall restore to them a system of lawgivers and judges, 

and bless all the families of the earth through the seed 

of Abraham,— Messiah and his bride, the overcomers 

of spiritual Israel.— Gal. 3:16,29. 

What we thus see exemplified on a large and national 
scale we may see exemplified in a small way 
closer to us. How many of us in our ignorance and 
blindness have at some time in life prayed for the 
various systems of bondage, for the various sects of 
Christendom, and labored, too, for their upbuilding, 
only to find ourselves injured spiritually by that which 
we prayed for and labored for. We asked amiss, as 
did the Elders of Israel, while, instead, our hearts as 
well as theirs should have inquired continually for the 
ways of the Lord, for his leadings, not asking to have 
him favor and bless that which we ignorantly and mistakenly 
supposed to be for his glory and our own good. 
Let us learn to pray aright, as well as to labor and to 
hope aright; and in order so to do let us be swift to 
hear, slow to speak, swift to hearken to the Word of 
the Lord and to the lesson which he has already given 
us, and to his method of instructing us and guiding us 
and blessing us. Let us be slow to tell him what our 
preferences are; indeed, let us seek to attain that development 
of Christian character which will permit us 
always not to seek our own wills, but the will and way 
of our Father in heaven. 



The same principle will apply in the more private 
affairs of our daily lives. Several parents have told us, 
with aching hearts, of prayers answered which subsequently 
they could have wished never answered; they 
have told us of companions and children on their deathbeds 
for whose lives they had prayed with importunity 
and without either the words or the sentiment, Thy 
will be done, and how the Lord answered those prayers, 
and what terrible evils had come to them through the 
answers. All cases may not be alike, but the properly 
exercised and heart-developed children of God should 
expect to attain to the place where all of their prayers 
are answered, and answered in the best possible way, 
and most satisfactorily, because the Lord's Word 
dwells in them richly. They would not ask amiss— 
would not ask anything contrary to the divine will and 
providences; but rather, trusting to the divine wisdom, 
their prayer would be, "Lord, thy will, not mine, be 
done." 



R3218 : page 204 

CHOOSING A KING. 

-1 SAM. 10:17-27.-JULY 12.- 

Golden Text:— "The Lord is our king; 
he will save us."— Isa. 33:22. 

ALTHOUGH the people of Israel were self-willed 
in the matter of desiring a king like the nations 
about them, it is to their credit that 
they desired the Lord, through his prophet Samuel, to 
make the selection of the one who should fill the office. 
Undoubtedly, however, men of the various tribes were 
ambitious for the office. To suppose otherwise would 
be to disregard our knowledge of and experience with 
human nature. If the petty offices of ward and town 
politics are eagerly sought and almost fought for at 
the primaries and polls today, what wire pulling might 
we not expect if it were determined that a king should 
be chosen? We fear that a contrast between the people 
of Christendom and the Israelites on this subject 
would result unfavorably to the former. In all the countries 
constituting "Christendom" how few there are who, 
when choosing their officers, give any consideration whatever 
to the Lord's choice for the position! Even when 
we think of the choice of ministers in the denominations 
of the Church nominal, we find the contrast rather unfavorable; 
for the choice of a bishop or minister is 
indeed, apparently, very rarely referred to the Lord 
exclusively, with the desire to have his will and his 
choice, and none other, selected. 
Guided by the Lord, Saul, a young man from 



an influential family, of the tribe of Benjamin, was 
anointed to be king. He was brought to the prophet 
for the anointing by a peculiar train of circumstances. 
His father owned a valuable herd of asses which strayed 
away, and Saul, after seeking them in vain, appealed 
to the prophet for assistance in locating them, and thus 
he showed his confidence in God, and in Samuel as his 
prophet. Nothing is recorded respecting the young 
man's interest in religious matters up to this time; 
but he is mentioned favorably as a "goodly" young 
man. After his anointing he kept the matter secret 
with becoming modesty, waiting for the Lord's plan to 
develop more fully and to bring him ultimately into 
prominence before the nation. It is quite probable 
that this secretiveness was at the instigation of Samuel. 

In due time Samuel sent word to the Elders of 
Israel to meet him at Mizpeh (watch-tower), and upon 
their arrival the matters of this lesson followed. Samuel 
rehearsed to them the Lord's favor as it had been 

R3218 : page 205 

with them during the previous centuries, beginning 

with their miraculous deliverance from Egypt. He impressed 

upon them the fact that all of the Lord's care 

over them had been for their good; that no king could 

have done them better service than their great King; 

and that no government could have been more to their 

happiness than that they had enjoyed and which they 

were now rejecting in their request for a king, which 

petition the Lord had determined to grant. In harmony 

with this they had assembled— not all the people, 

but representatives from all the tribes and from 

the various families of each tribe. Ignoring the anointing 

of Saul already accomplished, Samuel proceeded to 

cast lots, that the people might thus know that the 

choice to be made was the Lord's choice and not Samuel's. 

It was the custom at that time to have the 

High Priest's ephod in use on such occasions, and a 

pocket in the ephod was made the receptacle for slips 

of paper, or sometimes for the precious stones representing 

the different tribes and families. First, a choice 

was made amongst the tribes to determine in which 

one would be found the man whom the Lord had chosen 

to become their king. Doubtless the princes of the 

tribe of Ephraim remembered the good promises prophetically 

given by Jacob respecting them, and probably 

thought that the Lord's choice would fall upon 

their tribe. The princes of Manasseh may also have 

remembered the good promises respecting their tribe, 

and may not have been without hope respecting the lot. 

The men of Judah, unquestionably, would call to mind 

the promise that a lawgiver should come from Judah, 

and would have strong hopes respecting the result of 

the lot. But when the lot was cast, when the hand 

pulled forth from the ephod pocket the stone representing 



the tribe of Benjamin, the matter was decided, 
and in general the people bowed to the Lord's decision. 
Next, the leading families, or clans, of the tribe of Benjamin 
were representatively placed in the ephod, and 
the hand drew forth as the Lord's choice the name 
representing the family of Matri; and again, the various 
members of the family of Matri were representatively 
placed in the ephod bag, and the hand drew 
forth the name of Saul, the son of Kish. Thus was publicly 
demonstrated the Lord's choice, which the prophet 
and Saul himself already knew. We can imagine the 
stir and commotion to find the man thus chosen to be 
the king, respecting whom but few of the people seemed 
to have the slightest knowledge. They sought him 
everywhere, but could not find him, and again the 
inspired oracle was sought to indicate whether he 
would be found, and where. The Lord's answer 
was that he had hidden himself amongst the stuff— 
the baggage which, as was the custom, was probably 
piled up, surrounding the camp as a barricade. Saul 
evidently had full confidence in the Lord's foreknowledge 
and that the lots drawn would confirm the prophet's 
declaration to him and his anointing. The modesty 
which led him to hide and, to some extent, to shrink 
from the honor to be conferred, is very gratifying to all 
right-minded people. Would that we could see more 
of this modesty amongst the chief ones of this world 
and also amongst the chief ones of nominal spiritual 
Israel! We should each mark the beauty of such 
humble-mindedness, and seek to cultivate the same 
quality in our own hearts and lives— however different 
this may make us from the majority of the world. 

When Saul stood amongst the people he was head 
and shoulders above them, probably seven feet tall. 
His natural qualities would thus appeal strongly to 
the people of his time, who even in picturing their rulers 
represented them as many times larger than the 
average man. Then Samuel introduced him, saying, 
"See ye him whom the Lord hath chosen, that there 
is none like him among all the people?" and the responsive 
shout of the people was, "God save the 
king!" or literally, Lord, let the king live— the usual 
greeting to their kings. 

We are reminded of the fact that God is now about 
to establish a Kingdom in the world and is choosing a 
King. The Millennial kingdom might not be necessary 
in the form in which it will be introduced, were 
the people in the right attitude of heart to desire and to 
obey the divine will; but they prefer to have the laws 
of righteousness enforced rather than voluntarily to submit 
themselves to the Lord. In due time they shall 
have a king, Immanuel— like Saul in some respects, but 
very unlike him in others. The Lord is now selecting 
this King Immanuel. He is passing by the great tribes, 
the prominent people, and choosing the little and the 
humble— not many great, not many wise, not many 



learned has God chosen, but the poor of this world, 

rich in faith, to be heirs of the Kingdom. (1 Cor. 1:26-28.) 

The selection is going on in the sight of all the 

people. They will be witnesses, when all the steps of 

the election of God have been taken, that the choice is 

the Lord's without peradventure; and yet the Lord 

foreknew his choice in advance of this public selection. 

He foreknew Jesus as the Head of the Church, the 

Head of the great King; he anointed him in advance 

"with the oil of gladness above his fellows," to be 

King; yet, so far as the people in general are concerned, 

they know not the Lord's anointed— the matter 

is kept secret for a time. The members of the body 

of Christ must all be like the Head. As the Apostle 

declares, God has predestinated that every one who 

shall become a member of that body shall be "conformed 

to the image of his Son." (Rom. 8:29.) By 

and by, when the outward election is complete, when 

R3218 : page 206 

the world shall come properly to feel its need for a great 
King, search will be made to find the Lord's Anointed, 
and he will be found at his second advent. "The desire 
of all nations shall come"; the Christ of God will 
be the desired one of all nations. (The name Saul, singularly 
enough, signifies Desired.) As the men of Israel 
gave a shout when they recognized Saul's stateliness, 
so the world of mankind will shout for joy when they 
shall realize the presence of the Christ of God, the great 
King, their deliverer from Satan, from misrule, from 
every enemy— the Lord who "must reign till he hath 
put all enemies under his feet— the last enemy that 
shall be destroyed is death." Not only shall it be true 
that the Lord's Anointed One shall be head and shoulders 
above all others, "the chiefest amongst ten thousand, 
the one altogether lovely," but it should also be 
true to a considerable extent that all those who are 
intimately associated with the members of the body of 
Christ in the present life— before he is proclaimed King 
of the whole world— should be able to recognize the 
largeness and grandeur of character in those whom the 
Lord is choosing for this place of honor in the affairs 
of men. They should be able to take knowledge of 
them that they have been with Jesus, should see their 
largeness of heart, their moral heights— should discern 
in them the spirit of a sound mind. 

The record is that a band of Israelites, a bodyguard, 
at once attached themselves to Saul— men 
"whose hearts God had touched." They were touched 
with the realization that the Lord had made this 
choice, and with the desire to be in accord with 
the Lord and to support the divine will as it concerned 
the chosen one, and to cooperate therewith. 
This is a proper lesson to all of the Lord's 
people now. It is because we see Jesus to be the Father's 



choice that we unite ourselves to him; because we 
see the Father's character manifested in him that we 
leave all to follow him. Similarly, if we lend our aid, 
our support to any human being in connection with 
the divine plan and service, it should be simply upon 

R3219 : page 206 

this ground— not merely a personal magnetism or favoritism, 
but because our hearts are touched by the 
Lord with a realization of the leader being of his 
appointment. Thus our loyalty will always be to God 
and not to men. Nevertheless, we shall find ourselves 
co-laboring in a manner most useful and most helpful in 
the Lord's service; coworkers with God and coworkers 
with all who are his servants under his appointments. 
So, doubtless, it will be in the future when the great 
King complete has taken the reins of government; the 
best of mankind will flock to him, anxious to know 
and to do his will and to be in full accord with him as 
the representative of the heavenly Father and his 
Kingdom. 

The expression "Sons of Belial" signifies children 
of the Devil, or wicked persons— persons out of 
harmony with God and not submissive to his arrangements 
and selections. There are also such in the present 
time, who are speaking evil directly or indirectly 
of such members of the body of Christ as they have 
contact with; being out of sympathy with the Lord 
they are out of sympathy with all of his arrangements. 
Their influence either in the nominal church or out of 
it is, therefore, against the true interests of the Lord's 
cause. There will be such in the Millennial age when 
the Kingdom shall have been established, and of these 
the Lord speaks in the parable, "Those who would 
not have me to reign over them." Again they are 
mentioned by the Apostle (Acts 3:23) saying, "It shall 
come to pass that the soul who will not obey that 
prophet shall be cut off from amongst the people." 
However, we may be sure that they will not be cut off 
until they have had a full exhibition of the divine 
power and mercy;— only such as resist after all these 
opportunities and privileges will be counted worthy of 
the Second Death. 

Very shortly after Saul's appointment to the kingdom 
he had opportunity to show his ability in delivering 
the people, for a neighboring king advanced 
upon Israel with a considerable army. Saul gathered 
his troops from the various tribes, to the number of 
330,000 men, and totally routed Nahash and his army 
of the Ammonites. This victory cemented the hearts 
of the people of Israel to their king, and they in their 
loyalty demanded the execution of the sons of Belial 
who had spoken against him; but the nobility of King 
Saul is shown in his refusal to accede to this suggestion, 
and his saying, "There shall not a man be put to 



death today." So when the power of the glorious 
King of the Millennial age shall be manifested in the 
routing of the enemies of righteousness, the general 
sentiment of the world toward him will be loyalty, and 
then he will have an opportunity of showing his mercy 
and forbearance toward those who during the darkness 
of the present time have spoken evil of him and sought 
to oppose his Kingdom. The declaration shall then go 
forth that none shall die the Second Death on account 
of Adamic weaknesses, blindness and insubordination; 
—that none shall die the Second Death except as the 
result of personal and wilful sin after having been 
brought to a knowledge of the truth. 

Our Golden Text is one the sentiments of which 
should be deeply impressed upon the hearts of all the 
Lord's people. The world may cry out, saying, "We 
have no king but Caesar," but the Lord's people, the 
Israelites indeed, will feel the reverse of this,— that 
"the Lord is our king." In harmony with his command, 
we will honor earthly kings and obey earthly 

R3219 : page 207 

laws in every particular in which they do not conflict 

with the divine law; but, nevertheless, above earthly 

kings, our esteem, homage and obedience must 

be to him whom the Lord hath appointed, King 

Immanuel. If he be enthroned in our hearts 

it will be comparatively easy for us to be loyal 

to him in our conduct and in our words, wherever 

we may be. If we deny him, he will also deny us; 

but if we confess him he will also confess us before the 

Father and the holy angels— he will save us and ultimately 

through us as his Church, his body, he will, 

according to the original promise, bless all the families 

of the earth which we, with him, will then inherit— 

Gal. 3:29. 



R3219 : page 207 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS ANSWERED. 
GOD'S PROVIDENCE OVER THE WORLD. 



Question.— I have recently lost a friend by death, 
and notice that your teaching seems to be that the 
Lord's providential care is over the consecrated ones. 
Am I to get the thought that God had no providential 
care over the interests of my friend? 

Answer.— "His tender mercies are over all his 
works." (Psa. 145:9.) Hence, in a certain sense, 
God's providential care attaches to every creature. 



"The whole creation is his charge, 
But saints are his peculiar care." 
When thinking of your friend, consider him as 
one of the many children of Adam whom God so 
loved as to give for them his only begotten Son. The 
redemption price has been paid by our Lord, and 
the time of deliverance draws near. When it shall 
have arrived, all the families of the earth will receive 
a blessing at the hands of him who loved us 
and bought us with his precious blood. Viewing the 
matter from this standpoint, there is no human creature 
that is not a subject of divine providence and 
care. In speaking of God's providences being over 
only the consecrated, we referred to his special providences 
of this Gospel age in respect to the calling and 
election of the Church, the body of Christ. Divine 
providence deals with this class alone in this Gospel 
age, favoring them by the call and by the adversities 
which will polish and fit them as jewels for the Kingdom. 
For these, all things shall work together for 
good, because they love God in an especial sense- 
better than they love self or family or houses or lands 
—yea, better than their own lives. 

WHO ARE OUR BRETHREN? 



Question.— What should be our attitude toward 
professing Christians of the various denominations 
who give evidence of but slight knowledge of the 
truth, and but slight appreciation of the ransom? 
Should we consider them brethren in Christ? and 
should we fellowship them as such? or should we 
treat them as heathen men and publicans? 

Answer.— All who profess love to the Lord Jesus 
Christ and have faith in him as their Savior— even 
though their knowledge of his redemptive work be 
but limited and vague— and whose general conduct is 
noted as indicating their desire to walk after the 
spirit and not after the flesh, should be considered 
and treated as brethren. But when we use the word 
"brother" we are to remember that amongst believers 
there are two classes of brethren: (1) Those who 
have merely pledged themselves to the Lord for a 
reformation of life, and who are to some extent trusting 
in the Savior; and (2) those who have gone on and 
who have consecrated their lives even unto death, and 
have been begotten as new creatures by the holy spirit. 
These are brethren of a different order; the first 
were typified in the Levites, the last in the priests. 
Both are our brethren, and both should be treated 
courteously, kindly, helpfully; but it would be impossible 
to fellowship the first class in the same manner 
or degree that we would fellowship the second 
class. In considering the Church, only the latter 



should be counted, because the Church is the body of 
Christ, the Royal Priesthood. Only the latter, therefore, 
should be expected to participate in the Memorials 
of the Lord's death, and the pledge of consecration 
to be dead with him. It is to the first of these 
classes of brethren (typified by the Levites) that the 
Apostle addressed the exhortation, "I beseech you, 
brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your 
bodies living sacrifices," etc. (Rom. 12:1.) Those 
who follow this exhortation and make the sacrificial 
consecration, thereby become brethren on the highest 
plane of the spirit, and thus become members of the 
highest degree of fellowship as members of the body 
of the Anointed One. 

Knowledge is to be highly esteemed in the Church, 
and to be regarded as an evidence of progress, of 
growth; for none can grow strong in the Lord and 
in the power of his might— in grace— unless he grows 
also in knowledge. We properly esteem most highly 
those whose love for the Lord and for his truth are 
evidenced by zeal in the study of his Word, and whose 
favor with God is evidenced by their being guided 
more and more into the deep things of God. Nevertheless, 
as in the earthly family we love and care for 
the babes and immature, so also in the household of 
faith the little ones and the dwarfs are to be cared for 
and loved and helped that they may grow strong in 
the Lord and in the power of his might. 



page 209 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIV. JULY 15, 1903. No. 14 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 211 

Varying Degrees of Unbelief 21 1 

How Shall We Understand 

Them? 212 

Misled by Their Evolution 

Theories 214 

"Lord, What Wilt Thou Have 

Me to Do?" (Poem) 215 

Samuel's Farewell Address 215 

"To Obey is Better Than 

Sacrifice" 218 

The Lord Looketh on the Heart 221 

General Conventions, Etc 224 

page 210 



LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



R3219 : page 210 

TABERNACLE SHADOWS IN GERMAN. 



This valuable little booklet is now in stock— a complete 
translation of the English edition. It is supplied at 
rates uniform with the English, 10c each, 50c per dozen. 

page 210 

WATCH TOWER BINDERS. 



Remember, that we have these in good supply at 50 
cents each, delivery free. Each Binder will hold two years' 
issues, and they are very convenient for easy reference and 
preserving the papers from injury and soiling. 

MISSIONARY ENVELOPES. 



These are now in stock in large quantity. Every letter 
you send through the mail may be a more or less potent 
messenger of the truth, even on its outside, by the use of 
these envelopes. They catch the attention not only of 
those to whom they are addressed, but postmen and others 
have an opportunity, and often the curiosity, to read their 
message of peace,— the gospel in a condensed form. Cheap, 



too,— 25c per hundred, postpaid. 



THOSE TOO POOR TO PAY FOR THIS JOURNAL SHOULD NOT 
FORGET TO REQUEST IT YEARLY. SEE TERMS. 



R3220 : page 211 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
VARYING DEGREES OF UNBELIEF. 



THE "higher critics" differ considerably. It would 
be amusing, were it not so serious a subject, to 
note how the one class upbraids the other for 
"destructive criticism of the Word of God," and then 
in the same article proceeds along the same lines,— 
only a little less destructive of the faith. For instance, 
note the following from the Presbyterian Standard:— 

"On Sunday last Dr. Josiah Penniman, dean of the 
University of Pennsylvania, delivered an exceedingly 
interesting address or lay sermon from the pulpit of 
the Asheville Presbyterian Church at the morning 
hour, in which he told of the remarkable revelations 
made by pick and shovel in excavating the site of the 
ancient city of Chalneh in the valley of the Euphrates. 
This city is mentioned in Gen. 10:10, and the work of 
digging it out has been done by the University of 
Pennsylvania during the last thirteen years. The 
destructive critics say that the art of writing was not 
known at the time of Abraham. But the University 
of Pennsylvania has exhumed more than forty thousand 
burnt clay tablets full of written records dating 
back 4,000 years before the Christian era, and so 
2,000 years before the time of Abraham. The destructive 
critics say that the war of the kings as recorded 
in Gen. 14 is all a myth, as at that early age of the 
world such armies could not have been collected. But 
on some of the 40,000 tablets in the possession of the 
University of Pennsylvania taken from the site of this 
ancient city, the names of the very kings who carried 
on this war are given just as they are recorded in Gen. 14, 
and some of the spoils which they carried off from 
Chalneh have been found in excavating the ancient 
city of Susa. 

"These excavations have upset the already tottering 
chronology of Usher and have put the existence of 
man on the earth back some 10,000 years before the Christian 
era, and they show the existence of a high civilization 
at that early period. The work of exhuming Chalneh 
began on what seemed to be merely a mound of 



sand in a desert of drifting sand. The dome of a building 
was soon reached, which proved to be a magnificent 
temple of Baal, of whose worship this city was the 
center. The temple had been covered to the depth of 
more than forty feet from its base by the drifting 
sands. Among other curiosities found in adjacent 
buildings was the strong room of a real estate and 
banking house, containing certificates of deposit, title 
deeds, tax receipts and the like, all on baked clay tablets 
and beautifully written in cuneiform characters, 
and they read very much like similar 'papers' in a 
modern real estate dealer's office. 

"Dr. Penniman had beautiful photographs of the 
buildings in the city, which were strong, massive and 
imposing, and very much like the best buildings in our 
modern cities. The names of the various kings and 
dynasties are given, with the dates of each, which extend 
back to a period 2,000 years before Abraham, or to 
the time of Adam, according to our common 
chronology. 

"But the pick and the shovel went deeper, and the 
very surprising discovery was made that this ancient 
city of Chalneh was built on the site of a still more ancient 
city beneath it, of which there seems to have been 
no memory or tradition at the founding of the city of 
Chalneh. This city dated back at least 4,000 years 
more, or to a period 8,000 years before the Christian 
era. Its inhabitants, whoever they were, were very 
skilled builders, and had massive stone houses and 
temples several stories high, in which the arch is freely 
used. The arch was unknown to the Egyptians or to 
the Greeks or to any of the peoples whom we call 'the 
ancients,' and is considered a Roman invention. But 
the modern pick and shovel unearths it where the 
sands of the desert had buried it so deep that all memory 
and tradition of the mighty builders who invented 
it and used it some 8,000 to 10,000 years before Christ 
had passed away from among men; and what has been 
considered an invention of the Romans was really one 
of the 'lost arts' of a highly civilized people who 
lived and built and wrote and thought and perished, 
and the record of them and of their doings has lain for 
probably a hundred centuries so deep beneath the sands 
that their burial place was used by other men as a place 

R3220 : page 212 

for their building; and these in turn were buried in the 
sand, the removal of which shows that the Bible record 
is accurately true in its minute details, for while man 
must come and man must go, the Word of God abideth 
forever." 



All should recognize clearly and distinctly what 



is implied by the foregoing. It means that the lecturer 
wholly disagrees with that open form of infidelity 
which denies the Bible in toto, claiming that the books 
of Moses, as well as the books of the prophets of the 
Old Testament, were written only a short time before 
Christ— after the return of the Israelites from the 
Babylonian captivity. The claim is that these books 
are pious frauds, having little, if any, foundation in 
truth. Dr. Penniman, the lecturer, was not in sympathy 
with such open infidelity. He was glad, therefore, 
when the excavations he mentioned disclosed 
certain outside information, corroborative of some of 
the statements of Genesis. We are glad that the Doctor 
is with us thus far; but we regret to note that he 
is so tinctured with the spirit of higher criticism that 
the researches which he mentions have not convinced 
him that the Bible is of divine origin, and, therefore, 
unqualifiedly true. He merely admits that it is not 
unqualifiedly false— that these findings prove that 
there is some reliability in the Scriptural account;— 
but he evidently is as far from accepting the Bible 
narrative as it stands, as are the most destructive of 
the higher critics. 

The chronology of the Bible is so thoroughly interwoven 
with its narrative that the two are bound 
up together as web and woof: to destroy the one destroys 
the other; to invalidate the one invalidates the 
other; to corroborate the one corroborates the other. 

There is no question whatever that the Bible contains 
a chronological chain down to the Babylonian 
captivity— even the captious find it impossible to disagree 
more than 128 years with what we have presented 
as the chronology of the Bible;— and then they 
must make that period shorter than we do instead of 
longer. No kind of reasoning or figuring based on the 
Bible statements of chronology can extend the period 
from the creation to the birth of our Lord beyond 
4128 years which we have assigned to the period. 
Dr. Penniman, as the Dean of a University, and a lecturer 
upon this subject, is, of course, thoroughly 
aware of these facts. Yet how strange it is that he 
should address an audience as a champion of the Bible, 
and at the same time discredit the Bible by asserting, 
as he does, that man had been on the earth some ten 
thousand years prior to the Christian era! If this 
gentleman is a friend of the Bible, the latter has good 
reason to cry out, "Save me from my friends!" 

If the Doctor is a disbeliever in the Bible, and is 
posing as its friend and champion, he is occupying a 
dishonest and dishonorable position. In any event, 
the Bible is far better off without such friends and 
such champions. Whether intentionally or unintentionally, 
they are serving the cause of infidelity— they 
are overthrowing faith in the Word of God. True, 
we are to expect just such things at this particular 
time, for the Apostle assures us that every man's faith- 



structure shall be tried so as by fire; and that all the 
wood, hay and stubble shall be destroyed. We are, 
of course, sure that those who have built their faith 
according to the direction of the Lord's Word, upon 
the proper foundation, and with the proper materials, 
the gold, silver, precious stones of divine truth, the 
Word of God,— these will never fail, will never be 
stumbled, but will come off conquerors. But we also 
know that this class is a remarkably small one, out of 
the millions of Christendom. Let us not be surprised, 
then, that the "fire of this day shall try every man's 
work, of what sort it is." Let us, on the contrary, 
take the more earnest heed and the more firmly hold 
on to the things which we have received of the Lord, 
which in the end will shine forth gloriously bright and 
convincing to the whole world of mankind. 

HOW SHALL WE UNDERSTAND THEM? 

The question naturally arises, if honorable men, 
students "learned in all the learning of the Egyptians," 
find in the ruins of ancient civilization evidences 
satisfactory to them that man has been on the 
earth at least six thousand years longer than the Bible 
records teach, how shall the average person of medium 
ability and intelligence and opportunities determine 
what is the truth on this subject? If he cannot rely 
upon the savants, upon whom or upon what can he 
rely? 

We answer, that the savants base their estimates 
on their guesses,— and their guesses vary according 
to their mental makeup. Many of them guess that 
man has been on the earth for millions of years; others, 
like Dr. Penniman, congratulate themselves upon 
getting their faith down to a difference of only six 
thousand years from the Bible standpoint; but the 
humble child of God, who has made a proper use of 
the opportunities now within his reach, has learned 
to have little confidence in the guesses of the savants 
and higher critics, in proportion as he has learned to 
have great confidence in the Bible as a divine revelation. 
Those who will be easily moved to doubt the 
reliability of the Scriptures, under the instructions of 
its injurious friends (?), will, generally, be those who 
have never come to a clear appreciation of the divine 
plan of the ages, revealed in that wonderful Book and 
in it alone. Those who have been for any considerable 

R3221 : page 213 

time in the school of Christ, and have been faithful 
to the instructions there received, have learned 
that the Bible contains a plan so wonderful that it is 
not possible that man could have conceived or originated 
it;— a plan which fits into all the features of past 
history, and is as fully in accord with the declarations 



of the Old Testament as with those of the New Testament, 
—though in many things out of accord with the 
teachings of Churchianity. 

As we open the old Book, which some one has 
said is an anvil upon which numerous hammers of 
infidelity have worn themselves out, we find its declaration 
respecting our day,— "The wisdom of their 
wise men shall perish; the understanding of their 
prudent men shall be hid." (Isa. 29:14.) Dr. Penniman 
and other D.Ds. and LL.Ds. and Professors 
corroborate and fulfil this divine testimony today. 
Their difficulty is not so much a dishonesty of mind 
which hinders them from receiving the truth, but 
rather that they approach the subject from the wrong 
standpoint. Instead of approaching geology and scientific 
research from the standpoint of faith in the 
Bible, and a desire to find and prove it correct, they 
approach these from the reverse standpoint, with a 
conviction that the Bible is certainly wrong in some 
measure, great or small. Imbued considerably with 
the spirit of higher criticism, even when resisting its 
conclusions, they approach their investigations with a 
view merely to reduce the discrepancy between the 
Bible statements and the extreme position of infidelity. 
And it is needless to say that in such matters, 
where it is the mind that is concerned, and opinions 
that are to be formed, one usually finds corroboration 
in line with the sentiment of his search. 

"Common people," in reading such statements 
as the foregoing by the Doctor, should not forget to 
take them with the proverbial "grain of salt." It is 
natural that the Dean of a college which has spent 
several thousand dollars in scientific research— partly 
with the laudable object of securing information, and 
partly with another laudable object of advertising itself 
—should feel disposed to inflate the results of these 
investigations and expenditures, and to parade them 
just a little. 

Surely it is neither ungenerous nor unwise to conclude 
that Dr. Penniman's statements magnify considerably 
the service accomplished for the world by his 
college. The evidences of this, in the foregoing account, 
are numerous. For instance, it is not beyond the 
province of reasonable judgment to believe that the 
exploration committee found something of the ancient 
city of Chalneh. It is not beyond conception that this 
was buried as much as forty feet below the surface. 
It is quite believable that a palace and a temple were 
found, and that under the temple was found the ruins 
of a structure somewhat older still. But this is as far 
as reasonable judgment can follow the Doctor's narrative. 
We cannot take as literally true the statement 
that a whole city has been unearthed, or even any 
considerable portion of it, nor that another whole city 
under it was found— built, buried and forgotten thousands 
of years before the upper one was built, and yet 



the upper one accidentally built exactly on top of it- 
one temple over the other, etc. Neither can we take 
literally the statement that the buildings in these 
cities were "strong, massive and imposing, and very 
much like the best buildings in our modern cities." 
There are numerous reasons why we should not take 
these statements literally;— unless prepared to write 
ourselves down as credulous simpletons;— "common 
people" of the dark ages. The most forceful of these 
objections is the financial one. Any one of experience 
in the cost of grading, excavating, etc., can see at a 
glance that the few thousand dollars and the few representatives 
of the Pennsylvania University could accomplish 
practically nothing under such conditions as 
are implied. It would require millions of dollars to 
accomplish anything like what may be understood 
from taking the foregoing too literally. 

If we analyze the above report, on this literal 
basis, we find that it contradicts itself. It declares 
that the principal building was the temple, whose 
dome, covered by sand, evidently constituted the chief 
eminence of the sand-hill excavated. How deep the 
sand may have been on the top of this dome, completely 
obscuring it, we can only surmise. We will 
suppose it to have been covered to a depth of five feet 
only, for the report declares that it was "soon 
reached." When, then, we read that the top of this 
sand mound was "more than forty feet" above the 
foundation of the temple, we will allow an extra foot, 
and say forty-one feet, and then deducting the five 
feet above the dome we find that the entire height of 
the temple, dome and all, was about thirty-six feet. 
And this was the principal edifice in the city— far out-topping 
the other buildings, evidently, according to the 
description given. How, now, does the statement appear, 
that the buildings were "massive and imposing, 
and very much like the best buildings of our modern 
cities"? The best buildings in our modern cities range 
in height from fifty to four hundred feet or more, while 
in this city the chief building, dome and all, was about 
thirty-six feet high. We have need to keep well before 
our minds such evidences as these that the language is 
not literal, but highly figurative, hyperbolical, and 
then we need to flavor the remainder of the Doctor's 
statements with the same kind of salt of reason and cool 
judgment if we would not allow them to interfere 

R3221 : page 214 

with the process of our mental digestion, when studying 
God's Word. "Salt is good!" 

When we come to examine the findings in the 
libraries of these buildings, we are to appreciate them 
for what they are worth. We do appreciate them 
highly. They give evidence most conclusively that 
evolutionists are entirely wrong in their theory that 



man evolved from a monkey, and that present-day 
civilization is proof of this. These findings corroborate 
the Scriptural statement that there was a civilization 
in the past, though of a somewhat different kind 
from that of the present— that there were wise men in 
the past without present-day advantages, which belong 
to the period called "the time of the end," which 
we hold are incidentals of this day of preparation for 
the Millennium. That those people had some knowledge 
of justice, equity, business regulations, etc., is 
evident from the records found in these rooms. But 
nothing has been found in conflict with the Bible, nor 
in conflict with the chronology of the Bible. The conflict 
is wholly in the minds of the learned gentlemen 
whose wisdom in such matters has perished, as the 
Scriptures declare— because they have abandoned the 
true foundation, and are no longer seeking to harmonize 
archaeological findings with the declarations of 
the Bible— especially as respects chronology. 

MISLED BY THEIR EVOLUTION THEORIES. 

They predetermine that because there are these 
good evidences of so pronounced a civilization in Abraham's 
time, there must have been long, long periods 
preceding that for the development of man from a monkey 
condition up to that degree of intelligence. Thus, in supporting 
their theories respecting evolution, they have 
an incentive to make the records as favorable as possible 
to a long period prior to Abraham. They find 
names of kings and dynasties, and attempt to separate 
them out in chronological sequence, but seem 
entirely to overlook the fact that conditions which 
prevail today in Europe may also have prevailed to 
some extent in Egypt, and in Babylonian times. For 
instance, suppose that some city in Bavaria, Germany, 
had been buried today from the world, and that the 
civilization of the present time in all other cities of 
Europe were completely blotted out. Suppose, too, 
that general world histories of the present time were 
not kept, but that, as in ancient times, every nation 
and city kept records and a chronology of its own, 
paying no attention to the year of the world, A.M., 
B.C. or A.D., or any other arrangement but simply 
reckoning by its own dynasties. Suppose also that 
some one should uncover the Bavarian city mentioned, 
and should there find records of the Bavarian line of 
kings, and in connection with it a record of the German 
emperors, and references to the many other lines 
of German kings and princes. He would there find 
records of the Napoleonic dynasty, and of the present 
Bavarian dynasty, and of the present imperial dynasty. 
How much likelihood there would be that, with nothing 
to guide him except Frederick I., William I., 
William II., William III., he would become all confused, 
and fail to realize that there are kings in Bavaria 



at the same time that others reign as emperors 
of the whole German empire. Thus he might allow 
so many years for the emperors, and so many years 
for the kings, and be doubling his count every time. 
Our savants look over a pile of ancient clay tablets, 
written in a language they do not fully comprehend; 
they see in them names of hundreds of kings, princes, 
etc., and string them out to support their theory of a 
long and slow development from monkey-man to the 
degree of intelligence witnessed in our day. 

This seems to fairly represent the tangled and 
unsatisfactory records of these ancient civilizations 
unearthed by explorers. They give some evidence, 
but nothing in a chronological order that will in any 
sense of the word compare with the Bible record. The 
Bible gives us the only chronological record from Adam 
down to the Babylonian captivity that is worthy of 
calling history or chronology. Our wise men in universities, 
colleges, theological seminaries, etc., in passing 
by this only reliable record, and attempting to construct 
chronology from other sources, are doing the 
impossible thing, as well as the unwise thing. The 
Christian who recognizes the Bible as the Word of 
God, because of its internal evidences, and who harmonizes 
its statements with themselves, accepting the 
conclusions with implicit faith, is the only one who 
will stand the shakings and sittings of this present 
time. Such will be found to be right when that which 

R3222 : page 214 

is perfect is come, and when all matters will be fully 

revealed. 

"How firm a foundation, ye saints of the Lord, 
Is laid for your faith in his excellent Word!" 



The South-Western Presbyterian of March 27 
quotes Rev. J. P. Peters, director of the Nippur Expedition, 
as follows:— 

"An immense mass of inscribed material has been 
secured from Egypt, Babylonia, Assyria and Persia. 
We have a very fair picture of the advanced civilization 
prevailing in the ancient civilized world in and 
from the latter half of the third millennium B.C. 

"These records discredit the extravagant claims 
of China and India in regard to the antiquity of the 
civilization claimed by them. It was only in the latter 
half of the third millennium B.C. that civilization 
spread to China, and shortly after this India was occupied 
by a civilized race. 

"These records, so far discovered, confirm the 



R3222 : page 215 



statements and the historical representations of Samuel, 
Kings and the Prophets. Hebrew history, as 
recorded in these books, is proved by the comparison 
to be honest and trustworthy. 

"The statements of the earlier books of the Old 
Testament in regard to a high civilization, advanced 
religious development, and literary activities, which 
but a little while ago were held up as a proof of the 
inaccuracy and untruthfulness of the Bible record, are 
now proved to be literally true." 



R3222 : page 215 

"LORD, WHAT WILT THOU HAVE ME TO DO?" 
-ACTS 9:6.- 

Anxious soul, dost thou inquire 

How thou mayst thy fealty prove? 
In this day of "thine espousal," 

In the dawn of thy "first love," 
While thy heart is now o'erflowing 

With a new-found peace and joy; 
Where wilt thou, a willing servant, 

In his service find employ? 

Listen! Wouldst thou tell the story 

Of the Father's wondrous plan, 
And its consummation-glory 

Now appearing unto man? 
Wouldst thou be a faithful witness 

To the truth thou hast received? 
Seek "his fulness" for thy portion; 

Empty souls have naught to give. 

Hear the Master's voice directing, 

As to him thou drawest nigh, 
"Tarry till endued with power 

Of the Spirit from on high." 
Learning first, thyself, the lesson 

Which thou wouldst have others know; 
Eating daily at his table, 

Thus in "grace and knowledge grow." 

Following close in Jesus' footsteps, 

That whate'er you say or do, 
It shall be "your Father's spirit" 

That shall speak and act through you. 
Seeking the divine direction, 

Blessings rich thou mayst expect; 
As thou dost his ways acknowledge, 

He thy pathway shall direct. 

Thus in trials that await thee, 



In the way, so rugged, steep, 
God's own peace which passeth knowledge 

Shall thy heart through Jesus keep. 
Then thou mayst go forth and comfort 

Those beneath affliction's rod, 
With the comfort wherewith thyself 

Hast been comforted of God. 

—John La Dow. 



R3222 : page 215 

SAMUEL'S FAREWELL ADDRESS. 

-1 SAM. 12:13-25. -JULY 19.- 

Golden Text:— "Only fear the Lord and 
serve him in truth with all your hearts." 

SAMUEL the Prophet stands out on the pages of 
sacred history a very noble character— very 
similar in many respects to Moses. He had 
served the Lord and the people faithfully for a long 
period, and then, at the urgent request of the people 
and with God's assent, he had anointed Saul their 
king. The latter had been received rather half-heartedly, 
but the battle with the Ammonites and the great 
victory which the Lord granted to his people on that 
occasion united their hearts to him who had been 
the visible leader in that victory, and Samuel perceived 
that the right time had come for a public coronation 
of the king, and the formal transfer of allegiance to 
him as the Lord's representative in the temporal affairs 
of the nation. Accordingly, a general convocation of 
the people was called to meet at Gilgal— one of the several 
prominent places for public gatherings— one of the 
places at which Samuel was in the habit of holding court 
when, as a kind of supreme judge, he went at different 
seasons of the year to various parts of the territory of 
Israel to hear and to decide causes and differences 
which the elders of the tribes could not adjudicate 
satisfactorily. 

Upon the assembling of the people, the prophet 
Samuel opened his address (vss. 1-5) by calling upon 
God and the people to witness to his own rectitude of 
character in all of his dealings with them for the many 
years in which he had served them; to his justice in 
seeking to decide their various questions righteously; 
to his honesty, in that he never received even the smallest 
bribe, nor permitted anything to vitiate his judgment; 
neither had he been an oppressor of his people, 
but had always sought their good. With united voice 
the people concurred in the excellence and purity of his 
administration— a wonderful tribute, one which would 
be almost inconceivable in our day, in which we find 



that even the best and noblest officials are sure to have 
enemies, traducers, backbiters, slanderers. We are 
not to suppose that Samuel was merely eulogizing his 
own administration, but are, rather, to attribute to 
such a noble character a nobler object. He wished to 
make a lasting impression with this address and this 
transfer of authority to King Saul; and, to make his 
words more impressive and more effective in the interests 
of his successor and in the interests of the Lord's 
people, he impressed upon his hearers the fact that his 

R3222 : page 216 

entire life had been one of devotion, and that they 

might well understand that his words now were in full 

accord with all the course of his previous life. They 

would thus realize that he had their best interests at 

heart, that he was thoroughly loyal to the Lord, and 

that his example, as well as his advice, would be beneficial 

to them. Perhaps, too, he would thus set before 

the people a standard of what they might look for and 

hope for from their new king, and before the king a 

standard of the ideal after which he should pattern his 

rule. 

Next, he called attention to God's faithfulness to 
them in the centuries past, from the time that he 
adopted them as his people and made a covenant with 
them through Moses and became their heavenly King. 
He recounted to the people the many deliverances which 
the Lord had wrought for them through various agents 
whom he had raised up. He would not wish them to 
think of the recent victory over the Ammonites as 
being the only one; but he desired that they recognize 
it, in common with all previous victories, as from the 
Lord, by whatsoever hand they were effected. He would 
have them discern that they exercised great ingratitude 
in forgetting that the Lord had all this time been their 
King, and in preferring an earthly king to the government 
he had established. Nevertheless, now that God 
had granted their request and given them an earthly 
king, they must not fail to recognize that he was only 
the representative of their real King, the heavenly One. 
Otherwise, their condition would be deplorable in 
every way. They had the king of their choice and 
God had set him over them: let the matter thus stand, 
and from this new standpoint they should go on to 
make the best of their condition; and to do this, would 

R3223 : page 216 

be to give close attention to the commandments of the 
Lord. 

Obedience to the Lord would bring blessings both 
to the people and their king, and disobedience and 
rebellion or any measure of irreverence toward the 
Lord and his commandments would bring upon them 



divine disfavor and injury. Not that the Lord would 

vindictively render evil for evil, but the hand of the 

Lord would be against them in the same sense that the 

current of the river is against the persons who attempt 

to go contrary to it. Divine justice has its steady flow. 

It is irrepressible; it opposes anything that comes 

against it, and favors anything that goes in harmony 

with it. We can recognize something of this principle 

in various laws of nature; as, for instance, gravitation. 

Let us also recognize that the principles of divine government 

operate in a very similar manner. As fire 

burns the evil or the good when they come in contact 

with it, and as the law of gravitation operates in respect 

to all, whether good or bad, who come into the line of 

its influence, so the principles of divine justice operate 

automatically. 

The correctness of the foregoing statement may be 
questioned by some, who may say that in the majority 
of cases justice does not seem to operate; that those 
who tempt God are set up, and those who work wickedness 
and deceit often prosper. We reply that in 
order to understand our position it must be remembered 
that God's government has never been established 
in the world except over the one nation of Israel; 
and, hence, only in that one nation should we expect 
to find the laws of retribution operating automatically. 
The Lord said of Israel, "You only have I known 
[recognized] of all the families of the earth." (Amos 3:2.) 
Again, the Apostle asks, "What advantage 
hath the Jew?" and, answering, declares, "Much 
every way; chiefly because to them were committed 
the oracles of God." God entered into obligations 
with Israel that if they, as a people, would obey his 
laws and keep his statutes, they would be blessed in 
proportion to their faithfulness and obedience; and if 
they should fail of obedience, they would be correspondingly 
punished; that he would permit to come 
upon them various chastisements— diseases, etc.— as 
the natural results of the violations of the principles of 
his government. But such an arrangement has not 
been made with other nations at any time in the 
world's history. With spiritual Israel God's blessings 
and chastisements are spiritual, and do not extend to 
temporal affairs. In proportion to their faithfulness 
they grow spiritually strong and beautiful; and in proportion 
to their unfaithfulness they grow spiritually 
weak and receive chastisements and lose divine favor. 
It is not true with the spiritual Israelite as it was 
with the natural Israelite, that by obeying the Lord 
he would be blessed temporally in all his undertakings. 
On the contrary, to the spiritual Israelite the Lord gives 
the express declaration and encouragement: "All that 
will live godly in Christ Jesus shall [in this life] suffer 
persecution"; "Marvel not, my brethren, if the world 
hate you"; "Ye know that it hated me before it hated 
you"; "Blessed are ye when men shall say all manner 



of evil against you for my sake: rejoice and be 
exceeding glad; for great is your reward in heaven" 
—in spiritual things, not in temporal matters.— 2 Tim. 3:12; 
1 Jno. 3:13; John 15:18; Matt. 5:11,12. 

When the Millennial Kingdom shall be established, 
and, in harmony with the petition of our Lord's 
prayer, God's Kingdom shall come, and his will be 
done on earth as in heaven— then the laws of righteousness 
will work automatically again, and "every transgression 
shall receive its just recompense of reward," 
and every proper endeavor will bring its meed of blessing 
and uplifting influence— restitution. The divine 

R3223 : page 217 

regulations operating toward fleshly Israel in the days 
of Samuel differ from those to operate toward the whole 
world in the Millennial age, in that the latter will have 
a greater prophet than Moses, a greater priest than 
Aaron, a greater king than Saul. The Lord's Anointed 
will include all the graces, powers and qualities represented 
in these types, but on a perfect scale and backed 
by divine wisdom, justice, love and power, and will put 
down all insubordination and permanently establish 
righteousness upon a proper basis throughout the 
world, eventually destroying all who will not come into 
accord with its principles. 

Samuel proceeded to do a miracle before the people 
—to cause a thunder shower in the middle of harvest. 
In Palestine they have the early and the latter 
rains. The spring rains usually end in April, and 
the fall rains begin in October or November. A writer 
on the subject says, "In ordinary seasons, from the 
cessation of the showers in spring until their commencement 
in October or November, rain never falls, and the 
sky is usually serene." The wheat harvest which the 
prophet pointed out to them as just in order, must have 
been the first of June and, hence, nothing could have 
been further from the expectation of the people than a 
thunder-shower at that time. The bringing of it at the 
prophet's announcement, was to remind the people 
how completely their affairs and interests were in 
divine power. They were to discern that the recent 
victory need not have been theirs except as the Lord 
had been pleased to favor them and grant them the 
victory; and that simply by bringing unfavorable 
showers upon their harvest the entire fruitage of their 
labors of many months might be quickly spoiled and 
they be reduced to starvation, and in that way become 
more thoroughly subdued than by any foreign invasion. 
The prophet calls their attention to the wickedness of 
their course in the rejection of God as their King, and 
to this power of God, which could easily be exercised 
did he wish to requite them according to their dealings 
with him. 

The people saw the point. They discerned that if 



it were to rain a few days they would lose their all; 
they recognized that they were wholly in the power of 
God, and entreated Samuel to pray for them, confessing 
not only the wrongs they had done in seeking a 
king, but also their sins; "We have added unto our 
sins." 

As the Lord's mouthpiece, the prophet assured the 
people that they need not fear God's taking vengeance 
upon them, notwithstanding their wrong course. On the 
contrary, they should more fully than ever determine 
to turn to the Lord whole-heartedly, and let their mistake 
and the trials and difficulties that would come to 
them as a result of it prove a blessing to them in drawing 
their hearts nearer and nearer to the Lord, their 
true King, who never sought anything but their highest 
welfare. So it should be with us. If at any time we 
find that we have taken a wrong course which is irretrievable, 
we may expect it to bring the disappointments 
as the Lord foretold; but he may permit it to 
bring, as well, some blessings in the way of contrition 
of heart, and humility toward the Lord, and greater 
zeal, watchfulness and faithfulness for the future. 
Thus, even some of the blunders of life may become 
stepping-stones to higher planes of grace and truth. 

The sentiment of verse 22 is very beautiful, and, 
doubtless, was very encouraging to the Israelites in 
assuring them of God's continued love and favor toward 
them because of his having adopted them as his 
people. Applying this verse to spiritual Israel, we 
may take great comfort from it, too. If it was a favor 
to natural Israel to be adopted as the Lord's peculiar 
people, as the house of servants, how much greater is 
the blessing to spiritual Israel, adopted of the Lord as 
the house of sons under the chief Son, Jesus; "whose 
house are we, if we hold fast the confidence and the 
rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end!" (Heb. 3:6.) 
It is well that the Lord's people be called upon to 
fear, to reverence, the Lord; but if the Scriptures were 
entirely made up of commands and reproofs, the Lord's 
people would all surely have been discouraged long 
ago. On the contrary, with the reproofs and corrections, 
the Lord gives us very precious testimonies respecting 
his love and mercy, his goodness and long-suffering 
kindness, to encourage us. All the members of 
the body of Christ laboring against the course of this 
world and against public opinion and against the weaknesses 
of their own flesh and against the great adversary 
Satan, need spiritual encouragement— assurances 
that the Lord is for them. The Apostle points this out, 
saying, "If God be for us who can be against us?" 
—what will all the opposition against us amount to if 
God be on our side? He again encourages us with 
precious words, reminding us of the unchangeableness 
of God and of the fact that he has already done great 
things for us and is preparing to do still greater things. 
If while we were yet sinners Christ died for the ungodly, 



much more shall his favor be with us now that we 
are adopted into his family and are seeking to walk in 
his ways as members of the body of Christ. 

The grandeur of the Prophet's character shines out 
in the twenty-third verse again: he seems to have none 
of the petty animosities which some smaller creatures 
might have under the circumstances, and was a patriot 
to the core of his heart, as well as a faithful representative 
and ambassador of the Lord and mediator of his 
people. He says, practically: "Nothing that you 
have done toward me— rejecting me in choosing King 

R3224: page 218 

Saul— shall in any manner or degree hinder my love 
for you and my prayers on your behalf. God forbid 
that it should! I should consider this a sin against 
the Lord who has placed me as a kind of representative 
of him to you, and of you to him; and I certainly 
would be failing of my duty and privilege did I neglect 
this important office of mediator. You may rely upon 
it that I not only will refrain from pleading against you 
with the Lord, but that I will petition him on your 
behalf." 

The nobility of Samuel's course may well be copied 
by the Lord's people under various circumstances 
in life. When those who are near and dear to us flag in 
their love and devotion, they need all the more our 
sympathy and our prayers; and, as our dear Master 
showed us, even our enemies are to be prayed for and 
have our good wishes— that the Lord would grant them 
in his providence such opening of understanding, such 
experiences as in divine wisdom would be for their highest 
welfare to bring them into full accord with himself, 
and thus back into harmony with us and all who are 
in harmony with him. The prophet indicates that, 
although he was ceasing to be their judge and ruler, he 
would not cease to be their instructor in the good and 
right way so long as the Lord's providences might permit 
him to serve them, and so long as they would 
accept his aid. 

Recurring, however, to the principal point of his 
instructions, he points out that reverence for the Lord, 
serving him in truth with all their heart, was not only 
a proper course, but a course which would bring them 
the Lord's blessing. And as a help to our flagging zeal, 
we should continually remind ourselves of the Lord's 
great blessings to us. As we learn to appreciate the 
goodness of the Lord, if rightly disposed at all, the 
influences will be to strengthen us and to make us more 
and more loyal to him. Failing to seek with our 
whole heart the Lord's service after we have become 
his people and entered into covenant relationship with 
him, receiving of his favors and blessings in this life, 
and also, by promise, in the life to come, would mean 
wickedness which, persevered in, will surely bring destruction. 



Faithfulness to God should be the keynote 
of all our desires. "Let the words of my mouth and 
the meditation of my heart be acceptable in thy sight, 
O Lord, my strength and my Redeemer."— Psa. 19:14. 



R3224: page 218 

"TO OBEY IS BETTER THAN SACRIFICE." 

-1 SAM. 15:13-23. -JULY 26.- 

THE words of our caption, the Golden Text of this 

lesson, are the Lord's rebuke to King Saul by 

the prophet Samuel, in connection with the 

announcement that Saul, by disobedience to the heavenly 

King, had forfeited his privilege of representing him 

on the throne of Israel. The rending of the kingdom 

from the hands of Saul meant more than his own displacement: 

it meant that his son and successive heirs 

should not continue the Lord's representatives in the 

kingdom. 

For a number of years Saul seems to have prospered 
fairly on the throne, and the people of Israel 
prospered with him. It was several years after 
his coronation, noted in our last lesson, that his first 
severe testing in respect to his obedience to the heavenly 
king came to him. At that time a war was instituted 
against the Philistines, who had been encroaching 
upon the Israelites to the east. Saul waited several 
days for Samuel to come to offer the sacrifices of the 
Lord previous to the beginning of the battle. Samuel 
was providentially hindered, and Saul, after waiting for 
a time, offered the sacrifices to the Lord himself, contrary 
to the arrangement, and then proceeded to battle, 
the result being a considerable defeat to his forces. 
Apparently he was not evilly intentioned, but lacked 
proper respect and reverence for the Lord and his arrangements. 
This may be said to have been the beginning 
of Saul's rejection by the Lord. Samuel's words 
were, "Thou hast not kept the commandment of the 
Lord.. .now thy kingdom shall not continue. The 
Lord hath sought him a man after his own heart." 

The lesson of this incident is as applicable to spiritual 
Israel today as it was to Saul and natural Israel 
in their day— "Obedience is better than sacrifice." In 
how many ways we may see expressions of this same 
condition amongst many who profess the Lord's name 
today! Many are "workers" in the Lord's cause in 
the various denominations of Christendom, and many 
are their sacrifices of time and money; but inasmuch 
as they are not obedient to the Lord, they fail of the 
blessing they would have, and, indeed, in a considerable 
measure cut themselves off from greater privileges 
and opportunities. Yea, many of them, we fear, are 



cutting themselves off from the kingdom, from glory, 
and from join t-heirship with the Lord in that Kingdom. 
We should learn from this lesson, given us in Saul's 
experience, that our heavenly Father wishes us to be 
very attentive to his Word, and not to think for a moment 
that we can improve thereon, or that times and 
circumstances will alter the propriety of our obedience 
to him. Had Saul been obedient and the results 
disastrous, he would at least have had a clear conscience; 
he could have said that he had been obedient 
to God and was not responsible for the results. But if 

R3224 : page 219 

he had been obedient God would have been responsible 
for the results, and we know that divine power 
would have brought about the proper results. Let us 
apply the lesson to ourselves in respect to our daily 
conduct in every matter of life: let us hearken to the 
Word of the Lord and keep close to it, not fearing the 
results, but having faith that he who keeps us never 
slumbers nor sleeps and is too wise to err, as well as 
competent to meet every emergency that could possibly 
come upon us as a result of our obedience. How many 
of the Lord's people in Babylon would be blessed by 
following the instructions of this lesson. They have 
said to themselves, time and again, "I see that present 
institutions and arrangements are contrary to the 
simplicity of the Gospel of Christ and the practice of 
the early Church, but what can I do? I am identified 
with this system and am engaged in sacrificing for its 
upbuilding; if now I withdraw my hand it will mean 
more or less disaster. I wish I were free from human 
institutions and that I had my hands filled with the Lord's 
work along the lines of his Word, but I cannot let go, 
for necessity seems to be upon me. I must perform a 
sacrifice and this seems to be my most convenient place 
for so doing." The Lord is not pleased with such argument. 
His message to us is that to obey is better than 
sacrifice: leave the matter of your sacrifice in my 
hands;— it will amount to nothing anyway unless I 
accept it, and I accept sacrifices only from those who 
are first obedient. "Come out of her, my people, that 
ye be not partakers of her sins, and receive not of her 
plagues." 

Although the Lord announced the rejection of 
Saul, the prediction was evidently not executed for several 
years after; perhaps ten years the decree stood, as 
it were a dead letter, for quite possibly Saul was properly 
exercised by the rejection and became more attentive 
and more obedient to the divine will, and David, 
who was probably anointed about this time, was not 
yet sufficiently developed to be the Lord's representative 
in Saul's stead. 

Saul's next severe trial was in connection with 
the Amalekites— a nomadic and fierce people who, 



on several occasions, had done injury to the people 
of Israel. In sending the message the Lord gave 
special instructions that the Amalekites should be 
destroyed, saying, "Utterly destroy all that they have, 
and spare them not; but slay both man and woman, 
infant and suckling, ox and sheep, camel and ass." 
Without mentioning other of Amalek's transgressions, 
he specifies here that the destruction is on account of 
Amalek's opposition to Israel in the way when they 
came up out of the land of Egypt several centuries 
previously. 

This narrative is seized upon by sceptics to prove 
either one or the other of two things: (1) That God 
sent no such message; that it was either the imagination 
of Samuel or Saul or of some one writing fictitiously 
in their names. (2) If it were accepted as being 
the command of the Lord, it would prove him to be a 
monster— lacking injustice, pity, sympathy and love 
—that he should thus command the wholesale slaughter 
of human creatures and dumb animals. There is 
but one answer to make to this matter, and it should 
be and is satisfactory to all who understand it. It is 
this:- 

First, the slaughter of the Amalekites did not 
mean, as is usually inferred, that they, being admittedly 
wicked, went forth to eternal torture. Death had 
the same meaning to the Amalekites that it had to their 
cattle— a termination of whatever was desirable in the 
present life, and the desirable things in the present 
life were probably not more to the Amalekites than to 
their herds. The Amalekites suffered far less, slaughtered 
by the sword, than if they had been made the subjects 
of famine or a pestilence, and had died of hunger 
or disease— the ending of life with little pain to themselves 
or trouble to others— the ending of comparatively 
uneventful lives anyway. They all went down 
to the great prison-house of death— sheol, hades— the 
tomb. God foreknew and had already arranged a 
great redemption not only for them but for all mankind, 
and that redemption, secured by the great sacrifice 
of Christ centuries after their death— will by and by 
secure to them release from their imprisonment, an 
awakening from the sleep of death. They will be 
amongst the class mentioned by our Lord, saying, "All 
that are in their graves shall hear the voice of the Son 
of man and shall come forth." They will come forth 
under much more favorable conditions, to learn of the 
grace of God in Christ and to be amongst the families 
of the earth who shall be blessed by the seed of Abraham, 
spiritual Israel. They will not be in the chief or 
life resurrection, but will be awakened unto the privileges 
of restitution by judgments, corrections in 
righteousness. 

Second, it is quite true of the Amalekites, as it was 
true of the Amorites, that they would have been cut 
off sooner but that their iniquity was not yet come to 



the full. One lesson to be learned from this is that 
even though those nations may not be under special 
covenant relationship with God, there is a certain divine 
supervision— that their iniquities go not too far, and 
that, when they have reached their full, punishment is 
to be expected. We know not the particulars respecting 
the Amalekites, but, knowing the character of God 
and his justice and mercy, we may be sure that, in some 
particular sense of the word, their iniquities had come 
to the full and running-over measure before this order 

R3225 : page 220 

for their execution was committed to King Saul. 

Saul's error in this trial was his failure to carry 
out the command of the Lord explicitly. He slew all 
the Amalekites, old and young, except the king, whom 
he kept alive, possibly thinking to exhibit him in some 
kind of a triumphal display; but as for the flocks and 
herds, he consented with his people to spare all that 
were goodly and desirable— "The best of the sheep and 
of the oxen and of the fadings and of the lambs, and 
all that was good,. ..but everything that was vile 
and refuse, that they destroyed utterly." (Vs. 9.) 

It is at this juncture that the Prophet Samuel came 
to him and the colloquy of our lesson ensued. The 
general narrative— the indignation of Samuel and the 
Lord's positive announcement— clearly indicates that 
Saul had not misunderstood his instructions, but had 
with considerable deliberation violated them. Consequently 
we must understand his words addressed to 
Samuel to have been to a considerable extent hypocritical. 
He first salutes the Prophet with blessings, and 
assurances that he had performed the commandment 
of the Lord successfully. But immediately the prophet 
replies, "What means, then, this bleating of the sheep 
in my ears, and the lowing of the oxen which I hear?" 
The prophet understood at once that the work of destruction 
had not been complete, that Saul and the 
people of Israel were anxious to take a spoil. This 
was wholly contrary to the Lord's direction. They 
were not to destroy their enemies to their own advantage, 
but simply to act as the agents of the Lord in 
thus executing his decree, the sentence of justice. 
They were not to take booty and thus to become like 
the nations about them— a robber nation, profiting by 
the troubles they inflicted upon the enemies of the 
Lord. This is in full accord with the Lord's character 
and the foregoing explanation of it. 

Saul, seeing that the prophet was not likely to sympathize 
in any measure with his violation of the command, 
began hypocritically to represent that all those 
fine sheep and oxen had been captured from the enemy 
to be sacrificed to the Lord, and incidentally this would 
have meant a great feast for the Israelites, because the 
flesh of animals so sacrificed was eaten by them. Samuel 



stopped the king in his explanation and told him 
of the Lord's words of the night preceding (which, in 
Jewish counting, would be "this night," because their 
day began in the evening). The message of the Lord 
calls attention to the fact that Saul was humble when 
he was chosen as the Lord's representative upon the 
throne, and at that time he was very willing to give 
strict obedience to the heavenly voice, but the intimation 
is that now he had grown more self-confident and 
therefore less reliant upon the Lord and less attentive 
to the Lord's commands; getting into the wrong attitude 
of heart, he had failed to properly execute a very 
plain specific direction. Knowingly and in violation 
of the Lord's command he had the spoil separated, and 
spared the best when the Lord had commanded the 
reverse. 

If, in applying the principles of this to the Lord's 
people of today, we think of the Amalekites as representing 
sins and of how the Lord's command comes to 
us to put away sin entirely, utterly destroying everything 
that is related to it, we may get a good lesson. 
Like Saul, many are disposed to destroy the vilest 
things connected with sin, but to save alive the king 
sin, merely making him a prisoner. Many are disposed, 
too, to seek out the things which they realize 
to be condemned of the Lord to destruction— such 
things as would be choice and desirable to their taste— 
and frequently, like Saul, they claim that even these 
sins of the less obnoxious kind are held on to for the 
purpose of sacrificing them and thus honoring God. 
How deceitful above all things is the heart! How necessary 
it is that all who would be in accord with the 
Lord should be thoroughly true-hearted, thoroughly 
sincere, and that under the Lord's direction we should 
seek to take away the life of every sinful principle, evil 
teaching, evil doctrines, evil engagements, unholy 
words and thoughts and deeds. 

Saul sought to defend his course, to put as good a 
face upon the matter as possible and to lay the responsibility 
for the saving of the spoil for the sacrifice upon 
the hosts of Israel, who, with himself, were so desirous 
of offering sacrifices to the Lord. Samuel's answer is 
the pith of this lesson and contains its Golden Text. 
He clearly points out to Saul what the latter should 
have known, and what all should recognize, namely, 
that offering sacrifices is far less pleasing to the Lord 
than obedience to his Word. No one could offer an 
acceptable sacrifice to the Lord unless obedient in his 
heart and unless the sacrifice represented that obedience. 
So with the Lord's people today. It is not so 
much of ill-gotten wealth that we may sacrifice to the 
Lord; it is not so much the proceeds acquired directly 
or indirectly by wrong doing that we may sacrifice acceptably. 
Our sacrifice must be from the heart, and, 
first of all, must be the will. He who gives his will, 
his heart, to the Lord, gives all; he who gives not his 



will, who comes not in obedience of heart unto the 
Lord, can offer no sacrifice to the Lord that could be 
acceptable. "Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice," 
is a lesson which should be deeply engraved upon the 
hearts of all the sanctified in Christ Jesus. To have 
the spirit of obedience is necessary, too, and whoever 
has the spirit of obedience will not only obey the divine 
will, but will seek to know the divine will more and 
more that he may obey it. It is of this class that the 

R3225 : page 221 

Scriptures declare, "His word was found and I did eat 
it;" and again, in the words of our Lord, "I delight 
to do thy will, oh my God; thy law is written in my 
heart." 

Saul had been very diligent in his opposition to 
witchcraft and idolatry throughout the land of Israel, 
and in so doing was accomplishing a good work in 
accord with the divine plan, the divine will; but the 
prophet calls his attention to the fact that his energy in 
such matters would not prove an offset to his deliberate 
wilful neglect of the divine injunction. The Lord's 
commands against sin and every evil thing are to be 
executed to the very letter, no matter how highly exalted 
the sin may be in dignity and place, and no matter 
how precious or valuable or desirable or toothsome 
the sin may be to our fallen natures. Though it be as 
dear as a right hand or as a right eye, there is no course 
open to the Lord's followers but to be obedient— even 
unto death. 

Although fully rejected, Saul's removal was not 
yet due. Samuel associated himself with him in a 
public sacrifice, commemorating the victory over the 
Amalekites, and on this occasion he slew Agag with 
his own hand— departing then to his own home. He 
never afterward saw Saul, yet the Scriptures declare, 
"Nevertheless, Samuel mourned for Saul"— thus again 
showing us the beauty and strength of his character. 
He was ready to do the command of the Lord in any 
and every particular, yet was not without a feeling of 
compassion for those who were out of the way;— not a 
compassion which would make them his friends and 
lead him to cooperate with them in their wrong course, 
but a compassion which would have been glad to have 
cooperated with them at any time in a righteous course. 



R3225 : page 221 

THE LORD LOOKETH ON THE HEART. 

-1 SAM. 16:4-13.-AUGUST 2.- 
Golden Text.— "Man looketh on the outward 



appearance, but God looketh on the heart." 

SAUL'S rejection by the Lord because of disobedience 
meant not only his own ultimate 
removal from the kingdom, but that his family, 
his sons, should not succeed him in it. It meant, 
also, the Lord's selection of another man, another family, 
for the office of ruler in Israel and representative 
of the Lord upon the throne. The Lord's choice was 
David, to whom Samuel indirectly referred, saying, 
"The Lord hath sought him a man after his own 
heart, and the Lord hath commanded him to be captain 
over his people, because thou [Saul] hast not kept that 
which the Lord commanded thee." (1 Sam. 13:14.) 
David, at the time of this lesson, was about twenty 
years old; consequently, the words of the prophet just 
quoted must have been uttered about the time of David's 
birth. Thus we have another illustration of 
God's foreknowledge and design, in respect to those 
whom he specially uses in his service, from their very 
earliest moments. Similarly, God's choice of Jacob 
was declared before he was born; and similarly, the 
Apostle Paul tells us that he (Paul) was chosen of God 
from his mother's womb. We are to separate from this 
declaration any false thought respecting the divine 
choice, and note that none of these were chosen to eternal 
life, but each of them, all of them, chosen and fitted 
for special service. It gives us a suggestion of the 
possibility of paternal and maternal influences affecting 
the natural disposition of a human being from before 
his birth. He still has a will, and even though favorably 
endowed, it remains with himself to determine, to 
will, whether or not he will walk in the Lord's ways, 
and to what extent he will be obedient. There is no 
coercion of the will, for the Lord seeks such to worship 
[serve] him in spirit— willingly, heartily— and in 
truth. 

R3226 : page 221 

David's grandmother was the gentle Ruth, who 
gleaned grain probably in the very fields with which David 
was familiar. His grandfather's name was Boaz, a 
page of whose history is recorded in the book of Ruth. 
His father Jesse, like his grandfather, was doubtless one 
of the elders of the city of Bethlehem, respected and 
honored as a noble man. Of his mother we know little, 
except that he mentioned her twice as "a handmaid of 
God." 

Samuel mourned and prayed for Saul, and was 
apparently disappointed that this man, of whom he had 
expected such great things and under whose guidance 
he had anticipated great prosperity for Israel, should 
be rejected. Quite probably fearful forebodings of a 
civil war to result from the installation of a new king 
perturbed the prophet's mind. He knew that Saul 



would not quietly submit to lay down the scepter 

which he had taken up with so great modesty in obedience 

to the Lord's arrangement; his mental eye could 

see the probability of civil strife which might rupture 

the nation and cause great trouble. He should have 

had greater trust in the wisdom and power of the Almighty, 

but his trouble was more or less like that 

which assails all of the Lord's people even today. The 

lesson from this to our hearts should be that we will 

implicitly trust the Lord to manage his own affairs: 

that we will trust him where we cannot trace him, and 

be obedient to his directions, and, so far from mourning 

at the execution of his plans, will rejoice, knowing 

R3226 : page 222 

that all things are working together for good to them 
that love God— that all things will ultimately work 
blessings for those who are in accord with the Lord- 
blessings for the future life if not for the present. 

When sent to anoint David, Samuel exhibited a 
power not elsewhere noticeable in his character. He 
did not hesitate to perform the Lord's bidding, but intimated 
that he clearly understood that it meant the 
risk of his own life— that Saul would kill him as a 
traitor if he should anoint a successor to the kingdom. 
The Lord made it clear to him that it was not the intention 
to make the matter known at once, and directed 
him that he should go to Bethlehem and make a sacrifice 
there, and, incidentally, improve the opportunity 
of finding and anointing the one who, in due time, 
would be made known and exalted to the throne. At 
the time, he was merely to perform the initial work, 
which David's father and brethren would not understand, 
thinking, perhaps, that the anointing meant 
special blessing or a commission from the Lord to engage 
as one of the members of the school of the prophets 
or something else of this kind. Quite probably, 
however, the prophet privately informed David of the 
meaning of the anointing, just as he had privately informed 
Saul when he secretly anointed him to the office 
of king. 

The lesson takes hold of the subject at the point 
when Samuel had arrived at the town of Bethlehem. 
The Elders were in fear, thinking that his presence signified 
some sin on their part or on the part of some of 
their fellow-citizens which God had sent him to reprove 
and to punish; hence, their inquiry whether or not he 
came peaceably— whether or not his presence meant a 
blessing or the infliction of a penalty. Their fears 
were allayed when they heard that his mission was a 
peaceable one— to offer a sacrifice there unto the Lord. 
Some time before this the ark had been captured by 
the Philistines, and the tabernacle services thus discontinued 
had not yet been reestablished; for this reason 
this sacrificing was performed by the Lord's specially 



appointed prophet. The command to the people of 

Bethlehem to sanctify themselves if they would be participators 

in the blessings of the sacrifice, signified that 

they should wash their persons and put on clean 

clothes and draw nigh to the Lord with their hearts. 

Thus they typically represented that justification and 

sanctification which the Church of this Gospel age enjoys. 

Samuel seems to have taken supervision of the 

family of Jesse to the intent that he might without 

public display find the man whom the Lord had chosen 

and anoint him to the office and give him the 

divine blessing in preparation for it. Jesse properly 

introduced his sons to the prophet according to the 

order of their birth, his eldest, Eliab, first; and as he 

was of fine appearance Samuel naturally assumed that 

he was the Lord's choice; but as he looked to the Lord 

for direction in the matter he got the response (in 

what manner we know not) which constitutes the 

Golden Text of this lesson. Judging from the human 

standpoint of appearance, age, ability, etc., Eliab was 

the most suitable person in Jesse's family to be the 

king over the nation; but not so in the Lord's sight. 

The Lord was looking at the heart and had already 

selected David as a man after his own heart, although 

at this time being under age, etc., his father had not 

thought worth while to send for him to be present at 

the feast. As one after another appeared, and the 

prophet found not him whom the Lord's spirit indicated 

as the one to be anointed, he inquired, "Are all 

thy children here?" when Jesse suddenly remembered 

that he had another boy, his youngest, in the field 

with his sheep. 

Our Golden Text appeals to all in connection with 
the high calling of this Gospel age, and year by year experience 
shows us its general applicability. We, too, as 
the Lord's messengers, are seeking for those to be anointed 
with the oil of gladness, the holy spirit, that they may 
be kings and priests unto God in the Kingdom he is 
about to establish, which will supersede present kingdoms. 
We too, like Samuel, might feel afraid to proceed 
with this work of anointing the successors of present 
institutions, did we not realize that the work of 
sealing the elect of the Lord, which is now in progress, 
is a secret work which the world cannot understand. 
Indeed, none understand this matter of the sealing, the 
anointing of the holy spirit, except those who have received 
it, and they are all of the David class. The 
name David signifies "beloved," and as it applied specially 
to our Lord and Master, of whom it was said by 
Jehovah, "This is my beloved Son," so also it applies 
to all the members of his body, each one of whom must 
be beloved, else he cannot be acceptable as a member. 
The Head says of such, "The Father himself loveth 
you," and again he says that we should love one 
another as he has loved us. It is not too much to say 
that all who receive this anointing of the Lord must 



ultimately be of this David, or beloved, character— the 
spirit of love must be in them, love for the Lord and 
love one for the other, else they are none of his. 

In seeking for the Lord's anointed who shall by 
and by reign in Millennial glory for the blessing of the 
world, as antitypes of David, we notice that as he was 
counted by his brethren too insignificant to be considered 
in this connection, so also are those whom the Lord 
is choosing and anointing for his heavenly Kingdom. 
Our Lord Jesus was disesteemed of his brethren, and 
when the suggestion was made that he should be the 
Lord's anointed, his people hid, as it were, their faces 

R3226 : page 223 

from him— disdained him, despised him, and considered 
him hopeless in respect to anything great or glorious, 
—"as a root out of dry ground." The same has 
been true respecting the members of his body, the true 
elect Church; they also have been despised and rejected 
of men, and of them the Apostle declares, We are 
counted the filth and offscouring of the world; we are 
counted fools all the day long for Christ's sake.— 
1 Cor. 4:13. 

Again he declares that "not many great, not many 
wise, not many learned, hath God chosen; but chiefly 
the poor of this world, rich in faith, to be heirs of the 
Kingdom." And this principle of the divine selection 
of things that are not [esteemed amongst men], to 
bring to naught the things that are [esteemed by men], 
is noticeable all throughout this Gospel age. Often 
have we, like Samuel, looked about us amongst men 
seemingly eligible to a place in the Kingdom— upon 
those who are high in position,— socially, intellectually, 
morally, educationally,— and in the esteem of 
men, and expect that surely the Lord would sanction 
their anointing with the oil of gladness, and grant them 
a knowledge of the truth pertaining to the Kingdom, 
etc., only to find ourselves mistaken, and to get a fresh 
lesson that God looketh not on the outward appearance 
but upon the heart. We concede that we are unable 
to read the heart, but we are fully satisfied to accept 
the divine decision in such matters, and to trust that 
when in due time all the secrets of this present time 
shall be disclosed, we then shall be able to understand 
the meaning of the Lord's selections more completely 
than we do now— we shall then be able to see what a 
difference there was between the hearts of those the 
Lord accepted and the hearts of those outwardly humble, 
whom he did not so highly favor in respect to the 
Kingdom call. Meantime, we must simply wait and 
trust the Lord and accept his decisions, as expressed by 
our dear Redeemer when he said, "I thank thee, 
Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou hast 
hidden these things from the wise and prudent, and 
hast revealed them unto babes: even so, Father; for so 



it seemeth good in thy sight.— Luke 10:21." 

Instructed respecting the Lord's methods, we are 
not to despise the least, the most ignoble or illiterate of 
those who give evidence of a purity and honesty of 
heart toward God, and to whom he seems to give the 
anointing of his spirit and the "ear to hear." Rather, 
while making known the message to all as we have 
opportunity, we are to rejoice specially with those upon 
whom the Lord's favor is manifested, regardless of their 
earthly surroundings, etc. The Lord knoweth them 
that are his, and it is for us to recognize, to honor and 
to cooperate with all such, as the ambassadors and 
representatives of our Lord and Master. 

Often have we thought as we have looked over a 
congregation of the Lord's people and beheld some not 
prepossessing in personal appearance, some not well 
educated or refined, some ignoble, but, nevertheless, 
bearing the marks of the anointing of the Lord, the 

R3227 : page 223 

light of the truth shining in their faces, the confidence 
and hope of the truth inspiring them, and their lives 
indicating a transformation from the kingdom of darkness 
into the kingdom of God's dear Son,— often have 
we thought of such, that had the Lord sent us forth to 
seek his bride, we might have ignorantly passed by 
some of his choice jewels and have gathered in some 
whom he rejects as unworthy— because we are unable to 
read the heart. This thought should make us very 
humble, gentle and meek toward all, and very trustful 
of the Lord and very much inclined to look for his leading 
in respect to our labors as his servants, just as Samuel 
looked to the Lord in connection with the anointing 
of David. 

Samuel's words, "We will not sit down until he 
come hither," referred to the feast of which they were 
about to partake. It was the custom that, after the sacrifice 
had been offered, the sanctified persons present 
and those in spirit sharing in the sacrifice might join 
in a feast, eating the flesh, and thus celebrating a communion 
with the Lord. It was this feast that Samuel 
decided should not be commenced until David's arrival; 
—indeed, by reason of his being the Lord's 
anointed, he would be the most important one present 
at the feast. Perhaps in this also we can see a figure 
of the Lord's blessing in the divine plan. A great 
feast of fat things has been designed for the whole world 
of mankind, but it cannot be participated in until the 
justifying and sanctifying sacrifice has been killed— 
and, more than this, the feast cannot be commenced 
until first the Anointed One shall come and shall receive 
the anointing. The anointing began with our Lord, 
the Head of the Church, and has throughout the Gospel 
age been flowing down upon all the members of his 
body, the Church. The sacrifice has been killed, and 



we, as members of Christ, have been participating in 

the sacrifice. Shortly the whole matter will be accomplished 

and then, as the Lord's anointed, the feast of 

fat things will be spread,— the Anointed One— Head 

and body, being the principal in that great antitypical 

feast. 

The blessing and power of the Lord accompanied 
David's anointing in some manner— just how we may 
not understand, because the manifestation of the spirit 
was not the same in that time as it is with us, the 
Church, since Pentecost, respecting which the Apostle 
declares, "The holy spirit was not yet given, because 
Jesus was not yet glorified." (John 7:39.) However, 
in some manner God's blessing and power were with 
David, enabling him to progress in knowledge, etc., 
and fitting and preparing him for the duties of the 
office to which he had been anointed. May we not 
consider as an antitype to this, the anointing which 
comes upon the Church from the time of her acceptance 
with the Lord? Ours is not a physical anointing, 
nor are the blessings conferred of a temporal character: 
it is as New Creatures that we are anointed; as New 
Creatures that we grow in grace and knowledge and 
love; and as New Creatures that, by and by, we shall 
be perfected in the First Resurrection and come to the 
throne with our Lord and Master as our Head. 



page 321 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIV. AUGUST 15, 1903. No. 16 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 323 

Peculiar Views of the Death of 

Pope Leo XIII 323 

Character of Next Two Popes 

Prophesied 325 

Out of Thine Own Mouth 325 

Anxious to Check German 

Socialists 327 

Our Sufficiency is of God 327 

Strong Characters in Contrast 330 

A Remarkable Friendship 332 

Interesting Letters 334 

page 322 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



WANTED-WIDE MARGIN BIBLES! 



Friends who have several copies of our special Wide 
Margin Tower Reference Bible, and who would like to 
dispose of one or more, are requested to write us, stating 
number available and style of binding of each. 



EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT, LEATHER EDITION. 



The printers have had much delay in connection with 
this special edition of the Diaglott, but we trust the better 
workmanship, as a result, will more than compensate for 
the disappointment. We expect to at once begin mailing 
this edition to all whose orders are now in, and all new 
orders will have prompt attention. Remember that the 
price of this book, in leather, on thin paper, is $2.50— a 
year's subscription to the TOWER being given free with 
each when desired. In cloth binding, the price is $1.50, 
a year's subscription being given free with each. 

TABERNACLE SHADOWS IN GERMAN. 



This valuable little booklet is now in stock— a complete 
translation of the English edition. It is supplied at 
rates uniform with the English, 10c each, 50c per dozen. 



R3227 : page 323 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 

SINGULAR VIEWS OF THE DEATH OF POPE 
LEO XIII. 



THE death of Leo XIII. at the age of ninety-three 

years is said to have created "a profound impression 

throughout Christendom." The President 

of the United States even felt it his duty to 

dictate a message to the Associated Press as the representative 

of seventy millions of people, more than 

one-seventh of whom were the pope's followers:— 

"The president expressed his profound regret at 
the death of the venerable pontiff, whose long career, 
no less than his exalted character, has commanded 
the respect of all Christendom. The president said 
that in uttering these sentiments he was giving expression 
to the feelings of all the people in the United 
States, wholly without regard to their religious faiths." 

We have no desire to say one word against any 
man, and surely have no grudge against this one of 
the more than fifty thousand millions of the dead; 
but we admire consistency, and fail to see how the 
deceased is worthy of all the adulation heaped upon 
him. We doubt not that he had an "exalted character," 
as the President intimates, but we have had no 



opportunity forjudging of this, as we had not his 
personal acquaintance— as the President may possibly 
have had. We certainly should expect good morals 
and good character generally from one making the 
high claims that Leo XIII. made. We personally 
know some very humble people who have "exalted 
character," and therefore should not be surprised that 
a man claiming to be Christ's personal representative 
as King of the World should be given at least a decent 
reputation by his supporters, who claim that he was 
infallible. The fact that some of his predecessors on 
the papal throne were admittedly infamous, morally 
and otherwise, perhaps should, by contrast, lead all to 
proportionately greater respect for this man, whose 
gross immoralities, if he had any, are unknown. Yes, 
we may well rejoice that the deceased was not so viciously 
disposed as some of his predecessors on the 
"throne of Christendom," who deluged the world 
with the blood of martyrs— in their endeavor to enforce 
the same false theories which this pope as tenaciously 
held but more covertly advocated. 

But while thanking God that the fallen representative 
of the great Antichrist* was much less ferocious 
than many of his predecessors, let us allow also 
that all this change is not due to the man who died, 
but in great measure to the changed conditions— Papacy's 
loss of civil power, together with the greater 
enlightenment of the masses, incident to the new conditions 
which have prevailed since A.D. 1799. In this 
"time of the end," as foretold by the Prophet Daniel 
(Dan. 12:4), many are running to and fro, and coincident 
with this commingling of the people has gradually 
come the equally predicted dissemination of 
knowledge amongst the masses of so-called "Christendom" 
(Papacy's kingdom); and as a result the "bulls" 
and "thunders" of Antichrist dare not be of the same 
character as previously. Times have changed greatly 
since Papal bulls instructed the kings and princes 
of Europe that they must persecute heretics to the 
death through the Inquisition if they would maintain 
favor with the pope, who was proclaimed "A very 
God on earth." Otherwise their subjects would be 
released from obedience to them and enjoined to favor 
and fight for some "more worthy" "son of the 
Church." In view of these known and widely recognized 
facts, let us thank God rather than Leo XIII. 
for the beneficence of Antichrist during the last few 
pontificates. 



*See "Great Swelling Words," MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
Vol. II., page 304. 

R3227 : page 324 



It is not necessary for us to suppose the pope to 
have been evil intentioned because he was for a time 
the head of the Antichrist system; rather we may 
well give him the benefit of any doubt on the subject 
and suppose that he belonged to the vast throng of 
those mentioned by the Apostle as "deceiving and 
being deceived." Satan, himself, is the great Antichrist 
who, by his wiles and arts, has deceived almost 
the whole world into one form or another of misbelief 
and opposition to God and his great plan of the ages. 
Thanks be to God for the blessed hope of the Scriptures, 
that the true Messiah shall shortly take the 
throne of earth and subdue all things unto himself, 
bind Satan and illuminate the whole world. "This 
is the true light which lighteth [shall enlighten] 
every man that cometh into the world." 



Telegraphic reports told how before the pope's 
death he received at the hands of a fellow-mortal 
"absolution," freeing him from sin and its penalties, 
and how, when he did not die as expected that day, 
he asked for its repetition the next day, when he 
seemed to be sinking. Yet for all this, according to 
Roman Catholics, Leo XIII. went straight to purgatory. 
Evidently they doubt that his "exalted character" 
or his claimed high office as Christ's vice-gerent 
on earth, or his "absolution"— any of these or all of 
them— were acceptable to God, and so the poor old 
man, they think, went to "limbo" to expiate his sins. 

R3228 : page 324 

How do we know this to be the Catholic view of 
the matter? Because, as usual everywhere throughout 
Papacy's kingdom, "pontifical requiem masses for 
the repose of his soul" are being performed— for the 
stilling of his soul's anguish in purgatory. Surely 
this would not be done for him if he were believed to 
be in heaven— in glory! Poor old man! Time after 
time, during his long career, he had fresh sacrifices of 
the mass said for his sins, and thus, theoretically, 
had thousands of years of purgatorial suffering remitted, 
and finally had all sin absolved, and yet to be 
obliged to go to purgatory to suffer and scorch— for 
how long no Catholic knows! He and his followers 
surely have our sympathy in the calamity of so unsatisfactory 
a faith. 

We inquired of a more than ordinarily intelligent 
Catholic how these seeming inconsistencies were harmonizable, 
and got the reply— "Well, you know, in 
matters of such importance we feel like using every 
precaution." Poor things! It is all a matter of 
doubt and uncertainty. Blind faith in the words of 
men (proclaimed infallible by men but not by God) 



can never give "strong consolation" nor "full assurance 

of faith." As the poor Romanist thinks of his 

pope ("a very God on earth") in purgatory, he shudders 

for his own fate and that of his friends. Nor 

are Protestants much better off. By rejecting the 

doctrine of purgatory and making the rewards of the 

present life to be heaven or hell— eternal bliss or eternal 

misery— they in some respects increase the difficulty. 

They must admit that only "saints" have the 

heavenly promises of the Scriptures, and few of them 

claim saintship. Besides, even the saintly must concede 

that but few of their neighbors and kin are 

saints. They are thus driven to doubt, or to the unreasonable 

hope that those who were unkind, dishonest, 

unneighborly, or brutal and bestial and savage 

are the kinds God is taking to heaven. In which 

case their reasonable hopes of heavenly bliss and harmony 

and joy would be rudely shaken. 



How refreshing to turn from all this unscriptural 
nonsense— from all this darkness of the dark ages— 
and to glance at the reasonable and plain teaching of 
the Bible on this subject of sin, its punishment, and 
the divinely provided salvation from these. Death, 
the penalty for sin, is comprehensible— reasonable, 
Scriptural. The resurrection hope, based upon the 
fact that "Christ died for our sins" (paid the penalty 
against us), is also reasonable. That God is now 
calling and electing a "little flock" of "saints" out of 
every nation, people and tongue to be associated with 
Christ in the Kingdom work of the Millennial age, is 
also reasonable. And that all others than the saints 
must wait for the Kingdom of God (of which Papacy's 
kingdom was but a counterfeit)— wait in the tomb 
(where Pope Leo XIII. is now waiting), in which 
there is neither wisdom nor knowledge nor device, 
until the Kingdom time— is also reasonable. 

It gives us pleasure to know on the strength of 
God's Word that Leo XIII. , and all the millions of 
the dead Catholics and Protestants, are waiting in the 
great prison-house of death until, at the command of 
the Redeemer, "all that are in the graves shall come 
forth." 

In due time Leo XIII. , and all the other popes 
and peoples of the world, blinded by Satan, "the god 
of this world," will come forth to a purgatorial condition, 
but a very different one from that preached by 
Romanists. The Millennial Kingdom will be a purgatorial 
kingdom— established for the very purpose of 
blessing all the families of the earth by binding Satan 
and destroying his blinding influence, and by chastisements 
(administered in love) purging from all people 
(or from so many as will submit joyfully) all their 
sins and weaknesses and blemishes. This purgatorial 



kingdom will last only one thousand years and will 
accomplish its designed purpose (Isa. 55:11.) At its 
close all not in fullest heart-harmony with the Lord 

R3228 : page 325 

will be "destroyed from among the people" (Acts 3:23), 
and throughout the whole of the cleansed world 
praises shall ascend to God and to him who loved us 
and redeemed us with the one sacrifice of himself, 
which needed no addition of repeated mass sacrifices. 
And thereafter there shall be no more sorrow or dying 
or crying, because all the former things of sin and 
darkness and error shall have passed away.— Rev. 21:4; 
Isa. 35:10. 

VIEWED FROM ANOTHER STANDPOINT. 

Evidently others view the above matters quite 
differently, for, according to newspaper reports, prayers 
have been ascending to God all over the land, from 
Protestants as well as Catholics, that the aged pontiff 
might not die. Evidently many good people are of 
opinion that 93 years was too young for this man's 
death rate. They seemed to consider their opinion on 
the matter worthy of divine consideration, but God 
was unmoved by their numbers and influence. Again 
the Apostle's words are verified: "Ye ask and receive 
not, because ye ask amiss." 

However, one error always leads to another when 
the fault is with the heart, and hence, so far from 
realizing divine disapproval in the rejection of their 
prayers, we may expect that Protestants thus carried 
away with admiration for the head of Antichrist will 
be still further misled. Indeed the indications are 
that "mother" System (Rev. 17:5) and her daughters 
are surely coming into fuller harmony than has ever 
before existed between them. This will be recognized 
as in perfect accord with what we have already 
pointed out to be the teaching of Revelation,— that 
in the close of this "harvest" time Papacy and Protestantism 
will cooperate to arbitrarily coerce the 
people of Christendom and thereby lead to the great 
catastrophe of anarchy;— "a time of trouble such as 
never was since there was a nation."— Dan. 12:1. 

The following from the Sun (N.Y.) is to the 
point:— 

"On Sunday prayers for the dying pope were 
offered up in several Protestant churches, of whose 
services we have particular reports and, probably, in 
many more as to which we have no such information. 

"They were indicative of a change in the attitude 
of Protestantism toward the Roman Catholic church 
which is one of the most remarkable religious developments 
of recent years. Even not more than a quarter 
of a century ago that church, by far the greatest 



in Christendom, was usually excluded from consideration 

by Protestants when they were discussing the 

means and agencies for the propagation of Christianity. 

The article on the Pope in the Westminster 

Confession, in which he was described as 'that Antichrist, 

that man of sin and son of perdition,' represented 

the prevailing Protestant belief. 

"Twenty-five years before, this whole country 
had been stirred by a political agitation against the 
Roman Catholic church which seemed to some prophets 
ominous of a religious war. That church, then 
comparatively feeble, has now grown into the strongest 
in the Republic, yet, instead of the bitterness of 
hostility against it, proclaimed and predicted by the 
old Know-Nothingism, there have come harmony and 
respect. In Protestant churches prayers were offered 
up for the suffering and dying pope. The Roman 
pontiff has become a Christian brother, and Protestants 
join with Catholics in celebrating the spiritual 
exaltation of his character and the services he has 
rendered to Christianity. He was described by a 
Methodist preacher of New York on Sunday as 'a 
leader of the great army of the Lord's hosts,' a 'spiritual 
commander-in-chief,' a 'champion of the faith 
who has never wavered from the Catholic position and 
the theology of Thomas Aquinas,' 'who has done 
much for the progress of civilization,' who 'has restored 
the golden age of the Papacy in its best sense.' 
...It cannot be denied, however, that frequently 
this new spirit of toleration is due to lessened partizanship 
because of lessened religious conviction." 

THE CHARACTER OF NEXT TWO POPES PROPHESIED. 



Long ago, a Catholic whose name even is lost, 
affected to prophesy the characters of future popes. 
He did this by giving to each a "motto." And so 
accurate have some of his predictions been that Catholics 
respect them greatly. For instance, the Pope 
Leo XIII. motto was "Lumen in caelo" (Sunshine in 
heaven). His motto for the next pope is "Ignis 
ardens" (A burning fire), and that for his successor 
is "Religio depopulata" (Religion laid waste). 

The reign of Leo XIII. certainly has been a very 
sunshiny one for papal interests, and it would be well 
in accord with our anticipations of the future should 
his successor have a brief and strenuous experience, 
to be followed by the general collapse of Daniel 12:2. 

"OUT OF THINE OWN MOUTH." 



A sister in Christ, once a Presbyterian, handed 



us a copy of the Central Presbyterian of February 18th, 
with several items marked, saying: If ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER contained such caustic criticisms of "Babylon" 
and her methods, they would be thought severe 
and uncharitable, even if admitted to be true. We 
present four extracts; the last going far toward sustaining 
the true gospel of "good tidings of great joy, 
which shall [yet] be to all people":— 

"Dr. J. M. Buckley, the renowned editor of the 
New York Christian Advocate, at the meeting of Methodist 
ministers in that city, disputed the statement of 
Dr. Thompson of Chicago that a million and a half 
converts had been made by the Methodist Church in 
the last four years. He declared that statistics showed 
that Methodism was actually declining, at any rate in 
some of the Eastern conferences. 

"Dr. Buckley added that many ministers will 
plainly state in public their frank doubt as to the 
truth of the Pentateuch. He continued: 

R3229 : page 326 

'"Some of our ministers even do not hesitate to 
state in their pulpits that in a few years Abraham will 
be generally regarded as a name, and not as a person. 

"Tor twenty years I have not heard a real sermon 
on such a topic as the new birth. I do not say 
there have not been such sermons, but I have not 
heard them. I have heard but one sermon on sin 
properly presented. Now, I wish to say that if the 
gentlemen of the press report me as saying there is no 
such thing as a real revival and real converts, they 
will be wrong. But I do say that the predicting of a 
great revival tends to prevent its coming.' 

"Again, we say to the Christian ministers of the 
South, 'Stand firm, brethren, declaring the whole 
counsel of God!' A touch of the modern departures 
will make your sermons and all your ministry fruitless 
of anything but apples of Sodom!" 



"Certain so-called religious magazines and papers 
are constantly saying we need a higher state of 
morals in politics, in business, in social and civil life; 
saying, Preach moral duties, put high ideals before 
men; yet they fail to inculcate those very truths by 
which only high morals can be sustained— the regeneration 
of the soul by the Spirit of God, as the only 
reliable ground for good morals and upright living. 
They are trying to make men better by some other 
way than God's way. Dr. Chalmers tells us how, 
before his own regeneration, he preached all this sort 
of doctrine with God's power on the soul left out; but 
it was only when he became converted himself and fell 
back on the great truths of Scripture that his pulpit 



became a power. No preaching has ever really changed 
society deeply— made men earnest men, thoughtful 
men, holy, God-fearing— that has not dealt in the 
great primal truths of Revelation. The men whose 
preaching ignores God's grace, God's power in the 
soul, do not make Christians. That preaching which 
says develop your own natural virtues into piety, 
which does not proclaim the absolute necessity of being 
born again, is trying to warm up the frozen by 
painted fire, not by the real, burning flame. In much 
preaching in these United States God has as little part 
in what is preached as if we possessed no Bible. There 
is really no Savior in it at all. Men are not taught 
there is no salvation possible except through faith in 
Christ." 



IRREVERENT WORSHIP AND PREACHING. 

"From a letter in the Nashville Christian 
Advocate: 

"The editor of this paper well asks in a recent 
issue, 'When shall we have done with the abusive 
evangelist?' and he might easily have added a number 
of other adjectives similarly descriptive of that brother's 
preaching. By permitting in our pulpits and worship 
any and every sort of spectacular displays we are only 
cultivating in our people a lack of reverence for things 
the most solemn and sacred. There ought to be in 
none of our churches any sort of sham or catchy 
shows. Deliver us from fads in religion, from slang 
and sensationalism in the pulpit, and from cant and 
claptrap in revival services! 

"For one I wish to enter my most earnest protest 
against our preachers and people taking stock in these 
characters who advertise themselves as 'converted 
clowns,' 'cow-boy preachers,' 'boy preachers,' 'escaped 
nuns,' 'ex -priests,' and others of that ilk. Let 
us have holy living, plain, honest, quiet piety, faithful 
performance of duty, and fearless preaching of a 
pure gospel. 

"In closing an announcement not long since regarding 
a sermon to men only, the significant statement 
was made: 'There's no filth in this sermon.' 
That is a sad commentary on the character and contents 
of many sermons to men only. If there ought 
to be no double standard in morals, there ought to be 
none in preaching. What a pure woman may not 
hear, no self-respecting man ought to hear, much less 
ought it to be spoken in the pulpit. Can we imagine 
Christ or Paul excluding women from their meetings 
because they are too refined and delicate to hear some 
things which it is deemed advisable to say only to 
men? May God speed the day when our ministry 
will cease entirely from pandering in any way to the 



morbid curiosity of people for the irregular, the grotesque, 

the tragical, the irreverent, and, too often, 

the disgusting in affairs pertaining to our religious 

life and work and worship. 

"I heard one of the strongest thinkers of our 
church, and a man of deep and sincere piety, remark 
a few years ago: It disgusts me to hear some man 
say in simpering tones, "My Jesus keeps me sweetly.'" 
To which remark my heart responded Amen. It 
is a weariness to hear the easy and flippant phrases 
sometimes used in addresses to God or in statements 
about him. 

"It is shocking and humiliating to those who 
love the church to see the advertisements and descriptions 
which frequently appear in the secular papers of 
all sorts of freaks and abnormalities in the way of 
church entertainments and services. 'A Talent 
Lunch,' 'Freezing a Mother-in-Law,' 'Lap Socials,' 
are some that have of late come under our observation 
as 'church entertainments,' while some of the 
subjects announced for sermons fall little short of 
blasphemy. Besides the sad feature of lack of reverence 
in these things, they contain another feature 
equally as hurtful, for in them is a tacit confession of 
our skepticism as to the power of the gospel to attract 
people, and also a confession of weakness on the 
part of church and ministry. We seem to have gotten 
hold of the false idea that we shall have more hold 
on the sinful world by conforming a little more to their 
ideals and standards. The world has never been made 
better by low ideals. It expects and has a right to 
demand of the church the very highest ideals in 
matters pertaining to things holy and religious. Let 
us have done with sensationalism in the pulpit, with 
sacrilege in our songs, with undue familiarity in our 
testimony and conversation, and with irregularities in 
our worship." 



GOD IS LOVE. 

"We recognize electing love as the hope of man; 
but we see clearly that the love of compassion for all 
the perishing is coextensive with the earth. The commission 
of our Lord is an unmistakable declaration 
that 'his tender mercies are over all his works.' 

R3229 : page 327 

Every creature of our race is included in the provision. 
We do not remember any one of our leading 
theologians who has ever suggested a single exception. 
Our Savior never manifested, even to Judas, a 
particle of malice. 
"The gospel is now, and ever has been, a proclamation 



of the Lord's love to sinners. It is a misrepresentation 

to say that this love is only for a 

secret number of sinners. Our Lord was not conscious 

on the cross of expiating the sins of the 

reprobate, but he was conscious of a mercy fully capable 

of that redeeming act. The heart of the glorious 

victim was capacious enough and unselfish enough to 

save any number of such worlds. 

"Calvinism has suffered very much from its nominal 
friends, as well as its open enemies. The ardor 
of discussion has sometimes involved them in apparent 
views liable to misconception, but we cannot understand 
any of our representative men as imputing to 
God anything less than an infinite degree of benignity. 

'"God is love.' That is his nature. He takes 
no pleasure in retributive severity. Endless torment 
is inflicted by his enemies upon themselves. Irreconcilable 
antagonism to such a God clearly deserves the 
curse of its own perpetuation and appropriate misery. 
Fixed aversion to piety is the sin that destroys all 
who perish. They are incurable enemies of a God of 
love. That enmity toward such a Creator is the 
ground of perdition. It makes sin "exceeding sinful." 
It was honorable from the first that God was 
infinitely worthy of the love of man, and when the 
creature chose a bodily appetite in preference to him, 
the awful change occurred and the race of enemies 
began. But God did not become the enemy of man. 
He continued to be his best friend. 'He so loved the 
world' as to provide, by a divine sacrifice, for its salvation. 
The heart of the Creator was ready to forgive 
sin in Eden, and has been so ever since; and the 
olive branch of remission hangs high upon the cross 
wherever Christian missions have erected it in the 
view of men." 

ANXIOUS TO CHECK THE GERMAN SOCIALISTS. 



It will be remembered that the salient feature of 
the parliamentary elections which were held in Germany 
a few weeks ago was the enormous success of 
the Socialists. They polled 3,008,000 votes, as compared 
with 2,120,000 in 1898, and they increased their 
representation in the Reichstag from 58 to 81. Those 
figures indicate a gain which is most significant, and 
which is all the more remarkable because the Government 
had done everything it could to prevent it. It 
reveals the prevalence among the masses of the people 
of a feeling of profound dissatisfaction with existing 
conditions, and the growth of a determination to bring 
about a more or less radical and sweeping change in 
the circumstances of German life. 

Naturally, the situation thus presented is regarded 
with alarm by those who, either through their ownership 



of property or their official position, make up 

the ruling classes, and there is much discussion as to 

what shall be done to stay the rising Socialistic flood. 

"If the ruling classes have good sense, if they 
are acquainted with the teachings of history and are 
sufficiently intelligent to apply the experience of others 
to themselves, they will perceive the wisdom of 
meeting the Socialists at least half way and of placating 
them with some timely though moderate concessions. 
—The North American. 

A SMALL CONCESSION TO ZIONISTS. 



While refusing thus far the appeal of Zionists for 
some sort of autonomous government for Palestine, the 
ruler of Turkey has recently sold to them a tract of land 
said to be capable of supporting a colony of 70,000. 
Presumably this sale carries with it some right of residence 
not granted under present restrictions. Zionists 
rejoice in this crevice of an open door and hope for 
more. So do we hope for them— in accord with the 
divine Word. Official information is hoped for at the 
next Zionist Congress, Basle, Aug. 23-29. 



R3230 : page 327 

OUR SUFFICIENCY IS OF GOD. 

-1 SAMUEL 17:38-49. -AUGUST 9.- 

Golden Text:— "If God be for us 
who can be against us?"— Rom. 8:31. 

THE Philistines occupied a considerable portion of 
the seacoast fronting the land of Canaan at the time 
the Israelites took possession, and their rights seem 
to have been respected by the Israelites, for even when 
the land was divided by lot, before it was subdued, 
the portion occupied by the Philistines was not included 
in that recognized as given by God to the Israelites. 
Indeed we remember that the Lord used this powerful 
nation as his rod in chastening the chosen people when 
the unfaithfulness of the latter required it on more than 
one occasion. Thus in the time of Samson the Philistines 
were the masters of Israel, Samson being used of 
the Lord as one of his agents in the removal of their 
yoke— although the work begun by Samson was not completed 
until the days of Samuel, the prophet.— 1 Sam. 14. 
Our lesson shows us another invasion of Israel's 
borders by the Philistines, Saul at this time being king, 
though David had already been privately anointed but 
not publicly proclaimed as his successor. The Philistine 



hosts had advanced a considerable distance into 
the territory of the Israelites, and had reached the more 
mountainous country, where Saul gathered the army 
of Israel to meet them. A valley lay between the two 
hosts, and in the center of this valley there was a ditch 
about ten feet deep, cut through the rock by a mountain 
stream. The place was favorable for a battle of 
the kind usually fought at that day. Neither army 
seemed to be anxious to attempt to cross the steep 
banks of the brook in the face of its opponent, for under 
such conditions the attacking party would be considerably 

R3230 : page 328 

disadvantaged. Besides, the Philistines- 
knowing that Israel's king stood head and shoulders 
above his fellow-Israelites— had pitted against him a 
giant Philistine, Goliath, still taller, about ten feet 
high and probably stout in proportion, as indicated by 
the weight of his armor, spear and sword. The challenge 
set forth that the disputes between the two nations, 
of many years' standing, should be settled, not 
by a general battle, but by a duel between the Philistine 
giant and the most competent Israelite who could 
be found to come against him— who undoubtedly 
would have been Saul, the king. 

For forty days this challenge was made every 
morning, and the king of Israel and his chief mighty 
men practically confessed that they feared the giant 
and would not respond to his challenge. It was at this 
juncture that David, a young man of about twenty-one, 
was sent by his father to his brethren in the army of Israel 
to see how they fared, to take them some delicacies 
from home, and to bring back word respecting the prosperity 
of the Lord's hosts. The infidel is prone to twit 
the Lord's people upon the statement of Scripture that 
David was a man after God's own heart— referring to 
some of his weaknesses and shortcomings; but in this 
lesson we see clearly the feature of David's character 
which God so highly esteemed, and which he has always 
esteemed in everyone to the extent that he possesses 
and manifests it. This quality which God 
esteemed in David was his faith— the same quality 
that he esteemed in Abraham and in all the faithful of 
the past. Of all who had "this testimony that they 
pleased God," it is written that by faith they did thus 
and so, "and it was counted unto them for righteousness." 
-Gal. 3:6. 

David's faith in the Lord being great, he was surprised 
to learn when he came to the army that the Philistine 
had been boasting himself for forty days against Israel 
and Israel's God, and that no one of his nation had 
possessed sufficient faith in God to accept the challenge. 
He at once proposed that he would accept it 
himself and asked to be taken to the king that he 
might be thus commissioned. Those who mentioned 



him to the king spoke of him as a "mighty, valiant 
man," yet when Saul looked upon him he perceived 
that he was but a youth and was physically no match 
for the giant. However, he was the only champion 
who had arisen, and he was full of confidence in his 
own success as an instrument in the Lord's hands for 
delivering Israel from the boastful heathen. Saul 
finally consented, and proposed to loan Israel's champion 
his own armor; but, unused to such accoutrements, 
David found when he had donned them that he 
could not feel properly at home in them. It would 
require considerable time to learn how to use such 
armor and implements advantageously and without 
discomfort, and he decided to go in his usual garb as a 
shepherd, armed only with his shepherd's club and 
sling and the scrip or leather bag in which to carry the 
stones which he selected from the bed of the brook as 
he passed. 

Goliath could scarcely believe his own eyes when he 
saw that the ruddy youth who approached him had 
come out to do him battle with a club, for he probably 
did not notice the sling. He felt indignant and inquired 
whether he— the great, the mighty, the strong, the well-armed 
—was regarded as a dog to be attacked by a 
club; and, cursing David by his gods, he declared that 
he would make short work of him, and that the fowls 
should have his flesh. 

David's retort shows clearly that he appreciated 
the situation in all its bearings. He was aware that 
his opponent was armed with sword and spear and javelin, 
but, as he states the matter, he was approaching 
the conflict strong in the strength that God supplies- 
strong in his faith in the Lord as the decider of battles, 
as the one who would be able to give him the victory 
and deliver his people from all their enemies. David 
noted, and counted well upon the fact, that the issue 
was not between the two armies, not between two men, 
but between the God of Israel and the false gods of the 
Philistines. Faith in God had doubtless been increasing 
amongst all the Israelites within the twenty years 
preceding this event. They were gradually coming to 
learn that, having been punished for their sins and 
idolatries and having returned unto the Lord, his favor 
was now with them because of his people, but David 
seems to have had confidence in God in more than an 
ordinary degree. Doubtless his own anointing to be 
Saul's successor in the kingdom gave him assurance 
that it was God's will that the kingdom of Israel was 
to be continued, and that God's favor was to be with 
them still as a nation, notwithstanding the transgressions 
of the divine commandment by Saul, noted in 
a previous lesson. 

The Jews have a tradition that it was while Goliath 
threw back his head in laughter at his stripling 
opponent that David's sling-stone struck him in the 
temple. The helmets of that time were not nearly so 



complete as those used extensively in the middle ages, 
and apparently the neck and a portion of the head were 
generally exposed, so that David's stone might have 
struck the vital spot of the forehead even though Goliath's 
head had not been thrown back in laughter. 
Neither was David's marksmanship so extraordinary 
as to be considered wholly miraculous. We have the 
Scriptural record that many in the tribe of David could 
throw such sling-stones to a hair's breadth. (Judges 20:16.) 
Xenophon mentions the expertness of certain 

R3230 : page 329 

Persian slingers, and Livy speaks of slingers so expert 
that they could send a stone from a distance through 
an ordinary wreath or chaplet, and could not only 
strike their enemies in the face, but in whatever part 
of the face they chose. 

We cannot call this little incident a type, but we 
may properly see in it a figure and a lesson respecting 
spiritual things applicable to all who belong to the 
anti-typical David— Beloved— the Christ. Goliath fitly 
pictures the great Adversary, Satan, and all who are on 
his side of any controversy, seeking to bring the Lord's 
consecrated people into bondage either to errors or sins. 
Satan, as the prince of this world, found no one either 
willing or able to dispute his supremacy of power until 
our Lord Jesus, the antitypical David (Beloved), became 
the champion of God and the truth and such as 
love righteousness. As David risked his life for the 
deliverance of his people Israel, so our Lord Jesus not 
only risked, but sacrificed, his life for the deliverance 
of antitypical Israel; as David, after being anointed, 
encountered the lion, so Jesus, after he had been 
anointed by the holy Spirit at Jordan, was led of the 
Spirit into the wilderness and endured a great fight 
with the Adversary. He conquered him with the Word 
of God, answering each of Satan's propositions for his 
overthrow with the words, "It is written." The Apostle 
explains,— For this purpose Christ was manifested, 
that he might destroy the bondage of death and "him 
that hath the power of death, that is the devil"— 
eventually delivering all the people of God.— 
Heb. 2:14. 

David's conquest in some respects illustrates battles 
which all of the Lord's people must engage in. 
Goliath and the hosts supporting him may well illustrate 
to our minds various foes of God and truth and 
righteousness which challenge us and all of the Lord's 
people. 

(1) The hosts of doubt and scepticism are today 
led about by the great giant of unbelief, whose size, 
armor, sword and spear are over all the hosts of nominal 
Christendom— all except the David class— the 
body of Christ. This giant is the evolution theory, 
and his armor-bearer is higher criticism. The records 



and promises of Israel's God are disdained, and the 
David class who stand forth in their defense are treated 
with contempt and their pebbles from the brook of 
truth disregarded. But science, falsely so called, though 
it boasts itself today and creates so great an impression 
that few would think of opposing it, will, nevertheless, 
meet its Waterloo. It shall fall before the Lord's 
anointed— David, "Beloved"— and its own sword of 
truth shall eventually complete its destruction in the 
morning of the new dispensation: at the same time all 
the hosts of error shall flee, and many of the people of 
God, aside from the elect body of Christ, shall be 
blessed by these deliverances. 

R3231 : page 329 

(2) Goliath may properly represent pride, backed 
by a host of worldliness. One of the severe ordeals of 
the New Creature is the conquering of the love of the 
spirit of worldliness under the leadership of pride. 
Worldly pride challenges faith in God and obedience to 
him, and only those who are of good courage and full of 
confidence in the Lord can overcome this giant. It is 
necessary, too, that the victory should be made complete 
—that pride should be thoroughly humiliated, killed, 

so that it can never rise up again to destroy us. It is 
an individual battle, and the only proper armament 
against this giant is a stone from the brook, the message 
of the Lord, showing us what is pleasing and 
acceptable in his sight, and assuring us that he that 
humbleth himself shall be exalted and he that exalteth 
himself shall be abased. As the poet has expressed 
it:~ 

" Where boasting ends, true dignity begins." 

(3) Another giant which will sometimes challenge 
the people of God is fear, distrust. Mighty, imposing 
and terrifying indeed is the influence of fear, except 
upon those who have learned to know the Lord 
through previous experiences, and to trust him even 
where they cannot trace him. The giant of fear and 
despair must be met with the pebble from the brook, 
"It is written." The sling of faith must propel the 
word of promise with such force as to slay the adversary 
and to deliver us from his domination. 

(4) Another giant which assaults the Lord's people, 
but which in the present time can be overcome 

only by the David class, the body of Christ, is the giant 
of sectarian influence. How strong, how majestic, how 
well-armed, how influential is this great giant, whose 
powers are exercised in a large measure in intimidating 
the Lord's true children, so that all their lifetime they 
are subject to bondage and fail to attain the liberty 
with which Christ makes free indeed! To meet this 
giant and to resist him successfully and to gain the 
victory over him, thoroughly armed as he is with the 
haughty voice, and large and strongly organized and 



equipped with worldly power and influences and boycotting 
opportunities, requires great grace, such grace 
as is to be found only in the little flock, the overcomers, 
the body of Christ— the David class, the "Beloved." 
Thus armed only with the Word of God, and 
trusting in his rod and staff, we may well be courageous 
and answer imposing sectarianism as David answered 
the Philistine, "Thou comest to me with a 
sword and with a spear and a javelin: but I come to 
thee in the name of the Lord of hosts, the God of the 
armies of Israel, which thou hast defied." 
Let us all remember the meekness and humility of 

R3231 : page 330 

David, note that his conduct was utterly devoid of 
boastfulness, and that we are to copy this. Like him 
our confidence is to be in the Lord, and not in 
ourselves. 

By whom was David taught to aim the dreadful blow, 
When he Goliath fought, and laid the Gittite low? 
No sword or spear the stripling took, 
But chose a pebble from the brook. 
'Twas Israel's God and King who sent him to the fight, 
Who gave him strength to sling, and skill to aim aright. 
Ye feeble saints, your strength endures 
Because young David's God is yours. 
— Cowper. 



R3231 : page 330 

STRONG CHARACTERS IN CONTRAST. 

-1 SAMUEL 18:5-16.-AUGUST 16.- 

Golden Text:— "God is our refuge and strength, 
a very present help in trouble."— Psa. 46:1. 

SAUL and David were both men of strong character, 

but the former neglected the divine 

word and counsel and undertook the management 

of his own affairs, while the latter accepted the 

Lord and his leadings and by faith sought to follow 

him. The results showed in both cases: Saul came to 

an ignominious end. David was prospered and exhibited 

a wisdom and strength of character quite beyond 

his times. We are not to forget in this connection that 

David's discreetness and obedience to the Lord kept 

him from the throne of Israel for years— years of trouble, 

privation and wandering, whereas the following of 

worldly methods might have led to much greater prosperity 

so far as outward appearances would be concerned. 

Nevertheless, we are to remember also that 

the nation of Israel had been adopted by the Lord as 



his chosen peculiar people, with whom he would deal, 

whose course he would supervise, and in respect to 

whose rulers he would decide. Neither are we to forget 

the great difference between the Jewish age, with 

the divine arrangements and regulations of the same, 

and this Christian or Gospel age, with its different regulations 

and its law of love, patient endurance and spiritual 

instead of carnal warfare. Those who consider 

the course of David and other faithful ones of the Jewish 

epoch to be patterns for the Church, the body of 

Christ, show thereby that they have a total misunderstanding 

of the divine Word on this matter. To their 

mind David's battles and victories and slaughters are 

figures illustrative of spiritual battles and victories on 

the part of the antitypical David, the Beloved,— head 

and body— the Christ. 

Although Saul had already been notified by the Lord 
through the prophet Samuel that the kingdom should 
be taken from his family and given to a neighbor more 
worthy of the trust than he, more faithful to the Lord, 
nevertheless he had been given to understand that the 
kingdom might endure in his hands for a considerable 
time. We may assume, therefore, that Saul was on 
the lookout for one to rise to prominence who should 
ultimately become his successor,— although we have no 
reason to think that he understood that David had 
already been anointed to this position, for David's 
anointing was kept secret. 

Saul, although appreciative of David's prowess, 
was, nevertheless, jealous of him because of the prominence 
to which his noble course brought him in the 
eyes of the people. This jealousy was accentuated as 
he heard the praises of David sung in grander terms 
than his own were lauded. Jealousy is always an evil 
quality— no part of the Lord's Spirit, the holy Spirit, 
but a strong ingredient in the spirit of evil. Hatred, 
envy, malice, strife, works of the flesh and devil, are all 
closely related to jealousy, and often spring from it. 
Saul should have resisted the envious suggestions 
which came to his mind: he should have allowed his 
mind to rise above all personalities and to rejoice most 
sincerely, most heartily, in the praises of his young general. 
Doubtless it was in part his remembrances of the 
Lord's declaration that he should be bereft of the kingdom 
that made him look with jealous eyes upon David 
from thenceforth. 

Jealousy is one of the great foes that confront every 
Christian. It should be slain on sight as an enemy of 
God and man and of every good principle; and to the 
extent that its presence had defiled the heart even for 
a moment, a cleansing of the spirit of holiness and love 
should be invoked. Jealousy is not only a cruel monster 
of itself, but its poisonous fangs are almost certain 
to inflict pain and trouble upon others, as well as to 
bring general woe and, ultimately, destruction upon 
those who harbor it. Jealousy is sin in thought, wickedness 



in thought, and is very apt to lead speedily to 
sin and wickedness in action, the probable result being 
the defilement of men. The mind, if once poisoned 
with jealousy, can with great difficulty ever be cleansed 
from it entirely, so rapidly does it bring everything 
within its environment to its own color and character. 
This sin, when it is finished, if it is allowed to grow, if it 
is not routed, if it is not overcome, bringeth forth death. 
All of the Lord's followers should be on guard against 
this sin, and none need it more than those whom God 
has greatly honored as his mouthpieces or servants in 
any capacity. Had David and Saul not been in such 
high positions, jealousy and rivalry and enmity would 
have been comparatively impossible. 

Under the circumstances we are not surprised to 
read (v. 10) that jealous Saul was troubled with an 

R3231 : page 331 

evil spirit— an evil disposition. Perhaps the language 
should be understood as meaning that an evil spirit— in 
the sense of a fallen spirit, a demon— troubled him. We 
certainly know that as love, patience, joy and peace 
are elements of the holy Spirit— God's disposition— so 
a spirit of hatred and jealousy is an evil spirit or disposition 
"from God,"— that is, away from God, to the 
contrary of God. We may recognize the fact, too, that 
such an evil spirit as here took possession of Saul was 
not only a spirit far from God, or anything that he 
could approve, but we may even assume that, since 
Saul was God's anointed representative in the throne of 
Israel, the evil spirit could not have gained control 
over him without at least divine permission. As holy 
men of old were moved by the holy Spirit to speak and 
write matters of divine inditement, so men have been 
moved and are sometimes moved today by evil spirits to 
speak and to write perverse things. This is the thought 
contained in the word "prophesied" in this verse. 
Saul spoke unwise things, improper things, spoke foolishly 
while he had his javelin in his hand. The spirit 

R3232: page 331 

of evil was upon him, leading him to make a motion 

with his javelin as though he would do violence to his 

faithful and humble young general who, as a friend and 

companion, played for him upon the harp with a view 

to dispelling his melancholy. The word "cast" (v. 11) 

is a stronger one than is borne out by the original, 

which seems simply to signify a motion— although subsequently 

he did actually hurl the weapon.— 

1 Sam. 19:10. 

David seems to have been quite intrepid, fearless, 
and again and again exposed himself to Saul's power 
when the latter was under the influence of his melancholia. 
There is no mention of David's fear, for although 



he felt it to be propriety and duty to escape as 
he did, he seems to have had continually the memory 
of God's power for his preservation, and the fact 
that God had already anointed him to be the king in 
due time. Such faith and courage points a good lesson 
to all the members of the antitypical David. Nothing 
shall by any means hurt us. Things may interfere 
with our fleshly interests or comfort or course of affairs; 
but when we remember that we are not in the flesh but 
in the Spirit, that it is as New Creatures that the Lord 
has promised us the Kingdom in his due time, we can 
realize that no outside influence can interfere with our 
real interests, our spiritual interests, nor hinder our 
attaining to the glories of the Kingdom which the Lord 
has promised to his faithful ones. Only our loss of 
confidence in the Lord and our unfaithfulness to him 
could separate us from his love and his promises. 

Saul's jealousy of David was supported by his fear 
of him. Doubtless he wondered often that the fearless 
youth who attacked the lion should spare himself— even 
when he, Saul, had manifested openly his hatred and 
opposition toward him. He perceived that the Lord 
was with David and not with himself. David's presence 
became distasteful in the palace, and, as he could 
not be ignored, he was put into the army and various 
commissions given him in connection with the interests 
of the kingdom, Saul evidently hoping that through 
some indiscretion David would give an excuse for a 
turning of popular sentiment against him— perhaps 
hoping also that in some of the forays he would be 
wounded or killed. But the Spirit of the Lord, as the 
Apostle explains, is the "spirit of a sound mind," and 
in proportion as David trusted the Lord and was guided 
by that trust he was enabled to do his part with wisdom, 
winning the approval of the people and all the 
more the fear and awe of Saul. 

This lesson to some extent illustrates the relationship 
between the Lord's consecrated people and the 
world at the present time. The worldly are in power, 
in influence, and yet they are conscious of the fact that 
divine favor is no longer with them; that a change of 
dispensation is about to be determined in the divine 
program; that the Laodicean stage of the church is to 
cease to be the Lord's mouthpiece, and to be spewed 
out; that the faithful little flock— of whom not many 
are wise or great or noble according to the course of this 
world— are to inherit the Kingdom with much power 
and glory. They do not indeed realize that the 
anointed class is in their midst and mingling with them 
day by day; nevertheless they feel a jealousy in respect 
to those who have more of the Lord's Spirit than themselves, 
and hate that which is purer and higher and 
better than they themselves possess. At times their 
jealousy would almost lead to murder; but they fear 
and hate the David class because of their closer relationship 
to the Lord, and because of his blessing manifested 



in their hearts and lives. Our Lord referred to 
such a condition of things in the end of the Jewish age, 
which was certainly a type of the end of this age. He 
said of the religious people of that time: "The darkness 
hateth the light, neither cometh to the light, lest 
its deeds be reproved; but he that doeth truth cometh 
to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest that 
they are wrought in God." Thus, as a separation was 
made between Saul and David, and between those who 
loved the darkness and those who loved the light at the 
Lord's first advent, so a separation is rapidly going on 
today between those who love the light, the truth, and 
who are guided by the holy Spirit, and those who are 
of a different mind or disposition. 

Our Golden Text should be borne in mind as a 
comforting and sustaining power to the Lord's faithful. 
It is in full harmony with the words of the Apostle in 
the New Testament, who declares that "all things are 
working together for good to them who love God, who 
are the called according to his purpose." 



R3232 : page 332 

A REMARKABLE FRIENDSHIP. 

--1 SAMUEL 20:12-23. --AUGUST 23.- 

Golden Text:— "There is a friend that sticketh 
closer than a brother."— Prov. 18:24. 

HISTORY relates many instances of intense friendships 

between great men in ancient times, 

but it tells us of none surpassing the friendship 

between Jonathan and David, referred to in this 

lesson. Jonathan's love for David, evidently thoroughly 

reciprocated by the latter, shines out not only 

as a friendship that was unselfish, but as one that was 

apparently injurious to Jonathan's interests— though 

not really so. 

As the son of King Saul, Jonathan was the recognized 
heir to the throne of Israel, and was at this time 
about thirty-five years of age. David, the country 
youth of about twenty-one years of age, had suddenly 
sprung into prominence before the nation, had been 
appointed a captain of a thousand men, and was just 
recently married to Saul's daughter. Saul himself 
viewed David as a rival in the affections of the people, 
and everything foreboded that some day he would be 
Saul's successor. From the standpoint of fallen manhood, 
therefore, Jonathan had every reason to consider 
David an opponent and rival, and the envy and jealousy 
of the fallen nature might be expected to breed in 
Jonathan's heart hatred and enmity instead of friendship 
and love. These circumstances constitute the 



remarkable friendship between these two young men 
one of the most wonderful on the pages of history. 

We read of how Jonathan's soul was knit unto the 
soul of David— their affections, confidences and loves 
were interwoven. Jonathan giving to David certain 
parts of his own apparel when the latter came to live 
at the court of Saul, was merely an outward manifestation 
of the other precious sentiments which prompted 
this and other manifestations of affection— all of which, 
dignifying David and promoting his honor, were derogatory 
to the natural interests of Jonathan, who, as the 
heir apparent, might not improperly have aspired to 
the maintenance of his own place of honor at the court. 
Small minds are apt to make the mistake of supposing 
that the crushing down of others is essential to their 
own honor and exaltation; but it was because Jonathan 
was not thus small-minded, but noble-hearted, that 
his character has been beloved by all who have known 
it from then until now. 

There is a reason for everything, and there must 
have been a reason for this love between these two noble 
souls. We are to love and esteem whatsoever things 
are just, true, pure, noble, honorable, says the Apostle, 
which implies that the love of the reverse of these 
would be improper. True, there is a difference between 
loving principles of righteousness and goodness and 
loving individuals, but what we wish to notice is that 
the love for individuals should be based upon their 
possession of noble and love-worthy characters. Neither 
of these men could have loved the other had he 
been bad, ignoble; for only the mean can love the 
mean, and only the perverse can love the perverse. 

What was there in David's character that attracted 
Jonathan's love? Undoubtedly it was his 
nobility, his courage, his honesty, his faithfulness to 
the king and to the nation, and, above all, his trust in 
God, his reliance on him. What was there in Jonathan 
which drew forth the responsive love of David? 
There were many of the same qualities: Jonathan was 
also courageous and had already demonstrated this; he 
was sincere, honest, humble-minded, generous, faithful 
to a friend, and above all faithful to his God.-l Sam. 14:1-15,27-30,43; 
23:16-18. 

While these two men had certain natural qualities 
of heart which commended each to the other's love, the 
great bond of union was the faith and devotion of each 
to God. Some one has said that those who would be 
the best friends need a third object in which both are 
interested, and that then, like the radii of a circle, the 
nearer they come to this center the nearer they approach 
to one another. So with these men: their loyalty 
to God and to the principles of truth and righteousness 
exemplified in God, was the strong bond of their 
friendship which hindered the diversity of their earthly 
interests from alienating their affections. 

This same principle is exemplified in all true, unselfish 



love: there must be something mutually attractive 

to draw and to hold the interest and love of each 

to the other. The breaking of vows of love and friendship 

R3233 : page 332 

or the breaking of marriage vows implies that one 
or other had a selfish love and not a pure love, which the 
Lord's Word inculcates and which is so nobly illustrated 
in this lesson. Selfish love may indeed admire that 
which is brilliant, that which is good, that which is 
noble, that which is generous; but not being equally 
noble and generous, it will be sure at some time to be 
assaulted with the temptation to abandon the friendship 
where it believes it could better serve its own 
interests. Jonathan's love was not of this selfish kind, 
consequently it was unchangeable— indeed, grew the 
firmer and the stronger in proportion as it triumphed 
over the propositions of any selfish suggestions. In 
this respect it well represents the love of our Lord Jesus 
for his people. As Jonathan loved David at the cost 
of his own position, our Lord Jesus left the glory 
which he had with the Father that he might become 
the Redeemer of his people, to whom he declares, "Ye 
are my friends if ye do whatsoever I command you." 
"One there is above all others 

Well deserves the name of friend; 

R3233 : page 333 

His is love beyond a brother's, 
Costly, free, and knows no end." 
Our lesson introduces these two friends at a time 
when the life of David was in danger. Our preceding 
lesson showed that Saul was disposed to do violence to 
David. The threatening action mentioned in that lesson 
was repeated several times, and finally the javelin 
was thrown at his musician David, but the latter 
escaped it. It was in view of this hostile feeling that 
these friends decided that it would be unwise for David 
to again appear at court unless King Saul manifested 
some change of mind toward him. The coming 
feast would be an important one; Jonathan and others 
of the household would be present, but it was not considered 
prudent that David should hazard his life by 
attending, and it was arranged that Jonathan should 
make his excuses to the king and should subsequently 
let David know the king's attitude of mind, so that if 
necessary he should flee out of the country. Jonathan 
found Saul full of bitterness of heart toward David, so 
much so that he was angered at his son for making 
excuses for him and threw his javelin at him as an evidence 
of his displeasure, though probably not with the 
intention of killing him. Jonathan resented the indignities 
and wrong of his father, and at once communicated 
the matter to David by the prearranged signal 



related in this lesson. However, the two friends could 
not part without a personal interview, in which they 
kissed each other, and wept, and bound each other in 
promises, and called upon God to witness the sincerity 
of their devotion to each other. Jonathan was evidently 
fully convinced that David was the Lord's 
choice for a king to succeed Saul, and, being full of 
faith and devotion to God, he had not the slightest 
thought of opposing the divine arrangement. Quite 
probably, too, in their confidences, David had already 
told Jonathan of his anointing, assuring him, however, 
that he would not consider this anointing a proper excuse 
or ground for any interference with King Saul; 
that on the contrary, as the Lord had sought him and 
anointed him, the Lord himself was able in his own 
due time and in his own way to instal him in authority 
and power without his stretching forth his hand to 
do injury to one who already had been anointed of the 
Lord to this office of king. 

We have already noticed that friendship implies 
like qualities of mind and of heart. The generous love 
the generous, the noble love the noble, the honest love 
the honest, the meek love the meek, etc.; but now we 
call attention to the fact that amongst the Lord's people 
are not many great, wise or noble— naturally speaking 
—and that God loves and accepts as his covenant 
people, friends, children, chiefly those who are not 
noble by nature. We notice also a love and friendship 
amongst the Lord's consecrated people stronger and 
deeper than any earthly tie or relationship— notwithstanding 
the fact that amongst the Lord's people are 
"not many great or noble," but chiefly the poor of this 
world, rich in faith. How comes this seeming contradiction 
of a general rule of friendship? We reply that 
God's love toward us as sinners was not that of friendship 
but of compassion, and similarly the love of his people 
for sinners is not that of friendship but of compassion, 
sympathy, the desire to help them out of their degradation. 
Not until after we had ceased to be sinners, 
through acceptance of Christ, were we privileged to become 
the friends of God and to realize him as our 
friend. Not until we had ceased to be sinners, and had 
been accepted in the Beloved, would we become the 
friends of others similarly transformed, and begin to 
grow in this quality of friendship— love for one another 
as brethren, partakers of the holy Spirit. 

In a word there are two planes of friendship— a 
natural plane, on which men of like natural qualities 
would be drawn together; and a spiritual plane, on 
which those unlike in natural qualities, but alike in 
spiritual hopes, aims and ambitions, are drawn still 
more closely together by the new tie, the new love, 
which binds not their flesh but their hearts in Christian 
love and unity. 

These New Creatures in Christ Jesus know each 
other not according to the flesh but according to the 



Spirit. In each other's spirits or new minds there are 

the noblest sentiments, the highest aspirations, that 

which is good, true, noble, pure— whatever may be 

their weaknesses according to the flesh. They love 

each other from the new standpoint of intention, will, 

harmony with God, and their friendship for one 

another grows increasingly as they perceive each other's 

energy in fighting the good fight of faith against 

the evil influences of the world, the flesh and the Adversary. 

Nor tongue nor pen can properly express 

the love, the friendship, which subsists between these 

New Creatures in Christ Jesus, to whom old things have 

passed away and all things have become new. 

This does not signify, however, that a parent must 
have exactly the same love for other children as for his 
own;— he has a greater responsibility for his own, and 
should realize it. Nor does it imply that even the 
saints will all be loved to the same degree. Our Lord, 
we are told, specially loved some of his disciples. By 
and by, when perfection shall have replaced imperfection, 
all "brethren" will be perfect and all neighbors 
will be brethren beloved. Until then, however, we 
must love all, but "making a difference"— according 
to natural obligations and spiritual development.— 
Jude 22. 

As there are nominal Christians and real Christians, 

R3233 : page 334 

so there is a nominal love as well as a real love 
amongst those who profess the name of Christ, and it 
should be more and more the aim of the Lord's true 
people to cultivate his spirit, his character, his disposition, 
his love, his friendship; and that they may be 
able to cultivate these he has caused the Apostle to present 
to our attention a most graphic description of the 
love which is from above. This description is given in 
1 Cor. 13. It must be enjoyed to some extent by all 
who are New Creatures, for if any man have not the Spirit 
of Christ he is none of his; but it will be increasingly 
enjoyed and appreciatingly understood in proportion 
as the Lord's people each become stronger in the Lord 
—copies of God's dear Son— like him who is the friend 
above all others. 

One writer says, "The glory of life is to love, not 
to be loved; to give, not to get; to serve, not to be 
served.... The self-centered cannot keep friends 
even when he makes them." 

Another remarks, "Behold, what gross errors and 
extreme absurdities many do commit for want of a 
friend to tell him of them." 

"True criticism does not consist, as so many critics 
seem to think, in depreciating but in appreciation. 
More lives are spoiled by undue harshness than by 
undue gentleness." 

"The centered love of any one person tends toward 



universal good-will, the love of all. The candle 

not only shines on him who lights it, but on all within 

reach of its rays." 

"Every power for good in true friendship is a 
power for evil in the false. 

'"Was it friend or foe that spread these lies! 

Nay, who but infants question in such wise? 

'Twas one of my most intimate enemies.'" 



R3233 : page 334 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 

page 334 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:- 

Enclosed find order for WATCH TOWER. It is indeed 
a welcome visitor. I only regret not having learned of 
its true value sooner; and am sure that I cannot be without 
it again so long as I live and it is published. 

It is beyond my power to express my appreciation of 
the fact that God, through your instrumentality, has called 
another poor, weary, Truth-hungry soul out of darkness 
into his marvelous light. Realizing that your work is stupendous, 
I know your time is very valuable, yet I cannot 
but trust that you will bear with me while relating some of 
the instances in which a gentle, unseen hand has been 
leading in my case, hoping in that way to let you know 
something of my deep gratitude to our loving heavenly 
Father and yourself for the truths set forth in DAWN publications 
—"meat in due season for the household of faith." 

At the age of fourteen my Christian life began, and 
almost immediately the impression came that my life work 
must be that of a missionary, but I knew not whether it 
would be in a home or foreign mission field; would trust 
the Lord's guidance in that particular later. But this I 
knew, that my life must be devoted to the study of his 
Word and the service of the same. Preparations were 
then made for me to continue my school work, and in 
connection with this I tried to take advantage of every 
opportunity to aid in the different works connected with 
the Methodist church, believing that to be the first effort 
of what I then thought would be my life work. I was permitted 
to attend and aid in several revivals also, and was 
asked to aid in another when the president refused to excuse 
me from my school work. This I could hardly bear, 
especially when the pastor returned from the meeting and 
remarked that perhaps a great many more would have been 
saved had I, or some one else, been there to help him. 
None save God knew the weight of those words upon my 
poor heart. For, to view God's plans for the salvation of 
the world as I did and as most of those in the nominal 
churches do, causes a burden that our loving Savior did 
not intend for us to bear when he said, "My yoke is easy 



and my burden is light." On the contrary, Babylon 
teaches that all who are not saved during this age are 
doomed to eternal misery, and that, if they are not saved, 
we, to some extent, will be responsible for them; at the 
same time realizing that hundreds are dying daily without 
so much as hearing the only name whereby we must be 
saved, while great congregations in our own civilized 
country listen, unmoved, to sermon after sermon on the 
everlasting misery prepared for all except the saints. 

Soon the burden of these souls became so great that I 
could hardly take time to eat and sleep for fear that I 
would lose an opportunity to warn some one of this horrible 
place. I could not understand why those who knew 
of it could refrain from talking about it all the time. But, 
thanks be to God, he hath recently shown me that his 
plans for their salvation are far above ours. It required 
some time and many trials to reach the place where I 
could lay aside my impatient zeal long enough to 
hear the "still, small voice," one of the greatest trials being 
that of failure of health to such an extent that my 
school work could not be continued even at home. I 
could not understand why I should be losing (as I thought) 
so much valuable time, so I first prayed for a restoration 
of physical health, but no relief came; rather, I grew 
worse. The burden upon my heart increased daily also 
until, in utter helplessness, I once again fell at the feet of 
Jesus longing and pleading for an understanding heart. 

How comforting it would have been to have appreciated 
at that time the following words of our Lord, uttered 
a short while before his ascension, "Father, I pray not 
for the world, but for those which thou has given me out 
of the world." 

In a short while a dear sister in Christ who had previously 
given me some of the DAWN literature (though I 
was unwittingly postponing my own joy, waiting for God 
to show me by some miraculous power whether or not I 
should read it) told me of the chapter in the third volume 
of the DAWN series on the "Great Pyramid in Egypt" 
and at the same time called my attention to the fact that 
the words of our Lord as recorded in Luke 19:40 are now 
being fulfilled; that while many of his professed living 
witnesses fail to recognize his second presence and power, 
therefore are dumb, the very stones of this Great Pyramid 

page 335 

are "crying out" in no uncertain tones. This being the 
first beam of light upon my dreary pathway, and proving 
such a wonderful blessing, I immediately began to read the 
"Plan of the Ages," and now, having read all five volumes 
and the first and second ones twice, suffice it to say 
that its teachings are far more to me than my daily food. 
Though the way has been difficult and the trials severe, 
they are nothing when compared with the joys and comfort 
of the present, and then there is "more to follow"— 
"when we shall be like him and see him as he is." O, 



"Haste along ye ages of glory!" 

While feasting upon the fat things of God's Word, as 
harmonized in MILLENNIAL DAWN, the burden that had 
been such a weight upon my heart disappeared. Now, 
how thankful to know that in "due time" all the precious 
promises contained in the blessed Book, which none save 
the Lamb is worthy to unseal, shall be fulfilled! 

Remember me at the throne of grace that I may yet be 
prepared as a missionary in the truest sense of the word, 
—that I may have power to proclaim the "good tidings of 
great joy which shall be to all people," briefly summed up 
in these words, Behold the Bridegroom, King and Reaper! 

I have been out of school two years, but no longer regret 
it; rather rejoice in that I have been permitted to 
enter the school of Christ and to know that he will cause 
all things to work together for good to those that love 
him. My physical health is improving also. Oh, that 
the way may soon be opened up for me to enter the harvest 
field to be spent in his service! I long to pass the 
cup of refreshment on to others. 

May our dear Lord continue to strengthen and bless 
you to the end. 

Sincerely, yours in the blessed hope, 

M. MUNDY.-Georgia. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

As I have been reading and carefully studying the 
books entitled MILLENNIAL DAWN for nearly five years, 
and have never written to you to tell you or to acknowledge 
my thoughts concerning this wonderful plan, I must 
say, dear brother, from the purest motives, it is a great and 
wonderful work, full of harmony and divine grace in every 
expression. In my estimation it far surpasses and is the 
crowning work of all I have ever read or studied. The 
unfoldings of this beautiful plan, as it gradually reveals its 
heavenly splendor, is almost beyond our feeble comprehension, 
and yet it is made so clear and plain in MILLENNIAL 
DAWN that all may understand. When I read it I felt 
sometimes almost dazzled with exceeding rapture, yet conscious 
of deeper humility than I have ever before experienced, 
and I have long wished to express my humble 
thanks to you for revealing to me through these books what 
is in every way "meat in due season," and for being the 
instrument through which God has given me the joy and 
happiness of seeing his word correctly interpreted. From 
the first I ever read of this wonderful work my interest has 
deepened every day, and new joys unfold themselves as I 
understand more clearly our heavenly Father's goodness 
and love for mankind. 

I have been for many years a member of the Christian 
church at this place, but must confess that there were some 
subjects on which I never felt entirely satisfied, but since 
studying God's teachings as set forth in MILLENNIAL DAWN 
I have become entirely satisfied and am no longer in harmony 



with the doctrines as taught in our nominal churches. 
Consequently I have withdrawn my membership from that 
church, and intend to devote myself to this blessed truth. 

I might write for hours and yet be unable to express 
the pleasure the Truth has given me, so I will not take any 
more of your valuable time. 

Your sister in the Present Truth, 

(MRS.) C. R. BUSBY,-Virginia. 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:- 

In one of our Bible study meetings some time ago, 
some one expressed the thought that it is the duty of the 
saints to distribute their back numbers of the WATCH TOWER, 
instead of keeping them on hand unused. Thereupon 
I began giving them out, one by one, as I had opportunity. 
In doing this I generally re-read each number before 
giving it to the person selected; and thus it came about 
that in nearly every case I would find something that I 
wanted to keep. Hence the fact that I have quite a stack 
of old WATCH TOWERS on hand, but not "unused." No, 
they are very precious to me. Sometimes a number ten 
years old contains something that just exactly fits my case, 
and I read it as though I had never read it before— and, 
in a certain sense, that is really the fact, for ten years- 
yes, even two years— ago, I did not understand what consecration 
meant, and was satisfied with the prospect of 
"human perfection." Well, the other day WATCH TOWER 
No. 11, '99, fell into my hands and I read again your 
article under the title, "The New Life in Christ." I read 
it very studiously twice, before laying it aside. It is indeed 
food in due season to me. I have already written to 
a very dear brother directing his special attention to it, 
and I am sure he will be blessed in the reading of it. 

"Finishing Touches of Christian Character," No. 20, 
1901, is another "nugget" I have just found— grandly instructive 
and edifying. 

Referring to a remark contained in one of your letters 
of a year ago I wish to say: Yes, dear brother, I am learning 
—slowly but surely— and can assure you that I am more 
willing now than a year ago to serve to the utmost of my 
little ability, even unto death. And my daily prayer is 
that I may be used of the Lord as one who has no will of 
his own, and therefore no disposition to dictate terms, 
time, place or kind, as to the work the Lord may be pleased 
to direct me to. 

Your brother in Christ our Lord and Redeemer, 
J. D. GEHRING, -Kansas. 



R3233 : page 335 

MR. CHARLES T. RUSSELL:- 
Dear Sir: I have had the pleasure of reading one of 



your books and have become very much interested in it. 
I am a young man who, having lost both father and mother 
at the age of 4, was sent to a Catholic institution in New 
York State. There I had the fear of hell so pounded into 
me that often I was afraid to go to bed for fear the devil 
would take me by the leg. That may sound simple, but 
it is a fact. After being there ten years, they gave me one 
dollar and sent me on to New York to make my living. I 
did not have a friend in the world and could not get work, 
so before I would starve I stole, and was sent to the penitentiary. 
When I came out I had no money and nowhere 
to go, so I went back to prison. That went on till at the 
age of 21 I landed in Sing Sing prison for five years. Now 
if I had had some one to tell me how Jesus loved me and 
would care for me, I would have been a different man; 
but my life has been blasted and today I am an inmate of 
an ex-convicts' home; but as I said in the beginning I 
have read one of your books and it has given me a clearer 
and a brighter view of God and a better hope in life. 
I remain, your brother in Christ, 

JAMES BURK,-Pennsylvania. 



page 337 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIV. SEPTEMBER 1, 1903. No. 17 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 339 

Death of Christ a Puzzle to Dr. 
Morgan 339 

A Naval Officer on Personal 

Religion 340 

Our Memorial Number 341 

Followers of Jesus: Crossbearers 342 

Overcoming Evil With Good 347 

Great Opportunities Misused 350 

Public Ministries of the Truth 352 

Special Items 338 

page 338 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



FAVORABLE METHODS OF SERVICE. 



The chiefest service we could commend, open to all 
who are unencumbered and in active use of their faculties, 
is the Colporteur work. It is an honorable form of ministering 
the truth from house to house, as the apostles 
served. It is a service which the Lord seems to have 



blessed as much or more than any other for gathering the 

"wheat." It is apparent at once to all that to sell such 

books as the DAWNS at 35 cents each, cannot be for money-making 

that it is merely another way of preaching the 

truth. No other religious books are sold at any such price. 

Indeed, few subscription books sell for less than two to 

three dollars each. Any who can serve in this work are 

invited to write to us for "Hints to Colporteurs." 

EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT, LEATHER EDITION. 



We are mailing this edition to all whose orders are now 
in, and all new orders will have prompt attention. Remember 
that the price of this book, in leather, on thin paper, 
is $2.50— a year's subscription to the TOWER being given 
free with each when desired. In cloth binding, the price 
is $1.50, a year's subscription being given free with each. 



R3234 : page 339 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
DEATH OF CHRIST A PUZZLE TO DR. MORGAN. 



THE Rev. G. Campbell Morgan preached on the 
life of Christ to a large congregation at the 
Fifth Avenue Presbyterian church yesterday. 
"In the light of the revelation of the life of Christ, I 
come face to face with a great moral mystery," said 
Dr. Morgan. "There is some infinite meaning in the 
death of Jesus, and it is the stumbling block of my 
faith. At the cross of Christ I must be either an infidel 
or a believer. In the presence of the death of Christ I 
am compelled to deny the existence of a moral governor 
and admit his death a most terrible blunder or the 
presence of the most wonderful love that man has 
known. Notwithstanding the wonderful teachings of 
this man, God permitted him to die at the age of 
thirty-three. Humanly speaking, his work was undone 
—just commenced, as a matter of fact. Not a 
volume written, not a school founded, but just as he 
reached the commencement of his career he was foully 
murdered. I want an explanation of this. My mind 
demands it."— Exchange. 



It is astounding that any man should consider 
himself competent to preach the Gospel who does not 
know why Christ died. It is still more astounding 



that a body of Christians should appoint, engage and 
salary, as their teacher, a man who gives us every reason 
for believing that he needs that some one teach 
him the first principles of the doctrine of Christ. We 
can only conclude that the people recognizing and 
employing such a teacher are similarly ignorant of 
Christian fundamentals. 

To what advantage is it that thousands of church 
edifices are built every year, and that millions of 
money are spent on theological seminaries, and on salaries 
for preachers, organists and choristers, if this is 
the net result;— ignorance of the fundamentals. 

Are such people, who know not why Christ died, 
to be considered Christians? Certainly not. It is not 
good clothes, nor Sunday observance, nor even good 
morals that constitute men and women Christians, but 
faith— faith in the very thing that these people confess 
that they know nothing about. A Buddhist or 
Mohammedan or Confucian may have, and some of 
them do have, everything that a Christian has except 
this one all-important essential to Christianity— faith 
that Christ died as man's sin-offering, as his ransom-price, 
in order that God might be just and yet be the 
justifier of sinners who believe in this sacrifice and by 
faith accept forgiveness of sins and become on this 
basis followers of Christ. 

How plain the whole matter from the standpoint 
of the ransom, its necessity and results. How clearly 
we can see that all the sermons and books imaginable 
would have been of no avail until first of all the New 
Covenant had been sealed with the precious blood. 
Hearken to our Lord's words, "The Son of Man came 
...to give his life a ransom for many." (Matt. 20:28.) 
He came not to preach and write books. Others 
under divine power and inspiration could do and 
have done those things, but he alone had an unforfeited 
life "to give for the life of the world." As he 
said again, "O fools, and slow of heart to believe all 
that is written in the prophets: ought not Christ to 
suffer and to enter into his glory?" (Luke 24:25,26.) 
He did suffer death— "the just for the unjust"— and 
thus made atonement for our sins, paying the death 
penalty against us. He did enter into his glory and 
is fully prepared to give forth the vivifying blessing 
so much needed by the whole groaning creation. 

Why then did he not at once— as soon as glorified 
—begin the Kingdom work of rescuing Adam and his 
children from the grasp of sin and its penalty, death? 
Because in the divine plan it was arranged that first a 
church-bride should be selected as his companions in 

R3234 : page 340 

sufferings and future glories. Soon the testing of 
those called to this join t-heirship will be completed 
and then our prayer, "Thy Kingdom come," will be 



answered, and the blessing of the world at the hands of 
the Good Physician and his bride will begin. The 
great uplift of that blessed Millennial day will be not 
merely physical but mental and moral— not partial 
and temporal, but to those who will to obey it will be 
made complete and everlasting. 

A NAVAL OFFICER ON PERSONAL RELIGION. 



Captain Mahan, of the U.S. Navy, evidently 
knows something else than naval warfare. He delivered 
an address worthy of being considered by a larger 
audience than heard it. He said:— 

"In my judgment the Church of today, laity and 
clergy, have made the capital mistake in generalship 
of reversing the two great commandments of the Law; 
the two fundamental principles of her war, established 
by Christ himself. Practically, as I observe, the laity 
hold, and the clergy teach, that the first and great 
commandment is 'Thou shalt love thy neighbor as 
thyself.' Incidentally thereto, it is admitted, Thou 
shouldst love the Lord thy God.' It is of course too 
egregious an absurdity to openly call that the second 
commandment. It is simply quietly relegated to a 
secondary place. 

"You may perhaps dispute this deduction as a 
matter of fact or remind me of St. John's words, 'He 
who loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, can 
not love God whom he hath not seen.' It is evident, 
however, on reflection that St. John is in no sense inverting 
our Lord's order. He simply appeals to evidence. 
This man says he loves God. Very well, 
where is the proof of it? Does he love his brother? 
If not, he certainly does not love God, for the love of 
the brethren is the sure, inevitable fruit of loving God. 
In fact the whole missionary spirit, and much that is 
not narrowly missionary, involves love for brethren 
whom we have no more seen than we have seen God. 
The love of God is the one sure motive and source of 
the love for man." 

Is it not true, Captain Mahan inquires, that within 
the last thirty years the Church has been teaching 
that "a man's personal piety is of small consequence 
alongside of his external benevolent activities"? Has 
not the Church come to stand for the idea that "external 
activities, outward benevolence, are not merely 
the fruit of Christian life, but the Christian life 
itself"? He continued: 

"Is not the judgment of the world expressed, 
and is it not a true judgment, in the words of indifferent 
contempt for a man who is trying to save his own 
soul— his miserable soul, as I have sometimes read? 
And yet what is a man's soul? It is the one thing 
inexpressibly dear to God, for which, if there had 



been but one, he was content to give his Son, and this 
he has intrusted to man as his own particular charge. 
I do not say his only charge, but the one clearly and 
solely committed to him to make the most of. It 
is the talent which he is to multiply by diligent care; 
not that he may delight in it himself, but that he may 
present it to God through Jesus Christ.. ..Because 
care of one's own soul, by internal effort and discipline, 
seemed selfish, men have rushed to the extreme 
of finding in external action, in organized benevolence, 
in philanthropic effort, in the love of the neighbor— 
and particularly of the neighbor's body, for the neighbor's 
soul was naturally of not more account than 
one's own— not merely the fruit of Christian life, but 
the Christian life itself. That the kingdom of God is 
within you, an individual matter primarily and in 
essence, and only in consequence, and incidentally 
external, as all activity is but a manifestation of life 
and not life itself— all this was forgotten. This I conceive 
to be the state of the Church now, I mean as an 
organization; for I doubt not the multitudes of earnest 
cultivators of their own souls for the glory of God- 
perfecting holiness, as St. Paul says, in the fear of the 
Lord." 

There is but one remedy, declares the Captain, 
and that is the restoration of "personal religion"— 
"the direct relation of the individual soul to God— to 
that primary place in the Christian scheme which it 
has momentarily lost. In conclusion he said: 

"Within this generation there has been given 
much vogue to a secular phrase, the prevalence of 
which seems so indicative of the temper of the day as 
to point just where the sagacious Christian warrior, 
crafty as St. Paul was to seize opportunity and capture 
men with guile for Jesus Christ, may lay hold upon 
men's hearts and minds. Self-culture— we have all 
heard much of it; sweetness and light, and all the 
rest of it. No new thing. The Stoics cultivated themselves, 
their personality, that they might reach self-sufficingness, 
which, being attained, could be presented 
to themselves in the form of self-contentment. 
Let this human conception receive consecration. 
What is self culture, but deliverance from evil unto 
good— salvation from sin? And who shall thus save 
his people? Who but Jesus Christ? And what is 
Personal Religion but the cooperation of man's will 
with the power of Jesus Christ, that man's soul, man's 
whole being, may be saved; not for his own profit 
chiefly, but that he may lay it, thus redeemed, thus 
exalted, at the feet of him who loved him and gave 
himself for him." 



The "salvation" of the philosopher is the growing 
one today, everywhere; because faith in the Bible 



is giving way to Higher Criticism and Evolutionism, 
which are mere human philosophies. A living faith 
must have a foundation in the divine revelation, the 
Bible. It alone shows what righteousness is and that 
"there is none righteous, no not one." It alone 
shows how sin came into the world (Rom. 5:12) and 
that personal faith in a personal Savior is the only 
ground for hope of a personal salvation. 

"Truth people," as well as others, need to be on 
guard on this subject. Some of them seem to get the 
false impression that head-knowledge is the basis 
of brotherhood. While encouraging Bible study 

R3235 : page 341 

and growth in knowledge we must still recognize 

heart-salvation as the aim and object of all our proclamations 

of the Gospel. Knowledge is merely the 

lamp which guides the way toward heart-salvation,— 

"sanctification of the spirit [mind] through the belief 

of the Truth." 

With some, the thought that "our salvation is to 
be brought unto us at the revelation of our Lord and 
Savior" at his second advent seems to mean that it 
would be a mistake to speak also of a present heart-salvation 
translating us, even now, out of the kingdom 
of darkness into the kingdom of God's dear Son. We 
may be sure that none will attain the "great salvation" 
promised to the elect who does not in the present 
time experience heart-regeneration or salvation from 
the love of sin. 



R3235 : page 341 

OUR MEMORIAL NUMBER. 

OUR subscribers have recently received Vol. I. of 
the MILLENNIAL DAWN series as a number of 
this journal. This cheap edition we are supplying 
at 5c per copy postpaid to any address you 
please in the United States and Canada, or 9c per 
copy to any foreign address, except Canada. Confident 
that our readers will want to send these out to 
their friends in large quantities, we have given an 
order for 300,000 copies, and of these we have already 
received 100,000. Thus you see we are prepared for 
your orders and ready to execute them promptly— 20 
copies for $1, or more or less at the same rate. 

The experience of our readers we are sure agrees 
with our own, viz., that tracts and sample TOWERS 
and conversations and sermons are valuable in spreading 
the Present Truth only in proportion as they lead 
up to a study of the DAWNS. Whoever will not give 
time and attention to a careful reading of the DAWN, 



will apparently never become thoroughly rooted and 
grounded in Present Truth. And those who are most 
clear in the Truth have re-read the books several 
times. These books stand re-reading, because they 
are practically the Bible put in another form— Bible 
topics treated systematically,— the testimony of the 
various prophets and apostles, etc., being gathered 
together and arranged under the various appropriate 
heads. We could wish that our readers would all begin 
afresh the study of these volumes. It is noted 
sometimes how rapidly beginners now make progress, 
and occasionally seem to outstrip others who have been 
much longer in the way. The reason generally is 
that they have studied the DAWNS more recently, and 
therefore have the various features more distinctly 
before the mind, with their strong interlocking and 
corroborative testimonies. 

Our readers are aware from the annual reports 
that large numbers of DAWNS are continually going 
out, but very few, perhaps, are aware that the first 
volume has passed the one million (1,000,000) point, 
and is rushing along more rapidly than ever before. 
The new WATCH TOWER edition at 5c per copy may 
be considered a memorial of the one million copies 
already in circulation. The Lord's hand seems very 
markedly manifest in connection with this great sale; 
for booksellers, under the influence of denominational 
prejudice, will not handle the DAWNS. The Lord 
seems to intend that it shall be circulated only by 
those who are consecrated to him and his service; and 
he is raising up evangelists— colporteurs— who are 
carrying this message of the divine plan of the ages 
to all parts of the world. We are continually finding, 
too, that some of these have borne fruit without our 
knowledge— some coming into the light of Present 
Truth without learning of the WATCH TOWER and 
getting into our list. We trust that all of the dear 
brethren and sisters who love to serve the Truth will 
be more and more on the alert to introduce the WATCH 
TOWER to all of the consecrated, who have a deep interest 
in the things of the Kingdom. We want their 
names on the list, and that they should have the regular 
visits of the TOWER, whether they can afford to 
pay for it or not. We have a fund for the very purpose 
of paying the subscriptions of those who cannot 
afford to pay. 

We cannot say that all who purchase the DAWNS 
are deeply interested in them. Quite the contrary. 
Some are prejudiced by misrepresentations so that 
they will not read, even after having purchased them. 
However, we do find indications which lead us to 
believe that, when the great time of trouble shall be 
upon the world, many of the sincere-hearted who now 
are prejudiced by misrepresentations will look up these 
books and study them earnestly, and receive both comfort 
and profit from them under the trying conditions 



in which they will then be placed. 

When we inform you that over 14,000 DAWNS 
(quite apart from the new cheap edition) went out during 
June, as many more during July, and that the August 
output bids fair to be still larger, you will get an 
idea of the growing magnitude of the harvest work. 
It keeps us busy urging our printers and binders up 
to the notch, thus to keep the colporteurs in every 
quarter properly supplied; and all hands connected 
with the service here are endeavoring to do with their 
might for the service of the Lord and his cause. The 
WATCH TOWER office force consists of twenty-five persons 

R3235 : page 342 

engaged in various parts of the service, yet we 
do not do any printing or binding of our own. Five 
printing establishments are turning out papers, books 
and tracts, so that the total number employed in the 
work, directly and indirectly, must be very considerable. 

Incidentally, we note that the Volunteer work, 
this year, is progressing remarkably. The two million 
Volunteer tracts prepared in the Spring are practically 
all in circulation, and another million is ready 
for delivery now. These are aside from our ordinary 
tracts, which are going out freely also. Order all you 
can use judiciously. 

Pray for the divine blessing upon our service, and 
join to the extent of your ability in the reaping work 
of this time, and thus add to your joy, both now and 
everlastingly. 



R3235 : page 342 

FOLLOWERS OF JESUS: CROSS-BEARERS. 

"If any man will come after me, let him deny himself 
and take up his cross and follow me."— Matt. 16:24. 

OUR Lord's invitation to forsake all and follow 
him is presented in very different language 
from the usual invitations given in his name 
today;— the thought, the sentiment, is wholly different. 
The general thought today, in connection with 
an invitation to "Come to Jesus," might be expressed 
thus:— "We invite, we urge upon you to escape an 
eternity of torture, of misery, by accepting Jesus as 
your Savior. It is a question of eternal happiness or 
eternal misery, and, therefore, you have practically no 
alternative, but must accept him." How different from 
this is our Lord's presentation of the matter in this 
text. He says nothing whatever about there being 
no choice, nor about an eternity of misery for those 
who do not elect to become his followers. His words 



imply that it is a matter of choice with the individual, 
and not a matter of compulsion in any sense of the word. 

Our text contains no urging, no insistence that 
there is no alternative. On the contrary it presents 
to the mind obstacles which must be encountered by 
those who become the Lord's followers— the crosses 
they must expect; and thus it invites them to consider 
well what they are doing, before taking the step. 
The invitation contains neither rant nor cant, but is, 
in every sense of the word, logical and reasonable, 
and so stated as to avoid any misunderstanding. In 
this respect it corresponds with our Lord's other utterances 
on the subject; as, for instance, when he 
gave the parable of the man who proposed to build a 
house and laid the foundation, but afterwards was not 
able to complete the structure. On this parable the 
Lord builds the teaching that his followers should 
count the cost of discipleship, in the same cool, methodical, 
calculating manner in which they would count 
the cost of the erection of a building; and that they 
should make sure that they sufficiently desire the result 
to carry forward the conditions necessary to 
attain them. His words are, "Then said Jesus unto 
his disciples, Whosoever doth not bear his cross and 
come after me, cannot be my disciple." He explains, 
further, that this implies that he will love the Lord 
more than father and mother and wife and children 
and brethren and sisters— yea, more than his own 
life.-Luke 14:26-30. 

Furthermore, it is proper that we notice the class 
of people to whom the Lord addresses these searching 
requirements of discipleship. He addressed not vile 
sinners, not aliens, strangers, foreigners from God's 
covenants and blessings; but those who were already 
the recipients of these— Israelites. Our text shows 
that his invitation was addressed to those who were 
already, in some sense of the word at least, our Lord's 
"disciples"— believers in him and, to some extent, 
already cooperating with him. And so, still, we understand 

R3236 : page 342 

these words to be applicable, not to sinners 
but to those who have accepted of God's grace in 
Christ to the forgiveness of their sins. The Lord is 
seeking a very special class of followers, separate not 
only from the world in general, but separate and distinct 
from the ordinary class of followers or disciples. 
Without prejudice to the general interests of the 
world, the blessing of which will come in due time; 
—without prejudice to the general disciple or believer, 
who will experience some blessing, some favors more 
than the world;— our text is pointing out the conditions 
of that highest degree of discipleship, the reward 
of which will be to be with the Master, see him as he 
is and share his glory as joint-heir with him in the 



Kingdom which the Father has promised him— 
through the instrumentality of which Kingdom all 
the ordinary disciples and the world in general shall 
be eventually blessed. 

Our Lord wished, evidently, to draw a sharp line 
of distinction between all other classes and those followers 
who would walk in his steps, bearing their 
crosses after him. It is of this class that he declares, 
"No man having put his hand to the plow and looking 
back is fit for the Kingdom of God." (Luke 9:62.) 
This special class must be thoroughly imbued with a 
zeal for God and for righteousness; must gain some 
reasonable conceptions of the good things which God 
has in reservation for them; must have some appreciation 
of the Kingdom privileges, else they will not be 
persevering enough, nor zealous enough, to "fight the 

R3236 : page 343 

good fight of faith" and overcome the spirit of the 

world, with the Lord's assisting grace. It will require 

these qualities of heart, in addition to the grace, 

mercy and strength which the Lord has promised, to 

enable them to take up their cross and follow the 

Lord in the narrow way of self-sacrifice. And it was 

not only a kindness on the Lord's part to make clear 

and definite the terms of the sacrifice, but it was reasonable 

also that he should not inveigle any into 

taking such a course contrary to the true zeal of their 

hearts. It was eminently proper that he should put 

the matter just as he did put it and that we, as his 

followers and mouthpieces, should present the matter 

to each other and to all who purpose to become his 

disciples in the same straightforward manner. 

Some might be inclined to think that urging to 
accept the Lord and to seek to be his follower, with 
the thought that any other course would mean eternal 
torture, might be considered a deception which would 
work out benefit to the deceived ones— a deception 
which would do good rather than harm. We dispute 
this. We hold, on the contrary, that the erroneous 
teaching has done great injury in various ways. 

(1) Its misrepresentation of the divine methods 
and arrangements has caused many to doubt not only 
the love but the justice of God. 

(2) While people have theoretically claimed that 
only those who follow closely in the footsteps of Jesus 
and take up their crosses, following him in self-sacrifice, 
will be saved, and all the remainder of mankind 

be damned to eternal torture, nevertheless few believe 
it, few act upon such a belief, few are making 
an effort to be followers of the Lord as if they 
believed it; and extremely few of the many who are 
not trying to take up their crosses and follow the 
Lord give evidence of any fear of an eternity of torment 
because of neglecting his words. 



(3) As a consequence there is a nominal church 
of professed followers of Christ, extremely few of 
whom are followers in the sense comprehended by the 
Lord in the text. 

(4) As a result of this, nominal Christianity and 
nominal discipleship having crowded out the true 
condition of discipleship which our Lord specified as 
necessary to joint-heirship in the Kingdom, we find 
that nearly all the preaching and other religious efforts 
and services of today are going in another direction 
entirely— to produce merely justified believers, 

and not to produce the sanctified followers described. 

(5) As a consequence, present conditions, teachings, 
etc., are extremely unfavorable to the development 

of the very class which this Gospel age was 
intended to select and perfect as joint-heirs with their 
Lord in the Kingdom. 

It is because, under the Lord's providences, the 
mists of the dark ages are scattering and the light 
of the Millennial morning creeping in, that we are 
privileged to see the inconsistencies and falsities of 
the traditions of men which have beclouded the inspired 
records; and, therefore, we are led to inquire 
for the "old paths," and to listen, not for the confused 
babel of error, but for the clear words of the 
great Shepherd of the flock and his inspired representatives, 
the apostles. Listening to these— listening 
to the voice of God through these— the inspired plan 
of God is becoming clear and luminous to us, and its 
every feature reasonable, harmonious and beautiful. 

It is from this standpoint that we are enabled 
to view our text with pleasure; and seeing the 
grand designs of our Almighty Father, are enabled 
to rejoice that we are accounted worthy, through our 
Redeemer's merit, to be invited to walk in his footsteps 
and to take up our crosses and to follow him 
through evil and through good report. And we are 
assured of his sustaining grace by the way, and of 
final victory and joint-heirship with him in the Kingdom, 
if we thus continue steadfast to the end. 

"If any man will come after me," signifies, If 
any man desires to be a follower of mine, to walk in 
my steps of obedience to the Father's will, and to 
share with me in the Father's reward. Such are to 
know that the cost of such discipleship will be cross-bearing. 
Cross-bearing signifies endurance of trials, 
difficulties, disappointments— the crossing of the human 
will and preferences by circumstances and conditions 
permitted of the Father. Our Lord's will was 
fully submitted to God, so that it was his delight to 
do the Father's will, and this must be our attitude to 
commence with; but after this consecration has taken 
place comes the trial and testing. If we were in 
heaven, where all is in full accord with the divine will, 
we could have no crosses from the time we fully consecrated 
to the Lord; because our wills being in accord 



with the Father's will and with all righteousness, 
and there being nothing in heaven contrary to that 
which is right, we would be in accord with everything, 
and everything would be in accord with our newly 
consecrated minds. Our crosses come because we 
are living in "this present evil world," because the 
spirit of the world is contrary to the Lord and his Spirit 
of righteousness and equity, and because our Adversary, 
Satan, seeketh continually to stumble and 
ensnare us; because, also, our new wills are circumscribed 
and hindered and opposed by the desires of our 
natural bodies, which are more or less in accord with 
the things of this present time, its conditions, its aims, 
its sentiments; and because the new will strives to use 
the body in a manner and in a service which, under 

R3236 : page 344 

present evil conditions, continually causes it annoyance 

and suffering. These things are to be taken 

into consideration as the cost of discipleship— the cost 

of a share in the Kingdom and its glory, honor and 

immortality, promised to the "called, chosen and 

faithful." 

"GOD KINDLY VEILS OUR EYES." 

It is fortunate for us that in the outstart we do 
not, can not, estimate or appreciate the full meaning 
of the words, sacrifice, cross-bearing, etc. If we could 
look into the future and see from the start the various 
trials and difficulties to be encountered in the "narrow 
way," doubtless few of us would have the courage to 
make the consecration and the start— if we could not 
see or appreciate, beforehand, the rewards and blessings 
which under divine providence come to us in connection 
with every trial— more than compensating us for 
every earthly self-denial and endurance. Nor can we 
in advance appreciate how the Lord wishes to test our 
zeal and our faith, by letting us come to the crosses 
of life one at a time, and letting us see their ruggedness, 
—hiding from us the assisting hand by which, as 
soon as we take hold of the cross and put forth our 
efforts, our Lord lifts the real weight of it, so that we 
have no more at any time than we are able to bear. 
So careful is he of all those who thus become his footstep 
followers and cross-bearers, and prospectively his 
joint-heirs in the Kingdom, that he will not "suffer 
them to be tempted above that they are able, but with 
the temptation will provide also a way of escape."— 
ICor. 10:13. 

SACRIFICING PRECEDES CROSS-BEARING. 

The first step in following the Lord is properly 
designated in the Scriptures a sacrifice; but it is not 



a taking up of the cross. When we sacrifice our wills, 
when we submit ourselves fully to the Lord, it is the 
sum of all sacrifice— in the sense that the giving up 
of the will means the surrender of our all to the Lord, 
that his will may be done in respect to all our affairs. 
The will is the individual, the ego, and holds the command, 
the rulership of our time, influence, abilities, 
and every talent; hence the surrender of the will to 
God means a surrender of all these things to him. 
All subsequent sacrifices which we may make in the 
Lord's service are included in and represented by this 
sacrifice of the will. If the will changes, draws back, 
ceases to be obedient to God, ceases to be submissive 
to his arrangements, the whole condition changes and 
the relationship to God as a member of the body of 
Christ terminates. But if the will continues faithful 
to God and desirous of serving him and his cause, 
though the service and cross-bearing be not done faithfully, 
the Lord will carry such through, and by chastisements 
and corrections in righteousness they shall 

R3237 : page 344 

ultimately be "saved so as by fire"— by tribulation. 

This is the essence of the doctrine of "the final perseverance 

of the saints." So long as they continue to 

be consecrated— to have their wills sanctified to the 

Lord— they continue to be his, even should they, from 

lack of zeal, fail to win the prize offered to the zealous, 

the "overcomers." 

But if the will remain loyal to the Lord, and the 
crosses are approached and lifted and borne in faith 
and trust, not only will the Lord's grace suffice, but 
his comfort and assistance will be given in the narrow 
way;— so that its trials and difficulties may be esteemed 
as "light afflictions, but for a moment." 
Eventually this class shall be the victors, joint-heirs 
with the Master in his Kingdom, because by his assisting 
grace they shall have walked in his footsteps faithfully, 
even unto death— and that with greater ease 
and peace and joy and satisfaction than others who 
with less zeal seek to avoid the crosses of their 
consecration. 

The statement that the consecration of the will 
—its surrender, its sacrifice, that the Lord's will may 
be received instead— is not one of the crosses we are 
called on to bear, may need further explanation. In 
order for the sacrifice of our wills to be acceptable to 
the Lord at all, it must be no cross to us; the desire 
to give up our own will and to accept God's will must 
be a joy, a pleasure. Our wills must be sacrificed 
willingly, else the sacrifice will not be accepted of the 
Lord, and we shall have neither part nor lot with him. 
Unless the will be joyfully resigned to the Lord's 
will, all subsequent sacrificing or cross-bearing will 
count nothing whatever to our advantage. Our Master's 



expression respecting the surrender, the sacrifice, 
of his will to do the Father's will, illustrates this matter 
clearly; and it will be noticed from the language 
that there was no cross connected therewith. 

Our Lord's sentiments were, "I delight to do thy 
will, O my God; yea, thy law is within my heart." 
(Psa. 40:8.) And so all who would be his disciples 
must not only count the cost of cross-bearing because 
of the opposition of the world, the flesh and the devil, 
but they must have a somewhat similar spirit to that 
of our Lord in connection with the sacrificing of their 
wills; they, too, must delight to have God's will done 
in them— delight to surrender or sacrifice their own 
wills. Let us see this clearly, and if there is anything 
lacking in respect to the sacrifice of our 
wills let us give it our first attention. He who has 
completely sacrificed his will to the Lord's will has 
gained the victory at the start which will make all the 
remainder of the "narrow way" comparatively easy. 
He who has merely hacked and mutilated his will 

R3237 : page 345 

instead of killing it outright, will find extra difficulty 
at every step of his journey, and can never gain the 
victory until he has finished the sacrifice which he 
imperfectly began. 

IN WHAT DOES CROSS-BEARING CONSIST? 

The Master's cross-bearing did not consist in 
fighting the weaknesses of the flesh, for he had none; 
nor are these weaknesses of the flesh our crosses. 
Because all our weaknesses of the flesh are fully covered 
by the merit of our Lord's sacrifice; our standing 
before God is as New Creatures and not as imperfect 
fleshly creatures— the imperfections of the flesh, 
which are contrary to our wills and opposed by them, 
being fully pardoned by the Lord. The Lord's cross-bearing 
consisted in the doing of the Father's will under 
unfavorable conditions. This course brought upon 
him the envy, hatred, malice, strife, persecution, etc., 
of those who thought themselves to be God's people, 
but whom our Lord, who read their hearts, declared 
to be of their father, the devil. We are not able to 
read the hearts of those about us who profess to be 
the Lord's people, yet we may be sure that there are 
plenty still who profess the name of God and of Christ 
and who have none of his Spirit and are not his children, 
but are the children of the Adversary,— begotten 
of an evil spirit. 

Since we are walking in the same "narrow way" 
that our Master walked, we may reasonably expect 
that our crosses will be of similar kind to his— oppositions 
to our doing the will of our Father in heaven- 
oppositions to our serving his cause and letting the 



light shine out as our Master and Leader directed. 
It is a pleasure for us to do the Father's will— no 
cross about that. We delight not only to consecrate 
our wills, but the Lord's law of righteousness is in 
our hearts to such an extent that we delight to serve 
the right, the Truth. Our cross-bearing comes when 
we find that the Truth, so beautiful to us, so charming, 
is hated by others and draws upon us their anger, 
malice, hatred, as the same truths drew the same 
opposition upon our Master. Our faithfulness in 
cross-bearing consists in our willingness to stand up 
for the Truth and for every principle of righteousness; 
—meekly, humbly, yet firmly, speaking the truth in 
love, no matter what the cost of friendships broken 
or enmities enkindled, or evil words spoken against 
us falsely for the Truth's sake. 

Our Master forewarned us of just such experiences 
when he spoke of our crosses in following him. 
He was explaining the matter more fully when he 
said, "Marvel not if the world hate you, ye know 
that it hated me before it hated you." "If ye were 
of the world the world would love his own: but because 
ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you 
out of the world, therefore the world hateth you." 
If they have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, 
—prince of devils,— think it not strange if they 
will call his followers by evil names also. Yea, he forewarned 
us, "They shall say all manner of evil against 
you, falsely, for my sake." He even implied that 
some who are not children of the devil would be found 
amongst the persecutors of the cross-bearers, and assured 
us that some of these would verily think that 
they were doing God service. And are they not doing 
God and us also a service in the sense that Satan 
is serving God's purposes in the present time, 
in the persecution of the Church;— in making her 
path a "narrow" one, and filling it with difficulties; 
that thus the Lord's faithful cross-bearers might 
be tested and proven, and that he might thus select 
and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of 
good works and zealous of the Truth? 

CROSS-BEARERS MUST BATTLE WITH THE FLESH, ALSO. 

While we pointed out, foregoing, that cross-bearing 
is quite separate from battling with the weaknesses 
of the flesh, nevertheless whoever has the 
mind of Christ, whoever is seeking to be a cross-bearer 
and to stand up as a representative of the Lord and 
the Truth in the midst of a wicked and perverse generation, 
as an ambassador of God, will surely realize 
that he could not be an acceptable ambassador and 
could not claim that his will is sacrificed to the Lord's 
will, if he did not strive against the weaknesses and 
imperfections in himself as well as stand for the general 
principles of righteousness and truth everywhere. 



The Apostle included this thought and much more in 
this expression,— "He that saith he abideth in him 
ought himself also so to walk, even as he walked." 
(1 John 2:6.) He is to walk as our Lord walked, 
in his general deportment and relationship to everything 
that is good; and correspondingly to avoid 
everything that is evil. He is to walk as nearly as 
possible in the footsteps of Jesus. 

This, however, does not mean that he either 
should or could, in an imperfect body, walk up to all 
the perfection of his Lord, who even in the flesh was 
perfect. It means just what it says, that we should 
walk as he walked— in the same way, in the same 
direction, toward the same mark and standard that 
he recognized and established. The Apostle Paul gives 
us a suggestion along this line, very helpful when 
rightly understood. His words are, "The righteousness 
of the law is fulfilled in us who walk not after 
the flesh but after the Spirit." (Rom. 8:4.) To walk 
after the flesh is to walk after sin— to knowingly, 
willingly, intentionally, do those things which we 

R3237 : page 346 

recognize to be contrary to the divine will, even 
though we should not go to the extreme of wickedness. 
So, likewise, to walk after the Spirit does not 
mean to walk up to the standard of the Spirit, which 
would be impossible for us who were born in sin, 
shapen in iniquity, and thus blemished by sin according 
to the flesh. As "New Creatures" we are living 
in the earthly tabernacle, which is imperfect; and so 
long as we are thus limited, we cannot do all that we 
would. As "New Creatures," begotten of the holy 
Spirit, we desire to do perfectly. We desire that every 
thought, word and act should be perfect in the sight 
of our heavenly Father,— as perfect as were those of 
our dear Redeemer; but this we know from the Scriptures 
and from experience is impossible. We are glad, 
therefore, that the Lord shows us, as in this statement 
of the Apostle, that what he requires is that we should 
walk after the Spirit;— that he does not require of us 
that we should walk up to it, which would be an 
impossibility. 

It is because we could not walk up to the Spirit, 
up to the perfect standard of the divine requirement, 
that God has mercifully provided an arrangement of 
grace on our behalf. By this grace, those who start 
as members of the body of Christ, to walk in the footsteps 
of Jesus— to walk henceforth not after the flesh, 
but on the contrary to walk after the Spirit, and as 
nearly as possible up to the Spirit's requirements- 
have their deficiencies made up for them by their Redeemer's 
meritorious sacrifice. The divine arrangement 
for this is a unique one, which adapts itself to 
the various conditions and circumstances of each and 



all called to walk in this narrow way. If one by reason 
of being well born and having a good environment 
has for this reason a better balanced and 
equipped mortal body in which the new mind can 
exercise itself with the greater freedom;— and if such 
a one by reason of these advantages be able to walk 
nearer to the Spirit's standard than a less favored 
brother, whose will, however, is equally loyal to the 

R3238 : page 346 

Lord, the divine arrangement is that each shall have 
imputed to him grace sufficient,— so that both may be 
counted perfect— counted as having walked up to the 
Spirit's requirements. 

This matter may be more clearly before our minds 
if we imagine a scale marked off from naught (0) to 
one hundred (100)— a scale on which we will suppose 
moral stamina to be measurable, one hundred representing 
the full, complete character which God requires. 
On this scale imagine five brethren with 
different degrees of physical imperfections, yet all 
fully consecrated to the Lord, all seeking to the best 
of their ability to "walk not after the flesh but after 
the Spirit"— as nearly up to the full (one hundred) 
standard as possible. One has ten points of character, 
another twenty, another thirty, another forty, another 
fifty. From the Lord's standpoint, because they are 
all trusting in Christ and walking in his way, and 
seeking to do his will, they are all counted as up to the 
full standard, one hundred— all acceptable with the 
Lord— the weakest as well as the strongest of them. 
This wonderful divine arrangement for man's necessities 
tells of the wisdom of God as well as of his mercy 
and love. Who else could have devised such an equitable 
plan, by which whosoever cometh unto the 
Father through the Redeemer, with full consecration 
of heart, of will, and full intention of life, might be acceptable 
—nothing short of perfection being acceptable. 

It is for this reason that we are told that we are 
reckonedly justified— "justified by faith." Mark 
now the words of the Apostle, "Where sin abounded, 
there did grace so much more abound." He here 
expresses a general principle of the divine arrangement. 
Those hearing the invitation in this present 
time, and desiring to accept God's grace and call, are 
all thus put on an equality: he who has little character 
with many weaknesses and imperfections, has accredited 
to him of the Lord's grace and merit proportionately; 
he who has more of character naturally and 
who needs, therefore, less of grace, gets also according 
to his needs. But let it be clearly noted that there 
is "none righteous, no, not one"— none who can come 
up to the divine standard. All need to have the Lord's 
merit imputed to them, and hence the Lord makes 
this arrangement for all who would approach him and 



accept his favor, his call to joint-heirship with his 
Son. They can have neither part nor lot in the matter 
until they have acknowledged their own imperfections 
and have accepted the imputed merits of our 
Redeemer, "In whom we have redemption through 
his blood." 

All of the Lord's people— not all of the nominal 
church, not merely nominal disciples, but the true followers 
mentioned in the text— are not only walking 
in the same pathway, but similarly all find it narrow 
and difficult. Similarly all in this pathway have the 
same spirit, mind or disposition— to do the Father's 
will and to serve his cause. This is the Spirit of 
Christ, and by it all men may take knowledge of his 
disciples; they, like him, will be loyal to the principles 
of righteousness and truth. They will be willing 
to suffer opposition and persecution for the Truth's 
sake, for righteousness' sake, and thus with him to be 
cross-bearers. 

The Apostle Paul brings out this thought when, 
writing to the Corinthians respecting Titus, he asks, 
"Walked we not in the same spirit? Walked we not 
in the same steps?" (2 Cor. 12:18.) Assuredly Paul 

R3238 : page 347 

and Titus must have been walking in the same spirit 

and the same steps if they were both walking in the 

Spirit and steps of the Master,— taking up life's crosses 

and following him. And this, dear brethren and sisters, 

will be true of each and all of us. While we each 

have our individual peculiarities and differences of temperament, 

conditions, surroundings, opportunities, etc., 

the same spirit and the same steps can be noted in all 

who are followers of the Lamb. "If any man have not 

the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his." If any man 

walk not in the footsteps of Jesus he is not one of his 

followers, in this special sense pointed out by our text, 

and consequently would not be one of the joint-heirs in 

the Kingdom. But let us keep in memory the Lord's 

assurance that his grace is sufficient for us, and that 

his strength is made perfect in our weakness, and that 

this is the victory that overcometh the world— even 

our faith. 



R3238 : page 347 

OVERCOMING EVIL WITH GOOD. 

-1 SAM. 26:5-12,21-25.-AUGUST 30.- 

Golden Text.— "Love your enemies, 
do good to them that hate you." 



THIS lesson concerns the seven years of David's 
experiences as a fugitive from the envy and hatred 
of King Saul. The latter, though still the 
nominal representative of the Lord upon the throne of 
Israel, had lost the divine blessing and power which, 
in considerable measure, had been transferred to David 
after his anointing to be Saul's successor. The lesson 
brings before our minds in sharp contrast the king, 
whose better judgment was overcome by evil impulses, 
and David, the "man after God's own heart," who, 
although far from perfect, strove successfully for mastery 
over himself, and overcame promptings of evil 
under the guidance of principles of righteousness. We 
are not to think of David as perfect. Neither are we 
to be blind to his faults and sins, nor to excuse them 
nor to copy them. David was not one of the "saints" 
in the New Testament sense. He lived at too early a 
date to share in the high calling, nor could he follow 
in the footsteps of Jesus, since the Captain of our salvation 
and our forerunner in the narrow way had not 
yet come. David was a man after God's own heart, in 
the sense that he was full of faith in God and aimed 
aright. At heart he desired to do the Lord's will, and 
wherever he failed of this it caused him grief and led 
him to repentance. He lived before the time of God's 
revelation of his own character and plan and perfect 
will concerning his people. All things considered, 
David's attainments in faith and obedience were quite 
remarkable, so that although as a whole he was not to 
be considered as a model or pattern by the Church of 
the Gospel age, nevertheless many beautiful illustrations 
of proper faith and obedience may be drawn from 
his career, and some of them are noted in the lesson 
before us. 

The seven years from the time David fled from the 
wrath of Saul until Saul died must have seemed to David 
a peculiarly long period of trial of faith and patience. 
His own course had been a noble and true one. He 
had served his king and his nation most loyally, yet he 
suffered as a reward. He was for a time an exile in a 
foreign land, and his father's family was obliged to 
remove to Moab for protection. It must have seemed 
peculiar to David that the Lord should permit him, 
anointed to succeed King Saul, to be thus delayed from 
coming into his kingdom, and instead to be hunted 
and persecuted as an outlaw. This, however, was a 
valuable test of his faith, and doubtless helped to 
strengthen its roots, and thus to make his character 
stronger and his trust in the Lord firmer. But besides 
this, we may readily see that those seven years were 
valuable to David as a preparation for his kingly 
office. They made him intimately acquainted with the 
people and their usual manner of life and general sentiments 
—acquainted also with the neighboring peoples. 
Above all, he became intimately acquainted with the 
Lord, and, we may be sure, learned to trust his providences 



even where he could not trace them. Several 
of the Psalms were either written during this period 
and describe David's experiences on the spot, or written 
subsequently describing the lessons learned from 
those experiences. Amongst these Psalms may be 
mentioned numbers 34, 52, 56, 57, 63. 

Spiritual Israelites who have already received the 
adoption and anointing of the Lord to future service as 
kings and priests, who shall reign on the earth with 
our blessed Lord and Head, to bless all the families of 
the earth, can easily trace valuable lessons in the trying 
experiences of David at the time of this lesson. 
The Prince of this world is our enemy, not because we 
have done evil, but because he realizes that he has but 
a short time, and because he has a spirit that is opposed 
to the Lord's Spirit in us. We too, at times, may 
wonder why the Lord— having anointed us and assured 
us of the glory, honor and immortality in the 
Kingdom— permits us to have such trying experiences 
and such severe conflicts with the world, the flesh 
and the devil. The reason becomes evident as we 
learn the way of the Lord more particularly— as we 
learn that the present "afflictions which are but for a 
moment [comparatively] are working out for us [fitting 

R3238 : page 348 

us for] a far more exceeding and eternal weight of 

glory." We have need of patience, and that can only 

be gained by trials. We have need of faith, and that 

can only be developed by necessities. We have need 

of experience for our future work, which can be gained 

only by such experiences, which permit us to be 

touched with a feeling of the infirmities and difficulties 

and trials of those about us, to whom we shall be ministers 

and representatives when we reach the throne. 

For us, then, as for David, the lesson of present experiences 

is to resist evil,— and not with evil but with 

good. 

In considering the story of David and other Bible 
heroes we are impressed with the candor of the narratives 
—that the evil things of their conduct are told with 
the same frankness as their good deeds. This is one of 
the peculiarities of the Bible and one of the internal 

R3239 : page 348 

evidences of its truthfulness. How easy it would have 
been to have glossed the history of David so as to have 
avoided everything that would be to his discredit; and 
how surely this would have been done, especially in 
the case of a king, had the preparation of the Bible not 
been under divine supervision. Some, we are sure, 
incline to the thought that the Bible would have been 
much better reading had some of the faults of its prominent 
persons been omitted; we, however, are not sure 



of this. The story of the trials and failures and repentances 

of some of these noble characters have been no 

less blessings than the records of their noble deeds and 

sentiments. As some of the Lord's people have realized 

their own weaknesses in the flesh, having at times 

come short of their ideals in the battle against sin, they 

have found encouragement in the experiences of others 

related in the Scriptures— not to delve further into sin 

but to realize that "there is forgiveness with the Lord 

that he might be feared." As such have noted the 

failures of David on various occasions and his repentance, 

contrition and restoration to the Lord's favor, it 

has given them courage to similarly repent and to similarly 

trust in God's mercy and in their own forgiveness, 

and similarly to be encouraged to arise from their 

dejection and sin and start afresh in the battle for righteousness, 

truth, purity, etc. 

Our lesson deals with one of David's experiences 
when pursued by Saul. The erratic course of King 
Saul under the control of an evil spirit doubtless led 
him to deal unjustly with other men, as he did with 
David,— with some for one cause, with some for another. 
Such people as incurred Saul's enmity, and 
those that were forced to become fugitives and to be 
ranked with outlaws, sought out David and put themselves 
under his superior control. These numbered at 
one time 400 and later on 600. (1 Sam. 22:2; 25:13; 27:2.) 
These men, hindered from engaging in the ordinary 
pursuits of life by reason of the king's erratic 
course, moved about from place to place, and, since 
they must eat, their presence was doubtless an affliction 
upon the farmers wherever they went. Their 
foragings may have been carried on in harmony with 
the Jewish law, which provided that any hungry persons 
might enter any farm, orchard or vineyard and 
eat to his satisfaction without molestation. 

Doubtless it was because the people of the village 
of Ziph desired to curry the king's favor, and also because 
they feared the foragings of so many men, that they 
sent word to King Saul that David and his company 
could be found in their vicinity. The king hurriedly 
gathered a troop of 3,000 and went to the place, probably 
anxious to capture David and his followers. The 
latter, however, were not so easily caught; indeed they 
were much better used to scouting than the regular 
army would be. They readily ascertained all about 
the king and his army, while the king knew little or 
nothing of them. 

The story shows how David with one trusty companion 
went into Saul's camp. King Saul and the 
whole army were sleeping without tents, clothed in 
their outer robes, as is frequently the custom in Palestine 
even yet. The king lay not in a "trench" but in 
a space or corral formed by the army wagons; and at 
his head, to distinguish him from the rest of the army, 
his spear was erected near his head-rest, as is still the 



custom among the chiefs of the Bedouins of that country. 

Secure in the thought that David and his handful 

of followers would be afraid of the king and his 

army and would not think of coming nigh them, no 

provision had been made for pickets or watchmen, so 

that David and his companion readily found the king, 

and could have murdered him in his sleep and escaped 

without detection had they chosen so to do. It was 

not that David was so obtuse that he could not see the 

advantage that would come to him that he refrained 

from killing the king, but because of his respect for 

God and his loyalty to him. David recognized fully 

that God was the King of Israel, and that God had set 

Saul in the position he occupied and anointed him as 

king; and that it was the duty of the people to honor 

the king as God's representative. (Kings among the 

Gentiles are not thus divinely set.) He did not have 

so weak a conscience as would have permitted him to 

reason that as God had anointed him to be Saul's successor 

he had now providentially put Saul's life in his 

power. On the contrary he reasoned properly that 

God was still King and that he had all the power necessary 

to dethrone Saul and to bring him to the throne 

in his own way; and that the Almighty needed not 

the assistance of murder on his part for the accomplishment 

of his plan. 

R3239 : page 349 

To make the test still stronger David's companion 
suggested all this, and proposed to carry it out; so that 
the entire matter might have been done without David 
saying a word or lifting a finger. To a weaker mind 
this would have been an extremely strong temptation 
—he would have argued with himself that the crime 
would not be his,— that by merely keeping silent and 
refusing to interfere the whole matter might be accomplished 
by another. But David knew that his companion 
would not act without his consent, either formal 
or implied. He recognized that the responsibility 
still would be his, whoever might be the tool in the 
murder. He decided that he would not meet Saul's 
envy, malice, hatred and murderous spirit with the 
same spirit,— returning evil for evil,— but, instead, he 
would requite his evil and murderous intentions with 
mercy. This was not merely a matter of policy, but 
evidently David never had in his heart any murderous 
spirit towards Saul, for this was now the second time 
he had him in his power and might have destroyed 
him. We are not to suppose that David loved Saul 
with an affectionate love any more than he would have 
loved any other person of such a character. He loved 
him in the sense referred to in our Golden Text— with 
the kind of love it is proper to feel toward our enemies; 
—the love of sympathy and compassion which, however 
it might disapprove the character, etc., of the 



enemy, would neither do him injury nor encourage 
others to do so, but would spare his life and be ready 
in any manner to do him a kindness. 

There is a good lesson here for all spiritual Israelites. 
We are to recognize the Lord's appointments and 
permissions, not in respect only to earthly governments, 
but also, and particularly, in respect to those whom 
God has set in the Church. Even though such should 
become enemies of righteousness, it is not for us to 
accomplish their destruction. The Lord, who called 
us to the Kingdom and who has promised to give it to 
us in his own due time, declares it his will that in the 
present time we should live peaceably, and to exercise 
patience, moderation and kindness even toward our 
enemies— toward those who would destroy us or who 
are pursuing us with the intention of assassinating our 
characters, or what not. We are not to render evil for 
evil, nor railing for railing, nor slander for slander; 
but contrariwise, are to speak as kindly of our enemies 
as we can, and to think as generously of them as possible 
—in no sense of the word either physically or with 
our tongues or otherwise may we retaliate or manifest 
their spirit, but return good for evil, mercy and compassion 
for malice and injury. 

After David and his companion had reached a position 
of safety, and when the proper time had come, 
they hailed the king and his chief general, and called 
their attention to the fact that the king's life had been 
in jeopardy, but had been spared; and as proofs they 
showed the spear and water bottle and informed the 
king that these would be returned to a messenger whom 
he might send for them. It was not improper that 
David should let all know the spirit of magnanimity 
which had controlled his conduct in this matter. The 
king at once recognized the situation, and had manhood 
enough to confess it promptly and to apologize 
for his own contrary course. David's procedure conquered 
him. 

The results of well-doing are not always so apparent 
as in this case, because some evil-doers have less 
character and principle than had Saul,— unappreciative, 
envious and malicious as he was. But even if 
our rendering of good for evil fail to bring the acknowledgment 
of the evil-doer it nevertheless is right, and 
becomes a blessing to us. It is the evil-doer who loses 
by his failure to be conquered by our kindness. Although 
Saul evidently repented, David knew better 
than to trust himself to his power; and there is a lesson 
in this for us also, viz., that while generous toward 
our enemies, returning them good for their evil, we 
should not be too readily convinced of reformation on 
their part, but should realize, as David did in Saul's 
case, that he was under control of an evil spirit, and 
that therefore any acknowledgment of wrong or profession 
of reformation should be esteemed a passing 
emotion rather than a change of disposition until reasonable 



time should be given for a demonstration of a 
change of heart. 

David's answer to Saul, under all the circumstances, 
was a model of truthfulness and forbearance. 
He neither affirmed nor denied Saul's guilt, nor did he 
solicit the king's favor and mercy. On the other hand 
he declared his confidence in God— that he would deal 
with every man according to his righteousness and 
mercy— and showed that it was his respect for God and 
his standards that spared the king's life. He declared 
that as he had shown mercy toward the king he was 
trusting in the Lord to show mercy toward him, and 
that in the Lord— not in the king— he trusted for 
compassion and help, to deliver him from all tribulations. 
To what extent David appreciated the high 
standard of his own expression we do not know. Being 
a prophet, he frequently typified the Christ, Head 
and body. His words are certainly more appropriate 
for the Church than they were for him personally. 
David was still under the Law and must therefore be 
judged by the Law, which, as the Apostle declares, 
proves that there is none righteous, no not one. In our 
day, however, we may be covered with the robe of 
Christ's righteousness, so that "the righteousness of 
the Law may be fulfilled in us who are walking not 

R3240 : page 350 

after the flesh but after the Spirit." Our heart intentions 
for righteousness are acceptable to the Lord under 
the merits of Christ's sacrifice. Our desires and endeavors 
to be faithful to him and to his Word are 
accepted instead of perfect works, and hence we may 
expect that in due time the Lord will accept us in the 
Beloved, to the glory of his Kingdom. Again David's 
sentiments are ours and his principles those which appeal 
to us when he declares that God would have mercy 
upon him as he had mercy upon Saul. This is the 
very essence of our Master's teaching— "If ye forgive 
not men for trespasses against you neither will your 
heavenly Father forgive your trespasses"— he who 
shows no mercy shall obtain no mercy. 

As Saul recognized the spirit that was in David as 
being more righteous than his own, and declared that 
ultimately David would be prospered greatly, so do the 
enemies of spiritual Israelites realize the difference between 
their conduct and that of those who are guided 
by the Lord's Spirit— although they do not often candidly 
acknowledge the matter as did Saul. The class 
represented by Saul is a numerous one. It discerns 
and acknowledges righteousness but follows unrighteousness: 
it discerns the good but opposes it with evil. 
Let us, in respect to faith in God and desire to please 
him, be like David, whose name signifies Beloved, and 
who, as already intimated, in many respects was a type 
of the Beloved— Christ, Head and body. 



R3240 : page 350 

GREAT OPPORTUNITIES MISUSED. 

--1 SAM. 31:1-13.-SEPTEMBER 6.- 

Golden Text:— "There is a way that seemeth right unto a man; 
but the end thereof are the ways of death."— Prov. 14:12. 

KING SAUL'S life as a whole was a blunder and a 
failure. It opened with grand possibilities and 
opportunities under divine favor and the love 
and adoration of his countrymen. Not only his personal 
qualities were in many respects estimable, but even his 
physical proportions— head and shoulders above his 
fellows, goodly to look upon, and attractive to his people 
—had added to his influence. Yet he failed. A 
valuable lesson may be drawn by each of us from the 
causes of his failure. A contemporary sums up his case 
thus: 

"Saul had many noble and lovable qualities, such 
as bravery, promptitude— in his earlier days modesty 
and generosity. All these he had by nature, but there 
is no sign that he ever sought to cultivate his moral 
character or to win any grace that did not come naturally 
to him; nor is there any reason to suppose that 
religion had ever had any strong hold upon him. From 
the baleful influence of his selfishness, as before some 
hot poison-wind, all the flowers of good dispositions 
were burned up, and the bad stimulated to growth. 
His earlier virtues disappeared and passed into their 
opposites. Modesty became arrogance, and a long 
course of indulgence in self-will developed cruelty, 
gloomy suspicion and passionate anger, and left him the 
victim and slave of his own causeless hate. He who rebels 
against God mars his own character. The miserable 
last years of Saul, haunted and hunted as by a demon 
by his own indulged and swollen rebellion and unsleeping 
suspicion, are an example of the sorrows that ever 
dog sin; and, as he fell by his own sword in his final 
battle at Gilboa, the terrible saying recurs to our memory: 
'He that being often reproved hardeneth his 
neck, will suddenly be destroyed, and that without 
remedy.'" 

Saul's difficulty, which led to all this disaster, was 
his selfishness— and he was not unusually selfish either. 
The great majority of mankind are equally selfish- 
self-willed; and the great majority, like him, make a 
failure of whatever possibilities were before them at the 
first. As David's career illustrates the wisdom and advantage 
of an early consecration to the will of the Lord, 
and the blessing which must surely attend such a 
course— even though those blessings be accompanied 



with trials and difficulties— so Saul's course in a general 

way illustrates the error of those who measurably 

ignore the Lord and attempt to direct their own paths. 

Such will surely find themselves misled by their selfish 

ambitions as Saul was by his. Saul's two special transgressions 

were: (1) his offering of sacrifice, which, according 

to divine arrangement, he had no right to offer 

(1 Sam. 13:1-14); (2) his disobedience of another 

direct command of the Lord, as recorded in 1 Sam. 15:1-13. 

It may be argued that King David also erred 

and did contrary to the Lord's will on several occasions, 

but we are to notice the wide difference between these 

two characters, in that David's heart was apparently 

always loyal to the Lord, and that when overtaken in 

a fault his sorrow therefor was sincere and led to greater 

carefulness in the future. With Saul, on the contrary, 

the difficulty seems to have been with the heart— that 

at heart he was not submissive to the Lord's will but 

was guided by his own will, and merely repented and 

apologized through fear of consequences and not from 

sorrow at having deviated from the Lord's way. 

Herein we may note a great difference between 
people nominally the Lord's today: The truly consecrated 
may stumble, may err, but at heart they are 
ever loyal to the Lord and wish to serve and please 
him. These are spiritual Israelites indeed, and the 
blessing of the Lord is upon them. The other class 
professes to be the Lord's people, but at heart are far 
from him, and merely draw nigh with their lips and 
outward ceremonies. They have neither part nor lot 

R3240 : page 351 

with the others, and will surely reap the results of their 
own self-will so far as any opportunities under the present 
call are concerned. Another writer has well 
said: 

"When Saul forsook God there necessarily was a 
separation between him and God; and an evil spirit 
took possession of his heart. We see no sign of God's 
doing anything direct to hasten Saul's doom. He was 
left to work out the natural results of an evil heart, and 
a life guided by passion and selfishness, without the 
help and direction of God. He spent his time in hunting 
David instead of overcoming his enemies. His 
kingdom was thus neglected, his people discontented, 
many of his best men abandoned him and went over 
to David, and together were driven into the enemies' 
country. His army lost courage, and in the last great 
battle he was weakened and worn by spending the 
night in consulting a witch instead of preparing for his 
work. So that he perished miserably by suicide at 
last. 'He ate of the fruit of his own way, and was 
filled with his own devices.'"— Prov. 1:3. 

Our lesson concerns the closing days of Saul's experiences. 
The Philistines with an army had penetrated 



the kingdom of Israel, and Saul, with an opposing 

army, went forth to engage them in battle. The 

two armies encamped not far from Nazareth. We can 

easily imagine the dejection of mind which led King 

Saul on the night before the battle to consult the witch 

at Endor. In his self-will he neglected the Lord's will 

in general and was filled with hatred for David, because 

he realized that it was the Lord's will to ultimately 

bring the latter to the throne of Israel. He 

realized, therefore, that in opposing David, who did 

him no harm, but was really one of his most loyal subjects, 

he was in fact fighting against God. And now, 

on the eve of battle, it is no wonder that he felt downcast 

and dejected, because when he sought to inquire 

of the Lord he got no response. He bethought 

him of the witch of Endor and concluded to inquire of 

her respecting the outcome of the battle on the morrow. 

Here again he knew that his course was in opposition 

to the divine will; for he himself had given instructions 

for the execution of the Lord's command of Deut. 18:10,12; 

Exod. 22:18. His course in this matter 

illustrated the quality of his disposition which the Lord 

disapproved. Knowing that communication with the 

evil spirits through mediums was disapproved of God, 

he nevertheless pursued the wrong course. Similarly 

some of God's people today, notwithstanding the 

instruction of the Scriptures that they should not seek 

those having familiar spirits, etc., have attended Spiritualistic 

seances "just to see how it is done." Such 

a disposition to be careless of the Lord's instruction, 

self-willed, was the one which got Saul into trouble 

and surely will make trouble for those who have it today. 

God is not pleased with those who are careless 

of his commands: he lets them take their own way as 

he permitted Saul to take his own way; but, however 

wise such a self-willed way may appear at the time, the 

end is sure to be disastrous so far as peace and fellowship 

with the Lord are concerned. Only those who are 

fully committed to the Lord and who love the Lord's 

will better than their own can expect to have fulfilled 

toward them the promise, "All things shall work together 

for good to them that love God." 

The narrative of the lesson is very simple and requires 
very little comment. Saul and three of his sons 
and his entire bodyguard perished in the battle, in 
which the Philistines seemed to have specially pursued 
the royal party. Saul committed suicide, lest falling 
alive into the hands of his enemies they would have 
tortured him, as was not infrequently the custom in 
that day. The Philistines, of course, rejoiced in his 
discomfiture, and as an evidence of their victory his 
head was sent as a trophy to one and another of their 
cities. They were worshipers of the goddess Ashtaroth, 

R3241 : page 351 



and as a memorial of their victory Saul's armor was 
hung in one of her temples. The bodies of Saul and 
his sons were fastened to the outside wall of the city of 
Bethshan as a mark of special indignity, but they were 
soon recovered by men from the tribe of Manasseh, 
who, probably to prevent further desecration to the 
bodies, burned them, and subsequently buried the 
ashes, unconsumed bones, etc. 

The Golden Text is worthy of being committed to 
memory by all. Its lesson is that we are not competent 
to guide and direct our own affairs; that we need 
divine counsel. Human judgment would be unreliable 
even if supported by absolute knowledge; but in view 
of our deficiency in knowledge as well as in judgment, 
very evidently to man many ways seem right and wise 
and advantageous and desirable which, pursued, lead 
to disappointment and chagrin and ultimately would 
lead to death— second death. The wise, proper course 
for all, therefore, is to realize and acknowledge our own 
insufficiency, unwisdom, and to look to our great Creator 
for guidance. Happy are those who heed the 
Scriptural injunction, "Remember now thy Creator in 
the days of thy youth." The earlier this right course 
is begun the better will be the results every way, the 
easier will it be for us to bend our wills to the will of 
the Lord; and the lessons and satisfaction and peace 
coming to us through the Lord's guidance will be the 
more precious. A full consecration of the heart and 
life and all our interests to the Lord, that his will may 
be done in us in all things, is the consecration necessary 
to the bringing of every justified believer into 
fellowship in the body of Christ, which is the 
Church. 



page 353 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIV. SEPTEMBER 15, 1903. No. 18 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 355 

Lynchings Precursory to Anarchy 355 

Lawlessness on the Increase 356 

War in Macedonia, Bulgaria and 

Turkey 357 

Dancing Preferred to Devotion 357 

Your Righteousness 358 

St. Luke as Artist 359 

Waiting Patiently on the Lord 361 

The Gospel Preached to the Dead 363 

"The Lord is My Light and My 



Salvation 364 

Interesting Questions Answered 364 

page 354 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



FAVORABLE METHODS OF SERVICE. 



The chiefest service we could commend, open to all 
who are unencumbered and in active use of their faculties, 
is the Colporteur work. It is an honorable form of ministering 
the truth from house to house, as the apostles 
served. It is a service which the Lord seems to have 
blessed as much or more than any other for gathering the 
"wheat." It is apparent at once to all that to sell such 
books as the DAWNS at 35 cents each, cannot be for money-making 
that it is merely another way of preaching the 
truth. No other religious books are sold at any such price. 
Indeed, few subscription books sell for less than two to 
three dollars each. Any who can serve in this work are 
invited to write to us for "Hints to Colporteurs." 

EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT, LEATHER EDITION. 



We are mailing this edition to all whose orders are now 
in, and all new orders will have prompt attention. Remember 
that the price of this book, in leather, on thin paper, 
is $2.50— a year's subscription to the TOWER being given 
free with each when desired. In cloth binding, the price 



is $1.50, a year's subscription being given free with each. 



R3241 : page 355 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
LYNCHINGS PRECURSORY TO ANARCHY. 



THE prevalence of an anarchous spirit has for some 

time past been manifesting itself in the lynching 

of reputed criminals. The law-supporting 

and law-defying elements seem to clash in some 

men's minds, and the lynchers merely try to gratify 

both at one time. They gratify their desire to violate 

law and still their consciences with the thought that 

they are meting out justice. Doubtless the same mixture 

of sentiment accompanied the religious stake-burnings 

and rackings of the past; the victims were 

declared by high Church dignitaries to be "heretics," 

propagators of "monstrous doctrines," "injurious to 

the Church and the State." To the ignorant these 

charges justified any and every torture in their destruction. 

Doubtless there would again be danger to 

those dubbed "unorthodox" were it not for the Babel 

of doctrine now prevailing, which renders it difficult 

to determine where the lines of "orthodoxy" could 

be drawn to the satisfaction of a great majority. 

Who knows that in the near future, under the proposed 

consolidation of Christian religions (which we 

have for the past twenty years predicted from the 

Scriptures, and which comes closer yearly), this 

condition may not be reached— that mobs may not 

burn "heretics"? The Scriptures lead us to expect 

some such anarchistic conditions now,— preceding the 

establishment of the Kingdom. 

THE PRESIDENT'S VIEWS ON MOB VIOLENCE. 

Governor Durbin of Indiana not only called out 
the state militia to suppress a lynching, but under his 
commands the mob was scattered with considerable 
loss of life. The President of the United States, in 
an open letter, thanked him for his vindication of the 
law. We make liberal extracts from his letter as 
follows:— 
My Dear Governor Durbin:— 

Permit me to thank you as an American citizen for 
the admirable way in which you have vindicated the majesty 
of the law by your recent action in reference to lynching. 
I feel, my dear sir, that you have made all men your 
debtors who believe, as all far-seeing men must, that the 
well-being, indeed the very existence, of the republic depends 



upon that spirit of orderly liberty under the law 
which is as incompatible with mob violence as with any 
form of despotism. Of course mob violence is simply one 
form of anarchy; and anarchy is now, as it always has 
been, the handmaid and forerunner of tyranny. 

I feel that you have not only reflected honor upon the 
state which for its good fortune has you for its chief executive, 
but upon the whole nation. It is incumbent upon 
every man throughout this country not only to hold up 
your hands in the course you have been following, but to 
show his realization that the matter is one of vital concern 
to us all. 

All thoughtful men must feel the gravest alarm over 
the growth of lynching in this country, and especially over 
the peculiarly hideous forms so often taken by mob violence 
when colored men are the victims— on which occasion 
the mob seems to lay most weight, not on the crime, 
but on the color of the criminal. In a certain proportion 
of these cases the man lynched has been guilty of a crime 
horrible beyond description; a crime so horrible that as 
far as he himself is concerned he has forfeited the right to 
any kind of sympathy whatsoever. 

The feeling of all good citizens that such a hideous 
crime shall not be hideously punished by mob violence is 
due not in the least to sympathy for the criminal, but to a 
very lively sense of the train of dreadful consequences 
which follow the course taken by the mob in exacting inhuman 
vengeance for an inhuman wrong. In such cases, 
moreover, it is well to remember that the criminal not 
merely sins against humanity in inexpiable and unpardonable 
fashion, but sins particularly against his own race, and 
does them a wrong far greater than any white man can 
possibly do them.... 

Moreover, every effort should be made under the law 

R3241 : page 356 

to expedite the proceedings of justice in the case of such 
an awful crime. But it cannot be necessary in order to 
accomplish this to deprive any citizen of those fundamental 
rights to be heard in his own defense which are so dear 
to us all and lie at the root of our liberty. It certainly 
ought to be possible by the proper administration of the 
laws to secure swift vengeance upon the criminal; and the 
best and immediate efforts of all legislators, judges and 
citizens should be addressed to securing such reforms in 
our legal procedure as to leave no vestige of excuse for 
those misguided men who undertake to reap vengeance 
through violent measures.... 

But even where the real criminal is reached, the wrong 
done by the mob to the community itself is well nigh as 
great. Especially is this true where the lynching is accompanied 
with torture. There are certain hideous sights 
which when once seen can never be wholly erased from 
the mental retina. The mere fact of having seen them 
implies degradation. This is a thousand fold stronger 



when instead of merely seeing the deed the man has participated 

in it. Whoever in any part of our country has 

ever taken part in lawlessly putting to death a criminal by 

the dreadful torture of fire must forever after have the awful 

spectacle of his own handiwork seared into his brain 

and soul. He can never again be the same man. 

This matter of lynching would be a terrible thing even 
if it stopped with the lynching of men guilty of the inhuman 
and hideous crime of rape; but as a matter of fact lawlessness 
of this type never does stop and never can stop in 
such fashion. Every violent man in the community is 
encouraged by every case of lynching in which the lynchers 
go unpunished to himself take the law into his own hands 
whenever it suits his own convenience. 

In the same way the use of torture by the mob in certain 
cases is sure to spread until it is applied more or less 
indiscriminately in other cases. The spirit of lawlessness 
grows with what it feeds on, and when mobs with impunity 
lynch criminals for one crime, they are certain to begin to 
lynch real or alleged criminals for other causes.... 

The nation, like the individual, cannot commit a crime 
with impunity. If we are guilty of lawlessness and brutal 
violence, whether our guilt consists in active participation 
therein or in mere connivance and encouragement, we shall 
assuredly suffer later on because of what we have done. 
The corner stone of this republic, as of all free governments, 
is respect for and obedience to the law. Where 
we permit the law to be defied or evaded, whether by rich 
man or poor man, by black man or white, we are by just 
so much weakening the bonds of our civilization and increasing 
the chances of its overthrow, and of the substitution 
therefor of a system in which there shall be violent 
alternations of anarchy and tyranny. Sincerely yours, 
THEODORE ROOSEVELT. 

LAWLESSNESS ON THE INCREASE. 



On this subject the Jewish Exponent says:— 
"The earth was filled with violence.' (Gen. 6:11.) 
Are these words less true today than they 
were in the days of which the Bible speaks? Mob 
violence, race hatred, the subjugation of weaker nations 
—these things are accepted almost as matters of 
course by a large section of humanity. Each outbreak 
of lawless violence furnishes the fuel to kindle 
anew the flames of passion and of hatred, until respect 

R3242 : page 356 

for law and authority is derisively mocked at 
and whole communities bow in helpless impotence before 
the cruel, brutal instincts of the unbridled mob. 
"The truth of the matter is that all good men 
must have the courage of their convictions and their 



religious professions in instilling the lesson of respect 
for the law. The mob that burns a negro at the stake, 
even though he be guilty of the most heinous crime; 
the officer of high rank who ruthlessly orders his subordinates 
to burn and kill, even when a state of insurrection 
prevails; the private soldier who applies the 
fiendish water-cure to an uncommunicative prisoner- 
all these are alike enemies of human society. To condone 
their offense is simply an invitation for the inauguration 
of the reign of lawlessness, which in the 
end must result in the triumph of anarchy and the rule 
of the unreasoning mob. Failure to visit condign 
punishment for such offenses must eventually result 
in the paralysis of legal and orderly forms of government. 
'Cruel and unusual punishment' is forbidden 
by the Constitution of the United States, which therein 
speaks not only the language of governmental 
authority, but voices the divine protest against man's 
inhumanity to man. 

"The questions arising out of these recurrent 
exhibitions of lawlessness go to the root of all religious 
and ethical principles. To ignore them is the worst 
form of religious cowardice. To excuse or defend outbreaks 
against the fundamental law is the most dangerous 
because it is the most insidious form of treason. 
Civilized society cannot exist where offenders against 
the laws of the state are not tried calmly, fairly, dispassionately; 
nor can religion exercise its proper influence 
over the consciences of men unless it teaches 
them imperatively to yield a ready obedience to the 
constituted authorities. This is a lesson that all sections 
of the people must learn. Unless they learn it 
speedily, dark and sorrowful days are in store for 
those who love their fellow-men." 



The Apostle foretold that evil men and seducers 
would wax worse and worse, and that disobedience to 
parents, headiness, boastfulness, and love of pleasure 
more than love of God, would mark nominal Christian 
sentiment in the end of this age. And if so, what wild 
excesses may we not anticipate from those who have 
not even "the form of godliness"? The Scriptures 
clearly indicate that the result will be world-wide anarchy 
—lawlessness. 

For three reasons all who are of the Truth should 
be specially on guard that the influence of their every 
word and act should be in accord with law and order 
and peace. (1) It is the command that each shall so 
far as possible "live peaceably with all men" (Rom. 12:18), 
and be not a "brawler" nor a "striker" nor a 
"busybody." (Titus 3:2; 1:7; 1 Pet. 4:15.) (2) 
Such "moderation" (Phil. 4:5) will commend the 
gospel we preach and give us the greater influence in 
its service. (3) The time may come when the mob 



spirit will be incited against us as it was incited against 
the apostles and other early Christians. And although 

R3242 : page 357 

we should rejoice in a martyr's death if God so willed, 
we should do nothing to encourage or abet such lawlessness. 
The Master's word is, "In your patience 
possess ye your souls!" 

WAR IN MACEDONIA, BULGARIA AND TURKEY. 



Present appearances are that war has started in 
earnest in the Balkans, and no human being can say 
where it will end. To us it appears wholly political, 
and not a war against Christians by Mohammedans. 
So far as we are able to judge the Christianity of that 
region is of a merely nominal sort. The Gazette gives 
a fairly good summary of the situation as follows:— 

"Bulgarian and Macedonian agitators have perpetrated 
continuous outrages in the hope of inflaming 
the masses, and apparently they have succeeded in 
exhausting Turkish patience. The Turk has only 
been restrained up to the present time by the order of 
the Powers to keep hands off Bulgaria and to introduce 
prescribed reforms in Macedonia. The cables 
now indicate that the Turk has thrown off this restraint 
and proposes to at once inaugurate a campaign 
of pillage and slaughter, inciting fanatical Mohammedans 
to exterminate the Christian trouble-makers. 

"This war of extermination is exactly what the 
Bulgarian agitators have been trying to bring about. 
They do not believe that Russia and Austria will permit 
the Turks to annihilate the Christian population 
of the Balkan states. Their program is first to have 
Bulgaria declare war in behalf of the Macedonians and 
to keep the turmoil going until Russia or Austria, or 
possibly both, shall intervene. Their ultimate object 
is to have the Balkan territories taken from Turkish 
rule, and it is not improbable that Turkey's resolution 
to begin active operations will lead to that result. 
The Powers have not wanted to be mixed in the matter, 
but they may find it impossible to stay out, for 
once the Turk is started he knows neither reason nor 
humanity. 

"If Russia becomes involved, there is little doubt 
it will endeavor to make Turkey pay as the price of 
hostilities the surrender of Constantinople and the 
Bosporus. That will let Russia down to the Mediterranean. 
It has long desired to reach that goal. It 
was prevented from securing it at the conclusion of the 
last war with Turkey by the interference of the other 
Powers of Europe. Since then it has avoided conflict 
in order to develop its financial position and industrial 



resources. But if Russia is forced to fight for the restoration 

of peace on its Balkan borders it will not be 

cheated again. It will take over the direct management 

of the turbulent territory, and it will take along 

with that troublesome charge its coveted outlet to the 

southern sea. Hence the situation may fairly be regarded 

as a very serious one." 

BURNED LIVE KITTENS. 



HUMANE SOCIETY CHARGES A WOMAN WITH A HORRIBLE ACT 
OF CRUELTY. 

Mrs. Fannie Salmosky of No. 1534 Pike street is 
charged with cruelty to animals by Humane Agent 
Edward Thompson before Alderman G. F. Oyer. 
It is said that on Wednesday some boys put a grape 
basket in her yard containing five small kittens. The 
woman heard the kittens crying, and after locating 
them in the basket ordered her little son to put the 
basket in a fire that was burning in the street. The 
boy took the basket and threw it in the flames. The 
kittens began to feel the heat of the basket burning 
and set up a loud cry. The woman was arrested and 
gave $300 bail for a hearing— Pittsburg Gazette. 



Does it not seem remarkable that, in our day, 
when such anti-cruelty sentiments so generally prevail 
and the cruelties of the dark ages are so generally 
condemned, that the creeds of those times still have 
their votaries, who somehow consider that they honor 
God in ascribing to him a character for cruelty and 
cruel designs against his human creatures such as 
quite overshadow the meanest cruelties known to the 
most depraved of earth? Oh, shame! Let God be 
true though it prove every creed of men a lie! Let 
us get back to the Bible and assure ourselves that the 
Lord is truthful when he says: "Their fear is not of 
me, but is taught by the precepts of men."— 
Isa. 29:13. 

A reexamination of the subject will show that 
misconceptions of the Bible's teachings are built upon 
an unconscious violation of language which makes of 
such words as perish, lost, lose life, destroy, death, 
etc., mean their very opposites, viz., preserve in torture 
everlastingly. When we learn to give words 
their true meaning, and learn that in parables the fire 
is as symbolic as the sheep and goats and wheat and 
tares; and that the Book of Revelation is wholly 
symbolic, and that its "lake of fire and brimstone" is 
explained to mean "the Second Death" (Rev. 20:14), 
then our eyes will begin to see out of the smoke 



and confusion of mystic Babylon. Then we can see 
God's true character, and love and praise him with 
our whole heart. 

"DANCING PREFERRED TO DEVOTION." 



Prof. Goldwin Smith, whose repute as a man of 
letters is world-wide, remarks as follows:— 

"Methodism in England is downcast at finding 
that the increase of the Church has only been one per 
cent. Leaders complain that zeal is growing cold, 
that whist is preferred to class meetings, and dancing 
to devotion. The original enthusiasm, which wrought 
such wonders in its day, has done its work and is now 
spent. There is no use and there is considerable danger 
in struggling to keep up the hollow forms of it. 
The ordinary man must have pleasure, whist, valsing 
or whatever it may be; without it not only would life 
be dreary, but character would sour. A reasonable 
share of it in innocent forms is almost as necessary as 
food. Nor does it interfere with spiritual life, if by 
spiritual life is meant a life of aspiration to a character 
superior to our animal wants and desires. The 

R3242 : page 358 

Methodist Church on this continent seems to have recognized 

the fact, and to be cultivating in various ways 

the element of social enjoyment in the religious union. 

Its danger here, and a serious danger, is that into the 

place of spiritual aspiration may creep social and 

political ambition." 



R3243 : page 358 

YOUR RIGHTEOUSNESS. 

"Ye are the light of the world;. ..let your light shine. ...Think not 
that I am come to destroy the Law or the Prophets: I am not come to 
destroy, but to fulfil. For verily I say unto you, Till heaven and earth 
pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the Law till 
all shall be fulfilled. Whosoever, therefore, shall break one of these 
least commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be called 
least in the Kingdom of Heaven: but whosoever shall do and teach 
them, the same shall be called great in the Kingdom of Heaven. 
For I say unto you, that except your righteousness shall exceed the 
righteousness of the scribes and pharisees ye shall in nowise 
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven."— Matt. 5:14-20. 

OUR Lord's sermon on the mount, from which 
these words are chosen for our present consideration, 
was a discourse remarkable for its 



simplicity and its weighty import. From beginning 

to end there are in it no attempts at literary embellishment 

nor oratory nor flights of fancy to please and 

entertain. His object was to instruct, and he did so 

in the most simple and forcible language. It will be 

observed, too, that he did not on this occasion seek a 

public place where the largest audience could be gathered; 

but, on the contrary, he chose a place of retirement 

where he could be alone with his disciples. The 

multitudes had thronged about him to witness his 

miracles and to hear his words, and he had healed 

their sicknesses and taught them many things, but 

this discourse was one specially designed for his 

disciples, the household of faith. And here it 

has been faithfully recorded, that its instructions 

may extend to the entire household, even to the 

end of the age. So while we consider these words 

of our Lord, we may almost realize that in company 

with Peter and James and John, and many of 

the brethren and sisters of the early Church, we, too, 

are sitting on the grassy slopes of the mountain side 

and hearing the words as they fall from the lips of 

the greatest preacher the world has ever known. And 

as we turn away from the hallowed spot, let us not be 

forgetful hearers, but let us treasure up the words of 

life; let them sink deep into our hearts and bring 

forth their rich fruitage unto eternal life. 

This fragment of our Lord's discourse indicates a 
responsibility toward the truth received which it is 
feared many Christians do not carefully observe and 
consider. Mark the expression, "Ye are the light of 
the world;. ..let your light shine." And again 
he said, "As long as I am in the world, I am the light 
of the world;. ..he that followeth me shall not 
walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life." 
(John 9:5; 8:12.) And now, instructed and enlightened 
from his Word, he would have us remember that 
we, as his representatives, are the light of the world, 
and that we should keep our light constantly trimmed 
and burning— that we must let our light shine so that 
those following us may not walk in darkness. 

Light is a symbol of truth, both in the Scriptures 
and in common parlance. So the expression, "Ye are 
the light of the world;. ..let your light shine," is 
equivalent to saying— "You are now so illuminated 
by the truth that you yourself have become a living 
representative of the truth. So do not in any way 
obscure it, but let it shine out more and more, that 
others may be similarly blessed by it." This truth 
is "the light of life"; it is what the world needs— 
what all must have before they can attain unto 
everlasting life. Men must know the truth before 
the truth can make them free from the bondage of sin 
and death; they must know the truth before the truth 
can cleanse and sanctify them. It is the will of God, 
therefore, that all men shall come to an accurate 



knowledge of the truth. (1 Tim. 2:4.) And therefore 
it is the duty of every child of God to be very 
active in the dissemination of the truth— in letting 
his light shine, and in keeping it trimmed and 
burning. 

'"Trimmed and burning!" 'trimmed and burning!'" 
says some thoughtful soul. "I have often 
sung with fervor those words, 'Let the lower lights 
be burning,' 'Trim your lamps,' etc., but what does 
it mean?" It means that we must give very close 
attention to the words of life that we may come to an 
exact knowledge of the truth, and that we must carefully 
and faithfully trim away every vestige of error 
as fast as it becomes apparent to us— whether it be an 
error in doctrine or in our daily walk and conversation 
—so that the pure light of divine truth may shine 
out with as little obstruction as possible through the 
medium of a clear and transparent character. 

It is a lamentable fact that many of the Lord's 
children seem very indifferent to this matter of trimming 
their lights. They get some truth and with it 
a great deal of error; and instead of trying to eliminate 
the error, they hold and teach the two together, 
so that the light they shed is not a pure light, but 
is colored and distorted by the shades with which it is 
mixed. And again, even when much pure truth is 
held, there are those who fail to let it have its cleansing 
effect upon the character, and so the light is 
obscured and misrepresented by the unclean medium 
through which it passes. Any who continue thus to 
hold the sacred trust of truth are really unworthy of 

R3243 : page 359 

it, and must eventually lose it; for it is written, 
"Light [truth] is sown for the righteous"; and such 
indifference to the claims of the truth is 
unrighteousness. 

In our Lord's day there were those who openly 
professed to be teachers and representatives of divine 
truth. The scribes and pharisees professed to be 
very zealous for the truth, and thought themselves 
very creditable manifestations of its cleansing power. 
They claimed to have the light and to be letting it 
shine. "God," said the pharisee, "I thank thee 
that I am not as other men. ...I fast twice in the 
week, I give tithes of all I possess." But the Lord 
said, "Woe unto you;. ..ye outwardly appear 
righteous unto men, but within ye are full of hypocrisy 
and deceit." So they appeared in the Lord's 
sight; but they were reverenced and honored of men 
and esteemed as holy, and as guides in the way of 
truth and holiness. To God's law they presumed to 
add their own vain and foolish traditions, which made 
void the law of God, and they were very zealous in 
teaching these traditions to the people. 



In so doing those teachers were inexcusable. The 
law of God was open before them, and it was their 
privilege and their duty to be correctly informed 
with reference to it. And especially after Christ had 
come, and by his teaching had made the truth so manifest, 
and the absurdity of their vain traditions so 
apparent, they were without excuse. And our Lord's 
accusation of hypocrisy well fitted their case when 
they resolutely determined to hold and teach the traditions 
of the Elders and to oppose the increasing light 
of truth which made their absurdity so manifest. 

The scribes and pharisees had much truth: they 
had the whole law of God and claimed to believe and 
teach it; but they miserably colored and distorted it 
by their traditions and their really ignoble, though 
whitewashed, characters. And consequently their 
efforts, professedly to convert men to God, resulted 
only in making more hypocrites like themselves. 

"I say unto you," said the Lord to his disciples, 
"that except your righteousness shall exceed the 
righteousness of the scribes and pharisees, ye shall in 
no case enter into the kingdom of heaven." 

Let us beware of that kind of righteousness which 
to men may indeed appear fair and praiseworthy, but 
which, in God's estimation, is mere sham and hypocrisy. 
God, who reads the heart, quickly discerns the 
motives with which we receive or disseminate the 
Truth; and foolish indeed is the man who attempts to 
make merchandise of this divine treasure for the paltry 
gains of this fleeting life, who prefers to hold and 
to teach error and becloud or oppose the truth of God, 
or to sell it after having once accepted it, for money, 
or influence, or popularity among his dying fellow-travelers 
on the way to the tomb, or for any consideration 
whatever. 

And yet there are some who, though they do not 
thus hypocritically make merchandise of the Truth, 
do in a measure undervalue it, and who, both in the 
present and in the future, will be the losers thereby. 
If we permit prejudice, or some measure of self emulation, 
or of pride, or of combativeness, or any other 
thing, to interrupt the freedom of artless candor and 
simplicity and that spirit of meekness which alone 
befits the searchers after truth, we will find ourselves 
approaching the pharisaical spirit which, when fully 
ripe, becomes glaring hypocrisy. Those who avoid 
such a disposition, and who, therefore, in meekness 
and sincerity fully accept the Truth and zealously 
teach it at any cost or sacrifice, shall, the Lord says, 
be called great in the kingdom of heaven; while those 
who hold and teach a measure of error when it was 
their privilege to have clear Truth, had they been in 
the right condition of heart to receive it, shall be 
called least in the kingdom of heaven.— Matt. 5:19. 

Prejudices and various old deformities of disposition 
often greatly retard the progress of some of God's 



sincerely consecrated children; and in consequence 
their efforts, which are verily meant to be in God's 
service, are misdirected, and they are found both believing 
and teaching contrary to the Truth on points 
where God's Word is very explicit. Let us beware of 
these things, and, diligently casting behind us every 
hindrance to our personal progress in the way of 
truth and to our usefulness in the Master's service, 
let us run with patience, with meekness and diligence 
the race set before us, looking unto Jesus, who has 
said, "My grace is sufficient for thee. My strength 
is made perfect in weakness." 



R3244 : page 359 

ST. LUKE AS ARTIST. 

ST. LUKE, the Evangelist, physician and historian, 
is said by tradition to have been a 
painter, and perhaps in the picturesque qualities 
of his writing we may trace the origin of this 
pious opinion. There is a legend that he painted the 
portrait of the Virgin, and certainly the greater part 
of the little we know of our Lord's mother is due to 
St. Luke, who preserved for us the Magnificat, and 
drew in words that poetic picture of the Nativity, 
adorned with the Nunc Dimittis and the Benedictus, 
which pictorial art has never ceased to reproduce. 
There is just now a widespread desire to discover the 

R3244 : page 360 

personalities of all great writers, and surely there is 
no one who has any feeling for Christianity but must 
regret our ignorance about the four Evangelists. St. 
Luke is the only one of whose character it is possible 
to form any definite idea. Even in his case we must 
rely mainly upon conjecture, for the modest chronicler 
of the Acts of the Apostles has purposely withdrawn 
himself from the gaze of his readers. He never tells 
us who he was, nor asks for our sympathy or our 
praise for the many hardships which he and St. Paul 
bore, and the many heroisms they displayed together. 
He never even betrays his presence except by the use 
of the pronoun "we." All we know for certain is 
that the "beloved physician" never failed his friend, 
but was alone with him when he made "ready to be 
offered." There is no direct evidence as to whether 
he was a Jew or a Greek, but many authorities, including 
Renan and Professor Ramsay, adhere to the latter 
conclusion. To the ordinary reader their view would 
appear the more plausible. St. Luke shows little sympathy 
with the Jews as a nation, and always paints 
them as hindering the work of the Church. On the 



other hand, he betrays some tolerance for the heathen 
religion around him, and a just and sympathetic comprehension 
of the attitude of the Roman Governors 
towards the new faith. 

But whether he belonged to "the people" or "the 
nations," the historian was an artist,— a man of great 
literary genius, whose heaven-instilled purpose, while 
it inspired his work, never for a moment obscured 
his artistic skill. The object of the book of the Acts 
is, as we read it, twofold. First, the author desires 
to draw a picture of the early Church while it was 
still but an offshoot of Judaism; and secondly, to describe 
the bursting of the Judaic bonds by the real 
hero of the book— St. Paul. Inspired by his wonderful 
—we are tempted to say his Greek— love of 
beauty and happiness, St. Luke begins with an exquisite 
picture of the early Christian community. An 
ideal social life prevailed among the brethren. "No 
man lacked anything," for "they had but one heart 
and one mind." No one "called anything his own, 
but they had all things in common," and "breaking 
bread from house to house, did eat their meat with 
gladness and singleness of heart." We are told that 
"a great peace was upon them all," and that they possessed 
singular gifts of healing. Their increasing 
influence with the people disquieted the high priests, 
who, "doubting how far this would grow," summoned 
the apostles to appear before them and tried to 
bind them over to silence. Peter and John, however, 
replied to their accusers with light-hearted courage, saying, 
"Whether it is right in the sight of God to hearken 
unto you more than to God, judge ye," and so far 
impressed the learned Gamaliel with their assurance 
that he begged his brethren to let them alone lest 
they themselves should be found fighting against 
God. When persecution threatened them St. Luke 
shows us the disciples assembling themselves together 
and praying that God, seeing their peril, would "grant 
unto his servants that with all boldness they might 
speak his word by stretching out his hand to heal, 
that signs and wonders might be done by the might of 
his holy child." In the next picture which St. Luke 
puts before us the state of the Church is somewhat 
changed. The brotherhood has been greatly enlarged, 
and we trace some diminution in the early simplicity 
and joyousness. There arose, we are told, a murmuring 
among the Christian poor because some were better 
cared for than others;— evidently there is no longer 
community of goods. Certain men are chosen for the 
work of practical philanthropy, among them Stephen, 
who, by giving offence to the orthodox Jews, became 
the first martyr. In presenting Stephen to his readers 
St. Luke departs a little from his ordinary method 
of character-drawing. Generally he adheres strictly 
to the dramatic method, and allows his characters to 
reveal themselves by their own words. But in the 



case of Stephen it is not so, and the world knows Stephen 
better by what St. Luke tells us about him than 
by the long discourse which is reported as his. We 
are convinced by his biographer rather than by his 
eloquence that "he was full of faith and power," and 
that his hearers "were not able to resist the wisdom 
and power by which he spake," so that "all that 
sat in the council looking steadfastly upon him saw 
his face as it had been the face of an angel." By the 
description of his actual martyrdom this impression of 
spiritual fascination is confirmed in the reader's mind, 
and perhaps the picture of Stephen "looking into 
heaven," seeing the "glory of God," and forgiving 
his enemies, while they, "cut to the heart, gnashed 
upon him with their teeth," is for mere beauty of depiction 
the finest passage in the Acts. This moment 
of tragedy is the one which St. Luke chooses as the 
one in which to present St. Paul. "The witnesses 
laid down their clothes at the feet of a young man 
whose name was Saul." 

Once more the scene changes. Henceforward the 
reader's interest centers round Paul,— his conversion, 
his perils, his trials and his defences. As we read 
St. Paul's words as recorded by his friend it is impossible 
not to wonder to what extent they have been 
modified by passing through the medium of another 
mind. Was St. Luke's report always accurate? Verbal 
accuracy was surely impossible. It is out of the 
question. If a speech took some hours to deliver it is 
not possible to compress it into a short paragraph and 

R3244: page 361 

maintain verbal accuracy. All the same, the short 
report may be a true one. A man may give in ten 
minutes an account of a speech he has heard in the 
House of Commons, and may convey truly both the 
subject matter of what was spoken, and also the manner 
and mental characteristics of the speaker, though 
he give up all attempt at a literal repetition of the 
sentences. Such a report could not be called imaginary, 
though it makes of necessity some tax upon 
the understanding and imagination of the reporter. 
The account would remain essentially true, and in 
this matter of essential truth, so far as St. Paul is 
concerned, every reader of the Bible who has the 
smallest grasp of character is in a position to check St. 
Luke. Is the Paul whose adventures we follow in the 
Acts the same perfectly original character who reveals 
himself to us so unreservedly in his letters? Undoubtedly 
he is. No one could fail to recognize the Great 
Apostle. 

Nevertheless, every portrait reveals the painter 
in some degree, and in all St. Luke's sketches of character 
we see the same aversion to dogmatism, and the 
same fair attitude toward "those of the contrary 



part." He dwells particularly upon any sympathetic 

allusion to the classical standpoint made by the apostles, 

repeating with evident sympathy the words 

spoken by St. Paul suggesting the nearness of God 

toward those philosophers who had "felt after 

him"; and again, when Paul prevents the populace 

from worshiping him, we catch a glimpse of St. Luke's 

artistic appreciation of the joyousness inherent in a 

point of view which, however erroneous, bore testimony 

to the goodness of God, "who in times past 

suffered all nations to walk in their own ways. Nevertheless 

he left not himself without a witness in that 

he did good, and gave us rain from heaven and fruitful 

seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness." 

All through his book St. Luke shows the characteristics 
of a man of much education. He seems almost 
to share the high priest's surprise at the eloquence 
and force of Peter and John, "seeing that they 
were unlearned and ignorant men," and he displays 
that distrust of the multitude so common in men of 
exceptional gifts exceptionally cultivated. Witness 
his allusions to "fellows of the baser sort," and his 
account of the mass meeting of the Ephesian silversmiths, 
where "some cried one thing and some another, 
for the more part knew not why they were come together." 
The sudden changes of mind observable in 
crowds strike the historian's notice. He describes 
how the barbarians of the island on which Paul was 
shipwrecked, on seeing him bitten by a snake, concluded 
that he must be some murderer flying from 
justice whom vengeance had overtaken. "They 
looked that he should have swollen and fallen down 
dead suddenly; but after they had looked a great 
while and seen no harm come to him, they changed 
their minds and said he was a god." Again we see a 
trace of the same feeling in the almost satirical account 
of the behavior of the Jewish rabble before Gallio, 
when with utter inconsequence they beat Sosthenes 
in the Judgment Hall because they could not 
be revenged on Paul, and we feel St. Luke is not 
wholly out of sympathy with the supercilious Gallio, 
who looked on at what he considered a quarrel "about 
words and names and their law," and "cared for none 
of these things." To Gallio himself it can never 
have occurred that his name would be known two 
thousand years later solely in connection with a petty 
riot he hardly noticed, any more than it occurred to 
Festus how bitterly the course of history would satirize 
his contemptuous summing-up of Christianity as 
a question of Jewish "superstition," and of "one 
Jesus who was dead, whom Paul affirmed to be alive." 
Man has a treacherous memory. It is hopeless to say 
what he may remember, or to gauge how much he 
will forget. Agrippa, Felix, Festus, Gallio, would 
have been as dead men out of mind but for St. Luke's 
pencil. St. Luke showed wherein lies "the artist's 



vantage o'er the king."— London Spectator. 



R3245 : page 361 

WAITING PATIENTLY ON THE LORD. 

-1 SAMUEL 2:1-10; 5:1-10.-SEPTEMBER 13.- 

"Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for 
brethren to dwell together in unity!"— Psa. 133:1. 

"YE have need of patience," writes the Apostle. 
"In your patience possess ye your souls," instructs 
our Lord. "Let patience have her 

perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire, wanting 
nothing," the Apostle explains. Very evidently patience, 
therefore, includes other graces of character— implies 
their possession to a certain extent. Amongst 
the Lord's people patience surely must be preceded by 
faith, and the degree of patience very generally measures 
the amount of the faith. The Christian who finds 
himself impatient and restless evidently is lacking in 
faith toward the Lord; for otherwise he would be able 
to rest in the Lord's gracious promises, and wait for 
their fulfilment. After using reasonable diligence and 
energy he should be content to leave the results and the 
times and seasons with the Lord. 

Our lesson deals with David's attainment to the 
kingdom to which he was anointed, while a shepherd 
boy, by the Prophet Samuel. His patient trust in the 
Lord, and waiting for his time and way to give him the 

R3245 : page 362 

kingdom, are worthy of note, and constitute the most 
striking feature of this lesson. As a youth he exercised 
patience until the Lord's providence brought him 
the opportunity of meeting Goliath, and being advanced 
to the position of a captain in the army and made 
King Saul's son-in-law. Then came the check in his 
career, when for seven years he was treated as an outlaw 
by the king, and more or less so regarded by his 
fellow-countrymen. We have seen his patience under 
these trying circumstances, and noted his unwillingness 
to hasten the Lord's arrangements, in which he fully 
trusted, his unwillingness to raise his hand against the 
king, or to sanction his death at the hands of another. 
This lesson shows us that even after the death of Saul 
David still waited patiently on the Lord to give him, 
in his own way, the honors and powers promised. 
For some time before Saul's death David and his 
six hundred followers had been living in the country 
of the Philistines, and been treated by them as allies; 
and when the Philistines went to war with Israel— to 



fight against King Saul, who had been the enemy of 

David and his companions— it would have appeared 

strange had the latter refused to join in the war. In the 

Lord's providence they were very graciously spared from 

either fighting against their brethren or seeming unappreciative 

of their hosts, the Philistines, by the decision 

of the latter that they would prefer not to have David 

and his company go with them. After the defeat of 

R3246 : page 362 

Saul and his army the Philistines took possession of a 
considerable portion of the land of Israel, and it became 
a question for David as to what should be his proper 
course— how would the Lord give to him the throne of 
Israel, as promised? That David's heart was loyal to 
the Lord, as the needle to the pole, is evidenced by the 
fact that he did not conclude for himself what his course 
should be, but made inquiry of the Lord. This was 
probably done through the medium of the High Priest, 
Abiathar. He got the Lord's answer and followed it to 
the letter, locating, with his companions and their families, 
at Hebron and the adjacent towns. David was 
of the tribe of Judah, and thus settling in a central city 
of that tribe, where he and his family were well known, 
he was safe amongst friends;— besides, the Philistines 
were his friends. It was not long before the people of 
his own tribe chose him for their king, and anointed 
him accordingly— thus falling into line with the Lord's 
choice and anointing, already expressed years before. 

This was seemingly a good start toward the fulfilment 
of the Lord's promise of the kingdom, but again 
the matter was deferred for another seven years, during 
which time David patiently saw Ishbosheth, Saul's 
surviving son, anointed to be king over one province 
after another of Israel, and, with his general, Abner, 
gaining victory after victory over the Philistines,— 
seemingly establishing himself firmly in the power of 
the kingdom which David had certainly supposed was to 
come to him at the death of Saul. The experiences of 
these seven years surely were as strong tests of David's 
faith and patience as any in his career. To a man of 
his courageous temperament and energy the disposition 
must have been to assert the dominance of Judah over 
the other tribes, and to have declared them to be in 
rebellion, and to have attempted their conquest in the 
name of the Lord, with the assertion that he was the 
Lord's choice, anointed by Samuel, etc. 

David's course during this time shows forth distinctly 
the true character of the man. He trusted that 
the Lord, who had been with him as a boy, and had 
delivered him from the lion and the bear, and had used 
him as Israel's champion in the battle with Goliath, 
and had guided him thus far, would continue to guide 
and direct, if he would continue to be submissive, and 
to act only along the lines of the Lord's direction. The 



wisdom of this course is manifest from the narrative. 
David showed, not only in his dealings with the men 
of Jabesh Gilead, but on other occasions, that he entertained 
no animosity toward those who were Saul's 
friends, and the friends of his family. A man of smaller 
heart would have done very differently, but would not 
have been "a man after God's own heart." David's 
course was defensive. The tribe of Judah he knew 
was acting in accord with the divine program, and 
hence, when Ishbosheth and his army attempted to 
coerce the people of Judah and compel them to recognize 
Ishbosheth, David and his supporters resisted this 
intrusion, though we have no evidence that David attempted 
to extend his authority over the other tribes 
—except as they might voluntarily choose to accept him 
as their king. This they finally did, at the end of seven 
and half years, and a grand coronation made him king 
over all Israel. His patient waiting for the Lord's time 
and the Lord's way evidently was very much better 
than any other course he could have pursued. The 
Lord's wisdom is always superior; though in the midst 
of their trials, his people, being unable to see the end 
from the beginning, may have too much confidence 
in their own schemes and methods and too little faith 
in the Lord. 

The Lord's people of today should take well to 
heart this lesson of faith, obedience and patient waiting 
on the Lord. We, too, are waiting for a Kingdom, and 
for the peace and blessing which the Lord has promised 
shall come therewith. We, too, see Philistines in the 
way, and rival brethren, who, though really the Lord's, 
do not see so clearly as we the Lord's program for the 
establishment of his Kingdom. It is for us to wait 
patiently on the Lord, while he uses the wrath of man 
to praise him, and to make straight the way of the 

R3246 : page 363 

Lord, and to usher in eventually his Kingdom under 
more favorable conditions than would be possible if we 
were to attempt to act for ourselves, or in any manner 
or sense to hasten his arrangements. 

The Golden Text is an excellent one, and applied 
to this lesson we see it illustrated in David's course. 
Although he was a man of war, courageous and aggressive 
toward the enemies of the Lord and of Israel, David 
was most emphatically a man of peace toward his 
brethren of all the tribes;— careful to treat them as 
brethren, and to do all in his power to maintain unity 
and brotherly love and friendship. Although misunderstood 
and persecuted by them for a time, he finally 
was appreciated and proclaimed king of all Israel, with 
the result that all the brethren, thus united by his wise 
counsel and conduct, did dwell together in unity, and 
Israel had peace and prosperity, whereas by a different 
course on David's part a fierce and long-lasting civil 



war might readily have been enkindled. 

We are reminded, too, of the fact that it was the 
Lord's own brethren who persecuted him, but that, as 
the Apostle explains, "in ignorance they did it." We 
rejoice to know that when the Lord shall have fully 
established his Kingdom, all who are the Lord's people, 
all desirous of being on the side of righteousness, 
will hail him gladly as their King; and that the unity 
and peace and blessing of that glorious Millennial age 
will far exceed anything that our minds can grasp or 
our tongues express. Like our Lord, let us seek to be 
peacemakers, and to dwell together with all the brethren 
in the unity of the Spirit, in the bonds of peace. 
Let our activities, our combativeness, etc., be engaged 
against the great enemy and all the works of sin,— including 
those in our members, our own fallen flesh. 
We, and all the brethren, will thus find sufficient engagement 
for every combative element of our nature, 
in ways well pleasing to the Lord, and employment for 
every lovable and helpful quality we possess, in building 
one another up, and doing good unto all men as we 
have opportunity, especially to the household of faith. 



R3246 : page 363 

THE GOSPEL PREACHED TO THE DEAD. 

-1 PET. 4:1-11.~SEPTEMBER20.~ 

"Be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess."— Eph. 5:18. 

THE Apostle's argument is that dead people cannot 
sin; and that the Lord's consecrated ones, having 
devoted themselves even unto death, already 
reckon themselves "dead indeed unto sin, but alive 
unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord." (Rom. 6:11.) 
We have become followers of him who, realizing 
the sinfulness of sin, and that the whole human family 
was hopelessly under its control, gave himself even 
unto death, that he might redeem us from sin and its 
wages— death. If we appreciate our Lord and his work, 
his love for righteousness, and his sacrifice on our behalf; 
and if we desire to be truly his disciples, followers 
in his footsteps, it will mean that we will "arm 
ourselves with the same mind" that he had— the same 
opposition to sin, the same determination to lay down 
our lives in opposition to it, and in endeavors to assist 
in delivering those who are under its control. Not that 
any sacrifice of ours could effect the cancellation of the 
divine sentence, but that our Lord's sacrifice, being 
quite sufficient to accomplish this, we are privileged to 
show our devotion to him and to the principles governing 
his conduct: the inducement being held out to us 
that those who suffer with him shall share also his 



glory, his Kingdom, his immortality. 

Those who have made such a consecration unto 
death, in opposition to sin, will certainly not commit 
sin wilfully, for to do so would prove that their wills 
had changed— that they were no longer begotten of the 
new will, the new mind, the holy Spirit or disposition, 
but had become alive again as the servants of sin. 
Such a course would prove that such persons had 
ceased to be New Creatures, and the loss of this new life 
to them would mean the Second Death. But so long 
as they remain willingly faithful to their vows of fellowship 
with Christ in his sufferings, in his opposition 
to sin— so long as they remain thus reckonedly dead 
to sin and reckonedly alive as New Creatures, they 
have no sin. As the Apostle John expresses it, "Whosoever 
abideth in him sinneth not; whosoever sinneth 
hath not seen him, neither known him;. ..whosoever 
is born [begotten] of God doth not commit sin, 
for his seed remaineth in him; he cannot sin because 
he is born [begotten] of God."— 1 John 3:6,9. 

The thought here is not that any of the Lord's 
people become perfect in the flesh, so that they never 
err in thought, word or deed. The thought is that the 
new will is counted the New Creature, separate and distinct 
from the flesh, so that while the will, the heart, is 
fully loyal to the Lord, in opposition to sin, the flesh 
is reckoned dead to sin, and hence any of its weaknesses 
and imperfections which are unintentional, not 
assented to by the new will, the New Creature, are not 
counted by the Lord, who knows us not after the flesh, 
but after the spirit. Thus, as the Apostle Paul declares, 
"The righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us who 
walk not after the flesh [desiring to serve it], but after 
the spirit [endeavoring to do the Lord's will]." 

The "time past of our lives," referred to in vss. 3 and 4, 

R3247 : page 364 

was the time when we were natural men, before 
we became New Creatures, begotten of the Lord's 
Spirit. That time past, and that past experience of 
life, sufficeth us— we want no more of it, we have found 
a better life. We would not return to the former condition 
of natural-mindedness and alienation from God 
under any consideration. The list of excesses mentioned 
by the Apostle— lasciviousness, lusts, excess of 
wine, revelries, carousings and abominable idolatries- 
were not the same with all of us; and yet there is a certain 
amount of correspondency in every case. Some of 
the early Christians were lifted by the Lord's grace out 
of very deep degradation of mind and body, and some of 
the Lord's people of today have been similarly lifted 
from the depths of Satan and sin, while still others, 
never having been so deeply degraded, were not lifted 
from such great depths. However, all who have the 
new mind of full consecration to the Lord can realize a 



great change from the mind or disposition which was 
theirs naturally. 

Even those born of Christian parents, who therefore 
were born on the plane of justification, realize that 
their natural hearts had more or less affinity for the 
things of sin, even including idolatries— idolizing themselves 
or others or money or fame or influence or whatnot. 
A change takes place in all, but the degree of 
change is necessarily marked by the degree of degradation 
preceding our consecration. How thankful some 
of us should be that in the Lord's providence we were 
born of Christian parents and under Christian influences! 
How careful all of the Lord's people should 
be that any children which they have brought into the 
world, or may yet bring, shall come under the most 
favorable influences to make them the more amenable 
to the "reasonable service" of a full consecration of 
their all to the Lord! 

The idolatrous companions of those who once lived 
in sin doubtless spoke of the latter as hypocrites, when 
they turned from these things, becoming dead to them 
and alive toward the Lord and his service. Their disposition 
would be to attribute such a change to some 
ignoble motive. It would be beyond their comprehension 
that anyone should voluntarily make such a 
change, for truly they would say that the course was 
"unnatural"! Likewise, in our day, those who step 
out of churchianity, with its forms of godliness without 
the power, with its social revelry, intoxication with the 
spirit of this world and of false doctrines (Rev. 17:2), 
and its idolatries of money, influence, etc., are considered 
peculiar people, and not infrequently their sanity 
is questioned. The natural man understandeth not 
why any should seek for more than that which would 
be outwardly respectable and honorable. The world 
knoweth us not, even as it knew not the Lord.— Rev. 18:3. 

The fifth verse according to our Common Version 
seems to refer to those who speak evil, and to say that 
they will be obliged to give an account in the day of 
judgment— in the Millennial Day, when they will be 
on trial. This is undoubtedly true. As our Lord declared, 
every act and word done in injury of the Lord 
and his faithful will receive a just recompense of reward 
—justly proportionate to the amount of their wilfulness in 
the matter. But there is another way of viewing this verse, 
equally true, viz., by connecting it with the preceding 
verse, so as to have it read, "Speaking evil of you who shall 
give an account to him that is ready to judge the quick 
and the dead." This last thought seems more fully in 
accord with the entire testimony of the Word on the subject. 
It is we, the Church, who are expecting shortly 
to give such an account. It is we who are being specially 
tried and tested during the present time, because 
to us the light and knowledge and opportunity have 
come in advance of the world. This is our trial time, 
and the Lord's judgment or decision with reference to 



who shall constitute the very elect, and respecting who 
shall be accounted worthy of joint heirship with the 
Lord, is the very decision that is to be rendered. 

The Apostle continues with this thought, saying 
that it is for this reason (because we who are dead to 
the world and alive toward God are being called out 
now, as the Lord's elect class, therefore) the Gospel is 
preached to us who are (thus) dead, so that while the 
world judges us as in the flesh, like all other men, the 
Lord may judge us as in the spirit, begotten to a newness 
of life. This is in exact accord with what we saw 
in the first two paragraphs of this lesson. The world 
discerns not that the New Creatures are any different 
from other men; hence it wonders at their devotion, 
calls it folly or hypocrisy, and discerning the imperfections 
of the flesh may not at all times be able to see so 
great a difference between the New Creatures and the 
world. But God, who knoweth the heart, and who has 
from the moment of our consecration counted the flesh 
as dead, and who charges nothing against us as New 
Creatures, begotten spirit beings, except that which is 
wilfully wrong, is the One with whom we have to do, 
and in whose favor and love and promises we rejoice. 
God is "for us"! None can prevail against us; all 
things must work together for good to us, because we 
are his, because he has called us according to his purpose, 
because we are seeking to walk in his way, not 
after the flesh, but after the spirit. 

The end of all present things is near. Present institutions, 
under the supervision of "the prince of this 
world" (Satan), and controlled largely by his spirit, 
must soon, according to the divine promise, give place 
to the new conditions of God's Kingdom, when the 
great Redeemer shall take to himself his great power 

R3247 : page 365 

and reign— binding Satan and putting down all insubordination 

and everything contrary to the righteousness 

which is of God. We who so believe can look 

with great equanimity upon the changing conditions 

of this present time; and the evil-speaking of the 

world and its antagonism manifested toward us in various 

ways, because we are New Creatures, walking 

after the spirit to the extent of our ability, need not 

alarm us, for greater is he who is on our part than all 

that be against us. Hence it behooves us to be sober-minded 

—to take this reasonable and proper view, which 

does not overlook the future to see the present, but 

rather overlooks the present to see the future, held up 

before us in the Lord's Word. It behooves us also to 

watch unto prayer, to remember that we are not of ourselves 

sufficient for these things, that "our sufficiency 

is of God." 

"Above all things," urges the Apostle, these who 
are dead to the world, and misunderstood by the world, 



but alive toward God and accepted through Christ as 
God's sons (despite all the blemishes of the flesh), 
these should be fervent in love amongst themselves. 
Such as realize the true situation, such as are standing 
for the principles of righteousness and truth and loyalty 
to the Lord, and enduring hardness as good soldiers, 
must have a deeply sympathetic love for all others 
who, like themselves, are battling for the Lord, and 
for the same principles of right. Whoever has not a 
fervent (burning) love for his fellows has reason to 
question to what extent he is one with the Lord and 
with the little flock whose experiences the Apostle is 
here delineating. 

True, there are some of the Lord's accepted ones 
whom he counts dead as respects the flesh and alive as 
respects their spirit, their new natures, who are less 
lovely naturally (in mind and body) than some who 
are of the world, less fallen naturally: but wherever 
the true love of the Lord prevails it will indeed cover a 
multitude of sins, a multitude of blemishes, a multitude 
of imperfections, in those whom it will recognize 
as fellow-pilgrims in "the narrow way," "brethren" 
of the one family of God. This proper love, the love 
of God, will enable those who possess it to consider 
one another from the divine standpoint, not according 
to the flesh, but according to the spirit, the heart, the 
intention. 

Amongst those who are dead to the world and 
alive as New Creatures, there should be a special exercise 
of hospitality, and that without grudging. It 
should be hearty, and not merely because the Lord 
commends and commands it. Hospitality, indeed, is, 
as the Apostle points out, an element of character which 
should be cultivated toward all men: We should 
"do good unto all men as we have opportunity, 
but especially to the household of faith." There 
are some who can recognize this principle of hospitality 
quite keenly, and who, if hospitality be denied 
them, will be inclined to berate the brethren for their 
lack of the proper spirit. Such and all should inquire 
of themselves to what extent they have ever exercised 
hospitality and generosity to others; and anyone who 
realizes that he has received more from the brethren 
than he has given them should feel ashamed, and 
should seek of the Lord wisdom, that he may know 
wherein is his weakness, that he has so far come short 
of the great privileges of the Lord's followers, all of 
whom are to be givers rather than receivers— except under 
special conditions of distress. But let none of us 
forget that "it is more blessed to give than to receive." 
Let each of us seek to enjoy the blessing which comes 
from a liberal interpretation of this word hospitality. 

The Lord's grace and bounty are manifold; they 
come to us in numberless forms, in things both spiritual 
and temporal. Some of us may receive a larger 
number of these favors than others, but in that event 



the responsibility or stewardship is proportionately increased; 

and the Apostle urges (vs. 10) that we should 

seek to serve out to others whatever gifts we possess. 

He who waters others shall himself be watered. This 

principle applies to everything, both temporal and 

spiritual. 

Still speaking of this Church class, dead to the 
world, and judged by the world as though they were 
men, but alive toward God, and judged by God as New 
Creatures, spirit beings merely sojourning in these 
fleshly bodies, as in a tent, and waiting in this wilderness 
condition to learn the lessons necessary before entering 
the land of promise, the heavenly Canaan, by 
sharing the First Resurrection, the Apostle proceeds to 
point out that these, when they speak, should be as 
"God's oracles," absolutely truthful, wholly reliable. 
If they serve they should do it with all the ability 

R3248 : page 365 

which they possess, recognizing that the ability is God-given 

as well as the talent. These exhortations to 

truth and faithfulness in utterance and service are 

applicable first of all to believers (the Church) amongst 

ourselves, but applicable also to all with whom they 

come in contact. We may be evil reported of and slandered, 

but all who know us, who have dealings with 

us, should find from experience our loyalty to principle, 

our endeavor that the words of our mouths as well 

as the meditations of our hearts and the conduct of 

life should be pleasing to the Lord and an honor to 

his name and cause, that God may be glorified 

through Christ, to whom belongs the glory and the 

Kingdom forever. His Church alone, in the present 

time, recognizes fully and properly the right and dominion 

of the Lord as the King. We alone have the 

R3248 : page 366 

blessing that comes from this recognition and relationship, 
but we look forward with joy to the time when 
his Kingdom shall be established amongst men; when 
the time shall come for which we are praying, "Thy 
Kingdom come"; when the knowledge of the Lord 
shall be made to reach every creature, and when many 
shall come to know and to love and to obey him whom 
now we rejoice to honor as our Redeemer and King. 
As is indicated by the Golden Text, this lesson was 
designed by those who selected it to be a Temperance 
Lesson. We have not dealt with it after the manner 
they intended, but according to the Apostle's meaning. 
It certainly is a total abstinence lesson in one sense of 
the word, viz., in the sense that the class who have 
become dead to sin and alive toward God will desire to 
abstain from "every appearance of evil," which certainly 
will include intemperance, concerning which the 



Lord's Word is very explicit, in declaring that "No 
drunkard shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven. " - 
1 Cor. 6:10. 



R3248 : page 366 

"THE LORD IS MY LIGHT AND MY SALVATION." 

--PSALM 27:1. -SEPT. 27.- 

A REVIEW of the Quarter is appointed for this 

date, and our caption is the Golden Text. 

The four characters brought to our attention 

by the lessons of the past quarter have been Samuel the 

Prophet, Saul— Israel's first king,— Jonathan, his son, 

and David, successor to the kingdom. Three of these 

were grand characters, but one of them ignoble— Saul. 

The contrast before us has been chiefly as between Saul 

and David. Both were of good character in many respects; 

the differences between them we may safely 

credit to the fact that the one early gave his heart to 

the Lord, and the other kept his to himself. The secret 

of David's greatness is the Golden Text of this 

lesson. The Lord was his light and salvation— guiding 

his heart and overruling his affairs for good. But we 

should never forget that David was not only a great and 

good man of himself, because he chose the Lord for his 

portion and was always loyal at heart to him, but additionally 

because the Lord chose David, whose name 

signifies Beloved, to be a type of Christ, the well-beloved, 

—Head and body. 

The grand lesson of this quarter to spiritual Israel 
is reverence for the Lord, faith in him, courage, the result 
of that faith, and patient endurance, another fruit 
of the same. The members of the body of Christ cannot 
fail to be profited by studying closely and deeply 
the character of the man after God's own heart, and 
learning from his experiences;— always remembering, 
nevertheless, that King David belonged to the house of 
servants, that he lived at too early a date to belong to 
the house of sons, of which our Lord Jesus was the 
first-born and fore-runner; that consequently David 
did not have the begetting of the holy Spirit, nor the 
privileges and advantages of the same; that he was not 
running in the race for the great prize, was not a member 
of the Royal Priesthood, consecrated to death.— 
Heb. 3:2,5,6; 11:40; Luke 7:28. 

For these reasons, although drawing valuable lessons 
from David's experiences, we of this Gospel age, 
members of the house of sons (John 1:12) are not to 
regard David as our sample or pattern in consecrated 
living or self-sacrificing service. While we draw lessons 
from the experiences of David and other noble 
characters of the past, our patterns are Jesus and his 



apostles, whom we are to copy— walking in their footsteps 
in the narrow way of self-sacrifice even unto death. 
We commend to all a careful reading of Psalm 27 
entire. It is profitable, capable of an application to 
every member of the body of Christ, the Church, the 
house of sons. 



R3245 : page 366 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS ANSWERED. 

Question.— In what condition will those be who 
have been justified by faith in this age, and who yet 
refuse to consecrate because they think restitution 
blessings good enough for them, who feel afraid 
that they could not carry out their consecration vows, 
and, therefore, hold back and do not make them? Is 
it possible for a person to be justified in this age and 
then be justified again in the next age? Or does justification 
count only when it is used as a stepping 
stone to consecration? 

Answer.— We are to remember the meaning of the 
word justification; it signifies a righteous condition, 
acceptable to God. God's provision for the world 
through Christ is justification— that so many as desire 
may come back to righteousness,— to harmony with 
the Creator. The time for this return to divine favor, 
as respects the world in general, will be the Millennial 
age; and the way of return will be through restitution 
processes, physical, mental and moral, up to perfection. 
Meantime, before the Millennial age, God designs 
the selection of a Church to be associated with 
Jesus in the work of restitution; and wishing to deal 
with these before the restitution times, he grants them 
a faith-justification, or reckoned righteousness, a 

R3245 : page 367 

reckoned reconciliation and harmony with God, based 
upon their exercise of faith in him, and in his arrangements 
and promises. Thus we read in the New Testament 
that we who believe in Jesus are justified by 
faith— justified freely from all things— treated as 
though we were all right, in full accord with God, 
although really we are physically, mentally and morally 
unright, in that we are not absolutely perfect. 

God's object in providing this reckoned, or faith-justification 
during this Gospel age is to permit the 
justified ones to present themselves living sacrifices, 
holy (justified) and acceptable. Whoever fails to 
take this step of consecration— sacrifice— fails to use 
his faith-justification in the manner and for the purpose 
intended. He receives that much of the grace of 
God in vain, as respects God's intention and the only 



use for this justification in the present time. Failing 
to use this justification now within a reasonable time 
would, we understand, vitiate it, and the person 
would cease to maintain his justified standing before 
God;— but just at what juncture of his Christian experience 
he might be thus set aside, we will not always 
be able to judge. We would understand that 
those who thus receive God's favor in vain are not 
necessarily debarred from all opportunities for the 
future, though we may be sure that the failure to use 
privileges seen and enjoyed, will not work any special 
advantage to such, but rather probably the reverse. 

Question.— Could Adam have developed a character 
without the knowledge of good and evil? What 
kind of character did he have prior to the disobedience 
and fall? 

Answer.— A participation in sin is not essential 
to the development of character; otherwise God the 
Father and our Lord Jesus Christ and the holy angels 
would have to be classed as amongst those destitute 
of character. Surely God himself is to be considered 
as possessing character of the very highest class, and 
hence, his creature Adam, made in his own likeness, 
must have possessed a good character. So 
must a faultless character belong to all the angelic 
sons of God, and to his first-begotten. Character 
may be tested and buttressed and supported by 
experience or by observation. The holy angels who 
kept their first estate have evidently strengthened 
their characters by observation. Seeing sin in others 
and noting its evil fruit, they have doubtless been 
made the more strong in their determination for that 
holiness in which they were created and which they 
have maintained. But had sin never been permitted, 
this buttressing of character by the holy angels 
through observation would have been impossible. 

Adam, in the divine image, and, therefore, of excellent 
character, was subjected to a peculiar temptation, 
to which probably he would not have yielded 
had he been granted the same acquaintance with 
righteousness and with his Creator that the holy 
angels enjoyed. God left him in this condition, 
knowing in advance how it would result, and prepared 
for the rescue of the race in advance, in that 
feature of his plan which foresaw "the Lamb slain 
from the foundation of the world." God chose to 
give Adam and his race an experience in character-development 
through contact with sin and in overcoming 
it by the assistance he renders through the Redeemer. 
While, therefore, a certain degree of strong 
and good character may be created, the testing and 
proving and buttressing of that character and its everlasting 
insurance could not be accomplished without 
some lesson of either experience or observation. It 
pleased God to give man his lesson and testing 



through experience, and the angels the same lesson 
and testing through observation, and all his ways are 
perfect. 

Question.— Were the ancient worthies begotten to 
life by the heavenly Father or our Lord Jesus? and if 
by the latter, how could it be, since he had not yet 
come, in their day, and had not yet offered the sacrifice 
for sins, nor taken any of the steps seemingly 
necessary to his assuming to them the relationship of 
"the everlasting Father"? 

Answer.— The words "beget" and "born," as 
used in the Scriptures, apply specially to the Gospel 
Church, to illustrate the small beginning of the new 
life, its gradual development and its final birth in the 
resurrection to the full perfection of the heavenly 
nature. This figure would not apply to the ancient 
worthies, for the reasons you have mentioned and for 
other reasons. They were inspired with hopes toward 
God respecting future life, but had no promises of, 
and, therefore, could not properly have any hopes 
respecting a change to spiritual nature in the resurrection, 
or at any time. They could not, therefore, 
be said to have been begotten to any such spiritual 
hopes, nor ultimately to such condition. 

The fact that Christ had not yet paid the penalty 
for sin precluded not only the possibility of his being 
their life-giver, but likewise precluded the possibility 
of anyone being their life-giver up to that time. 
They are not, therefore, spoken of as having a new 
life begun in them, but merely as having discerned the 
new life in the distance, "having seen the promises 
afar off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced 
them," by faith; but they had the new life neither 
actually nor reckonedly; they must wait for Messiah, 
because in him all the promises centered. They 
hoped for his birth of their lineage according to the 
flesh, and yet had they understood the divine Word 
and plan, they must have known that, instead of being 
the fathers of Messiah, they must in due time, in 
order to have life at all, become his children— receive 
life from him as the Everlasting Father.— Psa. 45:16. 

Instead of its being said of them that they were 
begotten to the future life, it is said that they were 
justified to a future life through faith in the divine 
promises. 



page 369 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIV. OCTOBER 1, 1903. No. 19 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 371 

Baptists Bound as Truly as 
Others 371 

Zionists in Perplexity 372 

Uneasiness in Germany 373 

General Conventions Report, 1903 373 

"Christ in You, the Hope of 

Glory" 374 

A Proper Seeking of Divine Favor 377 

King David's Repentance 380 

Public Ministries of the Truth 384 

Special Items 370 

page 370 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



CHANGE OF BRITISH BRANCH ADDRESS. 



We call special attention of our British friends to the 
new location of our London office, noted above— 24 Eversholt 
St., N.W. Eversholt St. is a continuation of Seymour 



St., which runs alongside Euston Station. The new location 
is four minutes' walk from Euston Station. All will 
be glad to know that the increasing importance of the 
British work rendered the change desirable. 

PLENTY OF VOLUNTEER LITERATURE. 



Friends are advised that we have plenty of the Volunteer 
literature for 1903 on hand, and are able to fill all your 
orders promptly. Great blessing has been experienced by 
all engaging in the service, and we have reports of considerable 
interest being aroused. A good supply is now on 
its way to Great Britain. 

WATCH TOWER BINDERS. 



Remember, that we have these in good supply at 50 
cents each, delivery free. Each Binder will hold two years' 
issues, and they are very convenient for easy reference and 
preserving the papers from injury and soiling. 



R3248 : page 371 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
BAPTISTS BOUND AS TRULY AS OTHERS. 



WE quote from the Texas Baptist-Herald as 
follows:— 

"Prof. M'Glothlin of the Louisville Seminary, 
in an address at Savannah on Ecclesiasticism,' 
spoke these timely words: 

"Ecclesiasticism tends constantly to increase 
the amount of machinery and centralize it in the hands 
of the clergy. Now the whole tendency of the times, 
among most other denominations as well as the Baptists, 
is to magnify the importance of the layman in 
the denominational life. We delight to make him 
moderator of our associations, our State conventions 
and even the Southern Baptist Convention. We are 
beginning to put him at the head of our denominational 
colleges, and the only reason he does not play 
even a larger part in our Church affairs is our inability 
to induce him to do so. There is no disposition 
among our preachers to usurp authority or even to retain 
what they have. They labor to bring forward 
the layman. No ecclesiasticism here. 

'"But what of the increase in machinery? Here 



we have a different tale to tell. The early churches 
were the only Christian organizations so far as we know. 
They were wholly independent of each other, having no 
connection except that which comes through unity in 
faith and practice. The same was true of the Baptist 
churches in America for nearly a century. The first 
Baptist Church in America was founded in 1639 and 
the first Association in 1707. The movement to organize 
the churches into associations met with determined 
opposition, but the work progressed, and by the beginning 
of the 19th century there were few churches 
which still stood outside the associations. The chief 
motives to these organizations had been the desire to 
better resist the State churches, to secure doctrinal 
agreement and to prosecute local missionary work. 

'"With the 19th century came the great foreign 
mission movement and with it the need of larger organizations. 
In 1814 the first national organization, 
the present Missionary Union, was formed. Later 
two other national organizations, the Home Mission 
Society and the American Baptist Publication Society, 
were organized. As a result of this same movement, 
combined with the great educational movement, State 
organizations began to be formed about 1820. The present 
Baptist organization was completed by the formation 
of the Southern Baptist Convention in 1845. All, 
or nearly all, these organizations met with the most determined 
opposition on the ground that they were not scriptural 
and endangered or destroyed the independence of the 
churches. It is not strange that there was fear. 
Never in the history of Christianity was there such 
rapid progress in organization as in the 138 years 
from 1707 to 1845. Baptists have existed in the 
United States for about 264 years, and it must be admitted 
that we have far more ecclesiastical machinery 
than the Christians had 264 years after the death of 
Christ. Out of the simple Baptist Church at Rome 
has grown the great Roman Catholic Church which 
encloses the world in its embrace! Are we on the same 
road? We have gone at a very rapid pace so far; will 
we stop, or will the organizations go on increasing? We 
have rapidly increased our organizations, but two 
things are to be observed which make the situation less 
serious than it at first appears. Before the year 294 
A.D., infant baptism had been introduced and the 
churches had been greatly corrupted; and in the second 
place the local Church had lost its significance and 
independence. We Baptists, with all our increase of 
machinery, have stood true to the apostolic conception 
of an independent Church of regenerate people. 
The New Testament ideal is our ideal. And herein 
is our safety for the future.'" 



We cannot agree with the editor of the Baptist-Herald 



that these words are timely. They are quite 
behind time. Our dear Baptist friends have already 
lost their liberty in ecclesiasticism. For all practical 
purposes they are now bound as much as the people 
of other denominations, but they do not realize it and 
love their chains. Is it asked, How so? We reply 
that the bondage came through the error of ministerial 

R3249 : page 372 

ordination. Instead of recognizing, as we do, 

that "all ye are brethren," and that all anointed with 

the holy Spirit are anointed to preach,— each to the 

extent of his talents and opportunities,— Baptists recognized, 

as additionally necessary, a human ordination. 

The preachers took this into their own hands, 

implying that the Church was competent to express 

God's will in selecting its own pastor, but as "brethren" 

were so inferior that their commission or appointment 

or recognition of him would not do without a 

clerical sanction or ordination. 

This key in the hands of Baptist ministers has 
made them the masters and lords of the Baptist 
Church,— much to its injury. Under their Ministerial 
associations numerous independent congregations, 
such as the apostles organized, have been welded into 
a denomination which these ministers control— creed 
and all. How so? Because any Church not a member 
of the Association would have no standing as a 
Baptist Church. And if a member of the Association, 
it can have no one for its minister unless the other 
ministers accept him. Hence, pastors must be chosen 
from the ministerial clique and must be acceptable 
personally and doctrinally to the other Baptist 
ministers. 

The preachers, having all the vital power and 
authority, can, therefore, well afford to push forward 
their inferiors, the "laymen," to committees, chairmanships, 
etc. The preachers only reinforce their 
own power by securing the loyalty of the leading men 
of the denomination, financial and otherwise, at so 
cheap a price. Evidently the writer scents danger in 
the future, but just as evidently he rejoices in the 
Baptist bondage and hugs her chains as very precious. 
Baptist liberty is an empty boast— as meaningless and 
untrue as that other claim, that the early Church 
sailed under the name Baptist. The Church founded 
by our Lord and the apostles took no sectarian name. 
Baptists, as well as others, need to heed the Master's 
final command of Revelation 18:4. 

ZIONISTS IN PERPLEXITY. 



At the last Congress of the Zionists the President 



of the Society submitted two important communications. 
One was from the British Government, proffering 
the Society land, etc., in East Africa under 
favorable conditions, similar to those enjoyed by Canada 
—the suzerainty of Great Britain being understood. 
The proposition was favorably considered by a majority 
of the Congress and a committee of nine was 
appointed to examine into the feasibility of accepting 
the proposition. However, a goodly and influential 
minority stoutly opposed even the consideration of 
the question, declared that the Society's funds were 
secured with the understanding that they were for 
reestablishing the Jews in Palestine and not elsewhere, 
and that they should object to the use of a single 
penny in other colonization schemes, no matter how 
roseate. They temporarily left the Convention as a 
mark of their strong sentiments on the subject. 

The other important communication was from 
the Russian Government. It distinctly avowed sympathy 
with the Zionist movement as originally inaugurated, 
because it hoped that thus Russia might be 
relieved of its Jewish population and the troubles, 
disturbances, etc., connected therewith. It, however, 
as distinctly disavowed sympathy with the later development 
of Zionism into a national or political movement; 
because this had a disturbing effect on Jews 
living in Russia and tended to make them enemies of 
their home government and neighbors. The views of 
a Jewish writer and prominent Zionist are interesting, 
and follow:— 

MR. ISRAEL ZANGWILL'S VIEWS. 

"Viewed merely on its prosaic side, Zionism is by 
no means a visionary scheme. The aggregation of 
Jews in Palestine is only a matter of time— already 
they form a third of its population— and it is better 
that they should be aggregated there under their 
own laws and religion and the mild suzerainty of 
the Sultan than under the semi-barbarous restrictions 
of Russia or Roumania, and exposed to recurrent 
popular outbreaks. True, Palestine is a ruined country, 
and the Jews are a broken people. But neither 
is beyond recuperation. Palestine needs a people; 
Israel needs a country. If, in regenerating the Holy 
Land, Israel could regenerate itself, how could the 
world be other than the gainer? In the solution of 
the problem of Asia, which has succeeded the problem 
of Africa, Israel might play no insignificant part. 
Already the colony of Richon le Zion has obtained a 
gold medal for its wines from the Paris Exposition— 
which is not prejudiced in the Jew's favor. We may 
be sure the spiritual wine of Judea would again pour 
forth likewise— that precious vintage which the world 
has drunk for so many centuries. And, as the scientific 
activities of the colonization societies would have 



paved the way for the pastoral and commercial future 
of Israel in its own country, so would the rabbinical 
sing-song in musty rooms prove to have been but the 
unconscious preparation of the ages for the Jerusalem 
university. 

"But Palestine belongs to the Sultan, and the 
Sultan refuses to grant the coveted Judean charter, 
even for dangled millions. Is not this fatal? No; 
it matters as little as that the Zionists could not pay 
the millions if suddenly called upon. They have collected 
not two and a half million dollars. But there 
are millionaires enough to come to the rescue once the 
charter was dangled before the Zionists. It is not likely 
that the Rothschilds would see themselves ousted from 
their familiar headship in authority and well-doing. 
Nor would the millions left by Baron Hirsch be altogether 
withheld. And the Sultan's present refusal 
is equally unimportant, because a national policy is 

R3249 : page 373 

independent of transient moods and transient rulers. 
The only aspect that really matters is whether Israel's 
face be or be not set steadily Zionward— for decades 
and even for centuries. Much less turns on the Sultan's 
mind than on Dr. Herzl's. Will he lose patience? 
For leaders like Dr. Herzl are not born in every 
century." 



It will be vain for Zionists to hope to establish 
an independent government in Palestine. None of the 
civilized nations would favor putting the Land of 
Promise wholly into their control; and if they did 
God would not favor it. Palestine will be "trodden 
down of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles 
be filled full"-viz., October, 1914, A.D. By that 
time the heavenly Kingdom will be in power and the 
ancient worthies— Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and all 
the holy prophets— will be resurrected and constitute 
the earthly representatives of the spiritual and invisible 
Kingdom of Christ and his Bride— the Gospel 
Church. 

Then Israel will be saved from its blindness (Rom. 1 1:26,27); 
and God will "pour upon them the spirit 
of prayer and supplication" (Zech. 12:10); and this, 
their true conversion to the Lord and the Truth, will 
be the start of the world's conversion (Rom. 11:15), 
when "Many peoples shall come and say, Come, let 
us go up to the mountain of the Lord, and to the 
house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of 
his ways and we will walk in his paths."— Micah 4:2. 

UNEASINESS IN GERMANY. 



The Kaiser has recently proposed an increase in 
the German army, already considered a heavy burden 
financially and otherwise. The press declare that 
there will be danger of a revolution if the matter be 
urged. German government bonds experienced a 
sharp decline immediately on the announcement. 

The significance of this year's parliamentary elections 
in Germany cannot be fully appreciated without 
taking into consideration the fact that all men are not 
equal before the law in the Kaiser's Empire. Certain 
classes of voters have greater rights than others, 
and are permitted to cast two, three or more ballots, 
according to their rank or wealth. Needless to say, 
the privileged franchise holders are mostly adherents 
of the government and members of the conservative 
parties. The official returns showing that the Social 
Democrats polled 3,008,000 votes mean that they constitute 
more than one-half of the total number of electors 
in Germany, and that under a "one-man-one-vote" 
system they would sweep everything before 
them. They have gained 900,000 recruits since 1899, 
and their ultimate control of the Reichstag is a certainty. 
The Kaiser's enmity seems to help them. He 
will be forced to change his attitude or assume a dictatorship. 
He affects to treat the matter lightly, as one 
of chance, which may be reversed at the next 
election. 



R3249 : page 373 

1903. -GENERAL CONVENTIONS REPORT.-1903. 

WE have had three splendid General Conventions 
this year, and each of them very successful 
in all respects. The first one, on 
April 4,5, was in the South, where the "Truth People" 
are much less numerous than in other quarters 
of our land. It was held in Atlanta, Ga., which for 
many reasons may be styled the principal city of those 
parts. The gathering of friends was estimated at 
150, while the meeting advertised to the public had 
an estimated attendance of 450. Nineteen symbolized 
their consecration by water immersion. The 
listed speakers were Brothers Stevens and Wilbor, 
representatives of the Atlanta Church, Pilgrim Harrison 
and Pastor Russell. 

The spiritual power of the Convention was great, 
and we trust still abides in those who attended, and 
extends to their home-comrades who could not attend. 
The sentiments of the majority, we believe, were voiced 
by one old brother who boarded the train on which the 
writer departed. Shaking our hand warmly he said, 



"Brother Russell, I would not take a thousand dollars 
for the good I have received from this Convention; 
—and I am only a poor man, too." He is a 
mountain farmer who knows well what it means to 
combat the thorns and thistles and to eat his bread 

R3250 : page 373 

by the sweat of his face; yet he prized the spiritual 
blessings above all compare because of such were his 
treasures— heavenly. 

THE DENVER CONVENTION. 

The second Convention, at Denver, Colo., on July 
10-12, was central to a large district not previously 
favored with Convention privileges. The friends 
in attendance were chiefly of Colorado, and from 
California, Nebraska, Dakota, Iowa, Kansas, Arkansas, 
Texas, Oklahoma, Utah, Indian Territory, Illinois, 
Indiana and Ohio and numbered about 350 earnest, 
zealous brethren and sisters, in about equal 
proportions. Thirty-six availed themselves of the 
opportunity offered and symbolized their burial into 
Christ's death by immersion in water. 

The principal public service was attended by 
about 900, and it is to be hoped that our Master's 
name and cause were honored and blessed by the 
grand seasons of refreshing here enjoyed. The listed 
speakers were Brother Hall of the local congregation, 
Pilgrims Williamson, Draper, Barton, Howel and 
Pastor Russell. "It is good to be here," seemed the 
general sentiment of all in attendance. Not by any 

R3250 : page 374 

means the least important of its sessions were the 
Testimony Meetings and the final Love Feast, at 
which many eyes were filled with tears as the company 
sang, 

"Blest be the tie that binds 

Our hearts in Christian love; 
The fellowship of kindred minds 
Is like to that above." 
All seemed to have in mind the great Convention 
of the future which the Apostle designates "The 
General Assembly and Church of the Firstborns," 
in which we hope to participate and which will not 
break up forever. What a hope,— forever with the 
Lord and those who are his! 

THE TORONTO CONVENTION. 

The last Convention of the season has just closed 
at Toronto, Canada,— Sept. 5-7. We surely had a 
blessed season of spiritual refreshment. Many said, 



"This is the grandest we have ever had!" Yes! 
This is always the sentiment at every Convention, and 
it is really difficult to determine superiority when 
everything is so soul-satisfying and heart-uplifting. 
The listed speakers were Bro. Stovel of the Toronto 
Church and Pilgrims VanAmburgh, Hay, Harrison, 
McPhail, Barton, Streeter, Samson and Pastor Russell; 
but many others were heard from effectively in 
the Testimony Meetings, which continue to be 
amongst the most effective sessions of all 
Conventions. 

The attendance was chiefly Canadian, and from 
New York, Ohio, Indiana, Michigan, Illinois and Pennsylvania; 
the latter being the most prominent numerically. 
The number of "Truth people" was estimated 
at 800, while the attendance at the two public gatherings 
averaged about 1800 each— some estimating the 
number much higher. At the baptism service fifty-eight 
symbolized their burial into death with our 
Lord, and it surely was a solemn funeral occasion, 
yet one in which all rejoiced, remembering the promise, 
"If we be dead with him we shall also live with 
him." (2 Tim. 2:11.) The concluding session was 
a Love Feast long to be remembered. In some respects 
surely this last Convention deserves to rank 
chief of all Conventions thus far held under the auspices 
of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society. 
Central to a large population and to the homes of a 
large number of the interested, the attendance of the 
Church and the public was larger than at any previous 
Convention. The attraction to the people of Toronto 
was thorough advertising and the best public 
auditorium. 

The generous arrangements connected with these 
Conventions deserves a word of appreciation. The 
brethren of the entertaining Churches recognized the 
fact that hundreds of the Lord's brethren were coming 
at considerable cost, and concluded that no reasonable 
expense should be spared to make their stay 
pleasant and spiritually profitable. It is safe to say 
that the friends of the entertaining Church spent pro 
rata as much or more time and money than did those 
who came to them long distances. However, all was 
so cheerfully and heartily done, "as unto the Lord," 
that they evidently shared the great blessings of the 
Conventions also, proportionately. 

NEXT YEAR'S CONVENTIONS. 

It is too early to decide upon these definitely, but 
as the Grand Army Encampment will secure special 
railroad rates to Boston, and the World's Fair will 
probably secure special rates to St. Louis, these two 
cities will probably have next year's General Conventions 
if the churches at each desire this arrangement. 



R3250 : page 374 

"CHRIST IN YOU, THE HOPE OF GLORY." 

-COLOSSIANS 1:27.- 

LANGUAGE is but a medium for the communication 

of thought, and words are but symbols 

of ideas. When words are so framed in sentences 

as to express an impossibility or an absurdity, 

when considered literally, but do forcibly illustrate a 

known truth when symbolically interpreted, we instinctively 

recognize the figure, and are instructed by 

it. In this way many of the deep things of God— the 

spiritual things— are expressed to us, since they are 

often forcibly illustrated by things familiar to us on 

the natural plane. Thus, for instance, the resurrection, 

both natural and spiritual, finds an illustration 

in the processes of vegetation (1 Cor. 15:35-38); and 

the processes of the beginning, development and final 

perfecting of the spiritual sons of God find a remarkable 

illustration in the begetting, quickening and 

birth of the natural man. (James 1:18; Eph. 2:1; 

John 3:3.) But if, when we read these symbols or 

illustrations of spiritual things, we pervert and dishonor 

our God-given reason by accepting palpable 

absurdities as their interpretation, we deceive ourselves, 

and in so doing are not blameless. In parables 

and dark, symbolic sayings our Lord opened his 

mouth and taught his disciples, expecting them to 

use their common sense in either interpreting them 

themselves, or in judging of the correctness of any 

interpretation offered by others as they should become 

meat in due season. And when on one occasion, 

instead of using their brains to draw from it the implied 

lesson, the disciples asked for the interpretation 

R3250 : page 375 

of a parable, Jesus suggestively and reprovingly replied, 
"How then will ye know all parables?" (Mark 4:13.) 
He would have us think, consider and put 
our God-given mental faculties to their legitimate use. 

Bearing in mind these wholesome reflections, together 
with the fact that the Scriptures abound in 
these symbolic expressions of truth, let us consider 
the Apostle's meaning when he speaks of "Christ in 
you, the hope of glory." He uses the same figure 
again in his letter to the Galatians (Gal. 4:19), saying, 
"My children, whom I am bearing again, till 
Christ be formed in you," etc. Here the Apostle is 
likening his care and labor and endurance for those 
who had been begotten by the Truth to the new nature, 
to the physical endurance of a mother in nourishing 



and sustaining the germ of human life until 
the new human creature is formed and able to appropriate 
for itself the life-sustaining elements of nature, 
independent of her life. So the Apostle sought to 
nourish and sustain those germs of spiritual being 
with his own spiritual life until, apart from his personal 
work and influence, they would be able to appropriate 
for themselves the God-given elements of 
spiritual life contained in the Word of Truth;— until 
the Christ-character should be definitely formed in 
them. 

In no other reasonable sense could the Apostle 
bear those Galatian Christians; and in no other reasonable 
sense could Christ be formed in them, or in 
us. The thought is that every true child of God 
must have a definite individual Christian character 
which is not dependent for its existence upon the 
spiritual life of any other Christian. He must from 
the Word of Truth, proclaimed and exemplified by 
other Christians, draw those principles of life, etc., 
which give him an established character, a spiritual 
individuality of his own. So positive and definite 
should be the spiritual individuality of every one, 
that, should even the beloved brother or sister whose 
spiritual life first nourished ours and brought us forward 
to completeness of character fall away (which 
the Apostle shows is not impossible— Heb. 6:4-6; 
Gal. 1:8), we would still live, being able to appropriate 
for ourselves the spirit of Truth. 

Paul feared, and had reason to fear, that the Galatian 
Christians had not yet come to this condition 
of established character— that the Christ-life was 
not yet definitely formed in them. He said, "I 
am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed upon you labor 
in vain" (Gal. 4:11); for already they were giving 
heed to seducing teachers and departing from the 
faith, showing that they were not established in the 
Truth, and consequently not established in the spirit 
of the Truth, which is the spirit of Christ, and, 
hence, that Christ was not yet formed in them.— 
Verse 19. 

Alas, how often we see among those who bear 
the name of Christ, and who have truly received the 
spirit of adoption as sons of God, that Christ is not 
yet formed in them! that they have not yet reached 
that degree of development which manifests a distinct 
spiritual individuality! They depend largely 
upon the spiritual life of others, and if their spiritual 
life declines these dependent ones suffer a similar decline; 
if they go into error, these follow, as did many 

R3251 : page 375 

of those Galatian Christians to whom Paul wrote. 
How is it, beloved, in your several cases? Apply the 
question to yourselves— Is Christ formed in you so 



fully that none of these things move you? that, however 
they may grieve you at heart, they cannot affect 
your spiritual life? This is what it is to have "Christ 
in you, the hope of glory." 

A cloak of mystery and superstition has been 
thrown around this expression of the Apostle, evidently 
by the great Adversary of the Truth and the 
Church, to the effect that in some secret way, known 
only to the initiated, Christ personally comes into the 
consecrated soul and uses that soul simply as a machine; 
and that, consequently, the machine is about 
infallible, because Christ is using it; that for them to 
speak, or think, or act, or interpret the Scriptures, is 
for Christ to do it, in whose hands they are merely the 
passive agents. With this idea they generally go further, 
and claim that Christ personally talks with them 
and teaches them independently of his Word; and some 
go so far as to claim that they have visions and special 
revelations from the Lord. Some speak of this 
presence as Christ; some as the holy Spirit; and 
some speak of them interchangeably. 

While there is a semblance of truth in all this, 
and while we remember that Jesus said, "He that 
hath my commandments and keepeth them. ..shall 
be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will 
manifest myself to him;. ..and we will come unto 
him and make our abode with him" (John 14:21,23), 
it is true that a more serious error could scarcely be 
entertained than this idea of personal infallibility because 
of the supposed mysterious presence of another 
being within. 

Notice that this promise of the abiding presence 
of the Father and the Son is to those who have and 
keep the commandments of the Lord Jesus. Those, 
therefore, who ignore the Word of the Lord and have 
not his commandments— who do not know what they 
are, and hence cannot keep them, but who hearken 
to the voice of their own imaginations and note all 
the changing states of their own feelings, mistaking 
them for the voice of the Lord and follow the impressions 

R3251 : page 376 

arising from this source, instead of the commandments 

or teachings of the Lord— are quite mistaken 

in claiming this promise. Under their delusion they 

are following another spirit than the spirit of Truth; 

and unless recovered from the snare they must inevitably 

plunge deeper and deeper into superstition and 

error. 

The first difficulty we meet in attempting to dispel 
this delusion from the midst of those infatuated 
with it, is the claim that this is a higher attainment 
in the spiritual life, up to which we have not yet 
measured. If the testimony of the Scriptures bearing 
on the subject is brought forward they say, "Oh, I 



see you have the head-knowledge, but you have not 
the Spirit, you have not Christ in you." They then 
proceed to tell how Christ is in them, and that he is 
"teaching them wonderful things," which we shortly 
discover to be quite out of harmony with the Word of 
God. The case is indeed a sad one when all Scripture 
testimony contrary to their belief is set aside 
with claims of superior revelations of Christ or the 
holy Spirit which other children of God do not enjoy, 
and that Christ personally dwells in them, etc., etc. 

Who but these deceived ones cannot see that, if 
their theory be true— if God talks with them and answers 
all their queries aside from his written Word, 
the Bible, through mental inspiration, or by dreams, 
or by audible sound— then the Bible is to such a useless 
book, and time spent in its study is so much time 
wasted. Who would "search the Scriptures" as for 
hid treasures, as the Lord enjoined and as all the 
apostles searched, if they could shut their eyes, or 
kneel, and have God make a special revelation to 
them, respecting the information desired. Surely 
any sensible person would prefer a special revelation 
on a subject, rather than to spend days and months 
and years examining and comparing the words of our 
Lord and the apostles with those of the prophets and 
the Book of Revelation ("searching what or what 
manner of time the spirit did signify"), if they could 
ask and have an inspired and infallible answer in a moment. 
None of God's consecrated ones should be thus 
misled of the Adversary. It is the stepping-stone to 
pride and every evil work;— to pride, because those 
who are thus deceived soon feel themselves honored 
of God above the apostles, who even in conference 
judged of the mind of the Lord as read in his Word 
and in his providential leadings in harmony with his 
Word (Acts 15:12-15); to every evil work, in that 
those thus puffed up fancy themselves infallible, and, 
separated from the anchor of truth, the Bible, Satan 
can soon lead them rapidly into the outer darkness of 
the world, or into yet darker delusions. 

But the testimony of the Scriptures is quite contrary 
to this vaunting spirit. Paul says, "Know ye 
not.. .that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be 
reprobates?" and then he exhorts that we examine 
ourselves whether we be in the faith, or whether we 
have rejected the faith and thus become reprobates- 
no longer acceptable to God. (2 Cor. 13:5.) Every 
true child of God has respect to the commandments of 
God: he searches the Scriptures that he may know 
them, and is not left in ignorance of them; and, 
learning them, he endeavors to keep them, and the 
abiding presence of the Father and the Son is with 
all such so long as they continue to hold and to keep 
(obey) his commandments— to hold the Truth in 
righteousness. 

To have the Truth and to keep it is not merely to 



accept it on the recommendation of some friend, and 
because it gives some comfort and costs nothing, and 
to hold it until some other presumed friend dazzles 
the unsettled mind with some fanciful theory. The 
promise of the abiding presence of the Father and the 
Son is not to such. Christ is not in them; Christ is 
in the humble and sincere ones. He and the Father 
love and abide with them. 

But how? To illustrate— a friend accompanying 
another to a railway station said, as he was about to 
board the train, "Remember, I will be with you all 
the way." He meant that his thoughts would be 
with his friend and that he would be concerned for 
his welfare, etc. In a similar, and yet in a fuller and 
broader sense, the Lord is ever present with his people. 
He is always thinking of us, looking out for our interests, 
guarding us in danger, providing for us in 
temporal and spiritual things, reading our hearts, 
marking every impulse of loving devotion to him, 
shaping the influences around us for our discipline 
and refining, and hearkening to our faintest call for 
aid or sympathy or fellowship with him. He is never 
for a moment off guard, whether we call to him in 
the busy noon hours or in the silent watches of the 
night. And not only is the Lord Jesus thus present, 
but the Father also. How blessed the realization of 
such abiding faithfulness! And no real child of God 
is devoid of this evidence of his adoption. Sometimes 
it is more manifest than at others; as, for instance, 
when some special trial of faith or patience or endurance 
necessitates the special call for special help, and 
forthwith comes the grace sufficient with a precious 
realization of its loving source. Thus 

"E'en sorrow, touched by heaven, grows bright, 

With more than rapture's ray, 
As darkness shows us worlds of light 
We never saw by day." 

Every true child of God has these precious evidences 
of sonship, and the roughest places in his pathway 
are so illuminated with divine grace that they 

R3251 : page 377 

become the brightest, and memory continues to refer 
to them with thankfulness; and faith and hope and 
love grow strong and inspiring. 

Our Lord always links the progress and development 
of our spiritual life with our receiving and obeying 
the Truth, and every child of God should beware 
of that teaching which claims to be in advance of the 
Word, and that Christ or the holy Spirit speaks to such 
advanced Christians independently of the Word. The 
snare is a most dangerous one. It cultivates spiritual 
pride and boastfulness, and renders powerless the 
warnings and expostulations of the sacred Scriptures 
because the deluded ones think they have a higher 



teacher dwelling in them. And Satan, taking advantage 
of the delusion, leads them captive at his will. 

These symbolic expressions of the Scriptures 
must be interpreted as symbols, and to force any unreasonable 
interpretation upon them manifests a culpable 
wilfulness in disregarding the divinely appointed laws 
of our mind, and the result is self-deception. When 
we read, "He that dwelleth in love dwelleth in 
God, and God in him" (1 Jno. 4:16), the only 
reasonable interpretation is that we dwell in the love 
and favor, and in the spirit or disposition of God; 
and that his spirit or disposition dwells in us. Thus 
God by his indwelling spirit works in us to will and 
to do his good pleasure (Phil. 2:13); and we are reckoned 
as not in the flesh, but in the spirit, if the Spirit 
of God dwells in us.— Rom. 8:8,9. 

Let us endeavor to have more and more of the 
mind, the Spirit of God— to have his Word abide in 
us richly (John 15:7; Col. 3:16)— to have and to keep 
his commandments, that the abiding presence of the 
Father and the Son may be with us; and that, realizing 
that the Christ-character and life are definitely 
formed in us, the hope of glory may be ours; for our 
Lord said, "Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, 
Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he 
that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven." 
(Matt. 7:21.) How careful then should we be in 

R3252 : page 377 

seeking both to know and to do the will of God. 
Many indeed will come forth with the plea of their 
wonderful works, hoping to be admitted into the 
Kingdom, but only those will be recognized who have 
done the will of the Lord, and who have no theories 
or works of their own whereof to boast. 



R3252 : page 377 

A PROPER SEEKING OF DIVINE FAVOR. 

-2 SAM. 6:l-12.-OCTOBER 4.- 

"Blessed are they that dwell in thy house."— Psa. 84:4. 

AFTER David had been voluntarily chosen king 
of all the tribes of Israel, not as a result of 
his conquest, but as a result of his patient 
waiting for the Lord's time to put him into the position 
of king, he took possession of Jerusalem and made 
it the capital city of the kingdom. Then followed wars 
with the Philistines, who again sought to invade the 
land of Israel. In these wars, under the Lord's blessing, 
the Israelites were successful. It was after seven 



years had passed under such conditions— after the 
kingdom of Israel had become quite settled, and was 
not likely to be molested by enemies— that the scene of 
this lesson opens. King David, at this time about 
forty-four years of age, recognized the fact that religious 
matters had been at a low ebb in the nation for many 
years, and that the Lord having now blessed them by 
reuniting them and giving them peace, an appropriate 
time had come to do what he could in the way of reviving 
the religious sentiments of the people. His own 
heart ever loyal to the Lord, he desired that others 
should more fully appreciate the Lord as their light 
and their salvation. So it is with all who truly reverence 
the Lord and trust in him; they are desirous of 
telling their joys abroad, and helping others into the 
same condition of peace and rest in the Lord. 

The Ark of the Covenant, it will be remembered, 
was the chief article of furniture in the Tabernacle service 
which the Lord instituted at the hand of Moses 
in the wilderness. We have no certain knowledge of 
the regularity of the Tabernacle worship during the 
period from Joshua to date. Quite probably the services 
were maintained with more or less regularity. 
It is possible that since the Ark was the chief center 
of interest in connection with that service, its movements, 
etc., may have included the movement of the 
other articles of furniture of the Tabernacle, its boards, 
curtains, lamp, table, altars, etc. 

Shortly after Israel entered Palestine Joshua located 
the Ark at Shiloh, twenty miles north of Jerusalem. 
(Josh. 18:1.) That it was still there at the close 
of the period of the Judges, and while Samuel lived 
with Eli, is shown by 1 Sam. 1:3. The sons of Eli 
took the Ark with them into battle against the Philistines, 
thus evidencing their faith in the divine institutions, 
although their lives were corrupt; but as a result 
of this misuse of the Ark, the Lord permitted it to be 
captured by the Philistines. However, while they possessed 
it a curse seemed to accompany it. In the temple 
of their god, Dagon, his image fell down before the 
Ark, and the people of the cities in which it was located 
were afflicted with plagues. The Philistines were 
glad to get rid of the Ark, and loading it upon a cart 

R3252 : page 378 

started the oxen in the direction of the Israelites. From 
the time of its return the Ark was in the custody of 
Abinadab, the priest, and his sons, one of whom was 
Uzzah. The Ark had thus been with the house of Abinadab 
in the hill Gibeah and Kirjath-jearim, otherwise 
called Baale, seventy years. 

Any religious movement amongst the Jews must necessarily 
center in and about the Ark of the Covenant, for 
it was the symbol of the Lord's presence and of his mercy 
and grace toward them as a people. We remember that 



when in its place in the Most Holy of the Tabernacle a 
bright light, called the Shekinah glory, represented the 
Lord's presence between the two Cherubim of its golden 
lid, which lid was called the Mercy Seat, because upon it 
the blood of atonement was sprinkled each year, which 
covered the sins of that people for a year, and was repeated 
year by year continually, as a foreshadowing 
type of the blood of Christ, by which the real atonement 
is made. In the box under this lid or Mercy 
Seat was the golden pot of manna, Aaron's rod that 
budded and the two Tables of the Law, symbolizing 
the gracious arrangements and promises of the Almighty 
to his people. Spiritual Israel, thank God, has inherited 
the realities which were thus typified. Christ is 
the Ark of the Covenant. In him the Law has full 
satisfaction. In him is vested the priestly office, represented 
by Aaron's rod, and in him is provided the 
heavenly manna. All these things are made ours by 
the Mercy Seat, and we have access to and are accepted 
before the Mercy Seat as members of the High Priest's 
body, by virtue of the blood of atonement shed by our 
Redeemer as a propitiation for our sins, and not for 
ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world. 

King David realized that the Ark of the Lord, 
representing his presence, should be in the capital 
city of the nation, making it the city of the great King, 
and directing the minds of Israel, not only to their 
earthly king and his laws and regulations, but through 
him to the heavenly King whom he represented. To 
have this event notable— to arouse the religious sentiments 
of the whole people— the king realized that they 
must all to some extent participate in the movement, 
and hence he gathered from all quarters thirty thousand 
of the chief men of the nation— not only its military 
representatives, but the heads of the tribes. There is a 
good lesson here for all spiritual Israelites who have 
any prominence in the carrying forward of religious 
work. It is not sufficient that a leader, a representative, 
shall attempt some prominent service for the Lord 
and for the Truth. It is wiser, better every way, that 
all of the Lord's people be invited to join directly or 
representatively in any prominent matter connected 
with the Lord's service. Even in the affairs of a small 
congregation it will be found disadvantageous to have 
one person do all the speaking, all the leading, all the 
serving. Far better, far wiser is it, far more in harmony 
with the Scriptural direction, that each should 
endeavor to take a part in the service, and be encouraged 
so to do along the lines of his natural talents and 
in proportion as he shall be found humble, faithful 
and helpful. 

The holy joy and rejoicing of the journey with the 
Ark from Kirjath-jearim toward Jerusalem was suddenly 
interrupted by the jolting of the cart, which Uzzah, 
who had it in charge, feared would overthrow it. 
When he put forth his hand to steady the Ark he was 



smitten dead for his error. Consternation took the 
place of rejoicing. The thirty thousand who had come 
together specially to honor the Lord, and David himself 
also, were alarmed. Fear fell upon all, and David 
at once determined that this was either a mark of divine 
disfavor concerning the bringing of the Ark to Jerusalem, 
or that increasingly disastrous experiences might 
come to him and to the city by reason of the presence 
of the Ark. All were in fear, and the question now 
was, what to do with the holy oracle. A courageous 
man of the tribe of Levi, Obed-edom, was willing to 
receive the emblem of the Lord Jehovah's presence into 
his premises— probably the Ark was set up with the 
Tabernacle, etc., in his yard or court or appropriate 
place. 

"David was displeased because the Lord had made 
a breach upon Uzzah"— not displeased with the Lord, 
we may be sure, from what we know of the man, for 
David's reverence for the Lord and his confidence in 
his righteous dealings are clearly manifest in all of his 
writings. We may properly understand this to mean, 
then, that David was displeased with his former determination 
—to take the Ark to Jerusalem; displeased 
that his good intentions respecting the revival of religion 
and the honoring of the lord had thus gone astray 
through a lack of particularity on his own part and on 
the part of the priests who had charge of the movement, 
in that they did not obey the direct and explicit instructions 
of the Lord concerning the manner in which 
this sacred emblem of his presence should be moved. 
See Num. 4:15; 7:9, where it is specified that the Ark 
was to be carried upon the shoulders of the Levites by 
poles running through certain rings arranged for the 
purpose. That this was David's attitude of mind is 
evident upon the reading of the ninth verse: "David 
was afraid of the Lord that day, and said, How shall 
the Ark of the Lord come to me?" We can imagine 
the disappointment and chagrin, not only of David, 
but also of the thirty thousand representative Israelites, 
when they scattered to their homes, disappointed 
respecting their good intentions, which apparently had 
not been fully approved by the Lord. 

R3252 : page 379 

The statement that "the anger of the Lord was 
kindled against Uzzah" is not to be understood to signify 
violent passion on the Lord's part, but evidently 
is an accommodated expression to bring down to human 
comprehension the fact that the Lord was displeased 
with the action of Uzzah, and thought proper 
to punish him for his neglect. Quite possibly long 
association with the Ark had bred in Uzzah a familiarity 
and loss of respect for it as representative of God; 
and his open violation of the divine regulation on the 
highway, and in the sight of the representatives of all 



Israel, would have brought the divine commands and 

threatenings respecting the Ark and the various holy 

things of the Tabernacle into disrespect. The Lord resented 

this in the interest of his people, and incidentally 

took the opportunity to teach all Israel, through 

their representatives there assembled, a great lesson on 

R3253 : page 379 

the propriety of reverence for the Lord and for the particularities 
of his commands. 

The reverence of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom. 
Whoever has not learned this primary lesson in 
reverence has not made a proper start in his worship 
and service. Unless he learns this lesson he is not likely 
to accomplish anything that will be pleasing to the 
Lord— he is apt to be a stumbling-block, rather than an 
assistance in the Lord's service. Indeed, those who 
are the Lord's consecrated people, and who have been 
privileged to handle holy things, and to enter into the 
Most Holy by the blood of Jesus, approaching the 
throne of the heavenly grace in prayer, have continual 
need to remember the appropriateness of reverence as 
they approach the Lord or engage in any service for 
him. All such should learn from this lesson how they 
touch holy things, and to do so according to the divine 
direction and not otherwise. The poet has noticed 
this tendency of some to "rush in where angels fear 
to tread." Such irreverence sometimes manifests itself 
conspicuously in prayer, where the one who should be 
a worshiper, overflowing with thanksgiving for mercies 
received, undertakes to give direction to the great King 
of kings concerning the management of his work far 
and near and in all particulars. The Lord does not 
smite down such today, and make public examples of 
them for their irreverence, but we may be sure that, as 
the Apostle says, such petitions will receive no consideration 
of the Lord. (James 1:7.) A lesson in this 
matter to us is that obedience is better than sacrifice. 
The carrying of the Ark upon the shoulders of the 
four Levites might not have been as majestic a procedure 
as the one attempted with the cart; it would nevertheless 
have been more pleasing to the Lord, because 
it was according to his directions. Let us apply this 
lesson carefully, and see to it that we not only desire 
to do the Lord's will, but that we so desire to do it in 
his way that we will give close attention thereto, hearkening 
to the statements of his Word, or, as the prophet 
expresses it, let us be amongst those who tremble at 
his Word— who are extremely careful to note and particularly 
follow the Word of the Lord in every matter. 
"They shall be mine, saith the Lord, in that day when 
I come to make up my jewels." 

To those who discern the Scriptural teaching that 
death is the cessation of life, and not an entrance into 
life more abundant, there will be no need to explain 



that Uzzah's conduct not only justified the Lord in 

making him an example before the nation, instructing 

the whole people in reverence, but also that no injury 

was done to Uzzah's eternal future. He lived before 

the redemption price had been paid, and before any 

door to eternal life had been opened. He was one 

member of the human family for which Christ Jesus 

our Lord gave his life a ransom. As a consequence, 

he will be one member of the human family who shall 

ultimately hear the voice of the Son of Man and come 

forth from the sleep of death— to have it testified to 

him, in that his "due time," that God has been gracious 

to our entire race, and has redeemed us with the 

precious blood. (1 Tim. 2:4-6.) It is to those who 

have gotten the mistaken idea which ignores the resurrection 

and claims that there are no dead to be resurrected, 

but that the dead are more alive than they ever 

were before, and who, therefore, think of Uzzah as being 

dropped immediately into the hands of devils for 

eternal torture— it is to these that this narrative seems 

perplexing and unjustly severe. Thank God for the 

clearer light now shining upon his character and 

plan! 

During the three months that the Ark was at the 
home of Obed-edom the Lord's blessing was specially 
with the family, to such a degree that their neighbors 
took knowledge of it, and the matter eventually reached 
the attention of the king. We think it not unreasonable 
to assume that there was something in the character 
of Obed-edom, and the conduct of his home, in his 
reverence of the Lord and his confidence in him, that 
had to do with the blessing accompanying the possession 
of the Ark; because we have no record of any special 
blessing coming to the house of Abinadab during 
the seventy years that the Ark remained there. We 
might draw a lesson from this applicable to spiritual 
Israel. The Bible in some respects represents the Lord 
to us, as the Ark represented him to natural Israel. 
To it we go for the settlement of our questions. From 
it we hear the message of the Lord speaking peace to 
our souls, the forgiveness of sins, etc. The Bible has 
been in many homes in Christendom for more than 
seventy years without bringing any special blessing to 
those homes; yet to some, even in a few months, it 

R3253 : page 380 

has brought inestimable favors. What is the difference? 
We reply that very much depends upon the 
genuineness of the Israelite and the degree of reverence 
he has for the Lord and his Word, and his carefulness 
to consult that Word in respect to all his affairs, 
and the affairs of his home. Those who have the 
blessing of the Lord's Word, and especially those who 
have any light upon its pages in this dawning of the 
Millennial morning, if they are not receiving great 



blessing from it in their own hearts, peace, joy, comfort, 
courage, strength, and finding such blessings also 
upon the members of their households, have reason to 
inquire to what extent they are responsible for their 
failure to profit thus. 

Hearing of the blessing of the Lord upon the home 
of Obed-edom, King David took fresh courage, and 
realized that these different experiences of Uzzah and 
Obed-edom taught the lesson that those who reverently 
and carefully sought to know and to do the will of the 
Lord would have a blessing in proportion to their 
nearness to him, while the careless and the irreverent 
only need be in fear. Again the king assembled the 
representatives of the nation from all quarters, the chief 
men of the tribe and the chief representatives of the 
army, etc., and apparently this day of the bringing of 
the Ark to Jerusalem was the most joyful and the most 
notable day in David's entire experience. See an 
account of this in 1 Chron. 15, 16. On this occasion 
care was taken to follow the divine direction, and the 
Ark was borne on the shoulders of the Levites, frequent 
stoppages being made, during which sacrifices 
were offered to the Lord. 

On the whole we discern that the Lord's dealing 
in this matter taught David and all Israel a 
great lesson, and was very advantageous to the nation 
as a whole. Thus it is with all the corrections in righteousness 
which the Lord may at any time give to those 
who are truly his; rightly received they will bring 
forth peaceable fruits of righteousness, reverence and 
obedience. 



R3253 : page 380 

KING DAVID'S REPENTANCE. 

--PSALM 5 1:1-17. -OCTOBER 18.- 

Golden Text.— "Create in me a clean heart, O God." 

PROSPERITY did not work to King David's personal 
advantage. After years of phenomenal 
success under the Lord's blessing, when his 
kingdom was mighty and his name honorable, and the 
necessity for his personal participation in wars was 
passed, and his heart had begun to gravitate towards 
earthly pleasures and was less zealous for the Lord and 
the Law than at first, the king fell into very grievous 
sins, which appear all the more black in contrast with 
the high moral character shown by him in his earlier 
life, when he was the man after God's own heart. The 
story of his sins, how he became enamored of Bathsheba 
and committed adultery with her, and subsequently, 
to shield himself, caused her husband Uriah 



to be placed in the forefront of the battle that he might 

be killed by the enemy, involving the loss of several 

other lives as well, is told in the Scriptures in a most 

straightforward manner, without the slightest effort 

to condone the king's wrong-doing. No excuses are 

offered in connection with the account; the full weight 

of these awful crimes is laid directly on the king's 

head. Whatever excuses may be offered on his behalf 

must come from the reader of the account. We may 

suggest some thoughts along this line: In that day the 

kings of the world exercised a despotic authority, and 

it was a theory among the people that the king could 

do no wrong— that whatever he pleased to do was proper 

to him because of his high position as the head and 

ruler of the nation. We could in no sense of the word 

agree with such a thought. Nevertheless we can reasonably 

suppose that a sentiment so general would 

have more or less influence upon the mind of the king. 

He who respected Saul's life, because he was the Lord's 

anointed, may have to some extent fallen into the misconception 

that his own anointing by the Lord relieved 

him in some degree from the responsibilities resting 

upon others of his nation. 

For about two years after these crimes were committed 
the king sought to stifle his conscience, and to consider 
that he was only using kingly liberties in what 
he had done. Nevertheless his conscience smote him, 
and he felt an alienation from God and a condemnation 
under his law such as he would not have felt had 
he been of a different stamp of character. God was 
not hasty in reproving him, either. He allowed him to 
have a full taste of heart bitterness— allowed him to 
feel the darkness of soul, absence of joy, resulting from 
the cloud which had come between him and the Lord. 
It was at the appropriate time, after David had passed 
through secret mournings and travailings of the soul, 
that the Lord sent him a reproof through Nathan the 
prophet to bring the whole matter clearly before his 
mind. Nathan, under the figure of a parable, excited 
the king's sympathies and declaration of a very severe 
judgment— a death sentence— against the person offending, 
and then the Prophet brought home to him the 
lesson saying, "Thou art the man!" 

King David, we are to remember, did not belong 
to the spiritual house of sons, and hence had a far less 
clear view of such matters than that which would properly 

R3254: page 381 

belong to every member of the house of sons, begotten 

of the spirit and "taught of God." We are not, 

therefore, to expect to draw a lesson to ourselves along 

similar lines. Rather we of the spiritual house, under 

the clearer conceptions of the divine will, are to remember 

the higher interpretation of adultery and murder 

set forth in the New Testament: that whoever desires 



adultery, and is merely restrained from it by outward 
circumstances or fears, is really an adulterer in his 
heart (Matt. 5:28); that he that is angry with his 
brother, he who hates his brother, is a murderer— because 
the spirit of anger is that which, unrestrained, 
would lead to murder (Matt. 5:22); and that the person 
who covets the things of another and is merely 
restrained from taking them for lack of opportunity or 
fear of consequence, is at heart a thief. If these principles 
be applied by the New Creation in the examination 
of their hearts, it is entirely probable that some of 
the "house of sons" today may find themselves very 
near the plane of King David as respects sin, and so 
viewing matters they will exercise proportionately 
greater compassion in their judgment of the royal 
transgressor. Such, too, will find great consolation in 
the Lord's compassion, provided they are exercised 
in respect to their offences as David was concerning 
his. "There is compassion with thee that thou mightest 
be feared," is the prophet's expression. If God 
were wanting in compassion, as are many of our fellow 
creatures, there would be nothing to hope for under 
such circumstances. It is when we realize that there 
is forgiveness with the Lord for all who are penitent at 
heart, and who, therefore, give evidence that their sins 
are not wilful, but rather of the weakness of heredity 
and under the pressure of blinding temptations, that 
we are moved to repentance by a hope for better things. 

The 51st Psalm is generally recognized as being 
the one in which the Psalmist expresses to God his 
contrition for his sins, and the fact that it is dedicated 
to the Chief Musician implies that it was the king's intention 
that it, in common with other of the Psalms, 
should be chanted in the Tabernacle services, for 
which he had set apart a large number of singers. We 
thus perceive that if the sin was flagrant and gross, the 
atonement which the king endeavored to make was a 
most public one. Probably many of the nation had 
felt more or less of the king's condemnation, and its 
influence must have been very injurious; and now in 
his public view of it as sin, and his prayer for divine 
forgiveness, the king would undo so far as possible not 
only the injury which he had inflicted upon his own 
conscience, and which as a cloud hung between the 
Lord and him, but he would undo also the evil influences 
as respects the conscience of the nation— on the 
subjects of adultery and murder. 

Here again we see why David was described as a 
man after God's own heart. His sins were not pleasing 
to God— quite the reverse; but the after appreciation 
of the enormity of the sins and the hearty repentance 
therefor to the Lord, and the desire to be cleansed 
from every evil way, were pleasing to the Lord. Here 
we have an illustration of how all things may work together 
for good to those who love God. By reason of 
his heart-loyalty to the Lord, and the principles of 



righteousness, even these terrible sins resulted in bringing 
a great blessing to David's own heart— humbling 
him— giving him an appreciation of his weakness and 
littleness, and of his need to abide close to the Lord, if 
he would have the Lord's fellowship and compassion 
and be safe from the temptations of his own fallen 
flesh. So, too, with the New Creation. How many 
of them have realized profitable lessons and blessings 
out of some of their stumblings— not that the stumblings 
were good nor of the Lord, but that the Lord 
was able to overrule such circumstances for good to 
those who are of the proper mind— rightly exercised by 
them to repentance and reformation. 

The first three verses of the Psalm express David's 
appreciation of his sin and his trust in the Lord, 
without any attempt to apologize for his shortcomings. 
He trusted to the Lord to make whatever allowances 
could be made and merely appealed to his great "loving-kindness. 
In calling to mind the multitude of 
God's tender mercies in the past, he expressed faith 
and trust that in some way the Lord could blot out 
these grievous transgressions and forgive them. The 
Lord had not yet clearly defined the way in which he 
could be just and yet be the justifier of sinners. Only 
vaguely through the shadows of the Day of Atonement 
sacrifices had he intimated that he had some way of 
his own by which in due time the guilty but repentant 
ones might be cleansed. David grasped the thought 
of mercy as understood in the types and shadows of 
the Law, and much more may we of the house of sons 
grasp the thought of our Father's forgiveness when we 
see that it is exercised towards us by the Lord Jesus 
Christ, who already has given himself a ransom for all, 
to be testified in due time, and whose sacrifice has been 
accepted of the Father,— as manifested by our Lord's 
resurrection from the dead, and by the descent of the 
holy Spirit at Pentecost. If, therefore, David could trust 
the Lord for loving-kindness and tender mercies and 
forgiveness of sins, the members of the house of sons 
should be able to exercise full faith in the divine character 
and plan of salvation from sin. 

The fourth verse would seem to ignore the fact that 
wrong-doing had been done to fellow-creatures, but we 
may preferably understand it to mean that while this 
wrong to fellow-creatures was recognized by the king, 

R3254 : page 382 

he recognized a still higher responsibility to God, 

whose laws he had broken and whose kingly office, 

typifying that of the Christ, he had dishonored. Hence, 

in contrast between what man might think of his 

crime as against man and his own still higher consciousness 

of his sin as against the Lord, the latter 

seemed so much greater as to practically obscure the 

former. The greater sin as against the Almighty quite 



overshadows the wrongs to humanity. David declares 
his recognition of the fact that God is the great Judge, 
and that whatever his judgment would be he knew in 
advance that it would be right. 

In the fifth verse he introduces an extenuating 
thought, as though reminding the Lord that he was 
born in sin and therefore that perfection was not possible 
for him. But he does not use this fact as a screen 
behind which to hide his own responsibilities. Free to 
will, though a sinner by nature, he was necessarily responsible 
for yielding as he did to temptation, but he 
was confident that the Lord would give him the benefit 
of every mitigating circumstance. 

It will be noted that David expected punishment 
from the Lord for his sins, and was here expressing 
his confidence that the Lord would send no punishment 
which would not be reasonable and within the 
limits of justice. What he was praying for in this 
Psalm was not a remission of proper punishment, but 
rather for the cleansing of his heart in the sight of the 
Lord and for his restoration to the divine favor. As a 
matter of fact we find that the Lord did send a severe 
punishment upon the king, and that he restored the 
sinner to his favor, granting him to experience again 
the joys of his salvation. According to the sentiments 
of other kings of his time, evidently acquiesced in by 
the people of Israel, the king had taken an extremely 
moderate course in sin, in that he had not directly taken 
the life of Uriah but merely connived at his death in 
battle; but the king appreciated the fact that God was 
looking deeper than this and desired truth— righteousness 
in the inward parts— in the heart. Outward crime 
and a crime allowed in the mind are alike heinous in 
God's sight: his experience had taught the king wisdom. 
Now he wished to be thoroughly cleansed, and 
poetically says, "Purge me with hyssop and I shall be 
clean. Wash me and I shall be whiter than snow." 
Hyssop was used in the sprinkling of the unclean under 
the Law. David, grasping to some extent the significance 
of the symbol, desired the antitypical cleansing 
of his heart. His appreciation of the Lord's thoroughness 
in dealing with sin and of his compassion in forgiveness 
are good lessons for some of the still more 
favored members of the "house of sons." Many of the 
latter, although having seen with "the eye of faith" 
the great Atonement for sins made by our Lord Jesus, 
are still unable to appreciate the fact that the application 
of the merit of his sacrifice is quite sufficient to 
cleanse us from all sin and perfect us, that we may be 
recognized as absolutely pure in the Father's sight and 
dealt with accordingly— not as sinners, but as sons. 

From the statement of verse 8 we may reasonably 
infer that during the year that preceded this repentance 
King David was in so miserable a state of mind 
that even the music of the singers and of those who 
played skilfully upon the harp and all the joyous songs 



of Nature were sore to his heart— had no gladness in 
them to comfort his heart when it was barred from the 
Lord's presence and fellowship. This is the thought 
of our hymn, which says of the soul which enjoys the 
light of the Lord's favor:— 

"Sweet prospects, sweet birds and sweet flowers 
Have all gained new sweetness to me;" and 

"His presence disperses all gloom, 

R3255 : page 382 

And makes all within me rejoice;" and 
"While I am so happy in him, 

December's as pleasant as May." 

King David was longing for the joy and gladness 
which he had experienced in times past, and figuratively 
he likens himself to one whose bones had been 
broken. He knew that his joy and comfort would return 
if he could but have back again the Lord's favor. 
He knew, too, that the Lord could not look upon sin 
with any allowance, hence his prayer: "Hide thy 
face from my sins and blot out mine iniquities [unrighteousness] 
Create in me a clean heart, O God, 
and renew a right spirit within me. Cast me not away 
from thy presence and take not thy holy Spirit from 
me. Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation: and 
uphold me with thy free Spirit." 

No true Christian can read these words without 
feeling a deep sympathy with the different expressions; 
and even though as New Creatures in Christ Jesus we 
have had no experience with such terrible sins as 
those which weighed upon the heart of David, nevertheless 
our higher responsibilities and higher conceptions 
of sin under the "new commandment" and under 
the instructions of the holy Spirit, as sons of God, 
cause us to feel with proportionate weight transgressions 
which in the sight of the world would appear 
nothing— such, for instance, as we have just mentioned: 
covetousness, hatred, slander, which are thefts and 
murders from the higher standpoint of the divine view 
appropriate to the New Creation. 

In verse 13 the prophet proposes to the Lord that 
his discomfiture in divine disfavor was used for the 
instruction of others,— to show transgressors the Lord's 
ways and to turn sinners from the evil of their course. 
How appropriate this thought to us! Not until we 
know experimentally through faith in the blood of 
Christ that our sins have been put out of the Father's 

R3255 : page 383 

sight, not until we have experienced the joys of his 
salvation and forgiveness, are we in any condition to be 
servants to the truth or illustrations to others. Hence 
we see that it is only those who have been begotten 
of the holy Spirit who are anointed to preach the gospel. 



To others the Lord says, "What hast thou to do 
to take my word into thy mouth, seeing thou hatest 
instruction and castestmy words behind thee?"— refusing 
to submit to the divine requirements. 

The 14th verse repeats the same thought in a different 
form. If the Lord will deliver him from his 
guilt in connection with his sin, his tongue shall 
thereafter sing loudly the Lord's righteousness— not 
David's righteousness. This is the song that all the 
blood-washed may sing, "True and righteous are all 
thy ways, Lord God Almighty. Thou hast redeemed 
us from amongst men." None of us have any right 
to sing our own righteousness, for as the Apostle declares, 
"There is none righteous, no, not one." The 
mission of the cleansed ones is to accept and use the 
Lord's mercy towards them, to extol his righteousness, 
to acknowledge their unworthiness and to call upon 
others to recognize this fountain of righteousness and 
forgiveness. 

"O Lord, open thou my lips: and my mouth 
shall show forth thy praise." This expression implies 
that none need expect to have a proper opening of 
their mouths to show forth the Lord's praises, and give 
the call from darkness into his marvelous light, unless 
the Lord shall first have opened their lips with his 
mercy and truth; for otherwise how could any expect 
to tell the glad tidings of great joy which shall be unto 
all people? This equally implies that all who have 
had forgiveness of sins should be in a condition of 
spirit to make a full consecration of their all to the 
Lord, and then all such should expect an unsealing of 
their lips, that the message of God's truth and grace 
may flow out from them for the instruction and blessing 
of others— as it is written, "Grace is poured upon 
thy lips." "Thou hast put a new song in my mouth, 
even the loving-kindness of our God." While these 
are appropriate specially to our dear Redeemer, they 
are appropriate also to every member of "the Church 
which is his body," and all claiming to be of "the 
body," who have never had their lips unsealed to confess 
the Lord to the extent of their opportunity, have 
reason to question everything pertaining to their relationship 
to the Lord. 

In verses 16 and 17 the King shows that he had 
acquired a deep insight into the meaning of some of 
the typical sacrifices;— though probably, by inspiration, 
he wrote more wisely than he understood. As 
we have seen in our study of Tabernacle Shadows of 
Better Sacrifices, only the Day of Atonement sacrifices 
were sin offerings, the burnt offerings and peace offerings 
of the remainder of the year representing the consecration 
to the Lord and his service. Grasping this 
thought prophetically, to whatever extent he also 
grasped it intellectually, King David expressed his 
realization that the Lord is pleased rather with a broken 
and contrite condition of heart than with burnt 



offerings, which were but types. So, too, we learn 
that nothing that we can give the Lord, even after our 
acceptance in Christ, has any value in his sight until 
first of all we have given him ourselves,— our hearts, 
our wills. 

Let us ever keep in memory that a broken and 
contrite heart the Lord never despises, will never spurn. 
Therefore into whatever difficulty any of the Lord's 
people of the New Creation may stumble, if they find 
themselves hungering for the Lord's fellowship and 
forgiveness, if they find their hearts contrite and broken, 
let them not despair, but remember that God has 
made a provision through the merit of Christ which 
enables him to accept and justify freely from all sin all 
that come unto him through Jesus— through faith in 
his blood. There is a sin unto death— a sin unto the 
Second Death— from which there will be no recovery, 
no resurrection; but those who have broken and contrite 
hearts on account of their sins may know that 
they have not committed "the sin unto death," for their 
condition of heart proves this, as the Apostle declares: 
"It is impossible to renew again unto repentance" any 
who have committed the sin unto death— wilful sinners 
against full light and knowledge. Let all, therefore, 
rejoice in the grace of our God, who is able through 
Christ, his accepted way, to save unto the uttermost 
all who come to him, laying aside sin and its desires. 

"Now, if any man [of the Church stumble into] 
sin [through weakness and temptation— not intentionally] 
we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus 
Christ the righteous." (1 John 2:1.) Such, therefore, 
may come with faith to the throne of the heavenly 
grace that they may obtain mercy and find grace to 
help in every (future) time of need. (Heb. 4:16.) 
But, like David, their prayers and hopes should be for 
a restoration of divine favor and not for escape from 
chastisements needful to their correction. God forgave 
David, but also chastened him.— 2 Sam. 12:11-14. 

Surely King David must have learned a great lesson 
in mercy from this sad experience. How many 
times must he have called to mind his response to Nathan's 
parable, "The man that hath done this thing 
is worthy of death: and he shall restore the lamb four 
fold, because he did this thing and because he had no 
pity!" Alas, poor David! these words showed that 
he had a mind, a heart, that was no stranger to justice 
and pity in other men's affairs, and hence that he 
was the more guilty in his much more serious violations 
of justice and compassion. "Blessed is he that 
is not condemned in that which he alloweth,"— who is 
not condemned by his own declarations in respect to 
the affairs of others. Oh, how merciful to the failings 
of others it should make us when we remember our 
dear Redeemer's words, "If ye forgive not men their 
trespasses, neither will your heavenly Father forgive 
your trespasses"; and when again we remember that we 



may not even pray for forgiveness of our sins unless 
we from the heart forgive those who have injured us 
and again desire our fellowship. 



page 385 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIV. OCTOBER 15, 1903. No. 20 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 387 

Falling From the Faith 387 

Church Communism Arguments 389 

Higher Criticism's Wide Influence 390 

The Awful Problem of Future 

Retribution 390 

A Theological Discussion 391 

The Davidic Covenant 392 

The Joy of God's Forgiving Love 394 

Absalom's Shameful Disloyalty 397 

Rev. Dr. Morgan Says He is Not 

an Infidel 399 

Public Ministries of the Truth 400 

Special Items 386 

page 386 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



R3255 : page 386 

TO OUR GERMAN FRIENDS. 



Our dear Brother Otto A. Koetitz has just left us for 
Germany, his wife and child accompanying him. He goes 
to take the place of Brother Henninges as manager of the 
Elberfeld Branch. Brother Henninges, with his wife, will 
proceed to Australia, where he will open another Branch 
Office. Let us all join in prayer for divine blessings upon 
these brethren in their new fields of labor. 

page 386 

The German translation of DAWN, VOL. V. is about 
ready, and orders will soon be promptly filled. 

The German edition of ZION'S WATCH TOWER it is proposed 
shall be a monthly from and after January 1904. 

A new edition of TABERNACLE SHADOWS in German is 
now ready and in good supply. 

R3255 : page 386 

TO FOURTH CLASS POSTMASTERS. 



We should be pleased to hear from all of our friends 
who hold positions as Fourth Class Postmasters, and who 
would enjoy the privilege of serving the truth. We are 
aware that there are a number of such, and we should be 
glad to have word from them at as early a date as possible. 



R3256 : page 387 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



FALLING FROM THE FAITH. 



NOT content with showing from the Scriptures 
that we are living in the "harvest" of this 
age, when the Lord as reaper will separate 
thoroughly between the genuine and the nominal, imitation 
"wheat," gathering all of the former into the Kingdom 
"garner," we have endeavored from time to time to 
point out the fulfilment of this all around us. As already 
indicated, this "falling" appropriately appears 



first among the teachers in Churchianity— the masses 
readily following their blind leaders into the ditch 
of unbelief. 

One of the notable evidences of this growth of unbelief 
in God's Word and in the entire plan of salvation 
which it alone sets forth, is found in the following 
extracts clipped from a recent issue of The Ram's 
Horn. Not because the writer, Rev. R. F. Horton, 
D.D., of London, is higher in position than others 
who have taken the same stand (or rather have similarly 
lost their standing and fallen into unbelief); nor 
because The Ram's Horn is the only or even the leading 
religious paper to publish such open defiance to 
the Word, but because the journal was started as an 
opponent to infidelity— as a champion of the Bible and 
of faith in "the blood of the cross" as the only ground 
of forgiveness of sins— the only basis of the sinner's 
justification before God. 

The matter is presented in the Question and Answer 
form, and is given the full indorsement of the 
journal. It follows:— 

"Do you believe that man was evolved from the lower 
forms of life, or created as related in Genesis? 

"I believe that man was slowly evolved from lower 
forms, and that evolution is even now not complete; 
but I also believe he is being evolved into the likeness 
of the image of God. Men as individuals are in all 
degrees of evolution. The image of God is what logicians 
used to call the final cause of man, the goal 
and purpose for which man began his adventurous 
career. The goal explains the means. Man is here 
with his face towards the goal, and the goal is the 
measure of the stature of Christ. Evolution cannot 
explain causes, cannot explain life itself, but must 
draw on a region of truth beyond itself to explain its 
own processes. 

"Do you believe in the fall as related in the Bible? 

"Yes, exactly as related— as an allegory, a parable 
in order to explain the mystery of moral and spiritual 
evil, remembering that Adam is but the Hebrew 
word for man, and Eve the Hebrew word for life. The 
story is the pictorial presentation of that alienation 
from God which is the constant experience of human 
life, caused by disobedience. We disobey and know 
it, reach out our hands, and in strange inflation of our 
little godless minds we set up ourselves, and by self-exaltation 
are ruined because we have left our God. 
The fall is strangely illustrated by the writings of 
atheists." 

The Ram's Horn's editor properly calls these 
"great questions" and their answers "clear cut and 
definite." We are glad to have the truth clearly and 
definitely presented, and when error is stated we prefer 
to have it definitely proclaimed also; there is less danger 
that it will deceive ordinary readers. We only wish 
that Rev. Horton had been still more explicit: some 



of the Lord's unsuspecting sheep will still be in danger 
of being deceived by these answers, and it shall be our 
duty and privilege to help them get clearer light upon 
the full meaning of the explanations. 

The reply to the first question is clear cut in its 
denial of the Bible's account— that God created man in 
his own image; a very different thing from creating 
him either as a higher order of monkey or as a microbe, 
and expecting him to attain the divine image by his 
own efforts. Indeed, Dr. Horton totally ignores God's 

R3256 : page 388 

creative work in man when he speaks of "the goal and 

purpose for which man began his adventurous career." 

The Bible teaches that it is God's purposes and not 

man's that are being worked out, and that God gave 

man his start— and a good start at that— in an Eden 

whose every condition was fit for the testing of one 

already in the divine image and on trial to determine 

his obedient loyalty to his Creator's commands: the 

reward of obedience being a continuation of the divine 

image and favor unto life everlasting, and that of disobedience 

the loss of that image and favor in death. 

Dr. Horton declares that "the goal explains the 
means." By this his readers are to understand that 
the past six thousand years have marked such progress 
amongst men as to imply that the process, continued, 
will result in man's attainment of God's image. Evolution 
is the "means" this eminent D.D. credits for 
all the progress of the world— Evolution is the Savior 
he lauds for raising man from lower planes of existence; 
and still uplifting him will, he hopes, ultimately make 
him an image of God. He does not tell us if he has 
any hopes for those now dying and for those who have 
died for centuries past without attaining God's image. 
He leaves us to wonder whether he expects that such 
will never have God's image, or whether he believes 
that a process of Evolution continues beyond the tomb, 
and that it will ultimately "save unto the uttermost." 
If he carries Evolution into the heavenly conditions, 
would not consistency require him to claim that the 
angels are evoluting? and that God himself is evoluting? 
And if so, if God is not yet perfect, how can 
Dr. Horton or anyone else speak of man's becoming 
an image of a God who has not yet evoluted into a definite, 
fixed character? 

When considering that man is imperfect, and that 
his proper aim should be perfection, we are not to take 
Dr. Horton's Evolution theory as the only one that 
will explain the situation. God's Word, through his 
chosen mouthpieces— his Son, the apostles and the 
prophets— is more trustworthy than Dr. Horton. 
God's explanation of present conditions is that, "By one 
man's disobedience sin entered the world, and death 
by [as the result of] sin; and so [thus] death passed 



upon all men." (Rom. 5:12.) The Apostle explains 
the lesser degradation of some and the greater depravity 
of others by saying that, while all sinned and fell, some 
indulged more wilfully and fell more deeply than others. 
When they knew God they glorified him not as 
God, neither were thankful; but became vain in their 
imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened. 
Professing themselves to be wise they became fools,... 
wherefore God gave them up to uncleanness through 
lusts of their own hearts. ..who changed the truth 
of God into a lie.... And even as they did not like 
to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them over 
to a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not 
convenient,— being filled with all unrighteousness.— 
Rom. 1:21-29. 

This is the Bible side of the question— not that 
monkeys set for themselves as a goal an imaginary 
image of God, and have gotten so far along toward it 
as is represented by present-day civilization, but that 
man in God's image was disobedient to his Creator's 
commands and sought out many inventions and degraded 
himself (Eccl. 7:29), and God has permitted him 
to set low standards and ideals before himself to his 
own ruin. The Bible accredits the high ideals which 
are doing so much to lift man out of degradation not 
to anything in monkeys or fallen men, but to God's 
revelations of his plan of salvation, which, however 
imperfectly understood, is "the power of God unto salvation, 
to every one that believeth," and indirectly a 
power for good upon the heathen as well as upon the 
people of civilized lands who believe not, in the proper 
and specific sense of that term. The promises of the 
Redeemer, and his work of redemption and restitution, 
lighted the hopes of natural Israel and lifted that nation 
above the other nations, which more or less caught 
its spirit of hope; and since the Redeemer's death and 
resurrection, and his outpouring of his spirit upon 
Spiritual Israel, his Church, a "little flock," has been 
the light of the world, which in a small degree has uplifted 
the civilized nations to a semi-decency which in 
many is but a thin veneer of "form of godliness." 

The second answer deserves careful scrutiny, for 
it is an evasion instead of an answer. It is evident 
that the answer should not have been Yes, but No, I 
do not believe in the fall as related in the Bible. Adherence 
to the theory of Evolution forces this man, and everyone 
else who reasons logically, to deny the plain Bible 
narrative— not only the Genesis account but also the 
New Testament records, and to falsely teach that Adam 
and Eve were myths, that they never existed, that the 
record is merely an allegory— a fable. What, then, 
did our Savior mean when he said that he "came to 
seek and to save that which was lost," and to "give 
himself a ransom for all"? (Matt. 18:11; 1 Tim. 2:6.) 
What did the Apostle Peter and all the holy prophets 
mean when they spoke of the "restitution of all 



things" if our race did not fall and need restitution? 
(Acts 3:19-21.) What did the Apostle Paul mean 
when he said, "In Adam all die," and "By one man's 
disobedience," and "As by a man came death," and 
"The first man was made a living soul"? If the Bible 
record respecting Adam is unreliable we have no record 
of a first man, and if unreliable in this matter it 
could not be depended on at all. If left without an 
Adam and a fall and a Paradise lost we should have no 

R3256 : page 389 

use for a restitution, and a Paradise restored, by a Redeemer. 
If no fall no sin, and no need of redemption. 

Thank God for the good hope set before us in the 
Gospel, so different from the Evolution delusion. "This 
hope we have as an anchor to the soul, sure and steadfast," 
and reasonable and consistent and Scriptural in 
every particular. It acknowledges the fall, the need 
of the redemption accomplished by our Lord at Calvary, 
and the Church's need of full deliverance from sin 
and death in the First Resurrection, and the world's 
need of the great Millennial Kingdom for its restitutional 
uplift opportunities for "the whole world." 

Dr. Horton contradicts his first reply in his second. 
In the first he says, "Man is here with his face towards 
the goal," which implies that man is doing finely along 

R3257 : page 389 

Evolution lines; but he contradicts this in his second, 
saying,— "We [including himself] disobey and know it, 
reach out our hands and, in strange inflation of our 
little godless minds, we set up ourselves, and by self-exaltation 
are ruined because we have left our God." 
—Where, then, is the face toward the goal and the 
Evolutionary power in man? Does not the gentleman's 
reasoning rather confirm the Apostle's words than his 
own?-SeeRom. 1:21-29. 

CHURCH COMMUNISM ARGUMENTS. 



An exchange says:— 

"We declare that the germs of divine communism 
were planted in the Church nineteen hundred 
years ago, and that in the harvest of the dispensation, 
divine communism must characterize the economics of 
those who awake to a realization of the genuine science 
of the Lord's coming. He who denies the principles 
of communism as it obtained in the early Church 
in obedience to the law of love to the neighbor, cannot 
consistently lay claim to acceptance of the apostolic 
doctrines and practices." 



We consider that the writer of the above item 
erred in saying that the germs of communism were 
planted nineteen centuries ago. Such of those germs 
as were proper for man were planted six thousand 
years ago, when God created man perfect, in his own 
image. The conditions resulting from the fall made 
communism impossible— injurious, and therefore unwise. 
The Lord's people, in proportion as they become 
heavenly minded, should be better prepared 
than others for a return to proper communism; but 
experience teaches what the Apostle Paul proclaimed, 
namely, that the treasure of the new heart, the new 
mind, can exercise itself only through our earthen 
vessels— all of which are more or less twisted and 
cracked, "so that we cannot do the things that we 
would." 

It is far from the truth to claim that our Lord 
and his disciples dwelt together on communistic lines. 
On the contrary, the very terms of discipleship were 
that Jesus should be the acknowledged Lord and 
Master. To his disciples Jesus' word was law. They 
certainly did not have a commission of authority. 
True, Judas was treasurer of the funds, not, however, 
by vote or general appointment, but by the 
Lord's permission; for the moneys contributed were 
given to Jesus (Luke 8:3) and not to the disciples. 
He voluntarily shared with them. Clearly, however, 
he personally cared for his mother, Mary; and evidently, 
too, his disciple John had separately a home 
and means of his own.— John 19:27. 

After Pentecost, under the impulse of the new 
mind, the Lord's people evidently did attempt what 
every true Christian feels considerably drawn to, 
namely— a limited form of communism. But communism 
was not taught as proper Christian usage, 
and not one word can be found in the Bible inculcating 
it. It was purely a voluntary movement, which 
the apostles neither aided nor opposed, and which 
speedily proved itself impracticable under present conditions. 
The Lord permitted his people to experiment 
thus as a valuable lesson— teaching the need of 
the resurrection-change to transform their bodies. 

When the lesson had been given the Lord permitted 
a fierce persecution to scatter the Jerusalem 
Church, and we hear nothing more of Christian communism 
in the Bible. Quite the contrary. The 
Apostle writes to "them that are rich among you," 
and took up collections for the poor, and 
exhorted each Christian to lay aside for benevolent 
purposes according as the Lord had prospered 
him— showing thus that neither the labor nor its monetary 
result were considered common property. The 
exhortation to "do good unto all men as we have 
opportunity, especially to the household of faith," 



and the exhortation that, seeing a brother have need, 

we should not content ourselves with giving him our 

good wishes but should share with him the gifts 

which we by God's grace enjoy;— these, and many 

other Scriptures we might cite, show clearly that communism 

was not practised and that the apostles did 

not improve such opportunities to inculcate or even 

commend communism. Doubtless many of God's 

blessings will be common to all men during the Millennium 

and after it;— yet this surely will be far from 

the anarchous kind of communism advocated by some 

today. The Millennial Kingdom will be a monarchy 

—a theocracy. Similarly the heavenly Kingdom is 

not communistic in government, for grades are recognized 

—angels, principalities and powers, etc. And, 

as now, in the Church, the Apostle declares that God 

sets the members as it pleaseth him. So we find him 

R3257 : page 390 

teaching that after the First Resurrection shall have 
brought the entire body of Christ to perfection of the 
divine nature, there will still be no communism of 
authority, but there shall be least and greatest in the 
Kingdom, even as star differeth from star in glory. 

HIGHER CRITICISM'S WIDE INFLUENCE. 



A German scholar and editor of a religious journal 
says:— 

"We are at the beginning of a new epoch in the 
life of the Church. The seventy-year war between 
mythology and theology in the domain of the Old 
Testament has seemingly ended in a complete defeat 
of the traditional views. The critical views practically 
control Protestant thought everywhere and have 
assumed international proportions. Not one university 
man in Germany holds to the Mosaic authorship 
of the Pentateuch, and all make concessions to the 
newer views. 

"And yet when a person coolly and deliberately 
looks at the so-called 'certain results' of the critical 
investigations of the last century and a half, what are 
these 'results'? Nothing else than the conclusion 
that most of the books of the Old Testament are literary 
frauds; that they do not correctly teach the historical 
development of the religion of Israel, and, to 
make matters worse, intentionally and purposely misrepresent 
this history, especially those books that 
have been 'revised' in harmony with the spirit of 
the Deuteronomist. The whole Mosaic code, in its 
real essence, at any rate, is held to be a later fabrication, 
and its claim to have been given in the wilderness 
is regarded as an historical falsehood. Its whole 



historical background, it is asserted, is a fabrication, 
and the Law is but the outcome of a struggle between 
the advocates of the local cults and the hierarchical 
tendencies of the Jerusalem priesthood. 

"There is only one other religious book that, in 
its origin and development, can be compared with the 
Old Testament, as the critics regard it, and that is the 
Book of Mormon. A mere glance at this parallel 
must convince the earnest Christian that he can have 
no share in the radical criticism of the times. The 
strongest argument against the hypothesis is to state 
it in its simple and naked truthfulness." 

"THE AWFUL PROBLEM OF FUTURE RETRIBUTION.' 



In the New York Christian Advocate Rev. G. 
Jackson treats a timely topic thus:— 

"I close these brief notes on Methodist doctrine 
with a reference to the dark and awful problem of future 
retribution. In Dr. Dale's summary of the characteristic 
doctrines of the evangelical revival, 'those 
which its preachers were constantly reiterating, and 
on which they insisted most vehemently,' he names as 
the fourth and last, 'the eternal suffering to which 
they believed that those are destined who have heard 
the Christian Gospel in this life and rejected it.' He 
then goes on to point out in words which I could 
wish to transfer bodily to my own pages, the great 
change which the belief of large numbers of persons 
now belonging to evangelical Churches has undergone 
in relation to this subject. There are some— their 
number is probably small— who have accepted what 
is commonly known as the theory of universal restoration, 
who believe, that is, that all men will certainly 
at last reach the blessedness and glory of eternal 
union with God. Others again there are— and it 
is well known that Dale himself was one of them— 
whose study of the New Testament has led them to 
the conclusion that men possess immortality only in 
Christ, and that consequently those in this world who 
have rejected him are destined to eternal destruction, 
to a second death from which there is no resurrection. 
Others again can reach no definite and positive position; 
they find in the words of Christ and his apostles 
apparently conflicting teaching. Such, according 
to Dale, is the present position of the doctrine in our 
evangelical churches. How far are his words true of 
Methodism? That we have been greatly influenced 
by the modification of belief it is impossible to deny, 
though how far the change has gone it is not easy to 
say. So far as I am able to judge, dogmatic universalism 
has no place among us at all. A few, perhaps, 
especially since the publication of Dr. Joseph Agar 
Beet's work on 'The Last Things,' have been looking 



toward 'conditional immortality' for relief from 

the agonizing burden of the old belief. But the overwhelming 

majority of those to whom a restatement of 

their faith has become a necessity would probably prefer 

to class themselves amongst those who can reach no 

definite and positive conclusion. I am told on the highest 

authority that the late Dr. Moulton, who held an 

unrivalled position in Wesleyan Methodism as a 

saintly scholar, was wont in private to describe his 

own attitude as one of 'reverent agnosticism.' The 

phrase not inaptly describes the state of mind of multitudes 

of his younger brethren today. On the one 

hand, they can receive neither universal restoration 

nor conditional immortality, for they are resolved to 

be loyal to the New Testament, and they do not find 

either of these doctrines there. On the other hand, 

they dare not speak as did many of their fathers of the 

doom of the lost, for neither can they find warrant for 

this in the words either of Christ or his apostles. Therefore 

they are agnostics." 

R3258 : page 390 

CHURCH UNION IN NEW ZEALAND AND CANADA. 



A Canadian journal says:— 

"Signs are not wanting that Christian religions 
await only the coming of a Morgan to be fused into 
a gigantic trust, if such an ill-omened word may be 
used to describe Church union. New Zealand Presbyterians 
have taken the lead by appointing a committee 
to wait on the Methodists and Congregationalists 
of that country to consider the merging of all 
three denominations. Encouraged by this example, 
the lay conference of the Methodist Church at Winnipeg 
has passed a resolution heartily indorsing the 
action of the New Zealand workers and instructing a 
special committee to make inquiries with a view of 
definite proposals of a similar nature to Canadian 
Presbyterians and Congregationalists." 



R3258 : page 391 

A THEOLOGICAL DISCUSSION. 



THE following, copied from the Program for a debate 
arranged between the Editor of this Journal 
and a prominent Methodist minister of Allegheny City, 
will be self-explanatory:— 



HISTORY OF THE PROPOSITION. 



On March 10, 1903, Rev. E. L. Eaton, D.D., pastor 
North Avenue M.E. Church, addressed a letter to 
Pastor C. T. Russell, of the Arch Street (Bible House) 
Chapel, in which he said: 

"Believing that nothing helps so much to get at 
the exact truth of a fact or doctrine as a full and free 
discussion of it; and that any legitimate thing that will 
attract the attention and arouse the interest of those 
who are indifferent to Scriptural truth is commendable; 
I have thought that a public debate of some of those 
questions about which you and I differ, and which we 
both believe to be vital to the Christian system, would 
be of immense interest to the public, and perhaps of 
great spiritual profit to those who heard, provided that 
the discussions be carried on— as I feel sure they would 
be— in a Christian spirit and with moral and spiritual 
earnestness. Therefore I have decided to call your attention 
to the matter, and to inquire whether you 
would be willing to engage with me in a joint discussion, 
at some suitable time and place in this city. 

"The questions which I have in mind, but which 
I have not exactly formulated, are concerning the 
following: 

"1— The Second Coming of Christ. 

"2— The Millennium. 

"3— Post-Mortem Probation. 

"4— State of the Dead Between Death and the 
Resurrection. 

"5— Eternal States of the Saved and the Lost. 

"6— The Doctrine of Salvation." 

The Christian, brotherly spirit of the communication 
was responded to in like manner by Pastor Russell 
on March 12 in a letter as follows: 

"I assure you that your courteous expressions and 
Christian sentiments are fully reciprocated by me. I 
agree with you that such a public discussion as you 
suggest— of our divergent views on the teachings of 
the Bible— ought to be profitable, stimulating to Bible 
study on our part as well as on the part of all Bible 
students hereabouts. I therefore accept your proposition, 
and join you in mutual assurances that the 'Golden 
Rule' shall be observed, which will insure Christian 
courtesy of the very highest standard."... 

Other engagements and appointments hindered an 
early consummation of arrangements, but on June 27 
the gentlemen concerned appended their signatures to 
a joint letter embodying the general conditions which 
should regulate the discussion, viz.: that in debate the 
first speaker should have fifty minutes, the second 
speaker fifty minutes; and that each should have ten 
minutes for reply; that the meetings should be absolutely 
free to the public, and should be held in Carnegie 



Hall, Allegheny, on October 18,20,22,27,29, 
and November 1 . 

PROPOSITIONS. 



SUNDAY AFTERNOON, OCTOBER 18, THREE O'CLOCK. 



Proposition 1.— The Scriptures clearly teach that 
divine grace and power, full and free, have been constantly 
exercised toward mankind since the fall, to the 
intent that all, if they would, might be saved. Hence 
there will be no probation after death, nor need of any. 
Dr. Eaton will affirm. Pastor Russell will deny. 

TUESDAY EVENING, OCTOBER 20, EIGHT O'CLOCK. 

Proposition 2.— The Scriptures clearly teach that 
the souls of the dead are unconscious while their bodies 
are in the grave. Pastor Russell will affirm. Dr. 
Eaton will deny. 

THURSDAY EVENING, OCTOBER 22, EIGHT O'CLOCK. 

Proposition 3.— The Scriptures clearly teach that 
all of the saved will become spirit beings, and after the 
General Judgment will enter heaven. Dr. Eaton will 
affirm. Pastor Russell will deny. 

TUESDAY EVENING, OCTOBER 27, EIGHT O'CLOCK. 

Proposition 4.— The Scriptures clearly teach that 
only the "saints" of this Gospel age will share in the 
"First Resurrection;" but that vast multitudes will be 
saved in and by the subsequent resurrection. Pastor 
Russell will affirm. Dr. Eaton will deny. 

THURSDAY EVENING, OCTOBER 29, EIGHT O'CLOCK. 

Proposition 5.— The Scriptures clearly teach that 
the second coming of Christ will precede the Millennium; 
and that the object of both— the second coming 
and the Millennium— is the blessing of all the families 
of the earth. Pastor Russell will affirm. Dr. Eaton 
will deny. 

SUNDAY AFTERNOON, NOVEMBER 1, THREE O'CLOCK. 

Proposition 6.— The Scriptures clearly teach that 
the divine penalty for sin— actual transgressions of 
God's holy law— eventually to be inflicted upon the 
incorrigible, will consist of inconceivably great sufferings, 
eternal in duration. Dr. Eaton will affirm. Pastor 



Russell will deny. 



We bespeak the prayers of the dear friends of the 
Truth, that in connection with this opportunity for 
presenting the Scripture teaching concerning the wonderful 
plan of God we may have wisdom from above; 
and that the name and character of the Lord may be 
glorified. 

R3258 : page 392 

HOW TO SECURE REPORTS OF THE DEBATES. 



Anticipating your interest in the proposed discussions, 
we have negotiated with the leading Pittsburgh 
daily, The Gazette, to publish reports of each session 
in their issues of the following days. 

Our arrangement follows:— 

Eight copies of each issue containing the debate 
reports (with one copy each of the intermediate issues, 
as required by law to secure cheap postage) to one address, 
postpaid for 55 cents; or the same, with one 
year's subscription to ZION'S WATCH TOWER, for $1.50. 
All remittances should be sent direct to the WATCH 
TOWER office. 

Believing that many of the friends will consider 
these six reports desirable for circulating amongst their 
friends and neighbors we have felt no hesitation about 
guaranteeing The Gazette 1250 subscriptions. Order 
at once, as, otherwise, the number printed may not be 
sufficient to fill all orders. 



R3258 : page 392 

THE DAVIDIC COVENANT. 

-2 SAMUEL 6:4-16.-OCTOBER 11.- 

"Thy throne shall be established forever."— 2 Sam. 7:16. 

DAVID, during the first six years of his reign 
over all Israel, was kept actively engaged in 
resisting the enemies of Israel and enlarging the borders 
of the nation, in harmony with the original divine 
grant. Having to a considerable extent accomplished 
these things, and having built for himself a palace in 
Jerusalem, the reverential elements of his nature noticed 
the inconsistency of his dwelling in a palace while 
the typical residence of Israel's great King, Jehovah, 
was but the Tabernacle tent. His reverential impulses 



promptly suggested the building of a temple to replace 

the Tabernacle, and properly enough he consulted the 

Prophet Nathan, who rejoiced in this manifestation of 

the King's loyalty to the Lord, and indorsed the program. 

That same night, however, the Lord gave the 

prophet a message for the King, which, although it 

showed appreciation of David's intentions, forbade 

their execution, explaining that the reason that the 

Lord's presence was manifested in a tent, and not a 

permanent structure, was not because the Lord had not 

thought of this, nor because others of his servants 

would not have been glad to have erected such a structure 

at his bidding, but because the divine plan was 

otherwise. The Tabernacle was for the time being preferred, 

for certain reasons not explained at the time. 

The Lord, however, did assure David that by and by 

he would have a permanent temple, and that David's 

successor and son should erect it. 

The Lord's people may learn a valuable lesson from 
this incident. We are not to conclude that, because 
our plans and projects are reverential and designed to 
be for the glory of God, therefore they must have the 
divine approval. With spiritual Israel, as with David, 

R3259 : page 392 

it is frequently true that "My ways are not as your 
ways, nor my thoughts [plans] as your thoughts 
[plans]; for as the heavens are higher than the earth, 
so are my ways higher than your ways, saith the Lord." 
Those who are of David's disposition— "after God's 
own heart"— will not only consult with those whose 
judgment they would consider helpful, as David consulted 
with Nathan, but if subsequently the Lord rejects 
their best judgment, and does not cooperate in the 
execution of their plans, will do as David did in this 
instance: they will unmurmuringly acquiesce in the 
Lord's plans, and cooperate therewith, and thus further 
attest that they are of the kind the Lord loves to honor 
and call Beloved. To these also the Lord will grant 
other special blessings and favors, as he did to David. 

The spirit of David in this matter— his desire to 
honor the Lord and to build him a great house or temple 
—finds its parallel in the heart sentiments of every 
true Christian. We do not refer to those who merely 
take pleasure in erecting grand temples of stone, but 
specially to those whose ambition it would be to organize 
the Church of the present time— to glory in its 
grandeur and completeness of organization and function 
and service for the Lord. Those not in the right condition 
of heart, heady, self-willed, confident that their 
good intentions must be pleasing to the Lord, have proceeded 
to build various structures, each claiming his to 
be the temple of the Lord. As they have neither sought 
nor received divine instruction on the subject, but are 
following their own ideals, there is necessarily considerable 



diversity in these buildings, each seeming to its 
builders to be the right, proper and appropriate temple 
of God. These temples now number hundreds, the 
larger and more imposing ones being the Roman Catholic 
temple, the Greek Catholic temple, the Church of 
England temple, the Methodist temple, the Lutheran 
temple, the Presbyterian temple, the Baptist temple, 
the Congregational temple, etc., etc. 

But a small class follow the example of David, and 
receive instruction from the Lord to the effect that the 
present is not the time for temple-building; that he 
could have built his temple heretofore, and found many 
willing to serve him in this respect, but that he prefers 
that his representation in the world in the present time 
shall be extremely simple and unostentatious. Such 

R3259 : page 393 

receive of the Lord assurances, however, that in his own 

time and way, under a succeeding form of the kingdom, 

a much more glorious temple shall be constituted 

than would be possible for us to build at the present 

time— an enduring temple which shall be filled with 

the glory of the Lord. All who are of the Davidic 

character, of the disposition beloved of the Father— acceptable 

members of his dear, beloved Son— will, as 

soon as they learn of the divine purpose, promptly submit 

themselves, and cooperate in the divine plan. That 

plan in the type was that David, as the man of war, 

battling for the right, and severely tried and disciplined, 

should represent the saints of God in the present militant 

condition, warring with the world, the flesh and 

the devil, and becoming in their own hearts and faith 

strong in the Lord and in the power of his might. According 

to the same type it is the mission of the present 

time to prepare the gold, silver and precious things for 

the future temple— ready for its construction. In the 

type these were literal things, but in the antitype, as 

the Apostle shows, the Lord's saints are the gold, silver 

and precious stones, which very shortly now, in the establishment 

of the Millennial Kingdom, will be all 

thoroughly organized on the plane of glory, honor and 

immortality, and filled eternally with the life and glory 

of the Father. As David and his work of preparing 

for the temple, typifies the Church in this present time, 

and our work of preparing ourselves and each other for 

the glories to follow, so Solomon's Kingdom which followed 

represents the Kingdom of the glorified Christ— 

the real Kingdom, of which the present is but the embryo, 

and the construction of Solomon's Temple typifies 

the resurrection of the Church, in which all the 

members shall come together in glorious completeness, 

in the morning of the Millennial day. "Weeping may 

endure for a night [in connection with our fightings 

with foes without and within, and suffering for righteousness' 

sake], but joy cometh in the morning [when 



that which is perfect shall have come, and when that 
which is in part shall have been done away]." (Psa. 30:5.) 
"God shall help her [the Church, the Bride of 
Christ], and that right early"— in the morning.— 
Psa. 46:5. 

In connection with this refusal of David's proposition 
the Lord gave him very gracious encouragement, 
reminding him that every step of his onward way had 
been guided from on high, and that it was because he 
had faithfully looked to the Lord as his guide and counsellor 
that he had now reached the degree of development 
and relationship to the Lord and to the Kingdom 
occupied. So the Lord encourages all who are of this 
David class in spiritual Israel today. All who are looking 
to the Lord, and hearkening to his Word, are reminded 
that the Lord is attending to his own work in his 
own way, and that it is a far superior way to anything 
which we could devise. We are pointed to the low estate 
we occupied on the animal plane, and how the 
Lord by his grace has advanced us step by step, until 
now we are children of God, heirs of God, joint-heirs 
with Jesus Christ our Lord, if so be that we suffer with 
him. It is for us to appreciate the lesson of past experiences, 
and to trust that he who took us from the 
horrible pit and the miry clay, and placed our feet upon 
the Rock, and put the new song into our mouths, is able 
to bless us still further, and that in proportion as we 
hearken to his Word, through his prophet, the 
Scriptures. 

The succeeding verses of the lesson mingle and commingle 
the natural blessings upon David and his literal 
posterity and upon natural Israel, with the still greater 
blessings that are to uplift all who will come into 
covenant relationship with God through the antitypical 
Son of David, the glorified Christ and his Millennial 
Kingdom. Vs. 10 undoubtedly had a measurable fulfilment 
in literal Israel, in that for several hundred 
years they remained in their own land, under their own 
covenant— an experience very different from that preceding 
under the rule of the Judges. But the time 
when the Lord will plant them, and when they shall be 
moved no more and afflicted no more by the wicked, 
must apply to the grander restoration of the future, 
when, as he has promised, he will gather them out of 
all nations and peoples whither they are now scattered, 
and bring them into their own land. This later prophecy 
is in full agreement with the one made to David 
by Nathan. Then, as another Scripture declares, the 
Lord will restore to Israel her lawgivers as at the first, 
and her judges as at the beginning. Then it will be, 
too, that the house of David will be firmly established 
in great David's greater Son, the glorified Christ. Here 
the promises to the natural and to the spiritual seeds 
are more or less intertwined, just as they were in the 
Abrahamic promise. The seed of Abraham was both 
an earthly seed and a heavenly, as the sand of the sea 



and as the stars of heaven— the natural seed and the 
spiritual— and as the Apostle declares, the promise is 
sure to both of these, its proper part to each.— Rom. 4: 16. 
Compare Rom. 11:25-32. 

David's throne was perpetual through the line of 
Solomon down to Zedekiah, and when the Lord rent 
the Kingdom from the hands of Zedekiah he did not 
give it to another family, but proclaimed an interregnum 
—a suspension of David's Kingdom, which might 
not go to another. The language of the prophecy concerning 
Zedekiah is, "O thou profane and wicked prince, 
whose time is come that iniquity should have an end: 
remove the diadem, take off the crown; this shall no 
more be the same. I will overturn, overturn, overturn 

R3259 : page 394 

it, until he come whose right it is, and I will give it 

unto him." (Ezek. 21:27.) There has been no King 

of Israel, from Zedekiah's day to the present— the overturning 

of the Kingdom has been very thorough. The 

kings who reigned over Israel at the time of the first 

advent, and previously and subsequently, were not Israelitish 

kings, nor of Israelitish birth, but were appointees 

of Gentile governments, which, from Zedekiah's 

day to the present, have trodden under foot the 

sacred land. The fulfilment of this promise to David 

is nevertheless secure, sure as the word and oath of the 

Almighty; and we who were by nature Gentiles, but 

who have been betrothed to Abraham's great Son and 

David's great Son and Lord, are still looking forward 

to and praying and patiently waiting for the fulfilment 

of this promise, saying, "Thy Kingdom come; thy will 

be done on earth as it is in heaven"— even as our Lord 

taught us to do. As soon as this antitypical David, 

"Beloved," shall have assumed the reigns of government 

at the time appointed of the Father, he, as the 

antitype also of Solomon, on the natural plane, will 

build the Lord's house, and his throne shall be established 

forever— for it is the throne of the Kingdom of 

Jehovah: and although in its mediatorial sense it will 

terminate at the close of the Millennial age, yet in a 

still higher sense it will continue to all eternity, because 

David's Son and Lord has been associated with the 

Father in his throne, and his Bride shall be with him 

where he is, and share his glory, according to his 

promise. 

Much of this promise was applicable to Solomon. 
The Kingdom of David, or rather the Kingdom of the 
Lord, was established in the hands of Solomon. He 
did build a typical house or temple in the name of the 
Lord. God did deal with him as with a son, chastening 
his iniquity, yet continuing his mercy with him: 
he did not suffer the kingly power to depart from David's 
natural seed, as he took it from Saul. 

The 14th verse may properly be applied to those 



begotten of the Spirit to be Sons of God and joint-heirs 
in the coming Kingdom. "For what son is he that the 
Father chasteneth not?" Even the Head of the body, 
although in him there was no sin, needed the experiences 

R3260 : page 394 

called chastisements for his preparation, for his 

great position in the coming Kingdom. Indeed, he 

bore the stripes of the children of men, as the Prophet 

declares, and we, as members of his body, will not be 

spared by the Father from the needed corrections in 

righteousness, which would make us meet for the inheritance 

of the saints in light— so long as we receive 

them in the spirit of sonship, seeking to know and to 

do the Father's will. 



R3260 : page 394 

THE JOYS OF GOD'S FORGIVING LOVE. 

-PSALM 32.-OCTOBER 25.- 

"Blessed is he whose transgression 
is forgiven, whose sin is covered." 

THIS Psalm will be quickly recognized as King 

David's exultant acknowledgment of God's forgiveness 

of his sins against Uriah. The first verse 

is the keynote of the entire Psalm. Verses 3-5 

record the King's mental distress during the period in 

which his sins had come as a cloud between him and 

the sunshine of divine favor which he previously had 

enjoyed. His distress of mind naturally affected his 

physical health to such an extent that all of life's duties 

became burdensome and practically all of its pleasures 

died. In this fact we perceive that the King was 

far from the condition of a hardened criminal. His heart 

had been set for right and for the Lord, and was still set 

in that direction, even though under temptation he had 

grossly violated the simplest laws of justice and friendship. 

The fact that he had gnawings of conscience, 

that his soul was not at ease under the burden of divine 

disapproval, were the hopeful signs in the case. 

Since David was not a wilful sinner— since he did 
not at heart approve and rejoice in sin, but despised it, 
mourned for it— the Lord very graciously guided his 
affairs so that the lesson became more and more severe 
to him, until finally he could not bear it longer. Then, 
when the boil of contrition was fully ripe, the Lord 
sent his message through Nathan the Prophet to lance 
it, and his sharp reproof and severe sentence marked 
the culmination of the King's terrible mental distress 
and brought him to the point of confession to God and 



before the nation— to the point of prayer for divine forgiveness 

and restoration of divine favor, without which 

he realized that his agony of mind would continue. 

The King's prayers were heard— God was gracious to 
him, his transgression was forgiven, his sin was covered, 
his iniquity was no longer imputed to him, because 
his heart was repentant— in it there was no guile. 
His repentance was sincere, full, thorough. The Psalmist 
exultingly sings of his own restoration to divine favor, and, 
doubtless under divine guidance, represented his as being 
a sample or illustration of what God is willing to do for 
all who similarly have sincere sorrow for sin, true repentance, 
who confess their faults and make fresh acknowledgment 
of their faith. It is safe to say that in 
thousands of God's people, not only in David's own 
nation but in every nation, kindred, people and tongue 
familiar with God's Word, the King's experiences and 
the lessons of this Psalm, showing his reconciliation with 

R3260 : page 395 

God and the exercise of divine favor toward him, have 
inspired faith and brought peace and rest to those cast 
down through weaknesses of the flesh— some of them as 
grievous or more so, if possible, than David's, and some 
of them for sins less great in the sight of men but realized 
as being great in the sight of God— sufficient to 
separate the sinner and his Lord. 

As a picture or illustration this does not specially 
relate to the sinner coming from the alien world and 
seeking entrance into God's family: it rather represents 
one who had already enjoyed divine favor and lost it- 
one who had gotten from the light into darkness. 
The Scriptures clearly point out to us that even after 
we have become children of God it is possible to "fall 
away." They show us two classes of those who fall. 
One class is described in Heb. 6:4-7; 10:26-31: these 
we may have no hope for, because at heart they have 
become sympathetic with sin; they are wilful sinners, 
as the Apostle here describes. It would not be appropriate 
that God should exercise his mercy toward those 
who, after having come to a clear knowledge of the 
Truth, wilfully, preferably, approvingly delight in sin. 
The only thing remaining for these, as the Apostle declares, 
is judgment which will devour them as adversaries 
of God and adversaries of righteousness. Of this class 
the Apostle declares, "There is a sin unto death: I do 
not say that he shall pray for it."— 1 John 5:16. 

It is of the second class that the Apostle says there 
is a sin not unto death— one which may be repented of, 
which may be forgiven, and out of which the transgressor 
may come with valuable lessons which may ultimately 
result in blessings of knowledge and experience 
which will be helpful to him in future conflicts and triumphs. 
David's sin was of this latter class— not wilful, 
not approved by him, but of the class of sins referred 



to by the Apostle when he says, "If any man 
sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ 
the righteous." (1 John 2:1.) Of the same class of 
sins the Apostle says, "He is just to forgive us our sins 
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness," and again, 
"Though he fall yet shall he not be utterly cast down." 
The fact is that transgression that is wilful and approved 
by the heart means an utter fall from divine favor in 
every sense of the word, while stumbling into sin contrary 
to the will, through weakness of the flesh and 
temptation, is to be considered a stumbling from which 
there is every hope of recovery. 

Some one will perhaps argue that practically every 
transgression is a wilful one, because the Lord's people, 
however weak in body, have still the power to will 
aright if they would. Such are inclined at times to accuse 
themselves of wilful sin, and to fear that they are 
under the ban of the second death. We point, however, 
to David's case as an illustration of what is not 
esteemed of the Lord to be a wilful sin. King David 
deliberately planned for days and weeks and months in 
connection with his transgression. It cannot be denied 
that there was a measure of wilfulness in it, but there 
was a measure of something else also: namely, of weakness 
of the flesh, inherited as a member of the race 
from father Adam. Only divine judgment could clearly, 
distinctly discern how much of David's sin should 
properly be accredited to wilfulness and how much to 
weakness. That it was not wholly weakness or ignorance 
is evident, and that it was not wholly wilfulness is 
equally evident. It was therefore what we might term 
a mixed sin. The proof that it was not wholly wilful 
is found in the fact that David's conscience afterward, 
before being reproved by the Lord through the Prophet, 
recognized his sin and realized the barrier which it had 
raised between the Lord and his soul. Had the sin 
been wilful, instead of feeling sorrow and contrition the 
King would have felt disposed to go on in the course of 
sin still farther, and would have had no longings for 
divine forgiveness and reconciliation. His desires for 
these prove to us that, although he had deviated so 
grievously from the proper paths, his heart, his will, 
was still on the side of the lord and of righteousness. 
Let this serve as a lesson and illustration for all who 
have fallen into sin and who long for divine forgiveness 
and reconciliation. Let such accept the mercy of the 
Lord by faith and rejoice therein as did King David. 
Let them remember that those who have sinned the sin 
unto death it is impossible to renew again unto repentance 
—impossible to bring them back to a condition 
where they would be truly contrite and repentant for 
their evil course. 

True repentance implies a rectification of the wrong 
to the extent of one's ability. David's sin being a 
public one, known to the nation, it was appropriate 
that the repentance should be as public as was the sin, 



and we have reason to believe that David would not 

have received restoration to divine favor had he not 

been thoroughgoing in his confession and his endeavors 

to make good the wrong he had done. His course had 

led some to blaspheme God's name (2 Sam. 12:14), 

and it was appropriate that his repentance should, so far 

as possible, offset this. And so the story of David's repentance 

has come down the ages with the story of his 

crime; and while the one has given occasion to blasphemers, 

the other has given hope and encouragement to 

many overtaken in faults, who, like David, at heart 

were loyal to the Lord. 

We are to distinguish sharply between forgiveness 
of sin and remission of penalties. In this case we see 
that David's sin was forgiven, yet the punishment which 
the Prophet had foretold came upon him in due time. 
Thus we see that forgiveness here stands not for judicial 

R3260 : page 396 

forgiveness, which would have exonerated the forgiven 

one from all punishment, but it stands merely for the 

removal of divine disfavor which had come upon the 

King as one of the results of his transgression. We are 

to notice also that the King had not in his mind the 

thought of escaping the punishment which God had 

foretold and described; his joy was in respect to the restoration 

of communion between himself and the Lord 

—the removal of the sin-born cloud which had hidden 

from him for a time the light of the divine countenance, 

the smile of heaven, the fellowship of God. And so it 

will be today with all who, falling into sin wilfully, repent 

thereof and seek a renewal of the fellowship of the 

Father and of the Son from the right standpoint. Their 

moving desire will not be simply escape from punishment, 

but specially a renewal of communion of soul 

R3261 : page 396 

broken by transgression. It is in full accord with this 
that the New Creation at the present time rejoices in 
forgiveness of sins and reconciliation with the Father 
through the Son, yet live under practically the same 
conditions as the world, subject to the aches, pains, trials, 
difficulties and disappointments which belong in 
general to the fallen race because of original sin. The 
blessings of our new relationship to God consist not in 
our release from the burdens and difficulties of the 
groaning creation, but in the realization that we are no 
longer under divine condemnation, no longer children 
of wrath even as others, but brought nigh unto God in 
fellowship and communion through the blood of Christ. 
Our hope of deliverance from the burdens which afflict 
the whole groaning creation are centered in the promised 
Kingdom blessings at the second advent of our Lord. 
Inspired by these hopes and promises we sorrow not as 



do others, but are enabled to rejoice in tribulation and 
to wait patiently for the Lord's time and for the Lord's 
way— the First Resurrection. 

This thought, namely, that in the present time our 
sins are merely covered from divine notice through the 
merit of our Lord,— that they are merely forgiven or 
given over or set aside, are hidden and not actually 
blotted out— is very clearly stated by the Apostle Peter 
(Acts 3:19-21) when, preaching under the influence of 
the holy Spirit, he declared that his hearers should repent 
and be converted to the Lord, so that their sins 
might be blotted out when the times of refreshing should 
come— the times of restitution— the Millennial age and 
Kingdom. 

In that glorious Millennial day the Church, now 
reconciled, will first pass inspection, and those counted 
worthy will share in the first resurrection, and the bodies 
they will then receive will be perfect, without blemish 
and without flaw— very different from the mortal 
bodies of the present time, all of which are more or 
less marred by sin, mentally and physically. The receiving 
of the new bodies perfected will mean that all 
the blemishes, all the marks of sin for this class, were 
blotted out in the tomb, in the flesh, their spiritual bodies 
being perfect, even as it is written of this first resurrection 
class: "It is sown in corruption, it is raised in 
in incorruption; it is sown in weakness, it is raised in 
power; it is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory; it is 
sown an animal body, it is raised a spiritual body." 

The world not having received reconciliation, not 
having received forgiveness of sins, will not receive the 
blotting out of sins in the Millennial morning. The 
great blessing that will come to the world of mankind 
as distinguished from the Church, the body of Christ, 
the little flock, the elect of the present time, will be the 
blessing of forgiveness— full, free. The great atonement 
day (the Gospel age) will then have closed, its better 
sacrifices will all then be in the past, its blood of atonement 
will then have been presented before the Father 
and will have been accepted on behalf of the whole 
world. As a result of this acceptance, the divine forgiveness 
will reach the whole world through Christ— a 
remission of the sentence pronounced upon the world 
in the person of Adam. This is specifically stated by 
the Apostle, saying, "As by the offence of one judgment 
[sentence] came upon all men to condemnation; even 
so by the righteousness of one the free gift [will come] 
upon all men unto justification of life." (Rom. 5:18.) 
But as forgiveness to David did not mean a repudiation 
of such penalties as were due him because of the measure 
of wilfulness contained in his sins, and as forgiveness 
in this Gospel age to the Church does not mean an 
immediate release from the penalties that are upon the 
race, so likewise the forgiveness of the world's sins at the 
dawn of the Millennium and the beginning of Messiah's 
reign will not mean the removal of all the marks of sin, 



the disabilities, death conditions, which come upon all 
men partly through their own wrongdoing. As with 
the Church now, forgiveness of sins means a covering 
of those sins, that we may be treated as though 
we were not sinners: so with the world in the next age 
—the forgiveness of the world's sins will mean that 
thenceforth Christ stands for the whole world before 
God as the covering of their sins, and that on account 
of the sacrifice paid by Christ on behalf of the world 
the sentence of everlasting death upon them is annulled. 
The work of Christ and of the Millennial Kingdom will 
be to lift up all who will of the world of mankind to 
the full perfection of their human nature, so that at the 
close of that age they may be perfect and entire as human 
beings. The work of the Millennial age will 
therefore be a work of blotting out sins— blotting out 
the evidences and traces of sin in body and mind. The 
weaknesses and impairments which sin has brought 
upon humanity will be thus overcome, and it is for this 

R3261 : page 397 

reason that that age is called the times of restitution, 
the times in which gradually the original likeness of 
God will be brought back to all those who will accept 
the divine favor through the great redemption. 

In verse six King David suggests that his own experience 
should be helpful to others who at heart were 
godly— desiring God's way of righteousness, but who had 
stumbled in the way. He advises that they pray to the 
Lord promptly— that they should seek him while he may 
be found. David's own experiences seemed to teach him 
that every day removed him farther and farther from 
fellowship with the Lord. His exhortation is that 
in order that the floods of great waters of trouble should 
not reach such an one, he would be spared much by 
going promptly to the throne of heavenly grace to make 
confession and to obtain mercy and grace to help in 
future times of need. 

In verse seven the King reverts to his own experiences 
and how he had found peace in the Lord— a 
hiding-place in which he could have rest; and although 
he knew to look forward to the prescribed punishments, 
his heart now being in fellowship with the Lord he 
could realize that the Lord's presence would be with 
him in those punishments and preserve him in that 
trouble, and that he would be, so to speak, enabled to 
hear the heavenly messengers singing songs of his deliverance 
even whilst in his affliction. 

The concluding verses of the Psalm represent the 
Lord as the speaker, instructing David and all of his 
people who, like David, desire the Lord's guidance and 
feel wretched and troubled when any earth-born cloud 
intervenes between the Lord and their souls. The Lord 
engages to be the teacher, the instructor of all such; he 
will overrule their affairs, he will make all things to 



work together for good. Even their stumblings shall 
not prove disastrous; but because they maintain the 
spirit of devotion to the Lord and to the principles of 
righteousness, he will make even their missteps to become 
valuable lessons, that they may be henceforth 
less liable to stumble, and learn to look unto the Lord 
and to be guided in their goings by his eye. 

Those whom the Lord instructs, and who will receive 
his instruction, will not be like the horse or mule 
that must be turned and guided by force. Their hearts 
will be so in sympathy with the Lord that he can deal 
with them otherwise, to their blessing and joy. The 
wicked shall have their sorrows, but the Lord's people 
will not be counted in among these; for his mercy shall 
be with them, restoring their souls. Therefore this 
class, through the Lord's mercy, will be counted righteous 
—not that they were righteous of themselves, but 
counted righteous through the divine provision in Christ. 
These may be glad in the Lord, though they could not 
be glad in themselves. These, because upright in heart 
even though prone to sin and full of weaknesses according 
to the flesh, may be brought off conquerors through 
him who loved us and bought us with his precious 
blood— may shout for joy as they realize the abundance 
of the divine provision "for the propitiation of our sins; 
and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole 
world."— 1 John 2:2. 



R3261 : page 397 

ABSALOM'S SHAMEFUL DISLOYALTY. 

-2 SAM. 15: 1-1 2. -NOVEMBER 1.- 

GOLDEN TEXT:— "Honor thy father and thy mother: that thy days may be 
long upon the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee."— Ex. 20: 12. 

THE closing years of King David's life included a 
series of very trying experiences, which, however, 
under the Lord's providential care, apparently 
worked out for him a ripeness of heart and character 
exhibited to us in the Psalms of his later writing. 
These disastrous experiences date from the time of his 
sin, and to a considerable extent they were used of the 
Lord as punishments for that sin. Although in the 
case of Absalom's rebellion we may trace the evil which 
there culminated to circumstances which occurred long 
previous to David's sin, we are also to remember that 
it was quite in the Lord's power to have shielded the 
King so as to have prevented the success of Absalom's 
deceitful machinations. Amongst these earlier influences 
may be mentioned David's marriage to Absalom's 
mother, who was not a Jewess but a foreigner, the 
daughter of a heathen king. The counsel of the Lord 



is to the effect that his people should not be unequally 
yoked together with unbelievers, and this counsel applied 
to the typical Israelite as it still applies to spiritual 
Israel. This disregard of the divine wisdom was 

R3262 : page 397 

sure to produce unfavorable results in some manner at 
some time. Children born to such a mismated marriage 
are sure to inherit certain elements of character and 
disposition from the unbelieving parent which will 
eventually show themselves. In the story of Absalom 
we see an illustration of this. His vanity, insubordination, 
disloyalty, went hand in hand with an ambition 
which seemed to hesitate at nothing. It killed a 
half-brother who stood between himself and the throne, 
and later on stimulated a usurpation of his father's 
throne, and the seeking of his father's life. 

Absalom is a distinguished example of dishonor to 
a father, and the resultant cutting off in the prime of 
life. The story of his unfilial conduct is told in this 
lesson. For the murder of his half-brother under provocation 
he fled from his father's dominions, and was 
three years an exile in the king's (his grandfather's) 

R3262 : page 398 

country. Then in intrigues in official circles his father's 
love for him was prevailed upon to such an extent as 
permitted his return to his home land, and eventually 
to all the privileges of the heir apparent to the throne. 
It is at this time that our lesson opens. The young 
man, remarkable for his handsome appearance, introduced 
a custom from his grandfather's court, a custom 
which still prevails in Egypt, namely, that a prince 
should have a special chariot and a bodyguard of fifty 
trained men. King David seems to have had so much 
love for his son that he practically let him have his own 
way in these matters. The people were pleased with 
the display, etc., of royalty in the person of their prince, 
and for several years a great and sobering change had 
come over the King, who was also advancing in years 
and who no longer showed himself amongst his people 
as much as formerly. 

The vain young prince was quick to see that his 
spectacular course pleased the people, and quite probably 
he heard that his young brother Solomon was 
David's choice for his successor in the kingdom, and 
he concluded to make a bid for the royal honors of 
his father. His method was a crafty one: he would 
steal the hearts of the people from his father to himself. 
He had no filial affection; only selfish ambition is manifested 
in his course. He would use his father's indulgence, 
which had shielded him from the penalty of his 
crime, to undermine his father's influence. Surely, if 
it is wrong to render evil for evil, it is a despicable crime 



to render evil for good— to a father or a friend or to 
anyone. 

The King in these days acted as a superior court, 
so that cases not satisfactorily adjudicated before the 
regular judges were appealed to him. As the nation 
grew these cases of appeal became more and more numerous, 
and doubtless the King's advancing age and 
his greater attention to religious things, writing of Psalms, 
etc., interfered to some extent with his conduct of this 
court business. Absalom perceived all this and turned 
it to his own account. Meeting those persons who had 
appeals and who were delayed, he expressed sympathy 
for them, assuring them that if he were a judge in their 
case justice would be speedily meted out— of course implying 
that his hearer had justice on his side and would 
therefore be pleased with the results. As a prince it 
was the order of that day that he should receive homage 
from the people of the realm, and feigning a love and 
humility which he evidently did not really feel, he lifted 
up and kissed these people. A royal kiss would be 
a matter to be boasted of. To have the fellowship, nay 
the affection, of a prince would mean to many a complete 
perversion of their judgment and a binding of 
them to him as his obedient servants. 

Not only was this conduct unfilial, dishonoring to 
his parent, but it would have been disloyal to any 
ruler, ignoble toward any benefactor. Indeed the 
word "stole" is none too strong. In stealing 
the hearts of the people the theft was not less, but 
even greater, than if he had stolen money or merchandise. 
There is a point of morality here which is 
but faintly discerned by many in our day. We regret 
to be forced to believe that quite a good many are very 
willing to steal the affections of another and to misrepresent 
another to their own advantage. The Lord's 
people of the New Creation need continually to be on 
their guard against any such tendency in their flesh, 
which might disguise itself so that its real character 
would not be discerned readily by the new mind. The 
Golden Rule should be applied by the saints to all the 
affairs of life every day. It is a safe rule, and those 
who use it freely and are obedient to it will assuredly 
grow in the fruits of the Spirit, all of which are 
branches of the one great spirit of Love. 

This conspiracy against his father may be considered 
as having begun immediately on Absalom's return 
from exile, or as dating from his full acceptance back 
to fellowship with his father and a princely position. 
In the latter case it was four years in progress, in the 
former case six years. When he considered that matters 
were properly ripe for action, in order not to excite 
the suspicion of the King or others he asked of the 
King permission to go to Hebron, there to offer a great 
sacrifice unto the Lord in harmony with a vow made 
years before, and the occasion was thus made so important 
that the taking with him of many of the chief men 



of the army and of the city would not be considered 
remarkable, but rather an honor to the King through 
his son. 

Meantime spies had been sent throughout the twelve 
tribes, and trumpeters were posted in various quarters, 
so that when the appropriate time would come and Absalom 
should proclaim himself king at Hebron, these 
trumpeters, being heard by others, the whole line 
of trumpeters throughout the twelve tribes would 
sound almost simultaneously, and the spies in Absalom's 
secret service as well as the trumpeters would explain 
the meaning of this to be that Absalom was now king. 
The people, who had learned to love Absalom because 
of his mock meekness, would thus gain the impression 
that the revolution of the kingdom was complete; that 
King David was certainly thoroughly vanquished, and 
that their personal prosperity with the new king would 
depend upon the prompt manifestation of their loyalty 
to his cause. The matter worked remarkably well, 
and as a result practically the entire nation was turned 
to Absalom in a day. 

Some of those who went from Jerusalem to Hebron 
were totally ignorant of the use that was being made 

R3262 : page 399 

of them, yet their influential names being associated 
with Absalom would affect the populace; and they in 
turn, being with him and favored by him as his friends, 
and their future being dependent upon his grace, had 
everything to gain by adherence to his cause and everything 
to lose by its repudiation. 

The conspiracy was successful to a degree that could 
scarcely have been anticipated. Practically the whole 
nation gave allegiance to Absalom, and that in so outward 
and marked a manner that it was necessary for 
them subsequently, after his defeat and death, to publicly 
request the King to return to the head of the government 
of all the tribes. If we wonder that a nation 
should so quickly forget the valuable services of so eminent 
a ruler, to whom it owed so much of its prosperity, 
let us remember that the King's confession would 
not be viewed by the populace as it is now viewed by 
God's holy ones. Doubtless some appreciated him in 
a measure, but more would disesteem him for "showing 
the white feather," and many would be inclined to consider 
him an "old hypocrite." His seclusion during 
those eleven years and his accumulation of treasure for 
the building of the Temple— perhaps involving taxes 
upon the people— could all have been viewed from an 
evil standpoint and have assisted in his unpopularity. 
It is the fortune of all of the Lord's people to be misunderstood 
by the worldly, even when conduct and 
words and intentions are the very best. How careful, 
then, we all should be to walk circumspectly, and to 
avoid every appearance of evil! 



Here, too, we may have an illustration of how God 
is able to overrule the affairs of the world in such a manner 
as to execute his designs without interfering with 
the free agency of any. Had it not been for David's 
sin and the penalty prescribed for it, Absalom might 
have had the same evil designs upon the kingdom,— 
might have made the same effort to accomplish his designs; 
but the Lord would not have permitted the matter 
to reach so successful a climax. An example of 
this is found in the subsequent attempt by a younger 
brother of Absalom to take the throne. He proceeded 
in many respects as Absalom did and under more favorable 
conditions, in that at that time the King had grown 
quite feeble with age and was unable to administer the 
interests of the kingdom personally or to take the field 
in battle. However, in due time the Lord brought the 
matter to the attention of David, so that the revolt was 
nipped in the bud before it had time to take effect, and 
Solomon instead of Adonijah was anointed king. 

Just so it is with the Lord's people today. Conspiracies 
may arise to threaten the interests of the Truth, 
but the Lord is at the helm, and will permit these to go 
no further than in his judgment is wise— only so far as 
they will work for the Lord's glory and the accomplishment 
of his plans, for the instruction and disciplining 
of his people, and for the sifting out of those who at heart 
are enemies of the cause. The general lesson for us is 
confidence in the great King of kings and Lord of lords; 
implicit obedience to him and loyalty to the principles 
of his government; the law of love in our dealings with 
all the true Israel of God and with mankind in general. 
The Lord is able and willing to make the things which 
would seem to harm us work out for our everlasting 
good and work disastrously to those who essay the injury 
of his people and his cause. 

The Golden Text is well illustrated in our lesson. 
Absalom, the disrespectful, ungrateful, disobedient son, 

R3263 : page 399 

selfish, avaricious and grasping, came to a disgraceful 
end in the prime of life, and marks a lesson to his kind. 
On the other hand Solomon, the peaceful, the good, the 
wise son, attained to the kingdom, and attained to it, 
too, with his father's blessing and the divine favor. 



R3263 : page 399 
REV. DR. MORGAN SAYS HE IS NOT AN INFIDEL. 



"I preached this summer in Fifth Avenue Church, 
New York, a series of sermons on some of the 



saying of the Gospel of John. When I came to deal 
with the death of Christ, I began by saying that it 
brought me face to face with a moral mystery; that 
unless there was some explanation of that tragic ending 
of a pure life, it was the most terrible reflection on 
the government of God, and would make me an infidel. 
The whole sermon was to answer that position and to 
show how the death of Christ reveals the infinite goodness 
of God. But next morning I saw in the New 
York Journal a flaming headline: 

"'DR. MORGAN PUZZLED ABOUT THE DEATH 
OF CHRIST: SAYS THAT THERE IS A MORAL MYSTERY 
IN IT, AND IT MAKES HIM AN INFIDEL.' 

"This was copied into religious periodicals, and 
ever since I have been receiving letters explaining the 
death of Christ. In fact, the cutting has been sent to 
me three times within the last two weeks by people in 
England." 



ZION'S WATCH TOWER, having circulated the error, 
takes pleasure in correcting it. It is always difficult 
to choose words which the worldly cannot misconstrue, 
and doubtless this illustration will make Doctor 
Morgan, and us all, more careful than ever to avoid 
expressions subject to such distortion. On the other 
hand we are glad that in this day of "falling away" 
from the faith there were still numerous religious journals 
ready to protest against such teachings in pulpits 
dedicated to God. 



page 400 

FAVORABLE METHODS OF SERVICE. 



The chiefest service we could commend, open to all 
who are unencumbered and in active use of their faculties, 
is the Colporteur work. It is an honorable form of ministering 
the truth from house to house, as the apostles 
served. It is a service which the Lord seems to have 
blessed as much or more than any other for gathering the 
"wheat." It is apparent at once to all that to sell such 
books as the DAWNS at 35 cents each, cannot be for money-making 
that it is merely another way of preaching the 
truth. No other religious books are sold at any such price. 
Indeed, few subscription books sell for less than two to 
three dollars each. Any who can serve in this work are 
invited to write to us for "Hints to Colporteurs." 



page 401 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIV. NOVEMBER 1, 1903. No. 21 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 403 

A Bible League 403 

General Unrest Prevails 403 

A Prominent Man's Views 404 

"Ye Know Your Calling, Brethren" 405 

"O Absalom, My Son, My Son" 409 

"The Lord Is My Shepherd" 411 

"Wine Is a Mocker" 414 

Public Ministries of the Truth 416 

Special Items: Pastor Russell's 

Weekly Discourses 402 

The "Debate" Reports 402 

Increased Price of Dawns, 4,5,6 402 

page 402 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



R3265 : page 402 

PASTOR RUSSELL'S WEEKLY DISCOURSES. 



The Pittsburg Gazette proposes to print Brother 
Russell's sermons every Monday hereafter, until further 
notice. Thinking that some of our readers would like 
to have these we have arranged to club the "Gazette" 
and the WATCH TOWER at $3.25 per year,-beginning 
as soon as you like. This will give the WATCH TOWER 
semi-monthly and the Gazette daily postpaid at less 
than one cent per copy. Send all subscriptions to the 
WATCH TOWER address. 

But this does not apply to territory within 100 
miles of Pittsburg where the Gazette may have an agent, 
as the agent must be protected. However, there are 
many places near at which there are no agents, and 
where agents can be found the Monday papers can be 
obtained from them. 

R3264 : page 402 

THE "DEBATE" REPORTS. 



Responses to our notice that the Pittsburg Gazette 
would publish lengthy reports of the Doctrinal Discussions 
between Doctor Eaton and Pastor Russell almost 
overwhelmed our office force as well as the Gazette's. 
Orders have come in for more than twice the number 
we guaranteed and more are still coming. 

Friends will please accept the arrival of the Gazettes 
as evidence of our having received their letters, and not 
expect other acknowledgment. Indeed, as may be surmised, 
all of our correspondence is greatly belated on 
this account, and it will require considerable time to get 
caught up;— and the less important letters may need to 
be wholly neglected, much as we should like to reply to 
them all. 

The Gazette's supply of the first report becoming 
exhausted, that journal reprinted the debate reports under 
another date, and request us to explain the reason, 
and to assure subscribers that all orders received 
will be filled promptly. Should any of our 
friends not receive the papers ordered by them, they 
should report to us by postal card. Later orders will 
be filled at once by a special edition containing the six 
debates. These latter we will supply postpaid on order 
—at the rate of 2 cents each. In lots of 50 or over one 
cent each, express prepaid. 

page 402 

INCREASED PRICE OF DAWNS IV., V., VI. 



In consequence of raise of prices for printing and binding 
just after we had reduced our price on cloth-bound DAWNS, 



we have been selling all volumes of the series at a loss for the 
past six months. The loss has been specially heavy on the 
thicker volumes, and we now feel compelled to increase the 
price on these to 40 cents, plus 10 cents postage. Subscribers' 
wholesale rate 20 cents plus 10 cents postage. These prices 
take effect Nov. 1, 1903. 

Volume VI. will have over 700 pages and is hoped for in 
December. Those who have already paid for it at old prices 
need not send additionally. 



R3263 : page 403 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



A BIBLE LEAGUE. 



A "BIBLE LEAGUE" has been organized in 
the Methodist Episcopal Church, with the 
avowed purpose of driving out destructive 
Higher Criticism. Its president is Bishop Mallalieu, 
and the promoters hope to establish branches in 
every Methodist Conference in the country."— 
Exchange. 

We are glad to see that the situation is being 
partially realized. It is much more dangerous than 
many might be willing to believe. No words can 
more graphically describe the results than the words 
of Scripture themselves, viz.: "A thousand shall 
fall at thy side." (Psa. 91:7.) A thousand to fall 
to one who will stand means a great "falling away" 
from faith. Our Master's question is pertinent here, 
"When the Son of Man cometh [at his second advent] 
shall he find faith on the earth?" 

The cleavage or separation on this subject can 
only result favorably so far as the gathering of the 
Lord's "jewels" is concerned. Those who will cling 
to the Bible honestly and intelligently will give it 
more careful examination than ever. And their 
longings will not be satisfied by the interpretations 
and creeds of the dark ages, ruled by superstition 
and the spirit of persecution. Nothing short of "the 
faith once delivered to the saints," which now rejoices 
our hearts with its lengths and breadths and 
heights and depths of divine love and provision, will 
satisfy them. These will be but a "little flock" in 
all, however. We will be glad to greet Bp. Mallalieu 
among them, but we do not forget the Apostle's 
words, that not many rich or great or noble are being 
chosen now, but chiefly the poor and ignoble, 
rich in faith, to be heirs of the Kingdom. 



That the battle above referred to has commenced 
is shown by the press dispatch:— 
"CHICAGO, September 10. 

"The Outlook, an official publication of the Methodist denomination, 
has made a sensational attack upon the Methodist 
universities. That the doctrines of "Tom" Paine are being 
taught by Dr. Milton S. Terry, professor of Theology in 
Garrett Biblical Institute, and by Dr. Hinckley G. Mitchell, 
of the Boston University School of Theology, is the charge. 
Methodists are advised not to send their sons and daughters 
to schools 'where such teachers are allowed to remain on the 
faculty.'" 

GENERAL UNREST PREVAILS. 



"Prepare war, wake up the mighty men, let all the men of 
war draw near; let them come up: Beat your plow shares into 
swords, and your pruning hooks into spears; let the weak 
say, I am strong."— Joel 3:9-16. 

The whole world is growing restless— preparing 
to fulfil the above prophecy, of which we quote only 
the introduction. The people of Macedonia and 
Bulgaria are impatient of the Turkish rule, and fomenting 
rebellion and bringing upon themselves the 
brutal vengeance of their rulers— the only kind of 
reprisal and suppression known to the Ottoman. 

France is still in a warfare with the secret 
orders of the Roman Catholic Church, in an attempt 
to free the rising generation from the incubus of 
superstition, which it realizes has for years been opposing 
the Republic by misrepresentations of the 
facts of history. In a word, the French Government 
is seeking to turn the religious schools built by the 
people into free public schools, similar to those of 
the United States. They refuse to have these taught 
by garbed nuns and priests, and the golden hours 
of childhood given specially to studying the Roman 
Catholic Catechism. In no sense is it a movement 
to curb the freedom of the Roman Catholic conscience 
to believe and teach as it pleases outside the 
public schools. This warfare is so absorbing to the 
French that other questions are no more than secondary. 
The clerical party would even favor war 
in hope of reviving monarchy. 

In England a very similar question is before the 
public mind. Parliament has recently put the control 
of public-school education into the hands of the 
Church (Episcopal), and other denominations are 
fearful of the results. 

In Austro-Hungary partisanism runs high. 
Both nations desire to exercise controlling influence, 
yet both realize that division would injure both 
dreadfully. They maintain a union of hatred and bitterness 



R3263 : page 404 

that bodes an open warfare at the opportune 
moment. 

Russia, according to the London Times, is keeping 
from general publicity her dreadful internal disorders, 
which may eventually force her into war to 
offset the restless spirit and give it employment. It 
says in part:— 

"The murderous assault made on Prince Urussoff by the 
peasants of his estate, in the province of Tchernigoff, has its 
parallel in the similar crime perpetrated on the person of 
Prince Gagarin, his wife, and their guest, Prince Sherbatoff, 
in the province of Riazan, hundreds of miles further north. 
The governor of the province of Ufa has been murdered under 
the shadow of the Urals; and the prisons of St. Petersburg 
are filled with political prisoners, who largely belong to 
that most dangerous of all classes, the intellectual proletariat. 
The very forces of the state are not themselves untainted. 
There were military trials at Moscow not many weeks since 
for revolutionary agitation in the army, and it is even alleged 
that several members of the crew of the imperial yacht, 
including some non-commissioned officers, are at present in 
detention in the capital for being in possession of forbidden 
literature on board the Standart, (the Czar's yacht) herself. 

"The government appear to have been attempting to practise 
a double policy toward the labor movement, which now 
for the first time is growing conscious of its strength. On 
the one hand, M. Witte seems to have attempted more than 
two years ago to solve the problem by discovering the real 
wants and wishes of the artisans and factory hands. As the 
result of a conference instituted on his suggestion, the men 
obtained the right to elect spokesmen who might confer with 
the manufacturers and government inspectors. But the new 
scheme has not been fairly applied, while a childish attempt 
has been made by the reactionaries to convince the workingmen 
that their best friends are the bureaucrats and their 
worst enemies the enlightened middle classes. In several 
cases the men have elected their representatives, only to see 
them subjected to summary arrest, while any combined action 
by the men employed in different factories is severely punished. 
On the other hand the secret police of St. Petersburg 
have been endeavoring to educate the workmen in loyalty to 
the existing institutions of the country by telling them that the 
French Revolution led merely to the triumph of the bourgeois, 
bought by the blood of the proletariate, and that the Government 
are eager to meet them half way. Naturally these devices 
have not produced much effect, but neither, so far, have 
the repressive measures of M. de Plehve. The problem remains 
unsolved and perhaps insoluble, and the fact may not 

R3264 : page 404 

be without its influence on the foreign policy of the empire, 
both in the Balkans and elsewhere. In the face of such enigmas 
foreign adventures have been undertaken before now as 



a diversion, but history shows that the remedy has often 
merely aggravated the disorder." 

It is thought by some that the chief danger of war 
between Russia and Japan lies in the internal unrest 
of Russia, the supposition being that war might 
be esteemed an advantage if it would serve to unify 
the nation or give excuse for radical measures as 
war necessities, giving malcontents the appearance 
of open rebels. 

Germany is so full of the factional spirit and so 
verging on to socialism that some are sighing for 
war to unite and cement them as was the case thirty 
years ago. The Deutsch Wacht says: 

"No inglorious (faul) peace! And inglorious to the core 
has become that peace which, armored in steel and bristling 
with weapons, now lies upon our portion of the globe and beneath 
the weight of which we Germans have had to endure so 
much. The eternal repetition of peace twaddle has unmanned 
our ears; love of peace, emphasized on all occasions, has 
inspired in our enemies an impression that we are weak, and 
has already robbed some part of our nation of its confidence in 
our strength. The campaign in China was a flaming forth of 
the old warlike fire, but the blaze was soon extinguished. 
When we now make a movement to display our fist in faraway 
Asia, the feminizing breath of peace is felt with enervating 
effect in Europe in order to make the sword drop 
nimbly from the hand. 

The peace that we now enjoy has damaged us because we 
value it above everything else, and have forgotten that readiness 
for peace brings honor only to those of whom it is known 
that they can be strongly stern, and are in a position to strike 
and make the splinters fly. 

"The peace of this post-Bismarckian period has made us 
inglorious at home as well. We Germans can not maintain 
our sense of strength without the impulse of pressure from 
above, without a sharp, powerful summons at the moment we 
are to stand united. Such a summons has been wanting. Under 
Bismarck we were constantly being roused. We knew 
that honor might require us any day to grasp the sword 
again and fight foes outnumbering ourselves. This knowledge 
united us, or at least suppressed the divisions among 
the German people. We have no such influence at work now. 
Ever since the adoption of the policy of obsequiousness, the 
Philistines have evidently nothing to fear from a foreign foe. 
We are, in fact, good friends with everybody, as fine speeches 
and flattering telegrams have testified a hundred times. And 
the same tone prevails as regards German unity. Mighty 
has been the upstart growth of Ultramontanism under the 
protection of inglorious peace. It has already divided Germany 
into two camps, between which there is such total alienation 
of sentiment as makes concord impossible. Daily widens 
the rift made by Social-Democracy between the classes 
among our population, aided by the circumstances of the inglorious 
peace. Daily the blind masses are more and more set 
on by agitation. To our people this peril, which has a foreign 
intellectual origin, grows more dire, and it could carry out 



its mission of destruction only beneath a rule of inglorious 
peace. 

"He only fashions a sword who has never felt fear. But 
the German people, God save us, have been made fearful since 
1888. Then may Heaven make us see the dread perils which 
glower down upon us from within and without. Thus may 
we free ourselves from the enervating, inglorious peace, and 
once more, in unity and strength, win the proud self-consciousness 
which inspires our saying 'Many enemies mean 
much honor!'" 

A PROMINENT MAN'S VIEWS. 



Hon. Whitelaw Reid, for many years editor of the 
New York Tribune, speaking to the graduates of 
Vassar College and their friends, said in part: 

Of specific excesses toward which our Democratic institutions 
seem to be tending, perhaps we do not need now to 
speak in any great detail. It may be enough to recognize that 
the American who colonized the Atlantic Coast and the great 
Middle West, who framed the Constitution, started the Government, 
developed the country under it, and fought a gigantic 
civil war to preserve it, is not the American who 
leads the popular movements of today. The type is changing; 
the beliefs are changing, and the aims. 

He is neither Puritan any longer, nor Cavalier. He may 
outwardly deny the decay of faith, but he inwardly feels it. 
Nothing is more noticeable at the great centers of population 
and of national activity, or in any large section of what 
calls itself, and is often called, our best society, than this disappearance 
of the old foundation of character and action; 
this loss of profound, enduring, restful faith in anything. 
It is a laissez-aller age; an age of loosening anchors and drifting 
with the tide; of taking things as they are, with cordial 
readiness to take them hereafter as they come; of an easy indifference, 
whose universal attitude toward each startling departure 
from old standards is "What does it matter, anyway?" 
—an age, in short, marked by a refined, "up-to-date" adaptation 
of the old Epicurean idea that there is nothing in this 
world to do but to eat, drink and make merry, for tomorrow 
we die. 

The loss of faith brings us by this short cut straight to 
the loss of purpose in life— of any purpose at least beyond 
purely material ones. To those who need money, the duty 
of getting it first, and above anything else, becomes the gospel 

R3264 : page 405 

of life. To those who feel the need of position, whether 

in society, business or elsewhere, their gospel drives them 

to all means within the law to obtain that. To those who 

have both money and position comes the only remaining purpose 

in life, that of using them for an existence of amusement 

and enjoyment. Is it too much to say that never before 



in our history have such aspirations so completely dominated 
and limited such large classes? 

WHAT MANY FIND LEFT IN LIFE. 

But this craze for mere amusement and enjoyment, like 
other perverted appetites, grows by what it feeds on. The 
amusement soon becomes wearisome, the enjoyment soon 
palls, unless constantly more and more spectacular and bizarre. 
Perpetual change and constantly increasing variety of 
extremes seem to be the ever-rising price of keeping amused. 
One never is for long where one wants to be, or doing what 
one desires; there must be incessantly a rushing to and fro, 
and a change of pursuits, all under the glare of electric lights 
and the blare of brass bands. If in the country, one must 
hasten to the city, where something is going on; if in the 
city, one must fly to the country, where the crowd is not so 
mixed and where pleasanter house parties can be gathered; if 
in one's own land, one longs for the boulevards or the Alps; 
if abroad, one is eager to try the new steamer back; if at the 
seashore, one wants suddenly to know what the mountains 
are like, and can only find amusement in going to see when 
clothed in leather jackets, protected by masks and goggles, 
and powdered with dirt, rushing through the dusty air on the 
highways at forty or fifty miles an hour in a Red Devil, and 
leaving the luckless rustics in the way to go to a fiend of any 
color they like. 

Even then this vehement vacuity is not amusing unless it 
is talked about. One must be forever before the footlights and 
if possible, in the center of the stage. Privacy is deadly dullness. 
Not to have your name every other day in the newspapers 
is to be out of the world, to be bored to death. Not 
to see every intimate fact about yourself or your friends 
thrust naked and shameless under the public eye is to feel 
that you are dropping out of the swim. 



The public seems to be slowly awakening to the 
realization that the far-sighted Jesuits have been 
working their representatives into the Associated 
Press, which supplies general news to many newspapers 
all over the world. The effect seems to be to 
give prominence and good tone to things Roman 
Catholic and to suppress as much as would be wise 
of contrary news. Young Catholics are trained to 
this service and quietly and unostentatiously pushed 
into controlling positions— unsuspecting Protestants 
often unwittingly assisting in the scheme. 



R3265 : page 405 

"YE KNOW YOUR CALLING, BRETHREN." 



"But ye are a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, 
a peculiar people; that ye should show forth the praises 
of him who hath called you out of darkness 
into his marvelous light."— 1 Peter 2:9. 

"VOCATION" is the term that describes 

the special business of any person, while 

the word "avocation" describes an occasional business; 

as, the Apostle Paul's vocation was that of 

a minister of the Truth, while his avocation, or occasional 

employment when necessary to provide 

things honest and decent in the sight of God and 

men, was tent-making. Similarly all of the Lord's 

people should consider that their vocation or calling 

is of God, and relates to the special or spiritual 

ministry in which he privileges us to engage as fellow 

servants of our Lord Jesus Christ. In order 

to provide the necessities of life for ourselves and 

those dependent on us, it is necessary that we should 

have some earthly employment also; but this we 

should always regard, not as our vocation— not as 

our chief or principal business in life— but merely 

as our avocation, or temporary engagement incidentally 

necessary to our chief business. Of course 

it would not be wise for the Lord's people to speak 

of spiritual things from this standpoint to worldly 

people. Our Lord warned us against so doing, saying, 

"Cast not your pearls before swine"— attempt 

not to tell the deep and precious things that belong 

to you as spiritual New Creatures in Christ, and 

which you only can understand and appreciate 

through the holy Spirit (1 Cor. 2:14), to those who 

have not the Spirit and who cannot comprehend 

your teachings and who would be disappointed in 

the matter, as swine would be disappointed if you 

gave them pearls which they could not appreciate, 

instead of corn which they could appreciate. In our 

own hearts, however, and amongst the "brethren," 

this thought should always be uppermost; namely, 

that our calling, or business, or vocation is of God, 

—that we are called to be members of the Royal 

Priesthood. 

We are viewing our text just now specially 
from the standpoint of the Priesthood, or new race, 
or new nation, different from the remainder of mankind 
in that God has invited them to become joint-heirs 
with his Son in the great Royal Priesthood 
which he designs shall ultimately bless all the families 
of the earth. The royal feature of the matter 
belongs to the future; we have no royalty yet. It 
is only in prospect; it will be attained after we have 
faithfully performed the service which belongs to 
this present time and have thus proven ourselves 
worthy, according to the divine terms, to be members 



of the glorified Priesthood through our Lord 
Jesus' merit, and under him as our Head. Meantime 
it behooves us to learn distinctly what is expected 
of us as respects our vocation in the present 
time; what obligations attach to us as those who 
have made the consecration and have been respectively 
accepted to this Royal Priesthood and anointed 
with the holy Spirit in anticipation of our attainment 
of the goal. 

The Apostle Paul (Heb. 8:3) declares that 
"Every High Priest is ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices: 
wherefore it is of necessity that this man 
[the man Christ Jesus] have somewhat also to offer." 
The thought is that the High Priest serves,— is as an 
offerer or sacrificer to God. True, the Apostle is 
speaking here of our Lord Jesus and not of us, but 
from his own words elsewhere we will know that it 
is expected of all the members of the body that they 
shall be joint sharers with their Lord and Master 
in the sufferings and sacrifices of this present time, 
that they may be counted worthy to share with him 
the glories of the future. And the same Apostle explains 

R3265 : page 406 

that he (Christ) is our Head, and that we are, 

as members of his body, "filling up that which is behind 

of the afflictions of Christ," walking in his footsteps. 

The lesson, then, to each member of this 

Royal Priesthood, is that the special mission of their 

office, vocation, calling in the present time, is to 

sacrifice. 

In the light of the Apostle's explanation we can 
see that our Lord Jesus as the Head Priest had 
something to offer to God, and that he did offer it in 
that he offered up himself a sacrifice. (Heb. 7:27.) 
We can see how his sacrifice could be acceptable to 
God, because in him was no sin— he was holy, harmless, 
undefiled, separate from sinners. But how 
can we, who "by nature are children of wrath even 
as others,"— how can we fulfil our mission as priests 
to present some offering to God when we have 
nothing which is our own that would be acceptable, 
because all we have and are is by nature tainted with 
sin and under divine condemnation? The Scriptures 
answer that "that which God hath cleansed," his 
people are no longer to consider common or unclean; 
they tell us that God has justified us freely 
from our imperfections through the merit of Christ's 
sacrifice; they tell us that we are acceptable to God 
"in the Beloved." 

The Apostle carries this same thought further, 
and emphasizes it, saying, "I beseech you therefore 
brethren, by the mercies of God [no longer aliens, 
strangers, foreigners, but redeemed and accepted of 
the Father], that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, 



holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable 

service." (Rom. 12:1.) Here the entire 

matter is summed up. We are not to consider any 

longer that, after being justified by faith, the Lord 

esteems us unholy and unacceptable, but are to 

understand that the very object of our present justification 

by faith was to make us acceptable to the 

Father, to make us to be priests, to furnish us opportunities 

to do the work of a priest in this present 

time; namely, to sacrifice— to sacrifice ourselves 

—to present our bodies living sacrifices to God 

through Christ's merit. What a wonderful plan! 

what a wonderful privilege to be permitted to be 

priests! what a gracious arrangement! It gives 

us opportunity of completing the priestly service of 

sacrificing now, to the intent that by and by we 

may enjoy the privileges of the other part of the 

priest's work, connected with the glory and royalty 

of the Millennial Kingdom. 

If then God ordained the High Priest to offer 
sacrifices, and that was the particular feature of his 
calling while on earth, so likewise it is the particular 
feature of the calling of all those who would walk 
in his steps— ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices 
to God. The Apostle Peter calls this same matter 
to our attention in a verse preceding our text (v. 5), 
where he declares the Church "A holy priesthood to 
offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by 
Jesus Christ." Ah, but, says one, the Apostles differ 
respecting what shall be our sacrifices. The 
Apostle Paul declares, "Present your body a living 
sacrifice," while the Apostle Peter here declares that 
we should offer up spiritual sacrifices, and our bodies 
are certainly not spiritual bodies. We reply that 
the word "spiritual" in this text is not found in the 
oldest Greek manuscript, known as the Sinaitic. Apparently 
some scribe of about the fourth or fifth 
century must have concluded that the Apostle had 
left his statement of the matter incomplete, and that 
there would be danger of some understanding him 
to mean that the Royal Priesthood should offer bullocks 
and goats; and to hinder such a construction 
of the Apostle's language, the no doubt well-meaning 
copyist added the word "spiritual." 

But in the light of Present Truth we can see that 
he erred in attempting to assist the inspiration which 
guided the Apostle to a proper statement of the matter. 
We can see most clearly that our Lord Jesus 
did not offer a spiritual sacrifice, but a human sacrifice 
for sin— that for this reason it was necessary 
that he should leave the spiritual condition in which 
he previously existed and should take upon him 
human conditions,— become a man,— that he by the 
grace of God might taste death for every man. 
Adam was not a spirit being when he sinned, hence 
God's sentence was not against a spirit being, but, 



"Dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return." 
Hence it was necessary that the Lord Jesus should 
become the man Christ Jesus; that as by a man came 
death, so also by man should come the resurrection 
of the dead. And as our Lord's sacrifice was not 
a spiritual sacrifice but a human one, so it is also with 
our sacrifice: we are not to sacrifice our spiritual natures 
nor our spiritual interests nor anything else 
that is spiritual; but we are to sacrifice our justified 
human natures, our justified flesh, as the Apostle 
urges, "Present your bodies living sacrifices, holy, 
acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable 
service." 

The question should now properly arise in the 
minds of all who realize themselves as consecrated 
to the Lord, as members of the Royal Priesthood, 
to what extent am I fulfilling my present priestly 
office, and performing daily as I may have opportunity 
my appointed work of sacrifice— laying down my 
life for the brethren? Too many, alas! under the 
false teachings of Babylon, both in word and in custom, 

R3266 : page 406 

have come to consider that money getting and 

honor getting and ease getting and general self-preservation 

constitute the reasonable service of the 

Lord's people. Sacrificers are looked upon as deluded 

fanatics— especially in proportion as the sacrificing 

is done for the Truth's sake in the interest of 

spiritual things. We are not, however, to be taught 

of the world, nor by a cold worldly-wise churchianity; 

but we are to hearken to the voice of the good 

Shepherd, to hear his Word, to learn of him if we 

would be prepared by him in the school of Christ 

for the glorious things promised us as his joint-heirs 

in the future. "If we suffer with him we shall also 

reign with him," is the message. 

We can see how the Apostle, even though finding 
it at times necessary to engage in the business 
of tentmaking, might be considered as a priest 
whose time, energy, talents were all sacrificed to the 
Lord and given freely in serving his people— in doing 
good unto all men as he had opportunity, especially 

R3266 : page 407 

unto the household of faith: but how can 

others who have not the opportunity, not the talents, 

not the open door for such special service as his— 

how can those who must provide for their own 

household according to the Lord's Word, be sacrificing 

priests, when as a matter of necessity nearly 

all of their time must be given to tent making, shoe 

making, housework, or whatever other employment 

providence seems to have opened before them as 



their avocations? When it is necessary to spend 
nearly all of eight to twelve hours per day continuously 
in the service of our avocations, how can we 
consider or serve the interests of our vocation, the 
priesthood? 

The Lord has very graciously made arrangements 
adapted to this very condition. He assures 
us in his Word that it is not the amount we shall 
accomplish in his cause, but the spirit, the desire and 
the effort which we manifest that in his esteem would 
indicate the degree of our self-sacrifice. He graciously 
declares that if our hearts be given to him, 
whatsoever we do may be done as unto the Lord, and 
if done as unto him will be accepted by him. From 
this standpoint we can see that the work which the 
Apostle Paul did upon the tents passed to his credit 
as a part of his priestly sacrifice, just as much as the 
other part of his time which he spent in more congenial 
methods of proclaiming the gospel. Similarly, 
we can see that the shoemaker working at his 
bench, or the tinner at his labor, or the butcher in 
his shop, or the housekeeper, if at heart fully consecrated 
to the Lord, would be seeking to do their 
work as unto the Lord, and that if careful to use his 
opportunities for proclaiming the Truth, for serving 
the brethren, for doing good unto all men as opportunity 
afforded, the improvement of the few opportunities 
coming to them and their willingness to 
sacrifice personal tastes and convenience for the service 
of the Truth and for the brethren, would be 
counted by the Lord as a full sacrifice, because such 
a disposition in respect to little things would imply 
an equal faithfulness in the presence of larger 
opportunities. Luke 16:10. 

This does not mean that the Lord's people are 
to be content with the usual routine of daily life in 
the home or in the shop, and are to say to themselves, 
"God accepts my labor as thoroughly as 
though it were given directly to him in some other 
more desirable form," but it does mean that each 
person so situated should day by day carefully scan 
his earthly duties and obligations to see in what 
manner he could justly and properly cut off moments, 
hours or days from the service of earthly 
things and earthly interests, that now might be given 
to sacrifice for spiritual things and spiritual interests 
of himself or others. The consecrated heart, 
the sacrificing priest, is the one who will improve the 
moments as they swiftly fly, using them as far as 
possible in the Father's business. For instance, a 
workman may not take his employer's time to talk 
religion to his mate, for that would be unjust and 
contrary to the divine arrangement; but in the noon 
hour he may improve opportunities, and instead of 
engaging in worldly or foolish conversation or rude 
jest, he will seek to use opportunities to tell the good 



tidings to others; or if he have no such opportunities, 
finding no hearing ears, he will use the time in 
spiritually uplifting himself by study of the teachings 
and principles of the divine Word. In the evening 
he may not neglect duties of a social nature 
toward his wife and children, but will remember that 
under the divine arrangement he has some obligation 
toward them in respect to their mental and spiritual 
development as well as for their temporal necessities, 
and he will seek to use a part of his time in 
their service, perhaps sacrificing an inclination to 
read some story or light literature, or to indolently 
while away the time doing nothing. In addition to 
thinking of his obligations toward his family, he will 
think beyond them of his own spiritual needs and of 
the Lord's family and their necessities, and will endeavor 
to judge of the mind of the Lord in respect 
to how each moment shall be used. He consecrated 
every hour, every moment, when he presented himself 
a living sacrifice to the Lord; and the opportunities 
of laying down moments and hours in the interests 
of his New Creature and in the interests of 
spiritual brethren, etc., are coming and going daily, 
and the Lord is looking to see to what extent he 
was a sincere covenanter, sacrificer. These sacrifices 
on behalf of neighbors, friends, wife, children, 
husband, parents, are accepted of the Lord if done 
as a result of consecration to him, and as a result 
of the believing that these are the opportunities 
which his providence has opened for exhibitions of 
the self-sacrificing spirit. 

The same opportunities, though in a different 
form, come to the youth who is under age and subject 
to his parents, and to the wife surrounded by 
family cares and duties. If the consecration be to 
the Lord, then every sacrifice of our just rights and 
interests on behalf of ourselves as New Creatures, on 
behalf of husbands or children, father or mother, 
neighbors or friends, brethren in Christ, is counted 
of the Lord as so much done to him; whereas if the 
very same services were rendered from any other 
standpoint— by any one unjustified, and not consecrated 
to the Lord, or merely done to the individuals 
and not as a sacrifice unto the Lord— these things 
would not count to us as priests, as our sacrifices; 
but when viewed from the standpoint of consecration 
to the Lord, and faithfully performed as being our 
best judgment of what would be the Lord's will concerning 
our use of our time, interests, talents, etc., 
they are sacrifices wholly acceptable to God, our reasonable 
service. 

We are to remember that abstaining from immoralities, 
from sins, is not sacrificing. Nothing 
can be acceptably sacrificed to the Lord that is not 
of itself right, just, proper. It may be imperfect, as 
all that we have and do are necessarily blemished by 



reason of our share with the race in its fall; but unintentional 

blemishes of proper things are all covered 

by the merits of our Redeemer's sacrifice, as we 

have just seen. Another form of sacrifice frequently 

not discerned by the Royal Priesthood is the opportunity 

of renouncing our own ways or plans, our own 

methods or preferences, and in the interests of peace 

R3266 : page 408 

accepting instead the plans, the preferences of others 
—where it is merely a matter of personal preference, 
and where we believe the Lord will be as willing to 
have the matter one way as another. We can in the 
interests of peace sacrifice our preferences to the 
wishes of others if we see some good can be gained 
by such a course; as, for instance, the preservation 
of the peace of the home or the opportunity of winning 
our opponent to the Truth, or any good cause. 
Such sacrifices are pleasing to the Lord, who instructs 
us through the Apostle that, so far as in us 
lies, we should live peaceably with all men; and 
that we should rather suffer wrong and take injury 
from a brother in Christ than take the matter before 
the world of unbelievers and thus risk a general 
odium upon the Lord's cause.— Rom. 12:18; 
1 Cor. 6:7. 

We have known cases, however, where dear 
brethren in the interests of peace and harmony 
yielded their rights— and properly enough where no 
principle was involved— but who, nevertheless, held 
a kind of grudge against those to whom they had 
yielded, feeling that somehow or other they had 
been defrauded of their rights. This is wrong, 
and indicates that the sacrifice was not fully made. 
If the matter in dispute had been fully sacrificed, as 
unto the Lord, there would surely have been no room 
for feeling that it had been taken from them. Under 
such circumstances the Lord's dear followers would 
do well to make haste to cast out of their minds anything 
akin to resentment and the feeling that they 
had been deprived of their just rights, and, instead, 
to take into their hearts that they had fully, freely, 
absolutely given up the matter in the interests of 
peace and it was dead, buried forever, with no resentment 
toward any one, but, on the contrary, with 
the feeling of joy and rejoicing that this matter had 
been sacrificed to the Lord, to the interests of the 
home or the Church or what not, because they believed 
that it would be pleasing, acceptable to him, 
and, therefore, their reasonable service. 

We are to remember that we have each but one 
sacrifice; that it is to be rendered to the Lord day 
by day in the improvement of every opportunity, as 
it comes to us, to serve him and his. We are to 
remember that while it consists of many little sacrifices, 



some of them too small to mention or even 
to consider, nevertheless it will require all of these 
to complete the one sacrifice which we made at the 
beginning of our induction into his family. When 
we gave our wills, our hearts, we gave our all; and 
any holding back in any of the little affairs of life — 
any refusal to sacrifice that which we think would 
please the Lord— is a keeping back of that much of 
what we have devoted to him. 

The Lord is very patient toward us, and gives 
us repeated opportunities to accomplish the work 
of sacrifice; but it must be accomplished, our wills 

R3267 : page 408 

must be slain, must be submitted to the Lord's will, 
else we shall never attain to joint-heirship with 
him in the Kingdom— never become members of the 
overcoming Royal Priesthood. He graciously gives 
us line upon line, lesson upon lesson, respecting this 
subject; shows it to us in his Word from different 
standpoints, impressing upon us the necessity of being 
dead to self and alive toward God through Jesus 
Christ our Lord— the necessity of developing the 
various graces of the Spirit which are implied in this 
sacrificing work. Every one who will be a sacrificer 
must of necessity be meek, humble, teachable, 
else very shortly he will get out of the way. He must 
also learn to develop the grace of the Lord along 
the line of patience, because it certainly requires 
patience to deny ourselves and to submit at times to 
injustice where there is no proper means of avoiding 
it without doing injury to the Lord's cause or to 
some of his people. It also implies a cultivation of 
brotherly kindness and, in a word, the development 
of the whole will of God in our hearts and lives; 
namely, love, which must be attained in a large and 
overcoming measure ere we shall have completed 
our earthly work of sacrificing. 

In our studies of the "Tabernacle Shadows of 
Better Sacrifices," we saw that every one who took 
part in the priesthood was required to wash his 
hands and feet at the laver. We saw that the laver 
represented the Word, or message of God, and that 
the water, therefore, represented the Truth; and thus 
it is the Truth which is to cleanse the Royal Priesthood 
from the defilements of the flesh. As a whole 
we are clean, being covered with the robe of Christ's 
righteousness; but in our contact with the world we 
are to seek to put away the defilements of earth 
which come to us in connection with our daily walk 
and service, represented by our feet and our hands. 
And the Apostle, in the verse preceding our text, is 
not forgetful to mention this cleansing which all 
must have in order to be acceptable as members of 
the Royal Priesthood. In the verses 1 to 3, inclusive, 



he mentions that those who would be Royal 
Priests must lay aside "all malice and all guile and 
hypocrisies, and envies and all evil speakings." As 
the sacrificing requires all of the present life, so the 
washing requires all the present life; and only those 
who both wash and sacrifice will be accepted into 
the glorious Royal Priesthood of the future. 

It will be noticed that the Apostle does not represent 
that these priests will wash themselves from 
murders and gross sins, for those who have been begotten 
of the holy Spirit are necessarily far removed 
from any sympathy with any of the grosser forms 
of sin. What he does show is the more refined forms 
of evil which still infest the flesh, even of those who 
have the new mind, and which require to be mortified, 
rooted out, cleansed away. How "close girdling" 
are these sins that are mentioned— how many 
of the prospective members of the Royal Priesthood 
find that they have defilements along this line, malice, 
guile, hypocrisy, envy, evil speaking! It is safe 
to say that every one has some, if not all of these 
weaknesses in the flesh to contend with— especially 
at the beginning of his entrance upon the priestly 
vocation. How carefully all should seek to put all 
these away! how each should scrutinize, not only 
every act of life and every word and every thought, 
but, additionally, every motive underlying his words, 
thoughts and actions, so that they may be more and 

R3267 : page 409 

more purified from the earth defilements and be 
more and more acceptable to the Lord! 

With our very best endeavors we may never get 
entirely free from all of these "close girdling" sins 
while still in the flesh; but one thing is sure— the 
heart must be free from them, else we can never be 
accepted as members of the glorious priesthood. The 
heart must be so completely filled with the love of 
God that it will feel a repugnance to all of these evils, 
which are repulsive to the divine mind; and happy 
for us it is that God has promised to accept such a 
condition of our hearts, and that knowing the imperfections 
of the flesh with which we contend, he is not 
requiring that we shall attain to absolute flesh perfection, 
but that we shall be pure in heart in order 
to see him and to share in the glory which he has 
promised to his people. 

What we have seen respecting the perfect love 
which must dominate our hearts in order to enable 
us to complete our sacrifice in the Lord, is not so 
different from the Lord's requirements respecting 
all his creatures. There could be no angel of heaven 
acceptable to the Father without this spirit of love, 
of devotion, which, if the conditions in heaven were 
similar to the conditions now in the earth, would 



prompt and inspire all of the Lord's faithful angels 
to do good to the needy ones even at the cost of 
self-sacrifice and inconvenience. We can see that 
the same law of love must ultimately be required of 
the world of mankind who shall be developed under 
the training of the Millennial age, the world's school 
time. They also must ultimately reach that degree 
of love which, if the conditions were similar to those 
which now prevail, would lead them to sacrifice in 
the interest of the needy. Nothing less than this 
could be considered as a recovery on man's part of 
that which was lost— the image and likeness of God. 

The peculiarity, then, of this present time and of 
the Church's position in it, is the fact that we are 
begotten to the new mind, the new will, the new 
spirit and law of love, while still sin and death prevail 
around us. Hence to us living under present 
conditions, in contact with the weaknesses and imperfections 
and trials of others, it becomes, necessarily, 
an evidence of the new mind that, seeing 
these conditions, we should be permitted to make 
sacrifices on behalf of the brethren and on behalf of 
all men as we have opportunity. These indeed are severe 
testings and trials, which will come to the world 
of mankind during the Millennial Age, when all conditions 
will be favorable to the development of the 
new mind of love. They are more severe testings 
also than are brought to bear upon the holy angels, 
who, although possessing this love, have not the 
weaknesses and imperfections of the flesh, the fallen 
nature, to contend with in its exercise, and who, 
therefore, can gain no such victory as the Church of 
Christ is called upon to fight for and by the grace of 
her Lord to win. 

It is on this account that the Lord has attached 
to this "little flock," now being selected under these 
self-sacrificing conditions, so great a reward; as it 
is written,— "Eye hath not seen nor ear heard, 
neither have entered into the heart of man, the things 
which God hath prepared for them that love him." 
(1 Cor. 2:9.) Even though God hath revealed these 
things to us by his Spirit, which searcheth all things, 
even the deep things of God, nevertheless it is not 
possible for us to comprehend, know fully. As the 
Apostle says, we now see these glorious things of 
the future through a smoked glass, obscurely; but 
by and by we shall see face to face and know as we 
are known, and appreciate fully the wonderful things 
which God has declared to us through his Son and 
his faithful apostles. Then the royal feature of this 
priestly office will be added, and they shall be indeed 
priests, royal, sons of the Highest, and shine 
forth as the sun in the Kingdom of their Father. 

This royalty, while it will have great dignity, 
majesty and power, is not attracting us by any illustrations 
we have in earthly royalty, with its pride 



and often selfishness and pomp and show. It is attracting 
us, however, by the glorious things which 
God hath spoken respecting the work of these Royal 
Priests— the work of ruling, blessing and uplifting 
the world of mankind. This glorious hope inspires, 
encourages and revives the fainting priests who are 
now sacrificing, and the Lord has so intended. In 
view of these things let us remember our calling, 
brethren, and not mistake the avocations of life for 
the great vocation which God hath set before us in 
the Gospel. Let us see to it that every day shall witness 
our faithfulness to our priestly ordination of 
cleansing, priestly sacrificing, and thus preparing 
ourselves under the direction of the great High-priest 
for the glorious work that the heavenly Father 
has arranged for us in his wonderful plan. 



R3267 : page 409 

"O ABSALOM, MY SON, MY SON!" 

-2 SAM. 18:24-33. -NOVEMBER 8.- 

GOLDEN TEXT:-"A foolish son is a 
grief to his father."— Prov. 17:25. 

UTTERLY surprised and unprepared for Absalom's 
unfilial conduct was King David, 
when he learned of his son's rebellion and 
realized its extensiveness and how the hearts of the 
people had been stolen from him by his son's perfidy. 
He at once perceived that no other course 
was open to him than that of flight. It was a time 
of peace, and he had not a large retinue of soldiers 
at the Capital, but merely what might be termed a 
body guard. With these and the loyal officers of the 
court he fled across the Jordan, where he had time 
and opportunity to gather a few reinforcements 
and where he might feel comparatively secure in the 
small but strongly fortified city called Mahanaim. 
Meantime Absalom displayed his contempt for his 
father and his household and thus, so to speak, 
showed the people that the rebellion was one in 
which no quarter or reconciliation was to be expected. 
With a large army which had cast in their 
fortunes with the rebellious prince and expected 

R3268 : page 410 

under his patronage to reap large results of honor 
and influence and power as successors to the officers 
of the kingdom, Absalom pursued King David with 
haste. There seems to have been no doubt whatever 
that he was bent on capping the climax of his 



disgraceful course by the murder of his father. His 
pursuit with a large army meant this. 

Although King David's army was much the 
smaller of the two, they probably had the advantage 
in that many of the King's guard were men of special 
ability and large experience as warriors, according 
to the methods of their time. The King was persuaded 
not to go with the army, whereupon he divided 
it into three parts under three of his ablest adherents. 
These met Absalom's army, and attacking 
it from different quarters, the battle resulted in 
the slaughter of 20,000 of Absalom's forces and the 
routing of the remainder, including Absalom himself, 
who, being caught by the "head" in the low 
branches of a tree, was unhorsed and left helpless, 
and was slain by Joab, the chief of King David's 
generals. 

Here our present lesson opens. Near the watch 
tower of the wall of Mahanaim King David awaits 
news of the battle, while the watchman in the tower 
reports that he sees a messenger running, and, later, 
another. The first he recognizes as the son of his 
friend the priest, and according to the custom of the 
times he interpreted this to mean that the tidings 
were good, because a good man had been sent with 
them. This custom should still be in force amongst 
the Lord's people— that a good man would always 
seek to bear a good message. The words of the 
mouth and the meditations of the heart of all who 
are loyal to the Lord should be good— only good, 
ever good. Thus it is that God chooses not the 
worldly wise neither the worldly great, but those 
who are loyal at heart to him as his mouthpieces; 
and it should more and more be recognized that 
the bad tidings of great misery are not of the Lord, 
that those who bear them are not bearing the Lord's 
message, and that if they had the right attitude of 
heart toward the Lord, and the right spirit of love, 
they would not have the disposition to bear an evil 
message which maligns the divine character in a 
manner that even the depraved would resent if it 
were charged against them. 

When the first runner arrived he announced in 
a general way the success of the King's army. Then 
the King— in harmony with his parting words to 
the soldiers, that they should spare Absalom in any 
event— inquired first of all, "Is the young man Absalom 
safe?" As we are shocked with the unfilial 
conduct of Absalom toward his father, we are deeply 
impressed with the father love of David for his erring 
son, who sought not only his throne but his 
life. What was the difference between the two 
characters? which was the more noble, the more 
honorable, the more admirable? There could be but 
one answer from any quarter on this subject; even 
David's enemies could not read this record without 



an appreciation of his grandeur of soul. He was 
more anxious for Absalom than for his throne apparently 
—yea, and for his own life. The difference 
between the two characters can be accounted for in 
only one way, namely— that David was a man after 
God's own heart, one who had passed through trying 
experiences and learned profitable lessons, one in 
whom the spirit of love had been considerably developed. 
Absalom, on the contrary, is an illustration 
of selfishness and ambition which stooped to 
anything to accomplish its ends. David, although 
not a member of the house of sons of which Christ 
is the head, was one of the noble members of the 
house of servants of which Moses was the head.— 
Heb. 3:5,6. 

Some have esteemed that the answer of Ahimaaz 
was an untruth, intended to soften the facts so as 
not to wound the feelings of the King; but we cannot 
agree to this. We hold that, according to the 
record, the young man told the truth, and we believe 
that it would be much better for everybody if all 
mankind similarly confined themselves in their replies 
to important questions to the strict meaning of 
the word "know." The reply was that he had seen 
a commotion, knew that the battle was ended, knew 
that the victory was on the King's side, but knew nothing 
more. True, he had heard Joab say something 
about the King's son, but that was hearsay and 
not knowledge, and the young man answered the 
King properly when he said that he did not know the 
answer to the query about Absalom. The Lord's 
people above all others should be particular to discriminate 
between knowledge and belief and hearsay, 
etc. 

The second runner, Cushi, or literally a Cushite 
—that is, a negro— was probably one of the king's 
household servants who engaged in the battle. He 
quickly told the whole story, and it was upon hearing 
thus of Absalom's death that the King was 
moved to violent grief, and gave utterance to words 
which stand as amongst the most pathetic on the 
pages of history. "O my son Absalom, my son, my 
son Absalom! would God I had died for thee, O Absalom, 
my son, my son!" 

The pity is that the King's love for his son did 
not take a more practical course at the proper time. 
He was an indulgent rather than a wise father. Evidently 
the flash and glitter of the young man's natural 
talents not only charmed the people but charmed 
his father, so that he practically had whatever he 
wanted of everything, the King failing to apply to 
his son the valuable lessons which he himself would 
learn, to the effect that the reverence of the Lord is 
the beginning of wisdom, and that true happiness 
and true prosperity are only to be found in this path, 
which wisdom indicates. His unwise love for his 



son led him to feel that the young man must sow his 
wild oats and should not be much restrained, and 
now when he witnessed the reaping of those wild 
oats his heart was convulsed with sorrow. And so 
it has been with many a father and many a mother 
who, although truly the Lord's fail to apply to their 
children the lessons which the Lord has taught them 
by distressing experiences. It is unnecessary to 
comment upon the unwisdom of such love and to 

R3268 : page 411 

point the moral to Christian parents. It points itself, 
and Solomon the wise son expresses it tenderly 
when he said, in the words of our Golden Text, that 
"A foolish son is a grief to his father," and noted 
again that "He who spareth the rod hateth his son." 
From the practical standpoint, however the matter 
may appear to the superficial observer, the essence 
of wisdom is contained in his further observation, 
"Train up a child in the way he should go, and when 
he is old he will not depart from it." Parents seem 
not to fully appreciate the fact that in the training of 
their children, either in the right way or in the 
wrong way, they are laying out for themselves either 
joys or sorrows for the future. 

King David's inquiry respecting his son, "Is the 
young man safe?" should be the inquiry of every 
father and every mother respecting their sons and 
their daughters; but let them not do as David did 
—wait until sin has sprouted and blossomed and 
brought forth evil fruitage. Let them begin by realizing 
their duty toward their posterity in their earliest 
infancy. The duty of Christian parents toward 
their children is next to their duty to the Lord,— 
indeed the Lord has indicated that parental duty 
ranks first among all the earthly obligations of the 
saints. 



R3268 : page 411 

"THE LORD IS MY SHEPHERD." 

Psalm 23. -Nov. 15. 

JEHOVAH is my Shepherd, is the Prophet's sentiment, 

and our Lord's explanation of the matter 

further is that the great Shepherd's Son has been 

given full charge of the sheep. (John 10:1-16.) Not 

all mankind, however, are sheep, or have the Shepherd's 

care. In the present time only those who 

have heard the Shepherd's voice and responded to 

his call to become his sheep are of his flock, and 

his word on the subject is that it is a little flock, to 



whom it will be the Father's good pleasure eventually 
to give the kingdom in joint-heirship with his 
Son, their "Chief Shepherd." Then will come the 
time referred to by our Lord when "other sheep" 
will be found. The entire Millennial age, with all 
the forces and blessings of the heavenly kingdom, 
will be devoted to the finding of the other sheep. 
Our Lord's words are,— "Other sheep I have, which 
are not of this fold [not of the little flock of this 
Gospel age]; them also I must bring [in due time to 
a knowledge of the Truth and to the full privileges 
of sheep], and there shall be one flock and one 
shepherd." (John 10:16.) Eventually all of God's 
creatures on various planes of being shall be recognized 
as one family of God, as it is written of our 
Lord, "In whom the whole family of God both in 
heaven and in earth are named." (Eph. 3:15.) And 
again, "He shall gather together in one all things 
in Christ both in heaven and on earth." (Eph. 1:10.) 
However, though it may be interesting and helpful 
and profitable to understand something of our great 
Shepherd's generous plans for the future, our interest 
centers chiefly in the little flock of the present 
time, to which alone this lesson refers in many of 
its particulars. 

Professor George Adam Smith gives the following 
interesting description of the difference between 
the shepherds of sheep in olden times in Palestine 
and the care of sheep as is known to us of the 
present day. This is an important point to be remembered, 
as it was the eastern shepherd who 
illustrated our heavenly Shepherd's care for his little 
flock. Prof. Smith says:— 

R3269 : page 411 

"An Eastern pasture is very different from the 
narrow meadows and dyked hillsides with which we 
are familiar at home. It is vast and often practically 
boundless; it has to be extensive, for the greater part 
of it is barren— in fact the Hebrew word for desert 
and for pasture is the same. The most of it consists 
of dry, stony soil, out of which, for the great part 
of the year the sun has sucked all life. In this monotony 
the breaks are few, and consist of paths more 
or less fitful, gorges or thickets where wild beasts 
lurk, and oases of pleasant grass and water. Now 
in such a landscape of mirage, illusive paths, lurking 
terrors, and infrequent herbage, it is evident 
that the person and character of the shepherd must 
mean a great deal more to the sheep than it means 
to sheep with us. With us a flock of sheep without 
a shepherd is a common experience: every day we 
may see them left to themselves in a secure field or 
scattered over a side hill, with a far-traveling wire 
fence to keep them from straying. But I do not remember 



ever to have seen in the East a flock of 
sheep without a shepherd." 

Doubtless as the Prophet David penned this 
Psalm, his mind went back to his father's flock and 
to his own experience as its shepherd, concerning 
which we incidentally have the mention that while 
protecting it he slew a lion and a bear. Under 
heavenly inspiration the prophet pictures the Almighty 
One as the great caretaker watching over 
and protecting from harm all whom he recognizes 
as his "sheep." Nothing can be farther from the 
sentiment of this prophecy and illustration than the 
growing prevalent sentiment which recognizes Jehovah 
God as the shepherd and father of all mankind, 
and which is frequently voiced in the words, 
"Fatherhood of God, and brotherhood of man." 
This view ignores man's will and also ignores the 
Lord's Word, which declares that there are goats 
and wolves as well as sheep; that while some have 
become children of God, it is through faith and 
"adoption," and that many from the divine standpoint, 
so far from being recognized as children of 
God, are referred to as "of your father, the devil, for 
his works you do." (John 8:44.) Originally our 
race, represented by father Adam in sinless perfection, 
was recognized as related to Jehovah, but the 
breaking of this relationship by man's wilful disobedience 
and departure from God is clearly recognized 
in the Scripture, so that none are recognized as 
sons of God today unless they have been begotten 
again, begotten from above. Nor is it our hope that 
any in the future will be recognized as sons of God or 
as sheep of the Lord's fold except as they shall heartily 
renounce sin, and, being granted knowledge of divine 
grace, shall heartily accept the same and "follow 
on to know the Lord." 

Applying the psalm to the little flock, all of its 
provisions fit most minutely. Because the Lord is 
our Shepherd, we shall not want. Those who are 
proper sheep will submit their wills to the shepherd's 
will and trust wholly to his guidance, and so doing 
are relieved of that anxious craving so common to 
the children of the world and which is never satisfied, 
but the more it gets the more it wants. The 
Lord's sheep appreciate the heavenly things more 
than the earthly, and their wants in this respect are 
more than supplied when they accept by faith the 
divine assurance that 

"No good thing will He withhold 
From sheep which stray not from His fold." 
They have given up every earthly interest in exchange 
for the heavenly, and, realizing their own insufficiency 
and lack of judgment, they are trusting 
to the Lord to grant them such experiences, leadings, 
trials, difficulties, blessings, etc., in this present life 
as will be for their highest good, and as would work 



out for them a share of the glorious things of the 
future to which they have been called. The wants 
of this class are not of the kind after which the Gentiles 
seek, and for which they are anxious and strive. 
They in their hearts rejoice in the sentiment expressed 
by the poet, "Jesus has satisfied, Jesus is 
mine." Matt. 6:32. 

Although the experiences of the Lord's sheep 
include many trials in the parched wilderness of sin, 
yet he graciously gives them restful experiences in 
oases of divine favor. These are not always accompanied 
with immunities from trial, as the world 
would view the matter, but certainly are seasons of 
rest and refreshment— to such an extent that the 
Lord's sheep may truthfully say that they have "the 
peace of God which passeth all understanding" ruling 
in their hearts, notwithstanding outward trials, 
difficulties, perplexities and adversities. Which of 
the Lord's sheep has not found such green pasturage 
of spiritual refreshment in his private devotions and 
studies of divine things? which of them has not experienced 
similar refreshment and rest and nourishment 
from the Master's provision that his sheep shall 
not forsake the assembling of themselves together as 
the manner of some is— for the study of the Word, 
for prayer, for testimonies of the Lord's goodness 
and mercy? All these opportunities and privileges, 
whether personally experienced or whether they are 
yet only in the mind through the medium of the 
printed page, are provisions made for the sheep 
by the great Shepherd. Those sheep which find 
no enjoyment in such privileges and blessings and 
refreshments have reason to question their faithfulness 
in following the lead of the Shepherd. And 
those sheep which, finding such opportunities, decline 
to use them, thus give evidence of lack of harmony 
with the Shepherd's gracious intentions and wisdom. 

The "still waters" are contrasted with the rushing 
torrent of the mountain slope— still, not in the 
sense of stagnancy, but rather smooth flowing. At 
the latter only could the sheep receive proper refreshment. 
So applying the thought to the little 
flock, we find that the great Shepherd leads us away 
from the strifes of worldly ambition, from greatness 
and power and riches and honors highly esteemed 
amongst men, but does not lead us to stagnancy— 
rather to spiritual ambitions which bring with them 
a restfulness and refreshment of soul obtainable 
from no other source. The streams of truth and 
grace are living, but comparatively quiet, waters. 
As the Prophet intimates, these are not to be found 
by the sheep alone; to find them requires the leading 
of the Spirit. Let us give diligence to his voice, 
remembering his Word— that his sheep hear his 
voice and follow him. Let us discriminate, discern 
his voice, with its truthful accent, so different 



from the voice of error. Strangers true sheep will 
not follow, for they know not the voice of strangers. 
They do not like its money ring, or its worldly ambition 
ring, or its priestcraft tone, or its contradiction 
of the spirit of the divine message and method. 

"He restoreth my soul." The prophet does not 
refer to a restoration of body or of physical health, 
but a restoration of soul, being. Some of the Lord's 
most precious saints have been weary and faint and 
troubled— even the dear Redeemer fainted under his 
cross, and was neither kept whole or made whole 
miraculously on the occasion. The application of 
the Prophet's words to the Christian experience 
would make these experiences, called restoring of 
soul or being, to correspond with our justification to 
life. All our lives were forfeited under the divine 
sentence, and by faith a complete restitution or restoration 
of soul is granted to the believer, that he 
might have something to offer in sacrifice to the 
Lord, "holy, acceptable" (Rom. 12:1), and that in 
this sacrifice service he may walk in the footsteps 
of the great Shepherd who lay down his life for the 
sheep. Thus are the true sheep led in right paths, 
in proper paths, advantageous to their spiritual development, 
though frequently trying and difficult to 
them according to the flesh. This favor and blessing 
and opportunity comes to them not for their own 
sakes or worthiness but through the Lord's grace— 
"for his name's sake." 

The whole world is walking in the valley of the 
shadow of death. Mountain tops of life, of affection, 
were left by the race six thousand years ago, 
when Father Adam fell from his harmony with God 
to the plane of sin and death. The valley of sin 
carries with it the shadow of death, the penalty of sin. 
In the broad road the whole human family still 
walks; and even though the Shepherd leads his flock 
upward, and in the reverse direction from the 
course of the world, nevertheless, according to the 
flesh, they are still in the world, in this valley of the 
shadow of death. However, the true sheep, hearing 
the voice of the good Shepherd who gave his life 
for the sheep, have learned to be neither careless and 

R3269 : page 413 

indifferent as are some, nor to be in fear and doubt 
and perplexity as are the majority. These on the 
contrary fear no evil. They realize indeed that the 
penalty of sin is upon the race, but they realize also 
that divine love has provided a redemption. They 
realize that the whole world is going down to sheol, 
to hades, but that God has made provision that the 
good Shepherd shall deliver his little flock from the 
power of the grave in the First Resurrection, and 
that subsequently all that are in their graves shall 



hear the voice of the Son of man and shall come 
forth to a full, fair, reasonable, proper judgment— 
the testing respecting their willingness to be his 
sheep and to follow him and to attain everlasting 
life through him. The sheep of the little flock fear 
no evil because of the Lord's favor, because he is 
with them, on their side, and has shown his favor 
in the redemption price already paid. He is with 
them, too, in his word of promise— his assurance that 
death shall not mean extinction of life, but merely, 
until the resurrection, an undisturbed sleep in Jesus. 
What wonder that these can walk through the valley 
of the shadow of death singing and making melody 
in their hearts to the Lord, calling upon their 
souls with all that is within them to praise and 
laud and magnify his great and holy name, who loved 
us and bought us with his precious blood, and has 
called us to joint-heirship with our dear Redeemer. 

"His rod and his staff, they comfort me." As 
the Shepherd's crook was used to assist the sheep 
out of difficulties, to defend it from its too powerful 
enemies and to chasten it when inattentive, 

R3270 : page 413 

and as all of these uses of the rod were for the 

sheep's interest and welfare, so with the Lord's little 

flock and their Shepherd and his rod of help, defense 

and chastisement. The true sheep learn to 

love the providences of the Shepherd and are comforted 

by them. Knowing the Shepherd's power 

and his watchful care, they realize that all things are 

working together for good to them because they are 

his sheep. Why should they not be comforted, 

strengthened, encouraged? 

The Psalm diverges here and leaves the figure 
of the sheep and the Shepherd, adopting instead the 
illustration of a mighty lord who spreads a sumptuous 
feast for his humbler friend. In olden times 
an active hospitality meant much, and for a nobleman 
to receive one as his guest meant responsibility 
for his safety; and so the thought is that we, 
as the Lord's people, are accepted of him, counted as 
friends, are made to sit down to a bountiful feast, 
secure from the enmity of those who would injure 
us— secure from the great Adversary and all the 
wicked spirits in high places mentioned by the 
Apostle (Eph. 6:12)— secure so long as we are 
under the care of our great friend, our heavenly 
Father. The bounties of our table may indeed include 
some earthly good things, better or worse 
than those of the natural average man; but all of 
these, whatever they may be, accepted with joy and 
thanksgiving, are appreciated by those who recognize 
them as part and parcel of the bounties of the 
Friend above all others. 



All religious people make more or less claim 
to spiritual food, and the various parts and factions 
of Christendom especially boast that they have much 
advantage every way, and that their tables are spread 
with divine truth, promises, etc., food from which 
they claim to receive their strength. But what a 
variety of these tables there are and how different 
are the viands, doctrinally. The food on most of 
them seems to have been spoiled in the preparation. 
Some of it is sad, some of it is sour, and much of it 
is musty. For the most part it originated in "the 
dark ages," and the dear friends who sit down to 
these tables find that they have little appetite for 
such food, and we do not blame them. Rather, we 
would attract their attention to the generous, bountiful 
supply of divine Truth which the Lord himself 
is dispensing to the household of faith, "things new 
and old," but all of them pure, sweet, delicious, 
grand. This table is open to all those who love the 
Lord with all their heart, mind, soul and strength- 
better than they love houses or lands, parents or 
children, husband or wife, lodge or society or sectarian 
system or self. 

Is it strange that those so highly favored of the 
Lord and recognized as his guests and fed at his 
table should be hated by enemies? It would seem 
strange to us if it were not for the assurance of the 
Master himself, that whosoever will live godly will 
suffer persecution in this present time, and for the 
illustration of this in the Master's own experience, 
that it was the professedly godly, influential, great 
and nominally religious that persecuted him to death. 
We are not surprised, then, to find that our table is 
spread in the midst of enemies that now surround us 
on every hand. 

The anointing of the head of the guest with oil 
was a part of the hospitality of olden times. The 
antitype of this with us is the outpouring of the holy 
Spirit upon all this class— this little flock, the body 
of Christ, of which he is the Head, Chief, the Shepherd, 
the Leader. 

The fulness of the cup, running over, has a 
double signification. It is a cup of joy and a cup 
of sorrow, and in both respects it overflows. He 
who would partake of the joys of the Lord must also 
partake of his cup of suffering; we must suffer with 
him if we would reign with him. But we count the 
sufferings of this present time as not worthy to be 
compared with the glories that shall be revealed in 
us, and hence we are enabled to rejoice in tribulation, 
so that as the tribulations will overflow the rejoicing 
likewise overflows, and with the Apostle we 
can say, Rejoice, and again I say rejoice! 

The goodness and mercy which we anticipate 
beyond the veil has its beginning here already and is 
thus to be appreciated. Whoever knows nothing of 



the joys of the Lord in the present time will evidently 
not be prepared for the joys of the Lord in 
the Kingdom, whatever blessings and joys he may 
attain to under the administration of the Kingdom 
during the Millennial age. There is then joy and 
rejoicing granted to the Lord's faithful ones, not a 
momentary matter connected with their first acceptance 
of the Lord and their consecration of themselves 

R3270 : page 414 

to him. The goodness and mercy of the 
Lord is not to be looked back to as a thing of the 
remote past, but is to be recognized and appreciated 
as a thing of the present. Day by day God's goodness 
and mercy follow us, refresh us, strengthen us, 
bless us. 

The highest hope to which we dare aspire is that 
of final union with our great Shepherd, our heavenly 
Father, and the good Shepherd his Son, in the 
heavenly state, in our Father's house on high, one 
mansion or plane of which is intended for the little 
flock, separate and distinct from the mansion or 
plane provided for the restitution class of the Millennial 
age. The end of all our highest ambitions 
will be attained, and far more than realized, when 
we shall be like our Lord, see him as he is, and share 
his glory in the Father's house. 



R3270 : page 414 

"WINE IS A MOCKER." 

Prov. 20:1; 23:20,21,29-35. -Nov. 22. 

IN THIS LESSON wine personifies alcohol, which 
in one form or another mocks every man who 
becomes its friend and companion. Realizing this, 
surely it is true that "Whosoever is deceived thereby 
is not wise." Evidently many of our race are not 
wise, for millions are thus deceived, notwithstanding 
the illustrations they have on every hand of wine's 
deceived friends, wrecked socially, morally, physically 
and financially. 

The Department of Labor in Washington recently 
issued a bulletin showing the returns made 
by employers in various industries in the United 
States regarding the drinking habits of their employees. 
Of seven thousand employers who answered 
the question whether, in engaging employees, 
they discriminated against men who drank, forty-four 
hundred replied in the affirmative and only sixteen 
hundred in the negative. The returns divided 
according to industries were as follows:— 



Discriminated Not 
against discriminated 

Mining 56 per cent 44 per cent 

Agriculture 72 per cent 28 per cent 

Manufacturing 79 per cent 21 per cent 

Trade 88 per cent 12 per cent 

Transportation 97 per cent 3 per cent 

About two thousand employers forbade any use 
of intoxicants by employees of certain grades, and 
fifteen hundred forbade it when employees were on 
duty. We quote:— 

"It is worthy of note that the grades of work in 
which employers require that no liquor shall be used 
are always those entailing responsibility. For example, 
in agriculture it was the foremen, managers, 
etc., who were required to be abstainers; in manufacturing 
it was the engineer, fireman, etc.; in 
transportation, the trainmen, motormen, etc., conductors 
and the like. It will be perceived that the 
trades most highly organized show the most disposition 
to prohibit the use of liquor. Railroads, for 
example, stand at the top of the list, and agriculture 
very nearly at the foot, though the temperance sentiment 
among farmers is vastly stronger than among 
railroad managers." 

The liquor question seems to be less a dispute 
respecting the wisdom of intoxication and 
its unprofitableness and more a question of personal 
liberty. A love of liberty is born in every 
man, no matter how depraved he may be otherwise, 
and yet it cannot be disputed that liberty can be 
used properly only under perfect conditions or under 
restraints. If all men were perfect, well balanced 
mentally, and without depraved appetite, and if the 
surroundings were all perfect, they would need no 
restraints of any kind, though they would still be 
subject to divine laws. Under present imperfect 
conditions all lovers of liberty should appreciate the 
necessity of self-control, restraint of liberty— especially 
those who, as New Creatures, have voluntarily 
placed themselves under divine instruction. Even 
those who feel the greatest possible confidence in 
their strength of will should remember that the will 
grows stronger by its exercise in opposition, and 
that where it is not thus actively engaged habit is 
apt to supplant it and become the master. Furthermore, 
seeing as we do the large proportion of the 
human family who admittedly are weak in will power 
and self-control, and realizing the force of example 
upon such, those who feel themselves strong, in proportion 
as they love their neighbor as themselves 
will feel disposed to forego the exercise of liberties 
which would have the effect of stumbling their 
weaker neighbors. A noted writer has said: 



"My reader, beware of habit! Habit is the most 
significant word to be found in the English vocabulary. 
Get an artist to paint it in letters of fire and 
hang it on the walls of your chamber, where your 
eye shall catch its message when you retire and 
where it may greet you again with the rising sun. 
Gaze upon it until it is deeply cut into the sanctuary 
of your inner being, just where the lamp of life may 
cast its ruddy light over it. Habit is to be your 
curse or benediction; it is either to conquer you or 
enable you to conquer. Today it is transforming 
you into a sycophant or a prince of freedom. Today 
you are either girding your soul with fetters of 
sorrow or building a chariot that will conduct you 
to paradise. Good habits are as potent for emancipation 
as vile ones are for slavery and anguish. One 
may resolutely form habits of purity, honesty, fidelity, 
till he breathes the air of divinity as his native 
air;— as he eventually becomes expert and master 
in melody, by years of inexorable drill." 

The power of habit is unquestionably a great 
one either for good or evil, but let us not forget that 
the human will, however strong or persistently exercised, 
can only reach its highest attainment and 
most favorable results when placed under discipleship 
to Christ— to be taught of God. 

R3271 : page 415 

The Christian Endeavor World gives the following 
information regarding the use of liquors in 
various civilized countries. From this it appears 
that although the liquor habit has reached terrible 
proportions in this land and is blighting millions of 
lives annually, nevertheless the United States is fifteenth 
in the list. We thank God that it is no worse, 
and yet long for the time when our prayer, "Thy 
kingdom come, thy will be done on earth," shall be 
answered in the establishment of the Millennial 
kingdom under which Satan shall be bound, and all 
necessary restrictions be put into operation, to the 
intent that the world of mankind may be uplifted 
everywhere and brought to a knowledge of the salvation 
made possible for all through the dear Redeemer's 
death. The quotation follows:— 

"A table recently published showing the amount 
of all kinds of liquors consumed per capita in twenty-three 
nations, throws startling but not astonishing 
light on the much-talked-of commercial invasion of 
European markets by America. 

"At the head of this list of nations, the heaviest 
in drinking in the world is the Argentine Republic. 
Close after it comes France, Italy, Belgium, Germany, 
Austria, Great Britain,— the nations that are 
feeling most keenly the commercial aggressiveness 
of the United States. Fifteenth in the list comes 



the United States, the commercial rival whose success 
is making all Europe uneasy. In other words, 
the difference between successful competition and 
failure lies largely in the difference between the 6.4 
gal. of pure alcohol in all kinds of liquors consumed 
per capita in France, the 2.63 in Germany, the 1.96 
in Austria, the 3.47 in Belgium, the 2.52 in Great 
Britain, and the 1.26 in the United States." 

"At a recent meeting in Birmingham, England, 
addressed by the Archbishop of Canterbury, the presiding 
officer, Mr. Edwin Smith, said:— If we spent 
on alcohol the same per capita as America, our 
drinking bill would be about L. 66,000,000 less than 
it now is. We cannot succeed commercially while 
we are handicapped in this way to the extent of forty -eight 
per cent.'" 

The wise man does not say that a moderate use 
of alcoholic liquors brings woe, sorrow, contentions, 
complainings, wounds, redness of eyes, etc., and we 
are not to add to his words. We are to remember, 
however, that those who tarry long at the wine 
probably reach that condition through habit, that 
most of such begin with a fear of the consequences 
and the intention of becoming moderate drinkers 
only. Let us beware of the slavery of habit! Even 
the force and weight of the exceeding great and 
precious promises are not sufficient to hold our 
fallen appetites where they are being constantly fed 
and the chains of habit being forged; hence the wisdom 
of the exhortation to turn our eyes away from 
the smooth-flowing wine, to engage our attention 
and thoughts in some other direction, knowing that 
wine is a mocker, and that whatever it may promise 
of rewards and blessings at our first introduction, 
"at the last it biteth like a serpent and stingeth like 
an adder." Its tendency is to pervert the judgment 
in general, so that the eyes will see strange things, as 
in delirium tremens, and the heart will utter through 
the mouth perverse things. Surely the new nature 
could not thrive under such conditions, which tend 
even to deprave further the old nature. Hence, 
every New Creature must beware of this seductive 
influence, and resist it faithfully, as he would make 
his calling and election sure. 

Those who give way to the drinking habit become 
sottish, careless, as though a man were to lie 
down to sleep in the sea and not expect to be 
drowned, or as though he were to lie down upon the 
top of a mast and not expect to fall and be injured. 
To such ultimately the only desirable thing is oblivion, 
to be stupidly insensible to the reproof of 
friends and the blows of enemies. The waking idea 
seems to be to seek further intoxication. 

A well known temperance worker, when asked 
to address a Sunday School, desired to bring out the 
fact that the drunkards of the future must come from 



the ranks of the boys of today. "Boys," said he, 
"these men that we see all around us on the street, 
in the stores, in this church, grow old and feeble and 
sooner or later will die. Who will take their places 
and be the men then?" After a moment's pause they 
answered, "We boys." 

"Very true," answered the speaker. "Now, boys, 
you have all seen men who drank too much,— drunkards 
we call them. After a while they will die too. 
Now, boys, tell me who do you think will take their 
places and be the drunkards then?" Promptly came 
the answer, "We boys!" The thoughtless answer 
roused the whole school. Could there possibly be 
any truth in it? Alas, yes— not true of all these 
boys, but true of some of them. 

With this thought in mind, what child of God 
could feel indifferent in respect to his example and 
instruction to all boys over whom he exercises any 
influence; how carefully his own boys should be 
guided, counselled, assisted in the formation of correct 
principles, correct habits. 

A number of young men were one day sitting 
around the fire in the waiting room of an English 
railway, talking about a total abstinence society. 
Just then a policeman came in with a prisoner in 
handcuffs. He listened to the young men's conversation 
but did not give any opinion. Mr. McDonald, 
a minister of the gospel, was also in the room, 
and hearing what the young men were saying, stepped 
up to the policeman and said aloud, "Pray, sir, 
what have you to say about temperance?" The policeman 
replied, "Well, all I have to say is that I 
never took a teetotaler to York Castle prison in my 
life, nor to Wakefield House of Correction either." 



page 416 

MOTTO CARDS FOR HOME EMBELLISHMENT. 



When in London Brother Russell selected some 
very desirable motto cards; but the astonishing increase 
in every department of the office work has hindered us 
from attending to these. Even now we cannot fill 
orders for particular mottoes nor attempt a description 
of their styles, prices, texts, etc. They are of every 
variety and price and size;— all beautiful, all faith-inspiring 
all helpful. Even after paying 35 per cent, 
duty these are cheap. We can supply them at one-half 
the usual prices or less. 

For convenience we put them up in assorted $ 1 
and $2 packets,— postage included. Some of the old 
desirable styles we have duplicated, as they could not 



be better; and some are strictly new. We assort them 
in the packets; but for the sake of some who may have 
gotten several lots of the old and now want none but 
the new we have prepared packets of the new only. 
Such as desire the new should so stipulate when ordering 
but the average person will be as well or better 
pleased to get the ordinary assortment. 



page 417 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIV. NOVEMBER 15, 1903. No. 22 



CONTENTS. 

Views From the Watch Tower 419 

The Battle of the Great Day 419 

Making Hades too Hot 420 

Bishop Fowler on Money and 

Salvation 420 

Prize-Fighting Commended 420 

"I Have Chosen Him" 426 

"The Fear of the Lord is the Beginning 

of Wisdom 429 

What a Triumph of His Grace it 

Will Be 429 

Public Ministries of the Truth 432 

Items: The Pittsburg Gazette 418 

Increased Price of Dawns 415 

page 418 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



WORDS TO BE REMEMBERED. 



"Blessed are they that are persecuted for righteousness sake." 

"They shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my 
sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in 
heaven."— Jesus. 



THE PITTSBURGH GAZETTE. 



In our last issue we mentioned the engagement of the 
Gazette to publish Pastor Russell's Sunday Sermons every Monday, 
and proposed a clubbing rate for the Gazette and the Watch 
Tower for a year at $3.25 (13s. 7d.) We now add, that those 
who have already subscribed for the WATCH TOWER need be at 
no disadvantage on this account: they may send us if they 
choose $2.25 (9s. 5d.) more, and we will see that they get the 
Gazette. If for any reason the publication of the discourses 
should be discontinued, the pro rata amount will be refunded. 

Our British friends may send their subscriptions to the 
London office, in the usual way, from whence they will be 
transmitted to us. 

The British Branch will also be able to supply the special 
edition containing the complete report of the recent debates at 
the same rate as supplied here, viz., Id. per copy, or l/2d. each 
for 50 copies and over. 

Our own stock of the special issue of the Gazette containing 
all the debates is large enough to supply any quantity ordered. 
Friends are using these reports to good purpose amongst denominational 
people, whose prejudices sometimes hinders their acceptance 
of a tract. A perusal of the two sides presented leads 
to further inquiries concerning the Truth. We already have 
quite a number of reports along this line. 



MISSIONARY ENVELOPES. 

These are now in stock in large quantity. Every letter you 
send through the mail may be a more or less potent messenger 
of the truth, even on its outside by the use of these envelopes. 
They catch the attention not only of those to whom they are 
addressed, but postmen and others have an opportunity, and 
often the curiosity, to read their message of peace,— the gospel 
in a condensed form. Cheap, too,— 25c. per hundred, post paid. 



INCREASED PRICE OF DAWNS IV., V., VI. 

In consequence of raise of prices for printing and binding 
just after we had reduced our price on cloth-bound DAWNS, 
we have been selling all volumes of the series at a loss for the 
past six months. The loss has been specially heavy on the 
thicker volumes, and we now feel compelled to increase the 
price on these to 40 cents, plus 10 cents postage. Subscribers' 
wholesale rate 20 cents plus 10 cents postage. These prices 
take effect Nov. 1, 1903. 

Volume VI. will have over 700 pages and is hoped for in 
December. Those who have already paid for it at old prices 
need not send additionally. 



WATCH TOWER BINDERS. 

Remember, that we have these in good supply at 50 
cents each, delivery free. Each Binder will hold two years' 
issues, and they are very convenient for easy reference and 
preserving the papers from injury and soiling. 



R3271 : page 419 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



THE BATTLE OF THE GREAT DAY. 



As illustrating the progress being made toward 
the condition described in the Bible as that of the 
immediate future, when "every man's hand shall be 
against his neighbor" (Zech. 14:13; Ezek. 32:21), we 
give below without comment copies of two circulars 
being widely distributed among manufacturers- 
urging them to organize for mutual protection 
against the "unreasonable" demands of organized labor. 
These purport to go forth from The Press of 
the National Association of Manufacturers. The two 
circulars follow:— 

WHITHER ARE WE DRIFTING? 

At the late meeting of the American Federation of Labor, 
held in New Orleans, the following resolution came within 
four hundred votes of being adopted: 

Whereas, Capital being the product of all the toilers of 



the human race, and as wages can never be regarded as the 
full equivalent for labor performed, and since it is the mission 
of the trades-unions to protect the wage earner against 
oppression, and to fully secure the toilers' disenthrallment 
from every species of injustice; therefore be it 

Resolved, That this twenty-second annual convention of 
the American federation of Labor advise the working people 
to organize their economic and political power to secure for 
labor the full equivalent of its toil and the OVERTHROW OF THE 

WAGE SYSTEM, AND THE ESTABLISHMENT OF AN INDUSTRIAL CO-OPERATIVE 
DEMOCRACY. 

This resolution was introduced by delegate Max Hayes, 
one of the radical socialists from Cleveland, Ohio. In the 
final action on this resolution the socialistic element almost 
secured control of the convention. The struggle lasted a full 
day. The debate on the resolution was the most exciting 
of the meeting. John Mitchell's United Mine Workers' organization 
cast one thousand eight hundred and four votes 
solidly for this resolution. This is the organization which 
evoked so much maudlin sentiment and brought the whole 
country to its knees in the Anthracite strike. It is confidently 
prophesied that the socialists will be in full control of the 
Trades-Union movement in the United States by the time of 
the next A. F. of L. Convention. 

Max Hayes' resolution means that there is to be an attack 
upon the productive wealth of the country. Productive 
wealth, as interpreted by the socialists, means capital, factories, 
plants, machinery, railroads, etc. The socialists mean 
to take possession of all the money and private properties. 
Not content with getting their share of the consumable wealth 
of the nation, clothing, food, etc., which is being distributed 
more generously and cheaply to the people than ever before 
in the history of the world, the followers of Hayes are determined 

R3272: page 419 

to seize upon all the productive wealth. It has been 
estimated that if all the productive wealth of the country were 
to be divided up equally among the inhabitants of the United 
States that there would be but Two Hundred dollars for each 
person. Yet Hayes and his followers are determined to seize 
this two hundred dollars if they can get the backing. The 
basis of this movement is human greed and envy. Unless this 
movement is checked, it will lead to enormous industrial damage 
to the United States, for nothing but chaos and anarchy 
can come from a proposition to seize the private property of 
individuals. These are the people who are demanding that 
the political and commercial destinies of the United States be 
intrusted into their hands! 
Is it time to organize? 

ANTI-INJUNCTION LAW OR REBELLION. 

The special committee which reported on President Gompers' 
annual report at the recent American Federation of Labor 
meeting at New Orleans, said in connection with the anti-conspiracy 



bill now pending in Congress: 

"The use of injunction in labor disputes is becoming more 
and more general; its value to the employer and its danger to 
the workmen is becoming better and better understood. It is 
an effort to retain through judicial decisions and orders, the 
power over the working people, which has long been legislatively 
surrendered, and seems to have as its governing cause 
the concept that the ownership of a mine, a factory or a 
means of transportation, carries with its ownership so much 
of the working power of the laboring class as will make such 
factory, mine or means of transportation profitable to its 
owner. This concept has in it an idea of peonage (the word 
"Peon" is of Spanish-American origin, meaning a debtor held 
by his creditor in a form of qualified servitude, to work out a 
debt), which, if permitted to grow, will re-establish peonage 
in its most objectionable form. If through the use of the 
equity power vested in the Courts, our rights as workers to 
quit work at will, and to induce others to quit with us, can be 
taken away, then the peaceable evolution toward industrial 
democracy is cut off, and the workers will be compelled to 
look to more REVOLUTIONARY measures for redress of 
existing grievances, and the obtaining of better conditions in 
the future. If we are permitted to withdraw our labor in 
unison from any establishment where we have grievances to be 
redressed, then the development may go on the lines of the 
development in England toward political democracy, through 
parliamentary control over taxation and appropriation. If it 
is to be taken away, then we might as well now realize that 
PEACEABLE DEVELOPMENT will stop, and the POLITICAL HISTORY 

R3272 : page 420 

OF FRANCE WILL BE THE INDUSTRIAL HISTORY OF OUR COUNTRY. 

For these reasons your Committee recommends that NO EFFORTS 

BE SPARED TO INDUCE THE LEGISLATIVE POWER TO CURTAIL 

THE JUDICIARY BRANCH OF OUR GOVERNMENT BY THE ENACTMENT 

OF THE ANTI-INJUNCTION BILL." 

The report of this Committee was enthusiastically concurred 
in, and so well pleased were the delegates with the 
President's attitude towards employers, that immediately 
thereafter, upon proper motion, Gompers' salary was increased 
$500 a year. 

Thus it will be seen that Organized Labor never intends 
to stop, until it can secure class legislation by which the BOYCOTT 
and the PICKET are to be LEGALIZED, and every 
employer in this country be placed at the mercy of agitators, 
who hold for the employing class nothing but envy and hatred. 
This program of terrorization and despoliation can only be 
met with an organization which will embrace every manufacturer 
in the United States. 

Is it not time to organize? 

RELIGIOUS BASEBALLISTS. 



Six Washington City Churches formed a Base 
Ball League, and during the past season contested 
every day, except Sunday, from May 18 to July 25. 
Let us hope that this liberal attention to "bodily 
exercise" did not trench too heavily upon the hours 
usually set apart for prayer and the study of the 
divine Word. The following Churches composed 
the Association: 

Calvary Baptist Church, 

Fourth Presbyterian Church, 

Gunton-Temple Presbyterian Church, 

Sixth Presbyterian Church, 

Temple Baptist Church, 

Wesley Methodist Episcopal Church. 

MAKING HADES TOO HOT. 



A passion for accuracy seems to beset a revivalist in 
Texas. His idea of the best way to get people to heaven 
is to frighten them about hell, and he gives them exact 
facts. For instance he tells them that the temperature 
of hell is four hundred and fifty-three degrees Fahrenheit. 
On what he bases his calculations we do not know. But 
this we do know, and we wish to state it for the comfort of 
his hearers: If they fell into such a heat they would not know 
whether it was hot or cold, and there would be absolutely no 
feeling of any kind, but instantaneous annihilation. 

It is a comfort to think that today the man who talks 
about the temperature of hell seems simply a humorous creature 
and is taken no more seriously than an old nurse with ghost 
stories. As to the man who tries to preach the hideous 
theory that in frightful torments of heat human beings are 
kept alive and constantly tortured by a "merciful Creator," his 
statements are now considered blasphemous. No man would 
dare to make them, save to the most ignorant and degraded 
audience.— Exchange. 

BISHOP FOWLER ON MONEY AND SALVATION. 



"Salvation is reduced to a question of dollars and cents." 
"Now, don't misunderstand me. The goblins'll get you if 
you do." 

These were the characteristic words of Bishop Charles H. 
Fowler in his address to the ministers and laymen of the 
Cincinnati Methodist Episcopal Church Conference Saturday 
morning. Bishop Fowler said further: "We have the doctrine, 
the Redeemer, the experience, the schools; we have the railroads, 
the steamships; we have masters of languages— all we 
need is money. We have everything else. A famous New 
York layman once said, 'If you will give me enough money, I 
will make a Christian city of New York in thirty years.' I 
say to you, 'Give me money and I will make a Christian city 



of Cincinnati in thirty years.' I would let the old sinners go 
anywhere they please, but I would save the young ones and 
the little ones. You can't make a Christian city of Cincinnati 
on one-half a cent per person. The world must be conquered, 
and money is needed with which to do it. I want you laymen 
of the Cincinnati conference to be diligent in business. Get 
the money. The more you have the easier it will be to get 
still more. A soul set on fire for the Infinite God can't get 
money enough. I want you to believe all I have said. Do as 
much as you can without utterly disrupting your moral natures. 
—Daily News. 

ANOTHER WAY OF "COUNTING THE COST" 



Discussing the cost of "soul saving" as between 
the expenses of large and small churches the Brooklyn 
Standard Union says: 

From 248 churches, evenly divided into large and 
small, it is shown that the cost of new converts is almost 
twice as much in the former as in the latter, ranging from 
$262.22 to $150.14, though the average annual expenditure of 
each member when safely in the fold is much more nearly 
equal-$14.09 against $13.05. 

Of course the inevitable question, Does it pay? must be 
met by the churches, as well as by every other form of human 
organization and activity, and as with all other forms of the 
higher and better types, the attempt to answer it would be idle. 
One might as well ask, Does the family, the State, society at 
large, pay? There are fortunately some equations of life in 
which the factors are not convertible, and where to ask the 
question is to admit that its answer is impossible. A better 
form of the inquiry may be found in a book once read more 
than it is today, "What shall it profit a man if he shall gain 
the whole world and lose his own soul? Or what shall a man 
give in exchange for his soul?" It may be just as well once in 
a while to admit that there are some things which cannot be 
expressed in the terms of daily business, that cannot be measured 
by dollars and cents, and that the institutions, no matter 
by what name called, which go to make the world better 
worth living in, even though they require money and a good 
deal of it, are worth all they cost. The little churches, particularly, 
and those who love them and work for them, may 
well take heart. 



R3272 : page 420 

PRIZE-FIGHTING COMMENDED. 



"LIFE is a battle," some one has truly said. We 
see amongst the brute creation a constant 



struggle for existence, and it is the same 

with humanity. In business competition it is a battle; 

in politics the strife goes on continually; in the family, 

between the parents and the children, there is frequently 

strife for mastery; and throughout the world 

it is largely each family for itself and each individual 

for himself, all this strife being along the lines of ambition 

and selfishness, sometimes almost to the extent of 

necessity. 

The Lord's soldiers were recruited from these 
miserable conditions, but to another and different warfare 
—a war against selfishness, avarice, covetousness 
and all unrighteous, all unloving methods, all sin.— 
The Captain of our Salvation is our exemplar, whose 
methods of warfare we are to copy. Although he 
was holy, harmless, undefiled and separate from sinners, 

R3273 : page 421 

he was an inveterate foe to sin, and laid down 

his life in opposing it. All who would be accepted as 

followers of the cross must follow his example— "faithful 

even unto death"— if they would have the great 

prize, the crown of life. 

As we look at the world of which we once were a 
part, "Children of wrath even as others," we see that 
all of its strife is for some purpose. The politician 
strives for emoluments and sometimes for honor; the 
merchant strives for affluence and wealth; the struggles 
in the social arena are for place and influence. 
These are their prizes, and in their efforts to attain 
their ideals many are the sacrifices that are endured, 
many are the risks that are run, many are the night 
vigils and careful plans and schemes and plottings. 
Nevertheless, few of those who strive ever attain to 
their hearts' desires. The prize eludes their grasp; 
and the more fortunate ones who do grasp the prizes 
find that there is much bitterness connected with the 
success, much disappointment as to the real pleasure 
accompanying them. The Apostle compares these 
earthly ambitions of the world with the higher ambitions 
of the soldiers of the Lord's army. He points 
out that those who strive in earthly matters, either as 
race runners or as prize fighters in any department of 
the strife of earth, put themselves to certain tests of 
patience, endurance and self-denial in their endeavors 
to attain their ambitions; and he indicates that much 
more the soldiers of the cross should highly esteem the 
great prize for which we are called to fight the good 
fight— the prize of life eternal. The Apostle says, 
"Every man that striveth is temperate in all things: 
now they do it to attain a corruptible crown [reward], 
but we an incorruptible." 

These who strive for earthly prizes do so in the 
face of much uncertainty. Every politician admits the 
strong probability of his defeat; every one who seeks 



wealth will acknowledge a strong probability that he 
will fail in his fight for it; but not so with the soldiers 
of the cross. The prize is not only superlatively great 
and grand and incorruptible, but it is a certainty, as 
the Apostle adds, "I therefore so run, not as uncertainly; 
so fight I, not as one that beateth the air." 
We know that faithfulness as followers of our Captain 
will bring results not only blessed to ourselves, but 
results which will be under the Lord's providences a 
blessing to all the families of the earth. It is in view 
of this certainty on our part as to the results and the 
grandeur thereof that the Apostle intimates that we, 
as soldiers of the cross, should be willing to endure 
much greater hardness and self-denial and buffeting 
for the sake of the cause we represent than would those 
who strive for the earthly crowns and prizes. And if 
they practice self-denial and disciplines late and early, 
in season and out of season, when convenient and when 
inconvenient, whether of food and drink if preparing 
for some physical contest, or of comforts and conveniences 
and pleasures if for political or business contests, 
much more should we not be slothful in our business, 
fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, fighting the good 
fight of faith, laying hold on eternal life as a sure 
thing, not an uncertainty. The Apostle applies this 
thought too, saying, "I keep my body under [its ambitions, 
appetites, desires], and bring it into subjection 
[to the new mind]: lest by any means when I have 
preached to others I myself should be a castaway [rejected 
from being a member of the little flock]."— 
1 Cor. 9:25-28. 

The first essential in becoming a soldier of the 
cross is a proper understanding of the only terms of 
enlistment— that it is not for an occasion, nor for a year, 
but for life. Many err on this point, and after fighting 
faithfully in a few skirmishes they seem to have 
the impression that they have fulfilled the conditions 
of their enlistment, and drift into some other service, 
some other kind of fighting, or into a slothful, indifferent 
ease in the presence of the enemy and the evil 
against which they pledged themselves to war a good 
warfare even unto death. Such occasionally get revived 
under the stimulus of the Gospel or mental excitement, 
and for a time fight a little more, only to relapse 
again into indifference and slothfulness. Some even 
plume themselves upon these repeated reenlistments 
and purpose further reenlistments before they die, not 
discerning that this is a wrong view of the situation 
—that no volunteers are accepted save upon the terms 
of the Captain: "Be thou faithful unto death, and I 
will give thee a crown of life." Such need to see that 
participation in a few battles is not the condition of 
our call and enlistment, and that the rewards— glory, 
honor and immortality— which the Lord has promised 
to the faithful cannot be expected by those who do not 
fight the good fight faithfully and continuously. We 



are not here discussing what portion will come to those 

who are careless in respect to the terms of their enlistment. 

We are not saying whether their portion will 

be in the "great company" or elsewhere; but we are 

seeking to make clear that none can be counted worthy 

of a place in the little flock, in the glory of the 

Kingdom, unless he shall have the proper appreciation 

of his enlistment, and have been, at heart at least, thoroughly 

loyal to and active in the defence of the principles 

for which his covenant stands committed— the 

principles of righteousness at any cost, even unto 

death. 

It will be found a great help to the weaknesses of 
the fallen nature to have understandingly made a full 
consecration of the will,— a full enlistment of every 
power and talent of mind and of body. He who takes 
this proper view of his consecration to the Lord and 

R3273 : page 422 

enlistment in the Lord's army, realizes that he has 
nothing more to give to the Lord, and hence, whatever 
struggle of the will he may have is all ended when he 
has finally decided— "As for me and my house, we 
will serve the Lord." The others, who do not so recognize 
the matter, have continually a battle with their 
wills before they can engage in any measure in defence 
of the Truth. How important it is, therefore, that all 
the soldiers realize that the term of the enlistment is 
until death, and that there is no room for even considering 
any suggestion to withdraw from the battle and 
cease even for an hour to fight the good fight of faith. 

The new recruits to the Lord's army frequently 
have difficulty with themselves because of the very 
different kind of fighting to which the Lord's soldiers 
are called. Used to fighting in the battle of life as 
members of the fallen race, a battle for the Lord along 
the same lines is the natural tendency— with carnal 
weapons, carnal objects, actions, methods, etc. Such, 
however, are to heed the voice of the Captain, to fight 
only as he directs— for righteousness instead of unrighteousness, 
for love and generosity, and against selfishness 
instead of for selfishness. They may not even 
take the suggestions of certain moral reformers and 
begin a battle for pure politics nor for total abstinence 
nor for social uplift— because the Captain's commands 
have not been along these lines. They may, 
nay they should, feel a deep sympathy with all of these 
commendable efforts, and should smile rather than 
frown upon them; but their time, their influence, their 
talents may not go in these directions, however much 
their sympathy may go toward them, because they 
are under the orders of the Captain. They are not 
fighting at their own charges nor to accomplish their 
own wills; they are not the heads of the army, but the 
subordinate members, and thus look for their directions 



to the Captain. He has called them for a special 
purpose, and has given them particular instructions 
respecting the same, and their every energy and talent, 
not absorbed in procuring the necessities of life, must 
be considered as devoted and beyond their control. 

After enlistment each soldier should expect his 
share of the provided armor— helmet, breastplate, 
sandals, shield and sword; and his first work must be 
to put on this armor— to prepare himself. The armory 
from which these articles can be obtained is the Word 
of God, which is so well stocked that "The man of 
God may be thoroughly furnished unto every good 
word and work." (2 Tim. 3:17.) He who rushes into 
a fight without waiting to hear the Captain's command 
and without waiting to put on the armor provided, is 
certain to meet with measurable defeat and a disaster 
more or less consequential. Would that every soldier 
who enlists could realize the necessity for hearkening 
to the Word of God, and appropriating to himself the 
armor of Truth which it provides. The helmet, representing 
the Truth, which would fortify the Lord's soldiers 
intellectually by giving them a clear and intelligent 
appreciation of his plan, is necessary; the breastplate, 
which represents the knowledge of righteousness 
and an appreciation of God's provision for our covering 
in the great redemptive sacrifice, is also essential as a 
covering for our hearts, for our spiritual protection; the 
sandals, representing our expectation of trials and difficulties 
in the narrow way and our readiness to accept 
them all, with the assurance that they would all work 
for our good, are indispensable; also the shield of 
faith, which grows larger and larger in proportion as 
it is handled and used, is very important; no soldier 
can possibly acquit himself acceptably to the Captain 
except he have such a shield— without it he would be 
exposed to the darts of the enemy. Notwithstanding 
his having on the whole armor, the sword of the Spirit, 
the Word of God, sharper than any two-edged sword, 
must not be forgotten. He who has not on part of 
the armor will be unable to keep the foes of righteousness 
at a respectful distance; and this sword becomes 
stronger and larger in the hands of the soldier as he 

R3274 : page 422 

grasps it firmly at the hilt and uses it in his battles 
for the Lord and the Truth. 

Many soldiers in the Lord's army are surprised to 
learn that the Captain's name is the Prince of Peace, 
and that all the enlisted ones are expected to battle for 
peace. The matter seems at first to be contradictory. 
Battling is warfare, peace is the result; we are called 
to be soldiers and called to be peacemakers. Many of 
the soldiers, without waiting to learn the rules and 
commands of the Captain, without waiting to study 
the proper use of the sword of the Spirit, spring courageously 



into the fight and begin to wound their neighbors, 
their friends, and sometimes their fellow soldiers 
in the Lord's army. This is a great mistake: this is 
an attempt to use the spiritual weapons in a carnal 
manner and is contrary to the example and word of 
our Captain. All such would do best to put up their 
swords again— to refrain from using the word of God 
in a belligerent manner, in a smiting way against those 
with whom they have to do. We must learn who is 
our foe, and not recklessly and blindly smite down 
any and everything opposing us. 

But some one inquires, Are we not to smite down 
error, and does not this mean the smiting of those who 
uphold the error? We answer that those all about us 
who are upholding error, and those who despitefully 
use us and persecute us because we are on the Lord's 
side, are blinded by ignorance, and it is not the Lord's 
intention that we should fight against them;— rather 
we would fight for them to lift them out of their ignorance 
and blindness, their superstition. So the Lord 
expressed it when he said, "The Son of man came 

R3274 : page 423 

not to destroy men's lives," but that they might have 
life, and that more abundantly. He has not changed 
in the interim; he still has the same generous sentiment 
toward the poor world that he had when he died, 
when he tasted death for every man. The Apostle 
will instruct us who are our foes. He says, "We 
wrestle not against flesh and blood, but with principalities 
and powers and wicked spirits in exalted positions." 
-Eph. 6:12. 

Ah, then, our real opponents are the fallen angels, 
the demons; and our poor fallen fellow creatures who 
oppose us and who oppose righteousness do so because 
they are under the power of Satan, more or less blinded 
by his sophistries and deceptions,— as it is written, 
"The god of this world hath blinded the minds of them 
that believe not"— has deceived the whole world.— 
(2 Cor. 4:4; Rev. 20:2,3.) Our sentiment against all 
opposers of righteousness amongst men should therefore 
be that of benevolence and compassion, realizing 
that they are under the Adversary's power, though 
they know it not. And if we suffer at their hands as 
soldiers of the cross, our sentiments should be, "Father, 
forgive them; they know not what they do."— 
"Lord, lay not this sin to their charge." As the 
Apostle Peter explained respecting those who crucified 
the Lord Jesus, that in ignorance they did it, so we 
should regard that present oppositions to righteousness 
and to those who are on the Lord's side are largely 
the results of ignorance and superstition, and of the 
blindness which comes from the great deceiver against 
whom we are enlisted and seeking to fight a good fight. 

Our good fight of faith, as the Apostle explains, 



consists in a considerable measure in our defense of 
the Word of God, which includes also our defence of 
the character of God. This is implied in the Apostle's 
words, "Contend [fight earnestly] for the faith 
once delivered unto the saints." This will mean our 
willingness to stand for the Truth at any cost and 
against any number of assailants— against the creeds 
and theories of men, which would misrepresent the 
good tidings of great joy which the Lord and the 
Apostles have announced, and which shall, thank God, 
yet be unto all people. As the Apostle again says, 
"I am set for the defence of the Truth." We can do 
no less than defend the Truth. The Truth is God's 
representative, Christ's representative, and hence our 
standard, and as true soldiers we must defend our 
standard, even unto death. Not every truth, however; 
for although we may feel in sympathy with all truth 
yet we are enlisted under a Captain whose command 
indicates that it is one special line of truth that we are 
to defend with our lives— the truth of divine revelation 
—the divine message, the Gospel, the good tidings 
of redemption through the precious blood, forgiveness 
of sins, and in general the divine plan of salvation as 
set forth in the inspired Word. It will be noticed that 
his measurably ignores truth on other lines, on mathematics, 
on astronomy, geology, not to mention other 
sciences falsely so called, respecting which the Lord 
has given us no revelation— respecting which, therefore, 
his sword of Truth has never been sent offensively nor 
defensively. It is for the "faith once delivered unto 
the saints," and that only, that the soldiers of the 
cross are to battle. 

We have already noticed that the contesting is not 
to be with carnal weapons, even when it is for the faith 
once delivered unto the saints; and by carnal weapons 
we understand more to be meant than many at first 
surmise. Not merely are swords, spears and guns carnal 
weapons, but anger, malice, hatred, strife and a 
general contesting and combative spirit are all carnal 
weapons; and whenever these are used in defence of 
the Lord's good cause they do it injury instead of benefit, 
whatever the users may intend. It is important 
to remember that all the soldiers fighting in this battle 
for the Truth win not by injuring others, but by showing 
to others such noble examples of fidelity to the 
principles of righteousness (truth) even unto death, 
as will commend to them the Lord and his cause. 
Those who fight with anger and malice and strife, who 
fight carnally, misrepresent the Captain, however unintentionally, 
and do injury to his cause. There are 
many of these fighters who are not warring a good 
warfare, not fighting a good fight, and who will consequently 
fail of the chief reward— the glory, honor, 
immortality and join t-heirship with the Lord in the 
Kingdom. 

It may be inquired, then, How can these soldiers 



expect to have any battle if they abstain from carnal 
warfare either with their hands or their tongues, 
speaking only that which is good, and endeavoring so 
much as lieth in them to live peaceably with all men? 
How can such soldiers have any battle at all? who 
would contend with them? Surely, says one, it is not 
supposable that the world would battle or in any wise 
injure or oppose those who seek only its good, its welfare, 
its blessing, its peace. Nay but, we answer, the 
Master suffered for his fidelity to the faith once delivered, 
and forewarned us, saying, "Marvel not if the 
world hate you, ye know that it hated me before it 
hated you. If ye were of the world the world would 
love its own: but because ye are not of the world, but 
I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the 
world hateth you." "The world loveth darkness 
rather than light." Guided by the Master's words, we 
look to see what constituted the world from his standpoint. 
We perceive that he could not have meant that 
the enemies of the saints would be wholly nor chiefly 
the hoodlum element of society, the thieves and thugs 
and murderers. Not from these are we to expect the 

R3274 : page 424 

hatred and persecution which, the Lord forewarned us, 
all true soldiers would experience from the world. 
When the Master said that the world hated him, we 
perceive that it was not the heathen or Gentile world, 
but the religious world as we might term it— the 
churchianity of his day— the chief priests and scribes 
and Pharisees who took counsel against him and who 
finally secured his execution. It was the same professedly 
religious world that through the dark ages persecuted 
the light and the Truth even unto death, and 
it is the same nominally religious world, deficient in 
the Spirit of the Lord surely, and more or less blinded 
by the god of this world, which will continue to be 
the persecuting power against the soldiers of the cross 
down to the very close of this dispensation— until the 
last soldier of the cross shall have proven faithful unto 
death and the elect company shall be finished. 

Here we get the broad view that the heathen religions 
are all of Satan, that he has misled the heathen 
people into gross darkness, and that whatever measure 
of superstition and darkness still clings to Christianity 
is so much the power of Satan working in and through 
those who are nominally and professedly the Lord's 
people. The soldiers of the cross all down through 
this Gospel age, following the example of the Captain 
and of his lieutenants, the apostles, have held up the 
banner of Truth, the light, not aggressively but defensively, 
and have been considered faithful in proportion 
as they have endured hardness with meekness and 
patience and long-suffering, brotherly kindness and 
love, not rendering evil for evil, slander for slander, 



reviling for reviling, but, like the Master, when reviled 
reviled not again, but blessed their enemies, and did 
good to those who despitefully used them and persecuted 
them, praying for them and hoping for them divine 
mercy in the future, to the opening of the eyes of their 
understanding. So also we must expect it to be today. 

Doubtless, in harmony with the Scriptural declaration, 
we may expect that in the near future all the 
soldiers of the cross will be exposed to much more 
severe attacks from the great Adversary and those 
whom he has blinded. The attacks are to be so severe 
that, according to Scriptural declaration, a thousand 
shall fall at our side to one who will stand— the merely 
nominal soldiers will fall. Only the faithful, the overcoming 
ones, the very elect, will be able to stand in 
that evil day, and they because they will have on the 
whole armor of God provided for their protection. 
The Apostle mentions all deceivableness of unrighteousness 
in the perishing ones as being one of the 
characteristics of Satan's manifestation in our time. 
We see some of this deceivableness manifested in the 
many wonderful works, healings, etc., performed by 
Spiritualists, Mormons, Christian Scientists and others 
—calculated to deceive if possible the very elect. 
But it will not be possible to deceive this overcoming 

R3275 : page 424 

class, because the true soldier will take careful heed 
to the instructions of the Captain and will have on the 
whole armor of his Word for their defence and protection 
from all the wiles of the Adversary, who, now 
that his kingdom is tottering to its fall, is forced to 
bolster it up by feigning works of mercy and goodness 
as a garment of light. -Matt. 12:26; 2 Cor. 11:14. 

Foregoing we have considered the outward battlings 
of the Lord's soldiers; let us now notice the 
more secret drillings and battlings which come to each 
individual soldier, to test his loyalty and to develop 
his character. 

We have already noticed that the soldier is the 
New Creature and not the flesh, that the enlistment 
was a surrender of the fleshly will and the acceptance 
of the headship or captaincy of the Redeemer. From 
that moment of full surrender to the Captain, enlistment 
under his orders and in the service of righteousness, 
the New Creature has experienced a conflict with 
its mortal body and its weaknesses, passions and tendencies 
for sin. The new will cannot free itself from 
the fleshly body, and although the reward promised 
by the Captain is a new body, perfect and in full harmony 
with himself and with righteousness, nevertheless 
the new will is required to demonstrate its loyalty 
to the Captain and to righteousness by its faithful 
combat with the flesh— with the desires and propensities 
of its own mortal body. 



Here is the great and continual battle, for although 
the new will asserts itself and puts the body under and 
compels its subjection to the new mind, nevertheless 
the mortal body, not being actually dead, is continually 
coming into contact with the world and the Adversary 
and is continually being stimulated by these 
and reinvigorated with earthly cares, ambitions, methods, 
strivings, conflicts and insubordination to our new 
will. No saint is without experiences of this kind- 
fightings without and within. It must be a fight to 
the finish or the great prize for which we fight will 
not be gained. For although the New Creature masters 
the mortal body by the Lord's grace and strength 
repeatedly, nevertheless until death there can be no 
cessation of the conflict, for the "flesh lusteth [desireth, 
striveth] against the spirit and the spirit against 
the flesh: and these are contrary the one to the other: 
so that ye cannot do the things that ye would."— 
Gal. 5:17. 

The Apostle urges that we do not seek for the 
cooperation of the flesh, but rather anticipate in advance 
its opposition and proceed at once to mortify 
[put to death] the flesh with its affections and its desires, 
assuring us that as the death of the flesh will 
result in our begetting to the new nature, so the death 
of the flesh actually will be a precedent to our attaining 

R3275 : page 425 

the birth of the Spirit. The Apostle's words along 
this line are comforting to us. He says: "For which 
cause we faint not [in our battlings]; but though the 
outward man perish, the inward man is renewed day 
by day [we become stronger in the Lord and in the 
power of his might], for our light afflictions [trials, 
etc., which may include these battlings with our own 
flesh], which are but for a moment [as compared with 
the eternity we hope to gain], work out for us a far 
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory."— 
2 Cor. 4:16-18. 

It is because the Adversary works in the hearts 
of the children of disobedience, and because the children 
of the light, the soldiers of the cross, are in contact 
in the flesh with the children of this world, that 
thus the Adversary is able to work powerfully against 
them and repeatedly to resuscitate their flesh, so that 
all need to follow the Apostle's course as expressed in 
his words, "I keep my body under"— the thought 
being that there is a tendency for the body, the flesh, 
to arise from its condition of reckoned deadness, and 
that hence the new nature needs to be continually on 
the alert to maintain its ascendency, to fight the good 
fight of faith and to gain the prize as an overcomer. 
These battlings of the new mind against the flesh are 
a good fight in the sense that they are fightings against 
sin and weaknesses that belong to the fallen nature. 



They are a fight of faith in the sense that the entire 
course of the New Creature is a course of faith as the 
Apostle says, "We walk by faith and not by sight." 
The New Creature has faith in the Word of God, in the 
promises therein contained, and with the eye of faith 
sees the heavenly city and the crown of righteousness 
which the Lord has in reservation for the overcomers, 
joint-heirship with the Redeemer. It is a fight of faith 
in the sense that no one could keep up this battle 
against his own flesh and its propensities and desires, 
and come off conqueror, except as he can exercise faith 
in the promises and in the Lord as his helper. 

Considering particularly what some of these battles 
of the new nature are, we suggest that many of them 
pertain to the weaknesses of the flesh through heredity 
—sin working in our mortal bodies and seeking to 
bring us more and more into captivity and to separate 
us from the Lord and the righteousness which he in 
every way represents. In proportion as the Lord's 
people receive the new mind, the gross sins of the flesh 
become distasteful to them— for instance, robbery, dishonesty, 
murder, filthy communications, etc., and when 
these are put away unquestionably a large victory has 
been gained— a great advance over what was in some 
hearts when first they heard the voice of the Lord. 
But the spirit of murder and the spirit of dishonesty 
often lurk in the hearts of those who have become 
thoroughly the Lord's people, and these dispositions 
hide themselves, cloak themselves in such a manner 
that they frequently deceive the new will, which indeed 
needs to be educated up to an appreciation of 
principles. 

It is an advance lesson in the school of Christ that 
gives us to understand that he that hateth his brother 
is a murderer, and hence that those who enlist as soldiers 
of the cross are not only to hate murder but are 
to hate the murder spirit and to cast it out entirely, so 
that they would have nothing but love in their hearts 
for any, even their enemies. Only the more advanced 
and better drilled of the soldiers of the Lord see clearly 
and distinctly the meaning of the Apostle's words 
when he denominates anger, malice, hatred, strife, envyings 
and evil speakings to be all works of the flesh 
and of the devil. 

As soon as this is perceived, the true soldier starts 
a campaign against these well-intrenched evils and 
weaknesses of his own fallen flesh, and he needs to keep 
continually before his mind the thought that perfect 
love must rule in the hearts of all who in the end will 
be esteemed of the Lord overcomers, worthy of a share 
with him in the Kingdom. He must see that perfect 
love worketh no ill to his neighbor (Rom. 13:10); he 
must see that evil speaking comes from evil thinking, 
because "out of the abundance of the heart the 
mouth speaketh;" consequently he must see that 
there is an evil condition still intrenched which needs 



eradication, and only in the name and with the assistance 

of the Lord can he hope to conquer fully and 

completely all such evil heart conditions. True, the 

Lord reckoned us pure in heart from the moment we 

made full consecration to him, and his mercy covers 

all the blemishes that were in us, ignorantly and unwillingly, 

and thus he receives us into his school, into 

his army— but receiving us meant our education, our 

instruction, our drill. As the instruction progresses, 

the obedience must also have made progress, else we 

will not have been considered in the Lord's sight as 

pure in heart, pure in intention. Evidently it is the 

divine purpose that all in this school of the Lord shall 

ultimately come to the place where their hearts will 

approve nothing but that which is approved of the Lord 

—noble, pure, good— however perfectly or imperfectly 

they may be able to express all this in their mortal flesh. 

If once the soldiers of the cross could get the 
proper thought that slander and evil speaking are assassinations 
of the character of another, and that defamation 
is the robbery of another's good name, the 
sooner they will see this matter in its truly awful light 
as it must appear in the Lord's sight, and once seeing 
the matter from this true, divine standpoint must 
awaken the new creature to the greatest activity possible 

R3275 : page 426 

in the overcoming of such works of the flesh and of 
the devil. Each will seek to purge out the old leaven 
of malice and envy and strife and crookedness and evil 
speaking, that he may be pure in heart, a copy of the 
Lord. 

The Scriptural declaration is "Speak evil of no 
man," and all who can see the matter in its true light 
as above set forth will feel a zeal for God and for righteousness 
that will burn against all such iniquity wherever 
it may be found, especially in his own flesh. 

But if it be reprehensible to speak evil of any person, 
if that be contrary to the spirit of love, the Spirit 
of the Lord, how much more evil in the Lord's sight 
must it be if any of the Lord's brethren should speak 
evil of one another— speak evil of a member of the 
Lord's body! How terrible is the thought, how surely 
an evil-doer would lose the Captain's favor and ultimately 
be cut off from all relationship with him and 
with the body. The Lord refers to such, saying, 
"Thou givest thy mouth to evil, and thy tongue frameth 
deceit. Thou sittest and speakest against thy 
brother; thou slanderest thine own mother's son [all 
of the house of sons, brethren of Christ, are figuratively 
represented as being the children of the Sarah 
covenant, the Abrahamic covenant.] These things 
thou hast done, and I have not kept silence; Thou 
thoughtest I was altogether such an one as thyself: 
but I will reprove thee."— Psa. 50:19-22. 



Many have the thought that the evil speaking 
which the Scriptures forbid refers to false witness; but 
not so. The Lord certainly does not expect any of his 
people to have any sympathy with lies. If we might 
speak of sin in a cumulative way, we might say 
that to speak evil is a sin, and that if the matter were 
untrue it would be doubly sinful in the Lord's sight. 
The principle which underlies the matter should be 
clearly discerned by all of the Lord's people. It is 
this: The law of the New Creation is love, and whoever 
loves another would not only not lie to his injury, 

R3276 : page 426 

but would not even speak to his injury if the thing 

were the truth. Whoever, therefore, finds in his heart, 

in his own disposition, a love to tell about others something 

that is to their detriment, to their discredit or 

injury, should see that he is proportionately deficient 

in the spirit of love, in the Spirit of the Lord. 

Love worketh no ill to his neighbor, justly or unjustly; 

it is ready to believe all that is good, and anxious 

to disbelieve and avoid mentioning anything that is 

discreditable. Only duty would move it to speak at 

all of that which is to the discredit of another, and 

then it would be spoken only in such a manner as the 

Scriptures and the spirit of love would approve to those 

who ought to know, and with a view to the assistance 

of the wrong-doer. 

Let us then as New Creatures be encouraged with 
every better understanding of the Captain's word and 
will respecting us, full of confidence in his wisdom and 
in his grace— that he is willing and able to bring us off 
conquerors in the full sense if we are obedient to him. 
Let us strive that we may be able to say with the 
Apostle at the close of our experiences, "I have fought 
the good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept 
the faith: henceforth there is laid up for me a crown 
of righteousness which the Lord, the righteous Judge 
shall give me at that day."— 2 Tim. 4:7,8. 



R3276 : page 426 

"I HAVE CHOSEN HIM." 

-1 CHRON. 28:1-10.~NOVEMBER29.~ 

GOLDEN TEXT-"Trust in the Lord 
with all thy heart."— Prov. 3:5. 

WE have already noted the fact that in King David's 
seventieth year, when it was evident that 
he was nearing the close of life, one of his elder sons, 
Adonijah, following the example of Absalom, attempted 



to seize the kingdom, evidently surmising or perhaps 
knowing that his father had already determined that 
Solomon, his younger brother, should be the successor 
to the throne. We saw how, under the Lord's guidance, 
Adonijah's plans were frustrated and Solomon was duly 
anointed and proclaimed King of all Israel before the 
conspiracy had hatched. Solomon at this time was about 
twenty years old, a very young man to succeed to the 
throne, but evidently the best qualified of all. Of 
his elder brothers Farrar says, "They were men of 
fierce passions and haughty temperament, and would 
be singularly unfitted to carry out the peaceful and 
religious designs which David wished to bequeath to 
his successor." King David had evidently been an 
over-indulgent parent, and, occupied with the larger 
affairs of the kingdom, he probably had neglected 
the training of his children in the ways of the Lord. 
Solomon, born after his legal marriage to Bathsheba, 
and at a time when the King's misguided course had 
brought him to a very humble position before God and 
man, and educated at a time when Absalom's rebellion 
had perhaps taught the King a great lesson, we may 
reasonably suppose that the education of Solomon and 
his younger brothers was along different lines from 
those previously pursued with their elder brethren. In 
line with this thought we find that Solomon's education 
was under the care of the Prophet Nathan and in 
every way characteristic of him. 

R3276 : page 427 

Not content with his own appreciation of Solomon 
as the most suitable heir to the throne and the one approved 
by the Lord, the King gathered a great assembly 
of the chief men of the nation to, so to speak, ratify 
Solomon's appointment and anointing. These princes 
represented (1) the heads of the families, in the twelve 
tribes; (2) the captains of industry and their subordinate 
officers; (3) in a word he gathered all the influential 
representatives of the nation, civil, military, and 
commercial. This was evidently a wise course, and 
points a lesson to the Lord's people of the Church of 
this Gospel age. It is not sufficient that those who serve 
the Lord's flock shall be sure that they understand the 
divine will in respect to the general interests of his 
work; it is expedient that they seek the cooperation of 
the entire congregation either directly or through their 
chosen representatives. David's assurance that God had 
chosen Solomon was a guarantee to him that the Lord 
would so overrule and influence the nation that they 
would gladly accept the divine choice. At the same 
time, the course would have been the wisest one in any 
event, because it is an element of human nature to prefer 
to be considered rather than to be ignored. 

Notwithstanding the King's age and decrepitude, 
and the fact that it was usual to sit in such assemblages, 



he stood upon his feet as implying the importance of 

the matters to be dealt with. His salutation to the officers 

and representatives of the realm was a gracious one: 

"Hear me, my brethren, and my people!" King David 

was not evidently of the dictator class, and all noble 

men and women will appreciate him all the more because 

of this. Notwithstanding his greatness, his success 

as a soldier in establishing and enlarging the kingdom, 

and his eminence as a poet, and his evident favor 

with God, he was not by any or all of these things made 

haughty, domineering, tyrannical, but even in speech 

was a faithful, humble shepherd to the people over 

whom God appointed him. No wonder his name is reverenced 

to this day not only by the Jews, his countrymen, 

but by all who love the Lord and the principles 

of righteousness. 

With full candor the King related to his princes 
his own desires for the glory of God and the nation in 
connection with the building of the Temple, and with 
equal candor he explained why the Lord rejected the 
work at his hands— because he had been a man of war 
and had shed blood. Herein we see a wide distinction 
between the character of our God and his Temple and 
that of other gods and their temples. The gods of the 
heathen are gods of war and their mighty ones are their 
bloody ones. One is impressed with the same thought 
in connection with some of the homage given to war 
heroes in the nominal Christian church. For instance, 
in Westminster Abbey the names of generals and admirals 
and men of the world in general are almost the 
only ones made prominent. Nor was this an exceptional 
matter in David's case: we see the same principle 
pointed out in the Law. (Num. 31:19.) Those who 
participated in battle were unclean and required purification 
for seven days before participating in the privileges 
of citizenship. 

David called attention to the fact that the Lord had 
chosen him to be their King; that he had decreed that 
he should be their King forever— that is, that the kingship 
should be in the line of his posterity. He called 
their attention to the fact that the tribe of Judah was 
the tribe of royalty by divine appointment, and that in 
the tribe of Judah the house of Jesse had been chosen 
by divine direction through the Prophet Samuel, and 
that in the family of Jesse, above all of his sons, the 
Lord had chosen David to be King over all Israel. 
In this speech the King was not attempting to defend 
his position on the throne, for that was conceded by all 
the tribes; but he did wish that the people should recognize 
the matter in a still higher light— that it was 
God who was their real King, and that God had taken 
the supervision of the affairs of the nation and had ordered 
and directed matters up to that juncture. It is 
well that spiritual Israelites should refresh their memories 
similarly; that they should call to mind that God, 
who was the King of typical Israel, is specially the King 



of spiritual Israel, and that being our King the affairs 

of his Church are not left to chance or haphazard, but 

are, in their largest interests at least, under divine supervision 

and care. The Apostle points this out in 

respect to our Lord, the great High Priest, saying, "No 

man taketh this honor unto himself, but he that is called 

of God." So our Lord Jesus called not himself to a position 

of headship in the Church, but was evidently appointed 

to that position by the Father, as the Apostle 

declares, "God hath given him to be the head over 

the Church, which is his body."— Eph. 1:22,23. 

Likewise throughout the Gospel age we may be sure 
that the affairs of God's Church have not been overlooked 
by him— that at all times during this age he 
has had the care of the interests of his people, and 
has raised up for them such helps and teachers as he 
saw best. Similarly, we may know that he still has 
the supervision of Zion's interests, as the Apostle 
declares, "God hath set in the body the various members 
as it hath pleased him." (1 Cor. 12:18.) If 
this thought were more in the mind of the Lord's faithful 
they would be more on the lookout to note the will 
of the Lord in respect to the affairs of the Church— 
whom he sets and where. With this thought in mind 
the choice of elders would not be conducted along lines 
of earthly preference or family kinship or selfish ambition, 
but instead the Lord's preference, the Lord's choice, 

R3276 : page 428 

would be sought. And, so far as the Lord's mind would 

be discerned, none other than his choice would be recognized 

by any of his faithful ones. 

David had no doubt whatever respecting the Lord's 
choice for his successor. How he knew the mind of the 
Lord on the subject we are not informed, but evidently 
he had assured Bathsheba years before that her son 
Solomon should fill the throne, and now he probably 
announced the matter, declaring that God had given him 
assurance that Solomon should build the great temple 
which King David had not been permitted to build, but 
for which he had accumulated great stores of gold, silver, 
iron, marble, precious wood, etc. The word of the 
Lord, "I have chosen him to be my son and will be 
his Father," we are not to understand as meaning that 
Solomon was lifted up from the house of servants, of 
which Moses was the head, and made a member of the 
house of sons, of which Christ is the head— "Whose 
house are we if we hold fast the confidence of our rejoicing 

R3277 : page 428 

firm unto the end." According to the Scriptural 
record, the first opportunity for any members of the 
house of servants to become sons of God was granted at 
the time of our Lord's first advent, and in view of the 



fact that he had already made consecration of his life 
as man's redemption price. (John 1:12,13.) Solomon 
was God's son in a typical sense— he typified God's 
great Son, the Christ. 

That Solomon was a model young man at the time 
of his induction into the kingdom, is evidenced from 
the statement of verse 7: "If he be constant to do my 
commands and my judgments as at this day, I will establish 
his kingdom forever." Here again, however, 
we see how the Lord, while making certain definite 
promises sure to be fulfilled, attaches them to certain 
individuals only upon conditions of their loyalty to him. 
As a matter of fact we know that Solomon did not continue 
in divine favor, but was led astray by the dangers 
of his lofty position and forfeited for his posterity their 
share in the Levitic promise. Hence it is that our Lord 
is not of Solomon's line, but a descendant of another son 
of David, Nathan.-See MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. V.~ 
pp. 145-150. 

Having thus set forth the reasons guiding him to 
the anointing of Solomon as his successor in the kingdom, 
the King charges responsibility upon the chief 
men of the nation— that they should maintain their 
relationship to the Lord and his arrangements faithfully; 
that they should not only observe the commandments 
of the Lord as already understood by them, but 
that they should continually seek to know the divine 
will in all things. He points out that as a nation this 
would be necessary to them if they would continue to 
possess the goodly land of Palestine. We know that 
they did not continue faithful to King David's exhortation, 
and that as a result the goodly land was lost, first 
by ten of the twelve tribes going into captivity, and subsequently 
by the two tribes being transported to a foreign 
land as prisoners. Nevertheless, God's promise 
to David still stands sure, and, like the promise made 
to Abraham, can have its fulfilment only when the 
greater than Isaac, greater than David, greater than 
Solomon, the antitype of these, shall take the throne 
and inaugurate the Millennial reign. 

Turning to Solomon his newly appointed successor, 
the King exhorted his son, "Know thou the God of thy 
father and serve him with a perfect heart and with a 
willing mind." Here knowledge is given its proper 
place. First, it is only in proportion as we come to 
know God that we can properly trust him or faithfully 
serve him, and the Christian's course should be a progressive 
one in these respects. To the first knowledge 
of God and the first faith on that small knowledge and 
first obedience following, come in God's order increased 
knowledge, increased faith and increased obedience. 
We are to remember, however, that the range of 
knowledge and faith is limited to natural things until 
the full consecration of heart is made and the begetting 
of the holy Spirit received, because "the natural man 
receiveth not the things of God neither can he know 



them, for they are spiritually discerned." God hath 
revealed them unto us [begotten of the Spirit] by his 
Spirit, which searcheth all things, yea the deep things 
of God. 

Solomon is exhorted to remember that God not only 
knows the outward things which man can see and of 
which they can imperfectly judge, but that he knows 
also the heart, the intents, the thoughts. The antitypical 
children of God need continually to have this in 
mind, for we walk by faith and not by sight. To 
us, too, the exhortation applies that we are to keep continually 
seeking the Lord if we would be continually 
finding him more and more precious, and that if 
we forsake him and break our covenant with him he 
will cast us off forever. 

The last verse of the lesson refers to the typical 
Temple which Solomon did build as God's sanctuary. 
He was strengthened in wisdom and in power and did 
accomplish that work. The antitype of Solomon, the 
Christ, has been strengthened, has been faithful, has 
been an overcomer, has been approved of the Father. 
He already has nearly prepared all the living stones 
which will constitute the living Temple of God for the 
coming age, through which the divine blessing will be 
administered for the restoration of the groaning creation. 
The building of the house, the growing together of the 
living stones, is already in progress; soon the capstone 
will be brought on with shoutings of grace, grace, unto 
it! 

R3277 : page 429 

WHAT A TRIUMPH OF HIS GRACE IT WILL BE. 



What a triumph of his grace it will be 

When the King shall take me home, even me; 

Lifting me from low estate, 

Passing by the wise and great, 

What a triumph of his grace it will be! 

What a triumph of his grace it will be 

When at last he saves, through faith, even me; 

Faith that he, the work begun, 

Will watch o'er me till 'tis done, 

What a triumph of his grace it will be! 

What a triumph of his grace it will be 

When, my sad mistakes all ended, I am free; 

Free at last to do the right, 

All my weakness turned to might, 

What a triumph of his grace it will be! 

What a triumph of his grace it will be 

When he says, "Well done!" at last to even me; 



When in glory he shall own me, 
And with my Lord enthrone me, 
What a triumph of his grace it will be! C. J. W. 



R3277 : page 429 

"THE FEAR OF THE LORD IS THE BEGINNING OF WISDOM. 
--1 KINGS 3:14,15.-DECEMBER 6.- 



SOLOMON began to reign when he was twenty 
years of age, and under unfavorable conditions 
in several respects. His elder brothers were ambitious 
for the throne, and the chief General of King David's 
army, Joab, had been deflected from the course of fidelity 
to the King. So had Abiathar, one of the chief priests, 
so that the young King had not a path of roses before 
him. The loyalty of his heart to the Lord and to the 
duties imposed upon him by his divine appointment to 
the kingship are remarkable for one so young. They 
clearly indicate the good training he enjoyed, and his 
father's wisdom in putting him under the tuition of the 
Prophet Nathan. Amongst the earliest acts of Solomon's 
reign was the calling of a religious convention, 
to which was assembled the chief men of the nation at 
Gibeon. Solomon realized the importance of religion 
to himself and to the people— that God must be first; 
and this assemblage was doubtless intended to stir up 
the religious enthusiasm of the nation, as well as to 
convince all that Solomon acknowledged the Lord, and 
that the course of the new kingdom would be after the 
same pattern as that of his father— loyalty to the Lord 
as the great King, and recognition of himself as merely 
his servant and representative. 

It is generally understood that the thousand burnt 
offerings sacrificed on this occasion were burnt offerings 
only in the sense that they were offered in connection 
with a religious ceremony in acknowledgment of God, 
that certain of the inward parts were burned upon the 
altar, and that the shoulder of each was devoted to the 
priesthood. It is generally understood that the multitudes 
feasted upon the remainder of the flesh of these 
sacrificed animals. This custom was not only recognized 
in Israel but in various heathen nations, each acknowledging 
its own gods. Thus Croesus, King of Lydia, 
"offered up three thousand of every kind of sacrificial 
beasts," to the god of the Delphian oracle, as Herodotus 
relates. Xerxes, according to the same authority, 
"made an offering of a thousand oxen to the Trojan 
Minerva." Whether the heathen nations copied 
these sacrifices from the Jews or not cannot be positively 
stated, but the earliest and most authentic histories 



seem to so indicate. 

It was while Solomon's mind was active in religious 
matters at Gibeon that the Lord appeared to him 
in a dream and asked him to choose what he would of 
any gift. We are not from this to infer that all dreams 
are of the Lord, but simply to understand that God is 
able to use dreams when he so chooses to convey lessons 
and instructions to his people. Many illustrations of 
this might be sighted— for instance, Joseph's dream 
Nebuchadnezzar's, Daniel's, Paul's, Peter's. We have 
the best of inspired assurance that these were really 
messages from the Lord, and hence are justified in attaching 
importance to them, believing in their fulfilment, 
etc. It is well to remember, however, that many 
dreams are simply operations of nature; that by reason 
of indigestion, or some other abnormal condition, one 
department of the brain seems to be awake while other 
departments are benumbed with sleep. Such dreams 
are apt to be inconsistent and unseasonable, because the 
judgment and counterpoise of reason from various 
standpoints and various sides are lacking. Such dreams 
are inconsistent and meaningless. Another kind of 
dream or vision should be mentioned, namely, those 
which are quite evidently inspired by evil spirits and 
which not infrequently represent the Lord as speaking 
to the individual, directing, commanding, etc.; these 
are in line with trance-medium development of spiritualism. 
The authorship of dreams being so much in 
doubt, as well as the fact that with the death of the 
apostles plenary inspiration ceased and the inspired 
class canonized, should make us very dubious, very 
skeptical, in respect to dreams that might come to any 

R3278 : page 430 

of us. Hence every dream and the lesson which it 

would seem to inculcate should be considered quite subordinate 

to the written Word of God. If they speak 

not in harmony with this Word, it is because there is 

no light in them. Those who are misled by dreams 

ascribe to them authority of a special revelation, and 

in so doing are not wise, but are greatly in danger of 

being side-tracked by our wily Adversary. 

Solomon was living in a time before the Scriptures 
were completed, at a time when it could not be said 
that the Scriptures are able to make wise, sufficient that 
the man of God may be thoroughly furnished. (2 Tim. 3:17.) 
Besides, the declaration is that his dream or 
vision was from the Lord. Even then we see that the 
Lord was not operating contrary to the freedom of Solomon's 
will, because had the young King's mind been 
full of ambition for power, for victories over his enemies 
or for great riches, undoubtedly in the dream he would 
have responded by asking the things uppermost in his 
heart. His reply shows us that he was full of appreciation 
of the great work which God had committed to his 



care, that he recognized that his father's success had 
been of the Lord and not of his own power, and that 
whatever others thought of his father's real sentiments. 
Solomon recognized his loyalty to God, to truth, to 
righteousness, to uprightness of heart. In acknowledging 
the Lord's kindness in raising him to the throne he 
was acknowledging that God was the real King, that he 
merely sat upon "the throne of the kingdom of the 
Lord." This is further evidenced by the words, "God, 
thou hast made thy servant King instead of David my 
father." What a strength it gave this young man to 
realize that he was in God's hands; that it was not 
merely to his father's foresight and wisdom that he 
came to the throne, nor by the superior prestige of his 
father's influence over the army and the majority of the 
people, but of the Lord's providences. 

Similarly, this should give strength to all of the 
Lord's consecrated people who realize that they have 
come into the present grace and Truth not by their own 
wisdom nor by the wisdom of others, but through the 
wisdom and grace of the Lord. The same thought 
should be entertained by all who serve the Church of 
God as ministers, servants in any department, in any 
manner responsible to the Lord for their position in the 
household of faith, and their opportunities to serve as 
the Lord's mouthpieces should be felt and confessed. 
But failure to confess it even implies a failure rightly 
to appreciate it. 

The humility of the king is beautifully indicated 
by his declaration, "I am but a little child and know 
not how to order my course in life, my outgoings and 
incomings," and yet he was in the midst of the Lord's 
people, the center or head of the nation— though he felt 
himself incapable of the proper management of these 
high and responsible duties. He did not say "my 
people," but "thy people which thou hast chosen." 
We feel like suggesting a lesson here to some of the 
elders of the Lord's flock, who, after the manner of the 
Babylonians, are inclined to speak of the congregations 
to whom they minister, as "my people," "my flock," 
"my church." They probably do not realize how inappropriate 
are such expressions; that if natural Israel 
was the Lord's people, whom he had chosen, how much 
more the antitypical Israel should be thought of and 
spoken of as the Lord's people, the Lord's flock. The 
very fact that any one would speak of the congregation 
of the Lord's people as his own indicates a dangerous 
condition of mind and a tendency to be heady, high-minded, 
injurious, detrimental to the interests of spiritual 
Zion. Those who have had such a tendency of 
mind should correct themselves with fasting and prayer, 
peradventure their wrongdoing may be forgiven of the 
Lord and they may be kept from stumbling into further 
self-assurance. And the Lord's flock everywhere 
should be quick to resent any such human ownership 
or control. A failure to quickly discern and properly 



resent such self-assurance on the part of leaders is an 
indication that the flocks to whom they minister are not 
fully appreciating and enjoying the liberty with which 
Christ is pleased to make free all who are truly his sheep 
and who acknowledge him as their chief Shepherd. 

In speaking of the numbers of Israel, Solomon used 
a form of expression common in his day for a large multitude 
—namely, a great people that cannot be numbered 
or counted for multitude. It is estimated that the numbers 
at this time were about 6,000,000, and probably 
without the conveniences at hand for taking an enumeration 
it was actually impossible to determine the number 
of people— the facilities for keeping track of births 
and deaths being much less convenient and much less 
accurate than at the present time. 

With this preamble as showing his estimate of his 
own incapacity and of the greatness of the work, and 
that the people were the Lord's people, and that he himself 
was the Lord's appointment to be the King, Solomon 
now comes to the expression of his choice, namely, 
"an understanding heart to judge thy people, that 
I may discern between good and evil; for who is able 
to judge this thy great people?" Solomon recognized 
that the most necessary thing for the welfare of the 
nation was righteous judgment of the various questions 
pertaining to the nation's welfare as well as those affecting 
individual matters. Doubtless he had come to realize, 
as his subsequent written proverbs clearly indicate, 
that selfishness is a foe to justice, and that the very 
wisest and best of governments need to be carefully 
guarded lest the selfish interests of some should work 
injury to others— to many. The whole world realizes 
this today, and if we would ask civilized humanity in 

R3278 : page 431 

general what is the one great need of the world, the 

answer unquestionably would be, We need to have righteousness 

established between nations, between individuals, 

and we need wisdom to discern the right from the 

wrong, the false from the true, the pure from the evil. 

Many of the wisest people of the world, although realizing 

the needs of the present time, have reached the 

conclusion that it is useless to attempt to secure evenhanded 

justice in all particulars, amongst all classes; 

and those who are best informed respecting the teachings 

of the divine Word have been led to pray with 

greater earnestness than ever before, "Thy kingdom 

come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven." 

They realize that earthly beings are all more or less fallen, 

more or less selfish, and that a crying need of the 

world today is for a perfect government, backed up by 

full power to enact, and to execute as well, laws of righteousness 

which shall control the whole world, subduing 

evil, exalting good. The antitype of Solomon, the 

Prince of Peace, Messiah, is to accomplish this in the 



world in the Father's good time, in the Millennial age. 

The Lord was pleased with Solomon's choice; he 
could not have chosen better. Some have suggested 
that he might have chosen spiritual things, and thus 
have made a still wiser, better choice; but such forget 
that the spiritual things were not open to be understood 
or to be chosen or to be acquired in Solomon's day, nor 
until the great atonement for sin had been made— until 
the call went forth inviting believers who had fled from 
sin and who had laid hold on the hopes set before them 
in Christ to become self-sacrificers with him, joint-participators 
with him in the holy Spirit of adoption and 
ultimately to be joint-heirs with him in the kingdom. 
Solomon, therefore, chose as wisely as was possible for 
him to choose of the things that were known to him and 
attainable in his day. 

It was just like our heavenly Father to give Solomon 
the riches and honors which he had not asked as 
a reward of his appreciation of wisdom. Indeed it is 
Solomon himself who expresses the thought that riches 
and honors are in the right hand of wisdom as her reward. 
It is thus implied that the Lord in giving to anyone 
wisdom, grants also the rewards which wisdom 
brings— namely, riches and honor. Some one then may 
inquire, How comes it that those who now seek the wisdom 
from above, the highest of all wisdom, first pure, 
then peaceable, easy to be entreated and full of mercy 
and good fruits— how is it that such very rarely get 
earthly riches and honors? We reply, that in Solomon's 
time the Lord was dealing with natural fleshly 
Israel, and his promises were along natural fleshly 
lines, but that during this Gospel dispensation he is 
dealing with spiritual Israel and his promises and blessings 
are along spiritual lines. The wisdom that his people 
are to seek and to enjoy, the wisdom that cometh 
from above, is not the wisdom of this world, as the Apostle 
clearly points out that the riches and honors which 
are in the hands of this heavenly wisdom, which comes 
to the Lord's consecrated Church, are spiritual riches 
and spiritual honors which the world sees not and appreciates 
not in this present time— which, like the wisdom 
itself, can be appreciated only by those whose eyes 
of understanding have been opened and who can and 
do thus discern the riches of God's grace toward his 
elect Church, which "eye hath not seen nor ear heard, 
neither hath entered into the heart of [the] natural man, 
but which God hath revealed unto us by his Spirit."— 
1 Cor. 2:9,10. 

The riches and honors which came to Solomon incidentally 
with his wisdom are world-renowned, and the 
blessing of long life which was made conditional was 
partly fulfilled. Solomon lived to be sixty, whereas, 
we believe, under this promise he would have lived 
until eighty had he been more obedient to the divine 
will, but with him as with many others, prosperity was 
much more difficult to stand than adversity. 



When Solomon awoke and realized that these 
things had been a dream, a visitation of the lord, he 
returned to Jerusalem, the Capital city where the ark 
was located, and presented himself as a sacrificer, offering 
burnt offerings and peace offerings and making a 
feast for his servants, and realizing that the Lord was 

R3279 : page 431 

prospering him in the matter to which he had called 

him, he evidently was full of joy and satisfaction and 

peace. So it should be with all the Lord's people 

who have been called to be heirs of God, joint-heirs 

with Jesus Christ their Lord, for "an inheritance incorruptible, 

undefiled and fadeth not away, reserved in 

heaven for you who are kept through faith and by the 

power of God unto salvation, ready to be revealed in 

the last time." They, too, should realize that the proper 

way to show their appreciation of the Lord's promised 

blessings is by a manifestation of faith in him, confidently 

trusting and rejoicing in these. Wherever we 

find fear, trepidation, unrest, we may know that these 

are symptoms of some spiritual malady; because whatever 

may be the outward disturbances, troubles, vexations, 

it is the privilege of those who are the Lord's to 

have the peace of God which passeth all understanding 

continually ruling in their hearts. It is their privilege 

to realize fully, thoroughly that all things are 

working together for good to them because they love the 

Lord, and with this thought of their call to the Kingdom 

and of the Lord's willingness that they should serve 

therein, and with the assurance that he will give grace 

and glory and no good thing withhold from those who 

walk uprightly, we certainly have reason for thankfulness 

and heart-rejoicing before him. 



Nov. 15 insert 
Bibles, Testaments, Students' Helps, Etc. 

SUPPLIED AT WHOLESALE COST PRICES. 



Our Society does not supply Bibles free, but it justifies the 
Bible feature of its name by supplying Bibles, Testaments and 
Bible Study Helps at wholesale rates. Additionally we give our 
readers the benefit of our experience and judgment respecting 
which Bibles are the best value at the wholesale rate. When 
ordering large-size Bibles always name your express office and 
company as well as post office. Letters containing money or stamps 
accompanying order should always be registered. 



BAGSTER TEACHERS' BIBLES. 

CONTAINING ALL THE IMPROVEMENTS-LARGE TYPE (LONG PRIMER). 
SIZE, 5-5/8 X 8-5/8 INCHES. 

No. 8701 French Seal, Divinity Circuit, Red under Gold $1.15 

No. 8709 Egyptian Seal, Divinity Circuit, Red under 

Gold, Leather Lined 1.65 

No. 8721 Norse Morocco, Silk Sewed, ditto 2.75 

Postage, 25c each extra; Thumb Index, if desired, 25c. 

THE CHEAPEST TEACHERS' BIBLE IN THE WORLD. 
MINION TYPE EDITION. 

No. 8301 French Seal, Divinity Circuit, Red under Gold 90 

Postage, 25c each extra; Thumb Index, if desired, 25c. 



HOLM AN TEACHERS' BIBLES. 

PICTORIAL EDITION. 

COMBINES ALL THE "HELPS" FEATURES, 

ALSO EIGHTY SPLENDID FULL-PAGE PHOTO-VIEWS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

BOURGEOIS TYPE-5-1/4 x 7-3/4 INCHES. 

No. 4810 French Seal, Red under Gold $1.25 

No. 8816 ditto, ditto, Linen Lined 1.35 

No. 8838 Alaska Seal, Calfskin Lined to Edge, Silk Sewed 

Red under Gold Edges, Divinity Circuit 2.35 

Postage, 25c each extra; Thumb Index, if desired, 25c. 



COMBINATION TEACHERS' BIBLES. 

This Bible shows the variations of the Revised Version at 
the foot of each page. Otherwise it is an ordinary "Teachers' 
Bible" with maps, concordance, etc. 

No. N.A. French Seal, Divinity Circuit $1.10 

No. N.B. do. do. Linen Lined 1.25 

No. N.C. do. do. Leather Lined 1.45 

All Red under Gold Edges. 

Postage, 25c each extra; Thumb Index, if desired, 25c. 



CAMBRIDGE INDIA PAPER BIBLES. 

No. 8635 Divinity Circuit, References, Minion Type, 

Red under Gold Edges $1.25 

No. 8636 Leather Lined, Red under Gold, Divinity Circuit, 
References, Minion Type 1.75 



Postage extra, 25c; Thumb Index, 25c. 



OXFORD INDIA PAPER BIBLES. 

The merits of these wonderful productions of the book 
maker's skillful art are so well known as to render detailed 
comment unnecessary. By special arrangement we can save 
our friends one-third of the list price on these Bibles, and have 
selected the styles which in our opinion are most desirable. 
All but No. 01 157x contain References, and are Silk Sewed. 
No. 03554 is Self Pronouncing. All are bound with Divinity 
Circuit, are Leather Lined, have Red under Gold Edges and 
Round Corners. The type increases in size as follows: Pearl, 
Ruby, Emerald, Minion, Bourgeois and Long Primer. No. 
0358 lx contains Concordance and Maps, and Nos. 0863x 
and 0865-l/2x contain full Teachers' Helps. Thumb Index 
on any of these 25c extra. 

No. 03009x Pearl Type, Persian Levant, postpaid $2.25 

No. 01 157x Ruby Type, French Morocco, postpaid 1.45 

No. 03114x do. Persian Levant, postpaid 2.50 

No. 03229x do. do. postpaid 2.65 

No. 03265x Minion Type, Levant Morocco, postpaid 3.25 

No. 03485x Minion Type, Persian Levant, postpaid 4.60 

No. 03554x Bourgeois Type, Alaska Seal, postpaid 4.20 

No. 03581x Long Primer Type, Persian Levant, postpaid 4.60 

No. 0863x do. do. Alaska Seal, postpaid 3.50 

No. 0865-l/2x do. do. Levant, postpaid 5.00 



VARIORUM TEACHERS' BIBLES. 

We can supply any of these at publishers' list prices less 
25 per cent, discount. 



THE LINEAR TEACHERS' BIBLE. 

Hitherto this Bible has been sold by "Subscription Agents" 
only. Its special feature, differentiating it from other "Teachers' 
Bibles," is that it shows the readings of the Common and 
Revised Versions side by side in the same line. 

(This is the Bible of which we procured a special edition 
with wide margins and Dawn & Tower references thereon; and 
of which edition we have no more.) 

No. 350 French Seal, Divinity Circuit, Red under Gold 
Edges, list price $6, our price $2.10 

No. 355 French Morocco, Divinity Circuit, Red Leather 
Lined, list price $8, our price 3.15 

No. 360 Levant Morocco, Divinity Circuit, Red Kid 

Lined, list price $10, our price 4.20 



Thumb Index, if desired, 25c extra; Postage, 25c. 
Other Desirable Bibles, New Testaments, Etc. 



The Students' Hand Bible. 

No. 04403 Minion type, French Seal, Divinity Circuit, 

Selected Helps, including Concordance $ .90 

Post extra 20 

Oxford Self-Pronouncing Teachers' Bible. 

No. 0823 Bourgeois Type, French Seal, Divinity Circuit, 

Round Corners, Red under Gold Edge $1.25 

Postage 25 

This is a wonderful book for the price, and its 
self -pronouncing feature is on a new plan 
preferred by some. 

Holman Lap Bibles for the Aged; References; Very Light. 

No. 2002 Pica Type, Cloth, Red Edges $ .90 

Post extra 25 

No. 2014 Pica Type, French Seal, Limp 1.50 

Post extra 25 

No. 2022 Pica Type, French Seal, Divinity Circuit 1.85 

Post extra 25 

New Testaments for Aged.— No References. 

No. 212 Small Pica Type, Roan, Square Corners 35 

Post extra 12 

No. 283 Same as No. 212 with Psalms added 45 

Post extra 15 

Pocket Bible with References. 

No. 03008 Pearl Type, Fr. Seal, Divinity Circuit 65 

Post extra 07 

Pocket Bibles without References. 

No. 01103 Diamond Type, India Paper, Divinity 

Circuit, Red under Gold Edges $1.00 .03 

No. 178 Pearl Type, Cloth, Red Edges 18 .07 

No. 010 Pearl Type, French Seal, Red under Gold 45 .05 

No. 013 Pearl Type, French Seal, Divinity Circuit, 

Red under Gold Edges 55 .05 

No. 038 Pearl Type, Padded, Red under Gold 55 .05 

No. 035 Pearl Type, Padded and Clasp, Red under 

Gold Edges 60 .05 

No. 01150 Ruby Type, French Seal, Red under Gold 50 .07 

No. 01153 Ruby Type, French Seal, Divinity Circuit, 

Red under Gold Edges 60 .07 



No. 01327 Minion Type, French Seal, Divinity Circuit, 

Red under Gold Edges 75 .12 

No. 01329 Minion Type, French Seal, Divinity Circuit, 

Leather Lined 1.10 .12 

No. 215 Nonpareil Type, French Morocco, Divinity 

Circuit, Red under Gold Edges 80 .12 

No. 0602x Thin Vest Pocket Bible, Persian Morocco, 

Limp, Round Corners, Red under Gold 

Edges 1.50 

No. 02002x Ditto-Divinity Circuit, Leather Lined, 

Silk Sewed, References 1.85 

(CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE.) 

OTHER DESIRABLE BIBLES, TESTAMENTS, ETC. 

Childs' Bibles, Profusely Illustrated. 

No. 252 Minion Type, Fr. Seal, Limp $ .80 post extra, .10 

No. 254 Minion Type, Fr. Divinity Circ 1.00 post extra, .10 

Pocket New Testaments. 

No. 801 Ruby Type, Limp Cloth $ .05 post extra, .02 

No. 030 Ruby Type, French Seal 17 post extra, .02 

No. 033 Ruby Type, Fr. Seal, Div. Circuit 28 post extra, .02 

No. 0130 Same as No. 030 with Psalms added 25 post extra, .03 

No. 0133 Same as No. 033 with Psalms added 35 post extra, .03 

No. 287 Brevier Type, Roan, Gilt Edge, 

Psalms 35 post extra, .05 

No. 010 Diamond Type (very small), 

Limp, Morocco, Red under 

Gold Edges 35 post extra, .01 

No. 014 Diamond Type (very small), Fr. 

Morocco, Divinity Circuit, 

Leather Lined, etc 65 post extra, .01 

Self-Pronouncing Family Bibles. 

At one-half list prices. Publishers' catalogue sent on 
application. 

"Bible Talks in Simple Language." 

This is the best book of its kind we have ever seen. It 
presents the Bible stories in simple, but not childish language, 
and seems remarkably free from the bad theology so common 
in this class of books. All Christian parents should have a 
Sunday Bible lesson with their children, and this book furnishes 
interesting topics, to which may be added as much 
concordant "present truth" as the age of the children will 
justify. Parents are responsible for their children's training 
in theology as well as morals. This will assist you in the 
discharge of this duty, and thus be a blessing to yourself as 
well as to your children. 

624 pages, 250 illustrations; cloth sides, leather back and 



corners, gilt edges. A subscription book at $3. Our special 
price 75 cents, plus 25 cents postage. 

"Daily Food." 

Two texts and a verse for every day in the year. Have 
one on your breakfast table with the natural food. Appoint 
one of the family reader, and call for questions and comments. 
Feed the soul as well as the body. Small, neat, cloth bound, 
gilt edges. 15 cents, 2 for 25 cents, including postage. 



Concordances and Other Bible Study Helps. 



First in this list we mention the several volumes of 

MILLENNIAL DAWN SERIES 

—referring inquirers to the second page of each issue of this 
journal for prices, etc. We commend also, as aids, the 
following publications by other presses, which we supply at 
specially low prices because of the assistance they will lend to 
the study of God's Word. We mention these somewhat in the 
order in which they seem to us to be desirable aids,— putting 
the concordances last, though they are not by any means least 
important. 

THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT. 

This very valuable work, published under the author's 
copyright by Fowler & Wells Co., New York City, has 
been sold by them at $4 in cloth and $5 in half leather 
binding. For several years a friend, an earnest Bible 
student, desirous of assisting the readers of our Society's publications, 
has supplied them through us at a greatly reduced 
price; now he has purchased the copyright and plates from the 
Fowler & Wells Co., and presented the same to our Society as 
a gift, under our assurance that the gift will be used for the 
furthering of the Truth to the extent of our ability, by such a 
reduction of price as will permit the poor of the Lord's flock to 
have this help in the study of the Word. 

REDUCED PRICES.-These will be sold with ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER only. In cloth binding $1.50 (6s. 3d.)— includes postage 
and one year's subscription, new or renewal, to Z.W.T. On 
thin paper, in full morocco leather, divinity circuit, red under 
gold edges, silk sewed leather lined, $2.50 (10s. 6d.)— includes 
postage and one year's subscription to Z.W.T. 

THE TISCHENDORF NEW TESTAMENT. 

This is the ordinary Common Version in cloth binding. 
As footnotes it gives the reading of the three oldest Greek MSS., 
Sinaiticus, Vaticanus and Alexandrine, wherever these differ 



from the Common Version. This is a very valuable little work, 
published in Europe, which we specially import for the benefit 
of our readers. Price 40c, including postage. 

THE NEW ROTHERHAM TRANSLATION OF THE NEW 
TESTAMENT. 

Mr. Rotherham's previous translation was good, but, so 
far as we are able to judge from a hasty examination, this one 
is better. Our price, in cloth binding postage included, is $1.50. 

THE SYRIAC-PESHITO NEW TESTAMENT-MURDOCH'S. 

This, too, is a valuable work, and an aid in critical study. 
It is translated from the Syriac instead of from the Greek. It 
is claimed by some that it was the language in which our Lord 
and the apostles spoke and wrote, and that the Greek was 
translated from this. Our price, in half leather binding, postage 
included, $1.50. 

LEESER'S TRANSLATION OF THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

This is the standard translation amongst English reading 
Hebrews, by one of their own rabbis. It is not perfect, but is 
a valuable aid in critical study of the Old Testament. Our 
special price, in leather binding, including postage, is $1.10. 

REVISED VERSION TESTAMENTS. 

No. 0100 Cloth Binding, pocket size, postage included 20 

REVISED VERSION BIBLES. 

No. 040 Pearl Type, Cloth Binding 30, postage extra, .10 

No. 060 Minion Type, Cloth Binding 75, postage extra, .20 

AMERICAN COMMITTEE'S REVISED (OXFORD) BIBLE. 

No. 03750 Bourgeois, Cloth, References $ .80, postage, .25 

No. 3752 Ditto, in Morocco, Div. Circuit 1.70, postage, .25 

AMERICAN STANDARD REVISED BIBLE. 

No. 260 Long Primer, Cloth, References $1.15, postage, .30 

No. 272 Long Primer, Fr. Seal, References 2.20, postage, .30 

No. 160 Bourgeois, Cloth, References 80, postage, .20 

No. 172 Bourgeois, Fr. Seal, References 1.55, postage, .20 

PROF. YOUNG'S TRANSLATION OF THE OLD AND NEW 
TESTAMENTS. 

Many regard this as a valuable aid; but we do not specially 
recommend it as such, as some of its peculiarities are liable to 
mislead those who have no conception of the Hebrew idiom. 
In cloth binding, including postage, $4. This is the regular 
retail price, and the publishers do not permit us to make any 



reduction. We are at liberty, however, to prepay the postage 
free and to give as a premium two volumes of the DAWN series 
in cloth binding. 

ANALYTICAL CONCORDANCE TO THE SCRIPTURES. 

In English, Hebrew and Greek, by Prof. Young (Presbyterian). 
A valuable work for all critical students. Price, in 
cloth binding, $5, including postage. We are not permitted by 
the publishers to cut this price; but may and do give postage 
free and give besides a premium of any four volumes of the 
MILLENNIAL DAWN series in cloth binding with each 
Concordance. 

THE EXHAUSTIVE CONCORDANCE TO THE 
SCRIPTURES. 

In English, Hebrew and Greek, by Prof. Strong (Methodist). 
This is also an able work and useful in critical study. 
It has some advantages over Young's; after getting used to it 
we prefer it. Price, in cloth binding, $6; half leather, $8; full 
leather, $10. We will pay mail or express charges on these, 
and in addition give as a premium all six volumes of the 
DAWN series in cloth binding, with each Concordance. 

CRUDEN'S CONCORDANCE TO THE SCRIPTURES. 

A valuable work, but scarcely necessary to those who have 
either one of the above mentioned. English only. Cloth 
binding, $1, postage included. 

SMITH'S BIBLE DICTIONARY. 

This is one of the most desirable editions of Prof. Smith's 
work. It is a large volume of 1020 pages. In cloth binding, 
$1.30, including postage. 

--WHEN ORDERING ALWAYS NAME YOUR EXPRESS 
OFFICE AND COMPANY AS WELL AS POST OFFICE.- 

ADDRESS ORDERS WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND 
TRACT SOCIETY, BIBLE HOUSE, ALLEGHENY, PA. 

For Prices in Great Britain, Address us at 

24 EVERSHOLT STREET, LONDON, N.W. 



YOUR "GOOD HOPES" 1904. 



[The plan here proposed we designate "GOOD HOPES," 
because nothing is actually promised— only your generous 
hopes expressed, based upon your future prospects as they 
now appear to you. The plan proved not only so beneficial 



to the cause of truth, but also so blessed to the hopers, for 
some years past, that we again commend it to all as Scriptural 
and good. Those who desire to make use of this plan 
can fill out both of these memoranda. One should be kept 
for the refreshment of your memory; the other mail to us.] 

To the 
"WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY." 

Dear Friends:— I have read with interest of the openings 
for the Dawn and Tract work in foreign lands and here 
at home. I need not tell you that I am deeply interested 
in the spread of the Glad Tidings of the lengths and 
breadths, the heights and depths of redeeming love expressed 
for us in God's great Plan of the Ages. 

I am anxious to use myself— every power, every talent, 
voice, time, money, influence, all— to give to others this 
knowledge, which has so greatly blessed, cheered and comforted 
my own heart and placed my feet firmly upon the 
Rock of Ages. 

I have been considering carefully, and praying to be instructed, 
how to use my various talents more to my Redeemer's 
glory and for the service of his people— those 
blinded by human tradition who are, nevertheless, hungering 
for "the good Word of God," and those also who are 
naked, not having on the wedding garment of Christ's imputed 
righteousness, the unjustified, who stand at best in 
the filthy rags of their own righteousness. I have decided 
that so far as my "money talent" goes, I will follow the rule 
so clearly laid down for us by the great Apostle Paul (1 Cor. 16:2), 
and will lay aside on the first day of each week, according 
to my thankful appreciation of the Lord's blessings 
during the preceding week. Out of this fund I wish to contribute 
to the several parts of the Lord's work specified on 
the back of this letter. Of course, I cannot in advance 
judge or state particularly what the Lord's bounty may enable 
me to set apart weekly, and hence you will understand 
the sum indicated to be merely my conjecture or hope, based 
upon present prospects. I will endeavor to contribute more 
than I here specify; and should I not succeed in doing as 
well, the Lord will know my heart, and you, also, will know 
of my endeavors. 

My only object in specifying in advance what I hope to 
be able to do in this cause is to enable those in charge of 
the work of publishing and circulating the Tracts, etc., to 
form estimates, lay plans, make contracts, etc., with some 
idea of what I will at least try to do in the exercise of this 
my highly appreciated privilege. 

My present judgment is that during the coming year, by 
self-denial and cross-bearing, I shall be able to lay aside on 
the first day of each week for Home and Foreign Mission 
Work (to assist in circulating Millennial Dawn in foreign 
languages, and in publishing the "Old Theology Tracts" in 
various languages, and in supplying these gratuitously to 
brethren who have the heart and opportunity to circulate 
them widely, and in meeting the expenses of brethren sent 



out as "Pilgrims" to preach the divine plan of salvation, 
and in general to be expended as the officers of the Society 
may deem best), the amount of per week. 

To comply with United States Postal Laws, all or any 
portion of my donation may be applied as subscription price 
for Watch Tower or O.T. Tracts sent to the Lord's poor 
or others, as the Society's officers may deem advisable. 

That the work be not hindered, I will endeavor to send 
you what I shall have laid aside for this cause at the close 
of each quarter. I will secure a Bank Draft, Express Order 
or Postal Money Order as I may find most convenient, and 
will address the letter to 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 

"Bible House," Allegheny, Pa. 

(Name) 

(Post Office) (State) 



WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTIONS 
-ON GOOD HOPES ACCOUNT.- 



The friends who contribute to the "Good Hopes" (described 
on the reverse of this sheet) at times desire to send 
the Watch Tower to friends who are not yet interested 
enough to subscribe for themselves; or to deeply interested 
friends who are too poor to subscribe and backward about 
accepting our Lord's Poor offer. They are invited to give 
us such addresses below— the expense to be deducted from 
their donations. Give full addresses, and write very plainly 
please, mentioning the length of the subscriptions. 



CHRISTIAN HOME EMBELLISHMENTS. 



For several years we have been supplying our readers 
with handsome text and motto cards for the walls of their 
homes. Their influence is excellent; for they continually 
and cheerfully catch the eye and remind the heart of our 
great favors present and to come, based upon the exceeding 
great and precious promises of our Father's Word. We 
commend these as helps in the "narrow way,"— helps in 
character-building . 

We aim to have a good supply of these very choice cards constantly 
on hand, and for particular description of some (not all) 
of the styles would refer you to our illustrated list, which will 
be sent on request. We still recommend the dollar packages 
as the most satisfactory way, all things considered, of acquiring 



these texts. They are sent carriage paid for $1.16, by prepaid 
express whenever feasible. 

OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS. 



These are published quarterly, copies being sent to all subscribers. 
Other copies, for distribution among friends, from 
house to house, for enclosure in letters, and in general for use 
in such ways as seem judicious, are supplied freely, the expense 
entailed by the great demand for them being borne by the 
Tract Fund of voluntary contributions. Write for the tracts as 
you feel able to use them, even if not so well able to contribute 
toward the expense; some who are not able, and do contribute, 
do not have opportunities personally to use all that their 
contributions pay for, so that the matter is equalized, 
and all may have a part in this service of disseminating 
the truth. 

A PRIVILEGE AND A SERVICE. 



We are convinced that the Watch Tower lists do not contain 
the names of one-half of those deeply interested in its teachings. 
The total is small enough surely, and we are not content that 
the name of any should be missing. We believe that all such 
will be stimulated and encouraged on the "narrow way" by 
its semi-monthly appearance on their table, reminding them 
afresh of spiritual matters which the world, the flesh and the 
devil continually tend to crowd out of mind and heart. 

Hitherto we have required that all desiring the Watch Tower 
on credit, or free, as "the Lord's Poor," should make personal 
application; but now we request every subscriber to inquire 
among those whom he knows to be interested in present truth, 
and to obtain the consent of all such to send in their subscriptions 
either on credit or free, as their circumstances may necessitate. 
Any getting it on credit may at any future time request 
that the debt be cancelled, and we will cheerfully comply. We 
desire that as nearly as possible the Watch Tower lists shall 
represent all those deeply interested in its message. 

Our object is not the gain of "filthy lucre," but "the perfecting 
of the saints for the work of ministry"— present and to 
come. (Eph. 4:12.) We offer no premiums, desiring the 
co-operation of such only as appreciate the privilege of being 
co-workers with us in this ministry. Our list is now about 
17,000; but it should be at least 25,000, and we confidently 
expect the above program to bring it to that figure. Let as 
many as appreciate it as a privilege, join at once in this service. 

WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTION RENEWALS. 



Most of our subscriptions end with the year, so we take this 



opportunity to remark that we will be glad to hear promptly 
from such as desire the visits of the Watch Tower continued. 
This applies to all who get it on the Lord's Poor list as well 
as to those who pay. When names are dropped and afterward 
renewed it makes us unnecessary trouble. 



page 433 

VOL. XXIV. DECEMBER 1, 1903. No. 23 
SEMI-MONTHLY. 



CONTENTS. 

"Hallelujah! What a Savior!" 435 

Christ Our Wisdom 435 

Christ Our Justification 435 

Christ Our Sanctification 437 

Christ Our Redemption or 
Deliverance 440 

Whom God Did Predestinate 440 

The Dedication of the Temple 441 

A Greater Than Solomon 444 

Interesting Letters 446 

Public Ministries of the Truth 448 

page 434 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



PASTOR RUSSELL'S DISCOURSES EVERY MONDAY. 



By a special arrangement with The Pittsburgh Gazette a stenographic 
report of Pastor C. T. Russell's discourses will be printed 
on Mondays. We will send you "The Pittsburgh Gazette" 
(daily) and ZION'S WATCH TOWER twice a month for a period 



of 12 months for $3.25, which is about the price of The Gazette 
alone. The subscriptions must be paid in advance and sent to us. 

NOTICE.— Where Gazette agencies are established the issues 
desired can be readily obtained through them. The Gazette refuses 
to mail papers to towns where they would interfere with 
the agents already located. 

THE LORD'S POOR SHOULD WRITE NOW. 



Those receiving the Watch Tower free and desiring 
its continuance on same terms for 1904, should send 
postal-card request now. By so doing they will save us much 
trouble. When a name has been dropped from the lists, 
it causes extra labor to reinsert it. This advice applies 
also to any who need to ask credit. Each year stands for 
itself. You are very welcome. What more can we say 
than "Ask that ye may receive"? 

R3282 : page 434 

SUBSCRIBERS FOR DAWN VOL. VI. 



We hope to fill all orders up to date, about December 
15th. Any who have changed their address since sending 
their orders should notify us at once by postal card, lest 
the book go to old address and be lost. 

INCREASED PRICE OF DAWNS IV., V., VI. 



In consequence of raise of prices for printing and binding 
just after we had reduced our price on cloth-bound DAWNS, 
we have been selling all volumes of the series at a loss for the 
past six months. The loss has been specially heavy on the 
thicker volumes, and we now feel compelled to increase the 
price on these to 40 cents, plus 10 cents postage. Subscribers' 
wholesale rate 20 cents plus 10 cents postage. These prices 
take effect Nov. 1, 1903. 

Volume VI. will have over 700 pages and is hoped for in 
December. Those who have already paid for it at old prices 
need not send additionally. 



page 434 

Mottoes on the walls of the earthly homes of the 
Lord's people are very helpful. We have a larger stock 
this year than ever before. Our prices are less than one-half 
the usual. We are putting them up in assorted packages. 
Ma, Mb and Mc, are three $1 assortments; My and 



Mz are $2 packages,— all different. Some may want all 
of these for $7, while others may be content with a 25c 
or 50c package of the less expensive sorts. We are pleased 
to co-operate and to supply your wants as best we can. 



Colporteurs who have no formal, written assignments 
of territory should write for such, expressing their preferences, 
—which will be granted so far as possible. Otherwise 
they, we, and others who have regularly assigned 
territory will be greatly inconvenienced at times. We 
cannot, hereafter, recognize any as colporteurs who do 
not comply with this rule, which is essential for the good 
of all. Changes of address should be sent us in advance.— 
on separate slip of paper or on postal card. 



R3279 : page 435 

"HALLELUJAH! WHAT A SAVIOR!" 



CHRIST, THE INSTRUCTOR, JUSTIFIER, SANCTIFIER AND DELIVERER OF HIS PEOPLE. 



"Who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, [justification], 
and sanctification, and redemption [deliverance]." 
-1 Cor. 1:30.- 

CHRIST OUR WISDOM. 



SINCE God's dealings with his creatures recognize 

their wills, the first step in his dealings 

with them, therefore, is to give them knowledge, 

or "wisdom," as it is translated in the above Scripture. 

It is for this reason that preaching was the first 

command of the Gospel age. To the worldly minded the 

preaching of forgiveness on account of faith in the crucified 

Jesus did not seem the wise course. To them it 

would have seemed better for God to have commanded 

something to be done by them. But, as Paul says— 

"It pleased God to save those who believe by [knowledge 

imparted through what the worldly consider] 

the foolishness of this preaching."— 1 Cor. 1:21. 

The first gift of God to our redeemed race, therefore, 
was knowledge. 

(1) Knowledge of the greatness and absolute justice 
of the God with whom we have to do. This knowledge 
was prepared for by the Mosaic Law, which was 
a "schoolmaster," or pedagogue, to lead men to Christ. 



And Christ, by his obedience to that law, magnified 
the Law and showed its honorableness, its worthiness; 
and thus honored God, the author of that Law, and 
showed his character. 

(2) Knowledge of his own weakness, of his fallen, 
sinful and helpless condition, was also needful to man, 
that he might appreciate his need of a Savior such as 
God's plan had provided for him. 

(3) Knowledge of how the entire race of Adam 
fell from divine favor and from mental, moral and 
physical perfection, through him, was also necessary. 
Without this knowledge we could not have seen how 
God could be just in accepting the one life, of Christ, 
as the ransom price for the life of the whole world. 

(4) Without knowledge as to what is the penalty 
for sin— that "the wages of sin is death"— we never 
should have been able to understand how the death of 
our Redeemer paid the penalty against Adam and all 
in him. 

(5) Knowledge, in these various respects, was, 
therefore, absolutely necessary to us, as without it we 
could have had no proper faith, and could not have 
availed ourselves of God's provision of justification, 
sanctification and deliverance through Christ. 

Most heartily, therefore, we thank God for knowledge 
or wisdom concerning his plan. And we see that 
this wisdom came to us through Christ; because, had 
it not been for the plan of salvation of which he and 
his cross are the center, it would have been useless to 
give the knowledge, useless to preach, because there 
would have been no salvation to offer. 

CHRIST OUR JUSTIFICATION. 



That Christ is made unto us righteousness or justification 
implies,— 

(1) That we are unjust, or unrighteous in the 
sight of God, and unworthy of his favor. 

(2) That, in view of our unworthiness, God had 

in some manner arranged that Christ's righteousness 
should stand good for "us," and thus give "us" a 
standing before God which we could not otherwise 
have because of our imperfections— our 
unrighteousness. 

(3) This scripture does not imply that Christ's 
righteousness covers every sinner, so that God now 
views every sinner as though he were righteous, and 
treats all as his children. No, it refers merely to a special 
class of sinners— sinners who, having come to a knowledge 
of sin and righteousness, and having learned 

the undesirableness of sin, have repented of sin, and 

R3279 : page 436 



sought to flee from it and to come into harmony with 
God. This is the particular class referred to in this 
scripture— "who of God is made unto us justification," 
or righteousness. 

(4) How God has arranged or caused Christ to be 

our "righteousness," or justification, is not here explained; 

but what we know of divine law and character 

assures us that the principle of Justice, the very 

foundation of divine government, must somehow have 

been fully satisfied in all of its claims. And other 

scriptures fully substantiate this conclusion. They 

assert that God so arranged as to have the price of 

man's sin paid for him; and that the price paid was an 

exact equivalent, a ransom or corresponding price, offsetting 

in every particular the original sin and just 

penalty, death, as it came upon the original sinner and 

through him by heredity upon all men. (Rom. 5:12,18-20.) 

He tells us that this plan of salvation was 

adopted because by it "God might be [or continue] 

just, and [yet be] the justifier of him [any sinner] 

that believeth in Jesus"— that comes unto God under 

the terms of the New Covenant, of which Christ Jesus 

is the mediator, having sealed it, or made it a covenant, 

by his own precious blood.-Heb. 13:20,21; 10:29. 

(5) While the benefits of this gracious arrangement 
are only for "us," for "believers," for those 

who come unto God by Christ— under the provisions 

of the New Covenant— these benefits are, nevertheless, 

made applicable to all; for God's special provision for 

the whole world of sinners is that all shall "come 

to a knowledge of the truth," that they may, if then 

they will accept the conditions of God's covenant, be 

everlastingly saved. A knowledge and a rejection of 

error— of false doctrines which misrepresent the divine 

character even though they be mixed with a little misconstrued 

truth— will not constitute grounds for condemnation; 

but a knowledge of the truth and a rejection 

of it will bring condemnation to the Second Death. 

The Greek text states this much more emphatically 

than our common English translation. It says, "come 

to an accurate knowledge of the truth."— 

1 Tim. 2:4. 

(6) The provision made was sufficient for all men. 

Our Lord gave himself [in death] a ransom— a corresponding 

price— for all; he was a "propitiation [or sufficient 

satisfaction] for the sins of the whole world." 

(1 John 2:2.) As a consequence, he is both able and 

willing "to save unto the uttermost [i.e., to save 

from sin, and from divine disfavor, and from death, 

and all these everlastingly] all that come unto God by 

him." (Heb. 7:25.) And inasmuch as God's provision 

is so broad, that all shall come to an exact knowledge 

of the truth respecting these provisions of divine 

mercy under the terms of the New Covenant;— inasmuch 

as the provision is that all the sin and prejudice-blinded 

eyes shall be opened, and that the devil, who 



for long centuries has deceived men with his misrepresentations 

of the truth, is to be bound for a thousand 

years, so that he can deceive the nations no more; 

and that then a highway of holiness shall be cast up 

in which the most stupid cannot err or be deceived; 

and in view of all this provision God declares that all 

men will be saved from the guilt and penalty incurred 

through Adam's sentence. Because, when all of these 

blessed arrangements have been carried into effect, there 

will be no reason for a solitary member of the human 

family remaining a stranger and alien from God's family 

except by his own choice or preference for unrighteousness, 

and that with an accurate knowledge that 

all unrighteousness is sin. Such as, of their own preference, 

knowingly choose sin, when the way and 

means of becoming servants of God are clearly understood 

by them, are wilful sinners on their own account, 

and will receive the Second-Death sentence as the wages 

of their own opposition to God's righteous 

arrangements. 

R3280 : page 436 

The world's salvation will be complete the moment 
all have come to an accurate knowledge of the truth 
concerning God's great plan of salvation; because then 
they will know that by accepting Christ and the New 
Covenant which God offers to all through Christ, they 
may have life everlasting— salvation to the uttermost. 
Whether they will hear (heed) or whether they will 
forbear (refuse to heed) will not alter the fact that all 
will thus have been saved from Adamic sin and death 
—will have had a full salvation tendered to them. 
Thus, the living God will be the Savior of all men— 
especially or everlastingly, however, the Savior of only 
those who accept his grace and become "his people" 
under the New Covenant.— 1 Tim. 4:10. 

(7) It is only to "us" that Christ is made justification 
or righteousness. Though all men are to be 
saved in the sense of being brought to the knowledge 
and opportunity of salvation, none have Christ as their 
justification, the covering of their imperfections, imputing 
his righteousness to them, except "us"— the 
household of faith. "Unto you, therefore, which believe 
he is precious." (1 Pet. 2:7.) He of God is made unto 
us justification, righteousness, covering and cleansing 
from the unintentional weaknesses and shortcomings 
of the present, as well as from the original sin and its 
sentence. Who is he who condemns us? Will that 
Anointed One who died; and still more who has been 
raised, who also is at the right hand of God, and who 
intercedes on our behalf? Nay, he has been made our 
justification; it is the merit of his great sacrifice that 
speaks our justification.— Rom. 8:34. 

Justification signifies to make right, or whole, or 



R3280 : page 437 

just. And from the word "whole" comes the word 
"(w)holiness," signifying soundness, or perfection, 
or righteousness. None of the fallen race are either 
actually or reckonedly whole, sound, perfect or just by 
nature. "There is none righteous [just, sound, holy], 
no, not one; all have sinned." But all who come unto 
God by Christ, whom he has accepted as the justification 
or righteousness of all who accept the New Covenant, 
are from that moment accepted and treated as 
sound, perfect, holy. Although we are actually unholy 
or imperfect, we are made "partakers of God's 
holiness;" first, reckonedly, in Christ, and, second, more 
and more actually by the eradication of our sinful tendencies 
and the development of the fruits and graces of 
the Spirit, through chastisements, experience, etc. 
(Heb. 12:10.) God not only begins on the basis of 
holiness, imputing to us Christ's merit to cover our 
demerits, but he continues on the same line, and ever 
urges us to "be holy [to strive after actual soundness 
and perfection], even as he is holy." (1 Pet. 1:15,16.) 
And he promises the faithful strivers that they shall 
ultimately attain absolute holiness, soundness, perfection 
—in the resurrection, when they shall be made actually 
like Christ, as now their wills are copies of his. 
For "without holiness [thus attained] no man shall 
see the Lord." (Heb. 12:14.) Hence, "Every man 
that hath this hope in him purifieth himself, even as 
he [Christ] is pure"— seeking to be as much like him 
as possible now, and by and by to be fully in his image. 
-1 John 3:3,2. 

Justified persons and no others are Christians, in 
the proper use of that term. 

CHRIST OUR SANCTIFICATION. 



The term "Sanctification," used in this text, 
means, set apart, consecrated, devoted to, or marked out for 
a holy use or purpose. 

Christ by God is made unto us sanctification. 
That is to say, God through Christ sets apart or marks 
out for a special share in his great plan "us"— the 
Church. 

Many make the serious error of supposing that 
God is sanctifying the world,— sanctifying sinners. 
As a consequence of this error, many are seeking to 
copy Christ's example, and thus be sanctified before 
God, while they repudiate the doctrine of the ransom, 
or justification by faith. They confound sanctification 
and justification in their minds, and suppose that if 
they consecrate or sanctify or set apart their lives to 
God's service and to deeds of kindness they are thereby 
justified. 



This is a serious error. Justification is entirely 
separate and distinct from sanctification; and no one 
can be sanctified in God's sight, and in the Scriptural 
sense, unless he has first been justified or cleansed from 
all sin. 

Consecrating a person or thing to God's service 
does not cleanse that person or thing. On the contrary, 
God always refuses to accept anything imperfect or 
unclean. This is distinctly and repeatedly shown in 
the typical arrangements of the Law given to typical 
Israel. The priests were obliged to wash themselves 
and put on new, clean linen garments before 
consecration to their office and work as God's typically 
set apart, or sanctified, priesthood. Their cleansing 
and new clothing represented justification, the appropriation 
of Christ's righteousness instead of the filthy 
rags of their own unrighteousness, as members of the 
fallen race. 

The seal or mark of their consecration was a totally 
different one, and followed the cleansing ceremony, as 
consecration should in every case follow justification. 
The sign or mark of consecration or sanctification was 
the anointing with the holy oil, which symbolized the 
holy Spirit. 

The anointing oil or symbol of consecration was 
poured upon the head of the High Priest only, but the 
under-priests were represented in the members of his 
body, even as Christ is the Head over the Church 
which is his body, and all together constitute the Royal 
Priesthood. So the holy Spirit given without measure 
to our Lord and Head applied to us (his body) through 
him. The Father gave the Spirit to the Son only: 
all of the anointing oil was poured upon the Head. 
At Pentecost it ran down from the head to the body, 
and has continued with the body ever since, and whoever 
comes into the "body" comes thereby under the 
consecrating influence— the spirit of holiness, the spirit 
of God, the spirit of Christ, the spirit of the Truth.— 
Acts 2:4. 

But in consecrating the typical priests the blood 
was not ignored. It was put upon all, upon the tip of 
the right ear, upon the thumb of the right hand and 
upon the great toe of the right foot, thus showing that 
the hearing of faith, the work of faith and the walk of 
faith must all be touched and made holy by an appreciation 
of the precious blood of atonement— the blood 
of Christ— the blood of the New Covenant. And then 
the garments of all the priests— their clean linen garments 
—were sprinkled with a mixture of the blood 
and the oil, implying that both justification through 
the blood and sanctification through the possession of 
the spirit of holiness are necessary in our 
consecration. 

To what end or service are God's people, the 
Royal Priesthood, consecrated or set apart? 

Some would be inclined to answer: To live without 



sin, to practice the graces of the spirit, to wear 

R3280 : page 438 

plain clothing and in general to live a rather gloomy 
life now, hoping for greater liberty and pleasure 
hereafter. 

We reply, This is the common but mistaken view. 
True, God's people do seek to avoid sin; but that is 
not the object of their consecration. Before consecration, 
they learned the exceeding sinfulness and undesirableness 
of sin, and saw Christ Jesus as their sin-bearer 
and cleanser. Consequently, they had fled from 
sin before consecration. When consecrated they will 
still loathe and abhor sin, and that more and more as 
they grow in grace and in knowledge; but we repeat 
that to seek to live free from sin is not a proper definition 
of consecration or sanctification. 

It is true also that all of the consecrated will seek 
to put on the graces of Christ's spirit and example; 
but neither is this the object of our call to consecration 
under the Gospel high-calling. 

It is true, also, that our consecration may lead to 
plainness of dress, and bring upon us sufferings for 
righteousness' sake, in this present evil world (age); 
but, we repeat, these are not the objects of our consecration. 
They are merely incidental results. 

The object of God in calling out the Gospel 
Church, and providing for the consecration or sanctification 
of its members, is a grand and worthy one; 
and when once clearly seen by the eye of faith it makes 
all the incidentals which it will cost, such as self-denials 
in dress, loss of friends and companionships, and 
even persecution for the Truth's sake, etc., to be esteemed 
but light afflictions, not worthy to be compared 
to the glorious object of our consecration, which is that 
we may become "partakers of the divine nature" and 
"joint-heirs with Christ," and together with him bless 
the world during its day of judgment— the Millennium 
—as we will show. 

God in his wisdom and foreknowledge knew that 
sin would enter this world and bring its blight,— sorrow, 
pain and death. He foresaw that after their experience 
with sin, some of his creatures would be, not 
only willing, but anxious, to forsake sin and return to 
his fellowship and love and the blessing of life everlasting. 
It was in view of this foreknowledge that 
God formed his plan for human salvation. 

In that plan Christ Jesus our Lord had first 
place, first honor. As he was the beginning of the creation 
of God, so he was the chief of all God's creatures 
thus far brought into being. But God purposed 
a new creation— the creation of a new order of beings 
different and higher than men, angels and archangels 
—higher than all others, and of his own divine essence 
or nature. The worthiness of any one accepted to that 



great honor should be recognized not only by God himself, 

but by all of his intelligent creatures. Hence God, 

who knew well the character of his first-begotten Son 

(our Lord Jesus), decided to prove or test his well-beloved 

Son in a manner that would prove to all of his 

intelligent creatures, what they all now recognize in 

the new song, "Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive 

R3281 : page 438 

power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and 
honor, and glory and blessing."— Rev. 5:12. 

But the exaltation of our Lord, who already was 
the chief of all creation, was even less remarkable 
than another feature of the divine plan, foreordained 
before the foundation of the world (1 Pet. 1:2; Eph. 1:4); 
namely, that he would make to some of his 
human creatures (of the race sentenced as unworthy 
of any future life, but redeemed from that sentence by 
Christ's sacrifice) an offer of joint-heirship and companionship 
with his beloved Son, in the order of the 
new creation (of the divine nature), of which he has 
made the worthy Lamb the head and chief, next to 
himself.-l Cor. 15:27. 

This offer is not made to all of the redeemed race, 
but to many— "Many are called." The called are only 
those who in this age are justified by faith in Christ's 
atoning sacrifice. Unbelievers and scoffers are called 
to repentance and faith; but none are called to this 
high calling of participation in the divine nature 
(2 Pet. 1 :4) until they have forsaken sin and laid hold 
upon Christ as their Redeemer. 

If the worthiness of the Lamb was necessary to be 
shown, the worthiness of those whom he redeemed to 
be his joint-heirs (called also the bride, the Lamb's 
wife) would also need to be shown, proved, manifested 
before angels as well as before men, that God's ways 
may be seen to be just and equitable. 

It is for this reason that God calls upon those 
whom he does call, to consecrate themselves to him— not 
in dress or word merely, but in everything. It is not 
a consecration to preach merely, although all the consecrated 
will delight to use every opportunity in telling 
to others the good tidings of God's love. It is not 
a consecration to temperance reform, social reform, 
political reform, or any other work of reform, although 
we may and should feel a deep interest in anything 
that would benefit the fallen race. But our devotion 
should be as that of a maid to her mistress, or of soldiers 
to their officers, or, better yet, as that of a dutiful 
child toward a beloved parent— swift to hear, quick 
to obey, not planning or seeking our own wills, but 
the will of our Father in heaven. Just such an attitude 
is implied in the words sanctified, or consecrated 
to God. It takes hold of the will, and therefore rules 
the entire being, except where uncontrollable weaknesses 



or insurmountable obstacles hinder. And since 

our call and acceptance are based upon the New Covenant, 

which accepts a perfect will on the part of those 

R3281 : page 439 

trusting in the precious blood, and does not demand 
perfection of deeds, it follows that all of us, no matter 
how degraded by the fall, may be acceptable to God 
in the Beloved, and make their calling and election 
sure. 

Nor is this arrangement of the New Covenant (by 
which those in Christ whose wills and efforts are right 
toward God are not held responsible for the full letter 
of God's law, but for the observance of its spirit or 
meaning, to the extent that they have knowledge, 
opportunity and ability) a violation of Justice, as some 
have assumed. God's law was designed for perfect 
creatures, and not for fallen ones; but under the New 
Covenant in Christ, God has adapted his law to the 
condition of the fallen ones without interfering with 
that law itself or even with its spirit. The perfect law, 
dealing with the perfect man, demanded a full consecration 
of his will to the wisdom and will of his Creator, 
and an obedience to that Creator's Word to the 
extent of his ability. But since man was created "upright" 
(and not fallen), in the moral image and likeness 
of God (and not born in sin and shapen in iniquity), 
it follows that his perfect will, operating through 
a perfect body and under favorable conditions, could 
have rendered perfect obedience; and hence nothing 
less could be acceptable to God. 

How just, how reasonable and how favorable is 
God's arrangement for us! Yet he assures us that, 
while he has made all the arrangements favorable for 
us, he must insist on our wills being just right,— we 
must be pure in heart, and in this respect exact copies 
of his Beloved Son, our Lord. (Rom. 8:29— Diaglott.) 
Of those who learn of and accept God's grace in 
Christ, in the forgiveness of sins under the New Covenant, 
all of whom are called to this high calling of 
joint-heirship with Christ in the divine nature and its 
honors, only a few will make their calling and election 
sure (or complete), because the testings of their wills 
and faith are so exacting— so crucial. 

Nor should either of these God-declared facts surprise 
us: it is not strange, but reasonable, that God 
should test severely, yea, with "fiery trials" (1 Pet. 4:12), 
the faith and love of those invited to so high a 
station. If they be not loyal and trustful to the last 
degree, they surely are "not fit for the Kingdom," its 
responsibilities and its divine honors. Nor should it 
surprise us to be informed by God's Word that only a 
"few," a "little flock," will gain the prize to which 
many are called and for which many consecrate. Few 
are willing to "endure" a great fight of afflictions; 



partly while being made a gazing stock, both by reproaches 
and afflictions, and partly as companions of 
those who are so abused for Christ's sake and his 
Truth's sake.-Heb. 10:32,33. 

In a word, the trial of the justified and consecrated 
consists in the presenting to them of opportunities 
to serve God and his cause in this present time, when, 
because of sin abounding, whosoever will live godly 
and hold up the light will suffer persecution. Those 
whose consecration is complete and of the proper kind 
will rejoice in their privilege of serving God and his 
cause, and will count it all joy to be accounted worthy 
to suffer in such a cause, and thus to attest to God the 
sincerity of their love and of their consecration to him. 
Such consecrated ones, pure in heart (in will or intention), 
realizing the object of present trials, glory in 
tribulations brought upon them by faithfulness to 
Christ and his Word, realizing that their experiences 
are similar to those of the Master, and that thus they 
have evidence that they are walking in the footsteps 
of him who said, "Marvel not, my brethren, if the 
world hate you. Ye know that it hated me before it 
hated you. If ye were of the world, the world would 
love its own, but because ye are not of the world, but 
I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world 
hateth you." "Be thou faithful unto death, and I 
will give thee a crown of life."— 1 John 3:13; John 15:18,19; 
Rev. 2:10. 

Furthermore, they glory in tribulations because 
they realize that the Lord will be near them while 
they endure faithfully, and that he will not permit 
them to be tempted above what they are able to bear, 
but will with every temptation provide some way of 
escape; because they realize the necessity of forming 
character, and that tribulation worketh patience, and 
patience experience, and experience hope— a hope that 
maketh not ashamed; and because they realize that 
all these favorable results of tribulation follow, on account 
of a genuine consecration in which the love of 
God has been shed abroad in the heart, displacing the 
spirit of the world, the spirit of selfishness.— 1 Cor. 10:13; 
Rom. 5:3,5. 

"He that committeth sin [wilfully] is of the 
devil." "Whosoever is begotten of God. ..cannot sin 
[wilfully]." (1 John 3:3-10; 5:18.) And we have 
seen that all of those acceptable to God in Christ were 
obliged to come unto him under the New Covenant, 
whose first condition is faith in Christ; and whose 
second condition is an entire consecration of their wills 
to God's will and service. Hence, any wilful sin would 
mean that they had repudiated the New Covenant and 
were no longer recognized as begotten of the Truth, 
but under the influence of sin, and hence begotten of 
the devil— his children. 

If any justified and consecrated child of God commit 
sin it will be, at most, only partially wilful— 



largely of weakness or deception. He may feel his 
shame and weep bitterly, as did Peter; but all such 

R3281 : page 440 

penitence would but prove that his sin was not of the 
wilful kind that would make him as "of the devil." 
No: so long as the seed of the Truth, and of his consecration, 
remains in him, he cannot sin (wilfully). 
But if any trespass under deception or weakness, and 
not wilfully, he has an advocate with the Father,— 
"Jesus Christ the [absolutely] righteous" one, whose 
merit is applicable for all unwilful errors of such as 
abide under the shadow of the New Covenant. If he 
confess his sin, God is just to forgive him— because 
Christ died. (1 John 1:7,9; 2:1.) But if we should 
say that we have no sin, no imperfection, we deceive 
ourselves, make God a liar, and disown the Advocate 
whom God provided; for we are weak through the 
fall, and liable to deception and error at the hands of 
the world, the flesh, and the devil.— 1 John 1:8,10. 
Having seen what Sanctification is, its object or 
result and its present cost, we note that Christ by God 
is made unto us Sanctification— in that we could have 
no such call and could experience no such work of 
grace, under the divine plan, except for Christ and the 
work he did for us;— justifying us before the Law of 
God, sealing for us the New Covenant and making us 
fit for this call to "glory, honor and immortality." 

CHRIST OUR REDEMPTION, OR DELIVERANCE. 



Many readers confound the words redemption and 
redeem, found in the New Testament, whereas they 
refer to different features of the work of Christ. The 
word redeem in its every use in the New Testament 
signifies to acquire by the payment of a price, while 
the word redemption in its every New Testament use 
signifies the deliverance or setting free of that which 
was acquired by the payment of a price. "We were 
redeemed [purchased] with the precious blood [the 
sacrificed life, the death] of Christ." We wait for 
"the redemption [the deliverance] of our body" (the 
Church) from present imperfections and death. We 
wait for "the redemption [deliverance] of the purchased 
possession. -1 Pet. 1:18,19; Rom. 8:23; 
Eph. 1:14. 

In Christ is our redemption, or deliverance; for 
so God has ordained. He who redeemed, or bought us 
with the sacrifice of his own life, gives us, as our 
Prophet or Teacher, wisdom by his Gospel, to see our 
fallen state and himself as our helper; as our Priest, 
he first justifies us and then sanctifies or consecrates us, 



R3282 : page 440 

as his under priesthood; and, finally, as King, he will 
fully deliver the faithful from the dominion of sin and 
death, to the glory, honor and immortality of the 
divine nature;— for "God will raise up [from the 
dead] us also, by Jesus." If faithful to our call and 
covenant, even unto death, we shall at the second coming 
of our Redeemer, receive "an inheritance, incorruptible, 
undefiled, that fadeth not away, reserved in 
heaven for us who are kept by the power of God [His 
Word and Providence] through faith unto salvation, 
ready to be revealed in the last time."— Jas. 1:12; 
1 Pet. 1:4,5; Rom. 1:16; 2 Cor. 4:14. 
" Halleluj ah ! What a S avior ! " 
Truly he is able and willing to save to the uttermost 
all that come unto God by him.— Heb. 7:25. 

WHOM GOD DID PREDESTINATE. 



In the light of the foregoing, now read a hitherto 
obscure passage of Scripture: "We know that all 
things work together for good to them that love God, 
to them who are the called according to his purpose. 
For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate 
must be conformed to the image of his Son, that he 
might be the first born among many brethren. Moreover 
[the class] whom he did predestinate [must be 
copies of his Son], them he also called [or invited to 
that honor through the gospel]; and whom he called, 
them he also [previously] justified [because he could 
not consistently call to honor and glory those who 
were under his own sentence of death as sinners]; and 
whom he justified them he also [previously] honored 
[by sending to them the gospel message]."— 
Rom. 8:28-30. 

Thus the Apostle continues his argument concerning 
the favor of God toward the Church, asserting that 
God had a purpose to fulfil, and that the call of the 
Church is in accordance with that purpose. (Peter 
declares the same thing.— 1 Pet. 1:2.) And he asserts 
that all of God's dealings and arrangements correspond 
with that purpose, and cooperate for its accomplishment. 
God's predestination was, (1) that he would 
have a class of beings of the divine nature; (2) that 
each one of that class must have a fixed character, like 
that of his ever-faithful, Beloved Son. To get such a 
class, the Apostle reasons and declares, God must call 
or invite some (just as we see he is doing), because 
"no man taketh this honor to himself." (Heb. 5:4.) 
But whom would God call or invite? None were worthy; 
all had gone out of the way; none were righteous, 
no not one. Hence it was necessary that God 
provide for the justification of those he would call. But 



he could justify only such as believed in Jesus; and how 
could they believe on him of whom they had not heard, 
and without a preacher sent of God? (Rom. 10:14.) 
Hence it was necessary that these be honored with the 
Gospel message in this age, in advance of its general 
revealing to every creature during the Millennial 
age.-Rom. 1:16; 2 Cor. 4:6; 1 Cor. 15:1. 

True, many more were called than will be acceptable 
—many more than will acquire the likeness of the 
Beloved Son; and many were justified who did not, 

R3282: page 441 

after believing, consecrate themselves, and whose justification 
consequently lapsed; and many were honored 
with a hearing of the Gospel who, after hearing a 
little of it, rejected the message of mercy and favor. 
But all the preaching, justifying and calling of this 
Gospel age has been to the intent that the foreknown 
class of the predestinated character might be selected and 
made joint-heirs with Christ.— See also 2 Tim. 1:8-10. 

"What shall we [who have been so highly favored 
by God, and for whose successful running of the race 
every necessary arrangement and provision has been 
made] say to these things? If God be for us, who 
can be against us?" And in view of this let each 
say,— "What shall I render unto the Lord for all his 
benefits toward me? I will take the cup of salvation, 
and call upon the name of the Lord. I will pay my 
vows [fulfil my covenant of consecration] unto the 
Lord, now, in the presence of all his people." (This 
will mean, as in our Lord's case, faithfulness dying 
daily, 1 Cor. 15:31— even unto death, but)— "Precious 
in the sight of the Lord is the death of his holy ones." 
-Psa. 116:12-15. 



R3282: page 441 

THE DEDICATION OF THE TEMPLE. 

-1 KINGS 8: 1-1 1,62,63. -DECEMBER 13.- 

Golden Text: "I was glad when they said unto me, 
let us go into the house of the Lord."— Psa. 122:1. 

VERY INTERESTING is the story of the 
great Temple of God purposed and largely 
prepared for by King David and built 
by King Solomon the wise. It was commenced in 
the fifth year of Solomon's reign and finished in the 
twelfth. The story of its cost seems fabulous, the 
gold and silver employed in its construction being 
estimated at from $1,000,000,000 to $2,500,000,000. 
We are inclined to think the smaller estimate nearer 



to the truth, or that the ancient standard of values, 
a talent, possibly, experienced a change of values, 
as for instance was the case in the English pound 
sterling, which originally meant a pound of silver 
in value but subsequently a quarter of a pound of 
silver, and to-day, by reason of the change of standard 
from silver to gold, it has a still different meaning 
not at all connected with silver. Similarly the 
Jewish talent may have experienced changes of 
value in the long centuries of its use. However, 
regardless of the aggregated value of the gold, silver, 
brass, precious stones, constituting the Temple, 
we have every reason to conclude that it was 
a wonderful structure for its day— one of which 
King Solomon in all his glory and wisdom, and the 
people of Israel with him, had good reason to rejoice 
and not feel ashamed. 

The context shows that King Hiram of Phoenicia 
not only contributed largely to the Temple as 
a friendly gift, but also supplied skilled workmen 
under Solomon's pay, who in various ways assisted 
in the preparation of the brazen columns for the 
porch, utensils for the court, etc. etc. Thirty thousand 
Israelites were drafted to serve in the Temple 
construction one month out of each quarter. Besides 
these there would appear to have been 150,000 
laborers, apparently foreigners, hired from outside 
(1 Kings 5:13-16; 9:21,22), or they may have been 
aliens residing in the land of Palestine— Canaanites. 
The overseers would appear to have been 550 chiefs 
and 3,300 subordinates, of whom 250 were Israelites, 
and 3,600 Canaanites. (2 Chron. 2:17; 8:10.) 
This preponderance of the Canaanites amongst the 
overseers seems to imply that the laborers were 
Canaanites, and also reminds us that "the Canaanite 
was still in the land." The fact that the Canaanites, 
strangers from the Commonwealth of Israel, were 
the chief laborers in the construction of the great 
Temple, seems to have been typical of the fact that 
aliens, strangers, foreigners, and enemies of the 
Truth have the larger share in the work of preparing 
the antitypical Temple. Their hammering, 
their chiseling, their melting and casting, under divine 
providence, serve to make ready the living 
stones and the glorious pillars for the spiritual 
house. Verily they know not what they do. Their 
work is greater, better, than they comprehend, as 
the glories of eternity will demonstrate. 

The lesson opens with the Temple's construction 
finished, and the chiefs of Israel gathered with 
King Solomon at Jerusalem for its dedication, at 
the time we call October, corresponding to the Jewish 
New Year feast, held in connection with the 
great day of atonement. The Atonement Day was 
probably past, the sacrifices of atonement having 
been made in the Tabernacle and the blessing of 



the Lord, as usual, dispensed upon the people for 
the new year. While they were thus legally cleansed, 
reconciled to God typically, was the most appropriate 
time for the dedication of the Temple, 
which represented the spiritual hopes and aims of 
the nation. 

The Ark, representing typically the divine 
covenant with Abraham, the fulfilment of which 
centered in the Christ, must be transferred from the 
Tabernacle to the Temple, that thus the latter might 
supersede the former as the meeting place between 
God and his covenant people. The thousands of 
sacrifices offered during the procession of the King 
and priests and the celebrities of the nation, besides 
evidencing their devotion to God and their willingness 
to sacrifice, had a typical significance as representing 
the consecration even unto death of the 
whole company thus engaged in transferring the 
emblem of their faith and hope. In some respects, 
therefore, the King and the chiefs of the nation represented 
typically our Lord Jesus and the overcomers, 
and the chief priests and under priests represented 
the same from another standpoint. The 

R3283 : page 442 

procession was the meeting place between the sacrificing 

emblems of the present age and the typical 

representation of the kingdom glories and honors 

of the next age. The Lord's people to-day seem 

to be following this type. The Great King, antitypical 

of Solomon, has about finished the Temple 

construction and has sent forth the invitation of 

the heads, the chiefs of spiritual Israel, to attend 

and share in the great dedication. These chiefs are 

not the great of this world, but the Lord's very 

elect. From the four quarters of the spiritual heavens 

they are gathering, the procession has already 

commenced; but as the Temple was not complete 

until the Ark, its most important part, was placed 

in position, so the glorious Temple will not really 

be finished until every member of the body of Christ 

has been changed from the Tabernacle condition to 

the Temple or permanent condition in the first 

resurrection. 

The declaration that there was nothing in the 
Ark save the tables of stone on which was inscribed 
the Law, seems at first to be in conflict with the 
Apostle's statement in Heb. 9:4, where he mentions 
also the golden pot of manna and Aaron's rod that 
budded. We are to remember, however, that this 
description related to the Tabernacle and not to the 
Temple. The golden bowl of manna which did not 
corrupt was a type of illustration of the immortality 
or incorruptibility which the Lord has provided for 
the Royal Priesthood, and the budded rod was a 



reminder that the blessing and fruitfulness and privilege 

of service belong to the antitypical Levite, but 

as types both of these will end in the present dispensation. 

They met with the Tabernacle conditions; 

they will not be needed in the future conditions 

of glory, honor, and immortality represented 

by the Temple, because there the glorious things 

typified by these will have been fully entered into 

by the overcomers of the Church. But the law 

will still be an integral part of the divine covenant. 

As the Apostle explains the fulfilling of the law is 

love, and love never faileth. It will always be the 

divine requirement and essential to participation in 

any of the blessings connected with the divine favor 

represented in the Ark of the covenant. 

While the priests proceeded with their work 
of placing the Ark, the Levites, "arrayed in white 
linen, having psalteries and harps, stood at the 
east end of the [brazen] altar, and with them an 
hundred and twenty priests sounding with trumpets. 
It came to pass that the trumpeters and singers 
were as one, to make one sound to be heard in 
praising and thanking the Lord; and when they 
lifted up their voices with the trumpets and cymbals 
and instruments of music, and praised the Lord 
saying, 'For he is good; for his mercy endureth forever,' 
that then the house [Temple] was filled with 
the cloud"— the peculiar pillar of cloud which symbolized 
the Lord's presence through the wilderness 
journey, and subsequently in connection with the 
Tabernacle, and now in the Temple, for the first 
time rested upon it. This, which outwardly had 
the appearance of a cloud in the sanctuary on the 
mercy seat, represented an extreme brightness— so 
great that the priests could no longer remain in the 
Holy. 

But meantime the King explained to the people 
the significance of the Temple, that it was the house 
of God and built under divine direction, given to 
himself and to his father David. Then standing 
near the altar of the court, spreading forth his 
hands toward heaven, he prayed a most beautiful 
prayer, and one which we recognize as prophetically 
directed, and as teaching us the purpose and object 
of the great antitypical Temple constructed by the 
antitypical Solomon. The literal Temple was to be 
the place toward which all the Israelites should look 
as God's dwelling place, the center of his power, 
authority, forgiveness and blessing and help in every 
time of need. So in due time, when the spiritual 
Temple shall have been constructed and dedicated 
and filled with divine power, it will be the center 
toward which all who would approach God shall 
look for help and assistance and blessing and forgiveness, 
toward which they shall make their prayers, 
and in which they shall realize the manifestation 



of divine power and blessing on their behalf. 

After Solomon's dedicatory prayer was finished, 
the Lord openly manifested his favor toward the 
King and all the people by accepting their sacrifices 
with fire from heaven, as we read: "When Solomon 
had made an end of praying the fire came down 
from heaven and consumed the burnt offering and 
the sacrifices; and the glory of Jehovah filled the 
house [the Temple]. ...And when all the 
children of Israel saw how the fire came down and 
the glory of the Lord was upon the house, they 
bowed themselves with their faces to the ground 
upon the pavement and worshipped and praised the 
Lord, saying, 'for he is good, for his mercy endureth 
forever'"— probably joining with the Levites 
in singing Psalm 136. 

It is noteworthy that the Levites and the people 
did not sing of divine wrath never ending, but of 
divine mercy forever. This, however, according to 
the strict significance of the Hebrew word, does not 
mean "without an end," but "to an end",— that is to 
say, that divine mercy shall be exercised to its completeness, 
to its fulfillment, until every creature 
shall have been brought to a knowledge of the Lord 
and his goodness and to an opportunity of knowing 
him and of benefiting by the great promise made to 
Abraham and symbolized in the Ark of the covenant, 
through which all the families of the earth 
shall be blessed. Similarly in the last book of the 
Bible we read of the song of Moses and the Lamb, 
sung by the antitypical priests, saying, "Great and 
marvelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty; just 
and true are thy ways thou King of saints. Who 
shall not reverence thee, O Lord, and glorify thy 
name? For thou only art holy: for all peoples 
shall come and worship before thee, because thy 
judgments [righteous dealings] are made manifest." 
(Rev. 15:3,4.) This is the song which none but 

R3283 : page 443 

the overcomers can truly appreciate and sing at the 
present time, but by and by— when the glory of the 
Lord shall have filled the Temple— the peoples, the 
multitudes, shall learn that song, shall learn of the 
divine mercy, and as a prophecy it shall be fulfilled 
and all peoples shall bow to the Lord to confess his 
goodness and his love and to enjoy at the hands of 
the antitypical Solomon (the Christ), as prophet, 
priest and king of the new dispensation, the opportunity 
of full reconciliation to God and full return 
to the perfect conditions of mind and of body, and 
to life everlasting, lost by Adam's disobedience, and 
brought back by the great Redeemer for as many as 
will receive it upon God's terms. 
Naturally and properly our chief interest centers 



in the antitypical Temple, the antitypical Solomon, 
the antitypical priests and antitypical people. 
There is a sense in which every member of the 
New Creation may be said to be individually a temple 
of the holy Spirit now, a sense in which every 
individual should build up his own faith and character 
from the divine promises and by compliance with 
the divine requirements, but this is not the larger 
antitypical view of the Temple. In its antitypical 
sense Solomon's Temple certainly represented the 
glorified Christ, head and body, built up of living 
stones, as the Apostle Peter explains. Under the 
supervision of the anointed the work of gathering 
the various stones for the Temple has been in progress 
throughout the Gospel age. As not any and 
every stone was taken for Solomon's Temple, but 
only those of specific dimensions and peculiar pattern, 
in accordance with the plan, so it is with the 
antitypical, the living, stones. Only a certain class 
are approached at all, and only those which being 
cut out are first roughly quarried out and found 
suitable in character and dimensions are tooled at 
all, and only those which under the tool yield proper 
results and become conformed to the intended pattern 
will ultimately find their place in the glorious 
Temple which our Lord as the great master-builder 
is constructing. As before intimated, this accounts 
for the fact that various agents, even Satan himself, 
may be used of the Lord as servants for the 
chiseling and polishing and fitting and preparing of 
these living stones for their future glorious position. 
Viewed in this light what a satisfaction may come 
from the trials and difficulties which all the Lord's 
people are sure to experience, and without some of 
which they would be justified in fearing that they 
are not sons but bastards. (Heb. 12:8.) Only 
those who have some such insight into the divine 
program can ever reach that position to which the 
Apostle Paul attained, who claimed that he could 
also rejoice in tribulation, knowing that tribulation 
worketh patience and patience experience and experience 
hope, which will not be put to shame, but 
which will be rewarded eventually in the glorious 
joint-heirship in the kingdom promised by our Lord 
to his faithful. 

To our understanding of the teaching of Scripture, 
the fact that the materials for Solomon's Temple 
were prepared before its construction began, 
and were so perfectly fitted that no iron tool needed 
to be used in the construction, indicates that the 
antitype, this Gospel age, has seen the preparation 
of the various living stones, which when ready were 
marked of the Lord to their positions in the Temple, 
and fell asleep in Jesus until the time for the first 
resurrection, the time for the construction of the 
Temple. To our understanding we are now living 



in that time and have been in it since 1878. The 
living stones of the past have been brought together 
and the Temple is merely waiting for the few living 
stones which are still under process of trial and disciplining 
chiseling and polishing. The resurrection 

R3284 : page 443 

"change" coming to each of these in turn places him 
with the fellow-members of the grand Temple of 
the Lord. The picture of the bringing of the Ark 
would seem to be another illustration of the same 
lesson— the bringing of the members of the body 
of Christ from the Tabernacle or earthly condition 
to the heavenly or Temple condition. Soon the Ark 
will be in place, and priests and Levites and people 
are generally learning to sing of the Lord's mighty 
love and that his mercy endureth to completeness— 
to the full limit to which mercy could be of service, 
benefit or advantage, to the completion, when every 
ear shall have heard, every eye shall have seen and 
every heart shall have shown appreciation, shall have 
come to a knowledge of the grace of God in Jesus 
Christ our Lord. Let us, as day after day rolls by, 
remember our threefold relationship then to this 
Temple: (1) We are still in process of preparation 
as living stones. (2) As members of the Royal 
Priesthood carrying the Ark we are marching 
from the Tabernacle into the Temple condition; 
some of our number have already entered in and 
some are still on the way. (3) As the Lord's people 
the time has come for us to know, to sing with 
the spirit and understanding, the new song of divine 
mercy, justice, love and truth. Let us be faithful 
in each of these respects, fulfilling our parts, and 
ere long our course will be ended and the glory of 
the Lord will fill the Temple. It will be after this 
that the people will take up the refrain,— for his 
mercy endureth forever— to completeness. 

Our Golden Text is in line with the foregoing. 
Those who hear the invitation to become members 
of the house of God, the house of sons, the antitypical 
Temple, and who receive the invitation into 
good and honest hearts, are indeed made glad, 
"Blessed are the people who know the joyful sound." 
We couple with this a similar expression by the 
same poet prophet, who declares, "I will dwell in 
the house of the Lord forever." Not in earthly 
houses, not in earthly temples, do we hope to dwell 
forever; but those who become members, living 
stones in the spiritual house, the heavenly Temple 
now under construction, will indeed dwell in the 
house of the Lord forever. For them to go out 
would mean the destruction of the house, for of it 
they will be members in particular; as the Lord declares 
they will be pillars in the house of the Lord, 



R3284 : page 444 

and the ministers of his grace and truth to all the 
people. This text will be true also of the world 
during the Millennial age. All mankind will then 
be invited to approach the Lord in worship, to approach 
the spiritual Temple, the Christ, and through 
the Christ to approach the Father; and all who shall 
hear that message and who shall obey it will be glad 
indeed, even as the message brought by the angels 
at the birth of Jesus intimated that eventually the 
tidings of great joy shall be unto all people. 



R3284 : page 444 

A GREATER THAN SOLOMON. 

--1 KINGS 10:1-10.-DECEMBER20.- 

Golden Text: "When the righteous are in 
authority the people rejoice."— Prov. 29:2. 

BY THE TIME Solomon had reached his fortieth 

year, under the blessing of wisdom 

which he craved of the Lord, he had made 

the kingdom of Israel famous throughout the then 

civilized world. His kingdom connected with 

Egypt on the south, with the desert on the east and 

the Mediterranean Sea on the north and west, except 

that small portion known as Phoenicia, whose 

king, Hiram, had made a league with Solomon and 

assisted him greatly in the materials and workmen 

for the temple. Solomon's ships and those of Hiram 

were known to all the nations of that time as far 

east as Judea and as far northwest as Britain. The 

account of the wealth which flowed to him is astounding. 

His table dishes were made of gold, a 

thousand shields for his mighty men were of gold, 

and other things in proportion were magnificent in 

the largest degree. The brilliancy of his mind 

found expression not only in financial channels, but 

his army was equipped on a scale of equal magnificence. 

Fourteen hundred chariots were imported, 

and thousands of horses for these and for a cavalry 

detachment for his army. Literary matters were not 

neglected; he wrote many sonnets and spoke 3,000 

proverbs, and his fame in respect to these matters 

had extended to all parts of the world. 

Our lesson deals specially with the visit of the 
Queen of Sheba to Solomon's court. She herself 
declares that she had heard of his fame and had 
come to see him with her own eyes, and that notwithstanding 
her great expectations she found that 



not one-half of his greatness had been told her. The 
distance she came is estimated at 1,500 miles, and 
as the means for traveling was by camels, and their 
average speed twenty miles per day, it is estimated 
that the journey to Jerusalem and back to her home 
consumed five months; besides whatever time she 
spent at Solomon's court. Unquestionably it would 
be much less inconvenient to-day to journey around 
the earth than it was for the Queen of Sheba to 
visit Solomon. 

Tradition tells us that the Queen sent her ambassadors 
with a letter to King Solomon before she 
went herself. With them she sent 500 youths 
dressed as maidens, with instructions that they 
were to behave accordingly in the presence of Solomon. 
She sent also a thousand costly rugs inwrought 
with gold and silver, and a crown composed 
of finest pearls and gold hyacinths; also camel-loads 
of musk, amber, aloes and other precious products 
of South Arabia. She added a closed casket 
containing an unperforated pearl, a diamond intricately 
pierced and a crystal goblet. A letter accompanied 
these gifts as follows: "As a true prophet 
thou wilt no doubt be able to distinguish the youths 
from the maidens and divine the contents of the 
enclosed casket, to pierce the pearl and thread the 
diamond and to fill the goblet with water that has 
not dropped from the clouds nor gushed forth from 
the earth." 

The legend declares that when this embassage 
reached Jerusalem King Solomon told the bearers 
the contents of the letter before they presented it, 
and made light of their mighty problems. He 
caused the thousand slaves to wash their hands and 
faces and from the manner in which they applied the 
water detected their sex. He directed a fiery young 
horse to be ridden through the camp at the top of 
speed, and on its return caused its copious perspiration 
to be collected in a goblet. The pearl he pierced 
by some process known to him. The threading of 
the diamond with its crooked perforation puzzled 
him for a moment, but at length he inserted a small 
worm, which wound its way through, leaving a silken 
thread behind it. He dismissed the ambassadors 
without receiving their presents. When the emissaries 
reached the Queen of Sheba, their reports of 
these matters determined her to visit King Solomon 
in person. The account of her visit and her astonishment 
are recorded in this lesson. 

We are not informed as to the character of her 
questions, many of which quite probably were in 
the nature of conundrums, after the custom of that 
time. Everything connected with this story, however, 
assures us that Solomon was truly a wonderful 
man, that his mental powers were great and active. 
Nothing illustrates this better than the useful 



and expensive water works and arrangements which 
he provided for the capital city. So far as is known 
these were the first of the kind in the world and 
very much resembled the superior arrangements of 
our day. The fact that, although constructed 2,500 
years ago, they have recently been partially put into 
operation again, indicates clearly the solidity of 
their construction. Truly we see that the Lord's 
promise to the King was abundantly fulfilled, that 
he was wiser and richer than all others of his day 
and subsequently. The Queen was attracted specially 
by the sumptuous and methodical arrangements 
of the King's palace, his provision for the ministers 
of the realm, their uniform, etc., and the grand stairway 
which led up to the Temple. The expression 
"There was no more spirit in her," corresponds very 

R3284 : page 445 

closely to an expression of our day— it took her 
breath away. 

Our Lord indicated what otherwise would not 
have been quite apparent— namely, that Solomon's 
wisdom and glory, prosperity and peace, were typical; 
that the antitype of the Solomon is the Christ. 
Our Lord spoke as never man spoke, the people marveled 
at the gracious words that proceeded out of 
his mouth, and his fame during the three and one-half 
years of his ministry spread abroad;— yet so far 
from being recognized by his own people he was 
crucified as an enemy of their nation and an enemy 
of God. Referring to the matter he says, "The 
Queen of Sheba shall rise up in judgment with this 
generation and shall condemn it; for she came from 
the uttermost parts of the earth to hear the wisdom 
of Solomon, and behold a greater than Solomon is 
here. "-Matt. 12:42. 

By these words the Lord indicated his approval 
of the desire for wisdom evinced by the 
Queen. Indeed this is the spirit of the Scriptures- 
growth in knowledge, grace and love, knowledge being 
essential to the development of character. Here 
we have set before us a lesson which our Lord 
taught in the words, "Blessed are they that hunger 
and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be 
filled"— blessed are they who hunger and thirst for 
wisdom, for knowledge, for understanding of the 
good and true, knowing that they shall be blessed 
of the Lord and shall find that which they seek. 
The Lord's words were a reproof for his own nation 
and indicated that they were careless, indifferent 
respecting the Truth. It is still more important 
for us of to-day to notice that the same spirit of 

R3285 : page 445 



indifference prevails in nominal spiritual Israel. As 
the slightest suggestion of the heavenly wisdom 
manifested in our Lord's words and deeds should 
have kindled enthusiasm and zeal in nominal 
Israel, which would have hungered and thirsted for 
the Truth and by seeking would have found the 
Truth, so likewise to-day what confidence we have 
respecting the Lord and his character and plan 
should awaken every spiritual Israelite and lead 
him to seek the great fountain of wisdom. 

And as at the first advent the "Israelites indeed" 
were attracted to the Lord and learned of him, so in 
spiritual Israel those who are Israelites indeed are 
attracted to the Lord and are taught of him to-day; 
but as the Israelites at the Lord's first advent were 
few in number as compared with the professing nation, 
so the Spiritual Israelites of to-day are few in 
number compared to the millions of nominal Christendom. 
But as it was not until after Solomon had 
built the great Temple of God at Jerusalem that his 
fame was spread abroad and his greatness manifested, 
so with the antitype Christ; not until he, the antitypical 
Solomon, has erected the great Temple of 
God, which is the Church— not until it shall have been 
filled with the divine glory as the New Creation— 
not until the new Jerusalem shall shine resplendently 
with the riches of divine grace and the brilliancy 
of the Lord's polished jewels, will the fame 
of Emmanuel reach to the uttermost parts of the 
earth. Then, as the Scriptures declare, "Many peoples 
shall go and say, Come, let us go up to the 
mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of 
Israel; he will teach us of his ways and we will walk 
in his paths; for the law shall go forth out of Zion 
and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem."— 
Isa. 2:2,3. 

All the ends of the earth shall see the salvation 
of our God. The whole world shall have its eyes 
opened to behold the riches of divine grace and wisdom 
embodied in Christ, head and body, reigning in 
the New Jerusalem for the blessing and uplifting 
of the entire race of Adam— whosoever wills. The 
knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole earth as 
the waters cover the face of the great deep, and 
there shall be no need to say every man to his neighbor 
and every man to his brother, Know thou the 
Lord, because all shall know him from the least 
even unto the greatest. (Isa. 11:9; Jer. 31:34.) The 
wisdom of the great King, the antitype of Solomon, 
will be exercised on behalf of not merely the one 
nation of Israel but on behalf of all those who shall 
come into covenant relationship with the heavenly 
Father, typified by this people which entered into 
a covenant with the Lord, and which because of that 
covenant was the object of his mercy and care. In 
Revelation a little glimpse of the New Jerusalem 



is given and of the greater than Solomon who will 
be the light of it, and we are told that the nations 
shall walk in the light of it and the kings of the 
earth shall bring their glory into it.— Rev. 21:22,24. 

The Queen's astonishment at what she found, 
and her declaration that the half had not been told 
her, reminds us of the Scriptural declaration respecting 
the greater than Solomon and the wonderful 
kingdom glories in reservation for his faithful. We 
read: "Eye hath not seen nor ear heard, neither 
hath entered into the heart of man, the things which 
God hath in reservation for them that love him." 
Now we know in part and see as through an obscure 
glass, but then we shall see as we are seen and 
know as we are known, and be like our Lord and 
share his glories.— 1 Cor. 2:9; 13:12. 

The Queen's exulting remarks at the conclusion 
of her visit were, "Happy are thy men, and 
happy are these thy servants, which stand continually 
before thee and hear thy wisdom. Blessed be 
the Lord thy God which delighteth in thee to set 
thee on the throne of Israel; because the Lord loved 
Israel forever, therefore made he thee King to do 
judgment and justice." 

The greater than Solomon, in harmony with 
the divine arrangement, has prepared to have his 
faithful servants of the present time with him to 
share his glory and his Kingdom, and the blessings 
of that time will be specially theirs. Happy those 
men who will be in his presence, who will see him 
as he is and be like him, and be the recipients of his 
favors. O blessed thought! O words with heavenly 
wisdom fraught! 

And although the blessings of the Millennial 

R3285 : page 446 

kingdom will come first and chiefly to the Church 
of this Gospel age, which will be associated with 
the Lord in the kingdom glory and sit at meat with 
him and participate in his honors and be blessed by 
his presence and wisdom, yet indeed a great blessing 
will remain for the world. As the Queen expressed 
it of the typical King, that God's blessing 
upon Israel was manifested in choosing him for 
King, so God's blessing to the world of mankind 
will be manifested in the establishment of Messiah's 
kingdom, which is to bless all the families of the 
earth and to grant them an opportunity of coming 
back to covenant relationship with God, and thus 
eventually, if they will be obedient to his judgments 
and justice, back to all that was lost in Adam, 
with superadded favors and mercies. 

By faith some of us have heard of the Lord's 
fame in advance of the establishment of his Kingdom; 
by faith some of us have come from afar and 



offered him our treasures, laying our all at his feet; 
by faith these have been accepted of him, and instead 
he has given us exceeding great and precious 
promises and hopes far outweighing and outvaluing 
the little all that we gave to him. 

Although Solomon's wisdom and greatness and 
riches and honor as the king typified the greatness 
of the Christ in the Millennial kingdom, his subsequent 
manifestation of weakness, causing the decay 
of his greatness, is not to be esteemed as typical, 
for of the antitype it is declared that of the greatness 
of his kingdom there shall be no end. Nor is 
this type alone in this particular. Similarly David 
was a type in some particulars; so was Moses a type 
in some particulars and not in others; so was Adam 
a figure of him who was to come, yet not a figure in 
his transgression and condemnation. Our Golden 
Text can only have a partial application to any kingdom 
of man during "this present evil world," of 
which Satan has attempted control as the prince 
thereof. Owing to the inherent weakness of our 
race even its best specimens are far from absolute 
righteousness, and consequently no government of 
the present time, no government under imperfect 
men, can fulfill the predictions of our Golden Text. 
This is implied throughout the entire Scripture, in 
which the Lord promises that he will establish his 
kingdom amongst men, and that under Emmanuel's 
government all the families of the earth shall be 
blessed. It is for this reason that the Lord's people 
still pray, "Thy kingdom come, thy will be done on 
earth as in heaven;" it is for this reason that the 
Apostle declares that the "whole creation groaneth 
and travaileth together in pain until now"— waiting 
for the manifestation of the sons of God. 

The sons of God, the little flock with their Head 
the Lord Jesus, will by and by constitute the 
righteous who will be in authority, in power, in governmental 
control of the world by divine arrangement, 
based upon the great atonement sacrifice. Of 
that time and of that great ruler, head and body, it 
is written, "In his day shall the righteous flourish." 
In his day Satan shall be bound a thousand years to 
deceive people no more, and all the influences of 
righteousness and truth shall be let loose, that the 
world may be flooded with the light and knowledge 
of the glory of God. Under those blessed conditions 
whosoever will may take of the water of life freely 
and live forever. 



page 446 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 



DEAR MR. RUSSELL:- 

I received Millennial Dawn from a dear sister 
who is a Colporteur, and I have received so much 
light and am just rejoicing in the Lord so much that 
I feel constrained to write and thank you. Thanks 
cannot express my gratitude to you. Oh, the joy I 
have got in the Lord! I realize how highly favored 
of the Lord I am that I am counted worthy to share 
in his sufferings and to follow in his footsteps. It 
is going eight years since I became the Lord's, 
but I never got any farther than justification until 
I got the Dawn and "Shadows," and the Lord has 
brought me rapidly into the light. I felt I must 
write you, for I know it is right you should enjoy 
the fruit of your labor. If you knew how much 
darkness I have been in during the past years as a 
Christian you would know much better how I feel 
toward you. You are a spiritual father to me. From 
you, under God, I have got my greatest blessing. 

I am, your sister in Christ, 

MAGGIE OLIVER,--Scotland. 



R3285 : page 446 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

It was my privilege to have an interesting conversation 
with an Adventist preacher a few months 
ago. The brother referred to, being at our home 
on business, I handed him several "Old Theology 
Tracts." The next day he called again, and the conversation 
which took place was in substance as 
follows: 

He said to me: "My dear brother, I have come 
to your house this afternoon to try, if possible, to 
rid you of the terrible errors which the tracts you 
gave me yesterday support." 

I replied that I certainly appreciated the 
brotherly intention, but assured the visitor that his 
attempt would be fruitless. 

"Well," said he, "you will at least talk with 
me upon the subject." 

"Certainly," I replied; "but since I have been in 
the Truth but a few months, and since I am your 
junior by many years, and not wishing to seem disrespectful, 
I ask one 'handicap.'" 

On being asked what it was, I told him that I 
preferred him, instead of attacking my views, to 
question me concerning them and allow me to give 
a reason for the hope within me. He readily acquiesced, 
stipulating that all views must have a 
"Thus saith the Lord." 

He then asked me concerning our erroneous (?) 

R3285 : page 447 



idea of future probation. I read Acts 3:20; Jno. 1:19; 
1 Tim. 2:5,6; 4:10; Heb. 2:9; etc., and he 
tried to refute these testimonies by argument and a 
feeble attempt at quoting Scripture. Then taking 
his own standpoint I quoted Isa. 65:17-20, and asked 
him how sinners (according to his belief) could be 
in the new heavens and earth. 

"My dear brother," he replied, "when you reach 
the 20th verse you should know that God goes away 
back in his dates hundreds of years." 

I replied, "There is one thing sadly lacking in 
your argument— namely, your stipulated 'Thus saith 
the Lord.'" 

After a painful pause, he said, "I simply cannot 
quote Scripture today, and my ideas do not seem 
as clear as usual. I hoped to convince you of your 

R3286 : page 447 

error, but I see you are too well established in it to 
be moved." 

(Oh, how I thanked our heavenly Father for the 
encouragement thus brought to my heart!) 

I asked him if he had ever read the Divine Plan 
of the Ages. He replied that he had done so, and 
that its author crossed the Bible, human reason and 
common sense, besides crossing his own arguments. 

"If that is so," I replied, "I want to know it. 
Here is the book. Please show me his first error." 

He nervously turned the pages of the book and 
said, "I don't seem to see any place now." I urged 
him to hunt, or, if he was very busy, to take the book 
home, and when he found such a place to show it me. 
After a few more spasmodic attempts he turned to 
me with a distressed look and said he was not 
familiar enough with the work to really find such 
places. After begging his pardon if anything in my 
manner was not becoming to my youth, I urged him 
to either become sufficiently acquainted with the 
book to warrant such assertions, or else be very cautious 
about bringing such accusations. He left me 
very soon, and despite the fact that he insisted 
to our neighbors that I was possessed of the 
devil, I rejoiced in the privilege of thus serving our 
Master. I truly realized that the brother's defeat 
was not occasioned by his inferiority as a student, for 
I am sure that he was recognized, and doubtless 
justly too, as a Bible scholar; and I realized then my 
own insufficiency, but perceived that God allowed the 
Truth to triumph, to encourage me at that time. This 
fills my heart with joy, and I can indeed say with the 
Apostle, "I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ." 
Yours in him, 

W. H. B. -Rhode Island. 



page 447 

MY DEAR PASTOR:- 

The great wave of spiritual power and joy 
which it was our privilege to experience during your 
visit here last spring will long remain in our memories. 
The blessing of the Lord attending all the 
proceedings was manifest, and much beyond the little 
faith mingled with fears as to the result. Truly 
the Lord is good, and we have felt his goodness, 
and the hearts of all the dear saints here are verily 
overflowing with gladness since hearing the joyful 
tidings proclaimed, and the Truth so lovingly and 
charitably presented to their minds. 

We are very hopeful of good results. Certainly 
many are less prejudiced after hearing for themselves 
the unadulterated Word of Life. 

Oh, for the word of God, so pure, 

Sweet and refreshing to the mind; 
A constant draught from heavenly springs 

Within the Scriptures we can find. 

Free from adulterating creeds 

The soul true progress then can make; 

When strengthened by the Word of Truth, 
Man's faith in God no foe can shake. 

The lessons I was permitted to learn during your 
stay,— "beholding your order and steadfastness in 
Christ"— I trust will greatly instruct me to be more 
qualified for the responsible position as leader of 
such an honorable cause in the service of him 
"Whose I am and whom I (desire to ever) serve." 

The present commences a new epoch in our 
Christian history, which, by the Lord's help, will 
chronicle a larger sphere of influence, a more faithful 
declaration of the Present Truth, deeper spirituality 
of life, and fitness for the high honor of being joint 
heirs in the great future assigned for the faithful. 
It is the earnest desire of all our hearts, particularly 
that of my dear wife and self, that you may ever realize 
the needed supply of the holy Spirit to use you 
in "confirming the churches," and to be spared in 
furnishing the Lord's Table (through the Watch 
Tower and the remaining volumes of Dawn) that 
his people may continue being nourished "with the 
finest of the Wheat." With kind remembrances, 
Yours in the Redeemer's service, 
JAMES HAY,-England. 



MY DEAR SIR AND BROTHER: 



I do not wish to burden you with much writing, 
but I know how you must be interested in the 
human family or you would not devote so much 
time and labor for their good. I only wish that I 
could devote my time in the same way. 

I meet with a great many traveling salesmen in 
my business, and it has been my pleasure to get 
some of them interested in God's Word and its real 
value to us. One of them was an infidel, or, if not 
altogether one, he was at least an unbeliever of the 
Word of God— and by insisting on a promise from 
him to read the 'Plan of the Ages' if I would loan 
it to him, I succeeded in getting him to read; and 
now he is much interested in it, and, using his own 
words to illustrate his feeling, "It makes me glad 
to the ground." 

Another traveling man has become very much 
interested and has already distributed quite a number 
of tracts which I gave him. 

Yours very truly, 

J. D. HENDERSON, -Iowa. 



page 449 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIV. DECEMBER 15, 1903. No. 24 



CONTENTS. 

Views From the Watch Tower 451 

Humility at a Discount 451 

Hebrew, Infidel, Preacher 451 

Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society 

Annual Report 452 

Christmas Review 456 

The Boyhood of Jesus 457 

Requests for Pilgrims, 1904 460 

John the Baptist and the Promised 

Elijah 460 

In the Winepress Alone (Poem) 462 

Special Item: Vol. VI. Not a Special 

Tower Issue 450 

page 450 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 



GERMAN BRANCH--MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



R3293 : page 450 

VOL. VI. NOT A SPECIAL TOWER ISSUE. 



Owing to the postal ruling which deprived us of the 
privilege of mailing paper-bound DAWNS at second-class 
rates, as special issues of the WATCH TOWER, we cannot 
send Vol. VI. to our WATCH TOWER subscribers in the 
same manner as formerly. There will be no paper bound 
edition issued, and all subscribers who want the sixth volume 
should remit at the rate of 30c per copy for cloth-bound 
books. This price covers postage. 

R3294 : page 450 

VOL. V. IN GERMAN. 



This translation is in good stock, and orders will have 
prompt attention. 

page 450 

MOTTOES IN GERMAN. 



We can fill orders for German mottoes. A packet of 
three large and two small mottoes of pretty design will be 
sent for $1.00, postpaid. 

"WHAT SAY THE SCRIPTURES ABOUT HELL?" 



We can supply this effective booklet in the Swedish 
language at 10c per copy, $1.00 per doz., postpaid. 

The English and German booklets still remain at the 
price of 50c per doz., postpaid. 



R3286 : page 451 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
HUMILITY AT A DISCOUNT WITH CLERGY. 



THE louder a man boasts of himself and the more 

domineering over others he becomes the more will 

he be reverenced. This is true in all religious circles 

to-day amongst the "clergy." It was so, too, in St. 

Paul's day. He pointed it out to the Corinthians, saying, 

in substance: The more a religious teacher brow-beats 

you and the more he exacts from you of money and reverence, 

the more you will esteem him. (2 Cor. 1 1:20.) This 

still seems to be the trend of unbalanced human nature. 

It is exemplified in every church organization except the 

true one, where alone meekness, gentleness and patience 

are recognized as the proper adornments of 

Christ's representatives. 

As an extreme example note the following proclamation 
of John Alex. Dowie to his deluded followers, clipped 
from his own publication: 

"The time has come when the world shall no longer 
make money out of Zion investments, for Zion can now 
invest more profitably in Zion industries, through Zion's own 
Financial Institutions. Therefore I say to you, are you loyal 
to Zion when you are backing up worldly institutions outside 
when Zion needs your resources and your strength 
and can use these to God's glory, and to your increased prosperity? 
I say to you, and I say to Zion everywhere, that you 
will have to recognize fully the tremendous fact that I was 
within my rights and only fulfilling my Divinely imposed and 
positive duty when I issued the Command of September 21st. 
After due time given for the prayerful consideration of that 
Command, every man or woman throughout the world who 
says, I will not obey,' is asked to send in his or her resignation. 
If you will not obey, then I will know that you are 
outside of Zion. My responsibility as your leader, under God, 
will cease; for you will have found another leader, or be 
a 'wandering star. '...I do not want you in Zion. You 
are a curse to Zion and the quicker you get out the better off 
Zion will be." 

HEBREW, INFIDEL, PREACHER. 



Felix Adler, rabbi and D.D., has been discoursing on 
prayer to New Yorkers. He said,— 

"Prayer also gives vent to that instinct in the human 
heart to worship God. But here, too, in regard to worship, 
I cannot sympathize with the kind of worship of which we 
do so much nowadays— characterized by the posture in praying 
—by kneeling. When a congregation falls on its knees I 
recoil. I find it repugnant to my whole nature. 

"Prayer is said to have the effect of putting before us 
a divine model. But the idea of God, when it rises in the 
mind, fills it with a kind of nebulous light, but doesn't present 
the clear outlines of a model. 

"I think men are really better and abler examples for 
behavior and serve us better as models than deity— such men, 
for instance, as Socrates, Brutus and Lincoln. They furnish 
definite models, not a vague notion of perfection; they do us 
good. Let us have moral heroes, human exemplars." 



Mark how vain Evolutionists speedily become. Pluming 
themselves on their humility in acknowledging protoplasm, 
jellyfish and monkeys as their progenitors, they 
pride themselves on having attained so high a dignity 
that it causes a shudder to see others bow to him whom 
they acknowledge as their Creator. 

As for Mr. Adler's preference for a human rather 
than a divine model, let us remember that he rejects the 
human model provided by Jehovah— "the man Christ Jesus." 
Let us remember, too, that the horrible "doctrines 
of devils" promulgated by Satan (through Heathen, Jewish 
and Christian "Doctors of Divinity") so misrepresent 
the plan and character of God as to make any half-decent 
man a "model" of justice in comparison. 

Thank God that Satan is soon to be "bound," that he 
may deceive the nations (peoples) no more. Then Felix 
Adler's eyes and all the other blind eyes shall be opened, 
and they shall see the glorious character of the great 
Creator. Then Felix Adler and all others will bow the 
knee: as it is written, "Unto me every knee shall bow." If 
he bow willingly and adoringly he may then go up the 
"highway of holiness" to everlasting life under the guidance 
of the wonderful teachers of the Millennium. If he 
refuse to bow his heart he, with all such, will "perish" in 
the Second Death. 

REV. DR. DIX WARNS THE GREEDY RICH. 



In the pulpit of the richest church in America 

R3286 : page 452 

Dr. Dix preached a Thanksgiving Day discourse 
of which the following is an extract: 



"The account between God and man is still open, 
our debt to Him still unpaid. True, there is ample 
material whereof to bring a thank offering to Almighty 
God. 

"Peace is within our borders. The horrible nightmare 
of the past winter induced by the coal strike 
no longer makes heads sick and hearts faint. The 
spirit of anarchy has done no more murder in high 
places. The state is secure from foreign assaults and 
domestic disaffection. For these and countless other 
instances of the Divine favor and goodness we do give 
thanks." 

Then the eloquent preacher drew the other side of 
the picture and surprised his hearers with these words: 

"Still, shadows fall, and under them we add intercession 
to thanksgiving. What casts some of those 
shadows? Class alienation. The insolence of wealth 
and the angry discontent of the poor, the growth of 
riotous living, the misuse of money and its reckless 
squandering on pleasure and pride; education without 
religion; the steady breaking up of homes by divorce 
and remarriage; the appearance of vast systems of religious 
imposture and their success in making converts; 
the spirit of gambling in every place where it can be 
practiced. 

"Others are the cold-blooded assaults on private 
property by those who attack corporations and drag 
them down to bankruptcy in order to enrich themselves; 
the insecurity of life through contempt of the 
law, and the freedom of assassins, whether sane or insane, 
to wreck their will upon their innocent victims; 
the steady decline of womanhood from its old ideals 
and its deterioration through copying the ways and 
invading the sphere of men. These are some of the 
things that cast a shadow on the years. No one sees 
how they are to be stopped, and no one who thinks it 
over from a Christian standpoint can doubt that if they 
are not stopped the harvest will be frightful beyond 
telling." 

HIGHER CRITICS CONTRADICT EACH OTHER. 



Rev. Sheraton of Wycliffe College, Canada, recently, 
defending the Pentateuch, said: 

"One good reason for rejecting the radical theory 
of the higher critics is that their criticisms have been 
nothing less than a series of speculations since 
their inception, each one contradicting all those that 
preceded it. Originally the crude objection was made 
that Moses could not have written the Pentateuch, because 
of the illiterate character of the age in which he 
lived. Discoveries in Bible lands, however, make it 
abundantly plain that there was a regular mania for 
writing and recording in ancient Egypt; and that tablets 



were erected and correspondence took place in 

R3287 : page 452 

Canaan before the Exodus. Moreover, recent research 

makes it evident that such an accurate knowledge was 

had by the sacred writer of the geography, arts, social 

and religious customs of Egypt, that no one but an eye-witness 

could have so described the conditions. No one 

living at a remote age could have drawn upon his imagination 

for the facts. 

"It was objected at a later date, in 1866, that the 
body of laws in the middle books were placed there 
after the Babylonian exile; and this was a portion that 
the critics had hitherto declared to be the oldest. 
No unanimity was shown on their part. Objection 
was also made to the diversity of style appearing 
in Deuteronomy and by a process of vivisection thirty-six 
verses in that book were actually attributed to 32 
authors. Almost all great literary works have been 
attacked in the same way, and in just as plausible a 
manner. Homer's authorship of the Iliad and Caesar's 
production of Commentaries were disputed for years 
because of the diversity of style. Sir Walter Besant, 
who finished a novel commenced by a dead friend, said 
no one had ever pointed out the place where he took 
up the work. The critics were captious and magnified 
differences, as the result of their restless analyses was 
fruitless, tedious and repulsive.— Toronto News." 



R3287 : page 452 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY. 
-ANNUAL REPORT.-DEC. 1ST, 1902, TO DEC. 1ST, 1903. 



"ONWARD, Christian Soldiers," seems to be our 
Great Captain's command to our Society— in its 
every department. When recording the year's 
results each December we have been amazed at "what God 
hath wrought," so great results from so imperfect instrumentalities. 
We are continually reminded of the feeding 
of the five thousand on five barley loaves and two small 
fishes, and the twelve baskets full of fragments left over. 
Each yearly report we have feared would be our best; not 
seeing how the following year could be a favorable. And 
just so is this year's report: Excellent, splendid, better 
than we could have surmised. The Lord be praised! We 
do not see how 1904 can equal or surpass 1903, but past 
experiences lead us to expect greater and still greater 
blessings from the great Chief Reaper in his service. 
One of the encouraging features of the work is, that 



the newly interested seem to grasp the Truth quickly, 
thoroughly, and with a self-consuming zeal which stimulates 
afresh those who have been longer in the way. As 
an instance we mention a young woman of less than 
twenty years who, during the Eaton-Russell Debates in 
October, fully consecrated her life to the Lord, set about 
a systematic study of the Dawn volumes, and so on, resolutely 
sacrificing the comforts of an elegant home, became 
a Colporteur, and began to carry the water of life to 
others fainting by the way. She realized herself to be an 
"eleventh hour" laborer, and besought the Lord for privileges 
and blessing in the vineyard. The language of her 
heart was expressed in the words of the hymn: 
"The hour is come to do and dare, 
To win a heavenly prize." 
Did she succeed, you ask? Surely; where faith and 
zeal go hand in hand to the Lord for service he rarely if 
ever rejects them; guidance, direction, alone was needed, 

R3287 : page 453 

and we were privileged to supply it. As a result that sister 
is circulating from fourteen to forty volumes of Millennial 
Dawn daily— delivering from 200 to 600 sermons 
daily, reckoning each chapter a sermon. 

Some seem to get a worldly view of this matter of 
Colporteuring, and think of it as unworthy the time and 
service of the well-to-do and educated;— well enough for 
those who have no other business or trade, or who have no 
capital wherewith to engage in "something better." The 
contrary view is the proper one, namely, that this in God's 
esteem is one of the most honorable services rendered in 
his name to the household of faith. As the "Pilgrim" 
brethren do the service of Elders, so the "Colporteurs" 
and "Volunteers" are doing the service of Deacons and 
Deaconesses. And the more education, refinement and 
natural ability are brought to the service, the greater number 
of talents invested, the greater are the possibilities 
of grand results to the glory of our King and the assistance 
of his "brethren." Those who feel that their talents 
are too many or too valuable to be used in the Lord's service, 
but not too valuable to be used in law or medicine or 
merchandising or other money-winning employment, do 
not properly value the privilege of laboring in the Vineyard 
—do not rightly value the great rewards promised to 
those who forsake all to have the privilege of Kingdom 
service and self-denial now, and of Kingdom glory by and 
by. 

True, many long for such service, but are so handicapped 
by earthly obligations that they cannot do as they 
would— cannot engage in colporteuring— should not so engage. 
We doubt not that with these the Lord, who 
knoweth the heart, reckons to their credit all the self-sacrifices 
of this sort they would be glad to make if the conditions 
favored. But such will be active along some other 
lines of service for the Truth and the Brethren. Faithfulness 



in all possible ways will doubtless bring them eventually 
new doors of opportunity. 

While increase of interest is to be noted all along the 
line, we accord first place to the Colporteur branch of the 
service. The figures given in the summary following will 
no doubt astonish all of our readers, the total sales of 
Dawns being nearly three times last year's total. These 
were nearly all in cloth binding, too, whereas last year the 
majority were in paper covers. The cloth binding is much 
better appreciated, better cared for and displayed; and 
thus does more good. 

We have one hundred and forty-three Colporteurs at 
work now, with many additions promised as soon as they 
can arrange their affairs. They are a noble band, laboring 
not for the meat that perisheth merely, but specially for 
the present and the prospective joys of the Lord. 

Many of the great men in history, who won fame and 
renown as statesmen, soldiers, authors and scientists, or 
gained a world-wide reputation in commercial life, laid 
the foundation of their greatness, perhaps gained that 
knowledge of men and human nature which is such a 
factor in great minds, by acting as canvassing agents. 
Napoleon Bonaparte, when a poor lieutenant, took the 
agency for a work entitled "L'Histoire de la Revolution." 
In the foyer of the great Palace of the Louvre can be seen 
to-day the Emperor's canvassing outfit, with the long list 
of subscribers he secured. George Washington, when 
young, canvassed around Alexandria, Va., and sold over 
two hundred copies of a work entitled "Bydell's American 
Savage." Mark Twain was a book agent. Longfellow sold 
books by subscription. Jay Gould, when starting in life, 
was a canvasser. Daniel Webster paid his second term's 
tuition at Dartmouth by handling "De Tocqueville's 
America," in Merrimac County, New Hampshire. Gen. 
U. S. Grant canvassed for Irving's "Columbus." James 
G. Blaine began life as a canvasser for a "Life of Henry 
Clay." Bismarck, when at Heidelberg, spent a vacation 
in canvassing for one of Blumenbach's handbooks. None 
of these, however, labored thus for the King of kings. 
None of these carried to their fellow creatures so precious 
a gospel. None of these invited saints in the name of the 
Lord to prepare for a share in the throne with their Redeemer, 
or sought thus by faithfulness to make their own 
calling and election sure by attesting their loving devotion 
to the Lord and his cause, to the sacrifice of some 
earthly privileges;— esteemed in comparison as but "loss 
and dross." 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER CIRCULATION INCREASING. 

While the work has increased greatly during the past 
year and the Watch Tower's regular issues are now over 
20,000, this, although very gratifying, seems less important 
to us, as we believe it is less important in the Lord's 
esteem than the evident increase in deep spirituality witnessed 
in so many ways— by the letters we receive, by the 



energy displayed, etc. We remark, by the way, that we 
continually receive evidences that there are thousands of 
interested Dawn readers who are not on the Tower list. 
Surely this ought not to be so. We should be in constant 
touch with all who are of like precious faith. Generally 
the reason given is scarcity of money. We know not how 
to tell these dear brethren and sisters that they are as 
welcome to the Watch Tower as to the air they breathe; 
but they must request it, even as they must inhale the air. 
Those who do not like to ask for it as "the Lord's poor," 
may, if they prefer, ask it on credit year after year, and if 
never able to send the money they may at any time so inform 
us and have the debt cancelled. What can we say 
more than this? We merely add that we are convenienced 
by those whose renewals (whatever their kind) come to 
the office before January 1st each year. 

We are expecting great things for the next few years 
in the spread of the Truth. We expect that the regular 
issues of the Watch Tower will be 40,000 copies (representing 
80,000 readers) before 1908. We want the cooperation 
of all of the Lord's people to this end. As the 
editor can do a part in this not open to others, so others 
can do a part which is not open to the editor. Let us continue 
to co-labor, hoping by and by unitedly to hear the 
Chief Reaper say, "Well done! good, faithful servants. 
Enter into the joys of your Lord." 

THE VOLUNTEER WORK. 

If space permitted we would enjoy giving details respecting 
this great work— explaining the practical methods 
adopted, by which in some large cities practically 
every house was visited— especially in Boston, Washington, 
Pittsburg and Allegheny, and their suburbs, for ten 
miles or more in every direction. Over three millions of 
tracts were thus used; besides the ordinary circulation of 
about two millions of other assorted tracts. Great as this 
work is, and far beyond all other tract distribution in the 
world, it can be more than doubled next year, if the 

R3288 : page 454 

friends in all other cities can arouse the same zeal displayed 

by some of those mentioned. For instance, at 

Washington practically the entire church, of about sixty 

engaged in the work. The trouble there was that with so 

many hands this much enjoyed service was too quickly accomplished. 

We are preparing "ammunition" for next 

year, and hope to be ready to supply orders in April. Let 

all prepare carefully and prayerfully for the opportunities 

of 1904. Remember that much depends on the selection 

of earnest-hearted and wise-headed captains and lieutenants, 

as well as on the zeal of the Church. Surely those 

who know no better way to use their time or to render 

service to the Truth, should be careful how they disregard 

this grand opportunity. The tracts are provided free; 



and the more of respectability, education and good address 
anyone can put into the service, the greater is likely 
to be the favorable impression to read and consider these 
messages from our King to nominal "Christendom" to select 
the "wheat" class. 

THE TOWER-DAWN A SUCCESS. 

The special issue of Dawn I. in Watch Tower form 
has been well received. Its price (5c per copy, including 
postage) is so cheap that it permits many to send it to 
their friends. One brother has sent about 300 to his 
friends and is still sending us large lists. A fund has been 
provided, by means of which this edition may be sent to 
every English-speaking minister and missionary in the 
world. We already have the lists, and about 50,000 have 
been sent out. 

The cheapness of this edition and also of the handsome 
cloth-bound edition makes unnecessary the old paper-bound 
edition, which will be discontinued soon as 
present stock is exhausted. 

OUR CORRESPONDENCE BIBLE SCHOOL. 

Letters come to us from all parts of the world making 
inquiries on the lines of Bible study and for assistance 
in applying the teachings of the Word to the affairs 
of daily life;— as well as business correspondence. We 
take pleasure in replying to these as lengthily as the questions 
seem to demand— frequently referring the inquirers 
to the more convenient and elaborate treatises of Dawn 
and the Watch Tower. We rejoice in such opportunities 
for service, and trust that any of the Lord's children who 
so desire will freely appeal to us for willing assistance 
along these lines. 

Letters and cards received from Dec. 1, 1902, to 

Dec. 1, 1903 41,079 

Letters and cards sent out from Dec. 1, 1902, to 
Dec. 1, 1903 37,810 

THE PILGRIM SERVICE INCREASED. 

The Lord's guidance in regard to the "Pilgrim" service 
is continually in evidence; not only in the words of 
appreciation coming constantly from those who have been 
blessed, but also in the evidences showing an increasing 
zeal and spirituality in their wake. This is not merely the 
result of the excellent discourses delivered by the "Pilgrims," 
but also, and, in large part, a result of the exercise 
of energy necessary to the making of the arrangements 
for the "Pilgrim" and for the meetings. The activity 
and comminglings incident to the preparations, 
bring a blessing, according to the divine promise that he who 
assists in watering others gets watered also himself. 

Elsewhere we ask for brief postal card answers to 



questions useful to us in connection with this service, 
from those desiring visits during the year 1904. Please 
respond promptly. 

During the past year 25 persons took part in this 
"Pilgrim" work; 2,647 parlor meetings and 1,702 public 
meetings were held;— total 4,349. The distance traversed 
in connection with these services (the editor's trip to Europe 
included) was 154,214 miles. The expense was 
$7,956— a very modest amount for so extensive services. 
The One Day and Annual Conventions are also reckoned 
in account; but not the convention expenses, which are 
borne by the inviting churches. 

CONVENTIONS OF THE YEAR. 

These we have reason to believe were appreciated and 
profitable. The One Day Conventions are chiefly for the 
benefit of those "brethren" yet in Babylon, who are hungering 
for and seeking Present Truth; the General Conventions 
are chiefly for those already fairly established in 
it. Both are proving so helpful that we consider it the 
Lord's will that they be continued, as per regular 
announcements. 

THE SOCIETY'S FOREIGN MISSIONS. 

"Darkness covers the earth [civilized] and gross 
darkness the heathen." Our Society is making no effort 
to reach those in grossest darkness, believing that to be 
the work designed of the Lord for the Millennium. We 
have more than enough to do in dispelling the darkness 
prevalent in Christendom. For these are our labors and 
prayers, as were those of the Apostles.— Eph. 1:13. 

The British Branch is well established, though by no 
means self-sustaining yet. A splendid work is in progress 
everywhere in Great Britain, and it is extending 
and broadening and deepening. Evidently, the Lord has 
"much people" in those islands. (Acts 18:10.) The editor 
was much refreshed by the manifestations of love and 
zeal everywhere encountered during his brief Pilgrim trip 
thither last Spring. Indeed, we know that all Watch 
Tower readers shared this through our reports, as was 
abundantly testified by your letters to us subsequently. A 
separate report of the British Branch is subjoined. 

Work is commenced at Copenhagen and Stockholm 
for the benefit of our Scandinavian brethren;— to put 
into their hands the Present Truth and to co-operate with 
those who have already been blessed with the opening of 
the eyes of their understanding. We hope to have more 
to report in the way of works a year from now. 

The German Branch has opened under fairly prosperous 
conditions, yet not what we had hoped for. The 
oneness of the "body" and of the "harvest" work does not 
seem to be sufficiently appreciated by the German brethren. 
It is proposed, however, to continue the mission during 
1904, giving the field a fair trial and looking to the 



Lord for guidance as to whether or not there are more 
favorable fields for the use of consecrated time and 
money. Meantime Brother Koetitz has succeeded Brother 
Henninges as the Society's representative at Elberfeld, 
and the latter has passed to a new field, as below. 
The work in French and Italian now centered at 
Yverdon, Switzerland, is being given a push, and promises 
well for the time. We are spending considerable money 
for free reading matter to be scattered all over Germany, 

R3288 : page 455 

Switzerland, France and Italy, as the Lord may stir up 
the hearts of his people to co-operate in the "harvest" 
work. We will do some witnessing. The Lord will use the 
Truth to gather the "wheat" and permit Satan to sift it 
clean. Experience seems to teach that the principal crop 
of ripe "wheat" will be gathered in Great Britain and 
America, where freedom has more or less prepared the 
way for the Truth amongst all nationalities. We must 
"harvest" while it is called day and where the wheat 
principally is. 

THE AUSTRALIAN MISSION. 

Little has yet been accomplished in Australia, yet 
everything we are able to learn about it seems to imply 
that it should be ripe for the sickle of Truth. Its population 
is chiefly British and we believe intelligent and liberal-minded. 
Its claims appealed to us as being in line 
with the leadings of the Lord, and accordingly Brother 
Henninges has been dispatched thither to open a Melbourne 
Branch or Mission. 

Brother Henninges has had a large experience in Allegheny, 
and later in London, and is, we believe, every 
way competent to push the work there. He will doubtless 
make it a success if the conditions are as favorable as we 
hope— if the Lord has "much people" there. Although 
this is in the nature of an experiment, we have already 
shipped nearly eight tons of literature there— chiefly 
Dawns— so great is our confidence. 

We bespeak for all the dear "Yoke-fellows" (Phil. 4:3) 
in foreign fields, as well as in the home Pilgrim service 
and in the Colporteur service afar and near, the prayers 
and co-operation of all who recognize the one Lord, 
one faith, one baptism, and one harvest work, and who 
see that the time for co-operation is short. Yea, as we see 
how few there are loyal to the Truth, and how many are 
their opponents, "within and without," let it draw us the 
closer to all whom the Lord has counted worthy to receive 
the Truth and worthy to permit to remain in its light. 
Let us pray for one another and in every way assist one 
another to "stand" and to "fight a good fight." Love of 
the brethren is classed in Scripture as one of the evidences 
of the new life— with what propriety each who has 
this love can judge. 



Our continued prayers ascend daily, for all the dear 
co-laborers and for all the Lord's true sheep— known to us 
as well as unknown. Brethren, pray for us. Under the 
Lord's providence our position in this "harvest" work 
specially draws the fire of the great enemy and his blind 
and misdirected servants. It is a comfort to us to know 
of your Christian love and prayers in behalf of the editor 
and his faithful co-laborers. And amongst these do 
not forget the 32 loyal office helpers at Allegheny. 

THE FINANCIAL END. 

With the opening of wider ranges of labor and influence 
the Lord sent an increase of the necessary means;— 
our money receipts for the past year will surprise you. 

R3289 : page 455 

This is another evidence that the Lord's hand is guiding 

the "harvest" work;— grace sufficient to endure added 

trials; and money sufficient for the increased expenses, 

and that without either direct or indirect appeals for 

money. The Truth stirred the willing-hearted to do what 

they could, and the Lord gave the increase. We dare 

scarcely hope for as large opportunities or as ample 

means for next year, but we leave all in the Lord's hand 

and will seek to do with our might according to the opportunities 

and means the Lord will supply. All who have 

participated in the results summarized below, either 

through active service of the Truth or by money contributions 

in its aid, or both (and this includes almost every 

Watch Tower subscriber), may well join us in giving 

thanks to the Lord for the showing. 

It will be noticed that while the work more than 
doubled the expenses did not double. We believe it to be 
a part of our stewardship to see that not one dollar of 
these consecrated funds is wasted. The dear co-laborers 
join heartily in this spirit. None here receives wages— 
merely expenses— and all rejoice to keep these at the lowest 
notch, and each feels that he cannot do too much for 
our King and his "brethren." We are entirely safe in 
saying that no such work was ever before done, nor at so 
relatively small a cost. But then neither was such a gospel 
ever before proclaimed. "What manner of persons 
ought we to be?" 

SUMMARY OF THE YEAR. 

Receipts. 

Surplus on hand Dec. 1, 1903 $3,938.11 

From Good Hopes and all other sources 39,526.08 



Total $43,464.19 

Expenditures. 



For "Pilgrim" expenses $ 7,956.65 

For publishing matter circulated free,— 

tracts, etc 21,678.02 

For expenses, postage, etc., on same 5,026.49 

For loss on Dawns incidental to rise in cost and 
our desire to keep retail price low and give 

Colporteurs every opportunity 2,014.71 

For Foreign Mission accounts, on which there 
may be partial returns later on 5,694.21 

$42,370.08 
Surplus remaining $ 1,094.11 

SUMMARY OF LITERATURE CIRCULATED FREE. 

Old Theology Tracts sent out, 5,487,700, representing 
81,211,600 tract pages,— various languages. 
Sample copies of Zion's Watch Tower, 198,590. 

BOOKS AND BOOKLETS SOLD AT COST OR LESS. 

Millennial Dawns, all volumes and languages 210,961 

Sundry booklets 63,057 

MISCELLANEOUS. 

Letters and cards received 41,079 

Letters and cards sent out 37,810 

"Pilgrims," regular and special, 25. Visits, 1,411; 
Public meetings, 1,702; Parlor meetings, 2,647; Miles 
traveled, 154,214. 



Praising God for past mercies, let us begin the service 
of the New Year with a renewal of our consecration 
vows; and with the thought that we are a year nearer to 
the glorious "change" and "well done" for which we hope. 
"Now is our salvation nearer than when we first believed." 

REPORT OF BRITISH BRANCH. 



We give below Brother Hemery's Letter and Report. 
We all rejoice that the British Branch prospers, and hope 

R3289 : page 456 

that in another year there will be something to report respecting 
the "harvest" work in the lands afar. 

Lest there should be some misunderstanding, we note 
the fact that the Financial Report takes no account of 
the cost of the tons of tracts sent from Allegheny, but 
merely of its circulation. We propose having the reports 



next year include cost of paper, printing, etc. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We are gratified in being able to send a report showing 
increase in the various branches of the work. The 
sale of Dawns has advanced upon last year's figures by 
3,000, while that of the lesser booklets also shows an increase. 
But notable progress is shown in the account of 
tract circulation— we have sent out 1,033,000 free tracts 
and Towers. Of this number 700,000 represent the Volunteer 
matter; the new method of distribution lending 
itself to more extended opportunities of service than the 
previous one did. But while much has been done, much 
more remains. The increases plainly indicate further 
possibilities, telling us that "The fields are white unto the 
harvest." We pray the "Lord of the Harvest that he will 
send more laborers into His vineyard." 

We believe your visit to us in the Springtime has, in 
the Lord's providence, done much to give a general impetus 
to the work in this part of the field. The brethren 
were stimulated to further assurance and zeal, and many 
new friends were made. Indeed, in view of the possibilities 
in these countries, it would appear that your early return 
is desirable. You will be glad to know that the work 
prospers in Ireland: the friends in Dublin especially 
were enthused by your visit there, and have, since then, 
sold a good many Dawns. The change of the British depot 
to its present address— brought about in harmony 
with your thought that this locality would be more desirable 
—already promises much advantage. 

It has been our pleasure to have a Pilgrim visit from 
Brother Henninges this fall. He reports that the meetings 
have been well attended, and the usual good interest 
maintained. We are sorry to have to say "good-bye" to 
him and Sr. Henninges, though we are glad the work in 
Australia is to be helped forward by them. We are grateful 
to the Lord for all His favors to us— for the privilege 
of knowing His Truth, and for that of serving each other. 
We thank Him for all that He has done, and are hopeful 
concerning that which remains. Continue to pray for us 
here, as we do for you, that His purposes may be worked 
out in us and that we may all be good "laborers" in the 
vineyard. 

Your fellow-servant, in the Lord, 
J. HEMERY. 

EXPENDITURES. 

L. s. d. 

Deficit from last year 542 18 8 

Postage, Rent, Labor, Gas and sundry 

expenses 105 1 5 

"Pilgrim" work expenses 86 4 9 

734 4 10 

Tract fund receipts from Great Britain 411 2 

Deficit 323 2 10 



Dawns sold, chiefly by colporteurs 20,590 

Booklets sold, chiefly by colporteurs 3,851 

Tracts circulated free, chiefly by "Volunteer" 

method 1,033,700 

These represented in pages 18,368,600 

Letters and cards received 4,649 

Letters and cards sent out 9,842 



R3289 : page 456 

CHRISTMAS REVIEW 

--READING LESSON, PSALM 103. -DECEMBER 27.- 

THE lessons of the last quarter, dealing with Saul, 

David and Solomon, are fresh in our memories. 

Saul's great but wasted opportunities have impressed us 

with the thought that we also have great opportunities, 

and need to be on guard lest these should be wasted. 

Saul's opportunities were of an earthly kind, in connection 

with an earthly kingdom; ours relate to the everlasting 

glorious Kingdom. His mistake was in failure to give 

his heart entirely to the Lord. Instead of doing this 

he sought to serve the Lord but to maintain a will of his 

own. Seeing how great was his mistake impresses upon 

us the importance of making our consecration full, complete, 

and then seeing to it that, by the Lord's assistance, 

we faithfully carry out the provisions of that 

consecration. 

In David, Saul's successor, we have a man 
after God's own heart— not in respect to all the affairs 
of his life, but in respect to his heart, his intentions, his 
holiness of will, of purpose. Seeing what God appreciated 
in David helps us to understand the better what he 
appreciates in all those who would please him. Not 
that we could hope to please God of ourselves,— but 
having accepted his grace in our hearts, having come 
under the robe of the Redeemer's imputed righteousness, 
and having realized ourselves accepted in the 
Beloved, then it must be the desire of our hearts to 
attain as nearly as possible to the divine standard in 
thought, word and deed. By so doing we are making 
our calling and election sure, for the Lord seeks only 
those to be his servants who worship him in spirit and 
in truth. He accepts us under Christ's merit because 
we have declared that we desire to be like Christ and 
to fulfil the Father's will. Our acceptance is with the 
view of giving us an opportunity to demonstrate the 
truthfulness of our assertions— to fulfil the covenant of 
self-sacrifice in obedience to the principles of righteousness. 
Failures surely will from time to time mark our 
very best endeavors, but so surely as we are of the David 
class, the beloved of the Lord, so surely our failures will 
cause us regret and pain, and lead us to the Lord to 



entreat his forgiveness in the name and merit of him who 
loved us and bought us with his precious blood. 

David's warfare with the enemies of the Lord, and 
with the enemies of the Kingdom and Law which the 

R3290 : page 457 

Lord had established in Israel, were continued through 
David's career, and these very properly represent the 
warfare which all the Lord's beloved ones must endure 
faithfully if they would abide in his favor. Loyalty to 
the principles of the divine government is of prime importance; 
the royal banner must be lifted high; our lives 
must be risked and be given in defence of the divine 
character and teachings if we would be counted worthy 
of the Kingdom of glory, if we would belong to the 
house of David, the beloved, which the Lord has promised 
shall be established forever— the house of Christ, 
the house of sons. 

We review Solomon's peaceful reign and note how 
its opening years were typical of the blessings of the 
noontide of the Millennial Kingdom. The glories and 
wisdom and wealth of Solomon were but trifles in comparison 
to the wisdom, honor and riches which God has 
promised to those who love him. Respecting the faithful 
overcomers, we remember it is declared that they 
shall know even as they are known by God, that they 
shall share the glory, honor and immortality of their 
glorious Head and Master. 

We remember, too, the typical temple, and its construction 
from materials previously prepared during the 
Levitic reign, and how this prefigured our preparation 
as living stones for the glorious temple of the future, in 
which God shall make his presence known to all the 
families of the earth for their blessing and uplifting, and 
for the joy of all those who shall respond to the blessed 
influences of the Millennial Kingdom. The thought of 
the preparation of these stones causes us much comfort 
and joy respecting the trials and difficulties of this present 
time, as we realize that they are working out for us 
and in us preparation for the far more exceeding and 
eternal weight of glory which will be ours if we are faithful 
when we shall be brought together in glory as the 
spiritual temple of the Lord. 

This review is perhaps as appropriate a lesson for 
the closing Sunday of the year as any, especially when 
we remember that all of these glories and blessings and 
privileges are ours because of the great redemptive work 
accomplished by him whose entrance upon the work is 
celebrated by Christmas day. Although we cannot 
agree that this is the proper day for celebrating the birth 
of our dear Redeemer, but must insist that it was about 
October first, nevertheless since he did not intimate his 
desire that we should celebrate his birthday it is quite 
immaterial upon what day that event, of so great importance 
to all, is celebrated. Upon this day, so generally 



celebrated, we may properly enough join with all whose 
hearts are in the attitude of love and appreciation toward 
God and toward the Savior. 

The habit of giving little remembrances one to another 
at this time of year seems to us specially appropriate. 
God is the great giver of every good and perfect 
gift. He is continually giving and we are continually 
receiving from him; but amongst all his gifts the one 
of greatest importance to us is the gift of his Son to be 
our Redeemer. While, therefore, thanking the Lord for 
this great gift and for the great plan which centered in 
it, it is appropriate that we cultivate in our hearts the 
spirit of liberality, generosity, and that we allow this 
spirit to exercise itself to some extent— according to our 
conditions and circumstances— toward those with whom 
we have contact, especially to the members of our own 
households. We recommend that every little gift on 
this occasion should, so far as possible, represent or be 
accompanied by some little remembrancer of the great 
gift— something to draw the mind of the recipient to the 
fact that the great gift of God in Christ is and should 
be in the minds of all who give or who receive the trifling 
exchanges of the season. 



R3290 : page 457 

THE BOYHOOD OF JESUS. 

-LUKE 2:40-52.-JANUARY 3.- 

FOR the first six months of the new year the International 
Lessons turn again to the New Testament, 
beginning appropriately enough with the 
childhood of Jesus. 

The more we think of it the more marvellous it 
seems that the Gospel narratives record so many of the 
particulars of our dear Redeemer's ministry— miracles, 
teachings, etc.— yet never once descend to the discussion 
of commonplace events, nor of our Lord's sayings 
or doings other than those directly connected with his 
ministry. This is one of the strongest internal evidences 
that these books were written under divine 
supervision. Our experience with the writings of men 
in all ages assures us that it would be almost impossible 
for four men to write biographies of one person, 
such as these four Gospels are, without entering into 
social features and events. Our Lord's mother is 
barely mentioned, and this only where her life touched 
particularly with that of Jesus. Her husband, Joseph, 
was probably dead at the time our Lord's ministry began, 
yet no mention is made of this fact either. 

Respecting our Lord's life, previous to his consecration 
at thirty years of age, we know scarcely anything. 
The four Gospels merely bring to our attention 



his miraculous birth, Herod's jealous fury, and the 
escape of the child before the massacre of the innocents, 
followed by the little incident of our lesson, 
which occurred in his twelfth year, and the declaration 
that he increased in wisdom and stature and favor with 
God and man. How brief the record, yet how suggestive! 

R3291 : page 458 

It would have been no part of the Gospel to 
have explained the details of his life as a boy, as a 
young man, etc. It might, indeed, have satisfied the 
curiosity of some to have told us whether he was a 
farmer or a fisherman or a carpenter, matters about 
which people seem inclined to dispute. Undoubtedly 
the Lord's way in this matter was the better one. Our 
minds are more drawn to the important features of the 
Lord's work by reason of the brevity of the sketch 
given us of his earthly life and interests. 

The important thing for us to know is simply 
stated, namely, that he was the beginning of the creation 
of God— the first born of every creature; that in 
his preexistent condition he had glory with the Father 
before the world was, and was the Father's instrument 
in the creation of angels, principalities and powers and 
men, everything that was made. (John 1 .) The 
necessary particulars are also given us respecting the 
transference of this great spirit being to earthly human 
conditions— that he might become man and redeem 
man, the world; that he might be born under the 
Law and thus redeem those who were under the Law, 
the Jews. Let us then thank God heartily for the simplicity 
of the narrative, and for the fact that no item 
necessary to our comfort and peace and joy has been 
omitted therefrom, and that no needless items pertaining 
merely to earthly things have been permitted 
to intrude themselves and thus to dim in any measure 
the glorious record of the great love wherewith the 
Father loved us and the great redemption effected 
thereby. 

Coming more particularly to the appointed lesson: 
We see that the boy Jesus, although miraculously begotten, 
not of the will of the flesh, nor of man, but by 
the holy Spirit, was permitted to grow after the ordinary 
manner, gradually getting stronger physically 
and mentally, being filled more and more with wisdom, 
and giving evidence that God's favor was upon him. 
Quite probably Joseph, his foster father, was a carpenter, 
and if so the boy Jesus unquestionably, like other 
boys, would have more or less association in the carpenter 
shop, its tools, etc. It has been wondered by 
some that our Lord never referred to carpenter tools or 
work in any of his teachings or parables, and this has 
been urged as an objection to the thought that he was 
reared in contact with such work and tools. It matters 
not, so far as we can see. Our Lord addressed, 



not classes, but the masses; and quite probably the 
majority of the people at the time knew little about 
the carpenter's trade, tools, etc., even less than in our 
day. Hence it was not necessary or appropriate that 
our Lord should use as figures and parables that which 
would not be common to the experiences of all or nearly 
all of his hearers. 

In verse 41 Joseph is evidently referred to as one 
of his parents. This is not in conflict, however, with 
the previous statements of the same writer, to the effect 
that Jesus was begotten, not by Joseph, but by the 
holy Spirit. (Luke 1:30-35.) We would consider it 
proper enough today that any child should speak of 
his foster-father or stepfather as father without explaining 
the particulars of the relationship, and likewise it 
would be proper for the friends to speak of both father 
and mother as the parents of the child, as in this verse 
under consideration and previous verses.— Vs. 27. 

The narrative passes over the twelve years of Jesus' 
earthly life to tell of the incident of his tarrying 
behind after having been with his parents at the Passover 
Feast. The religious Jews from all parts of the 
country went to Jerusalem upon these feast occasions 
according to the directions of the Law, and naturally 
enough close relatives traveled in each other's company 
considerably. Thus it was that in the large concourse 
returning from Jerusalem after the feast a whole day 
elapsed before the boy Jesus was missed by those who 
properly had guardianship over him. Although admonished 
by the angel Gabriel that Jesus would in due 
time be greatly honored of God, and that he was born 
differently from others of the human family, nevertheless 
neither Mary nor Joseph seemed to have caught 
any considerable view of the greatness of the one 
whom they called their son Jesus. The prophecies 
spoken respecting him, like all the prophecies of olden 
times, were more or less vague, and could not be comprehended 
except by the aid of the holy Spirit, which 
had not yet been given. His mother Mary, however, 
we are told, kept all these things pondering in her 
heart, wondering what would be the consummation- 
little dreaming, we may be sure, how great her son 
must ultimately be made, according to the divine 
arrangement. 

The story of the boy of twelve amongst the Doctors 
of the Law, discussing the various types of the 
Law and what these probably signified, and what would 
be expected to be their antitypes, furnish us a very 
interesting picture, especially when we remember 
that the one who was asking the questions was the one 
who ultimately would give correct answers to those 
questions in his own experiences. We are not to assume 
that this precocious boy of twelve was unduly 
bold or forward; we are not to presume that he undertook 
to teach the Doctors of the Law. He was not yet 
anointed to preach, and was therefore not yet qualified. 



The narrative is that he was found hearing the doctors 
and asking them questions, and not attempting to 
teach them. There is a good suggestion here— especially 
for such as are not permitted to teach, by reason 
of sex or insufficient years— namely, that even a child 

R3291 : page 459 

can ask questions, and in asking the questions may 
suggest wonderful and powerful answers. 

We may reasonably assume that Jesus had previously, 
after the manner of the Jewish boys, attended 
the synagogue worship at his home, and that hearing 
there the Law and the prophets, the Scriptures of the 
Old Testament, read Sabbath after Sabbath, and having 
a perfect memory and an active mind, because not 
blemished by sin and the fall, the various questions of 
the Law and the various declarations of the prophets 
would greatly interest him— especially as he realized 
that he had left the Father and had come into the 
world to do a redemptive work. 

The Doctors of the Law doubtless remarked that 
they had never had such pointed questions asked them 
respecting the Law and the prophets, even by wise men 
of their day and by each other; hence they evidently 
noticed the precocity of this boy. As he asked 
questions which apparently showed that some of their 
interpretations were faulty and inconsistent, they in 
turn considered it not beneath themselves to ply the 
boy with questions. Doubtless they thought that after 
his questions had confounded them their questions 
would likewise confound the boy, but, according to 
verse 47, so far from confounding him they got their 
questions answered in such a manner as amazed 
them. Nevertheless we are to remember that our 
Lord Jesus could not have himself understood the full 
meaning of the Law shadows and the prophecies 
at that time— nor until after his anointing with the 
holy Spirit. (1 Cor. 2:14.) This little item gives us 
a suggestion respecting the ability of mind that would 
belong to a perfect boy. It gives us a suggestion respecting 
what we may expect of the ancient worthies 
when they shall be resurrected to human perfection, 
and the same suggestion also of what we may expect of 
the perfection of the Church in the glorious condition 
promised in the First Resurrection. 

It was natural enough that after missing the boy 
for four days his mother should upbraid him somewhat, 
and, taking Jesus' answer in its simplicity, we 
must suppose that he had been so absorbed with the 
opportunities and studies that the time had passed 
without his appreciating the trouble and inconvenience 
he was causing to others. 

"Wist ye not that I must be about my Father's 
business?" must have seemed strange enough even 
from so remarkable a boy. His parents did not fully 



comprehend the meaning of the words, but Mary set 
these apart with the other peculiar things to treasure 
up, hoping ultimately to see something that would 
fully justify the words, as she did afterwards see. 
After making this protest respecting his desire to be 
engaged in the heavenly Father's mission, studying 
his Word and teachings, and realizing that his sentiments 
were not understood or appreciated, and that 
really he was still properly under subjection to his 
parents, Jesus said no more, but went quietly with 
them to Nazareth and doubtless to his accustomed 
vocation. 

Our Lord could not begin his ministry because he 
was under the Law and bound by its every restriction. 
We note, however, his promptness to engage in his 
heavenly Father's business at the very earliest moment, 
as we read, "Now when Jesus began to be about 
thirty years of age he came to Jordan to be baptized." 
We who are not under the restraints of the Law Covenant 
but, on the contrary, are under grace, are not thus 
limited as to the time we may present our bodies living 
sacrifices upon the Lord's altar to be used in his 
service; hence we rejoice the more if we can find that 
at an early date we can give our hearts and our all to 
him who loved us and bought us with his precious 
blood. 

It was not the babe of Bethlehem that was to bless 
the world, nor the boy of Nazareth, nor the young 
man of Capernaum, but it was to be a full-grown man, 
a mature one, whose sacrifice would offset the sin of 
Adam, redeem him and his posterity and satisfy the demands 
of divine justice against the condemned race. 
So, then, while interested in everything pertaining to the 
divine character and plan, while interested to know 
how Jesus grew in stature and in wisdom as he approached 
the maturity of manhood at thirty years, 
while interested to know about his miraculous birth, 
our chief interest in all of these things is that they 
established our faith in him as the man Christ Jesus— 
that he was holy, harmless, undefiled and separate 
from sinners, and therefore able to make the atonement 
sacrifice— to give his own life a ransom, a corresponding 
price for the life of Adam, and thus for the 
life of the whole race of Adam, in his loins at the 
time of his transgression and thus sharers with him 
in his condemnation. 

We do well, therefore, to dwell less upon the birth 
and infancy of Jesus and more and more to grasp the 
precious themes set before us in the Gospel, of which 
the cross is the great point or center of interest. Similarly 
we regard all the followers of the Lord— not 
according to the flesh but according to the Spirit. 
True, we are glad to know of some that even before 
their consecration and baptism of the Spirit were noble 
minded, virtuous and irreproachable, and we have a 
measure of regret when we hear of some who had 



a contrary disposition to this; nevertheless our interest 
centers around the fact that they did turn from sin, 
did become the Lord's followers and that they have 
been begotten of his holy Spirit. In this we rejoice. 

R3292 : page 460 

Thus we know each other according to the Spirit as 
New Creatures in the Lord, and thus we know our 
Lord as the New Creature, as the Apostle suggests, 
"Though we have known Christ after the flesh, henceforth 
know we him so no more." Our special interest 
centers in our Lord from the moment of his anointing 
of the Spirit until he completed the work there begun 
three and one-half years later on the cross, crying, "It 
is finished." Our interest still holds beyond that 
point in the resurrection of our Lord from the dead, and 
the evidence thus given us that the begetting of the 
Spirit at his baptism became the birth of the Spirit at 
his resurrection, and that he was thus the first born from 
the dead, born of the Spirit to spirit conditions. Then 
our hope is to follow in his steps, and thus realize the 
promise that if we suffer with him we shall also be 
glorified together and share his Kingdom and his nature 
in glory. 



R3290 : page 460 

REQUESTS FOR PILGRIM VISITS, 1904. 

THE following information is very important in 
connection with arrangements for "Pilgrim" 
services. There is no charge for these services, 
nor for the traveling expenses; nor are collections 
ever to be taken up. We expect that all friends of 
the Truth will be glad to entertain the "Pilgrims," 
during their brief stays, with "such things as ye 
have;" but where circumstances do not permit this, 
the "Pilgrims" are prepared to pay their way. If you 
desire to be remembered by us when we lay out the 
routes for these "Pilgrims," please answer the following 
questions— on a postal card or on separate paper 
from your letter. You need not repeat the questions, 
but merely number the answers, thus: No. 1— Yes 
(or No). No. 2— Twice a week— Sunday and Wednesday 
(or whatever may be the truth). No. 9— 
Sunday at 3 p.m. at Bible House, 610 Arch Street; 
Wednesday 8 p.m., same place (or whatever may be 
the facts of your case). And thus with each question. 

If you cannot answer all the questions reply to as 
many as possible. Neglect to send in such requests 
will be understood to mean that the "Pilgrim" visits 
of 1903 were not appreciated, and that you think it 
undesirable to have them continued so far as possible 



in 1904. Requests of 1903 hold good until Jan. 31, 
'04. "Pilgrim" routes are laid out sometimes several 
months ahead and cannot well be altered; hence the 
necessity for our having full information and in 
time. 

ANSWER AS MANY AS POSSIBLE OF THESE QUERIES. 

(1) Are regular meetings now held in your vicinity? 

(2) How frequently? 

(3) What is the present average attendance? 

(4) Is request for Pilgrim visits the publicly expressed 
wish of those who usually attend meetings? 

(5) Will suitable places be secured for parlor meetings? 

(6) Can suitable room for a public meeting be secured? 

(7) At what date are leaders or elders chosen? 

(8) Give full name and address of regularly elected 
elders,— that arrangements for Pilgrim visits 

may be committed to them. 

(9) Give addresses of meeting-places and hours. 

(10) To whom should the Pilgrim be referred for 
entertainment? 

(1 1) If no regularly chosen elders, give at least one 
address in full, beside your own. 

(12) Give your own name and address in full (state if 
colored) and any other information likely to be 
useful. 

(13) If not on the railroad give name of proper station 
and your distance from it, and the direction. 

State also if a conveyance would meet the Pilgrim 
at station and return him to it. 



R3292 : page 460 

"JOHN THE BAPTIST AND THE PROMISED ELIJAH." 

-MATT. 3: 1-12. -JANUARY 10.- 

Golden Text:— "Repent ye: for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. 

IN the first three verses of our lesson are summarized 
the mission and work of John, our Lord's cousin, 
respecting whom the Master said, "Verily I say unto 
you, there hath not arisen a greater prophet than John 
the Baptist: and yet I say unto you that the least in 
the Kingdom of heaven is greater than he." John's mission 
was to announce that Kingdom, but it was not his 
privilege to become a member of it. He was the friend 
of the Bridegroom, as he expressed it. He heard his voice 
communing with the prospective betrothed, and he rejoiced 
as his friend, but not as a member of the betrothed 
class— the bride, the church of this spirit dispensation, 
the least one of whom enjoys a higher privilege and station 
than did this noble prophet: because even hereunto 



were they called and he called not. 

John from his birth was specially prepared to be a 
servant of the Lord in the capacity he filled, and on reaching 
the age of maturity he, being fully consecrated, at 
once began the service. He was six months older than 
our Lord, and hence began his ministry that much sooner. 
Abstaining from earthly comforts, he subsisted on the 
plainest of food, and was attired merely with a camel's 
hair girdle about his loins. His entire time and attention 
were thus left free for the mission before him. 

We do not advocate that all the Lord's people follow 
the example of John the Baptist in respect to their food 
and raiment, but we do believe that a good lesson of simplicity, 
consecration and zeal may be drawn from his 
course. We do believe that our Lord's faithful followers 
might copy John's example to the extent of avoiding the 

R3292: page 461 

extremes of social custom, not only in their clothing but 
also in their food. We advocate "things decent" and 
"things honest," as the Apostle expresses the matter— a 
simplicity of diet and wardrobe. Those who have consecrated 
their time and energy and influence to the Lord, and to 
the service of the Truth, will do well for their spiritual interests 
to be on guard against the fashions and follies of 
this world in these matters; and whether they eat or 
drink, or whatsoever they do or wear, that all may be 
done to the glory of the Lord— with a view to their own 
greatest usefulness in the divine service and in the service 
of the household of faith. 

John's mission was heaven-directed, and exactly at the 
right time to introduce the Lord Jesus to the Jewish nation, 
which had been waiting for him for centuries to fulfil 
in and through their nation the promise made to Abraham, 
"In thy seed shall all the families of the earth be 
blessed." Under divine guidance the affairs of Israel 
were, outwardly at least, more prosperous than they had 
been for centuries, and they were as a nation hoping that 
this return of God's favor might culminate in the sending 
of the promised King for the exaltation of their nation, 
and through its establishment in power the blessing of 
Israelitish rule in the name of the Lord should be extended 
to all the families of the earth. We are told that 
amongst the Jews "all men were in expectation of the 
Messiah."— Luke 3:15. 

No wonder then that so striking a figure as John the 
Baptist made an impression when he announced that 
God's Kingdom was soon to be established, and that he 
had been sent as an advance minister to proclaim it and 
to sanctify the hosts of Israel, that they might be prepared 
to be the hosts of the Messiah in the fulfillment of the 
long-expected promise to Abraham. By a new method 
those who accepted John's teaching were required to 
mark their reformation of life, namely, by an immersion 
of water, which symbolized their putting away of sin, 



their return to full covenant relationship with God, already 
established through Moses, the mediator of the Law 
Covenant. All who did this with true sincerity of heart, 
and not merely an outward form, undoubtedly were 
Israelites indeed, of the very kind that the Lord would be 
pleased to accept and own and bless under the spirit dispensation 
soon to be inaugurated. 

And thus we find that not only many of the disciples 
of Jesus were previously disciples of John, but also that 
many of those who received Jesus had previously received 
John. Nevertheless the majority of those baptized by John 
evidently had not been touched to the heart by his preaching, 
but merely nominally repented and instituted some 
slight reform. 

The movement became a popular one, and drew to it 
many who loved publicity and notoriety, and who are always 
foremost in the promise of godliness but are without 
its power, therefore without the sincerity, without the 
heart interest. John recognized the hypocrisy of many of 
the leading Pharisees and Sadducees who came to his baptism, 
and by some prophetic power was enabled to read 
their hearts in a manner which would be improper for us 
to do. This prophetic insight not only permitted John to 
call these false ones a brood of vipers, but permitted him 
also to intimate to them the great day of wrath that was 
soon to come upon that nation; "wrath to the uttermost," 
as the Apostle Paul speaks of it (1 Thess. 2:16)— the 
wrath of God which entirely swallowed up the nation and 
left the land almost desolate, scattering the people 
amongst all the nations. John would not baptize these 
until they showed by outward conduct a change of life, 
a change of heart and not merely a changed profession. 
He realized that this class in particular was stumbling 
over the promise made to Abraham, because they were his 
natural children without having Abraham's faith. John 
inspiredly warned them to the contrary, that God was 
quite able to establish his Kingdom in due time and to 
ignore them entirely. 

Verse 10 is a further part of his prophecy, declaring 
that fruitage was necessary on their part, and that any 
who did not bear the fruitage required would be cut off 
from divine favor and cast into the fiery trouble with 
which the Jewish age ended. 

Prophetically John realized that his mission was 
merely a preparatory one, and that somehow— how he 
could not understand— the coming one would have the 
power to immerse the faithful in the holy Spirit, in holy 
power, and the unfaithful with a baptism of fire, of trouble. 
Again he likened the ministry of Christ to that nation 
as that of a reaper who, with a winnowing fan, would 
separate the true wheat from the chaff, gathering the 
wheat to the garner of the Gospel age at Pentecost and in 
due time thereafter permit the fires— confusion, anarchy 
and the Roman legions— to entirely consume the chaff 
of that people in an unquenchable fire, a trouble that 
would not be extinguished, that the Lord would not help 



them out of, but that would utterly destroy their national 
polity. 

ELIJAH THE ARCHETYPE. 

Elijah the Tishbite, who in the days of King Ahab 
was used of the Lord to produce a reformation in Israel 
by which the priests of Baal and their power over the people 
were overthrown, was declared to be a type or likeness 
of a greater reformer who would precede Messiah to announce 
him and to make ready for his reign. Our lesson 
(verse 3) declares that John the Baptist was an antitype 
to Elijah. We see that he did do a work of reformation 
amongst the Lord's people at the first advent, the work of 
introducing the Messiah. Moreover, we remember that 
the disciples asked Jesus respecting this very prophecy 
saying, If you are the Messiah what answer should we 
give to the Jews who say that Elias (Greek for Elijah) 
must first come? Our Lord's answer was that Elias had 
already come (John the Baptist, the antitype of Elijah), 
and that the Jews knew him not, recognized him not, but 
had done to him whatsoever they pleased— imprisoning 
him and ultimately beheading him in prison. Our Lord 
further added "likewise shall also the Son of man suffer 
of them." "Then the disciples understood that he spoke 
unto them of John the Baptist. "-Matt. 17:10-13. 

As it was a surprise to the disciples that John, the 
Lord's forerunner and the antitypical Elijah, should be 
put to death, so likewise it was a surprise to them that the 
Master himself, instead of reigning, should be crucified. 
It took them some little time to understand that the Lord's 
coming as Messiah had two phases— one in humiliation, a 
suffering ending in death and apparent defeat, the other 
to follow later in power and great glory, to reign, to uplift, 
to bless Israel and all nations, thus fulfilling on the 
richest possible scale all the precious promises through all 
the holy prophets since the world began. It was appropriate 

R3293 : page 462 

also that the Lord should explain that there should be 
a second coming of Elijah— an antitypical Elijah on a 
still higher plane, of as much larger proportions than 
John the Baptist as the second coming of Messiah will be 
grander and more glorious than his first coming. 

John the Baptist himself understood that he was not 
fulfilling all the features of the antitypical Elijah— he 
evidently understood that there would be still a larger fulfilment 
by an archetype. This is evidenced from his 
own words when asked, Art thou Elias? And he saith, I 
am not. Art thou that prophet? And he answered, No. 
(John 1:21.) Our Lord's words explained the matter, 
showing that he was the antitypical Elijah in a certain 
measure, to a certain extent, to that the nation of Israel. 
Jesus said "This is Elias if ye will receive it." That is to 
say, to those who recognized his message and who obeyed 



it and who became the Lord's disciples, to these John fulfilled 
the work of Elijah (Matt. 11:14.)* Likewise Jesus 
is already the Christ, the Messiah, the King, to those few 
who have ears to hear and hearts to receive the message— 
the household of faith, the Church; but as John was not 
the Elijah promised to the world in general, so Jesus was 
not yet come as the Messiah. This coming of Jesus to the 
world as the world's King, to take unto himself his great 
power and reign, is the grand event toward which all 
prophecy points, and before that event takes place the 
an ti typical Elijah of still larger proportions than John 
the Baptist must bear a witness and message to the world. 

As we have already pointed out, Christ, the Messiah 
of the divine plan, includes not only Jesus glorified, the 
Captain of our salvation, the High Priest of our profession, 
Head over the Royal Priesthood, the glorious 
Church, but it includes also the Church which is his body, 
the under priests, the faithful which shall sit with him in 
his throne, be like him and share his glory and his divine 
nature. And as the anointed Christ of glory is a composite 
one of many members under one glorious Head 
(Eph. 1:18), so the antitypical Elijah is a multitudinous 
one. Jesus in the flesh was the Head of this great Elijah, 
bearing witness to and preparing the way for the coming 
of the great Messiah and Deliverer in due time. The 
Church, the body of the Christ in the flesh all down 
through this Gospel age, has been the body of the antitypical 
Elijah bearing witness all down through these centuries 
to all the families of the earth that God is to set up 
a Kingdom, and urging preparation therefor, urging a repentance 
from sin and reformation toward God, and being 
used of God as the instrumentality for the anointing of 
the most holy ones. Soon this work of the Church, of announcing 
the Kingdom and calling upon men everywhere 
to repent and reform, will be at an end, and the Kingdom 
will be introduced with power and great glory. Soon the 
work of baptizing the anointed ones and witnessing to 
their relationship to God will be at an end. Soon this 
antitypical Elijah, like John, will be restrained from further 
proclamation— and ultimately be cut off. Soon thereafter 
the Kingdom will be revealed. The faithful overcomers, 
as the wheat gathered from the sowing of this 
Gospel message of the Kingdom, will be gathered into the 
Kingdom, glorified with their Lord and Head, and soon 
thereafter the Kingdom itself will be manifested— "revealed 
in flaming fire"— in judgments, in troubles, distress 
of nations, etc. Soon the Messiah, Head and body, in 
glory, will so overrule in the affairs of men, that the nations 
of earth shall be broken to shivers as potters' vessels; 
and soon thereafter, on the ruins of the present 
reign of sin and selfishness under Satan, who shall be 
fully brought to naught and bound for a thousand years, 
all the blessed influences of righteousness, justice, truth 
and love will be set at liberty amongst the people, that the 
whole world may be blessed according to the divine promise. 
-Gal. 3:16,29. 



That the Church is the true antitype of Elijah is beyond 
question to those who have an understanding of the 
divine plan. As the Christ is composed of many members, 
and as the man of sin is a system of many members, 
so the antitypical Elijah is composed of many members. 
The three years and a half of no rain under the prophesying 
of Elijah the Tishbite are shown in Revelation to 
have their larger fulfillment in connection with the great 
Elijah archetype, the Church in the flesh. Those three and 
one-half years, a time, times and a half-time, or forty-two 
months or 1260 days, represent just that many years in 
the archetype, namely, the 1260 years that the true 
Church was persecuted and in a wilderness condition because 
of the power of papacy, which, in Revelation, is likened 
to the woman Jezebel who persecuted Elijah.— 
Rev. 12:14. 



'■•Millennial Dawn, chap. 8, Vol. II. 



R3293 : page 462 

"IN THE WINEPRESS ALONE." 

In the dusk of the sorrowful hours, 

The time of our trouble and tears, 
With frost at the heart of the flowers, 

And blight on the bloom of the years,— 
Like the mother voice, tenderly hushing 

The sound of the sob and the moan, 
We hear, when the anguish is crushing, 

"He trod the winepress alone." 

And, therefore, he knows to the uttermost 

The pangs that the mortal can bear: 
No mortal has pain that the Master 

Refuses to heal or to share. 
And the cries that ascend to the Loving, 

Who bruised Him for us to atone, 
Are hushed at the gentle reproving,— 

"He trod the winepress alone." 

How sudden so e'er the disaster, 

Or heavy the hand that may smite, 
We are yet in the grace of the Master, 

We are never out of his sight. 
Though the winnowing winds of temptation 

May forth from all quarters be blown, 
We are sure of the coming salvation— 

The Lord will remember his own! 

From him, in the night of his trial, 
Both heaven and earth fled away; 



His boldest had only denial, 
His dearest had only dismay. 

With a cloud o'er the face of the Father, 
He entered the anguish unknown; 

But we, though our sorrows may gather, 
Shall never endure them alone. 



