Announcements
◆ Literature offer for June: New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures (bi12) and God’s “Eternal Purpose” Now Triumphing for Man’s Good, for $1.25. For July: In isolated territory the Watchtower or Awake! subscription or a pocket-size publication not offered yet in that particular territory. In regular territory: A pocket-size publication on a contribution of 25c or four for $1.00.
◆ The New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures (bi12) is available in English, French, German, Italian, Portuguese and Spanish. The New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures is available in Finnish, Danish and Japanese.
◆ Elders should arrange for a review of district assembly material on the service meeting. It would be good to schedule it soon after most of the congregation attends an assembly. Make appropriate adjustments in coverage of material in Our Kingdom Service for that month.
◆ The congregation accounts should be audited on June 1, or as soon thereafter as possible by the presiding overseer or someone appointed by him.
◆ The following new publications are available in English braille, grade two: A Secure Future—How You Can Find It; There Is Much More to Life!; Is There a God Who Cares? These may be obtained on a free-loan basis by submitting a written request to the Society, Attention: Braille Desk.
◆ The Government has announced that the Selective Service arrangement ceased to function as of January 23, so none now reaching 18 years of age will have to register. Brothers of draft age who are in the pioneer service, or elders or ministerial servants, should not request of the Society certificates to use verifying their ordination, since the draft arrangement no longer functions.
◆ As a reminder, all regular and special pioneers should bring their United States convention pioneer identification card with them to the assembly. This will be used in connection with meals and for literature.
◆ Songbook price changes as of June 1, 1976:
                  Pio.    Pub.
Regular edition   15c     25c
Deluxe edition    60c     75c
◆ New Publications Available:
God’s “Eternal Purpose” Now Triumphing for Man’s Good—Portuguese
One World, One Government, Under God’s Sovereignty—Japanese
◆ Out of Stock in U.S.A.:
1975 Watchtower and Awake! bound volumes—English, Spanish

