Presenting the Good News—Together with Your Children
1 Do you know that one of the best ways to ascertain the spiritual growth of your children is by taking them with you in the field service? There is opportunity to converse as you walk between houses. As you listen to how they talk to householders and the answers they give to questions raised, you can learn much about how well they understand the truth and how deeply they appreciate it. At first small children might just offer the handbills or tracts, but as you train them progressively they can learn to offer the magazines, give a short Scriptural presentation, and possibly make the regular offer, eventually being able to conduct a Bible study. Surely such training and a response to it by children are a delight to observe. Really it is a demonstration of their faith growing stronger and stronger. What could be more satisfying to a parent? Suppose you have children who could be trained to give a Bible presentation. What might they say?
2 After introducing himself, and stating that he is assisting his parents in sharing Bible knowledge with his neighbors, a young person could say: “There seem to be many problems in families today, but as a young person interested in helping families I would like to share with you some thoughts from God, who created the first family. Here in Colossians 3:18-21, God speaks about families and what each one can do to bring happiness in the family circle. Note what verse 20 says about young children. [Then read verse 20.] The Bible is filled with instructions for families, and so that each family might have an up-to-date translation of the Bible, we are offering the New World Translation along with this companion publication for $1.25.”
3 Or, if you prefer, you could simply say: “As a young person looking forward to the future, I’d love to see the end of pain and death. Wouldn’t you? Did you know that the Bible says that time is coming shortly?” Read Revelation 21:4. Then make the offer.
4 Training our children as Christians in every possible way and at every opportunity is not only a God-given responsibility, but a happy way of life for Christian families. (Deut. 6:4-9; 1 Tim. 5:8) If you would like to get to know your children better, what they are really thinking about, how they feel about matters, ascertaining how much they really love Jehovah, arrange time to take them with you in the field service. Truly, it will be a rewarding experience.

