The Truth Is Beneficial Each Day
1 In a great many congregations our sisters are making an excellent contribution to the advancement of the Kingdom work. They work hard with their families, are zealous in field service and often put up with many problems and frustrations in order to walk in their integrity, day by day. Of course, soon now a New Order will resolve these problems. But even now our sisters, and all of us, are benefited greatly by having the truth. Have you reflected lately on how the truth can benefit you each day?
HOW THE TRUTH BENEFITS THE MARRIAGE RELATIONSHIP
2 We realize that if you have an unbelieving husband, perhaps even opposed or unbelieving children, there can be many problems in your home. But the blessing of knowing the truth and applying its principles is that we can learn to cope with our situations better. We can learn to live with problems, rather than let them get us down. For example, many of our sisters with opposed husbands have a calm spirit and lead a quiet, well-ordered life. How? The truth has helped them to look at their situation in a balanced way. These sisters have learned not to expect too much too soon from their husbands and families, and their calm, quiet spirit has been an influence for good on their husbands and other members of their family.
3 One sister thought recently that she could not endure any more mental and verbal abuse from her opposed husband. On her own she decided to separate from him, but before doing this she went to Jehovah in prayer and read carefully 1 Corinthians 7:10-16 and 1 Peter 3:1-6. She reviewed her situation with two of the local elders and obtained mature advice and help. Thereafter she decided to talk to her husband and tell him what she had thought about doing but reconsidered in the light of the Scriptures. She spoke to him kindly and respectfully, but frankly, and her opposed husband reacted favorably. He had not seen his actions objectively, but assured his wife that things would be better. The truth benefited this sister greatly because she took a wholesome, Scriptural course of action and Jehovah blessed her.
HOW THE FIELD SERVICE HELPS
4 Often just getting out of the house and telling the good news to others has a healthful effect on our outlook. One sister says that one way she has been able to keep her joy throughout the years is to be active in the service and in helping others. (Acts 20:35) This sister finds the Kingdom Hall a peaceful place, and the joy she gets from attending meetings and being with her spiritual brothers and sisters keeps her built up for the rest of the week.
5 But what if you have young children and want to get into the field service? One couple we know have taken their youngster along in the field service from infancy. While one conversed at the door, the other stayed by the baby carriage on the sidewalk when the child was very young. Householders were impressed. A former missionary sister tells us that, even though having a child, she continued to have fine success at the doors, for the people were fascinated by seeing her go from house to house with the baby carried on her back, and this opened many doors.
6 Still other sisters have expressed themselves as having a most satisfied feeling by working with the pioneers on occasion, trying to accompany them for a full day wherever possible. They are built up by having valuable association with the pioneers, and there is a rich interchange of encouragement, benefiting the pioneers also.—Rom. 1:12.
HOW CAN YOUR FAMILY BEST BE HELPED?
7 Where husbands and wives both work at secular jobs, they do well to think about the effect this has on them and their families. Is it necessary that the wife work also? Could you possibly adjust your standard of living so she is able to have more time for the children, her husband, personal study and the field service? Is it possible that more time with the children, training them in the truth at all times, is needed by your family even more than the money you earn? (Deut. 6:4-9; Eph. 6:1-4) Is it possible that a re-evaluating of priorities, especially your time, might be quite beneficial in your family? Each family has to decide what is best according to its circumstances.
8 The truth obviously benefits us in so many ways each day. By our really applying Bible principles each day and not putting things off until a future time, the truth can be a powerful force for good in our lives, day by day. Think of the blessings we can gain: the security of really knowing Jehovah (Prov. 18:10), an increased faith so that we will not drift away from our relationship with Jehovah (Heb. 2:1), a more joyful, happy outlook (Prov. 17:22a). These and many other blessings can be ours if we make the truth our own and gain its benefits each day.

