Use The Bible—Its Message Is Powerful
1 “The word of God is alive and exerts power and is sharper than any two-edged sword and . . . is able to discern thoughts and intentions of the heart.” (Heb. 4:12) These words indeed tell us of the power of God’s word or message found in the Bible, which all of us have for use in our field service to help people to get free from false religion and enable them to learn the way of the truth.
2 The “word of God” has exerted great power in our lives in that we have been delivered from the bonds of darkness in Babylon the Great and have been equipped to use the Bible to enable others to do likewise. By using it well in our field service activity we may find many others whose hearts can be motivated to look into its message so as to treasure its lifesaving influence in their lives.
3 How appropriate that we use the Word of God in our field service, both in our conversations at the door and in offering the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures to the people along with the bound book God’s “Eternal Purpose” Now Triumphing for Man’s Good! This will be the offer for June on a contribution of $1.25.
IT’S EASY TO PRESENT THE OFFER
4 To offer the Bible to people during the month we suggest a simple, straightforward approach, reading from the Bible itself. For example, you might have your Bible ready to open to Psalm 119:105 as you approach the door, and you might begin with the words of this scripture after an appropriate local introduction. By using this scripture you direct attention to the Bible that you have in your hand, which is like a lamp and a light. If the opportunity presents itself, read verse 130 also. Comment on the fact that it is God’s purpose for mankind to enjoy an earth filled with righteousness and with upright people, and offer the New World Translation and the “Eternal Purpose” book, explaining that they are for those who wish to understand more of the light of truth contained in the Bible.
5 Those who are fathers and mothers, are you training your children to use the Bible itself in the field? Perhaps your son or daughter could use this Bible presentation as you share together in the house-to-house work or, if you prefer, you could help your children to learn the presentation featured in “Presenting the Good News.”
6 You might also find it helpful, especially for those who are in a hurry, quickly to point out a highlight of the book we are offering during the month of June, the “Eternal Purpose” book. The opening paragraph sets the tone for encouraging people to obtain and read this Bible publication. It says: “Life on earth is taking on new interest for increasing numbers of people as our twentieth century nears its end.” After reading that short sentence you could point out that this Bible study aid along with the Bible itself is available for the one to whom you are talking.
THE TRUTH SETS US FREE
7 Never underestimate the power of God’s Word. Use the Bible itself in your public worship from house to house, on return visits and in your Bible study work. A pioneer sister from Nebraska who began publishing in 1968 said that she had not made great effort before to use the Bible in the house-to-house work. Now the work has taken on a completely new dimension for her, so that she is enjoying her field service more and getting more people to listen. Your use of God’s Word among the people has more than one purpose. Not only do they get a witness but they are helped to see that the message comes from God’s own Word.
8 Our Lord Jesus Christ demonstrated the effectiveness and power of the Word of God to help people. He knows that it is the truth, that is what he preached and he set the example for us to follow in his footsteps. His words at John 8:31, 32 show this: “If you remain in my word, you are really my disciples, and you will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.” We know the truth. We are free of false religion’s grip. Our responsibility and privilege now is to help others to gain that truth and freedom. During the month of June may we prove to be highly successful in distributing the Word of God, making return visits and starting home Bible studies as we use the Bible, for its message is indeed powerful.

