Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING JUNE 6
14 min: Song 20. Introductory comments. Lively consideration of article “Use the Bible—Its Message Is Powerful,” with discussion of points and appropriate questions and answers. Include demonstration of the offer, perhaps with father teaching child to use the Bible in field, if desired. Slant from viewpoint of fathers taking family lead in public worship.
12 min: Highlight the Bible in Your Conversation. Deal with the ways in which family heads and others can use the Bible in their preaching and teaching work. Discuss with audience how to talk with: (1) A person who shows interest in integrity in government. Show how this has been a problem of long standing with mankind; and show what is the solution. What scriptures could you use? (Mic. 3:9; Hab. 1:4; Isa. 11:5) (2) A person concerned with social injustice and the poor. What scriptures would be appropriate? (Prov. 12:7, 28; Mic. 4:3, 4 or Ps. 72:13, 14) These and many other scriptures you might have listed in the front of your Bible that you use in the field in order to quickly turn to the Word of God when assisting people. “Make Sure” has a wealth of information to help all of us in using the Bible in the field service to Jehovah’s honor.
18 min: “How Well Do You Know Your Family?” Interview parents whose mates are not in the truth with regard to: (1) How and when family study is conducted. (2) What arrangements are made for training in field service. (3) How respect is cultivated for unbelieving parent. Then have a panel of three or four who have good backgrounds in Christian living to discuss how a family can be brought closer together by (1) eating meals together, (2) praying together as a family, (3) participating in field service together, (4) sitting together at meetings, (5) working on projects together, such as cleaning the Kingdom Hall, etc., (6) training of boys and girls in day-to-day living. Chairman should make sure points are upbuilding and realistic, emphasizing benefits that result when father takes the lead in worship. Encourage brothers to take notes as to what they find practical so as to knit their families more closely together in the worship of Jehovah.
16 min: Concluding remarks. Include brief comments on Branch Letter; also cover material in “Questions from Readers” in the June 1, 1976, Watchtower. Song 81.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 13
 8 min: Song 70. Introduction. Explain that the meeting has been arranged to discuss problems our sisters have and possible solutions. Many have opposed or indifferent husbands, difficult situations at home, etc. Want to exchange some practical suggestions. There will be opportunity during various parts of the program to express oneself, share experiences and observations, which should be beneficial to all in attendance, especially our sisters.
20 min: “The Truth Is Beneficial Each Day.” Question-and-answer coverage. Allow time for local experiences primarily along the lines of those mentioned in the article. One handling the part should prepare participants ahead of time so will be most beneficial.
20 min: The Woman’s Role in Strengthening the Family. Mothers usually spend more time with children in early formative years than fathers. They can be a marvelous influence for good and can have considerable impact on the habits and attitudes developed in early years. Ask audience such questions as: What should mothers discuss with their children from infancy so young minds can be molded along spiritual lines? How can mothers train children in harmony with Deuteronomy 6:6-9? How and when can mothers arrange to participate with their children in field service? How can some temporary pioneer, strengthening the family further along spiritual lines? Let the sisters and others comment on these questions, offering their their observations, sharing ideas with one another. We can all learn from this.
12 min: Concluding remarks. Accounts report. Short talk on “Question Box” emphasizing main points. Then ask those in attendance what they learned from meeting. Encourage sisters to state what they have learned in a practical way. Song 29.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 20
Youths, Remember Your Creator.—Eccl. 12:1.
 7 min: Song 73. Introduction. Encourage parents and children to make this meeting their own. There will be time, especially in concluding comments, for expressions on things of a practical nature learned. Make some notes. Pay close attention to what is said and see what you can learn about cultivating a warmer, closer relationship with Jehovah and your parents.
20 min: A Child That Is a Praise to His Grand Creator. (Aid book, pp. 311-313) Consideration by audience participation of following points: (1) What does Psalm 127:3-5 show as to how one’s children should be viewed? (2) What responsibilities do fathers and mothers have in training their children? (Prov. 1:8; 22:6; Eph. 6:4) (3) What attitude did young Jesus show toward the worship and service of his heavenly Father? (Luke 2:41-49) (4) How does Psalm 148:12, 13 show that boys and girls are to be worshipers of Jehovah God? (5) What attitude toward their parents should children have? (Lev. 19:3; Deut. 5:16; 27:16) (6) How should young children treat older persons? (Lev. 19:32) (7) What attitude should children have toward congregation meetings? (Deut. 31:12, 13) (8) Why should children also be taught respect toward those in the congregation who are looking after the spiritual interests of the brothers? (1 Pet. 5:5; 2 Ki. 2:23, 24) (9) What warning did Jesus give about children turning against their believing parents in our day? (Mark 13:12) (10) How should all children who would have Jehovah’s favor conduct themselves in this urgent time?—Eccl. 11:9; 12:1.
15 min: Presenting the Good News—Together with Your Children. Question-and-answer coverage along with realistic demonstration of points in paragraph two.
18 min: Concluding remarks. Consider theme of meeting: Youths, Remember Your Creator. (Eccl. 12:1) Young people appreciate parents who spend time with them. Do you know what is in the hearts of your children? In addition to taking them with you in the field service, how can you determine this? Good to take advantage of every opportunity to inculcate knowledge and understanding of Jehovah’s Word in their hearts. (Deut. 6:4-9) For example, what do your children know about the soul, paradise earth and resurrection? Make sure they understand fundamental Bible doctrines and can explain them. Good to train them to memorize at least one scripture supporting each doctrine. Also, would be beneficial to learn the nine fruits of the spirit and have a scripture to back up or support each one. Many things we can do to train our children so that in later years they will have a fund of knowledge to draw from when problems arise or issues come up. Could have parents demonstrate what one or two children in the congregation have accomplished along these lines. Fit the experiences to local circumstances and situations. Allow time for comments on what young people, especially, and their parents have learned from this meeting and what they resolve to do to improve their relationship with Jehovah and their parents. Song 71.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 27
15 min: Song 69. Introduction. “Keep the Poor in Mind.” (Watchtower, April 1, 1976, pp. 200-202) Discuss with audience, showing the part those in the congregation play in giving attention to the poor. Emphasize and read appropriate scriptures. Not only elders and ministerial servants, but each one in the Christian congregation, is involved.
15 min: Proper Respect for Congregation Meetings. Discussion. Stress the role of elders and ministerial servants in taking the lead in showing proper respect for meetings; being at the Kingdom Hall early, being seated during meetings and not carrying on other business, unless of an urgent nature that cannot be done at other appropriate time; keeping meetings on time; parents encouraged to sit with children during meetings, children should be taught by parents to be attentive, should not be allowed to unduly disrupt meetings. Whispering excessively should be avoided as well as other distractions. Highlight thought that Kingdom Hall is a house for Jehovah’s worship, and we should appreciate keeping it clean and in good repair. This part should be given in a balanced way, reasoning with the audience so that respect is built up for this feature of our Christian worship.
20 min: How Are We Doing in Spreading the Good News? A lively experience session, with audience participation regarding the work accomplished recently, including offering the Bible and “Eternal Purpose” book, as well as magazines and other literature. This can be in all fields of service, house to house, return visits, Bible studies, informal witnessing. Perhaps beforehand one or two can be asked to be prepared so as to get discussion started. Would be good to inquire as to how families did in sharing together in service during June. Outline current field service arrangements for the week, including holiday activity.
10 min: Concluding comments. Include appropriate items from “Announcements” and “Theocratic News.” Song 52.

