Vol. XXX IX 


BROOKLYN, X. Y., APRIL 1, 1918 


No. 7 


OUR SAFE REFUGE 

"Come, my people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy doors about thee; hide thyself as it were for a little moment 
until the indignation be overpast. For, behold, the Lord cometh out of his plaee to punish the inhabitants
 of the earth for their iniquity ; the earth also shall disclose her blood, and 
shall no more cover her slain." — .Isaiah 26:20, 21. 


While standing upon the watch tower and beholding the 
terrible storm that is raging, the sea and the waves roaring, 
lashing with fury the more stable places of society; while 
hearing the rumbling thunder of the near approaching earthquake
 and beholding in the distance occasional flashes of 
destructive fire, what a wonderful privilege to be numbered 
among the people of God and to know that we are absolutely 
secure from all harm ! Who can enjoy such a privilege as 
this? Jehovah, through his Word, answers, "My people." 

What does it mean to be of the people of God? What 
are the requirements? Ah, it means much more than many 
think it means — much more, both on man's part and on 
God's part. On the part of man it means not merely the 
naming of the name of Christ and being a member of some 
organization which claims to be Christian. It means on 
man's part that he must recognize himself to be born a sinner 
and in need of a savior; he must recognize that Jesus Christ, 
by the grace of God, died and rose again for the purpose of 


redeeming mankind. Believing this, it means that man must 
take the further step of a full surrender of his own will 
to do the will of God — a full and complete consecration to 
the Lord. It means, further, full heart obedience to the will 
of God by dail/ taking up his cross and following in the 
footsteps of Jesus, and thus continuing faithful, even unto 
death. As the Psalmist expresses it, the thought of "my 
people 3 ' includes only those who have made a covenant with 
God by sacrifice. (Psalm 50:5) It includes all such consecrated
 and faithful children of God, however young or old, 
weak or strong, they may be, who possess a pure heart, firmly 
and resolutely fixed, and loyally obedient unto the heavenly 
Father. 

WHO CONSTITUTE GOD'S PEOPLE 

On the part of God it means that he has accepted uh at 

consecration through the merit of his beloved Son, Jesus, and 

that he has begotten us anew to a hope of life, reserved in 

heaven for those who are kept by his power, through faith, 


IG2U] 


April 1, 1918 


THE IVA TCH TOWER 


(99-100> 


even unto the end; that he has given to such his exceeding 
great and precious promises, which promises guarantee the 
faithful one that she shall be a partaker of the first, or chief 
resurrection. It signifies that in this present life we have 
the fatherly love, care, counsel, discipline and protection of 
God. It means that such may claim the precious promises 
in his Word, which are given for their comfort in the hour 
of distress or tribulation. All such have the glorious hope 
set before them of being forever with the Lord. 

DIVINE' WBATH UPON FALSE SYSTEMS 

Thousands have been wrongly induced by the blind clergy 
to believe that they are God's people if they merely join 
themselves to some earthly organization and support the 
clergy, no matter what else they may do. These blindly 
follow the clergy, concerning whom Jesus said: "If the blind 
lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch-" in the great time 
of trouble that is now impending. (Matthew 15:14) Through 
all the age, God has permitted his people to be among these 
organizations, some being fed by good shepherds, while others 
were ministered unto by false shepherds. Until the harvest 
time the wheat class has been scattered among the tares, 
the true sheep among the wolves. In due time the harvest 
of the age came ; the gathering and separating has been taking 
place, and now is about accomplished. 

Throughout the age, "his people" have been in the midst 
of these great man-made organizations, the nominal Christian 
church, which God designates as Babylon (meaning confusion), 
but which men call Christendom (meaning Christ's kingdom
) . These systems have contained some true, loyal Christians
 and many who have been merely Christians in name. 
Toward these great systems which have appropriated the 
name of Christ and claimed to represent his teachings and 
his spirit, although possessing the spirit of the world, God 
is now manifesting his displeasure and soon will pour upon 
them his indignation. For some time he has been warning 
his people in these systems, saying, "Come out of her, my 
people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye 
receive not of her plagues." — Revelation 18:4. 

In the text, Jehovah addresses himself to "his people." 
More than twenty centuries ago, God's prophet, Daniel, took 
his standpoint at the hour in which the church now finds 
herself, standing on this side the vail. God foreknew the 
condition now on the earth. He foresaw the great time of 
trouble that would come upon mankind because of the unfaithfulness
 of that class of men to which he had committed 
the privilege and obligation of proclaiming his coming kingdom
. Through other prophets also he spoke of this time of 
trouble, He indicated that wars would first come, to be followed
 by revolution and anarchy. The great Master himself 
referred to such a time, saying, "Upon the earth distress of 
nations, with perplexity; the sea and the waves roaring; 
men's hearts failing them for fear and for looking after those 
things which are coming on the earth; for the powers of 
heaven shall be shaken," culminating, as he stated, in "great 
tribulation, such as was not since the beginning of the world 
to this time, no, nor ever shall be." — Luke 21:25, 26; Matthew
 24:21. 

God foresaw *that sin would reach its fulness; that selfishness
 would ripen and go to seed; that a time of ill-will 
and hatred would prevail — a time of religious intolerant 
and persecution upon the faithful ones following in the Master
's footsteps. In our text, the Prophet seems to express the 
thought that the Lord bides his time; and when his due 
time arrives, he says: "For, behold, the Lord cometh out of 
his place to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their 
iniquity; the earth also shall disclose her blood, and shall 
no more cover her slain." 

GOD'S LOVING COUNSEL TO HIS PEOPLE 

The Lord likens his people unto sheep. Sheep are defenseless
 creatures. Again he likens them unto children. 
Children are guileless. But his description of the trouble 
is so terrible that even the strong and full-grown might 
well be expected to quake for fear. Amid all the storm 
and strife and turmoil, God -would have his children to rest 
in peace and quietness in his love. And so he causes his 
Prophet to say: "Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace whose 
mind is stayed on thee ; because he trusteth in thee. Trust 
ye in the Lord forever; for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting
 strength." (Isaiah 26:3, 4) When one becomes a 
child of God and follows in the footsteps of the blessed Master 
and Lord, those of the world cannot understand him. They 
look upon him as they did upon the Master — as despised 
ones. God foreknew that the time of great stress would come 
and that some of his people would be in the midst of it; 
and so he caused his Prophet to write the words of the text, 
which seem to apply so appropriately at the present hour. 


There is an affectionate tenderness and sweetness in his words. 
Like a loving, gentle father, he says: "Come, my people, enter 
thou into thy chambers, and shut thy doors about thee; hide 
thyself as it were for a little moment, until the indignation 
be overpast." How loving of our Father thus to provide a 
refuge, and sweetly to invite his people to enter in* 

Knowing the inability of his people to defend and protect 
themselves; knowing their desire for help and strength, he 
lovingly made provision by giving them numerous precious 
promises. Through another of his holy prophets, he put into 
our mouths the beautiful words of trust and confidence: 
"God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in 
trouble. Therefore will not we fear, though the earth [the 
present order of society] be removed, and though the mountains
 [governments] be carried into the midst of the sea 
[overthrown by the turbulent sea of world-wide anarchy] ; 
though the waters [peoples] thereof roar and be troubled, 
though the mountains shake with the swelling thereof. . . . 
The Lord of hosts is with bs; the God of Jacob is our 
refuge." (Psalm 46:1-7) With fatherly love he beholds his 
children, and <f like as a father pitioth his children, so the 
Lord pitieth them that reverence him." (Psalm 103:13) 
Lovingly he counsels them to full confidence and faith and to 
quiet trustfulness in his loving power and provision, saying 
to them "In quietness and in confidence shall be your 
strength."— Isaiah 30:15. 

Poor, sin-sick world; groaning and travailing in pain, waiting
 and hoping for deliverance, but not knowing how it will 
come. God is not lacking in love for them. In the midst of 
the great tribulation, gladly would we call their attention to 
the loving provision that Jehovah has made. The great indignation
 of Jehovah now upon the earth is permitted for 
a good purpose. Vailed behind the clouds of his expressed 
indignation against the sins pf men, he strikes with wisdom 
these heavy blows which will humble their pride to the dust 
and shatter their idols. Then he will pour in the balm of 
Gilead and commence their everlasting healing. Sweetly the 
Master gave expression to his Father's will when, in beautiful 
phrase, he said: "God so loved the world that he gave his 
only begotten Son, that whosoever believe th in him should not 
perish, but have everlasting life.*' (John 3:16) Jehovah loved 
the world then, and his loving provision will soon be put into 
operation for them. Now he wields the rod for correction. 
Thus he shows his people his love for all mankind. While 
God's people, amid the storm, rejoice in the protection he 
has graciously provided for them, he would have them manifest
 his spirit toward the world. And while his blows of 
righteous indignation fall heavily upon the world, he would 
have his people point mankind to the cause of their calamities
 and to his, the only remedy. He would have them 
know that he is the mighty One who will rule the universe 
through his Christ, to bring blessings to the peoples and 
nations of earth. To them he says: "Be still, and know that 
I am God; I will be exalted among the nations; I will be 
exalted in the earth."-— Psalm 46010." 
OUE JOURNEY 
When first we knew the Lord and his gracious provision 
for the human race, our hearts responded with sincere joy. 
Born in sin, shapen in iniquity, having no right to life, 
children of wrath, without God and without hope, we wandered 
in the wilderness (of Babylon) in a solitary way and we 
found no place in any of her organizations in which we could 
dwell in peace and happiness. Hungry and thirsty, our 
souls fainted within us. and we cried unto the Lord in our 
trouble and he delivered us out of our distress. Then he led 
us forth by the right way, that we might go to the city 
(kingdom) of our everlasting abiding place. Feeling the 
warmth of his love, joy filled our t hearts, because the Lord 
had satisfied our longings and filled our hungry souls with 
goodness. Then we saw not only a hope for the consecrated 
of the Gospel age, buit a hope for all mankind in due time 
to turn away from the wrongful course and receive the\ blessings
 of restitution. Then was our mouth filled with laughter 
and our tongue with singing, and we said: "The Lord has 
made a wonderful provision for all, even the heathen." "The 
Lord hath done great things for U3, whereof we are glad." — 
Psalm 107:1-10; 126:1-3. 

Begotten of the holy Spirit, and having our minds illuminated
, we perceived that we had entered the blessed condition 
of 'the Holy" and found that our heart's desire was beginning
 to be realized. As we have rested here, the words of 
the Psalmist have been sweet to us: "One thing have I 
desired of the Lord, that will I seek after ; that I may dwell 
in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold 
the beauty of the Lord, and to inquire in his temple." (Psalm 
27:4) Dwelling temporarily in the spirit-begotten condition, 


[6229] 


U01-102) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


we have looked forward to the spirit-torn state, when we 
may behold the Lord in all his glory, and worship him in 
the beauty of holiness. 

Gradually the knowledge was brought to us that some 
severe trials awaited us on the journey. "For even hereunto
 were ye called, because Christ also suffered for us, 
leaving us an example that we should follow in his steps." 
(1 Peter 2:21) The sufferings of The Christ must precede 
the everlasting joy. Christ Jesus, the Head, was made perfect
 through the things which he suffered. Likewise must the 
members of the body pass through the fiery trials. In no 
other way could a loving, sympathetic high priest be developed
. The journey has been interspersed with some trials 
and some joys, the Lord granting to us just the experiences 
needful to develop his people. 

WARNED OF THE STOBM 

Graciously and lovingly our Father warned us of the storm 
coming upon the earth at the close of the age, to the end 
that we might be prepared for it, having our faith strong in 
him and in the power of his might. Wonderfully he has 
led us from time to time in greener pastures, and" lovingly 
fed us upon the precious promises, giving us a clearer vision 
thereof, that we might grow stronger in him. Through his 
chosen servant, he, time and again placed before us the meat 
in due season. We were told and expected that the Seventh 
Volume of Studies rx the Scriptures, the last of a series 
foretold in Revelation, would be given to us. and that it 
would bring greater trials and sufferings, because it would 
greatly anger Babylon. We were forewarned, that we might 
be fortified in faith and in the love of God. More than 
twenty years ago, the Lord of the harvest, through his servant, 
called our attention to the fact (Z. 1898-95) that King Ahab 
and his queen, Jezebel, typified the civil and ecclesiastical 
powers; that Elijah typed the church in her closing days; 
that likewise Herod and his unlawful wife, Herodias, typed 
the civil powers and the apostate church, long ago unlawfully
 united; that Salome, the daughter of Herodias, typified
 united Protestantism, and John the Baptist the last 
members of the church upon the earth. We were advised 
to expect a fulfillment of these types in antitype. 
Then it was that Brother Russell wrote: 

"It is altogether possible, indeed probable, we think, 
that John's course which brought him into conflict with 
Herod was in some degree typical of the course of the 
Gospel church in this present time; and of the course of 
events that may he expected. If it be a type, Herod would 
represent civil government, and the unlawful wife would 
represent the nominal church, which throughout the symbolic
 Scriptures is represented as a woman, Jezebel, etc. 
Should it prove to be a type by its fulfillment in antitype, 
the fulfillment will probably be on something like the following
 lines: 

"(1) A partial reunion of church and state. (This 
is now practically an accomplished fact.) 

"(2) In such case it would become the duty of the 
true church, the forerunners and announcers of the Messianic
 kingdom, to reprove the civil powers as well as 
the nominal church systems, and to declare their union 
unlawful — contrarv to the Word of God. 

"(3) The effect of this would pretty surely be to 
awaken the animosity of both civil and religious powers; 
but it would draw out especially the animosity and venom 
of the latter. 

"(4) The church nominal, in her false position, would 
be anxious to stifle the reproofs and to destroy the reprovers
, and the effect would be that the civil power 
would be induced to pass such legislation as would restrain
 the liberty of the faithful ones and hinder them 
from public utterances — as John was hindered by imprisonment
. 

( *(fi) Herodias* personal influence being insufficient, 
it may subsequently be augmented by the influence of her 
daughter (united Protestantism) who will be so fully in 
sympathy with her as to become her tool in the destruction
 of the most loyal servants of God." 

In due time we received the Seventh Volume, and it caused 
some fiery trials among the consecrated. Others joyfully 
grasped the pointed sword and used it. We behold the picture
 being fulfilled. Is it not now time for all who have been 
disturbed in their minds and in doubt as to what should be 
done to get their eyes opened to the real situation? Long 
have we knowTi of the grudge held by Herodias. We have 


beheld now the dancing of Salome, and Herod has said to 
the John class. "No longer may you wield the Sword— 'The 
Finished Mystery' — and press it against the gates of Babylon." 
A place typifies a condition. John whs put in prison, and 
this would suggest that the John class would be restrained 
from the proclamation of the message of the kingdom. The 
John class is now in this condition. While in prison, John 
was in doubt as to whether or not Jesus was the Messiah. 
So he sent and asked him. Some are now in doubt as to 
whether or not the Lord is really here ani that the end is 
here, and if the kingdom of Messiah is about to be made 
visible. Some are in doubt as to whether or not a mistake 
has been made with reference to the use of the sword. Jesus 
sent word to John that the blind were seeing, the halt and 
lame were being healed, and other miracles wrought. He did 
not say, "I am the Messiah"; but be gave the evidences that 
would prove he was. Now the Lord is saying to the John 
class, "Look up, lift up your heads, behctld the fulfillment of 
my great prophecy set forth in Matthew 24. This is evidence 
that your deliverance is nigh. The kingdom of heaven is 
at hand. Rejoice!" 

DOOB CLOSING—WINDS BLOWING 

The evidence seems to point strongly to the fact that the 
door is closing. We are also seeing evidences of the winds being 
somewhat loosened, and these we may expect to be fully loosed 
and the great storm or whirlwind soon to be upon the world. 
Many are asking, "What are we to do when we see the door 
closing?" The words of Brother Russell, written more than 
eleven years ago, seem fittingly appropriate here: 

"The shutting of the door mentioned in one of our 
Lord's parables seems to imply something quite in harmony 
with the loosing of the winds when the sealing in the 
forehead shall have been accomplished. We cannot surmise
 just how this trouble will be precipitated and the 
door for further fellowship and promulgation of the truth 
be closed. It would not surprise us, however, if in some 
manner it would be accomplished through some governmental
 department. We cannot think now of what plea 
or pretext could be used to iaterfere with our legal rights 
and privileges under the law, but we are to expect that 
politicians will be ready at that time Co obey the united 
voice of the people, not the voice of God, and that, 
however illegal or unjust the procedure, they would be 
prepared to put a stop to our work. When that time shall 
come we will consider it to be our duty to use all reasonable
 energy to maintain our legal rights and privileges 
and to keep the door open. When it shall close, in spite 
of our every endeavor, we will accept the result as being 
of divine providence and apply the Master's words, 'Thou 
couldst have no power at all over me except it were given 
thee from above/ (John* 19:11 )"— Z. 1907-148. 

All of us realize that we are living in a peculiar time, 
a time in which the public mind is peculiarly affected. Few, 
indeed, are those who can understand our motive in withdrawing
 from the world and its various organizations and 
the nominal Christian church, to walk alone with God. Many 
are the reproaches which the Lord's people must endure for 
his sake. Let us not be dismayed with these trying experiences
. Long ago the Lord warned that they would come, 
and now they are here. To us now he says: "Fear not, shut 
thy doors |"of faith] about thee [and heed not the reproaches] ; 
hide thyself as it were for a little moment, until the indignation
 be overpast," 

PLACE OF REFUGE 

The place of hiding is the secret place of the Most High, 
under the shadow of the Almighty. (Psalm 91:1-9) This 
secret place of the Most High, beloved, is the secret place of 
communion and intimate fellowship with God, through the 
blessed privilege of prayer and through faith in his precious 
Word and his promised providential" care. Beautifully the 
poet has expressed it: 

"When the storms of life are raging, 

Tempests wild on sea and land, 
I will seek a place of refuge 

In the shadow of God's hand. 
He will hide me, he will hide me, 

Where no harm can e'er betide me; 
He will hide mo, safely hide me. 

In the shadow of his hand." 

Oh, how precious is this hiding place! What rest and 
refreshment we find in the midst of the commotion that is 


[6230] 


April 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(102-103) 


now upon the whole world and especially upon Christendom. 
We pity the poor, groaning creation. We rejoice to know 
that ere long God will bring order out of chaos, and peace to 
the people. It can come only in his own good way. 

"PEAR NOT" 

The day of persecution is at hand. The same religious 
intolerance manifested in the dark ages is still abroad in the 
land and is being manifested in a marked degree. Recently 
some of the Lord's dear little ones have been roughly treated. 
Their homes have been searched, without even a search warrant
 being presented, and their books and Bibles taken away 
from them. In some instances houses were broken into by 
force, in clear violation of the law. Some have been arrested 
and thrown into foul jails. The clergy have incited this work. 
They have openly charged from their pulpits and continue 
to charge that the International Bible Students Association 
is a pro-German organization, distributing "Hun propaganda 
under the cloak of religion." They have denounced the 
Bible Students as traitors and urged that they be prosecuted 
for treason. Verily, the spirit of Inquisition is in their 
hearts. 

But, beloved, be not at all disturbed by these things. 
The same charge was laid against the Master by the same 
class of men. Evidently Jesus had in mind the present 
condition when he said: "If the world hate you, ye know 
that it hated me before it hated you. The servant is not 
greater than his lord. If they have persecuted me, they 
will also persecute you." — John 15:18, 20, 

The Constitution of the United States guarantees that 
every man shall be free from search and his property from 
seizure, except upon presentation of a warrant, duly issued 
and served according to law. No person, not even an officer, 
has the right to go into the house of another and search 
it and take away his property unless he is armed with a 
warrant properly issued. "But they disregard the law," you 
say. Yes, even so. The inflamed condition of the public mind 
at* this time is such that men go to- all kinds of excesses. 
Usually it is the clergy that are the worst agitators. They 
stir up the people. But be not afraid, having in mind always 
that we are in the Lord's hands. The LoTd speaks to his 
people that their faith might be strong. He desires that 
they shall have a childlike trust in him; and, that they 
may be encouraged, he bids them turn a deaf ear to the reproaches
 of men, saying, "Hearken unto me, ye that know 
righteousness, the people in whose heart is my law : fear 
ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye afraid of their 

revHings I, even I, am he that comforteth you; who 

art thou that thou shouldest be afraid of a man that shall 
die. and of the son of man which shall be made as grass; 
and forgettest the Lord thy maker, that hath stretched forth 
the heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth; and hast 
feared continually every day because of the fury of the oppressor
, as if he were ready to destroy? .... I have put 
my words in thy mouth, and I have covered thee in the 
shadow of mine hand, that I may plant the heavens [establish 
the new visible ruling powers] and lay the foundations of 
the earth [the new order of society], and say unto Zion 
[those tried and proved by these afflictions], Thou art my 
people." — Isaiah 51:7-16. 

How marvelously the Almighty God has made provision 
for his little ones! He would not have one of his children 
whom Christ has made free to come again under the bondage 
of the fear of man, which bringeth a snare. He would have 
every one in Christ realize bis liberty from sin and superstition
, and his solemn accountability to God for all his 
thoughts and words and doings. 

The child of God who is strong in faith will claim the 
promises and say: "The Lord is my light and my salvation; 
whom shall I fear? the Lord is the strength of my life; of 
whom shall I be afraid? ♦ . . . Though a host should encamp
 against me, my heart shall not fear; though war should 
rise against me, in this will I be confident. ... In the time 
of trouble he shall hide me in his pavilion ; in the secret place 
of his tabernacle shall he hide me; he shall set me up upon 
a rock." "The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and my 
deliverer; the God of my rock; in him will 1 trust; he is 
my shield, and the horn of my salvation, my high tower, 
and my refuge, my savior; thou savest me from violence." — 
Psalm 27:1-10; 2 Samuel 22:2-4. 

If we have come to the end of the harvest, if the dark 
night is here, then we may expect to be required to stand 
for a while. To such the "words of the Apostle come as a 
consolation: "Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of 
God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and, 
having done all, to stand." (Ephesians 6:13-18) In this 


time of great stress it is especially' needful that the Lord's 
people consider the value of the whole armor of God and 
have it all on. "Above all, take the shield of faith, wherewith
 ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the 
wicked." The experiences through which the church is now 
passing are real tests of faith.' The heavenly Father now 
sweetly says: "Hide thyself as it were for a Httle moment, 
until the indignation be overpast." Some of the afflictions 
through which the Lord's people are now passing seem indeed 
grievous to be borne ; but let us remember the Apostle's words, 
that these are light afflictions, enduring but for a moment, 
and working out for us a far more exceeding and eternal 
weight of glory. (2 Corinthians 4:17) Having always in 
mind the glories that are before us, we can rejoice inj the 
tribulation, knowing that we have a home, not made with 
hands eternal in the heavens, into which it will soon be our 
privilege to enter. And there, in the presence of the Lord, 
we shall have fulness of joy and pleasures for evermore. 
—Psalm 16:11. 

THE KINGDOM HEBE 

It will be the policy of the Internationl Bible Students 
Association to do legally all in their power to keep the door 
of opportunity open for the proclamation of the message of 
the Lord's kingdom ; but when conditions become such that 
this can no longer be done in a lawful manner, then we will 
take it to be the Lord's will that we do no more. We know 
that nothing can happen to the Lord's little ones, except by 
the Lord's permission. "No weapon that is formed against 
thee shall prosper, and every tongue that shall rise against, 
thee in judgment thou shalt condemn. This is the heritage 
of the servants of the I^ord and their righteousness is of 
me, saith the Lord," — Isaiah 54:17. 

We believe that the end of the harvest is here and that 
the kingdom of heaven is at hand. And if so, then shortly 
after the great time of trouble ends, restitution blessings will 
begin. Marvelous are the times in which we are living. 
Daily the evidence accumulates that the Lord is taking control
 of things. The public press announces that "by the 
close of the present month (March) Palestine, the ancient 
home of the Jews, will again, after a lapse of many centuries, 
be under JewifJi administration. The Jewish Commission sent 
out by the English Zionist Federation, with the authority of 
the King of England and the British Parliament, left London 
a few days ago to take full charge of the reconstruction of 
the Holy Land and to lay the foundation of a new Jewish 
State. This commission will act not later than March 27, 
the eve of the Passover, the festival commemorating Jewish 
emancipation from Egyptian bondage." Forty years after 
the withdrawal of God's favor from the Jews, Judea was subjugated
. Forty years from the beginning of the return of 
his favor to the Jews (1878), the Jews officially take possession
 of Jerusalem. They are returning to Jerusalem in 
unbelief. But soon the eyes of their understanding will be 
opened and they will recognize the Lord Jesus as the great 
long-looked-for Messiah. 

The great Master plainly Baid that for the elect's sake 
the time of trouble would be cut short and that some flesh 
will be saved, being brought through the fiery trouble. Therefore
, confidently we may say that some now living on earth 
will never die. * What a wonderful privilege to announce that 
to the world at this time! Let every child of God do so, 
according to his several ability. Surely this is good tidings 
of great joy to fhe sin-sick, torn and bleeding world. Surely 
it is a wonderful honor and privilege to announce the kingdom. 
<; How beautiful upon the mountains [ kingdoms 1 are the feet 
of him TThe Christl that bringeth good tidings, that published
 peace, that bringeth good tidings of good, that published
 salvation ; that saith unto Zion, Thy God reigneth." 
(Isaiah 52:7) While the turmoil increases we can confidently
 announce the kingdom of the Lord and at the same 
time enjoy the blessed invitation of our Father: "Come, my 
people, enter thou into thy chambers and shut thy doors upon 
thee; hide thyself as it were for a little moment until the 
indignation be overpast." With full assurance of faith, then, 
we can say, "Lord, we will trust in the covert of thy wings." 

Glorious is the great Prince of Peace, taking unto himself 
his power to reign. Glorious his kingdom of peace and blessings
, whose walls signify salvation, protection and blessing 
to all who enter it; whose foundations, laid in justice, can 
never he moved; whose builder and designer is God. It is in 
the light which will shine forth from this glorious kingdom of 
God that the nations and peoples of earth will walk up the 
highway of holiness, up to perfection and full harmony with 
Jehovah. By the eye of faith beholding the blessings that 
await us, with confidence and joy will we, by the Lord's grace, 
endure for a little while, until we shall see him face to face. 


[6231] 


OUR STRONG INCENTIVE TO COURAGE AND CONFIDENCE 


"Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of 
grace to help in time of 
The Jewish priesthood was, as we all know typical of the 
royal priesthood, Head and body, which has been developed 
during the Gospel age. Israel's high priest was a type of 
our great High Priest, Jesus Christ. The Jewish high priest 
made a typical atonement for his sins every year. Did he 
not possess sympathy for sinners, he would probably be very 
loath to undergo the experiences in which he risked his life, 
as he passed under the vail into the Most Holy, to sprinkle 
the blood of the sacrifice upon and before the Mercy Seat. 
This was a crucial test to the high priest. If he had done 
all the work in the proper manner, he would pass beyond the 
vail successfully and make the atonement. But if he had 
failed in any particular, the passing under the vail would 
mean his death. Hence the high priest was undertaking 
something which was fraught with the gravest danger and 
the most serious possibilities for himself. 

The apostle points out to us that, while there may have 
been more or less sympathy in the high priests of Israel, 
yet our High Priest is the one who has special sympathy, 
special feeling for human weakness. He is not one of the 
hard, callous kind, who could not or would not appreciate the 
difficulties of those for whom his sacrifice was made, and 
especially for those who are seeking to be hi 3 followers, to 
walk as he walked. God's Word assures us that he is "touched 
with the feeling of our infirmities." He was "tempted in 
all points like as we [his disciples] are, yet without sin." 
This gives him special ability to sympathize with us. — 
Hebrews 4:15. 

Some may inquire in what way our Lord Jesus could be 
tempted as we are, seeing that he was "holy, harmless, undefiled
, and separate from sinners." We are to remember that 
this expression does not relate to the mere man Christ Jesus, 
but to our Lord after he had become our High Priest, after 
he had been begotten of God's holy spirit. He was not 
tempted in all points like as the unregenerate world are 
tempted; for he was not a fallen being, but was perfect, and 
was a new creature. Hence he was tempted, tried, as new 
creatures have ever since been tried. Jesus was never tempted 
to drunkenness, profligacy, debauchery, murder, theft, etc. 
Neither do his followers, as new creatures have any such 
temptations. If any of them are tempted along these lines, 
it is their perverted, fallen flesh that is tempted; it is because
 of a disordered and diseased condition df their mortal 
body resulting from a former life of sin or from inherited 
tendencies* These the new creatures must overcome by divine 
grace. 

NEW CREATURE'S PECULIAR TEMPTATIONS 

The temptations which are peculiar to the new creature, 
and to which our Lord was exposed are along the lines of 
loyalty to God, of trust in God, of persevering determination 
to obey him, however contrary to human inclination. They 
are temptations which would present themselves to any intelligent
 creature of God under like conditions. These were 
the lines of Jesus' temptations and testings. 

During the period of our Lord's temptation in the wilderness
 the adversary suggested to him that he should attract 
the public, to arouse their awe and admiration for him, that 
he might thus become their king — not according to God's 
will, but according to worldly policy. If he had leaped from 
the pinnacle of the temple he would have been tempting God, 
arid would have been guilty of presumptuous sin. God has 
never promised to protect any one who acts in violation of 
his will. Satan's quotation of Psalm 01:11, 12. presented 
to our Lord a temptation to misapply a Scriptural promise 
and to presume upon the Father's protection while seeking to 
gratify a desire for vain-glory, and to become a great king 
by a course contrary to God's purpose. 

And so Jesus promptly . said to the tempter, "Get thee 
behind me, Satan!" The Father, had mapped out a certain 
course for the Son to follow, a course that would bring 
suffering and death. But it was the only pathway to glory. 
He has mapped out the same course for those who have 
covenanted to walk in Jesus' footsteps; and we are to be 
loyal, as he was. If we are not thus loyal, we shall surely 
not reach our goal. As temptation to take any other plan or 
way than the one which God had purposed was one of the 
special lines of temptation that came to our great Head, 
so will it be* to each member of his body. 

Our temptations will be as strong as were those of Jesus; 
i.e., they will be as strong for us as his were for him. As 
he was" ft perfect man, he was much more able to reason 
into these things and to see his way through them than are 
we. Yet the same principle is involved. Jesus had perfect 
flesh, perfect mentality; but he also had larger ambitions. 


grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find 
need." — Hebrews 4:16. 

We have imperfect flesh, defective mentality, and have not 
the same degree of ambition. And so the Father has seemed 
to arrange that all his sons shall have practically the same 
amount of difficulty and testing. 

Jesus had all the vigor and energy of a perfect man, and 
naturally the greater dread of death. It is a comparatively 
small thing for a person who is weakened by disease and 
physical suffering, and who is drawing to the tomb, to say, 
"I am so tired, and would be so glad to die!" But for one 
who is enjoying perfection of life and vigor, to say, "Father, 
I yield up my life to thee," is a different matter. He would 
naturally desire to cling tenaciously to life, to shrink from 
letting ft slip from his grasp. 

THE TENDER SYMPATHY OF THE MASTER 
We are glad to know that the Master was "touched with 
a feeling of our infirmities." Although he was free from 
the weaknesses of the flesh which hamper his body members, 
yet be mangled with men for thirty-thee years; and he saw 
and realized their condition. Mloreover, "he took upon himself 
our weaknesses and sicknesses and bare our infirmities." In 
fulfilling the Father's will he gave out his vitality to the 
multitudes. "Virtue went out of him and healed them all." 
It is particularly recorded, in the case of the woman who had 
an issue of blood, that when she touched Jesus, he perceived 
that virtue [vitality, strength! had gone out of him. Thus 
was his own vitality depleted and some measure of their 
suffering transferred to his own person. 

When we recognize the loving, sympathetic character of 
the one who died for us, who afterward ascended up on high, 
and who tells us that he will apply of his sacrificial merit 
on our behalf to make good for all deficiencies and unintentional
 sins, we may well take courage and press on in 
the race set before ns, The realization of his tender love 
and care should enable us to lay hold with greater firmness 
upon the precious promises. Forgetting the things that are 
behind, and pressing forward to the glorious things just before 
us, let us run with patience and determination to win. Let 
us, as the apostle enjoins, "come boldly unto the throne of 
grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in 
time of need." 

The apostle's thought is not that we are to come with 
boldness, with )elf-assurance, but rather with holy courage, 
stimulated by the Lord's own invitation and promise. Let 
us come trustingly, pouring out our hearts freely unreservedly, 
to our Father, in the name of our beloved Advocate, our 
High Priest. Let us not be discouraged by our difficulties, 
by our trials and cares, We are to proceed onward in our 
heavenward way with confidence not in ourselves, but in the 
Lord. Although the Captain of our Salvation was without 
sin, vet because of is own experiences while he was a man, 
he knows all about our temptations, our struggles, our besetments
. Knowing this we can come to him with greater 
courage, and tell him all about our troubles, realizing his 
perfect sympathy. 

REASONS FOE COMING TO THE THRONE OF GRACE 
For two reasons we should come to the throne of grace: 
(11 That we may obtain mercy. There is not a son or 
daughter of Adam who has not done wrong. There is not 
a soul amongst the Lord's family who has not made many 
mistakes. The new creature does not meditate sin nor follow 
sin; but if any be overtaken in a fault, lot him come with 
courage to the'mercy seat, to the throne of favor, for mercy 
and pardon through our dear Redeemer. Let him remember 
that if his heart is still loyal and true, if he is grievpd 
because of his trespasses, the 'throne of prrace i3 open to him, 
for the Lord knows all about his difficulties. 

If he does not thus come, he will be under 1 a cloud, be 
cause of his wrong course and his failure to run quickly to his 
Father in heaven. He needs to have that earthborn cloud 
removed. But it will only grow more dense if he remains 
away from the mercy seat. The sin will remain; and thus 
another spot will appear upon his wedding robe, because of 
his lack of faith and obedience, in postponing the proper 
step of hastening to the Lord. The heavenly Father shows 
no mercy directly. All these applications of mercy and cleansing
 are made through the Son, our great Advocate and 
Head. We must come to the Father through the channel of 
his own arrangement, in order to obtain the promised mercy; 
for God himself has bidden us thus to come. In this way 
the cloud is entirely removed, and the erring one has full 
forgiveness of sins through the merit of our Savior. 

(2) Additionally, we need to come to the throne of grace 
to find help for future times of need. We need to keep close 
to the source of strength. Our mistakes should prove helpful 


(103-104) 


[6232] 


April J, 1918 


THE WA T CH TOWER 


(105-110) 


lessons to us, as we remember what a season of distress 
our previous error brought to us. Therefore when the child 
of God sees the temptation coming, he will flee to the place 
where he may find the needed supply of gra-ce. Fleeing there, 
he obtains the help in advance of the temptation, and is 
kept from falling. 

Whenever we find ourselves under temptations, however, 
we should lift our heart at once to our Father in heaven. 


Let us do this in full assurance of faith, realizing his love, 
his wisdom and his power to give us the needed assistance, 
and his willingness to make all things work together for our 
own good because we love him. Our appeal for help in such 
times of need will surely draw to us the ministry of the 
heavenly messengers; and we shall receive strength for righteousness
, for truth, for purity, for loyalty. Thus shall we 
be victorious in every battle, and be crowned a victor at last. 


JESUS SILENCES HIS ADVERSARIES 

[Paragraphs 1-13 of this article, aa it originally appeared in issue of April 1, 1918, were reprinted from article entitled, 
"Teaching With Authority," published in issue of September 1. 1906. The remainder was reprinted from article entitled, "Not 
Far from the Kingdom," published in issue of September 15, 1906. Please see the articles named.] 


JESUS WARNS AND COMFORTS HIS FRIENDS 

["The first paragraph of this article was a. reprint of that entitled, "She hath Done What She Could," published in issue ot 
October 15, 1906. The remainder was .a reprint of article entitled, "Perfume Very Precious," published in issue of April 
1, 1905. Please see the articles named.] 


THE WICKED HUSBANDMEN 

[Tli is article was a reprint of that published in issue of April 1, 1895, which please see.] 


BROOKLYN CONVENTION AND MEMORIAL 


Upwards of I20O brethren, mostly from points in the near 
Eastern states, have just been enjoying the privileges of a 
four- day convention with us in Brooklyn, terminating with the 
celebration of the Passover Memorial on the evening of 
Tuesday, March 26th. 

Opportunities for fellowship between the meetings were 
pleasantly employed by all, so far as we have any knowledge, 
the recent manifestation on the part of churchianity of the 
disposition to persecute the International Bible Students in 
a more open and pronounced way has doubtless contributed 
much to a sharpening of appreciation and zeal on the part 
of the friends generally. 

For many years the Lord's people have wondered whether 
or not each convention might be the last. Each one has always 
proved to be the last for some of the dear friends; but 
abundant evidence, not only from the Lord's Word, but also 
from corroborative occurrences pressing in upon us from all 
sides, seems to lend more basis for the hope that this might 
be the la*st in this vicinity, before the great convention beyond
 the vail. 

The convention opened with an address of welcome by 
Brother J. F. Stephenson, the chairman. Probably not more 
than 700 were present at this meeting, on Saturday afternoon
 in the Tabernacle. Then followed a discourse by Brother 
T. H. Thornton, in which he compared our heavenly Father 
with a great and provident housekeeper. He contrasted 
God's method with that of man in the matter of establishing 
a household. He called, attention to the fact that when a 
young man determines to get married the first thing he thinks 
about is a bride ; the . second thing he thinks about is his 
bride; and the third thing he thinks of is his bride. After 
the marriage has taken place he begins to think about the 
details of the home, children, and servants. All of these 
things God has provided for in connection with the nuptials 
of his Son and the glorified church. 

In the evening a discourse was heard from Brother F. H. 
Robison on the subject of Gratitude. He reminded the friends 
how that all we have, whether on the natural plane or 
spiritual plane, comes from God, because he is the giver of 
every good and perfect gift. We are indebted to him for life, 
and "for food, raiment and shelter to sustain even the imperfect
' life which we now have until we shall have learned 
the lessons and developed the character which will make us 
meet for the inheritance of the saints in light. Additional 
causes for gratitude were found in provisions which God has 
made for the delighting of our senses. These rightly used 
and directed will enable us to appreciate their giver and be 
a genuine help in the narrow way. Many other occasions 
for thankfulness were cited, touching more especially the opportunity
 for sacrifice, God's providential instruction, etc. 

Sunday morning dawned bright and clear, bringing with 
it several hundred friends from surrounding cities and towns 
who could not find it possible to attend^ all the sessions. 

At ten o'clock Brother R. J. Martin met with about 200 
friends in the Bethel dining room, where also is located a 


baptistry, and reviewed for those present the Scripture teaching
 on the subject of baptism. Seventy- three were immersed 
at the close of this talk; 40 sisters and 33 brothers. While 
this meeting was going on at the Bethel Home, Brother Siewert
 delivered a discourse at the Tabernacle on the heavenly 
phases of the kingdom and its development. 

At eleven o'clock Brother Stephenson talked to the friends 
on St. Paul's words: "I have fought a good fight; I have 
kept the faith; I have finished my course; henceforth there 
is laid up for me a crown of righteousness which the Lord, 
the righteous Judge, will give me at that day." He dwelt 
on each phase of this text, showing that to keep the faith 
at all it is necessary to fight a good fight and that this fight 
itself is a fight of faith which, when properly waged, enables 
one to lay hold on eternal life. 

Sunday afternoon was a public session, held in the Brooklyn
 Academy of Music, and announced to a considerable extent
 through newspaper advertising and house to house distribution
 of special announcements. The topic was: "The 
World has Ended — Millions now Living will never Die." A 
two-column report of the lecture was given in one of the 
Brooklyn papers on Monday afternoon. Mlany prayers had 
gone up for the success of this meeting, all made, we trust, 
with entire submission to the Lord's will. The Academy 
Opera House seats about 2200 people, but close to 3000 were 
admitted, about 300 being seated on the stage back of the 
curtain and other hundreds standing in the rear of the main 
auditorium and balconies. Government officers were present 
to take stenographic report of all that was said. It is expected
 that this topic will be used quite extensively by 
brethren who have ability for speaking in public, so that a 
report of the discourse will not be necessary here. The 
great audience showed intense interest for two hours, and 
many points were received with distinct approval, as manifested
 by continued hand-clapping on several occasions. Our 
Lord's great prophecy, containing testimony by which we 
would be able to discern the end of the world, was taken as 
a basis for the discourse. Everything pointed to a deep interest
 on the part of the public — save ecclesiastics and ecclesiastical
 "hangers on" — in the general subject of religious 
tolerance as necessarily involved in a meeting of this kind. 

Sunday evening Brother R. H. Barber addressed the 
friends in the Music Hall of the Academy of Music. He 
traced the experiences of the "seed off the woman" and the 
"seed of the serpent," and pointed out how many attempts 
had been made, either overt or covert, on the part of Satan 
to make away with what he considered to be the promised 
"seed." Brother Barber's talk contained much encouragement
 to all in the na'rrow way at this present time. Considerable
 use was made of present day military terms and figures
, even as the Apostle Paul used such similes in his time. 
He showed that we had entered the fight against the world, the 
flesh and the devil, and that it would be a fight to the finish, 
the complexity of the enemy 'making the situation a peculiarly 
difficult one and requiring extreme faith and obedience. 


[6233] 


(110-111) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


On Monday morning a moat enjoyable Praise and Testimony
 meeting was held in the Academy of Music, followed 
by a discourse by Brother J, A, Bohnet on various items 
mentioned in the eleventh chapter of Revelation, but bearing 
especially on the "two witnesses." He showed that God had 
given these witnesses to the church for her benefit, that she 
might be developed in character sufficient to make her pleasing 
and acceptable in the sight of her Lord. He showed that while 
the Bible had heen suppressed in large measure for the greater 
portion of the Gospel age, still God had preserved it despite 
all the efforts of the clergy class to effect its destruction. 
Finally the time came for the exaltation of the Word, and 
the Bible sprang into great circulation — it was "lifted up to 
the heavens 3, — it was exalted in the ecclesiastical heavens and 
came to be looked upon as a source of real authority by the 
most active denominations. He showed that efforts nad been 
made in times past to destroy the Scriptures by the burning 
of Bibles or ordering their destruction. Some refused to 
burn their books, so that God's word was not destroyed, 
though the clergy had hoped for its extinction in the common
 languages. 

Brother Bohnet was followed on the morning program by 
Brother R, 0. Hartley, who spoke on the text. "Fight the 
good fight of faith; lay hold on eternal life." He dealt especially
 with the necessity of having on the armor of God in 
order to be able to fight effectually this great fight of faith. 
He showed the Scriptural significance of the various pieces 
which compose the armor, and indicated the value of each 
one, drawing also example from the Apostle Paul's own 
course of faithfulness a^ a "good soldier of Jesus Christ." 

First in the afternoon Brother 0. L. Sullivan spoke from 
the 40th Psalm: "God U our refuge and strength/' Among 
many other things peculiarly dear to the Lord's people he 
gave expression to the love and appreciation which he had 
for his country, the country in which he was born and which 
had accorded him so many advantages. He stated that one 
of his sons was in the navy and the other in the army. He 
pointed out also that, though he loved his country, still God 
loved it much more than he was able to, and that Jehovah 
purposed to establish* conditions which will guarantee that 
the high ideals of America will be far more than fulfilled 
when his glorious plans and blessings for the world are more 
fully inaugurated. He said that no claim should be considered
 superior to the claim of one's country — saving fidelity 
to God himself. 

Brother Rutherford next spoke to the friends from 1 
Peter 4:1: Forasmuch then as Christ hath suffered for 
us in the flesh, arm yoursejf likewise with the same mind." 
He suggested that the admonition "arm" implies combat with 
an enemy. This enemy was seen to be Satan and his minions 
of the air who seek to dominate in earth's affairs. Scripture 
testimony was adduced to show that the fallen angels would 
be released and bring about the great "whirlwind" which 
even now gives signs of approaching: further, that the hitter 
persecution which has broken out against the truth, and especially
 against the message contained in "The Finished Mystery
," is doubtless attributable to these fallen spirit beings. 
As before the great flood they had liberties with mankind 
and dominated public thought and action, so that it was possible
 to say, "The thoughts of men's hearts were evil and 
that continually," so now as they are allowed more and more 
liberty with mankind we may expect that many of the heretofore
 recognized standards of right and decency will he 
pushed aside, especially by those who seek to persecute the 
Lord's most earnest and active saints. 

Evidence pointed to the fact that the sealing of the servants
 of the Lord is about complete, and that thus the restraining
 influences hitherto e\creUed against the evil spirits 
would be withdrawn and that they would have to do with the 
great cataclysm upon the world. If permitted they would 
doubtless have wrecked the whole world long ago, but when 
now let loose the whole earth will be full of violence find 
there will be a saturnalia of crime and wickedness such as 
the earth has never known. But we should not be fearful 
under these conditions; for we have been forewarned and 
thus forearmed by the instructions of God's Word. We 
know that nothing can befall us except such as will constitute
 the proper test for our faith. Not only do these evil 
spirits seek to bring" outward persecution against the Lord's 
people, hut they attempt to bring dissension within the 
ranks. They suggest to one that he is not receiving proper 
honor in the church, not having enough recognition of his 
abilities and talents. This test comes chiefly upon those holding
 positions of responsibility and honor in the churches. 

Thus is will be seen that the mind of the saints becomes 
a battle ground for the fallen angels in conflict with the 
holy spirit. They can be most thoroughly repulsed if we 
"love one another," and "in honor prefer one another." The 
safe mind is the humble mind, filled with appreciation for the 
privilege of doing the JjQrd's will. Indeed, the usefulness 
of any is measured by humility rather than by natural ability. 

Just before the beginning of Brother Rutherford's discourse
 22 children were presented by their parents to receive 
the Lord's blessing. This was understood as indicating the 
hopes and intents of the parents, rather than in any way 
obligating the children, when they shall become responsible. 

Monday evening Brother Burgess addressed the friends in 
the Tabernacle chapel on the subject of "the hope which is 
an anchor to the soul." He dealt somewhat with the necessity
 of faith as a foundation for our hope. He Bhowed that 
without hope there would he absolutely nothing accomplished, 
because it constitutes the stimulating element of our Christian 
experiences. If there were no hope or relief from suffering 
then it would be folly to engage voluntarily in it. The figure 
of a ship and the relationship which the anchor bears to it* 
welfare was elaborated upon with profit. 

Tuesday morning. Memorial day, after an enjoyable Praise 
and Testimony meeting Brother W. K. Van Amburgh addressed 
the friends, using the Tabernacle Chart as a basis for hi* 
remarks. He referred . to the step* of consecration, the begetting
 and developing of the new mind, and to the fact that 
the flesh shrinks from the experiences suggested by the 
brazen altar in the court. But as the bodies of the beasts 
offered must be consumed, so all the powers and energies 
possessed by the Lord's consecrated people must be used up 
in ways that meet with God's distinct approval. He showed 
how that the greatest progress and keenest enjoyment is 
had in the Christian way if one does not look back at the 
altar, but keeps his face toward the holy of holies, as it is 
written of our Lord: "who, for the joy set before him, endured
 the cross, disregarding the shame, and is set down at 
the right hand of the majesty on high." 

Tuesday afternoon Brother A. IT. Macmillan delivered 
an enthusiastic address on the text, "The end of all things 
is at hand." He expressed it as a belief, and brought forth 
several Scriptures to lend strong color to his thought, that 
the gate of entrance into the narrow way is closing, and that 
the Jewish commission now taking possession in Palestine is 
further proof of the dispensational change. The glories and 
beauties of the heavenly state were dwelt upon; and all 
were encouraged to press forward with renewed zeal and 
vigor and be faithful unto death. 

In the evening 1184 of the Lord's consecrated people assembled
 in the Music Hall to celebrate the memorial of our 
Lord's antity pica 1 Passover. After singing Hymn No. 1 22 
prayer was "offered by Brother Van Amburgh. Then followed
 appropriate remarks by Brother Rutherford on the 
subject of the Passover in type and antitype. Song No. 98 
was sung and then appropriate remarks were offered by 
Brother Van Amburgh on the significance of the loaf, followed
 by prayer by Brother Barber, that our hearts might 
be in the right attitude and that we might fully appreciate 
the privilege of partaking of this emblem. The assembly of 
friends was quietly served with bread, after which Brother 
Barber offered brief remarks on the significance of the cup. 
Brother Rutherford asked the Lord's blessing on the wine 
and upon the hearts of all assembled, that they might enter 
into fullest appreciation of its symbolic significance. After 
serving those present with the wine, true to the picture which 
our Lord established, we sang a hymn, No. 2, and went out, 
each heart solemn with the thought that this might be our 
last Memorial this side the vail, yet each willing to remain 
as long as the Father's love and wisdom indicates our presence
 to be most useful on the earth. 


MUCH WORK TO DO 


In no wise should the friends be discouraged because of 
the persecution that ia being carried on against the promulgation
 of the Truth. In due time the right to circulate the 
Seventh Volume will be tested in the courts. In the meantime
, wo are asking all the Pilgrim brethren to have public 
meetings each Sunday in some well -located hall, each one 
using the subject, "The World Has Ended — -Millions Now 
Living Will Never Die." The meeting should be well ad- 

[6234] 


April 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(98-115) 


vertised; and to this end we are furnishing Kingdom News 
announcing that a free public lecture will he given in the 
vicinity soon on the above topic, and for the people to watch 
newspapers for place and date of the meeting. These should 
he widely distributed, that the people might have the truth 
concerning the unwarranted action taken with reference to the 
Seventh Volume and the persecution by the clergy. The 
Constitution guarantees that no one's property shall be taken 
without due process of law. Therefore, when officers demand 
possession of the Seventh Volume, they should produce a 


search warrant; otherwise the friends are under no obligation 
to deliver up the property. We advise the friends everywhere 
to store their supply of the Seventh Volume and not to distribute
 them until the question is adjudicated. 

lie of good courage! Let every one be active and zealous 
now in arranging for public meetings. The adversary is 
desperately striving to thwart the Lord's purpose, but he 
cannot succeed beyond the Lord's permission. Let us be faithful
 and true and loyal to the Lord and to his cause. 


Vol. XXXIX 


BROOKLYN, X. V., AI'RIL 


19.18 


No. S 


ISRAEL'S DOUBLE ACCOMPLISHED 


WONDERFUL PROPHECY FULFILLED — EVENT FORETOLD OVER EIGHTEEN CENTURIES AGO NOW TRANSPIRING- — ANOTHER 

CRISIS IN HUMAN HISTORY 


Dispatches from Europe state that a commission of prominent
 Jews left London last month for Jerusalem, expecting to 
arrive at the holy city on March 27th, the date of the 
Jewish 1'assover. To all students of history this is indeed 
interesting news; but it is doubtful whether many are aware 
of the fact that this event was foretold by three of the great 
prophets of Israel and that the very date of this return of 
the Jews to Palestine as representatives of a nation — the 
day of the Passover, 1918 — was indicated by their prophecies, 
when viewed with the sidelight of secular historic records. 
Surely we are living in momentous times; yet only a few 
realize that today the God of Israel is actually taking part 
in the affairs of men, particularly with reference" to his chosen 
people. 

It is a noteworthy fact that the Jewish prophets clearly 
foretold many of the experiences of the children of Israel, 
including even those of the present time and of the immediate
 future. Most Bible scholars have recognized that 
a large portion of the Old Testament was written particularly
 to the Jews and for the Jews, and that the world's 
history is more or less associated with this peculiar people. 
But all may not have noticed the exactness with which 
the Scriptures outline Jewish history. 

In Romans 21:25 St. Paul informs us that God caused 
blindness, or ''hardness," to happen to the children of Israel 
until he had completed a certain work among the Gentiles, 
and had gathered from the Gentiles a sufficient number to 
fill of a pre-ordained class; and, that at the completion of 
this selection from the nations his favor would return to 
the Jews, as mentioned in verses 26-28. 

Notice, particularly, the following Scriptures : "For thus 
saith Jehovah, Like as I have brought all this great evil 
upon this people, so will I bring upon them all the good 
that I have promised them." (Jeremiah 32:42) "Behold, I 
will bring them health and cure and I will cure them and 
reveal unto them the abundance of peace and truth." (Jer. 
.33:6) "33ehold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will 
perform that good thing which I have promised unto the 
house of Israel and to the house of Judah." — Jer. 33:14. 

From Amos 3:2 we learn that God's dealings with earthly 
nations have been principally confined to the children of 
Israel, saying. "You only have I known< [recognized as my 
people] of all the families of the earth; therefore I will 
punish you for all your iniquities." In Exodus 19:5 and 
Deuteronomy 14:2 we read that God chose this nation "to 
be a peculiar people unto himself above all the nations that 
are upon the earth." From Deuteronomy 28:15-29 we are 
informed that God told the Israelites that if they would not 
obey his laws lie would east them out of his favor. Jewish 
history of the last twenty centuries attests to God's faithfulness
 in carrying out his purpose. 

By comparison of the statements of three of the most 
prominent of the Old Testament prophecies, we learn that 
the Passover of this very year, 1918, is clearly indicated as 
a time for some special favor to be shown to the Jews. 
God advises that he is carrying out a plan of his own 
(Ephesians 1:11) and that this plan was purposed from the 
beginning. (Ephesians 3:11; Acts 15:18) In Isaiah 46:10, 
11 we' read: "Declaring the end from the beginning, and 
from ancient times the things that are not yet accomplished, 
saying, My plan shall stand, and I will do all my good 
pleasure; .... I have spoken it, I will also bring it to pass; 
I have purposed it, I will also do it." 

ISRAEL'S PERIODS OF FAVOR AND DISFAVOR EQUAL 

Jeremiah 10:13-15 reads: "Therefore 1 will cast you 
out of this land [Palestine] into a land that ye know not, 


neither ye nor your fathers ; and there ye shall serve other 
gods [mighty ones, rulers] clay and night; where I will not 
show you favor. Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the 
Lord, "that it shall no more be said, The Lord liveth, that 
brought up the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt; 
but, The Lord liveth that brought up the children of Israel 
from the land of the north [the lands north of Palestine], 
and from all the lands whither lie had driven them; and 1 
will bring them again into their land, that I gave unto their 
fathers." Notice particularly the 18th verse, which says: 
"And first [before 1 do this] 1 will recompense T requite them 
for] their iniquity and their sin double Ta repetition or 
counterpart in time] ; because they have defiled mine inheritance
 [my land]." This prophecy implies very strongly 
that God would grant Israel his special favor for a certain 
length of time, and that if they were not faithful he would 
then turn his face against them for an equal length of time, 
for "a double," or corresponding period. 

Zechariah 9:9 reads: ".Rejoice greatly, O daughter of 
Zion; shout, O daughter of Jerusalem; behold, thy King 
eometh unto thee: he is just, and having salvation; lowly, 
and riding upon an ass, and upon a eolt the foal of an ass." 
In verse 12 we read: "Turn you to the stronghold, ye prisoners 
of hope; even today do I declare that I will render [literally, 
turn hack] a double unto you." 

A CRISIS IK JEWISH HISTORY 

Matthew 21 :4, 5 identifies the incident mentioned in 
Zechariah 9:9; and our Lord's words in Matthew 23:37-39 
identify Zechariah 9 : 12. Evidently, then, this is the beginning 
of the repetition count or double, the beginning of Israel's 
disfavor. Is it possible to locate the time when Israel's 
favor began? It is! The children of Israel were first recognized
 as the nation of Israel at the death of their father 
Jacob, as recorded in Genesis 49:28. The children of Israel 
were in favor with God from that event down to the time 
when they were cast off by Christ. 

Referring to Exodus 12*: 40, 41 we have the statement that 
the sojourning of the children of Israel was 430 years. In 
Galatiajis 3:16, 17 the same period is mentioned as the time 
intervening between the covenant given to Abraham when he 
was seventy-five years old (Genesis 12:3, 4, 7) and the time 
when the covenant was made with the children of Israel at 
Mount Sinai. Therefore, 

From the Abrahamic to the Law Covenant
 430 years 

Abraham was 75 years old when the 
covenant was made with him, and his son 
Isaac was born 25 years later. (Gen. 17:17) 25 years 

Isaac's son Jacob was born 00 years 
later, (Gen. 25:26) 00 " 

Jacob lived 147 years. (Genesis 47:28) ..147 " 

From the time of God's covenant with Abraham 
down to the death of Jacob would then be 232 years 

Since the entire time of the sojourning was 430 
years, and since Jacob died 232 years after the sojourning
 began, the time when the children of Israel 
were first recognized as a nation would be 198 years 

'ZX B IT : 0I R-i^qumK u^im $;:p£ sjaqtnnx SutradnioQ 

sitjaX: sex ( 5SS — 0£fr ) enpoxg ©tft eiojeq 

also Xumbers 13:3 and Joshua 14:7-10, we find the 
period of time from the Exodus to the division of 
the land of Canaan among the tribes of Israel was . . 46 " 

Acts 13:19, 20 gives the period of the Judges as 
450 years. (See footnote Wilson's Emphatic Diaglott) .450 " 


[6235] 


(116 117) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N\ Y. 


The twenty-one kings of Israel, from Saul to THE DESTRUCTION OF THE JEWISH POLITY 

Zedekiah reigned as follows: We quote as follows from Cornil's History of the People 

Saul (Acts 13:21) 40 years of Israel: "On the 15th of Nisan, i. e.,, of April, in the year 

David (1 Chronicles 29:26, 27) ."..'.'. .40 " 73 A. D., the first day of the Easter festival, the same day 

Solomon (2 Chronicles 9:30) 40 " on which, according to tradition, the God of Israel had led 

Rehoboam (2 Chronicles 12:13) 17 " 5" people out of Egyptian bondage into freedom, the last 

Abijah (2 Chronicles 13:1, 2) 3 " bulwark of Israel's liberty had fallen, and Israel was delivered 

Asa (2 Chronicles 16:13)' ...."'./..'.'.. 41 M into bondage." 

Jehosaphat (2 Chronicles 20:31) 25 " We quote again from the Jewish Encyclopedia: Masada 

Jehoram (2 Chronicles 21:1, 5) 8 " attained great importance in the war with the Romans 

Ahaziah (2 Chronicles 22:1, 2) 1 " . . . . With the fall of Masada the war came to an end, 

Athaliah (2 Chronicles 22:10-12)"..!'... 6 " on the 15th of Nisan, 73." Again from Morrison's Jews 

Jehoash (2 Chronicles 24:1} 40 " Under Roman Rule: "The capture of Masada, a Jewish 

Amaziah (2 Chronicles 25:1} 29 " fortress on the southwestern shore of the Dead Sea, put a 

Uzziah (2 Chronicles 26:3) 52 u termination to one of the fiercest struggles recorded in hisJotham
 (2 Chronicles 27:1) !.!!...!.. 16 " toiy." (73 A. D.) Graetz's History of the Jews, Vol. 2, 

Ahaz (2 Chronicles 28:1) 16 " says: "Judea was not entirely subjugated; for three strong 

Hezekiah, (2 Chronicles 29:1) 29 " fortresses were still in arms: Herodium, Machaerus, and 

Manasseh (2 Chronicles 33:1) 55 " Masada .... The heroes agreed to this proposal (of their 

Amon (2 Chronicles 33:21) 2 " leader Eleasar) even with enthusiasm, and on the first day 

Josiah (2 Chronicles 34:1) 31 i( of the great Feast of the Passover (A. D. 73), after slaying 

Jehoiakim (2 Chronicles 36:5) 11 " their own wives and children, they all perished on their own 

Zedekiah (2 Chronicles 36:11) 11 " swords." We quote further from Ewald's History of Israel, 

Vol. 7 (which is entitled "The Apostolic Age," and which 

Period of the kings 513 years Prof. Ewald makes to end with the year A. D. 73.) : "Eleasar 

The period of desolation, 70 years (Jeremiah accordingly persuaded all his people during that night to 

9«.n i . %q if i 5> PhrnWl^ ^fi-22 2<U ' 70 " kl11 their Wlves and children and then themselves, but to 

25:11; 29.10, 2 Chronicles 36.^2 23) .. .... . rU ^ burn all ^^ treasureg firgt ^ next day the Koman3 

Cyrus ascended the throne of Babylon, B. C. ...536 found onlv 960 dead bodies, whilst but two women and five 

From A. D. 1 to the crucifixion of Christ in the children hid themselves in caverns and were discovered. The 

spring of 33 A. D. — 32 full years 32 " Easter of the year 73, just seven years [note the great awaken - 

ing of interest among the Jews by Pastor Russell in 1910 

Total length of Jewish favor from the time of and 1911 through his message to them at the New York 

Israel's first recognition as a nation to the time Hippodrome, Oct. 9, 1910, and the wide distribution of 'Die 

when Christ cast off that nation from divine favor. 1845 " Stimme' in 1911, jusij seven years ago] from the beginning 

In Isaiah 40:2 the statement is made: M Speak ye com- f the great movement and forty years after Christ's crucifortably
 to Jerusalem, and cry unto her that her warfare fixion, saw this end of the whole tragedy." Josephus also 

[marginal reading, appointed timel is accomplished [com- relates that Masada fell on the 15th of Nisan, April, A. D, 73. 

pleted, filled out], that her iniquity is pardoned; for she THE COMPLETION OF THE DOUBLE 

hath received of the Lord's hands double [a counterpart] The above quotations from standard authors show fully 

for all her sins." This statement assures Israel that the that the Jewish nationality came to an end just forty years 

time would come when her double, or time of disfavor, after their rejection of Christ and their being cast off as 

equivalent to former favor, would be accomplished, and that a nation, 

then he would turn his face towards her again. As the first sign of their rejection was the declaration 

If the foregoing be true, then just 1845 years after their f our Lord just before his crucifixion and was just 1845 

rejection by Christ (Matthew 23:37-39) we should expect years prior to the year 1878, would not their recognition 

some historic event indicating that divine favor was begin- at the Berlin Congress imply the first indication of God's 

ning to return to the Jews. 1845 years from the spring of returning favor to them again as a nation? If we are right 

33 A. D. would bring us to the spring of 1878. We should, in these conclusions, then just 1845 years after the spring 

therefore, expect to find gome occurrence in the early part of of A. D. 73 wq should expect some national recognition of 

the year 1878, as an indication of returning divine favor. the Jews as a nation. Does it not seem peculiar at least 

What do we find? that such a national recognition should occur this year exactly 

In June, 1878, the Berlin Congress assembled, Lord Bea- 1845 years to the month after their complete downfall? Does 

consfield (a Jew) was the chairman and the central figure, this not seem to imply to all reasoning students that divine 

the dominating mind that changed the treaty of San Stephano providence is now taking a hand in the affairs of the nations? 

between the Russians and the Turks, and so amended it that Would it be reasonable to account for all these exact correthe
 Turks; were to have suzerainty over Palestine and that spondencies as merely coincidence — especially since we find 

the Jews were to be permitted some measure of liberty. them so accurately stated in his Word? 

Tliis was the first act on the part of any of the nations of The Apostle Paul in the eleventh chapter of hi<* letter to 

Europe to recognize in any way the Jews as a nation. the Romans declares that the falling away of the Jews from 

A REMARKABLE PROPHECY LITERALLY FULFILLED divine favor meant the passing of that favor to the Gentiles. 

Note Zcchariah 8:23: "In those days it shall come to pass Recall the expression in Luke 21 :24: "And they shall /all 

that ten men shall take hold out of all [manner ofl languages by the edge of the sword and shall be led away captive into 

of the nations, even shall take hold of the skirt of him that all nations; and Jerusalem sha^l be trodden down of the 

is a Jew, saying We will go with you; for we have heard Gentiles until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled. Is it 

that God is with you." It is a remarkable historic fart not reasonable to suppose .that the returning oi favor to the 

that this conference was attended by representatives from the Jews means to some extent the withdrawing- of that favor from 

following eleven nations: Great Britain, Russia, France, Italy, the Gentiles?— Romans 11 : 15 

Turkey, Austria-Hungary, Germany, Greece, Roumania, Serbia Ezekiel 36:19-30 tells of the wanderings of the Jews and 

and Montenegro. Thus there were ten representatives in of the restoration of their land to its pristine holiness: 

attendance at that particular congress, in conference with "I scattered them among the heathen and they were dispersed 

the eleventh a Jew. (See Berlin 'Conference, International through the countries: according to their way and according 

Encyclopedia) to their d °i n gs I j ud ged them. And when they entered 

But did God have anything to do with the raising of a unto the heathen whither they went they profaned my holy 

Jew, Lord Beaconsfield, to the premiership of England, in name when they said to them, These are the people of the 

order that he might fulfill this very prophecy, and" in over- Lord and are gone forth out of his land; but 1 had pity on 

ruling that exactly ten other nations should be represented, mine holy name which the house of Israel had profaned 

and that the chairman should be the Jew? And did God among the heathen whither they went Therefore say unto 

have anything to do with the bringing about of that con- the house of Israel, saith the Lord God, I do not this fdr 

ference in the spring of 1878, exactly 1845 rears after he your sakes, house of Israel, but for my holy name's sake 

had cast the Jews into disfavor? It is surelv a remarkable which ye have profaned among the heathen, whither you 

coincidence, to say the least! The Lord's casting off of the went, for I will take you from among the heathen and gather 

Jewish people was in A. D. 33; but it was just 40 years you out of all countries and bring you into your own land, 

afterward that the nation was completely destroyed, and it and ye shall dwell in the land that I gave to your fathers, 

has not been recognized as a nation since that time until and ye shall be my people and I will be your God and 1 

our day, will aiso save vou ^ rom V(mr uncleanness and I will call 

[6236] 


April 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(117-118) 


for the corn and will increase it and lay no famine upon 
you, and I will multiply the fruit of the tree and the increase
 of the field, and ye shall receive no more reproach 
of famine among the heathen. And the desolate land shall 
be tilled, whereas it lay desolate in the sight of all that 
passed by and they shall say, This land that wag desolate 
is become like the garden of Eden, and the waste and desolate 
and ruined cities are become fenced and inhabited. Then shall 
the heathen [Gentiles] that are left round about you know 
that I the Lord built the ruined places and planted that 


that was desolate. I the Lord have spoken and I will do it/' 

Ezekiel 37:25: "And they shall dwell in the land that I 
have given unto Jacob, my servant, wherein your fathers 
have dwelt, and they sha 11 dwell therein , ev en they and 
their children and their children's children forever, and my 
servant David shall be their prince forever." 

Who shall say what great events may not soon follow the 
opening of this door for the Jews, and who can accurately appreciate
 all the blessing which is to come! — Jeremiah 3:17i 18. 


"ABOUT MIDNIGHT" 

"About midnight will J go out into the midst of Egypt." — Exodus 11:4. 


The children of Israel, in bondage to Egypt, were typical 
of the Lord's people of this Gospel age long in bondage to 
"Christendom." Egypt symbolizes that condition of middlecourse
, compromising worldliness which the word "Christendom
 5 ' represents, and which is identified by our blessed Lord 
as "the great city, which spiritually is called Sodom [typical 
of carnal union of church and state] and Egypt, where [in 
its ancient form of pagan Rome] also our Lord was crucified
" (Revelation 11:8) and where the crucifixion of the 
Lord's body members has steadily progressed. Historic precedent
 and Scriptural suggestions combine in warranting the 
expectation that this crucifixion, this crucial testing is about 
to reach its final climax in oppression and persecution by 
nominal church and clergy, acting underhandedly or openly 
through the civil powers and the mob. 

Several divinely arranged plagues came upon Egypt* because
 of the unwillingness of Pharaoh, the king, to release 
the Hebrews from bondage. Spiritual Israel has long sought 
to be released from the world, the flesh and the devil, and 
especially from doctrines of devils, which constitute the 
strength of antitypical Egypt's oppression. Pharaoh, king 
of Egypt, typified Satan, prince of this world, order of things, 
or civilization. Several times Pharaoh had promised to let 
the Hebrews go, but each time "the Lord hardened Pharaoh's 
heart, so that he would not let the people go." — Exodus 10:20. 

"And the Lord said unto Moses [Christ, Head and body], 
stretch out thine hand [instrumentality or applied power] 
toward heaven [the powers of spiritual control, the clergy 
and churches of Christendom] that there may be darkness 
[lack of knowledge, understanding, love] over the land of 
Egypt [Christendom], even darkness that may be felt. And 
Moses stretched forth his hand toward heaven [the churches 
who claim to represent heaven] ; and there was a thick darkness
 in all the land of Egypt [all in the condition of worldliness
, including worldly-minded clergymen] three days." The 
great world war among those nations that call themselves 
Christians has upset all theories about "Christ" -endom being 
Christian. During the first three years of the war from 
August, 1914, to August, 1917, there was no understanding 
by the world of the true, the Scriptural, significance of the 
war; all were in darkness, and remained so for three years, 
until enlightenment eame to them through the Lord's divinely 
appointed channel, the Watch Tower Bible and Tract 
Society, in the shape of the message in Volume Seven of 
Studies in the Scriptures. — Eixodus 10:22. 

"They saw not one another [comprehended not what they 
really were in God's sight] neither rose any from his place 
for three days." In proof of the antitypical correspondency 
we quote Rev. Joseph H. Odell, D. D., in the February, 1918, 
"Atlantic Monthly" ; "The vastest of the world's tragedies 
came, and the church was not its interpreter. The majority 
of the clergy have not even sensed the unique strategy which 
the convulsed and confused world conditions have made possible
. There are ministers everywhere who are still busy 
building their denominational fences and feverishly staking 
their sectarian claims." Neither worldly clergyman nor layman
 "rose from his place for three years' 7 — from the old 
somnolent condition of dumb dogs (D.D.'s) and blind guides 
(B.G.'s). (Isaiah 56:10; Matthew 15 :H) The utmost darkness
, something keenly and anxiously felt, pervaded the houses 
— churches — of the worldly-minded. "But the children of 
Israel [the Lord's truly loyal and devoted people] had light in 
their dwellings [understood the significance of the world war 
and the things to come, in all their humble ecclesias.]" — 
Exodus 10:23. 

OUE, CONSECRATION MUST BE COMPLETE 

"And Pharaoh called unto Moses and said, Go, ye, serve 
the Lord; only let your flocks and herds be stayed; let your 
little ones also go with you," (Exodus 10:24) In sacrificial 
rites the animals used typified the offerers of those animals; 


and the offering of an animal by a person pictured that 
person's consecration. Ecclesiasticism (the product of Satan, 
antitype of Pharaoh) is willing enough for the Lord's people, 
old or young in Christ, to serve Jehovah, if only they will 
not offer themselves in complete consecration, in such a 
consecration as consumes their- very bodies on the altar of 
sacrifice. 

"And Moses said, Thou must give us also sacrifices and 
burnt offerings, that we may sacrifice unto Jehovah, our God. 
Out cattle also shall go with us; there shall not an hoof 
be left behind; for thereof must we take to serve Jehovah 
our God ; and we know not with what we must serve Jehovah, 
until we come thither." — Exodus 10:25, 26. 

Those who start to serve the Lord cannot determine in 
advance just what or how much must be done ; yet the sincere 
ones purpose to hold nothing back, but to make a complete 
consecration of themselves and all that they have. 

"But Jehovah hardened Pharaoh's heart, and he would not 
let them go." (Exodus 10:27) No type can be taken to 
teach a doctrine; and we have no reason for supposing that 
Satan has intended to co-operate with God, but in the last 
analysis it must be admitted that he has done nothing which 
can successfully oppose the divine program. In this case it 
was really not God's purpose to have the people of Israel 
go until he had instituted the Passover type. Likewise, in 
recent years, it may be that Satan has been willing to make 
away with the Lord's people; but divine providence intervened
, because the hour was not yet come. But whether this 
part of the account was intended to be pictorial or not we 
do not know. At all events the people did not go. Several 
times during the harvest, during the progress of what seemed 
plagues to Christendom, the Lord has permitted his people 
to think that they were about to go. Brother Russell expected
 the church to £0 beyond the vail in 1878, 1881, 1&10 
and 1914 — just as with Elijah, who went with Elisha to 
four different places before he was actually taken. These 
seeming disappointments were divinely foreknown, "his appointments
." 

"And Pharaoh said unto him, Get thee from me, take heed 
to thyself, see my face no more; for in the day thou seest 
my face thou shalt die." (Exodus 10:28) Satan, speaking 
through ecclesiasticism is peeved at the claims of the Lord's 
people, and manifesting his displeasure, begins to utter threats. 

"And Moses said, Thou has spoken well, I will see thy 
face again no more." (Exodus 10:29) The face iB a sign 
of either favor or disfavor. The time has passed when the 
Lord will any longer show any favor toward ecclesiasticism, 
or when ecclesiasticism will show favor or intentional benefit 
to the Lord's people, 

THE ANTITTPIOAL TENTH PLAGUE 
"And the Lord said unto Moses, Yet will I bring one 
plague more upon Pharaoh [ecclesiasticism] and upon Egypt 
[Christendom — it will be to them an unprecedented plague] : 
afterwards he will let you go hence [this suggests that- the 
church now expecting to go to her Lord will not be disappointed
 this time; she shall surely be delivered after the 
divinely appointed last plague] : when he shall let you go, 
he shall surely thrust you out hence altogether." The final 
visitation of God's displeasure, amounting to the utmost expression
 of his wrath against Christendom, will so disturb the 
antitypical Egyptians that they may not confine themselves 
to words of chastisement against the Lord's people, but they 
may feel impelled to visit upon them tangible persecution, 
possibly culminating in imprisonment — through those civil 
powers which are deceived as to the true nature and character 
of the persecutors — and in bloody persecution and death. 
< Exodus 11:1) Here again we must not let the type teach 
us something which is not plainly stated elsewhere. This 
is no time to think "panicky" thoughts or to pose as martyrs 
unduly. But our Lord suffered such things, so did several 


VII— 27 


[6237] 


(119-114) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


of the apostles, so have many of the most noble and faithful 
of this age. We, as servants, are not better than our Lord 
and we have no just claim for better treatment. The Lord's 
wiH be done. 

"Speak now in- the ears of the people, [proclaim the message
 of the seven Studies in the Scriptures to all Christendom
], and let every man borrow [ask] of his neighbor, and 
every woman of her neighbor [every truth ecclesia of the 
neighboring churches] jewels of silver and jewels of gold 
[the Lord's jewels in the great company and in the little 
flock]/'— Exodus 11:2. 

"And the Lord gave the people favor in the sight of the 
Egyptians. [In some respects, for their truly Christian character
 and lives the Lord's people are appreciated by the 
peoples of the world.] Moreover the man Moses [Christ, 
the Head] was very great [highly esteemed, theoretically] 
in the land of Egypt [throughout Christendom] in the sight 
of Pharaoh's servants [clergymen] and in the sight of the 
people" [the laity of Christendom], — Exodus ll:-3. 

"And Moses [Christ through the Studies 12* the Scbiptukes
] said [to ecclesiasticisml, Thus saith the Lord, About 
midnight will I go out into the midst of Egypt." (Exodus 
11:4) If the year in which the remaining church is expected
 to begin, in a more pronounced degree, to go beyond 
the yail is the year beginning October, 1917, then midnight of 
that day (reckoning the days from sundown to sundown) 
would be about January, 1918. God, through some special 
word of indignation and wrath, may be looked for as going 
throughout the heart and center of Christendom about that 
time. 

"And all the firstborn [the firstborn of Egypt were set 
Aside to the deity and typified the clergy-ministers of Christendom
, set apart, in fact to the social service of Christendom] 
in Egypt, shall die [cease to be firstborns, or be divinely 
declared not to be what they claim and think themselves to 
be], from the firstborn [the leading ecclesiastic, the pope of 
Romel of Pharaoh that sitteth upon his throne [ Satan 
the god of priestcraft, is prince or ruler of this evil world], 
even unto the firstborn of the maidservant *that is behind 
the mill [down, to the lowliest minister of the smallest church 
grinding out its religious provender] and all the firstborn of 
beasts." — Exodus 11:5. 

"And there shall be a great cry throughout all the land 
of Egypt, such as there was none like it, nor shall be. like 
it any more." (Exodus 11:6) This suggests the final cry 
in Christendom. If this interpretation be correct, the next 
thing to look for is an unprecedented outcry on the part of 
Christendom's clergy and laity against the divine pronouncement
 which declares the end of Egypt's firstborn, the clergy, 
priestcraft, ecclesiasticism, churchianity- 

"But against any of the children of Israel shall not a 
dog move his tongue against man or beast; that ye may 
know that Jehovah doth put a difference between the Egyptians
 and Israel." (Exodus 11:7) How manifestly is God's 
favor with his own people who are dwelling in peace of heart 
amid a world in arms, and how markedly is his disfavor upon 
the people of Christendom torn with the sword and threatened 
with revolution, famine aAd pestilence! 

"And all these thy servants [the people of Christendom] 
shall come down unto me [Christ] and bow themselves down 
unto me [they will beseech the Lord's people to let their evil 
practices and institutions alonel, saying, Get thee out, and 
all the people that sit at thy feet [Afarginal reading. In 
this the day of the wrath of the Lamb, Christendom will 
want none of Christ or his members to trouble them any 
longer with their divinely authorized plagues] ; and after that 
I will go out. [Not till things have taken some such a 
turn will the feet members of Christ pass over to 'be ever 
with the Lord*]. And he went out from Pharaoh in a great 
anger." (Exodus 11:8) As the church turns her back forever
 in disfavor upon ecclesiasticism it is with a message 
containing all "the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God" 
(Revelation 19:15), in Volume Seven of Studies in the 

SCRrPTUBES. 

THE EFFECT OF THE PLAGUE UPON EGYPT 

"And Jehovah said unto Moses, Pharaoh will not hearkeji 
unto you; [ecclesiasticism will not heed the awful warnings 


of Ezekiel and Revelation, as shown forth in 'The Finished 
Mystery'] ; that my wonders may be multiplied in the land 
of Egypt." (Exodus 11:9) As a result of Christendom's 
failure to turn to God in a godly repentance, the words of 
God against her will be promptly and wonderfully fulfilled. 

"And it came to pass that at midnight [about January of 
the year 1918, through the enormous circulation of 'The 
Finished' Mystery' and the distribution of 10,000,000 'Fall of 
Babylon'] Jehovah [through his Word] smote all the firstborn 
in the land of Egypt [declared plainly and explicitly that the 
clergy, who insist on being first and foremost in everything, 
are really in his estimation dead, incapable of doing what 
they claim to do, because of iniquities which they committed 
in the dark ages and for which they are still unrepentant] 
from the firstborn of Pharaoh that sat on his throne unto the 
firstborn of the captive that was in the dungeon [literally, 
'house of the pit,' church of eternal torment] ; and all the 
firstborn of cattle."— Exodus 12:29. 

"And Pharaoh rose up in the night, he, and all M3 servants
, and all the Egyptians [if the suggestive interpretation
 set forth in these comments be right, then we may 
consistently look for an uprising of all worldly "Christians" 
because of and against the pronouncements of the wrath of 
God] ; and there was a great cry in Egypt [such a cry has 
begun to rise from the clergy, who are seeking to enlist the 
civil powers in a campaign of persecution of the Lord's people
] ; for there was not a house where there was not one 
dead." Not a church where there was not a clergyman against 
whom this divine denunciation had gone forth. 

"And he [ecclesiasticism] called for Moses and Aaron 
by night, [before the spring or summer of 1918] and said, 
Rise up ['rise to heights unknown,' to 'sit with Christ in 
the heavens'] and get you forth from among my people, 
both ye and the children of Israel; and go, serve Jehovah, 
as ye have said." — Exodus 12; 31. 

"And take your flocks and your herds, as ye have said [the 
Lord's people are completely consecrated], and be gone [there 
will be nothing the antitypical Egyptians will wish so heartily 
as to see gone forever those in whom is the present word of 
God. The wish may be father to their thought to hasten the 
going of the spiritual Israelites] ; and bless me also." (Exodus 
12:32) When an antitypical Egyptian is in peril or fear, he 
seeks a blessing from somewhere. 

"And the Egyptians were urgent upon the people, that 
they might send them out of the land ih haste [aroused 
nominal churchianity may be inclined to find quick means?, 
to expedite the passage of the Lord's people beyond the vaill 
for they said, We be all dead, men." (Exodus 12:33) It wa* 
the atrociously false alarm, "If we don't kill them, they will 
kill us," that caused the weak king of France to sign the 
wicked order for the utter destruction of all Protestants on 
St. Bartholomew's Might. 

"And the people took their Sough before it was leavened 
[the Lord's people have the unadulterated truth, the divine 
Word, without any of the leaven, evil teachings, traditions and 
theories of the clergy], their dough [marginal reading] being 
hound up in their clothes upon their shoulders," (Exodus 
12:34) The pure word of truth is bound up with the robe of 
Christ's righteousness and with the promises, with which the 
Lord's people are invested. 

"And the children of Israel did according to the word 
of Moses [of Christ, as set forth in the Bible] ; and they 
borrowed of the Egyptians jewels of silver and jewels of 
gold, and raiment; and Jehovah gave the people favor in 
the sight of the Egyptians, so' that they lent unto them. 
And they spoiled the Egyptians." (Exodus 12:35, 30) When 
the Lord's people go forth from Christendom to be ever with 
their Lord, they will take with them every Christian having 
the Lord's spirit; not a single one of the Lord's jewels will 
be left in Christendom when the approaching exodus of 
the last members of the body of Christ is finished. 

"It is a night [the dark night even now settling down] 
to be much observed unto Jehovah [it will be memorable 
forever] for bringing them out of the land of Egypt [out 
of the bondage of Christendom] ; this is that night of Jehovah
 to be observed [remembered] of all the children of 
Israel in their generations." —Exodus 12:42. 


COLPORTEUR AND PASTORAL WORK 


The great amount of advertising the public press has given 
Pastor Russell's books recently, particularly "The Finished 
Mystery," has doubtless, created a demand for these books ; 
and while it is not proper at thi3 time to circulate "The 

[6238] 


Finished Mystery," we advise the friends to colporteur for 
the other six volumes, especially the fourth, and to carry on 
the pastoral work, bearing the good tidings to as many as 
desire to hear. 


JESUS FACES BETRAYAL AND DEATH 


[With the exception of the first paragraph (printed below) 
Memorials," published in issue of 
Nothing connected with the Gospel narrative appeals to 
human judgment more forcibly than does its simplicity. The 
fact that the weaknesses, failures and stumblings of the 
apostles themselves are faithfully narrated, without apologies 
or excuses or attempts to gloss over the defects, shows a 
sincerity, a truthfulness of intention, very rarely found in 
other writings. Nowhere is this characteristic more conspicuous
 than in today's lesson, which records the shameless 
perfidy of Judas and the weakness of the remaining eleven. 


this article was a reprint of that entitled, "Two Passover 

September 15, 1914, which please see.l 

In our Lord's darkest hour these all forsook him and fled, 
seeking personal safety; and one of them subsequently denied 
knowing him. Had the writers of the Gospels interjected 
excuses and explanations • for their course, they would have 
been excusable; but the narrative is really stronger as it 
stands, and we are perhaps: inclined to furnish excuses for 
them which we might have been loath to receive had they 
offered similar ones for themselvesJESUS
 ON THE CROSS 

[The last twelve paragraph? of this article were reprinted from article-entitled, "Smitten of God— Afflicted," published in 
issue of November 15, 1914, which please seel 
.Tune 16.— Mark 15:22-39. 

AN ILLEGAL AKRKST— AN INIQUITOUS TRIAL— OUR LORD TAKEN BEFORE THE ROMAN GOVERNOR— CONDEMNED BY NEITHER PILATE NOR 

JIKHOD THK ROMAN GOVERNOR'S ATTEMPTS TO FREE OUR LORD— LEADERS OF RELIGIOUS THOUGHT COMPEL PILATK TO ACT 

CONTRARY TO HIS DESIRES— WHY DEATH BY CRUCIFIXION WAS NECESSARY IN OUR LORD'S CASE. 

"Truly this man ivas the Son of God."— Verse 39. 
Following the institution of the Memorial Supper our Lord the garden and strengthened him, gave him the Father's 


and his disciples sang a hymn, and then went out of the 
city to the Mount of Olives, a distance of perhaps a mile. 
Apparently several important lessons were given to the disciples
 en route to Gethsemane. These are recorded in John 
15-17. 

After they had arrived at the garden of Gethsemane, the 
Master left eight of the apostles near the entrance, and went 
a little further into its shades with Peter, James and John. 
All were to watch, to be on guard against something which 
was to occur, something of which Jesus knew, but- which 
seemed most improbable to the apostles. It was midnight, 
and thev were accustomed to retire early. The strain of 
the evening, and the weighty lessons which the Master had 
imparted, reacted in drowsiness; and they slept, instead of 
watching and praying. This was true even of the three 
nearest the Master. 

Wishing to be alone in his communion with the heavenly 
Father, our Lord went a stone's throw farther into the 
shadows by himself. Time and again, in the agony which 
fell upon him, he came seeking human sympathy, only to find 
his dearest ones oblivious in sleep. Well had it been expressed
 by the prophet: "Of the people there was none with 
me." (Isaiah 63:3) He trod the winepress of grief alone. 

For three and a half years he had devoted his life to the 
doing of the divine will. Had he done that will completely 
and absolutely, in a spirit that had been pleasing to the 
heavenly Father? More than this, could he, would he, pass 
through the experiences of the next few hours with proper 
courage, proper faith, proper obedience? Or would he fail, 
and lose his all in death? 

STRENGTHENED FROM OK HIGH 

Had the Master failed, there was no one to make good 
for him. He had no advocate. His failure meant, not only 
death everlasting for himself, but the loss of the great privilege
 of uplifting humanity from sin and death conditions 
through the Messianic kingdom. The Master's personal eternal 
life was in the balance that night in Gethsemane, as also 
were all his prospects of glory, honor, immortality find hi^h 
exaltation at the right hand of the. Father, far above angels, 
principalities and powers. No wonder the Master, realizing 
all this, was overwhelmed with the thought! No wonder 
he wished that if the divine plan could be otherwise worked 
out, he might be spared from the special tribulations and 
horribly misrepresenting experiences just before him I 

Apparently the ignominy of being crucified as a malefactor
 and blasphemer, a terrible experience to one of his 
refinement and nobility of soul, was the thing which he prayed 
might pass away. He did not ask that he might not die; 
for he knew that for this very purpose he had come into the 
world, and that only by hia death could the penalty resting 
upon the human family be removed. He had not thought of 
escaping death, but he hoped that the Father might have 
some way of eliminating the special ignominy of that hour. 
Yet even in his greatest distress the Master prayed: "Nevertheless
, not my will, but thine, be done." 

St. Faul assures us that the Master's Gethsemane experiences
 were linked with the fear of remaining in the death 
condition, fear of not being accounted of the Father as worthy 
of that glorious resurrection which he had been promised. 
(Hebrews 5:7) He was saved out of death, however; and 
more than this, he was given the assurance by the Father 
that he would be saved out of death. This is the explanation 
of the statement that an angel of God appeared to him in 


assurance that he had been faithful up to that moment, and 
that the divine blessing would be with him during the hour 
of trial just at hand. From that moment onward, all the 
fear and agony were gone. If the Father's blessing and 
smile went with him, he could endure all things come what 
might. 

VIOLATION OP LAW AND OF JUST PRINCIPLES 

Our Lord was arrested, neither by Pilate's nor Herod's 
instructions, nor by their soldiers. His arrest was made 
at the instance of the Jewish high priest and his associates, 
who had concluded that his life and ministry were inimical 
to their plans and projects and to what they considered to be 
the best interests of Judaism. The murder of Jesus was 
plotted in advance. But the murderers sought some excuse 
for their conduct, as all murderers do; and being politicians, 
they also sought an outward form or semblance of justice, 
having regard for the opinions of others of more tender conscience
 than theirs. 

Under the charge of the priests were men who served as 
policemen in the Temple and its precincts. Armed with 
maces, swords and lanterns, these servants of the priests 
followed Judas, who* knew beforehand that on this particular 
night Jesus did not intend to go to Bethany as usual, but 
had purposed to rendezvous with his disciples in the Gethsemane
 olive orchardAfter
 they had apprehended our Lord, the Temple police 
brought him directly to the house of Annas, a superannuated 
high priest, whose son-in-law Caiaphas officiated in his stead. 
Annas attempted an examination of Jeaus, hut met with 
little success, and so turned him over to Caiaphas, whose 
house was in the same courtyard. There, at probably three 
o'clock in the morning, the Sanhedrin had assembled. 

The plot for Jesus' death was deeply laid. The hours 
between the time when Judas had left Jesus and the other 
apostles at the Passover supper and the hour of this trial 
were spent in gathering the members of the Sanhedrin from 
their various homes throughout the city. Conditions were 
considered desperate enough to justify all this arrangement 
for the murder of him who "spake as never man spake." 
This was because he taught the people, because his teachings 
were weakening the power of the Scribes and the Pharisees 
and of the traditions of the elders. — John 7:46; Matt. 26:55. 

The theory of erroneous religious teachings is that ignorance
 and superstition are necessary to the preservation of 
sacerdotal power. Thus always has error hated the truth. 
Thus always has darkness hated the light. Jesus' condemnation
 was merely another triumph of darkness over light. Yet 
it was a triumph only in appearance ; for the divine plan was 
thus being carried out. The great atonement for sin was 
thus being arranged for, the result of- which will be the ultimate
 overthrow of Satan, sin and death, and the world-wide 
establishment of righteousness and truth forever. 
THE CASE BROUGHT BEFORE PILATE 

As quickly as possible the high priest and representatives 
of the Sanhedrin hurried Jesus to the Preetorium, asking 
Pilate to condemn him. The Roman governor inquired as to 
what charge they had against Jesus. They evasively answered 
that of course he was a wicked man, worthy of death, or they 
would not be there accusing him. 

Pilate reminded them that under Roman usage they had 
great liberty in dealing with all disputes of a religious kind, 
that he was not posted in the tenets of Judaism, and that 


[6239] 


(120 122) 


(123-125) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


therefore they should deal with the case themselves. The 
priests responded that they knew this, but that they had no 
power to inflict the death penalty. Thus they revealed the 
depth of their wickedness. They had deliberately plotted 
to have Pilate inflict the death sentence upon an innocent 
person. 

Then they began to accuse Jesus, claiming that he was 
perverting the nation, turning it away from loyalty and 
obedience to the Roman government, that he wae telling the 
people not to pay taxes to Cseaar, and that he claimed to be 
the Jewish King. These were serious charges, and the Roman 
governor was in duty bound to consider them. We note that 
these were altogether different charges from those brought 
against Jesus at the trial before the Sanhedrin. Although 
the charges were false, our Lord made no defense. He knew 
that the time had come for him to die; and he would not 
attempt to turn aside that which he knew to be a part of 
the divine program for him. 

OTTO LORD ACCUSED OF TREASON 

The wicked shrewdness of the Sanhedrin is very manifest, 
in preferring the charge of blasphemy for its effect upon 
the people, before whom they desired to appear very zealous 
for the divine law, while they brought an entirely different, 
but equally false, set of charges against him before Pilate, 
who cared nothing for their religious opinions. The accusation
 made before Pilate involved the charge of treason, a 
charge most likely to arouse the indignation and wrath of 
the Roman rulers. The Jewish religionists accused our Lord 
of seditious agitation, of prohibiting the payment of tribute 
money and of assuming wie title of king of the Jews, and 
thus apparently of conspiring against the Koman government. 

While the second charge was entirely false (Matthew 
22:21), the other two had an- appearance of truth; and to 
these were added numerous petty individual charges. Rut 


to none of them did our Lord make reply, so that Pilate 
marvelled that he made no effort at self-defense in the midst 
of such danger. 

Pilate's several efforts to release his innocent prisoner 
who, he discovered, had been delivered to him because of 
envy, were unavailing before the boisterous mob. These, 
instigated by their rulers, loudly clamored for our Lord's 
death, and that by the most ignominious and cruel method, 
crucifixion, so that his memory should ever be covered with 
infamy. 

Then Pilate, who was influenced more by considerations 
of policy than by principle, delivered Jesus to be scourged. 
Yet at the same time he protested the innocncc of his 
prisoner, and washed his hands in token of his own innocence 
in thus* delivering up to them this just person. Not until he 
himself was pressed by the mob with the threat that he could 
be reported to Cresar as one hostile to the government and 
a traitor to his trust in encouraging sedition and conspiracy 
aganist the government did he relinquish his efforts to save 
Jesus. 

OUE LOED'S LAST EARTHLY JOURNEY 

The Master had been on a constant strain, without sleep, 
from the time he had sent his disciples to prepare the Passover
. This period had included the trying experiences connected
 with the Passover and the institution of the Memorial 
Supper, the journey to Gethsemane, the agony and physical 
weakness there, the trial by the Sanhedrin, the trials before 
Pilate and Herod, the scourging, etc. All this must have 
been an enervating strain on him. Now, condemned to crucifixion
 by those for whom he had sacrificed his heavenly 
home and the glory which he had with the Father before the 
world came into existence, he was additionally required to 
carry his own cross. He did so until his weakness under it3 
weight hindered, and a passing farmer was compelled to assist. 


PERSECUTION CRYSTALLIZES CHRISTIAN CHARACTER 


"All that will live godly in Christ Jesus 
When St. Paul wrote the words of this text he seemingly 
had in mind the very closing experiences of the church on 
earth. While it is true that the principle of persecution of 
those who live godly in Christ Jesus has applied throughout 
the entire age, yet in a marked degree was that to be expected 
in the end of the harvest period. We reach this conclusion 
bcause in the context the apostle saysi "This know also, 
that in the last days perilous times shall come; for men shall 
be lovers of their own selves, boasters, proud, blasphemers, 
disobedient, .... heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasure 
more than lovers of God; having a form of godliness, but 
denying the power thereof." 

The best lexicographers define persecution as the act of 
doing injury to another; to beset with cruelty or malignity; 
to harass; especially to punish by loss, pain or death for 
adherence to a particular creed or mode of worship. Men 
with inflamed minds are apt to persecute any one who does 
not agree with them. Some have been persecuted by being 
put in prison; others by slander, libel, misrepresentation, 
which the Scriptures describe as bitter words shot out like 
arrows by the wicked. (Psalm 64:2-4) As civilization has 
advanced, methods of persecution have changed. In their 
turn, Lutherans, Baptists, Methodists, Presbyterians and 
others were persecuted ; and in course of time have themselves 
become persecutors. 

We are now living in a day when gross, vile persecution 
is not so popular as in olden times. The state of the public 
mind has much to do with determining the character of persecution
 inflicted, and which will be tolerated. At a time when 
the country is in stress, many take advantage of the situation 
to persecute those with whom they do not agree. They do this 
cunningly by misrepresentation. As an illustration, recently 
the clergy of the various denominations, Catholic and Protestant
, have represented that members of the International Bible 
Students Association are engaged in the spreading of "Hun 
propaganda/' and are in the employ of the German government
. Nothing would have a greater tendency to inflame 
the public mind than such a charge, If the charge were true, 
it would be a heinous crime. Therefore, if the charge be 
false, it is a great crime to make such an accusation. These 
misrepresentations, carried by the clergy and their emissaries
 to petty public officials and by these officials reported 
to officials in higher station, often result in action which 
amounts to persecution. For instance, Dr. Case, of the Divinity
 School of Chicago University, recently published a statement
 referring to the work of the International Bible Students 


shall suffer persecution."— 2 Timothy 3:12. 
Association, saying, "Two thousand dollars a week is being 
spent to spread their doctrine. Where the money comes 
from is unknown; but there is a strong suspicion that it 
emanates from German sources. In my belief, the fund would 
be a profitable field for government investigation." This, 
stimulated by similar charges from other nominal churchmen
, evidently had something to do with Army Intelligence 
officers seizing the books of the Treasurer of the Society. The 
authorities doubtless thought that they would find some evidence
 to substantiate the charge that our Society is working 
in the interest of the German government. Of course, the 
books disclose nothing of the kind. AH the money used by 
our Society is contributed by those who are interested in 
preaching the Gospel of Jesus Christ and his kingdom, and 
nothing else. 

The wide publication by newspapers throughout the country 
of the fact that the Society's books have been seized had 
a tendency to excite suspicion in the minds of others. In 
many places, local officers have attempted to prohibit the 
holding of any kind of meetings, either public or private, 
for the preaching of the Gospel. Certain local officials have 
required every one to bring in their books and deliver them 
up. This, of course, is without legal authority, because the 
Constitution guarantees that no one shall be compelled to 
surrender his property except by due process of law. All 
of this persecution really emanates from a class of religionists 
who hold views antagonistic to the Scriptures and the Society
's teachings. 

Our information is that the Department of Justice has 
instructed the District Attorneys to prosecute any one who 
sells "The Finished Mystery" from and after the date the 
order was made (some time in March). There was nothing 
in the order authorizing local officers to interfere with Bible 
study, nor with public meetings which are held for the purpose
 of preaching the Gospel. It is in no wise a violation 
of law to meet together to study the Bible; and, acting under 
advice of legal counsel, we are advising all the Bible classes 
to meet in the usual manner and continue the Berean studies, 
including the study of Volume VII. We advise, however, 
that the objectionable pages (247 to 253, inclusive) be removed 
from all books, in order that there may be no semblance 
of violating the law. It is the duty of everyone to be lawabiding
; but frequently men who think they are enforcing 
the law ar« themselves violating it. No Bible class should 
teach, instruct, or otherwise do any act or thing that will 


[6240] 


April 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(125-126) 


interfere with the Government's prosecution of the war. Our 

business is to declare the message of the kingdom. 

The Scriptures and the facts both lead us to the conclusion
 that the persecutions will increase. Those who make 
themselves the persecutors are to be pitied. Jn a measure 
we can sympathize with them, because once our eyes were 
blinded. We should have patience with these and speak to 
them kindly, trusting in the Lord to give us opportunity to 
open their eyes to the true situation. 

In the text the Apostle declares that some form of persecution
 will attach to any one who lives a godly life. This 
infliction of injury may come directly upon an individual, 
or he may suffer indirectly by being associated with others 
who are persecuted. (Hebrews 10:32-34) Whatever injury 
is done to one of the Lord's little ones, all who are of that 
same class will likewise suffer. ^Whether one member suffer, 
all the members suffer with it." (1 Corinthians 12:26) With 
consolation we remember the words of the Master: "Tf ye were 
of the world, the world would love his own ; but because I 
have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth 

yon All these things will they do unto you for my 

nnme's sake, because they know not him that sent me." (John 
15 : 10-21 ) In a general way, every person who is in opposition
 to the Lord's consecrated may be said to be of the 
world. All who have not the spirit of Christ are of the 
world. The clergy, manifesting the spirit of the world, are 
of the world; and history, from the beginning of the Christian 
era, shows that they have been the chief persecutors. 

LIVING GODLY IN OHBIST JESUS 

It is those who live godly in Christ Jesus that suffer 
persecution. To live godly means to live after the manner 
which Cod would approve; that is to say, to live in opposition
 to sin and in harmony with righteousness. It 
means to live according to the divine law, practising the 
golden rule. In the world there are two classes: one marching
 under the banner of Satan; the other, under the banner 
of the Lord. The first class is in darkness, not out of choice, 
hut because they were born that way — all coming under the 
influence of the "prince of the power of the air." The other 
class have escaped from darkness only by reason of a full 
consecration to the Lord. Such have come into Christ. 

In some respects the world has attained a very good 
standard. As a general rule the laws are very just; but 
because of the imperfection of man it is impossible to rightly 
construe and enforce the law. Every Christian realizes this 
and deeply sympathizes with those who are striving to enforce
 the law. 

Our text applies to those who live godly in Christ Jesus, 
which means more than keeping the Ten Commandments. It 
means that such a one must he fully consecrated to the Lord, 
begotten of the holy Spirit being accepted by the Father in 
the Beloved One; and then that such a one should seek 
faithfully and consistently to carry out the vow of consecration
 even unto death. Such consecration vow requires 
the one making it to follow faithfully in the Master's footsteps
. His commission is to make proclamation of Cod's 
message concerning the establishment of his kingdom. It is 
hia present duty to announce that the kingdom is here. All 
who do this will be opposed by those who say, "The kingdom 
is not here; things are going on as they were from the beginning
." 

A true patriot is one who is willing to lay down his 
life in the interest of his fellow-men. The Christian who 
consecrates himself unto death is a real patriot, because he 
has agreed to be faithful to the Lord even unto death, in 
order that he might be associated with Christ Jesus in uplifting
 and blessing the human race. He, then, is the real 
friend of the people. Those who take a view opposite to his 
and who have not the mind of the Lord, readily become 
persecutors. Thzis we see that those who are in Christ Jesus 
and who live godly have a difficult and narrow path to travel. 
Those who faithfully follow in the Master's footsteps bring 
upon themselves persecution. All who are loyal to God and 


to his message of truth must thus suffer. They must expect 
persecution. 

A good soldier is one who patiently endures the hardships
 incident to the performance of his duty. The good 
soldier of Christ Jesus must learn to endure patiently all 
hardships and persecutions that come to him. (2 Timothy 
2:3) God in his perfect wisdom knows what is best for his 
children; hence the persecutions that come must be for the 
good of his children. 

WHY PERSECUTION IS PERMITTED 

The word "suffer" as used in the, text means to experience
. Therefore, he who will live godly in Christ Jesus is 
certain to experience persecutions as a part of his lot. The 
Lord Jesus and the apostles all suffered persecutions at the 
hands of those who did not understand them. Misunderstanding
 is generally the cause of persecution. Had the Jews 
known that Jesus was the great Messiah whom they were 
expecting, doubtless they never would have persecuted him, 
Did the world know the real purpose of Christians who are 
striving to follow in the Master's footsteps, doubtless the 
world would never persecute them. God's arrangement is 
such and the Scriptures everywhere tell us that those who 
belong to the royal priesthood will suffer persecution if they 
live godly, and that those amongst this class who do not 
experience such suffering may be sure they are not living 
according to God's will. 

It is clearly God's will that in the end; of the age his 
vengeance should be declared against the Babylonish systems. 
(Isaiah 61:1-3; Jeremiah 5*1:0) It is unpopular to take 
this course, but since it is the will of God, those in Christ 
must call attention to the manner of Babylon's deception. 
They must call attention to the fact that the Lord's kingdom 
is at hand, and that the great King is now present and will 
soon set up his kingdom. Any other course would be ungodly. 
Following the right course brings what the Apostle said it 
would — persecution. 

The conditions imposed upon the church are designed by 
the Lord to be crucial tests of loyalty to him and the principles 
of righteousness. Trials, difficulties and persecutions are useful
 in demonstrating whether or not our covenant of consecration
 is really from the heart. Those who have merely made 
a covenant with the Lord by words, and not in truth and in 
fact, in due time will be sifted out. The faithful and loyal ones 
God has promised shall be made joint-heirs with Jesus Christ 
in his kingdom. It is for this reason that the church was 
called while evil still was permitted to reign in the earth arid 
while the majority of mankind were under the blinding influence
 of the adversary. Now it seems that the calling is 
ended and the final crucial test of patient endurance is upon 
the church. The truly consecrated would have been disappointed
 had not the events developed as they have. This fiery 
experience is absolutely necessary, that the dross may he burned 
away and that the true character might be made manifest. 
The end is here. The great crucial test is upon God's people. 
l^et every one, then, who has hope of^being of the kingdom 
class know that he must suffer persecution; and in doing this, 
remember the Apostle's words: "If we suffer, we shall also 
reign with him. If we deny him, he also will deny us." All 
things of the world, all of its hopes and prospects, we have left 
behind us. We have hurned every bridge connecting us with 
things earthly and the hope of earthly blessings. There is 
nothing to which we could turn back. All things are before 
us: life everlasting, with a perfect, glorious organism; jointheirship
 with Christ Jesus in his kingdom: the loving smile 
and approval of Jehovah. There is no inducement to relax. 
There is every inducement to firmly press on, enduring hardness
 as good soldiers of Jesus Christ — patiently and cheerfully 
bearing whatsoever experiences the Father permits us to have, 
having in mind that soon we shall see him face to face and 
be forever with our" Lord and King, Be patient, dear brethren. 
Look up and lift up your heads!* The evidence is conclusive 
that our deliverance draweth nigh. 


TWO KINDS OF LOVE 


Question : Would you kindly explain the distinction between 
the two Greek words "philia" and "agapee," as used in the 
New Testament? 

Answer: These are elusive words to translate into English
, but may be approximated by our terms love and friendship
. In languages older than our own, the distinction between
 the love that craves and the love that goes out uncravingly
 is indicated in equivalents of "love" and "friendship." 
Thus the Sanskrit — elder sister in our family of tongues— gives 

[6 


for "love" [lubh) "covetousness" or "greediness" ; and for 
"friendship" (pri) "unselfish love". The Greek has pkilia 
for that love which goes out "lovingly" after its object, "an 
inclination prompted by sense and emotion"; while in the 
Septuagint and the New Testament it has agapee, "a love 
without desire," The Latin correspondingly has amo as representing
 the love that turns to another in the spirit of agreement
 and of longing ; but, as an equivalent of agapao, it has 
diligo for the act of "a distinguishing love — without desire," 

241] 


(126 127) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y* 


a love that selects and rests on the one selected without asking 
any return. 

Failing to preserve clearly the distinction between a love 
that instinctively grows out of a relationship, or that is based 
upon a natural desire for possession, and a voluntary and 
distinguishing love that goes out unselfishly and admiringly 
toward its chosen object, New Testament critics and commentators
 generally have been confused in their minds, while 
seeking to account for the apparent difference 'between the 
two words — philia and agapee — employed in the sacred text 
for the designation of "love*'. 

It is admitted by practically all that philia was a word in 
common use in New Testament times, as expressive of the 
love between parents and children, and brothers and sisters, 
and also of craving love between the sexes. It is also admitted
 that the word agapee comes into new prominence in 
New Testament use, as applicable to man's love to God, and 
to love that is otherwise peculiarly pure and sacred. But 
these two words seem at times to be employed interchangeably
; and many an eminent scholar has confessed his inability 
to see the real difference between the words in their using, 
as accounting for the often indicated superiority of agapee, in 
spite of the greater warmth and intensity of philia, 

Cramer, in his "Biblico-Theological Lexicon of New Testament
 Greek," covers the simple facts in the case when he says : 
"We find agapee used to designate a love unknown to writers 
outside of the New Testament — love in its fullest conceivable
 form ; love as it is the distinguishing attribute in all humanity
, but, in the strictest sense, of divinity." Trench, in 
seeking to differentiate the meanings of the two words agapee 
and philia, says: "The first expresses a more resting attachment
, of choice and selection — diligere=deligere — from seeing 
in the object on which it is bestowed that which is worthy of 
regard; while the second, without being necessarily an unresting
 attachment, does yet oftentimes give less account of 
itself to itself; is more instinctive, has more of the feelings, 
implies more passion." Woolsey, after an exhaustive study 
of the histories of the two terms, says of Trench's definition: 
"We believe that this is a true statement of the difference between
 the two words and notions." And all this is in confirmation
 of the claim made here that philia represents a love 
that grows out of relationship or craving, while agapee represents
 a love that goes out voluntarily without any intermingling
 of selfishness — the one being ordinary love, and the other 
the higher form of friendship love. 

Men are said to love, or crave (philein) , "the chief place 
at feasts" (Matthew 23:6), and "salutations in the market 
places" (Luke 20:46) and to have this self -interested love 
(philein), as growing out of relationship, for "father or 
mother", or for "son or daughter". (Matthew 10:37) On the 


other hand, the Roman centurion is said by the Jews to have 
had an unselfish, friendship love ' {agapan) for their nation, 
as evidenced by his building for them a synagogue. (Luke 
7:5) God's children are commanded to have friendship love 
(agapan) for their "neighbors" (Matthew 5:43; Galatians 
5:14), and for their "enemies" (Matthew 5:44), because love 
does not go out in those directions instinctively, but must be 
given unselfishly, and of deliberate choice. 

The saints are enjoined to have a feeling of family love 
[philein) for their Lord (1 Corinthians 16:22} and for one 
another in the household of faith. (Titus 3:15) "The world" 
is said to give a selfish, interested love (philein) to "its own," 
because of the mutual relation between the two. (John 15:19) 
But Jesus is said to give a pure and unselfish friendship love 
[agapan) to Mary and Martha and their brother Lazarus, in 
the home so dear to him at Bethany. (John 11:5) God is 
said to be governed by unselfish, friendship love (agapan) 
toward the world, in the gift of his Son. (John 3:16) But 
Jesus says the Father loves as with a feeling of family love 
(philein) those who have come into his inner family circle 
through Tove for his Son. (John 16:27) And many another 
passage seems to recognize and accentuate these distinctions 
iir the force of the two words severally. 

A striking illustration of the significant uses of the two 
words in the same conversation is found in the narrative of 
the interview of Jesus with Peter, on the shore of the Sea of 
Galilee, after the resurrection. (John 21:15-19) Jesus asks 
Peter if he gives him friendship love (agapan) more truly 
than the other disciples, as Peter had asserted that he was 
ready to do. Peter, remembering his denial of his Lord, replies
 that Jesus knows that he gives him longing love (philein) . 
The second time Jesus asks Peter if he can claim to give him 
any measure of friendship love (agapan), apart from all comparison
 with others. Again, Peter affirms that the Lord Ipows 
that he gives him a longing love (philein) . Then Jesus changes 
his form of question, and asks Peter if he is sure that he gives 
him even a longing love (philein). At this Peter is "grieved", 
not because the question is repeated a third time, but because 
in its third putting it seems to imply a doubt whether Peter 
has any love for his Lord, even on the lower plane; and his 
earnest answer is: "Lord, thou knowest all things; thou 
knowest that I love thee" — with a longing love (philem) ; and 
Jesus quietly goes on to say that he would have Peter bear 
himself towards his dear ones just as he would if he were a 
devoted friend above all the other disciples. Tims the way is 
opened for Jesus to tell Peter plainly of what is in store for 
him in his faithful service. 

Only in the light of the distinction here pointed out isthe 
full force of divine love to be comprehended in the teachings 
of the New Testament. 


SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 


EUPHRATES BEING DBIED TTP 

Dear Brethren: — 

Just a few minutes of your valuable time to let you know 
of another joyful experience in the harvest field. On one 
of my regular visits to the Syrian class in Mt. Pleasant, Pa., 
one of the elders informed me that he had a Free Methodist 
friend to whom ho had often spoken about the truth, but 
could not make him see the true meaning of "hell," etc. 

We went together to the home of his friend, who was a 
Sunday School superintendent. After a few minutes we turned 
our conversation onto the real subject. He said he had bought 
the first three volumes several times and burned them at the 
instigation of the clergy, and that nothing under the sun 
rould convince him that there is no hell-fire and eternal toTment
. He said his church was the true church. Then I said: 
Dear Brother, if that is true, why is the Methodist church 
divided into 16 different sections! Ts Christ divided? 

FTc was -speechless with surprise. He, said he did not 
know that the Methodist church had 16 different divisions. 
Our conversation lasted about an hour and a half; his wife 
and four daughters and a few Syrian brethren were the 
audience. After wc finished he said: "Please send me that 
booklet on 'hell* because I want to read it." 

After he read the hell booklet it dispelled the eternal torment
 idea from his mind and he is rejoicing over it. Soon 
after he procured the first three volumes of Scripture 
Studiks. This month he knew that I was coming and arranged
 to attend the meeting, but he did not show up. Later 
we learned why. He said that the preacher and some of the 
church officials had come and hindered him by their presence 
at that hour. The preacher told him not to come to our 
meeting. He turned to the preacher and said: "Reverend, 
1 believed your misrepresentations in the past without proof, 


but now you cannot fool me any longer, because I have proved 
Pastor Russell's teachings to be the real truth by the Word." 
The preacher and those with him were greatly astonished. 
Again He said: "Now please take my name oft your church 
roll/' I just received a letter from him saying that he is 
reading the books and walking in the light as far as he sees it. 
Are there not many like him? 

Yours with best Christian love, Geo. E. Kafoory. — Pa. 
NOW VIEWS MATTERS DIFFERENTLY 
Dear Brethren in CnRtST: — 

You will doubtless have had my answer to your letter of 
October 23 last, returning the Vow slip unsigned. That was 
the true expression of my heart as to the Vow at that time. 
1 have been opposed to the Vow ever since I came to know 
present truth in 1910, yet not opposed to individual liberty 
in taking it; nor did I think that it contained anything 
wrong. But T objected to its being made a test for holding 
any office in the church. 

' That part of the Vow which speaks of the relationship of 
the sexes I used to think the most objectionable. I used 
to think that all who had put on Christ would not need any 
such help by vowing to abstain from all appearances of evil— 
as the Vow suggests. The w T ords of Brother Hollister come 
back to me now. When talking over this matter with me 
he said: "You do not seem to realize the great -stress that 
is upon mankind during this evil day and the powers of evil 
that are agrainst us for our downfall." 

Since that faithful servant has passed beyond the vail 
and the magnitude of his great office has become more apparent
, and the fact that the Lord is still using only the one 
channel to give us meat in due season, I come to the one 
conclusion that it muet be of the LoTd that such a safeguard 
is now set before us. I wish to do the will of God in ftll 


[6242] 


April 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(127 ir> 


things and I have rest about t]ie matter when 1 realize after 
careful thought and prayer that by subscribing to the Vow 
T am doing his holy will. I have always appreciated the 
Morning Resolve. If the V. D. M. questions were being answered
 by me now I believe I would give more care to the 
work, yet I think on the whole the answers were very close 
to the truth. I shall sign and date separate slip for attachment
 to Vow form, or you can return me the slip itself and I 
will sign it. 

I have deeply appreciated the article, "The Price of Exaltation
" in Nov. 15th Watch Tower. It is clear evidence to me 
the Lord is still at the helm. 

Your brother in hope of eternal life, 

J. R. Douglas. — Aus. 

APPRECIATES FREE PRESS AND SPEECH 

Dear Sirs: — 

My attention has been called through a news item to a 
book published by you called "The Finished Mystery/* which 
the Canadian press censor proscribed as pro-German. 


If there is no law in this country against your supplying 
the book, please let me Jcnowits price. Catalogue of other 
publications of yours would be appreciated. 

As I understand it, a free press is one of the fundamentals 
upon which this government is based. I like to see for myself
 why certain lx>oks and publications are so greatly feaTed 
by the ruling class. Thus far I have usually found that there 
is some unpleasant truth which they hope by these tyrannical 
and undemocratic methods to suppress. All autocrats hate 
to let the people do their thinking. I believe that nothing
 that could be done would do more to create dissatisfaction
 and unrest in a country supposedly free than to attempt 
autocratically to say what the people shall be allowed to read 
or not read. 

I am far from being a pro-German, but I pride myself on 
being a free and independent American, and nothing stirs 
me more than to see efforts made to suppress fTee-speeeh, freepress
 and free-assembly. 

Sincerely, F. H. S.— N. Y. 

