R897 : page 1 

VOL. VIII. PITTSBURGH, PA., FEBRUARY, 1887. NO. 6. 



page 1 

Zion's Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 
PITTSBURGH, PA. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: 

No. 40 Federal Street, Allegheny. 
C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, 
relative to what shall appear in these columns, 
which he cannot and does not cast aside; yet he 
should not be understood as endorsing every expression 
of correspondents, or of articles selected from 
other periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS:-FIFTY CENTS. A YEAR, POSTAGE FREE. 
Including special number (Millennial Dawn, Vol. I., 
paper bound) seventy five cents. Remit by draft, P.O. 
Money Order, or Registered Letter, payable to C. 
T. RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Three shillings per year. Including "Special Number," 
four shillings. Remit by Foreign Postal Money 
Order. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's 
poor who will send a card yearly requesting it. Freely 
we have received and freely we would give the truth. 
"Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters; 
and he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat- 
yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and 



without price." And you that have it— "Wherefore 
do ye spend money for that which is not bread? and 
your labor for that which satisfieth not? Hearken 
diligently— and eat ye that which is good, and let 
your soul delight itself in fatness."— ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



ORDER all the sample copies you can 
judiciously use, free. 



WE send this February number to 
many whose subscriptions expired with 
the December number, whose names 
will be dropped unless heard from at 



R897 : page 1 

DID YOU GET A PAPER "DAWN" VOL I, 
AS NOV., DEC. AND JAN. TOWER? 

To all regular subscribers, including 
those on the "poor list" unable to pay, 
and also to a large number whose subscription 
closed with December, 1886, 
we sent a paper bound edition of Millennial 
Dawn, Vol. I, as representing 
three numbers of the TOWER, November 
and December, '86, and January, '87. 

The wrapper of this was of specially 
heavy paper, but some of them sent 
without tying got the wrappers much 
torn, and not a few lost the address entirely 
and failed to reach the proper 
hands. All therefore who failed to get 
that number, and who were entitled to 
it, either as paying subscribers or as the 
"Lord's poor," according to the terms 
at the head of this column, should write 
and let us know at once. 

Because of the mutilation of so many 
wrappers, it becomes proper for us to 
reprint here a supplement which was 
printed inside of the wrapper, as 
follows:— 

SUPPLEMENT TO ZION'S WATCH TOWER. 

VOLUME VIIL, NUMBERS 3, 4 AND 5. 

TO ALL READERS, GREETING: We 



wish you all a very happy New Year 
and pray that it may be to all of us a 
very profitable one, very favorable to our 
further growth in grace and in knowledge, 
and in the love of God. And if 
the love of God thus united with and 
built upon the knowledge of his plan be 
shed abroad in our hearts, filling them, 
it will make us NOT ASHAMED of the 
Gospel of Christ, nor unfruitful in its 
service, but, on the contrary, valient supporters 
and expounders of it, willing and 
glad to support it in the face even of opposition 
and evil speaking on the part of 
those whom the God of this world hath 
blinded to the truth, by prejudices and 
misconceptions sacred with age and 
loved associations. And it is to render 
aid to you all in putting on the whole 
armor of God and to shed abroad in 
your hearts more fully the love, and 
thus provoke you to love and good service 
for the truth, that this special number 
is sent out thus. Let us explain: 
The book MILLENNIAL DAWN, Volume 
I. (cloth-bound, $1.00), which some of 
you have already had and read, seemed 
to be doing so much good that we earnestly 
desired to have you all possess a 
copy, but all were not able to purchase, 
and we had not the means to supply 
them gratis. So, to meet the many calls 
for a cheaper edition, which all could 
possess, and of which a large number 
could be used in loaning to friends and 
neighbors, we were led to issue the 
present edition as a special number of 
the TOWER, on the terms mentioned on 
back of same. We issued the October 
number late in the month, and will, commencing 
with February, 1887, hereafter 
issue at the first instead of the 15th of 
each month. Thus the time between the 
October, 1886, and February, 1887, issues 
which this edition fills, will not be too 
long for a thorough study of the subjects 
treated, even for those who already 
have the cloth-bound edition; for it is 
the general testimony of those who have 
been most blessed by the book, that the 
second or third readings benefitted them 
most, and paid better than the first even. 
We could not think of getting out this 
edition on poor, common paper and with 
poor workmanship, hence the saving is 
in the binding and the quantity. The 



message it carries is clean and beautiful 
—"good news" indeed, and the Lord, 
we think, would be pleased to see the 
truth-bearers also clean and good. 

The price of this number is 50c, but 
to our subscribers to whom it represents 
three numbers of the TOWER, we make 
the extra charge only 25c. Those who 
do not wish to retain it on these terms 
may return it to us and recken their term 
of subscription extended three months 
further, instead. Those who cannot pay 
the extra charge, and yet desire it and 
will read it, may keep it without pay- 
freely, if they will drop us a postal card 
stating these facts. Any subscriber to 
ZION'S WATCH TOWER who may desire 
copies of this edition for loaning or 
giving may have them on the following 
special terms (free of postage in U.S. 
and Canada; 5c. each extra for postage 
to Foreign Countries): 

10 Copies $3.00 

20 " 5.50 

50 " 13.00 

100 " 15.00 

Anyone can have the present volume 
(VIII.) including this number at 75c. 

With the hearty co-operation of you 
all we can have this edition in the hands 
of 50,000 readers before this time next 
year. Do you know of any better 
method of preaching the good news? 

Yours in fellowship and service, 
C. T. RUSSELL. 



R898 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

Matters are rapidly shaping themselves 
for the great physical struggle of 
the "Battle of the great day of God 
Almighty." In Europe all the great 
men and many of the little ones are full 
of fear and anxiety, looking after those 
things coming upon the earth— seeking 
to read the future and desiring to shape 
their course accordingly. 

Britain's government is weaker than 
it has been for a long time; consequently 
she is without policy, except to endeavor 

R899 : page 1 



to keep hold of all the countries 
over which in the name of God she 
claims the right to rule, because by force 
of arms she took control years ago. 
She is beset by her dependencies, whose 
people, under the increasing light of 
this day of increasing knowledge, are 
demanding greater privileges and liberties 
than she feels would be consistent 
with her self-preservation. Her common 
people are almost paupers, made such by 
drunkenness, combined with the injustice 
which in years past permitted 
the aristocracy to "seize" and call 
their own, all the land, which God gave 
to all the people. English statesmen 
and others see that she has enough to 
do to preserve her present arrangements, 
and that not for long. 

Germany and France, armed now far 
beyond what reasonable taxation can support, 
are voting for increased military arrangements. 
But in Germany even pride 

of country and fear of France have not influenced 
their parliament to grant all the 
enormous increase asked for by their 
King, whose Prime Minister urged that the 
entire sum was needed and indispensable 
to the preservation of the Empire's 
peace, and who dissolved parliament 
rather than accept a less liberal allowance. 
Prince Bismarck's speech upon 
that occasion aroused the attention of 
the world, and showed that Germany is 
so fully engaged in keeping guard over 
her own Socialists, and in holding 
France at bay, that she is quite willing 
to let Russia have her own way in the 
overthrow of Turkey, Bulgaria, etc. 

In view of the reorganized policy of 
Russia in connection with Turkey, this 
speech is significant as preparing the 
way for all of the great powers of Europe 
hitherto opposed to it, to give their 
consent to such an arrangement, or by 
declaring themselves opposed to it, to 
involve themselves in war to protect 
Turkey. This all looks as though next 
Summer would see a war on foot which 
might engage every nation of Europe. 
Already France is building extra barracks 
for troops upon the German frontier, 
and Austria is ordering extra hospital 
supplies and provisions, and arranging 
for transportation of troops in 



March, while Germans in England have 
been notified to be in readiness for a 
twenty-four hour notice to return home 
for military duty. 

Wars in Europe would be no new 
thing, but circumstances are greatly 
changed and results would doubtless be 
greater than ever before. Every country 
contains a large class whose chief 
disease is discontent, and frequently not 
without just cause. These will gradually 
conclude that themselves and their 
sons can fill a better mission in life than 
that of supporting Royalty either by 
laboring under excessive taxation, or 
acting as bullet-stoppers. The fact that 
General Von Moltke and Prince Bismarck, 
as the agents of their Emperor, 
failed during the last month, even by 
the strongest appeals to patriotism, and 
the statement that the Empire would be 
endangered unless the measure and the 
funds it demanded were granted, failed 
to influence the one-half of the people's 
representatives, is an evidence that the 
Germans are no longer easily moved by 
that poor sentimentalism called patriotism. 
This is well; good sense and 
broader ideas will cause men to look 
with as much sympathy and care at the 
homes of others, as at their own. And 
it will lead them to withhold their aid 
and support from Kings and Emperors 
who take from them the flowers of the 
family in their very bloom for soldiers, 
and rob the remainder through taxation 
to support their thrones and gratify their 
vanities or spites— all under the name 
of patriotism! 

But let no one imagine that such a 
war will bring final results. It will be 
but one act in the drama— one skirmish 
in the "Battle of the great day of God 
Almighty," which covers the coming 
twenty-seven years. It will doubtless 
change the map of Europe some, and 
by weakening and draining the empires 
it will prepare them for overthrow at the 
hands of the Communist vultures of 
Rev. 19:17,18. 

Russia, recently refused a large loan 
of money by the great Jewish Banking 
House of the Rothchilds, has found 
another way of replenishing her treasury. 
She has ordered all Jews to leave 
Russia. She will thus from their confiscated 



property be able to supply herself 

with sinews of war, while taking revenge 

on the Rothchilds and helping to 

fulfill the predictions of Scripture, that 

in this day of the Lord the Jews in large 

numbers shall return to their own land. 

There are 4,000,000 [See R1465:2] Jews in Russia 

more than in all other countries. 

R899 : page 2 

At home the interval of peace has 
come temporarily, only to be succeeded 
shortly by another travail pang more severe 
than before. 

The large vote which Henry George 
polled in New York city, has alarmed 
some who dreamed not of so many in 
sympathy with views so socialistic, [we 
use the word in its true and proper 
sense] as those advocated by Mr. 
George. Now repressive measures 
are introduced. One Lutheran church 
has excommunicated several of its members 
for belonging to the Knights of 
Labor. The Catholic church in Canada 
has taken a similar stand, and a priest 
who has assisted Mr. George in his New 
York city canvass, has been relieved of 
his pulpit, a successor appointed, and 
he has been ordered to Rome. He has 
refused to go. He does not submit as 
the Catholic clergy used to do. He has 
been thinking to himself that as a man 
he has some rights, while in this country 
at least. His congregation has rebelled 
against the Archbishop's decree. 
The choristers refuse to officiate, and 
even the janitor will not open the house 
for the services of the newly appointed 
priest. At a largely attended meeting 
of the congregation, resolutions were 
passed demanding the reinstatement of 
the deposed priest, and declaring that 
until it is done they will neither attend 
its services nor contribute to its 
support. These resolutions were sent 
by a committee of thirty of the prominent 
members to Archbishop Corrigan. 
A banner displayed by one of the 
priests' adherents, read: "Give us from 
Rome all the religion you want, but of 
politics nothing." Rather unusual for 
Catholics, is it not? This goes to sustain 
our prediction of some years ago, 
(based upon our interpretation of Rev. 19:19-21,) 



that in the coming struggle 

the Nominal Church will take sides with 

and fall with the earthly empires, in their 

overthrow. 

In spite of encouraging "statistics" 
skillfully manipulated to make a good 
showing, in spite of the retention on 
church rolls of the names of the dead, 
etc., candid minds are reluctantly admitting 
that Protestantism, and in fact all 
religion, is going rapidly backward. 
Babylon's fall from power and influence 
was thus attested to by Mr. J. W. 
Sproul, an Allegheny preacher of the 
Reformed Presbyterian Church, recently. 
He said, "it is a disagreeable truth, 
but it cannot be denied that the church 
is losing ground in every respect, and 
this despite the statements of statisticians." 
"How lamentable it is to be 
obliged to say that the church is not 
even holding her own." 

Babylon is so wedded to the darkness 
and errors of human traditions that she 
cannot and will not admit the light and 
"meat in due season" to her children. 
Since some of these are the Lord's, the 
whole institution he declares, must be 
wrecked to set at liberty his captive 
children. It begins to fall. 

All men are waking up, and girding 
on their various swords and drawing 
nigh to the battle. "It is near and 
hasteth greatly." As the prophet has 
expressed it, (Joel 3:9-16,) the plowshares 
will first be turned into swords, 
and the great conflict must take place, 
before they shall peacefully be turned 
back again to plowshares. So though 
the dread evil is coming which will 
cause great trouble to us and to all, yet 
seeing the outcome of it, and relying 
upon God's sustaining power throughout, 
we alone can look forward with 
composure and trust. 

"In God we have found a retreat 

Where we can securely abide: 
No refuge nor rest so complete, 
And here we intend to reside." 

But what is the outlook of our own 
battlefield close around the bulwarks of 
Zion? some one inquires. We answer 
that the enemy by first one agent and 
then another in heavenly garb seeks 
still, and more, to overthrow the truth, 
using all subtilty. Thank God we are 



not ignorant of at least some of his devices. 

(2 Cor. 2:11.) But more on this 

under the caption, "As the Serpent Beguiled 

Eve," crowded out of this issue. 

It will appear in our next. 



R899 : page 2 

THE LORD'S SUPPER. 

The anniversary of the Lord's Supper 
will this year fall upon Thursday 
evening, April 7th; and in harmony 
with a custom among the early Christians, 
we esteem it as they did, a blessed 
privilege to commemorate our Lord's 
death in the manner which he requested 
us to observe, and at the time observed 
by him. Though he has made free 
from the Law all believers in him who 
were under it (Israelites), yet he was 
"under the Law" and was limited by 
it. Accordingly he could be crucified 
only upon the fourteenth day of the 
Jewish month Nisan (which this year 
commences Thursday evening, April 
7th, and ends at 6 P.M. on Friday, the 
8th), because his death was the antitype 
of the death of the lamb whose blood 
sprinkled upon their door-posts covered 
or protected the firstborn of Israel. 
And these firstborn in turn were exchanged 
for the tribe of Levi (Num. 3:12,13), 
of whom came the priests through 
whose sacrificial ministrations all the 

R900 : page 2 

people were justified. 

The lamb typified Christ Jesus our 
Lord; its death represented his death. 
And, in exact correspondence with the 
type, his sacrificial death, must and 
did occur at the same date. The firstborn 
saved by the blood of the typical 
lamb, typified "the church of the firstborn, 
which he (Jesus) hath purchased 
with his own blood." Those firstborn 
Israelites, afterward the priests, typified 
the "Royal Priesthood" of whom the 
Lord himself is Chief Priest; and this 
anointed company is to be God's instrumentality 
for blessing all people who 
will come into harmony with him, typified 



by all Israel. Thus seen, the blood 

of the typical lamb cleansed and preserved 

all Israel, though applied at first 

and directly only to the firstborn. For 

if the firstborn ones had not been preserved, 

there would have been no priesthood; 

and if no priesthood, no reconciliation. 

So also in the antitype, the merit 

of the Lamb of God which taketh away 

the sin of the world, is applied during the 

gospel night only to the firstborn, the 

church, the select little flock, the Royal 

Priesthood, who under the direction of 

the High Priest, shall soon in the incoming 

age, bring all of honest hearts 

(Israelites indeed) into full harmony 

with God. 

Let all of the Church of Firstborns 
then intelligently and reverently commemorate, 
not the typical lamb, nor eat 
it as did the typical people (Israel), but 
let them celebrate the death of our Paschal 
Lamb, the Lamb of God. Let us as 
often as its anniversary recurs, keep it in 
remembrance of him; for even Christ our 
Passover [lamb] is slain, therefore (let us 
not only commemorate his death) but 
let us joyfully afterward keep the antitype 
of the Feast of Passover.* 

We do not celebrate the "Feast of 
Passover" on the night of April 7th. It 
is celebrated throughout the remainder 
of our lives which the seven days of its 
continuance represented; but we will 
celebrate the Supper, whose elements 
(bread and wine) symbolize the flesh and 
the blood of our Redeemer. 

And yet the bread and wine are only 
symbols, and to appreciate what we do 
we must see deeper than these while 
using them as our Lord directed, saying, 
"Do this, in remembrance of me." The 
partaking of the bread representing his 
flesh, to us means a partaking of those 
perfections which were in him as a perfect 
man, which we and all, lost through 
Adam. In partaking of the wine representing 
his blood, his life, we accept from 
God again through him, the right to live, 
lost in Adam. Thus the eating and 
drinking of the bread and wine, emblematic 
of his flesh and blood, signifies our 
complete justification. All of the Redeemer's 
human perfections and his right 
to life— given for us— are thus accepted 
by us, in this symbol. All believers in 



the ransom are thus privileged to celebrate 
or commemorate it, and the blessings 
it brings. 

But among those "believers" there is 
a class, a "little flock," to whom it means 
all this and more. These are those who 
have consecrated themselves as the under 
priests, under their great Chief. To these 
the emblems not only signify the Lord's 
sacrifice by which they are justified to 
human life and all its rights, but also their 
own consecration to be joined in sacrifice 
with him, to suffer with him, to be dead 
with him; to sacrifice all the rights to 
human perfection and life to which their 
justification through acceptance of his 
sacrifice had entitled them. To these 
the emblems (bread and wine) are not 
only remembrancers of the Lord's sacrifice, 
but also of their own covenant to 
share the sacrifice with him, if by any 
means they might fulfill the conditions 
and be accounted worthy to be "made 
partakers of the divine nature," and to be 
with him, his "joint-heirs" and co-workers 
in blessing all the people. 

Paul calls our attention to this feature 
of the commemoration, saying: "The 
loaf which we break, is it not the communion 
of the body of Christ [the "little 
flock," the Church, of which our 
Lord is the head]? the cup of blessing 
which we bless, is it not the communion 
of the blood of Christ [the entire anointed 
company]? For we, though many, 
[members] are one loaf and one body, 
for we are all partakers of that one loaf. 
-1 Cor. 10:15-17. 

All must eat of the flesh and blood of 
our Lord Jesus: i.e., they must partake 
of those human rights and privileges 
which his sacrifice secured for all, 
either in this age by faith, or in the next 
age actually, else they will have no life 
rights, either to make sacrifice of now, 
or to enjoy (without the privilege of 
sacrificing them) hereafter. So then we 
urge all believers to "do this" intelligently, 
and while using the emblems, to 
accept and apply and appropriate fully 
the justification from all sin and the 
right to life which God holds out through 
the Lamb of God, and in no other name 
or way. And especially let all believers 
who have been immersed with Christ 
into his death, and thus into membership 



in his "body" (Rom. 6:3,4), do 
this, remembering their justification 
through his blood and renewing their 
covenant to be dead with him as human 
beings, that they may live with him as 
partakers of the new, the divine nature. 

So far as possible meet with such as 
you can recognize as fellow-members of 
the same body, and exclude no believer 
in the ransom. Arrange for the meeting 
long enough beforehand. It matters 
not who shall pass the emblems, even 
Judas may have assisted at the first 
celebration. 

All who can do so are cordially invited 
to be present and celebrate with 
the church that is at Pittsburgh. If possible 
arrange your affairs to stay over 
the following Lord's day, which will be 
the anniversary of our Lord's resurrection. 
Turn aside— let us devote a few 
days to the pursuit of our spiritual interests 
exclusively. It will help possibly 
to break some of the cords by which 
the world, the flesh and the devil would 
bind us down to "diligence in business," 
to the dwarfing of the fervency of spirit 
in serving the Lord, so indispensable to 
every crown-winner. 

Quite a number were present from a 
distance last year, and many more have 
expressed the intention of attending the 
coming celebration. Especially those 
whose labors are of a public character, 
will do well to come. Make a memorandum 
of questions which you would 
like to discuss, so that our communings 
together may be the more profitable. So 
far as possible all of our readers will be 
provided with board and lodging free 
during the meetings. Let us know of 
your coming a day or two ahead. Notice 
the date and get here some time before 
6 P.M., of April 7th, that you may 
be in time for the celebration of the 
"supper." Come to the Z.W. TOWER 
business office. 



*The "Feast" is not the "supper," but follows 
it and has a totally different significance. The 
"Feast" with the Jews lasted a week, and commenced 
after the lamb had been killed and eaten. 
Its observance was marked by joy of heart, separation 
from all carnality and from leaven. It 



represents the life of joy and purity and separation 
from sin [leaven] which all who recognize 
the value of the lamb, etc., are to enjoy. 



R902 : page 2 

THE EASY YOKE. 

"Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy 
laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke 
upon you and learn of me; for I am meek and 
lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto your 
souls. For my yoke is easy and my burden is 
light. "-Matt. 11:28-30. 

Satan the prince of this world has 
placed many yokes upon the necks of 
all mankind. They are bound and fettered 
by every device which he could 
arrange. But Jesus invites all such to 
come to him and find rest— the blessed 
rest of freedom from the galling yoke 
of the oppressor. That rest is found in 
the meek and quiet spirit which humbly 
submits to the easy yoke of the divine 
will and ceases the strife to gratify the 
perverted human will. The burden of 
the divinely imposed yoke is easy and 
light when we let it rest naturally upon 
us. It is only placed upon us for our 
good, and only those who cheerfully 
submit to it have rest and safety. 

Our Lord's words were addressed to 
those of his day, bound by Jewish 
creeds and traditions and their own fears, 
engendered by their erroneous misconception 
of God and his plan. As with the 
Jewish church, so with the Christian 
church, the "yokes" of sectarianism 
and the "burdens" of tradition, fetter 
and gall those who possess the spirit of 
Christ, whose zeal and love are according 
to knowledge and for Christ and the 
church which is his body, rather than 
for a sect of human organization. Such 
cannot be comfortable with the yokes 
and burdens of men and must claim the 
freedom of sons of God, the liberty 
wherewith Christ hath made them free. 



R902 : page 3 



THE CHURCH OF GOD. 

"Zion, arise, break forth in songs 

Of everlasting joy; 
To God eternal praise belongs, 

Who doth thy foes destroy. 
Thou Church of God, awake, awake, 

For light beams from on high; 
From earth and dust thy garments shake, 

Thy glory's drawing nigh. 

"To raise thee high above the earth, 

God will his power employ; 
He'll turn thy mourning into mirth, 

Thy sorrow into joy. 
In shining robes thyself array, 

Put on thy garments pure; 
Thy king shall lead thee in the way, 

That's holy, safe and sure. 

"In thee, the Lord shall place His name, 

And make thee His delight, 
And place on thee a diadem, 

Divinely fair and bright; 
And thou shalt be the dwelling place, 

Of him that reigns above, 
Yea, thou shalt be adorn'd with grace 

And everlasting love. 

"The joy of nations thou shalt be; 

A bright and shining light; 
For God is in the midst of thee, 

To keep thee day and night. 
He'll bring thy wandering children home, 

And gather those without; 
And with a wall of jasper stone, 

Will guard thee round about. 

"Arise, O Zion, praise thy King, 

And make His name thy trust; 
With joy and triumph loudly sing; 

For he is true and just. 
O Zion, sing with truthful voice, 

Thy great Redeemer's praise; 
In His almighty power, rejoice 

Throughout eternal days."— Manifesto. 



R900 : page 3 

THE TIME IS SHORT. 

"But this I say, brethren, the time is short; so 
that they who have wives, should be as if they 
had none; and they who weep, as if they wept 



not; and they who rejoice, as though they rejoiced 
not; and they who acquire, as though 
they acquired not; and those occupied with this 
world, not going beyond the proper using of it." 
-1 Cor. 7:29-31. 

It is a great mistake, and yet a very 
common one, to apply the teaching of 
the Apostle Paul to the world and the 
church indiscriminately. It should be 
borne in mind that the apostle is addressing 
the church only, as a peculiar 
people, separate from the world, with 
hopes and aims, and present conditions 
and future destiny entirely different 
from those of the world, although they 
appear to be as other men. It would 
seem strange indeed if such a class 
should need no special instruction. 

Under the erroneous impression that 
these and other teachings of the apostle 
were intended alike for all, Paul is generally 
considered as an extremist, and 
as a teacher who though good in some 
respects, had his peculiarities which 
colored his teachings, and which should 
therefore be received at a discount to 
that extent. Paul was indeed a man 
of marked personal peculiarities, and 
therefore he was a fit instrument and a 
chosen vessel to do the greatest work 
that any man, except "the man Christ 
Jesus," was ever privileged to accomplish. 
He was a man true to his convictions, 
untiring in energy, and full of 
zeal,— one of the meek who, when called 
upon by the Lord even in the midst of 
his zealous persecution of the saints, in 
which he verily thought he was doing 
God service, meekly inquired, "Lord, 
what wilt thou have me to do?" And 
what the Lord showed him to do, he 
did immediately, not stopping to confer 
with flesh and blood. 

But these were not the only peculiarities 
which influenced Paul's teaching. 
By the favor of God, Paul was caught 
away (in the spirit, that is, mentally) to 
Paradise, to the third heaven, the new 
dispensation or kingdom of God, where 
he saw things to come, which were not 
then lawful to be uttered clearly, because 
it was not yet due time. And the broad 
view of God's plan thus given to the apostle 
enabled him to realize the real position 



R901 : page 3 

of the saints, and the weighty interests 
involved in their development as members 
of the body of Christ. Yes, Paul 
at that early day of the church's history 
was by special favor of God permitted 
to know what is now due to all the 
saints, viz., the plan of God spanning 
the ages past and future. And from 
this standpoint of knowledge he was 
able to guide the church by his teachings 
all through the age— from the beginning 
down to the closing days of her 
course, until she is presented to her 
Lord as a chaste virgin accounted 
worthy to be his bride. In this great 
work of preparing the bride for the 
marriage, the various apostles and 
prophets were privileged to share; but 
Paul was more highly honored thus 
than any other. 

As we are now privileged to see from 
the same standpoint of knowledge, it 
now being due time, we can see a propriety 
in Paul's teaching which is in perfect 
accord with God's plan and purpose for 
the saints, though it must seem extreme 
to others. Being begotten to a new nature, 
they are no longer to live after the 
old. We should now live, not as men, 
concentrating our interests, affections, 
hopes and aims on earthly things and 
striving after them, but as new creatures, 
whose sole interest and concern is for 
the advancement of the interests of the 
heavenly kingdom. 

The principal work in the interest of 
the heavenly kingdom during the present 
age has been the selecting and development 
of the church, who are to be 
God's agents for the enlightenment, 
conversion and blessing of the world in 
the age to come. The all-important 
work, therefore, to which every earthly 
consideration should now bend, is the 
seeking out and preaching the gospel to 
the meek, few though they be; encouraging, 
strengthening, and helping them 
in every possible way to make their 
election sure. 

For this great work we are reminded 
that the time is short, and that if we 
would have a share in it, we must push 
aside the earthly hindrances and improve 
every passing hour; for very 



soon our opportunity will be gone. 

Consider for a moment how very short 

is the opportunity which as an individual 

you possess, that you may more fully 

realize the necessity for haste and diligence 

in the service. Deduct from the 

brief space of your present life the 

years past, before you came to a knowledge 

of the truth and consecrated your 

life to the service of God, and then the 

declining years of life, when sight grows 

dim and physical strength grows more 

and more feeble, and then the time and 

strength which must be expended in 

providing things needful for the temporal 

wants of ourselves and those necessarily 

dependent upon us, and with the 

greatest economy of time, how much is 

left for the great work in hand to which 

we have consecrated ourselves? When 

we actually figure it out, how very insignificant 

it appears! Truly, Paul is 

right here— the time left for service is 

extremely "short"; and it behooves 

the saints to resolutely push aside the 

hindrances and overcome the obstacles, 

if they would run successfully for the 

prize, or accomplish anything to the 

Master's honor, or to show their love 

and appreciation of the good tidings by 

sounding the trumpet of truth to 

fellow-pilgrims. 

The time is short; so that they [of 
us] who have wives should be as if they 
had none. The establishing of an 
earthly home and the rearing of an 
earthly family, which is generally regarded 
as the principal business of life, 
should not be the ambition of the 
saints. The injunction to increase and 
multiply and fill the earth, was given to 
the natural man, but not to the little 
flock, the new creatures, partakers of 
the divine nature. Their mission is not 
to help to people the earth, but to help 
bring to the spiritual birth the new creatures 
of the divine nature— the little 
flock— begotten of the heavenly promises. 
And the time for that work being 
short, they cannot afford to further cumber 
themselves by increasing their earthly 
cares. The idea of consecrating one's 
life to the service of God, and then going 
on, year after year, tying ourselves 
down and loading ourselves with cares 
and responsibilities of an earthly character, 



which when once incurred we 

dare not shirk, and which with increasing 

and necessary demands will require 

more and more of our time and thought, 

and care and attention, is simply preposterous, 

and entirely out of harmony 

with our covenant. It is not following 

the footsteps of either the Lord or his 

most faithful apostle. 

Jesus said he had finished the work 
given him to do at his first advent, and 
how did he spend his life? He spent it 
in selecting, teaching, training and developing 
a small and apparently insignificant 
company of men and women, 
who should form the nucleus of the 
church, which under his future direction 
and care would be fully developed and 
perfected. He did not cumber himself 
with the cares of this life, and let his 
special work take its chances, in the 
odds and ends of time which could be 
spared from earthly things. The increase 
of the earth's population, he considered 
no part of his work; nor is it 
the mission of those who follow in his 
footsteps. 

With his clear insight into the plan of 
God, and a realization of the importance 
of the great work in hand, Paul's counsel 
that the unmarried should remain so, 
that they might thus give themselves 
without hindrance to the Lord's service, 
and that the married should not add to 
their earthly cares, and thus make their 
pathway more difficult and their opportunity 
for service less, was timely and 
important, and in perfect harmony with 
The Lord's example and teaching (Matt. 19:12), 
which he also so closely 
followed. 

None should make the mistake, however, 
of supposing that the responsibilities 
of a family already incurred can be 
ignored or set aside; on the contrary, it 
is written, that he that provideth not for 
his own is worse than an unbeliever, 
and hath denied the faith.— 1 Tim. 5:8. 

The worldly and lukewarm Christians 
are in total ignorance of the great work 
before the saints either in the future or 
in the present age, and therefore our 
work seems to them unimportant and 
foolish— a waste of energy; but we must 
not for a moment view it from their 
standpoint. This work, insignificant 



though it may seem in the eyes of 
others, and small though it may appear 
to us now in its results, is the grandest 
work in which it was ever the privilege 
of any to engage. Eternity alone will 
reveal to the world its magnitude and 
importance, or enable us to fully realize 
it. 

Further, we are told that because the 
time is short, those who weep should be 
as if they wept not, and those who rejoice 
as though they rejoiced not, and 
they who buy as if they acquired not. 
We may and have, in common with all 
mankind, causes of an earthly character 
for both weeping and rejoicing; but we 
should not allow either joy or sorrow to 
unfit us for our work, nor to detract 
from our interest and effort in it. But 
we may rejoice always in the Lord, 
knowing that in due time all tears shall 
be wiped away, and that fleeting earthly 
joys shall give place to the songs and 
everlasting joy which by-and-by shall 
be upon every head. And those who 
acquire wealth or goods should not 
reckon their acquirements their own, or 
for the gratification of self -pride or 
the love of display, but as something 
belonging to the Lord, something more 
of his entrusted to them to be utilized 
in his service. If once thoroughly 
awake to the fact that every acquirement 
is the Lord's and not their own, 
that their time, influence and talent, 
past, present and future, is all consecrated, 
it would free such from many of 
the snares to which they are subject— 
"which some coveting after, wandered 
away from the faith and pierced themselves 
through with many sorrows."— 
1 Tim. 6:7-12. 

Finally, while necessarily occupied 
with the business of this life and the 
expenditure of its income, we should 
not go beyond the just using of it for 
ourselves as becometh saints. Provide 
things honest, neat and comfortable for 
the temporal necessities, and then give 
them no further thought. Though we 
have consecrated ourselves and all our 
goods which we have acquired or may 
acquire, to the Lord, he permits us to 
appropriate this much of it for our temporal 
wants. In harmony with our covenant, 
this only is the "proper using" 



of earthly goods. 

O how narrow is the way in which 
the saints must walk who follow in the 
footsteps of the Master! There is self-denial 
at every step, but Jesus said, 
"He that taketh not up his cross, and 
followeth not after me, is not worthy of 
me." If we cannot prove our love for 
the Lord by thus sharing in his reproaches 
and self-denials, we are not of 
the class he wishes to make his Bride. 
It will be no easy thing for any to endure 
unto the end, but blessed is he 
that shall do it. If we keep looking at 
the things behind, cherishing the old 
ambitions and fostering the old spirit 
which once impelled us, endurance of 
our trials will become more difficult if 
not impossible; but let us take the 
apostle's advice, and forgetting the 
things behind, seek new conquests over 
the world and flesh and devil. Let us 
thus press forward to the mark of the 
prize of our high calling, which is of 
God through Christ Jesus. And bearing 
in mind that the time is short, let us 
make haste to improve passing opportunities 
for such a grand and blessed 
service. 



HE is a great conqueror who can conquer 
himself. 



page 3 



WHEN you make a mistake don't 
look back at it long. Take the reason 
of the thing into your mind, and then 
look forward. Mistakes are lessons of 
wisdom. The past cannot be changed. 
The future is now in your power.— 
Hugh White. 



R902 : page 4 

BIBLE LIGHT ON PROBATION AFTER 
DEATH. 

Brother Stowe is a contributing member 
of one of the branch Bible Societies. 



At one of their recent meetings the so-called 
" Andover question" of probation 
for infants and heathen in death, was 
taken up for discussion. Brother S., 
though not a public speaker, prepared 
and delivered the following paper, which 
shows the question from our standpoint 
in a good light. It made quite an impression 
on some of the D.D.'s who 
heard, and we doubt not they wondered 
that a Christian business-man could become 
so well versed in theology as to be 
able to teach them on this subject. It 
shows how the earnest ones who have 
the will can find some way to serve the 
truth. Each saint should seek to multiply 
his opportunities for service and 
thereby increase his talents. Willing 
hearts, hands and voices are finding and 
using hundreds of ways, great and small, 
and making openings.— Editor. 



Opinions, from other sources than the 
Bible, differ as to what the act of death 
is, but the agreement of the whole Bible 
seems to be that it is a total extinction of 
life, and, therefore, that the state of death 
is an entire suspension of being, mental 
as well as physical. This being so, 
man's probation or trial must occur, not 
in death, but before the state of death 
has begun or after it has ended— in 
resurrection. 

"So man lieth down and riseth not; 
till the heavens be no more they shall 
not awake, nor be raised out of their 
sleep. Oh, that thou wouldst hide me 
in the grave, that thou wouldst keep me 
secret until thy wrath be past, that thou 
wouldst appoint me a set time and remember 
me! If a man die, shall he live 
again? All the days of my appointed 
time will I wait till my change come. 
Thou shalt call and I will answer thee; 
thou wilt have a desire to the work of 
thine hands. "-Job 14:12-15. 

"Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, 
do it with thy might; for there is no 
work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor 
wisdom, in the grave, whither thou 
goest."— Eccles. 9:10. ("Grave" is 
here translated from "sheol.") 

"For in death there is no remembrance 
of thee; in the grave (sheol) who 



shall give thee thanks?"— Ps. 6:5. 

"For if the dead rise not, then is not 
Christ raised; and if Christ be not raised 
your faith is vain; ye are yet in your 
sins. Then they also which are fallen 
asleep in Christ are perished." 
-1 Cor. 15:16-18. 

A great multitude of texts convey the 
same meaning. This death is the Adamic 
death, from which Christ, by virtue 
of his sacrifice, giving a ransom or corresponding 
price, redeems all men. The 
first probation of the race was a representative 
one in Adam, whereby all became 
subject unto death. Were there 
not to be a recovery as wide as the condemnation 
the first probation would be 
properly regarded as a total failure, a 
sweeping victory for the adversary at the 
outset of creation. But "Known unto 
God are all his works from the beginning 
of the world." (Acts 15:18.) "For 
the Lord of Hosts hath purposed, and 
who shall disannul it? and his hand is 
stretched out, and who shall turn it 
back?" (Isa. 14:27.) We who believe 
in the infinite power, wisdom and 
benevolence of God cannot doubt that 
he has a definite and systematic plan for 
the development of the race, by which 
the largest possible proportion thereof 
shall be brought to ultimate and permanent 
good. This idea was hinted at 
when God told Adam that the seed of 
the woman should bruise the serpent's 
head. Two thousand years later he told 
Abraham plainly that in his seed should 
all the families of the earth be blessed. 
Gradually the features of the plan were 
delineated in the prophecies, but it was 
yet a mystery until its fulfillment began. 
Paul declares (Col. 1:27) that "this 
mystery which hath been hid from ages 
and from generations,. ..now 
made manifest to his saints,... 
is Christ in you the hope of glory." 

Jesus is anointed to be the Head or 
Lord over the Church, which is his body, 
and unitedly they constitute the promised 
"seed"— the Great Deliverer. "If 
ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's 
seed and heirs, according to the promise" 
(Gal. 3:29)— the promise of blessing to 
all the families of the earth. 

There never was a publication to the 
Gentiles of the "only name" given 



whereby men must be saved until the 
world was 4000 years old, and the very 
gradual and intermittent progress of the 
"good tidings which shall be to all people" 
up to this day, indicates the purpose 
of God hitherto to have been other than 

R903 : page 4 

the application of the ransom to the world 
in this life. Who can doubt God's power 
to have enlightened all men had he so 
chosen? He has not done so. More 
than nine-tenths of the race have died 
without any knowledge of Christ. Only 
a "little flock" has been "called and 
chosen and sanctified," while mankind at 
large have only lived that they might 
learn the sad but needful lesson that sin 
brings misery and evil brings destruction. 
With this experience which Adam 
had not, they will be better prepared than 
he to accept the favor of God when it 
shall be extended to them. To them, 
indeed, "the law," whether written on 
tables of stone or in their hearts, has 
been a "schoolmaster," availing for their 
condemnation, but not for their salvation, 
since that must come through Christ 
alone. 

The present mission of Christ to the 
Gentiles has been to take out of them "a 
people for his name." Convinced of 
this, many have supposed that all not so 
chosen were forever lost. In reality the 
few are chosen and severely disciplined 
now, that through their labors in the 
coming new day "all the families of the 
earth" shall be blessed. 

There is to be a resurrection of all. 
"But now is Christ risen from the dead 
and become the first fruits of them that 
slept. For since by man came death, by 
man came also the resurrection of the 
dead. For as in Adam all die, even so 
in Christ shall all be made alive." (1 Cor. 15:20-22.) 
"Therefore, as by the 
offence of one, judgment came upon all 
men to condemnation [to death], even 
so by the righteousness of one, the free 
gift came upon all men unto justification 
of life." (Rom. 5:18.) "And he 
shall send Jesus Christ, which before was 
preached unto you, whom the heaven 
must receive until the times of restitution 
of all things which God hath spoken 



by the mouth of all his holy prophets 
since the world began." All that was 
lost in Adam by the world of mankind 
will thus be restored through Christ. 
All the prophets had declared it, though 
it is improbable that they understood it. 
This resurrection, this "justification to 
life," then, is a part of the Savior's work 
of blessing all the "nations," "kindreds" 
and "families of the earth." How, then, 
shall we read his words— John 5:28-29 
—"Marvel not at this, for the hour is 
coming in the which all that are in the 
graves shall hear his voice and shall 
come forth; they that have done good 
unto the resurrection of life, and they 
that have done evil unto the resurrection 
of damnation." The new version renders 
the last word "judgment" instead 
of "damnation," and a glance at the 
original discloses the fact that the change 
is wisely made. The Greek word is 
"Krisis." Webster gives eight definitions 
to the word "judgment," which includes 
trial as well as sentence. Read 
now verses 24 to 27, the burden of which 
tends toward the giving of life, rather 
than its withdrawal. 

"Judgment must begin at the house of 
God," says Peter. The church has its 
trial now; the world will have its trial 
hereafter. The "day of judgment" will 
be a period commensurate with the extent 
and grandeur of the work to be 
done in it. 

"Then said one unto him, Lord, are 
there few that be saved? And he said 
unto them, Strive to enter in at the 
straight gate; for many, I say unto you, 
will seek to enter in and shall not be 
able when once the master of the house 
has risen up and hath shut to the door." 
This refers to the present dispensation. 

Now note a picture of the coming day: 
"Strengthen ye the weak hands and confirm 
the feeble knees. Say to them that 
are of a fearful heart, Be strong; fear 
not; behold your God will come with 
vengeance, even God with a recompense; 
he will come and save you. 
Then the eyes of the blind shall be 
opened and the ears of the deaf shall be 
unstopped. Then shall the lame man 
leap as a hart and the tongue of the 
dumb sing, for in the wilderness shall 
waters break out and streams in the 



desert.... And a highway shall 
be there, and a way, and it shall be called 
the way of holiness; the unclean shall 
not pass over it; the wayfaring men, 
though fools, shall not err therein." 
And the ransomed of the Lord shall return 
(from death) and come to Zion with 
songs and everlasting joy upon their 
heads; they shall obtain joy and gladness, 
and sorrow and sighing shall flee 
away."— Isa. 35:3-10. 

Every age is tributary to its successor 
in the revealed plan of God. In the 
present the rod of God smiteth the rocky 
heart of a man, and lo! it becomes a 
"well of water springing up into everlasting 
life;" but in the broader day, 
when the New Jerusalem "cometh down 
from God out of heaven," the water of 
life is not a little well here and there, but 
a mighty river, and then "whosoever 
will may partake" thereof freely. (Rev. 22:1,2,17.) 
The church is then complete; 
yet we are told that the leaves of 
the trees upon the margin of the river 
are for the healing of the nations, showing 
that there will then be nations not in 
health, but capable of being healed. 

"The ransom given does not excuse 
sin in any; it does not propose to count 
sinners saints and usher them into everlasting 
bliss. It merely settles the first 
condemnation and its penalty, and 
reckons the sinner released from that 
condemnation and its results, direct and 
indirect, and places him again on trial 
for life, in which his own willful obedience 
or willful disobedience shall decide 
whether he may or not have everlasting 
life. "-Millennial Dawn," Vol. I., p. 148. 

"But, beloved, be not ignorant of this 
one thing, that one day is with the Lord 
as a thousand years and a thousand 
years as one day. The Lord is not 
slack concerning his promise as some 
men count slackness, but is long-suffering 
to us-ward, not willing that any 
should perish, but that all should come 
to repentance."— 2 Peter, 3:8-9. 

"Who will have all men to be saved 
(from death) and come to a knowledge 
of the truth. For there is one God and 
one mediator between God and men, the 
man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a 
ransom for all, to be testified in due time." 
-1 Tim. 2:4-6. 



In this last clause lies the key to the 
mystery. To the millions of the living 
to-day and to the far vaster myriads of 
the dead the ransom has not been testified, 
but that it will be we have many a 
"Thus saith the Lord." When even 
extinct and sinful Sodom shall be brought 
back to her "former estate" and made 
a daughter to Jerusalem, as we read in 
Ezek. 16:44 to end, we may well believe 
that "the mercy of the Lord endureth 
forever," and that "I will give 
thee the heathen for thine inheritance 
and the uttermost parts of the earth for 
a possession." The mysteries of human 
destiny that have pained our hearts and 
tested our faith are clearing up in the advancing 
light due to the household of 
faith, and as the Church beholds her 
work spreading out before her in the 
coming life, and sees the grandeur of her 
association with her head in ruling and 
blessing the nation's new-born from the 
grave, she is filled with gratitude and 
gladness and her heart is stirred with 
passionate zeal for present self-purification 
and to make known to all the good 
tidings which shall be to all people. 
J. A. STOWE. 



R903 : page 4 
LIVING BY FAITH. 



"Now the just shall live by faith, but if any 
man draw back my soul shall have no pleasure in 
him."-Heb. 10:38. 

Living by faith is a very different thing 
from living by sight. To live by sight 
is to act in the present, and plan for the 
future, according to our own knowledge, 
experience and judgment; while to live 
by faith is to study and accept God's 
plan for both the present and future, and 
to act as he directs, ignoring our own 
ideas of expediency whenever God's 
word speaks to the contrary. 

It will not require very deep penetration 
therefore to decide to which of these 
two classes we belong. Every man belongs 
to either the one or the other, unless 
he be an idiot or insane. The great 
mass of mankind are endeavoring to 



walk by sight; yet they are so very 
short sighted that they can see but a 
short distance in advance, and their past 
experience has been so brief and varied, 
that it forms a poor criterion on which 
to base a correct judgment in devising 
plans for the future. Yet, lacking faith 
in God, it is the best they can do for 
themselves, and they very generally 
realize that all their plans must end with 
the present existence, as they know 
nothing of the future beyond the tomb. 

But there is a small class who walk by 
faith. They are a peculiar people, separate 
from the world, and cannot assimilate 
with it. Having learned and believed 
God's plan, and seeing that it not 
only includes all the present but stretches 
on into eternity, and having implicit 
confidence in his infinite wisdom and 
boundless love, they simply place their 
hand in his, accepting of his proffered 
leading, and promising to follow wherever 
he directs, trusting that however 
dark or thorny the way may be, the end 
will be blessed and glorious. They are 
not promised that the pathway in the 

R903 : page 5 

present life shall be one of luxury and 
ease, that they shall have abundance of 
comforts, that their business plans shall 
all succeed, that friends will multiply, 
and that their declining years, specially, 
shall be years of rest, after the heat and 
burden of the day is past. 

No, these things are not promised, 
but it is promised that their bread and 
water shall be sure as long as God desires 

R904 : page 5 

to have them live; and having food 
and clothing they are to be therewith 
contented, and whatever temporal adversity 
may come, to remember through 
it all, that all things whether good or 
evil, shall, under the divine management 
work together for good to them. Having 
this confidence it is their privilege 
to be always rejoicing, trusting with 
childlike simplicity to their heavenly 
Father's love and care, and faithfully 
meekly and obediently following in 
the footsteps of our leader and head, 



Christ Jesus, who set us an example 
that we should follow in his steps. 

His life was one of implicit faith in 
the promises of God, and his daily walk 
in perfect harmony with his faith— obedient 
even unto death. He took no 
thought more than was necessary for the 
life that he then possessed— either for 
the present or future of his earthly existence; 
and beyond that, he had nothing 
except what was secured to him by 
the promise of God. 

The apostle denominates this class 
who now thus live by faith, the just. 
This includes Jesus their Lord and head, 
the just one, and all those now justified 
by faith in his blood and following in 
his footsteps. These justified ones are 
just, having received the favor of justification 
through Christ, and in grateful 
and cheerful obedience submitted themselves 
to God. Blessed "little flock" follow 
on, through evil report and good 
report, through present tribulation and 
trial and conflicts within and without; it 
is your Father's good pleasure to give 
you the kingdom; blessed virgin church 
"the King hath greatly desired thy 
beauty" and thou shalt be his bride and 
joint-heir, if thou wilt prove thy love for 
him by cheerful endurance unto the 
end. 

But if any of this class draw back 
the Lord will have no pleasure in them. 
To draw back from this high privilege 
into which we have come by faith, is to 
go back to the world and to live after 
the course of this world, to take the 
world's standpoint of observation and 
to reject the Lord's leading. The drawing 
back is not generally done suddenly 
but gradually. It begins with discontent, 
and the discontent soon finds expression 
in complaint; and complaint 
soon developes into open opposition, 
which grows more and more fixed and 
obstinate. Paul declares the end of such 
apostacy when in the next verse he remarks 
hopefully, "But we are not of 
them who draw back unto destruction, 
but of them that believe to the saving of 
the soul." 

Let each of the dear consecrated 
company beware of taking the first 
steps backward; and if you realize that 
you have already done so, wake up to a 



sense of your danger and recover yourself 
at once from the snare of the adversary. 
Your only safety dear ones is in 
keeping your eye of faith fixed on the 
mark of the prize of your high calling 
and forgetting the things behind. If 
you keep looking back at the sacrifices 
already made you will only see the 
things behind, and the things before- 
unseen except by the eye of faith— will 
cease to attract you, and very soon you 
will be caught in the snare of the prince 
of this world. Besides the malady of 
discontent is contageous and may spread 
to some other members of the household 
of faith, and so many be defiled. 
Thus you would be a stumbling block 
and adversary of the body of Christ 
rather than an aid and upbuilder of it. 
"Watch and pray that ye enter not into 
temptation. "-MRS. C. T. R. 



R904 : page 5 

"NO VARIABLENESS, NEITHER SHADOW 
OF TURNING." 

"Do not err, my beloved brethren: Every 
good gift and every perfect gift is from above 
and cometh down from the Father of lights, with 
whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning 
Of his own will begat he us with the word 
of truth, that we should be a kind of first fruits 
of his creatures."— Jas. 5:16-18. 

Only those who have been brought to 
a clear knowledge of the plan of God, 
can really rejoice in those assurances 
which the Scriptures give of the unchangeableness 
of his character, and the 
certainty that all his purposes shall be 
accomplished. To the great majority 
of Christians this assurance only awakens 
fearful apprehensions. For centuries 
the church has been taught that 
God's plan is to consign all but a few of 
his creatures to eternal and hopeless 
misery; and as they look at his perfect 
law and realize their own shortcomings 
when measured by it, and much more 
the utter failure of all the world to find 
justification through it, the assurances 
of God's unchangeableness sounds like 
the knell of an eternal and merciless 



doom for the great majority of the human 
race. 

But with what different feelings we 
read the blessed words, "With Him is 
no variableness, neither shadow of turning" 
—we who have been so wonderfully 
enlightened through the Scriptures 
concerning God's plan: as to how it was 
wisely designed before the creation began; 
how it has been developing in the 
ages past; what is its present status and 
mode of development; and what and 
when will be the glorious outcome. As 
we take in the grand scope of the wondrous 
plan and perceive the blessings in 
store through it for all creation, both 
spiritual and human, our hearts are 
filled with joy unspeakable and full of 
glory as we read, "With him is no variableness, 
neither shadow of turning." 
"I am the Lord, I change not." "My 
word that goeth forth out of my mouth 
shall not return unto me void, but it 
shall accomplish that which I please, 
and it shall prosper in the thing whereto 
I sent it."-Mal. 3:6; Isa. 55:11. 

Do not err, beloved brethren: every 
good and perfect gift comes from God. 
God's plans for mankind are all good 
and perfect, and when fully realized in 
his appointed time will amply demonstrate 
his glorious and benevolent character. 
Every purpose of God is for the 
ultimate good of his creatures. His severest 
chastisements are for the reformation 
of the wayward and their final establishment 
in righteousness and everlasting 
happiness; and only when they 
absolutely refuse to be rightly exercised 
by the discipline of the Lord will he 
administer the final punishment which 
forever blots them out of existence, because 
unworthy of life. And this he 
declares will be the last resort; for "As 
I live, saith the Lord, I have no pleasure 
in the death [second death] of the 
wicked, but that the wicked turn from 
his way and live.— Ezek. 33:11. 

God is not the vindictive tyrant which 
so-called orthodoxy represents him to 
be, delighting in the eternal misery and 
torture and hopeless despair of millions 
of his creatures; and those who have 
been taught to so regard him should 
reflect upon his words through the 
prophet Isaiah (29:13)— "Their fear 



toward me, is taught by the precept of 
men." 

God's eternal purpose is briefly epitomized 
in two great covenants carefully 
recorded by the prophets— the Abrahamic 
Covenant, and the New Covenant. 
The former, addressed to Abraham, 
reads thus: "In thy seed shall all the 
nations of the earth be blessed." (Gen. 12:3; 
22:18.) The latter, addressed 
to the typical people Israel who represented 
the whole world [see Tabernacle 
Types] is recorded thus: "Behold the 
days come, saith the Lord, that I will 
make a new covenant with the house of 
Israel and with the house of Judah. 
Not according to the covenant that I 
made with their fathers in the day that 
I took them by the hand to bring them 
out of the land of Egypt, which my 
covenant they brake, although I was a 
husband unto them, saith the Lord. 
But this shall be the covenant that I 
will make with the house of Israel: 
After those days [when the days are 
accomplished for the overthrow of the 
kingdoms of this world and the setting 
up of the kingdom of God] saith the 
Lord, I will put my law in their inward 
parts, and write it in their hearts; and 
will be their God, and they shall be my 
people. And they shall teach no more 
every man his neighbor, and every man 
his brother, saying, Know the Lord; 
for they shall all know me, from the 
least of them unto the greatest of them, 
saith the Lord; for I will forgive their 
iniquity, and I will remember their sin 
no more. In those days they shall say 
no more, The fathers have eaten a sour 
grape, and the children's teeth are set 
on edge. But every one [who dies then 
—the second death] shall die for his 
own iniquity [his own wilful sin, and 
not because of inherited weaknesses 
and tendencies to sin] . Every man 
that eateth the sour grape, his teeth 
shall be set on edge." 
-Jer. 31:31-34,29,30. 

Of these two covenants it will be 
seen, that the latter, or new covenant 
guarantees to all mankind, represented 
by Israel, a restitution. This is the 
prophet Jeremiah's testimony concerning 
the restitution of all things which 
Peter says, God has spoken by the 



mouth of all his holy prophets since 

the world began (Acts 3:21). A restitution, 

as all must know, signifies a restoration 

of that which was lost— the 

restoration of mankind to the perfection 

and blessedness lost in Eden. Read it 

again, and see how emphatically and 

clearly the Lord here states his purpose; 

and notice further that it is unconditional 

—an affirmation of Jehovah 

not subject to any contingencies which 

might hinder its going into effect. And 

then remember his words: "I am the 

Lord, I change not," and the words of 

the Apostle James, "With him is no 

variableness, neither shadow of turning"; 

and the words of the Apostle 

Peter, which show that the times of refreshing 

the times of restitution, are 

due to begin with the return of our 

Lord Jesus Christ whom the heavens 

receive until that time.— Acts 3:19-21. 

R905 : page 5 

In view of this glorious purpose of 
God for all mankind, is there not cause 
for great rejoicing in the unchangeableness 
of God's purpose, and also in 
looking for the appearing of our Lord 
and Saviour Jesus Christ clothed with 
divine power for the accomplishment of 
that purpose? 

The former or Abrahamic covenant, 
it will be observed, is not applicable to 
the whole world, except in the sense 
that the whole world shall be blessed 
through it. It guarantees that a class 
called the "seed," whom God shall 
elect, shall be clothed with authority 
and power as Jehovah's agents for the 
accomplishment of his purposed blessing 
of all, as indicated in the new covenant. 
This promised Seed of Abraham 
is the Great Prophet of whom Moses 
wrote (Deut. 18:15-19; Acts 3:22,23), 
and whom the Apostle Paul explains to 
be the Christ— Jesus the head, and the 
overcoming church the members of his 
body.-Gal. 3:16,29. 

As the new covenant which guarantees 
restitution for all, belongs specially 
to the Millennial Age, so the Abrahamic 
covenant, which guarantees the selection 
and exaltation to power of the Great 
Prophet who shall restore all things, is 



confined exclusively to the Gospel Age. 
This covenant must be fulfilled, before 
the New Covenant can go fully into 
operation. And of course when it is 
fulfilled, the special favors now offered 
through it will no longer be offered to 
or attainable by any. The favors of the 
Abrahamic Covenant do not go beyond 
this age, in which the selection of the 
little flock to receive the kingdom will 
be fully accomplished. 

It is in this covenant that those who 
are Christ's faithful followers now, may 
read their title clear to joint heirship 
with him in his kingdom.— "Now to 
Abraham and his seed... which 
is Christ, were the promises made. And 
if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's 
seed, and heirs according to the promise." 
-Gal. 3:29. 

Abraham was the father of this seed 
only in a typical sense— "like unto him 
whom he believed, even God." (Rom. 4:16,17, 
see margin.) Like as Abraham 
was the father of the natural Isaac 
(type of Christ-Gal. 4:28; Rom. 9:8), 
so God is the father of the spiritual seed, 
the spiritual Isaac, which is Christ, head 
and body." (Gal. 3:16.) And yet a 
special blessing will come to the natural 
seed of Abraham in fulfilment of this 
covenant as he understood it. The covenant 
has two phases and will be fulfilled 
in each. (See "Millennial Dawn," Chap. 
XIV.) As James explains, "Of his own 
will begat he us with the word of truth, 
that we should be a kind of first fruits of 
his creatures." Not only was Jesus thus 
begotten of God, but every member of 
the anointed body is thus begotten." 
(1 Pet. 1:3; John 20:17.) Of this spiritual 
body or class Jesus was the first 
fruits, and they all as a class are a first 
fruits of all classes or orders which shall 
be brought back to harmony with God 
through their ministry of sacrifice. 

To be begotten is to receive the first 
impulse of life. As a race we were all 
dead, having lost life and all right and 
claim upon it through Adam's transgression. 
And not until begotten again, 
through faith in and acceptance of his 
promises, are any alive in the sight of 
God. The whole world yet lieth in condemnation 
[condemned to death], and 
consequently the steady tread of the 



whole race is downward toward the 
tomb. The time for their begetting 
again, or regeneration, has not yet come, 
but will have come when the great Restorer 
has fully taken unto himself his 
great power, and begun his reign. Then 
the fact of their redemption and consequent 

R905 : page 6 

right to life through faith in the 

Redeemer, and grateful acceptance of 

the unmerited favor, will be clearly testified 

to all (1 Tim. 2:6), and the hope 

begotten of this truth will be the first impulse 

of that life which when fully developed 

will be eternal. Those thus begotten 

of the truth, and who go on unto 

perfection, will be fully born into life 

when actually and fully delivered from 

the bondage of corruption into the glorious 

liberty of the children of God— when 

the great work of restitution is complete. 

But there is a class who are now begotten 
of the truth, as the apostle James 
here asserts, before the time appointed 
for the begetting or regeneration of the 
world in general. By faith they now 
accept the promised redemption, and 
though their restitution to perfection 
does not follow their acceptance of the 
ransom in this age, they are reckoned of 
God as restored and are told to so reckon 
themselves. They are thus not only begotten 
again, but are reckoned of God as 
born again, made perfect, fully restored, 
just as all mankind will be when the 
great work of restitution is complete in 
the end of the millennial age. Thus by 
faith they become partakers of the blessings 
of the New Covenant before its 
time for coming into force fully or for 
all. The blessings of restitution are 
reckonedly theirs, and God can now treat 
them as sons, "holy and acceptable" 
unto him. 

The apostle explains why it is that 
some are thus begotten now. It is that 
they may be "a kind of first-fruits of his 
creatures." When this class is fully developed, 
born, in the resurrection, they 
will be the first ripe, perfected fruit of his 
plan. "Blessed and holy are all they 
that have part in the first resurrection." 
These are justified, begotten, in this age, 
in order that they may lay hold by faith 



upon another and still greater favor of 

God offered in this age, that they may 

be eligible to a yet higher calling, even 

to the divine nature. (2 Pet. 1:4.) 

The conditions of this high calling are 

works and sacrifices added to faith; and 

since only perfect works and unblemished 

sacrifices are acceptable with God, 

it was needful that all of the sin-defiled 

ones called to such service should first 

be justified or reckoned pure and perfect, 

that they might present themselves 

living sacrifices, holy and acceptable to 

God. Those begotten of the truth, who 

hear and obey this call to become join t-sacrificers 

with Christ Jesus (Rom. 12:1) 

thus become heirs of the Abrahamic 

Covenant, joint-heirs with Christ, members 

of the "seed," the "Great Prophet," 

the "anointed," which is to bless and restore 

all nations; which is to apply the 

blessings of the New Covenant actually 

to all mankind. 

As members of the condemned race 
we never could have become heirs of the 
Abrahamic Covenant had we not first 
had the favors of the New Covenant applied 
to us; for only that which is holy, 
without spot or blemish or any such 
thing, is acceptable as a sacrifice (Lev. 22:20; 
Deut. 15:21; 17:1; 1 Pet. 1:19,16-19; 
Eph. 5:27), and we are so 
reckoned through Christ, our Redeemer. 

We notice further the expression of 
the apostle— "a kind of first fruits." 
While this class will be the very first 
fruit of God's creatures, it is only one 
kind of fruit, and there will be other kinds 
to follow, both human and angelic. But 
the divine kind will be first of all— first, 
both in point of time and also of rank. 
And through the divine kind shall all 
the other kinds be blessed; for they are 
to be exalted far above angels and principalities 
and powers, with Christ, even 
at the right hand of God [chief place of 
divine favor]. "Eye hath not seen, nor 
ear heard, neither have entered into the 
heart of man the things which God hath 
prepared for them that love him, but 
God hath revealed them unto us by his 
spirit." (1 Cor. 2:10.) Surely our 
light afflictions, our little crosses of the 
present time, are not worthy to be compared 
with the glory which shall be revealed 
in us, if we prove faithful unto 



death and are counted worthy of the 
crown of life. 

Language seems too weak to paint 
the glories of our high calling, and the 
blessedness vouchsafed to the heirs of 
the Abrahamic Covenant. Only those 
who are diligently delving into the 
depths of God's revealed truth are able 
to grasp these promises and to realize 
their value. And we might add, that 
only those who are faithful also in 
spreading the knowledge of the truth 
are able to fully appreciate it themselves. 
As we tell it to others, its blessed inspiration 
fills our own hearts to overflowing, 
and we are enabled to run more 
swiftly and more patiently the heavenly 
race. Let those who are faithfully running 
the race remember that "Faithful is 
he that calleth you, who also will do it." 
(1 Thes. 5:24.) Let not your faith 
stagger at the promises of God; for what 
he has promised he is able also to perform 
(Rom. 4:21), and "with him is no 
variableness, neither shadow of turning." 



R905 : page 6 

A VAST MAJORITY IN HELL. 

In the Christian Register, a Unitarian 
paper, we find the following: 

"The Examiner (Baptist) freely concedes 
the point we have pressed in regard 
to the damnation of the vast majority, 
at least of the adult portion, of the 
race. It says: The idea of a probation 
in this life does imply the possibility of 
salvation, but the possibility may never 
be realized. As a matter of fact, we believe 
that, for the vast majority of the 
heathen, this possibility never is realized, 
and we never yet heard of an orthodox 
theologian who held any other belief 
than this.'" 

In its comments, the Christian Register 
makes the following remarks: 

"This is meeting the issue fairly and 
squarely. The Examiner does not seem 
to be afraid to show its colors. Now let 
it print its weekly edition on black paper 
with a small margin of white, and its 
color will correspond with its doctrine. 
We are glad, however, that the Examiner 



is consistent. In these days of word-twisting 
and mental reservation, consistency 
is a notable virtue." 

R906 : page 6 

Another writer copying the above 
adds: "The suggestion is good, but if 
the white margin is to represent the few 
saved, even from Christendom, saying 
nothing about heathen lands, according 
to church creeds, the white margin will 
be so very small as to hardly be discernable. 
The hell into which our Baptist 
brethren would thrust the whole world, 
except the few who accept their terms of 
salvation, is described by the Christian 
poet, Dr. Watts: 

'Tempests of angry fire shall roll 

To blast the rebel worm, 
And beat upon the naked soul 
In one eternal storm.'" 

Here we see the difficulty which is 
rapidly overtaking intelligent Christians 
everywhere. It is a struggle between 
old creeds and reason, and the cause is 
that they falsely suppose their creeds to 
represent the Bible's teaching, and hence 
neglect the Bible and seek not in it, for 
the wisdom of God which alone is able 
to solve the question now rising prominently 
before men's minds, viz.:— What 
is the fate of those who have died in ignorance 
of the only name given under 
heaven or among men whereby we must 
be saved? 

In the above controversy the Examiner 
seeks to hold on to the Bible statements, 
that only believers in and accepters 
of the Lord as their Ransomer will 
be saved. But it failed to see that the 
present age is for the selection of a little 
flock, and that an age is coming in which 
all the blind eyes shall be opened and 
the deaf ears unstopped, when the knowledge 
of the Lord shall fill the earth, and 
when all shall know [believe in] him— 
when the "little flock" shall have become 
the Bride, the Lamb's wife, and as such 
shall say unto all the world, "Come," to 
the waters of truth and grace and live. 
(Rev. 22:17.) And failing to see this, 
it is forced to the position it takes, that 
the "vast majority" of the race never 
have had, and never will have a chance 
for life through Christ's ransom sacrifice 



—hence his ransom was not a ransom 
for all to be testified [to all] in due time." 
This in the Examiner's creed implies 
that the vast majority of humanity go 
into an eternity of torture because God 
did not make ample provision for them, 
either in the ransom or in the granting 
of a knowledge of that ransom as a basis 
for belief, without which they cannot be 
justified. 

Would that the Examiner and all 
could see that God's "due time" for 
granting a knowledge of the only name, 
is not limited to the present age and 
present adverse conditions: that As the 
heavens are higher than the earth, so are 
his ways and thoughts higher and wider 
than those of the vast majority of his 
children whose fear toward him, and too 
narrow views of his character and plan, 
are taught by the precepts of men.— 
Isa. 29:13 and 55:9. 

The Christian Register's views of the 
subject are broader and more reasonable 
when it repudiates the thought that God 
will consign the vast majority of mankind 
to endless torture simply because they 
knew not of Christ, and did not believe 
on him of whom they had not heard. 
But its reasonings are human merely. 
Not seeing the plan of God as set forth 
in the Bible, of a ransom for all and a 
due time for all to partake of the benefits 
of that ransom and believe in, and accept 
of Christ, it rejects the Bible's teachings 
entirely and represents a large and 
growing class who while professing a respect 
for the Bible, and calling Christ 
the Redeemer, in fact deny the teachings 
of the Bible and reject Christ as a Redeemer; 
denying that there was any 
need of a ransom for all, or for any. 
They virtually make everlasting life a 
reward for every man who will wear the 
filthy rags of his own righteousness, 
claiming that every man who lives the 
best he knows how, avoiding gross sins, 
will be accepted of God and granted 
everlasting life as a reward therefor. 
With such a view where was the necessity 
of testifying it now, or in any other 
"due time?" In such a view where 
could Paul's statement apply— "There 
is none other name given under heaven 
or among men whereby we must be 
saved?"— or where is the sense of urging 



men now, or at any time to believe on the 
Lord Jesus Christ to be saved, if they 
are to be saved without believing, and on 
the basis of works merely? 



R909 : page 6 

To do or not to do, to have 

Or not to have, I leave to thee; 

To be or not to be, I leave: 

Thine only will be done in me; 

All my requests are lost in one, 
Father, thy only will be done. 
-C. Wesley. 



R906 : page 6 

SAMARITANS LOOKING FOR MESSIAH. 

The woman of Samaria, talking with 
Jesus at Jacob's well, said, "I know that 
Messiah cometh (which is called Christ") 
(John 4:25, Revised Version.) Her people 
accepted the five books of Moses 
and from them drew their hope of a 
coming Messiah. 

A most wonderful corroboration of the 
woman's words is found in the belief of 
the Samaritans to-day. They belong to 
the race of the woman with whom Christ 
talked. They live at the ancient Shechem, 
(now Nablus,) not far from Jacob's 
well. They have a copy of the Pentateuch, 
which is of great antiquity. They 
celebrate all the Mosaic festivals, and are 
the only ones of all the Jewish race who 
offer sacrifices at the Passover. 

The Jewish Intelligence gives some interesting 
facts. The community now 
numbers about a hundred and fifty souls. 
By wearing of pink turbans they are distinguished 
from other people of the land. 
Their high priest is Jacob ibn Harun. 
Prof. Strack, of the German Palestine 
Association, had an interview with the 
high priest and questioned him concerning 
the belief of his people. The high 
priest replied in a letter, saying that their 
word Taheb (Ta'ib in Hebrew, signifying 
the Promised Prophet who will convert 
the people) refers to the prophet promised 
by the Lord, "I will raise them 



up a prophet," etc. (Deut. 18:15,18.) 
They interpret this as meaning "one 
who will teach the nations the good 
way, and lead them to walk in it only, 
so that the whole world will repent of its 
sin and become converted and purified 
from all evil." It is indeed a remarkable 
fact that the Samaritans, who accept only 
the Pentateuch, should have so strong a 
belief in the coming Messiah, and adopt 
the interpretation of Deut. 18:15,18, 
which the New Testament gives (Acts 3:22; 
7:37; John 4:25.) They think 
that they are now living in the age of 
"apostacy," which will only end with the 
appearance of Taheb, the Messiah, who 
will re-establish worship on Gerizim in 
its pristine purity. 

Great political convulsions will precede. 
"Then, the wisest of all the nations 
will be charged by the kings of the 
earth to find out the true faith. Among 
them will appear also Taheb, as the representative 
of the Samaritans, and quite 
unconscious of his Messiahship. But 
the whole council will be so impressed 
by his superior wisdom that they will 
follow him to Gerizim, where they will 
find the law of Moses, the vessels of the 
temple, and the hidden manna." Then 
the whole earth will submit to the law 
of Moses and to Taheb. At the foot 
of "this mountain" (Gerizim) of which 
the woman spoke to Jesus, her people 
still worship in a humble synagogue, in 
their prostrations throwing themselves 
on their faces towards the eastern summit 
of Mount Gerizim. They are still 
looking for Messiah.— S.S. World. 



R906 : page 6 

ANSWERS TO YOUR LETTERS. 

It is not possible for us to answer 
your letters as we should like to do. 
Our mail averages fifty to one hundred 
letters a day, some of them full of citations 
to Scripture which we have no 
time to look up, much less to reply to 
at length. We state this as an explanation 
why your letters have gone unanswered 
often, or perhaps a ten paged 
letter has been answered on a postal 



card. 

Please put all orders for books, etc., 
separate from your letter on another 

R906 : page 7 

piece of paper. And please state any 
questions as concisely as possible after 
you have finished your letter— as a 
Postscript. And be sure you write your 
name and full address plainly. Many 
letters come without and cause us much 
annoyance, as well as you. 

But think not, dear brethren and sisters, 
that your letters are unappreciated 
because unanswered. We can read 
five, for one we can answer; and were 
it not for the strength and encouragement 
which your many excellent letters 
afford, we would no doubt long ago 
have felt quite discouraged. But such 
wonderful letters from all quarters— 
from China, Britain, India, Sweden, 
Hayti, Australia, South America, besides 
the thousands from our own States 
and Canada, give evidence of such a 
work of grace in your hearts, and such 
zeal and variety of effort on your part 
to serve the truth, often at great sacrifice, 
that our hearts are re-invigorated. 
We wish you could all share this comfort 
and encouragement with us, and for 
this reason publish extracts (this month 
from an unusually large number) of letters. 
We give you but a sample, and 
we are by no means sure that they are 
the best; for some contain orders written 
in the body of the letter, and get 
lost after those orders are filled. 

So then write on, dear friends; your 
letters give us points, and frequently 
suggest subjects for TOWER articles. 
But do not be disappointed if your answer 
is slow, or if you get none. The 
TOWER, from month to month, is our 
letter to you; and the MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, when finished in its several volumes, 
will, we trust, answer all reasonable 
questions. 



R907 : page 7 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 



page 7 

Brother Adamson has been laboring 
for the truth in New York state for some 
time past with good success. In Buffalo 
especially quite a number were awakened 
to see the morning light. A hasty 
note recently received from him at Rochester, 
says among other things, "I 
have excellent letters from various 
places, especially Buffalo. Saints are 
encouraged and comforted by the truth, 
and growing daily in favor and knowledge. 
Here, storms have prevented 
much out-door work, but I have out 336 
of the Packets, (containing Food and sample 
TOWER) nevertheless. Catholics and 
Presbyterians seem to have gotten some 
"orders" respecting the Packets, not to 
read. Poor, stupid, blind "orthodoxy." 

Yours in tender regard and love in 
the anointed. J. B. A . 

Word received from Brothers Marting, 
Gillis, Myers, Bryan, Cobb, Blundin, 
Hickey, Van Hook, Bowman, 
[Brother Bowman, please send your 
present address in another good letter.] 
and many others, indicate that amid circumstances 
sometimes favorable and 
sometimes adverse, each is seeking to 
do what he can. And though our home 
(Pittsburgh) missionaries are seldom referred 
to, you should know that there 
are here quite a number who will we 
doubt not, receive of the Master in due 
time such honorable mention as, "She hath 
done what she could," "Thou hast been 
faithful over a few things, I will make 
thee ruler over many things." 

We are more and more convinced 
that the "slothful servant" becomes a 
wicked one, and in the present time of 
trial will be sifted out, and by getting 
out of the light into darkness, will thus 
get his portion with the hypocrites. It 
will be found that every one who shall 
be of that "little flock," the "Royal 
Priesthood," will have been a priest not 
in name only but in deed and in truth- 
he must sacrifice his own will, and spend 
and be spent in the Royal service if he 
would share in the glories to be revealed 
in that Priesthood. This applies to 
each, not merely the public teachers, 
but to the private also. Every under 
priest will not only recognize his justification 



by the High Priest's sacrifice, 
but must also bring his sacrifice to God, 
acceptable in the name and merit of the 
great High Priest.-EDITOR. 

Orangeburg, S.C., Dec. 13, 1886. 
BROTHER RUSSELL: The special 
number of TOWER is at hand. I am 
highly pleased with your plan in thus 
absorbing the three issues of the TOWER 
whereby the many readers of the 
TOWER may obtain so invaluable a work 
as the Millennial Dawn, at the trifling 
extra charge of 25 cents. I sincerely 
hope that not only every subscriber may 
obtain it, but that many of the thousands 
of creed-bound and famishing ones in 
the various sects may obtain one, or 
read one thoroughly. No book is more 
calculated to establish one in the truths 
of God's word than Millennial Dawn, 
and those who are drifting upon the sea 
of insecurity would do well to clasp 
Millennial Dawn very warmly. Enclosed 
is 75 cents, the extra charge for 
three of us here. 

Yours in Christ, . 

R907 : page 7 

Ohio, Dec. 13, 1886. 
MY DEAR BRO. RUSSELL: I am so 

near the wall that my being cries out 
with anguish— hard pressed by the flesh 
and Satan. My desire is to resign my position 
in the nominal church— that of 
pastor, (though not a salaried position, 
for I will not hire). I might say my desire 
was to do so, but now I conclude 
to remain a while yet. My reasons are 
these: Your late work, "The plan of the 
ages," The Fire of Judgment, I call it- 
is in season to accomplish a great work 
here. It is the wedge which will separate 
the true from the false; and I shall 
see that it is driven into our congregation, 
but I shall be wary in my work. 
When all the wheat has been reached, 
then we will forsake the old nominal 
threshing floor and go out into the broad, 
white wheat fields and glean. 

I have delivered three lectures here 
in my native village, which are not in 
the least in taste with nominal religion. 
My themes were: 1. God— His attributes 
—His Plan, and Purpose in Creation. 2. 



Man— His Origin and Destination. 3. 
Life and Death— The Wages of Sin and 
the Gift of God. My next will be the 
new race— Christ. By the time I have 
these all fixed in their minds I will be 
ready to preach any Bible subject to 
them, having their minds prepared to 
receive it. I am now ready to advertise 
Z.W.T. from the pulpit, as people are 
wondering where I get this strange doctrine. 
Verily God has been leading me; 
I have no purpose of my own. 

Some of the brethren in , are arranging 

to have me come and preach 
for them. If it is God's will, I expect to 
go there in a few weeks, but I do hope 
the Lord will not permit Satan to exalt 
me, for I am heart sick of worldly praise. 
I think we are in the midst of a great 
trouble in the nominal church, and M. 
Dawn is destined to take a prominent 
position in this coming storm. It is the 
panacea that will open the blind eyes 
and unstop the deaf ear, and unloose 
the dumb tongue in the nominal Babylon. 
What a confusion I anticipate! 
"Come out of her my people." I would 
send you some money, but I can't just 
now. I am no financier, I am more of a 
Bible student. I remain your brother in 
Christ, and ask for your prayers in my 
behalf. J. P . 

DEAR BROTHER: Your letter of the 
13th rejoices me greatly. May God bless 
you dear brother, giving you grace according 
to your day, and upholding you 
with the word of truth. 

I am glad that you are seeing clearly, 
I am glad too that you have a fervent 
zeal which permits you to become warm 
and excited over a matter worthy of excitement 
and warmth— the great prize— 
the inheritance— a pearl of great value. 
I pity those who become deeply absorbed 
muck-raking for earthly treasures, 
but are cold and lifeless and do less in 
regard to the heavenly prize of our high 
calling. My prayer is that you may not 
be moved when you find others lukewarm. 
Do not conclude that you are 
too hot, our Lord and the chief apostles 
were enthusiasts, and burned with zeal 
and love for their work. 

Go on, dear brother; your plan is 
good, carry it out thoroughly. Being 



unbound by oath of office or covenant 
with any denomination to preach only 
their doctrines, you are at perfect liberty 
to preach God's Word as it opens. 

It is well to understand what we must 
expect that we may not be disappointed 
but strengthened as we see the harvest 
separation progress. In this as in 
many other respects the "harvest" of 
the gospel age closely resembles its 
type, the "harvest" of the Jewish age. 
Now as then "they shall cast you out of 
the synagogues," and "shall say all 
manner of evil against you falsely," and 
shall "hate you." Rejoice, however, 
and be exceeding glad, for this is an 
evidence or "witness of the Spirit" that 
you are in the "narrow way" as voiced 
by the word of sure testimony. 

For this reason you must be on your 
guard that your opponents may find no 
real cause for their evil speaking. Guard 
weak places. If you are "no financier" 
that would be a very assailable point. 
Guard it well. Live within your income, 
if it cuts off all luxuries and reduces you 
to potatoes and salt. Owe no man anything 
but love. 

You will want to arrange your affairs 
on a business basis at once, because as 
soon as you begin to scratch instead of 
tickle the ears you will find purses begin 
to close, and, generally speaking, you 
may expect the truth to separate you 
from the more wealthy of your friends 
and leave you in company mainly with 
the poor, rich only in faith and the 
coming inheritance. 

As an ambassador of the Great King, 
yet as a follower of him who was a servant 
of servants, be both noble and fearless, 
as well as humble and condescending. 
Be careful for nothing, but in 
everything and in every condition give 
thanks always and make full proof of 
your ministry. Such fruitage will honor 
the Lord and stand the test of the present 
trial— "so as by fire." Let me hear 
from you often. Grace, mercy and 
peace. 

Yours in fellowship and service, 
C. T. RUSSELL. 

page 7 

Howells Depot, N.Y., Jan. 2, 1887. 



MR. C. T. RUSSELL, DEAR SIR: I was 

very much surprised, and so much 
pleased, to receive the Dawn. I was 
eagerly watching for the special paper, 
but never dreamed I was to get the 
much wished for Dawn. I had hoped 
to be able to pay up the two years arrearages, 
renew my subscription and 
send for the Dawn, which I have 
greatly desired ever since you announced 
it ready, but owing to recent sickness, a 
light form of diphtheria, including husband, 
self, and our four children, which 
caused us great anxiety and some expense, 
I abandoned my purpose, concluding 
to wait awhile. But through 
your kind consideration I have to-day 
had the pleasure of perusing some of 
the contents. It is valuable to me, and 
I shall try to do what good I can by 
loaning it to others. 
Humbly and sincerely yours in Christ, 
A. B . 

Nottingham, England. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: Accept 
my tribute of thanks for the Dawn. I 
concur most emphatically in all Brother 
Adamson has said respecting it. Notwithstanding 
some of the chapters are 
old friends, they add to the book's value. 
I esteem its price, next to the grand 
text-book of our faith, above rubies. I 
have read the book through and some 
chapters several times, and I am amazed 
at the light it sheds upon God's word. 
Truly the Lord is with you and your 
dear wife, may he grant you all needful 
grace to sustain you. You are willing 
to be accounted "fools" for Christ's 
sake now and seek only for "glory, 
honor and immortality hereafter." You 
will be glad to know that I received my 
copies safely and have six of them loaned 
out at work. I cannot tell you yet what 
effect they are having on the readers, 
but will report in my next. I want 
seven more copies to send to friends in 
different parts of the country. I feel 
that this is just a sort of work I can do. 

Praying that the blessing of the Master 
of the harvest may continually 
abide upon you, I remain in loving fellowship 
and service, yours affectionally, 
A. P. R 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: I am 
slowly improving in health. I am usually 
quite comfortable, and am able to 
take a walk of a few rods each day— 
usually about the yard. I have not 
strength for more than this. I cough 
considerable at times, though by no 
means as much as I did. Have not finished 
Millennial Dawn yet, as I cannot 
read much without getting too tired. 

I am thankful to our dear Father in 
heaven for giving you light and ability 
to write this volume, and trust it will be 
a very effective agency in disseminating 
the truth. I am aware that to have it 
so, the book must be brought to the attention 
of the people, and were I able it 
would be a great pleasure to me to add 
my mite in this direction. Perhaps the 
Lord may yet give me the strength. 
His will be done. Permit me to express 
my hearty approval of "A Word of 
Warning" in last number. I am thankful 
that all through the struggle you hold 
the readers of Z.W.T. to the Scripture 
teaching, and that while there is so general 
a tendency to looseness on Bible 
teaching, the WATCH TOWER has held 
up Christ and him crucified as the only 
foundation. 

Mrs. T. joins me in Christian love to 
yourself and Sister Russell. 

Yours in Christ, S. T. TACKABURY. 

Brooklyn, Jan. 9, 1887. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: Both your 
letters were received in due time and 
suggestions considered. I am afraid 
you over-estimate my service; or is it 
possible that there are so few willing to 
do much of anything that what I rejoice 
to do appears to be more than it is? 
Well, I feel that I am doing but little to 
what I would do, and so do that little 
gladly. 

The package arrived in due time. I 
was surprised at its size, but glad that I 
could get so many to distribute. Have 
sold one book to a Methodist brother in 
business, who has been considering these 
views for some time. 

On Friday evening I went down to 
Talmage's church with about 100 copies 
of Z.W.T. About eight hundred or 
more were present. The first half hour 
was devoted to lecture; then, while singing, 



all who do not wish to remain longer 
go out. Then about three-quarters of 
an hour are given to devotional meeting. 
Six hundred were present. I sat near 
the door, and was out nearly first; pulled 
wrapper off papers instantly and commenced 
handing out rapidly, saying, 
"New Christian work, new book," &c. 
By the time all were out my papers were 
gone. Many go there from other 
churches, so the paper must be pretty 
widely spread. Then I went into the 
church, and, seeing a couple of young 
men looking at a copy, I handed them 
two, with the request that they should be 
handed to Dr. Talmage. 

I am profiting by the perusal of Millennial 
Dawn. Your statements are 
clear, backed by Scripture proof, and 
advance step by step in so orderly and 
connected a manner that the learner is 
led gradually up to the view of these 
great truths, instead of being overwhelmed 
at once, and thus turned away 
from them. I do wish every earnest 
Christian could be induced to read the 
book. 

I shall go to another large church 
next Friday evening, and also mail 
copies to different places. To many 
places in the United States, and to Canada, 
England, Scotland, Germany, Switzerland, 
and even Russia, has the October 
number WATCH TOWER gone. You 
may think I have done some mailing 
when I tell you that almost all that large 
package of TOWERS have gone by mail. 
The five Millennial Dawns came safely 
to hand, and I sold two and mailed the 
other three, one to Mr. Moody, one to 
Major Whittle and one to Rev. Geo. E. 
Needham, Secretary and originator of 
the Proph. Conf., with letter to each, and 
asking a reply; and I sent a bound copy 
of Millennial Dawn to Canon F. W. 
Farrar, of England, with a longer letter, 
which I am almost certain will bring an 
answer. I have been very busy during 
December, but now am sitting down to 
go a second time studiously through Millennial 
Dawn. I desire to fasten many 
things therein upon my memory. 

I mailed you yesterday a money order 
for $10, which I expected to send you 
last month. Wish it were greater. I rejoice, 
even though not without trials. 



Yours in service, B. P_ 
R907 : page 8 



Kansas 
C. T. RUSSELL, DEAR SIR: Find enclosed 
$1.25, for which please send one 
copy of Millennial Dawn and the TOWER 
one year. I never was interested in religious 
writings till I read Food. I am 
not a Christian; it is so hard to do right; 
but I just love to read this teaching, it is 
so reasonable. I was on the "Poor 
List" last year, and am not really able 
to subscribe. I live in a "dug-out," 
with only a dirt floor, with a large family; 
but I do not feel like taking so much for 
nothing, so will send this much in spite 
of all. Will also send some names for 
samples. 

Yours sincerely, E. W . 

IN REPLY. 

DEAR FRIEND: You probably are 
more acceptable in the sight of our Lord 
than many who profess much more. Your 
willingness to sacrifice for the truth proves 
this. The fact that you love the truth 
proves that you have an "ear to hear." 
The fact that God has sent it to you at 
all, proves that he has some blessing in it 
for your heart and life. In fact, you are 
already a believer, and now you are experiencing 
some of the "joy and peace" 
promised to such as believe. Grasp a 
firmer hold of the Lord; realize him not 
only as the Saviour of all from death, 
but as your Redeemer. Trust him for 
the future and learn to trust him for the 
present also. Serve him by serving the 
truth and daily seek to be more like him 
in your thoughts and deeds. "She hath 
done what she could," is the highest 
praise any disciple can expect.— EDITOR. 

page 8 

Brother Brown, writing from Chicago, 
says: "I called yesterday to see Brother 
C. (an attorney-at-law) and passed about 
three-quarters of an hour very pleasantly 
with him. I found him to be a Scotch, 
"dyed in the wool" Presbyterian, but 
by accident a year or so ago his attention 
was called to Food. On Sunday 



last he sat down immediately after breakfast 

and began to read Millennial Dawn, 

Vol. I. He read without stopping even 

to eat until 10 o'clock that night, and the 

first half of the book looks as my own 

copy did, only more so, for he had underscored 

fully half of it. 

Veedersburg, Ind. 

MR. C. T. RUSSELL: Enclosed find 
one dollar for the paper. 

Educated by a Methodist father and 
Presbyterian mother, even as a child 
my inquisitive mind detected the inconsistency 
of accepting the tenets of both 
denominations, and also of rejecting 
them. When I grew older and ventured 
to express my doubts, my father 
replied, "It does seem illogical and inharmonious; 
but, my child, I am sure 
the Bible is true and logical if it were 
clearly understood. Do not try to 
comprehend what you cannot understand, 
but believe in Christ." Even 
then the thought crossed my mind, if 
Christ died to restore what Adam lost, 
why not make every man just as Adam 
was? That would be restoring. However, 
I tried to follow the advice given, 
tried earnestly and sincerely to exercise 
faith, but after a time fell into skepticism 
—stayed away from church, and had 
for my friends worldly people, scientists 
and infidels. My home was then in a 
beautiful city, but my mind kept at 
times reverting to the old subject. I 
finally concluded there must be, there 
is, one true church, and it must be the 
Catholic Church, since so many of the 
Protestants whom I knew were so insincere; 
and as the Episcopalians claimed 
the same origin, I would try that. 

Just as the change to this little town was 
talked of, your tract fell into my hands. 
I glanced over it, thinking it odd; said 
something to the pastor about it, who 
laughed at me for thinking it something 
new. The little book was packed 
amongst my effects, and while in a 
doubting mood one day fell into my 
hands again, seeming to answer every 
troubled question. I believe now my 
faith is established; and it seems odd to 
me that other people— cultured, Christian 
people— cannot see it as I do. 

Pardon my long letter, unless it interests 



you to hear details. I am in the 
"Wilderness condition," have consecrated, 
and dare not turn back. Remember 
me in your prayers. 
Kindly and respectfully, MRS. E. W. R. 

Brother MacMillan, of Latrobe, says: 
"We don't express our praise as does 
the Salvation Army, but if any of God's 
people can feel and live a Hallelujah life, 
we ought to. I sometimes wonder what 
those Salvation Army people would do 
if the light from God's word would 
shine upon them and illumine their understanding 
as it has done ours; for the 
little they have makes them so noisy. 

An aged brother here wishes me to 
say that the Dawn is the best prepared 
table of food that ever he sat down to, 
and that he cannot get done eating. 
He keeps right on partaking, and, 
strange as it may seem, his hunger has 
not yet diminished." 

San Joaquin Co., Cal. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: I have 
now given Millennial Dawn a thorough 
examination, and like the book. I took 
one day last week trying to get subscribers 
for it, and have got twelve for 
my first day's work, and as I intend to 
place one in each family who attend my 
Sabbath school (I say my school because 
for the last eighteen months I have had 
no connection with any denomination of 
Christians), and as I wish to send some 
to distant parts, I send you enclosed a 
P.O. Order for fifteen dollars, for which 
send the value in Millennial Dawn, 
Vol. I. Yours, etc., D. K . 

Bear Lake, Michigan. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: I have 
not done as much as I should like for 
the advancement of the truth, and the 
setting up of Christ's Kingdom, but I 
desire to do more. I long to give all my 
time to the glorious work of spreading 
the truth. To open the blind eyes, and 
to turn men from darkness to light, from 
the power of Satan unto God, that they 
may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance 
among them which are sanctified 
by faith that is in Christ Jesus. 

I had an opportunity last summer to 
symbolize my baptism, I was baptised 



by immersion by a Baptist minister, we 
had a talk together and I found his idea 
of baptism was according to scripture. 
He could not accept all of our views, 
although he was the most liberal Baptist 
I ever met, acknowledging the evils of 
sectarianism but fearing to come out. 
He baptised me on my confession of 
faith, but not into the Baptist church as 
is generally the custom. 

I have been approached by two Congregational 
ministers, one of them a 
great scholar, bearing the title D.D., 
trying to persuade me to unite with 
them in a Congregational church which 
they are trying to organize in this place. 
They made use of all manner of nice 
speeches, saying my influence would be 
a great help; and it mattered not what 
I believed if I would accept their creed. 
They even went so far as to write out 
what they called articles of faith, separate 
and apart from their regular 
church creed, leaving out some articles 
which they thought I and some others 
who have accepted the TOWER views, 
would object to. But they found we 
were not for sale: we told them that we 
would take nothing less than the Word 
of God itself for our creed, with Christ 
for our only foundation and hope; and 
with firm faith in him as our only Saviour, 
we claimed the right to search the 
Scripture for ourselves and to believe 
whatever it teaches. 

The TOWER is a great help in the 
search for truth, we would not do without 
it. There is always some new light 
received from the Scriptures by reading 
it and comparing it with the Bible. 

The Millennial Dawn which I am 
reading through the second time, is indeed 
a most wonderful book, it seems 
impossible for any one to read it and 
not be convinced of the truthfulness of 
its position. It is a great feast to my 
hungry soul. I find too, that the Diaglott 
is a wonderful help in clearing up 
many seemingly dark passages. I 
thank our dear Father in Heaven for all 
these helps. 

Will you please send me about a dozen 
of the October number of the TOWER? 
I think I can make good use of 
about that number. I intend loaning 
them instead of giving them away. I 



intend sending for some packets in order 
to do some colporteur work as soon 
as the way opens. 

Below are the names of two ministers 
(Baptist and Methodist) to whom please 
send the TOWER, October number. 

With love to yourself and the church 
at Pittsburgh, I am yours in Christ, 
J. N. L . 

Buffalo, Jan. 2, 1887. 

DEAR SIRS: I have just received the 
first volume of Millennial Dawn, I was 
about to send for one bound in cloth, as 
it would stand rougher usage, as I intend 
to lend it to all inquirers after truth. 
A priest here desires to read it, and I 
am more than pleased to loan it to him, 
as I believe it to be the essence of the 
word of God. ZION'S WATCH TOWER 
has been distributed to a great many of 
the members of the church of which I 
am a member. At first it was not received 
very warmly, but now many are 
anxious to read it and are seeing the 
Bible as a new book through its teachings, 
especially the priest to whom I allude. 

Yours in Christ, O. E . 

Helsingborg, Sweden, Dec. 19, 1886. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: It is now 
some months since I had the pleasure of 
receiving your letter and papers (Swedish 
as well as English), for which I 
thank you much. I will use them so 
that they will do the most good. People 
in general are averse to hear of salvation 
for any after this life, just as in 
America. Here the Lutheran faith predominates, 
but many have been led to 
abandon the idea of an atonement, and, 
as I have seen in the TOWER, you are 
fully acquainted with their way of mixing 
things. At one meeting, where I was 
defending the atonement, and claimed 
that Christ purchased us with his blood, 
one speaker said, "The average of Christian 
teachers allow that something great 
took place at the crucifixion of Christ, 
but of what and how, there seems to be 
no clearness." An odd one is desirous 
of perusing the TOWER, and they have 
nothing to say but that light and truth 
are shown through them. Thanks be to 
God, when I see through all God is showing 
me, that my efforts are not in vain, 



and people are getting more prepared to 
hear the glad tidings of great joy which 
shall be to all people. Thank God that 
light is shining; thank God that I am 
privileged to help to spread it. Some 
years ago, when I sacrificed myself to 
God, I had no idea that I should be distrusted 
and rebuked of any that trust 
God, but in entire reliance on God and 
his Son, my Redeemer, I shall be able to 
overcome. Yours, in hope of glory, 
N. M. O . 

Fort Dodge, Iowa, Jan. 17, 1887. 
DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST: I had 

just finished reading your book, lent by 
a friend, when the cheaper edition came. 
I thank God that he has given you such 
a work to do for his children, and now I 
have a great desire to persuade as many 
as possible to purchase and read the 
book. I had thought to get as many 
copies as I could and lend them, but that 
does not satisfy me. I could not reach 
enough, and I believe the way is open 
for me to visit the Christian and thinking 
people of this place, and perhaps of 
others, and my brother proposes to do 
the same in other cities and towns, if we 
meet with success sufficient to cover our 
necessary expenses. My hopes are very 
buoyant, because I want everybody to 
read it, yet I know that I must not expect 
too much. 

I enclose fifteen dollars, send me of 
the cloth and paper bound Dawn, Vol. 
I., half each. 

In Christian fellowship. Sue B . 



New Orleans, La., Dec. 17, 1886. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL: Inclosed please 
find P.O. Order for ten dollars, for which 
please renew my subscription for the 
WATCH TOWER (three copies), and send 
another copy of Millennial Dawn. What 
is over use where most needed. The 
money I send I received in answer to 
prayer. I have been desirous to send 
my subscription and something for the 
Lord's work, but somehow was not able 
to spare it out of my wages. Yesterday 
I asked the Lord to help me get it. Today 
my employer handed me twenty 
dollars as a present, which seems to me 
a direct answer to my prayer. 

I have been since asking the Lord to 



make plain his will to me regarding it, 
which I believe to be this, to give ten 
dollars for the clothing and feeding of 
the spiritual man, the other ten I give 
to my wife for her part of the work, 
namely, supplying the physical necessities 
of the Lord's poor around us. Still 
trusting in God, who gives us richly all 
things to enjoy, I remain as ever your 
fellow-laborer in the harvest field. 
C. S . 

Oceana Co., Mich., Dec. 6, 1886. 
C. T. RUSSELL, DEAR BROTHER: 

The first volume of Millennial Dawn, 

so kindly sent came safe to hand, may 

the Lord richly bless the unselfish love 

bestowed on the poor of the Lord's 

flock. I have not read it all through 

yet, but have been greatly blessed from 

the perusal so far. I thank God every 

hour of my life that I am enabled to understand 

so much of his grand loving 

plan for the blessing of all the families 

of the earth. I am sorry I am unable 

to forward you any money with this, the 

great drouth here the past summer has 

deprived me of that happiness. I am 

compelled this winter (with poor health) 

to labor in the lumber woods for means 

to supply self and family with bread, 

and food for my stock. However, I expect 

some money before long and part 

of it shall be appropriated in renewing 

my subscription for the TOWER and the 

volume of Millennial Dawn, and I trust 

something for the Tract Fund. 

I shall want one of the cloth bound 
volumes for my library, and intend to use 
the present volume for lending to those 
whom I have reason to believe are hungering 
for the truth. 

Your brother in fellowship and service. 
T. B 



R907 : page 1 

VOL. VIII. PITTSBURGH, PA., MARCH, 1887. NO. 7. 



page 1 

THE supply of "FOOD" is exhausted; 
and it will be some time before we will 
have a fresh supply ready. Any who have 
a quantity on hand not in use, will oblige 
us by returning a part, at least. We have 
always plenty of free sample TOWERS. 



THOSE who have "packets" loaned out, 
can procure of us clean papers, and packet 
envelopes to replace such as are too 
much soiled for further use. Order only 
as many as are needed. 



R909 : page 1 

THOUGH our office address is changed 
as noted above, we have not removed, but 
are still in the same place. The building 
fronts on Federal St. No. 40., but our office 
entrance is on Robinson St., and has 
recently been numbered. Our mail would 
come safely, whether addressed to street 
and number or not, but the above will be 
more readily found by strangers. 



R908 : page 1 

THE ONES MEANT. 



Hereafter it will not be sufficient, that 
one write us to send them the TOWER another 
year, without mentioning money or 
their intent to pay at some time, or their 
inability to pay. Say, what you mean. 

Neither will it be sufficient that some 
one write and send us an address without 
money, saying that the party is poor. 
We do not offer to send the TOWER to all 
the poor of the world. To the poor who 
are the Lord's children, and as such are 
sufficiently interested in the truths published 
in the TOWER to write us, and say 



so, and request it— to these only we offer 
it each year, so long as it is published. 

Let such not be backward to ask; we 
are anxious that such should have it. 
Accept it as from the Lord— it is from him. 
Not only are the truths it bears from his 
Word, unfolded to us by his favor, but the 
money with which it is published is all 
consecrated to Him. Hence those who 
have no money to pay for it, can and 
should accept it from Him, as per the notice 
above from Isa. 55:1,2. 

Should you learn of any who have asked 
as above, or who have subscribed and 
paid for the present year, who do not receive 
the paper, advise them to write us 
again, for there surely is some mistake, 
which we will be most glad to have rectified. 
Almost every mail brings some letters 
either without the writers name, or 
with insufficient address. 



R909 : page 1 

THE ANNIVERSARY SUPPER. 

Remember the date for the commemoration 
of the death of Christ, our Passover 
—on the anniversary of his last celebration, 
April 7th., evening. Meet with 
fellow members of the one body so far as 
possible, but eat it alone, if you know of 
none with whom you could celebrate it 
in spirit. If you cannot do better make 
a substitute for wine of raisin juice. 

We will be glad to have as many as 
possible meet with us in this city on that 
occasion. We anticipate a precious season. 
Warm hearts here will make you welcome, 
and endeavor to carry out Paul's and 
Peter's suggestions.— 1 Pet. 4:9; Rom. 12:13; 
Heb. 13:2. Review the subject 
in last (February) TOWER. 



R907 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 



"He shall send his messengers with the great 
trumpet [Seventh Trumpet], and they shall gather 
together his elect from the four winds, from one 
end of heaven to the other."— Matt. 24:31. [Sinaitic 



and Syriac MSS. omit sound. 

"Gather my saints together unto me; those that 
have made a covenant with me by sacrifice."— 
Psa. 50:5. 

Millennial Dawn Vol. I. both in cloth 
and paper covers has already sold very 
largely and every mail brings fresh orders 
and grateful acknowledgement of it as 
God's instrumentality of blessing and enlightenment. 
But some of the friends 
connected with the work and the Tract 
Fund declare that they want to see the 
volume in its Fiftieth Thousand by January 
'88, believing that that number of 
such preachers and teachers would do a 
great work in forwarding the truth, blessing 
God's children and honoring their 
Father and Lord. To accomplish so 
desirable a result, it is proposed to reduce 
the paper bound 50 cent edition to one-half 
its present price, and make it hereafter 
25 cts. per copy for any quantity- 
one copy or a thousand copies, postage 
prepaid by us. 

Surely at that price even a child who 
could show the book should be able to sell 
numbers of them wherever thinking people 
are to be found, particularly thinking 
Christians. If you have read it carefully 
yourself, ask yourself how many you can 
place in the hands of readers, and get to 
work at once. The harvest truly is great 
and the laborers are few. Pray ye the 
Lord of the harvest that he will send forth 
more laborers, and if you are not one of 
them, pray that He will accept of your service 
granting you the great privilege of 
being a co-worker with him in filling the 
earth with the knowledge of his glorious 
character and plan— a service which 
angels would fain be engaged in. If you 
are in earnest in your prayer, believe that 
you have the privilege you ask, and go 
forward. The way will open before you. 

Another matter— We remember that 
some who are willing and anxious to 
serve the truth, are so circumstanced 
that they must derive some income from 
their time, to support themselves. Such 
could make no profit in buying the book 
at 25 cts. if they sold it at the same. This 
matter has been arranged for thus: Out of 
the Tract Fund, an allowance of 10 cts. 
per copy will be made for expense money 
to any canvasser. Such, in ordering 



should state the matter clearly thus: 
"Please send me ten copies of Dawn Vol. 
I. paper covers, price $2.50 less "expense 
money" allowance 10 cents each. I 
enclose $1.50." Or reckon it and state 
it in the same manner whatever the quantity 
ordered. 

The supply of FOOD being exhausted for 
the present, will enable those who have 
been using the "packets" to give their 
attention to "DAWN." A plan has been 
suggested by which each one can make a 
thorough canvass of his own and neighboring 
towns. We have prepared circulars 
which give the Table of Contents, and 
Kind words of Commendation, to which 
we have affixed a small slip which calls 
attention to the book, states the price, and 

R908 : page 1 

tells the reader that an agent will call to 
show him the DAWN and to take his order 
for it. These circulars can be sent out by 
the hand of trusty boys or girls, whom you 
can employ. And if you cannot visit all 
your neighbors yourself to show the book 
and take their orders, these same boys or 
girls could do it. [Girls would generally 
succeed best.] You could pay them a 
commission out of each day's sales— so much 
on each copy disposed of. Let them so 
far as possible collect the circulars as they 
show the book, so that the same may do 
to use again and again, until too much 
soiled. Of course you can do better yourself 
than boys or girls could do, but all 
cannot give so much time. 

Now what think you, can we not thus 
bring the thinking people of every city 
and town in contact with the light of the 
Millennial Dawn? The joy, quickening 
and comfort which it will bring to one 
truly receptive heart, should you with 
much effort reach but one, would more 
than repay you, even aside from the joy 
it will give you to be a co-worker with 
God and our Lord Jesus Christ. 

The fact that you have canvassed your 
town with the "Packets" will be no hindrance, 
but rather an aid to the work now 
suggested. Your conversation and their 
examination of FOOD awakened an interest 
or at least a curiosity which passing events 
have not permitted to die out, and they 
are now more ready than ever for Millennial 



Dawn— The Plan of the Ages. Harp 
[the Word of God] in hand, strike up the 
Song of Moses and the Lamb. 
"Wake the song of Jubilee; 
Let it echo o'er the sea." 



R908 : page 1 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Brooklyn, N.Y. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Last March a 
Brother of this city employed me to work 
in his paint store. Every day more or less 
men gathered in the store and would 
engage in argument on different topics, 
and sometimes on religion, and by the 
grace of God I preached to them Christ, 
who is the Saviour of all men, specially of 
them that believe. I explained to them 
how Christ had paid the debt, and there 
was now justification for believers, a crown 
for overcomers, and restitution for the 
world. The grace of God began to work 
in my employer's heart, and one day he 
brought down stairs a large Bible and 
said to me, "William, it is not everybody 
wants that book in his store, but I am 
going to have it here from this on," and I 
praised the Lord. I had the FOOD for 
Thinking Christians that you sent me 
several years ago, and began reading it in 
the store, but he did not believe in restitution, 
and fought hard against it for a 
long time. I tried to get him to read 
FOOD, but he said, "No, that is all man's 
work, I won't have anything but Scripture." 
I said I was glad he wouldn't have 
anything but Scripture, and if he would 
only read FOOD and search the Scriptures, 
he would be surprised to see how the little 
book agreed with the Scriptures. But no, 
he would not touch it. I had almost dispaired 
of him, but I told it to the Lord, and 
left it all with him. I had put the FOOD 
in the show case, where he could see it, 
and one day I came in the store, and 
there he was, behind the counter, all broke 
up, and the tears running down his cheeks, 
and FOOD in his hands. I was sure it had 
entered his heart, as he said, "God bless 
him! God bless him!" and he has been 
preaching restitution ever since. Of course 
you hear from him, and know all about 



it. One day Bro. Hickey came in the 

store, to buy a brush to paste up Eternal 

Torture around the city. I told him about 

restitution, but he, being a regular ordained 

minister of the Presbyterian Denomination, 

could not see it, and thought I was 

a little off. Another day, I was reading 

out of FOOD in the store to a crowd of 

men, and Bro. Hickey was present. He 

came over to me and said, "What have 

you got there?" I told him it was a little 

book called "FOOD FOR THINKING CHRISTIANS. 

He asked me where I got it, and 

I told him. He said he would write to 

you, and he did. You sent him MILLENNIAL 

DAWN, and you know how he was 

closeted for three days with DAWN and the 

Bible, and when he came around to the 

store again, he was very happy, and praising 

the Lord. You know the rest. Dear 

brother, I write this for your encouragement, 

and to let you see how the Lord 

can use one little FOOD; that little book is 

bringing light and peace and joy to many 

a household. I received MILLENNIAL 

DAWN; it is a wonderful book, and has 

the right ring, and I am sure the Lord will 

R908 : page 2 

use it to his honor and glory. I am out 
of employment, and if you will send me 
some packages, I will spread the glad tidings, 
and take subscriptions for the WATCH 
TOWER. 

How I long to be with Jesus, to see him 
as he is, and be like him, to reign with 
him in glory. 

Your brother in Christ, and his labor 
of love, . 

page 2 

Reading, Pa. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Need I tell you? 
My joy continues to abound in the Lord: 
and I am putting forth every effort that 
his name may be magnified in my body. 

I informed you previously that I aided 
Brother Hickey four Sundays in succession. 
I then turned my attention to my 
own immediate neighborhood above Harlem 
Bridge, N.Y., and was instrumental 
in awakening some interest. Sold several 
FOODS and took some subscriptions for 
the WATCH TOWER, a list of which I here 



inclose. The "FOODS" I ordered were for 
this purpose and came duly to hand. 

I left N. Y. on Friday last and held a 
meeting that evening at Easton, Pa. 
Some of the brethren there said it was the 
most interesting meeting we have yet had. 

I preached yesterday (Sunday) in the 
Court House, Allentown, but my audience 
was small, owing no doubt, in a great 
measure to the inclemency of the weather. 

I expect (D.V.) to see you in about a 
week. Until then, farewell. With love to 
your household, I remain yours in the 
glorious Lord. S. O. BLUNDEN. 

Westboro, Mo. 
DEAR BRO. Russell:--The Z.W.T. of 
February received, I was glad to see it 
once more. I hailed it with joy, for its 
teachings lead to a higher plane of life. 
I have read and re-read M. DAWN, and 
every time I read, I see something that I 
overlooked previously; in fact I would 
not be without it for anything. I find, 
the more I read it the more I think of 
my God and every thing he has done and 
created. I used to blame men unmercifully, 
and thought they did not get punishment 
enough for their wickedness, but 
as I become more acquainted with God's 
plan for their redemption, my heart grows 
softer. I gradually take in their situation 
in their fallen nature, and I feel more like 
pitying than blaming them. A Methodist 
Minister said that by talking of this I 
would become unpopular. Such an idea! 
I would like to meet with you April 7th., 
and celebrate the Lord's Supper, but being 
so far away I see no chance of coming. 
Yours in Christ. D. R. D . 

R908 : page 2 

Nillville, Pa. 
DEAR BROTHER: I appreciate the 
teachings of the TOWER very highly, except 
upon one point. You seem to ignore 
or deny the Sabbath kept by our Lord and 
all the Jews— for he was "born under the 
Law," and bound by it so long as it held 
dominion (Rom. 7:4-6). I am not able 
to see clearly, as yet, that the keeping of 
the seventh day (Saturday) is not binding 
on Christians as it certainly was upon 
Jews. It seems to me that the observance 
of Sunday, the first day of the week, instead 



of the seventh, was a change for 
which Papacy is responsible. What say 
you? S. I . 

IN REPLY. 

DEAR BROTHER:-General articles on 
the Sabbath question have already appeared 
in the TOWER (Oct., 1883, Dec, 
1885, etc.) Have you carefully read 
them? If not, read them and wait for Millennial 
Dawn in some of its future volumes 
to deal with the subject at length. 

The Sabbath was a part of the Law. 
It and all other parts of the Law on stones 
was given to the Jew. I never was under 
the Law as a covenant of life, thank God, 
else I would have found it as the Jew did 
a covenant of death. 

As regards the Papacy's substitution of 
Sunday instead of the seventh day, we do 
not dispute it; but had they or any one 
else a right to make a substitute for a law 
that was never given except to the Jew, 
and which even to them ended as a "covenant 
of death" when Christ died for them 
and for all, becoming the end of that covenant, 
its fulfiller? The text you quote 
(Rom. 7:4-6) is against you, and says 
No. No day is commanded to the church. 
We are glad that a day is observed, but 
sorry that any suppose it to be a substitute 
for the day fixed by the Mosaic Law. Such 
bring themselves under a law not put upon 
them by God, but by Rome. I am 
glad to be of those who, in the liberty 
wherewith Christ makes free, am not under 
the law— neither that of Moses, nor that 
of Papacy. 

The Sabbath is not a "moral" law, as 
some claim; there was never any thing 
moral or RELIGIOUS about it. It was not 
a command to worship nor to study nor 
anything of that sort— but merely to DO 
NO WORK. 

It has a typical feature and lesson and 
NO OTHER: it illustrated or typified the 
REST OF FAITH from our own works— rest 
in Christ's merit and sufficiency as the 
one who fulfilled all righteousness for us 
and redeemed us all from death. 

I and every Israelite indeed (antitypical) 
keep this Sabbath or REST, not on one 
day of the week but EVERY DAY. I am 
ALWAYS RESTING. I have FOREVER ceased 
from my own works, ceased trying or 



hoping to justify myself by my own deeds 
or works. 

This glorious peace and rest which I 
enjoy is the antitype of the typical and 
enforced rest or Sabbath-keeping put upon 
the typical people, just as much as their 
Temple and all their sacrifices were types 
of which we have the higher and real 
antitypes. EDITOR. 



page 2 

Brooklyn, N.Y. 
DEARLY BELOVED AND FELLOW LABORER. 

—Grace to you, and peace, from God 

our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. I 

give thanks to my God always, making 

mention of thee in my prayers, (knowing 

thy love and faith which thou hast toward 

the Lord Jesus, and for all the saints) that 

the fellowship of thy faith may become 

effectual. ..for we have much joy and 

consolation over thy Love, Brother! Because 

the tender sympathies of the saints 

have been refreshed through thee. The 

February '87 TOWER has been a refreshing 

draught from the wellspring of truth. 

The "View from the Tower" has confirmed 

our position; "The Lord's Supper" 

has awakened pleasurable anticipations; 

"The Easy Yoke" has been more perfectly 

adjusted; that "The Time is Short" 

has been more fully realized, and our 

grave responsibility more deeply felt; 

"Bible Light on Probation After Death" 

dispels still more fully the awful gloom 

that so recently enveloped us because of 

the God-dishonoring creeds of Babylon; 

"Living by Faith" becomes a sweeter experience, 

and the things that are not seen 

and eternal, more and more real; "No 

Variableness neither Shadow of Turning" 

is the attribute of our God that gives stability 

to every doctrine of his word, and 

is the ground of all our confidence and all 

our boasting, for He hath spoken and He 

will bring it to pass; "Extracts from Interesting 

Letters" stir our hearts within 

us, as we learn of like blessing received 

by other members of the body of Christ, 

and of their work and labor of love in the 

Harvest. 

Altogether we have been strengthened 
and encouraged, hand and heart for the 



warfare and still more greatly rejoice, and 
more fervently thank Christ Jesus our 
Lord that He counted us faithful putting 
us into the ministry. I enclose list of 
subscribers to Z.W.T. 

In Christian Fellowship and Service 
affectionately yours, S. I. H 



R909 : page 2 

COMING IN THE FLESH. 



Rochester, N.Y. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Since removing 
here I have had my faith in the 
correctness of your teachings relative to 
the coming of the Lord a spirit being and 
not flesh, assailed and shaken by parties 
who claim that you are Anti-Christ. 
They base the charge upon what they 
claim is the literal translation of 2 John 7. 
They render it thus: "Who confess not 
that Jesus is coming in the flesh. This is 
a deceiver and an antichrist." If they 
are correct, then to deny that our Lord's 
second coming will be as before, viz. in 
the flesh, is wrong. Looking at the word 
for word translation of the passage in the 
Diaglott I find the Greek word is there 
translated coming, though in the regular 
reading translation in the side column of 
the Diaglott it is rendered did come. 
Doubtless the Diaglott's word for word 
translation gave rise to the application of 
this Scripture against you here. But no 
matter, the question is an important one, 
and I write you to know, if you can solve 
the difficulty. I called upon Prof. Kendricks 
of the Rochester College and asked 
him for the most literal meaning of the 
Greek word in dispute, and he said that 
its most literal meaning was coming. 

Hoping to hear from you soon I am 
Yours respectfully C. G . 

[The above is not the exact wording as 
our brother's letter got mislaid. We recall 
the main points from memory. We 
replied at once as below and now lay it 
before our readers that all may be armed 
on this point.] 

DEAR BRO. G.:-Yours of the 23d came 
duly. I am glad to see the candor with 
which you approach the question which 



you present to me, and that before deciding 
on the matter you write to see what I 
know of it. This is right, and your 
course may save you from being stumbled. 

The Greek word used in 1 John 4:2, 
and that of 2nd John 7, for "is come," 
are from the same Greek root, and might 
like our English words came, come, and 
coming, be used to indicate a past, or 
present, or future coming according to 
the way in which it is used. A strict 
translation of the two words would be (1 John 4:2.) 
came, and coming (2 Jno. 7.); 
but the weight you, and perhaps others, 
give this fact, is not justified, and probably 
arises from an imperfect knowledge of 
the Greek. To make the matter quite 
plain, let me show you how the English 
word coming, may clearly refer to a past 
coming, and let this be an illustration of 
the Greek: for instance when we say- 
It was not the time, but the manner of 
our Lord's coming, that surprised and deceived 
the Jewish Doctors of the Law— 
or that, He who denies that coming, 
stands where the Jew stands to-day, and 
must therefore be an opponent of the 
truth, a contradictor of the Apostle's testimony, 
and hence an opponent of the 
entire work of grace in progress during 
the Gospel age— Antichrist. 

It is after this manner that erchomia is 
used in 2 John 7; and it is repeatedly 
used similarly elsewhere. Take your 
Young's Concordance, turn to pages 181 
and 182. Note the instances in which 
this same word is used in the various tenses, 
past, present and future— came, come, 
cometh, coming. If you will examine 
the context you will find that in the majority 
of cases in which it is used it relates 
to transactions already past, just as in the 
cases under consideration— 1 John 4:2. 
and 2 John 7. 

You mention the literal word for word 
translation of the Diaglott in 2 John 7. 
We agree with it fully, you see, as to the 
literal meaning of the Greek word standing 
alone disassociated from the limitations 
of the sentence. Professor Kendrick 
answered your question as to the literal 
meaning of the word, in the same way; 
so would any Greek scholar. But the 
translator of the Diaglott, as also Professor 
Kendrick, and every other person 
who knows what he discusses, will agree 



with me that the word can be used to refer 
to a past coming, just as our English 
word coming, can; as illustrated in above 
examples. Furthermore, they will all agree 
that the construction of the Greek in 
2 John 7. signifies a past coming. 

You will notice that while the Diaglott 
in its literal translation, gives coming as 
the meaning of the disputed word, yet 
when giving the sense of the sentence, it 
in very unmistakeable terms shows that 
the coming was in the past, there rendering 
it did come. The author evidently 
was guarding the unscholarly against an 
error to which they would be very liable. 
Young's Bible gives only the very literal 
translation, coming, but when posted, 
any one can see from the construction of 
the sentence, that a past, and not a future 
coming is referred to. 

Notice too that nearly all Translators 
would naturally be favorable to the view 
that our Lord's second coming will be 
again in the flesh; for they so expect him 
—among others, the Author of the Diaglott. 
Hence it cannot be claimed that 
they were influenced in their translation 
in our favor. 

Yours in fellowship and service 
C. T. Russell. 

An answer to the above received 
before going to press, says that Bro. G. 
called upon Prof. Kendrick again, to inquire 
concerning the sense of the entire 
sentence (2 Jno. 7.) referred to above. 
The Professor fully agreed with us that 
the reference was to a "coming in the 
flesh" already in the past, and had no 
reference whatever to a future event. 



R909 : page 2 

THE DISPUTED CLAUSE. 

To those who are loath to part with the 
first clause of Rev. 20:5. (See Millennial 
Dawn Note p. 287) we would suggest, 
that it probably crept into the text by accident 
in the fifth century; for no MS. 
of earlier date (neither Greek nor Syriac) 
contains this clause. It was probably at 
first merely a marginal comment made by 
a reader, expressive of his thought upon 



the text, and was copied into the body of 
the text by some subsequent transcribers 
who failed to distinguish between the text 
and the comment. 

However, the repudiation of this clause 
is not essential to the "Plan" as by us 
set forth, as will be clearly shown in a 
subsequent volume of "Millennial Dawn." 
For, the word resurrection, it will be 
shown, has been misapprehended greatly: 
it signifies to raise up. As related to 
man it signifies to bring up to the full 
perfection of manhood— the thing lost 
through Adam. The perfection from 
which our race fell, is the perfection to 
which they will gradually rise during the 
Millennial age of restitution or resurrection 
(raising up). The Millennial age 
is not only the age of trial, but also of 
blessing through resurrection or restitution 
to life— to that which was lost. The 
process will be a gradual one, requiring 
the entire age for its full accomplishment. 
Consequently it will not be until the 
thousand years are finished, that the race 
will have fully attained to the complete 
measure of life lost in Adam. And since 
anything short of perfect life is a condition 
of partial death, it follows that it 
would be strictly true to say, the rest of 
the dead lived not again (did not regain 
fully the life lost) until the thousand years 
of restitution and blessing were complete. 

This much here to prevent stumbling 
upon this point— particulars again, in 
appropriate connection. 



R884 : page 2 

HAVE you not noticed that in the history 
of this planet God turns a leaf about 

EVERY TWO THOUSAND YEARS? 

God turned a leaf, and this world was 
fitted for human residence. About two 
thousand more years passed along and 
God turned another leaf, and it was the 
Deluge. About two thousand more years 
passed on, and it was the appearance of 
Christ. Almost two thousand more years 
have past by, and He will probably soon 
turn another leaf. What it shall be I 
cannot say. It may be the demolition of 



all these monstrosities of turpitude, and 
the establishment of righteousness in all 
the earth. He can do it, and he will do 
it. I am as confident as if it were already 
accomplished.— Talmadge. 



R910 : page 3 

THE PRAYER OF THE CONSECRATED. 

"We seek not, Lord, for tongues of flame, 

Or healing virtue's mystic aid; 
But power thy Gospel to proclaim, 

The balm for wounds that sin has made. 

"Breathe on us, Lord; Thy radiance pour 
On all the wonders of the page 

Where hidden lies the heavenly lore 

That blessed our youth and guides our age. 

"Grant skill each sacred theme to trace, 
With loving voice and glowing tongue 

As when upon thy words of grace 

The wondering crowds enraptured hung. 

"Grant faith, that treads the stormy deep 
If but thy voice shall bid it come; 

And zeal, that climbs the mountain steep, 
To seek and bring the wanderer home. 

"Give strength, blest Saviour, in thy might 

Illuminate our hearts, and we, 
Transformed into Thine image bright, 

Shall teach, and love, and live, like thee." 



R910 : page 3 

"AS THE SERPENT BEGUILED EVE." 

"I fear lest by any means, as the serpent beguiled 
Eve through his subtilty, so your minds should be 
corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ.... 
Such are false apostles, deceitful workers, transforming 
themselves into the apostles of Christ. 
And no marvel; for Satan himself is transformed 
into an angel of light. Therefore it is no great 
thing, if his ministers also be transformed as the 
ministers of righteousness, whose end shall be according 
to their works.— 2 Cor. 11:3,13-15. 

The early church was surrounded with 
many bitter and outspoken enemies, but 



against these the apostles never needed to 

warn the sheep. But continually they 

sought to put believers on their guard 

against false teachers, professing much, 

clothed as ministers of light, with morality 

etc., but teaching errors which would 

confuse and befog the minds of the saints, 

and tend to hinder them from the full accomplishment 

of their covenant of self-sacrifice. 

The great shepherd of the 

sheep warned them to take heed to His 

voice and to heed not the voice of strangers, 

intimating that others would seek to 

call the sheep in his name, and to direct 

them, whose leading would be contrary 

to his. --John 10:1-5. 

The apostle Peter referred pointedly to 
this same evil when he said, (2 Pet. 2: 1,2.) 
There were false prophets also among 
the people [Jews], even as there shall be 
false teachers among you who privily [in a 
subtle manner] shall bring in damnable 
heresies, even denying the Lord that 
bought them." 

This does not signify that these teachers 
will deny our Lord as a person, nor 
deny his Lordship or authority over the 
church. Such a teacher never was countenanced 
in the church; none would recognize 
such an one as a Christian at all. 
He would be an out and out Infidel; and 
so open a course would prevent any deception 
of the sheep. On the contrary 
those whom the adversary has used to advance 
errors, have always been loud in 
their professions of faith in the Lord. 
They thus wear a garment of light, as Paul 
calls it, and the more successfully serve 
the error which they "privily" bring in 
and set before the church. 

In this text Peter's words would be better 
translated thus: "The having bought 
them sovereign Lord denying." It is a 
rule in the Greek to put the important or 
central thought first in a sentence. This 
the translators have not generally observed 
in this case, not noticing that the ransom 
is the central thought. In the Greek it 
stands as we quote it above, showing clearly 
that the denying referred to by the 
apostle is a denying of the ransom— denying 
that our Lord gave for us and all men 
"a corresponding price." To deny this, 
is to deny all: for it is the removal of the 
very foundation of all our hopes and of 
Christ's Lordship. For if we were not 



"bought with a price, even the precious 
blood of Christ," then we are yet in our 
sins, condemned still, and without hope. 
If he has not bought us, he is not our Lord, 
and has no right or control, present or 
future. Hence those who deny the ransom, 
really deny the Lordship of Christ, 
no matter how much they may claim to 
acknowledge Jesus as Lord. 

The seriousness of this which Peter calls 
"damnable heresy," is far reaching, and 
leads into a great variety of errors and 
heresies, reflecting against other truths 
and laying a foundation for other errors. 
Peter adds: "Many shall follow their destructive 
ways [destructive of the very foundation 
of hope and its corresponding licence 
in dealing with scriptures which oppose 
them] by reason of whom the way of 
truth [the true way of salvation— through 
the ransom— the way of the cross] will be 
reviled." 

It is against such teachers, who, whether 
knowingly or ignorantly, are serving Satan 
and error, and are the enemies of the 
cross of Christ, that Paul speaks in our 
text. As Satan through the serpent beguiled 
Eve with crafty sophistry, he would 
now through such teachers among you beguile 
and lead astray the chaste virgin 
church espoused to Christ. Of course 
from time to time throughout the age Satan 
has sought to and did test the nominal 
virgin of Christ, but much more so now 
in the end of the age, when the church is 
almost complete, and as he sees the plan 
of God unfolding, and that he has not 
thwarted it thus far, Satan seems to redouble 
his efforts; for as each new ray of 
light shines out for her assistance, in this 
the dawn of the coming day, he matches 
it or counterfeits it, with rays of false light 
to draw attention away from the true. 

Various have been the delusions of our 
subtle adversary, but in this instance as in 
many others, the apostle's words seem to 
apply directly to our day. His words 
were a prophecy to us, now being fulfilled; 
for now the form of error is again presented 
as it was with Eve, 

"YE SHALL NOT SURELY DIE." 

In Eve's case it applied to the first 
death, now it is applied to the SECOND 
DEATH. 



The argument used to Eve was that she 
would not die at all, and when the reality 
of death was established beyond a question 
in the death of Abel, he changed the argument, 
and ever since he has unceasingly 
taught through deceived poets, philosophers 
and priests, heathen and Christian, 
that mankind does not really die, but only 
appears to; that when dead they are 
more alive than ever before. And in 
every age among heathens and Christians 
he has succeeded in gaining a majority to 
believe his lie, in direct opposition to 
God's statement, "Thou shalt surely 
die." "The soul that sinneth, it shall 
die."— Gen. 2:17. and Ezek. 18:4. 

This lie Satan started with, for he was 
a liar (and thereby the slayer of our race) 
from the beginning and abode not in the 
truth (John 8:44.), and he has since kept 
it up, and the sophistries used to back it 
up are truly wonderful, and worthy of such 
a Master deceiver. Upon this lie he has 
built his entire system of error with its 
God-dishonoring doctrines of a present 
or future place of anguish, in which the 
dead are doubly alive and suffering. And 
on it he builds the further idea of the endlessness 
of their torture, that they not only 
are not dead, but cannot ever die; that 
God, though he can create, cannot "destroy 
soul and body in Gehenna"— the second 
death [See October 1886, Tower]. Thus 
for centuries he has maligned God's character 
and cultivated a fear and abhorrence 
of God which repulsed all true love, and 
hindered that depth of consecration in his 
service which can spring only from love 
and appreciation of God and his plans. 

And not only so, but by and in support 
of this same lie, the adversary has warped 
and twisted and perverted the Scriptures 
so that all the exceeding great and precious 
and various promises of God's Word have 
come to mean only what might be interpreted 
in one sentence, thus: You must 
either spend an eternity in awe, fear and 
trembling in the presence of a fiendish 
God, or else in everlasting torture with 
devils. And of the two evils men have 
hoped to get the least, and dreaded almost 
to read the Bible whose every parable and 
symbol was caused to smoke and flame 
and to reflect the words ETERNAL TORMENT, 
under the lurid light cast upon it by the 
adversary, through hymn-books, prayer-books, 



and commentaries, in harmony 

with his original lie, "Ye shall not surely 

die." 

This lie has had a long run, of six thousand 
years; it has served his purpose well, 
and yet serves in most cases. But now in 
the dawn of the morning the light of truth 
begins to shine unto some, showing the 
Scripture to be in perfect harmony with 
God's original declaration, "In the day 
that thou eatest thereof, dying thou shalt 
die" [margin]. At first he merely cast 
odium upon it and was content to let a 
few get free from this error, but it led so 
rapidly from darkness to light that he 
must do something to oppose it, and to 
deceive and ensnare the espoused virgin 
of Christ, as in the past. 

R911 : page 3 

And what could be more taking or deceptive 
now, than the same lie he took at 
first, only newly applied, to the second 
death, instead of to the first. Surely this 
would be his wisest plan; for already he 
had the prejudices of many and a reflected 
bias cast on Scripture to favor his old and 
popular error. Hence as Paul prophesied 
he has concluded to attempt to deceive 
the "virgin of Christ" on this line. He 
now again declares through some willing 
to deliver his message to the church, as 
the serpent did to Eve, the same denial of 
God's sentence against sinners; and now 
as at first declares, "Ye shall not surely 
die"— every human creature that God 
ever made, will be saved everlastingly— 
not one will be cut off from life. 

We have not a full account of the sophistry 
used to Eve, but it was probably one 
or all three of these: Either, that God 
was not able to destroy as well as to create; 
or that he was too loving to punish 
and might be disobeyed with impunity by 
those who would take advantage of his 
mercy and love; or else that God had a 
plan arranged which would be interfered 
with if death were permitted, and which 
must not be interfered with, and that 
hence the threat was only a threat, and 
really a lie on God's part. 

Whether or not those were the arguments 
used to Eve, Paul's words seem to 
indicate considerable argument, and sophistry 
—"As the serpent beguiled Eve by 



his subtil ty." And certainly these are 

the arguments now being advanced by the 

same adversary. And as the light has begun 

to make the old doctrine of eternal 

torture unpopular, it seems as though the 

adversary by one bold move on the same 

line would swing the general sentiment to 

an exact opposite, and past the centre of 

truth. From thinking of God as the great 

monster delighting in the everlasting unmitigated 

torture of billions of his creatures 

—all except the handful of saints, the 

little flock— he would now have them to 

think of God as so loving and gentle and 

weak that he could not carry out his own 

just sentence of death upon wilful sinners, 

that therefore he must coerce all and accept 

an enforced obedience instead of a 

willing one, because he is so oversensitive 

and weak that he could not blot out of existence 

those who after having had the 

fullest opportunity of light and favor under 

the Millennial reign still wilfully and 

deliberately oppose him. How weak such 

an argument! In view of the past six 

thousand years— when we consider what 

God has permitted man to bring upon 

himself of pain, sickness and woe, is there 

room for such conclusions? None; that 

display of God's justice and firmness 

should leave no doubt on this subject. 

The fact that God so loved all while sinners, 

as to redeem them from Adamic 

death and grant to all another, this time 

an individual trial for life, should not be 

mistaken for a weakness on his part, nor 

used as an argument for further trials after 

all have had full individual trial and opportunity. 

It is because we were not wilful 

sinners, against full knowledge and 

opportunity, but sinners through the disobedience 

of one who sinned without full 

knowledge, that God redeemed all, and 

has provided under the Redeemer a second 

trial and second chance of life for all.— 

See "Second Chance" in TOWER of 

December, 1884. 

But glance for a moment at a sample of 
the sophistry now used to beguile the virgin 
of Christ on this subject. The first penalty, 
death, is denied by the claim that it referred 
not to the death of the man, but to the 
death of righteousness in the man. The 
same argument exactly that the adversary 
has used for centuries, is thus taken up again 
to form part of a specious argument, 



that the second death means the reverse 
of that death of man's righteousness, or 
the dying of the sinner to sin— the death 
of sin in him. Otherwise stated, the 
claim is that the first death was a death to 
righteousness making all sinners, and that 
the second death is to be a death to sin 
making the sinners all righteous. What 
perversion! What subtilty, as the apostle 
terms it, is here advanced to entrap the 
feet of Christ's little ones, now escaping 
from darkness to the light. Let us open 
up and examine this sophistical* 
argument. 

We deny both claims: The second 
death has no reference to the death of sin 
in sinners, and the first or Adamic death 
was not the death of his righteousness. 
These are figurative uses of the word death 
drawn from the one great actual death 
illustrated for centuries before all mankind, 
namely, ceasing to be. We have no 
right to object to the proper use of any 
figure, but when any attempt is made to set 
aside the reality entirely, and put a figure, 
based upon it, in its stead, we seriously 
object. The errors into which such a 
course would lead are legion. 

Of the first death, or Adamic death, the 
Apostle says: "By one man sin entered 
into the world and death by [as a result 
of] sin; and so [thus] death passed upon 
all men, by the one offence" (marginal 
reading). "As by the offence of one condemnation 
came upon all men [condemning 



*Sophistry is false, deceptive reasoning. Thus 
for instance, if we should say— (1) Food is essential 
to life. (2) Corn is food. (3) Therefore corn is 
essential to life.— our reasoning would be sophistical. 
That is it would be false, and yet, (if the subject 
were a deeper one) deceptive, in that it goes 
through a form of reasoning to establish a false conclusion, 
which those not accustomed to close thinking, 
are not quick to discern. On such apparent 
reasoning from the Scripture, many hurtful errors 
are based, and accepted without investigation by 
the superficial and prejudiced. 

R911 : page 4 

all to actual death] even so by the 

righteous act of one [by the actual not figurative 

death of Christ] favor has freely 



come to all men, justifying them to life. 
(Rom. 5:12,18.) Those whom we criticize 
claim that the sin (or death of 
righteousness in Adam) was the Adamic 
death, while we with Paul and the entire 
record of Scripture hold firmly that death 
was the penalty for sin inflicted after and 
because of that [figurative death to righteousness] 
sin. 

The penalty cannot be the crime; yet 
these confound the crime (the sin) with 
its penalty, and treat the question as 
though the penalty of sin consisted in becoming 
a sinner. 

But why pursue such a foolish and inconsistent 
theory? it cannot stand the 
least examination. The death penalty 
came after and because of Adam's disobedience 
[figuratively speaking, because of 
his death to righteousness]. Adam had 
all to do with the sinning [ceasing from 
righteousness] and did it wilfully; but he 
had nothing to do with inflicting the 
death penalty which followed as its just 
punishment. 

This penalty was inflicted by God [no 
matter into whose hands he commits the 
power of death as his executioner, Heb. 2:14.]; 
and it was inflicted against 
Adam and all his race, much against their 
wish, and against their every struggle. 
Adam had already become a sinner when 
God inflicted the literal penalty. It was 
because he was already dead to righteousness 
(or had ceased to be righteous) that 
God pronounced the sentence or curse of 
the law against him— "Dying thou shalt 
die." God would not permit one dead 
to righteousness (who had ceased to be 
righteous) to live on everlastingly in that 
condition, and hence he deprived him of 
life— not instantly, but by a dying process, 
the result of casting him out of the garden, 
from access to the life-sustaining trees. 
As it is written: "Because thou hast done 
this [become a sinner— died to or ceased 
from righteousness]. ..unto dust shalt 
thou return." 

The apostle James, also an authority, 
declares that sin when it is accomplished 
bringeth forth death— a return to dust. 
Neither Paul nor James (standard theologians) 
confounded the sin which is 
a ceasing from righteousness, with 
its penalty, which is death actual— a 
ceasing to exist. 



So then the death penalty is a return to 
dust, and is not at all the same as that implied 
in the figurative expression of dying 
to righteousness. It follows the other, 
and could not be mistaken for the other 
except under the deceptive sophistry of the 
original liar, who alas now works most 
successfully through those who have fallen 
away from the truth. 

Nor is the SECOND DEATH, a death to 
sin, a making alive to righteousness again. 
It is never used in such a sense anywhere 
in the Scriptures; only the desire to uphold 
and advance the original lie "Ye 
shall not surely die," coupled with a slight 
respect for some who use their Bibles (and 
could not be led off the track without the 
twisting and plausible and subtle perversion 
of those Scriptures which mention the 
Second Death,) could have induced reasonable 
beings to offer such a subterfuge 
in the name of truth and "New light." 

The Second Death [See October Tower 
1886.] is the same in kind as the First. 
It is inflicted as the penalty of the same 
law, and by the same Law-giver, and upon 
the very same class (wilful sinners fully 
able to have resisted, forewarned, and 
fully forearmed;) as the first death. The 
second death is the penalty of wilful sin 
under the second trial, as the first death 
was the penalty of failure in the first trial. 
This, when seen, establishes the fact that 
God's law is and always shall be the same 
unchangeable law; that He will always 
refuse the privileges and blessings of lasting 
life to those who, when enlightened 
and able, refuse to conform to his just and 
wise arrangements willingly. 

There could be no second death except 
the first death had been cancelled, since 
so far as man is concerned, the first death's 
condemnation passed upon all. And 
since a second trial implies a second 
chance for life, it is manifest that none 
could be granted a second chance for life 
until the first sentence of death was settled. 
And at the same time, a second chance 
for life implies a chance for a second 
death. 

As the law of the Creator is perfect, it 
can never change, hence a second trial, 
(which only a few have yet enjoyed, and 
which for the vast majority will be in the 
coming age of judgment), must be on the 
same conditions as the first, viz.: Obey and 



live forever, disobey and die forever. Not 
to be forever dying but to be dead, extinct, 

R912 : page 4 

"cut off from life" forever— the second 
death penalty for failure under trial, from 
which there is no redemption and no release. 
Such "shall be as though they 
had not been." 

Glance at the uses of the expression 
"Second Death," a glance is sufficient to 
convince any unprejudiced mind. Paul 
refers to it as a possibility in this age only 
to those who have first been enlightened, 
who have tasted of the good word of God, 
who have been sanctified and become partakers 
of the Holy Spirit, and who have 
been able by faith to grasp and apply to 
themselves now the cleansing and justification 
which will belong to the age to 
come. He says, "If these fall away it is 
impossible to renew them again unto repentance.' 
Such wilfull sin on their part 
proves them unworthy of the favor of God 
—the gift of life. 

John the apostle mentions the second 
death when he says: There is a sin unto 
death— I do not say that ye should pray 
for it. (1 John 5:16.) To pray for it 
would be to oppose God's expressed will, 
which we have no right to do. Rather, 
we must study his plan and will and consent 
thereto as the wisest and best for all 
concerned. 

Jesus the Great Teacher spoke of the 
second death using Gehenna as a symbol 
of it. (See October 1886 TOWER.) He 
said, God is able to destroy both soul and 
body [being] in Gehenna (the second 
death), and that it would be better to sacrifice, 
cut off, evil desires and practices 
even though loved as an eye or as a right 
hand and (if it were necessary) enter into 
life maimed, than to be destroyed utterly 
in the second death. 

Paul says that such as wilfully reject the 
favor of God through the ransom after 
they have once fully seen it and partaken 
of its benefits, have no further interest or 
share in the sacrifice, and for them naught 
remains but a fearful looking for of judgement 
which will devour (destroy) them as 
adversaries. He calls attention to the 
type, Moses, and to the fact that those 
under him who would not obey died without 



mercy, (Heb. 6:1-6; 10:26-31,38,39; 
Acts 3:22,23.) and asks whether a 
severer penalty is not due to wilful sin 
against the Great Teacher. The penalty 
under the type, was the taking away of a 
life already forfeited, and to be restored; 
but the severer penalty of wilful rejection 
of Christ is the second death— the cutting 
off forever from life without remedy 
or hope. 

The same law or rule will apply to the 
world in general in the next age: All will 
come to a knowledge of the truth, partake 
of the fruits of the ransom in restoration 
etc., etc., and such as wilfully spurn 
God's favor and cling to sin when able to 
avoid it, are fit subjects for destruction— 
the second death. Of such a class we 
read in Rev. 20:14,15: "Whoever was 
not found written in the book of life was 
cast into the [symbolic] lake of fire." 
"This is the Second death." Again, the 
same class proved unworthy of life in that 
Millennial trial are described (Rev. 21:8.) 
as the "fearful, unbelieving, abominable, 
murderers, whoremongers, sorcerers, 
idolaters, and liars" who have their portion 
[reward] in the [symbolic] lake which 
burneth with fire and brimstone, which is 
[literally] the second destruction. Fire 
is always a symbol of destruction, and 
when brimstone is added in the symbol, 
the destruction is intensified; for burning 
brimstone is a most destructive agent 
against life in every form and degree, 
known to science to-day. 

Now what can any sane man think of 
the classes here referred to as subjects of 
the second death— who after a thousand 
years of most impartial trial, under most 
favorable circumstances, under the judgement 
of him who bought them from the 
first or Adamic condemnation (death), 
and who in spite of all this opportunity 
and favor are pronounced by the judge 
"abominable", and whose names he refused 
to write among those worthy of life? 
Can any sane man think or honestly claim 
that the sentence of second death pronounced 
against these, means that they 
shall die to sin and live to righteousness? 
Surely any not totally blinded by the great 
deceiver must see, that it is because they 
have refused to cease from sin, and refused 
to live in righteousness, that, as the 
"abominable" filth— pestilential, noxious, 



and contagious— they are destroyed in 
(Gehenna) the Second death— outside the 
New Jerusalem, even as the literal filth 
was destroyed in literal Gehenna outside 
the literal Jerusalem. 

Look again, and notice that of the holy 
ones it is written— They "shall not be 
hurt of the second death," and "On such 
the second death hath no power"— and 
ask yourself, how this could be, if, as this 
theory would teach, the second death 
means a ceasing from sin? If the second 
death is a ceasing from sin, it is a grand 
thing, and no one could be hurt by it; all 
would be benefited. In that case the 
saints would be the first to plunge in and 
cease from sin. The fact that on the 
saints the second death has no power, and 
that its power is wholly upon the "abominable" 
rejectors of divine favor, proves 
that it is not a blessing, but a curse— the 
second curse— that it is not a death to sin, 
but a death of the sinner, blotting him 
from existence because of wilful sin. 



R912 : page 4 

CHOOSE LIFE OR CHOOSE DEATH. 

We showed in the October '86 issue that 
the offer in the next age to the whole 
world, was typified in the offer of life or 
death made to Israel through Moses the 
typical lawgiver, which because of the 
weakness of the flesh they were totally unable 
to comply with. 

Now some one wants to know whether 
we think that any would choose death, 
when a full opportunity is granted to all in 
the next age, of taking their choice. We 
answer that if the question were put to 
them in that form, Whether do you choose 
life or death, all would undoubtedly 
choose life; but it will not be put in that 
form. In that trial, obedience will stand 
for life and disobedience for death. So it 
is now: a thief does not choose imprisonment 
nor does a murderer choose the gallows; 
but in knowingly and wilfully 
choosing those crimes they virtually are 
choosing the known penalties. Those 
who will accept of God's plan and choose 
well-doing will be choosing life, and those 
who choose otherwise will be choosing 



death, the declared and sure wages of sin. 
Those who shall experience the second 
death will doubtless not be expecting it. 
By disbelieving God's plain statements 
with reference to it, they will doubtless 
deceive themselves. Such are ever deceiving 
others and being deceived themselves, 
and doubtless the goodness and favor of 
God manifested toward them so long 
(during the Millennium) will lead them 
to believe as some now conclude, that 
God either could not, or would not 
"cut off" wilful sinners. The statement 
is, that they will be deceived 
(Rev. 20:7,8.) by following the 
same deceiver who beguiled Eve and 
who now seeks with the same lie to deceive 
the virgin of Christ— the Gospel 
Church. Doubtless his deception then as 
now will be based upon the same lie, "Ye 
shall not surely die." 

WHAT IT INVOLVES. 

Error is far reaching; one error serves 
as a foundation for another, and so it is 
with this one, "Ye shall not surely die." 
Looked at from one standpoint some 
might say that it could affect other doctrines 
little whether we claim that all will 
be saved everlastingly, or that a comparatively 
small number will be cut off in the 
second death. But such do not see the 
full logical outcome of the proposition; 
for the doctrine of the everlasting salvation 
of all,* in spite of the wills of some, 
proves either that God is so loving, that 
he cannot and would not execute his just 
sentence, "The soul that sinneth it shall 
die," or else that though desiring to carry 
out his sentence he is unable to destroy 
the [souls] beings that he has created. 

If God is unable from either of these 
causes to destroy in the second death, then 
he was unable to destroy in the first death, 
for the same reasons. And if unable to 
destroy them, or in other words, if they 
were not lost in the first death, then the 
Bible teaching that our Lord Jesus gave 
himself a ransom for all and thus saved the 
lost, is false; for if God could not (from 
any cause) destroy them, they were not 
lost and consequently were not redeemed. 

Look at it again from another standpoint 
and we will reach the same conclusion; 
namely, that the everlasting salvation 



of all, stands logically opposed to the 
doctrine of the ransom. And it is for this 
reason that those who deny the ransom 
always sooner or later claim universal 
everlasting salvation. 

None will question from the account of 
the Scriptures, that in the trial of the next 
age there will be some wilful sinners (Jer. 31:28-30; 
Isa. 65:20; Matt. 25:41,46; 
Rev. 20:12-15; 21:8,27; and 
Ezek. 20:29.). And these being on as 
fair and full a trial as Adam was, and with 
greater experience, will be as culpable as 
he, and as worthy of condemnation to 
death under the law, "The soul that sinneth 
it shall die." And since it is recorded 
that "Christ dieth no more," it follows 



*Be it remembered that the TOWER has constantly 
taught the salvation of all from the first death, 
their redemption and recovery by Christ from all 
that was lost in Adam, that thus rescued or saved 
all shall be brought to a full knowledge of the truth 
and then by obedience prove themselves worthy of 
everlasting life or by disobedience prove that they 
merit second death. 

R912 : page 5 

that not one of such condemned ones 
can be redeemed or ransomed as Adam 
was. And it logically follows that if God 
can excuse sinners and clear or acquit the 
guilty without a ransom [corresponding 
price], then, where the guilt will be even 
greater than Adam's, because of greater 
knowledge by experience, then God's 

R913 : page 5 

ways were not equal when he inflicted 
death as the penalty upon Adam and all 
his children, refusing to release them from 
its condemnation until he himself had 
provided the ransom. And if God can 
and will excuse many wilful sinners in the 
next age without a ransom, He could have 
forgiven the one sin of Adam without a 
ransom. Seeing this to be the logical 
conclusion of the theory of everlasting salvation 
of all, four out of five of its advocates 
deny the ransom, and the remainder 
must choose the one or the other position 
as soon as they come to see the two sides 



of the question and their bearing upon 

each other. We recognize the fact that 

God's dealings with our race in the past, 

in condemning sin and sinners, is his one 

unalterable law, which for the security 

and good of his creatures he will not permit 

even himself to set aside, and that 

when he would save mankind from the 

Adamic sin and penalty it must be by 

providing a ransom [a corresponding 

price] for the sinner, in the death of our 

Lord Jesus. This rule being unalterable 

it follows that the wilful sinner in the second 

trial will be condemned to death— 

the second death. And since divine Justice 

and Love could not grant more favorable 

conditions than they will have 

enjoyed, any further trial would be useless; 

and being useless, will not be granted. 

Hence there has been no ransom 

provided for those condemned in the second 

trial; and no ransom being given, 

their recovery from it is impossible. 

Further, notice that if the total number 
of those out of harmony with God in the 
end of the Millennial age, and therefore 
(by believing his lie) deceived by Satan into 
outward opposition (Rev. 20:8.), be 
but ten thousand out of all the billions 
then tried and tested finally, their ransom 
would cost the sacrifice of ten thousand 
redeemers, just as surely as the sin of one 
man cost the death of one as his corresponding 
price— each wilful sinner requiring 
one to pay his price and to redeem 
him. And then all this would be useless, 
since they could have no more favorable 
opportunity in a thousand trials, than God 
promises to all in the second trial. 

In conclusion then, The second death 
like the first is a penalty for wilful sin. It 
means the taking away of the gift of God, 
the taking away of life because not used 
in accordance with his will for the creature's 
good and the Creator's glory. In 
neither is the penalty completed in the 
process of dying, but in the sinner's remaining 
dead— without life. Had the 
penalty been completed in the dying, so 
that the culprit might then be awakened 
free from condemnation, no ransom would 
have been needed, for each sinner in dying 
would pay his own penalty. But no, 
the penalty was real and lasting; for six 
thousand years sinners have died and remained 
dead; and none have been able 



to escape the verdict of the Great Judge. 
There is only one hope of deliverance. It 
is based on the Bible testimony that 
Christ died for our sins, and redeemed us 
from sin and its penalty, death, by paying 
our penalty. And this is man's hope 
of release from the first sentence in due 
time. So surely as a ransom was needed 
from the first penalty, one would be no 
less necessary from the second death penalty. 
But that trial being complete, no 
ransom should or has been provided; 
hence the second death is final and 
irrevocable. 

Let us be on our guard, lest, As the 
serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, 
our minds should be corrupted [warped, 
twisted] from the simplicity which is in 
Christ. Note this simplicity: Life, God's 
gift to man, lost through sin— death passed 
upon all. Christ Jesus, God's gift, became 
a man and paid man's ransom, or 
corresponding price— he died for our sins 
and the sins of the whole world. God 
raised him from death to a higher nature 
and commissioned him to dispense the 
favor which his death secured for all, and 
has appointed the Millennial age for that 
great work of giving men another chance 
for life, under the same perfect, divine law 
which condemned and sentenced Adam; 
and the law, unchanged, still declares 
death to be the wages of sin, and life the 
wages of righteousness, and thus puts the 
lie upon all such statements as that "Ye 
shall not surely die." 



R913 : page 5 

THE ZEAL OF THINE HOUSE. 

"The zeal of thine house hath eaten me up; and 
the reproaches of them that reproached thee are 
fallen upon me."— Psa. 69:9. 

Zeal in the Lord's service is that eager 
arduous active interest in the Lord's plans 
and their development, which is begotten 
of sincerest love for the Lord and for all 
those dear to him. The soul that is really 
in love with the heavenly Bridegroom 
will most naturally express its devotedness 
in such activity. And while ardent love 
is in the heart and prompting to action, 



we cannot contentedly be otherwise than 
active. We will seek and we will find 
avenues for usefulness. Since the special 
work of the Gospel age is the selection 
and development of the church, our zeal 
and service, like that of the Lord and the 
Apostles, should be spent chiefly for the 
church— in searching them out and doing 
all in our power to develop, strengthen, 
and encourage them to persevere to the 
end in the narrow way of sacrifice. It is 
in this service of the house or church of 
God that the Psalmist declares that the 
zeal of the Lord's anointed is expended— 
"The zeal of thine house hath eaten me 
up"— hath consumed all my energies. 

As we engage in that service, a growing 
interest will increase the desire to be more 
and more active until in the end like our 
Lord we can say, The zeal of thine house 
hath eaten me up, hath consumed me. If 
we are following closely in the Master's 
footprints, we will find this consuming 
process going on and increasing from day 
to day. We will find his work consuming 
our time, our energies, our money, our 
reputation, our former earthly hopes and 
ambitions, and every talent we possess 
however great or small; and realizing 
how little it all is, even when judiciously 
used, the language of our hearts will be 
"O for a thousand tongues to sing 

My great Redeemer's praise, 

The glories of my God and King, 

The triumphs of his grace." 

And just as surely as the fire of zeal is 
brightly burning and consuming our sacrifice, 
we will realize also that the reproaches 
of the same class who reproached 
our Lord will fall upon us. The reproaches 
will come thick and fast particularly 
from the nominal church. The world 
will have little interest in either opposing 
or defending us, but will coolly regard us 
with indifference, perhaps think us fanatical 
extremists, and will not desire to associate 
with us lest a measure of the same 
reproach should attach to them. But the 
devotees of Babylon will not fail to point 
the finger of scorn, to shoot the arrows of 
calumny and to instigate open opposition 
against the little flock of the anointed 
cross-bearers. But blessed are those who 
shall endure unto the end, until the zeal 
of God's house has eaten them up, entirely 
consumed them. Those faithful unto 



death shall receive the crown of life. 

We should not be troubled then if we 
find that we are being used up in the 
Lord's service. Through zeal for the 
spread of his truth and the honor of his 
name do you find that your time is so used 
up that you scarcely have enough left 
for your personal necessities? that whereas 
you were once in better circumstances 
when your earnings all or nearly all were 
expended on self, you now find that gradually 
as the necessities of the work seem 
to need it, the hard earned savings of the 
years past are diminishing and with increasing 
prospects of larger demands? 
Do you find that your reputation as a 
Christian and as a man of sound common 
sense is about gone? Do you find that 
your present course if continued will put 
an end to the ambitions you once deemed 
of so much importance? Do you find 
your friends fewer, (but thank God, these 
are generally truer) than formerly? Do 
you find yourself often weary, your energies 
largely spent, and that physical 
strength is actually wearing out in the service, 
in doing what your hand finds to do 
with your might? Then you can truly 
say, The zeal of thy house is eating me 
up. And when your sacrifice is ended in 
the complete exhaustion of all your powers, 
you will have fought the good fight 
of faith, you will have finished your 
course; and as he who has called you is 
faithful, you shall receive the crown of life 
that fadeth not away. 

The measure of our zeal in the service 
is the measure of our love for the heavenly 
Bridegroom who is now looking for his 
jewels, for such as he desires to make his 
bride. And only those who prove by the 
sacrifice of earthly things their supreme 
love for the Lord, will be counted worthy 
of such honor and exaltation. If our harmony 
and sympathy with him and his 
great work for others is so great as to 
prompt us to sacrifice all other ambitions 
and hopes, even unto death, then we are 
giving most satisfactory evidence of our 
love and interest, and will most assuredly 
be chosen; and even now such may reckon 
themselves his bride elect. 

There is no punishment for those who 
do not manifest such zeal. Such service 
is not forced nor unduly urged upon any. 
The Lord does not want for his bride one 



who needs to be forced or even coaxed to 

engage with him in carrying out his plans. 

He wants such as from the heart, and not 

by constraint are in deepest love and sympathy 

with him. He will not take for his 

bride one whose heart is divided, or whose 

love is chilled, or who cannot enter heartily 

R914 : page 5 

into his plans, esteeming it a privilege 
to endure hardness in doing so. 

Those who do not manifest such zeal 
are simply showing themselves unworthy 
of this great favor to which they are called, 
and shall not be numbered among his 
jewels. The marriage of the Lamb is based 
on supreme love and tenderest devotion, 
a matter of choice and by no means 
of compulsion or constraint, and their 
hearts are most truly united long before 
the consummation of their hope. 

It is quite an erroneous idea that it is 
possible to be over zealous in the Lord's 
service. Yet such is the impression which 
many give who receive the truth, yet never 
allow it to spur them to more than ordinary 
activity. If we really appreciate 
the truth, it ought to arouse and utilize 
all the enthusiasm of our nature; not in 
noisy and unreasonable demonstration, 
neither in words only, but in unusual efforts 
by every method which we can devise. 
And if we do so, we will very soon 
find the reproaches of the lukewarm and 
indifferent cast upon us. 

Dearly beloved, let us examine ourselves 
by the tests which the Lord is applying to 
us, and he will soon show us how we personally 
stand in his estimation. And if 
we find that we are falling short of a full 
and complete sacrifice, let us strive yet 
more diligently to fully render that which 
we covenanted to give— our all. Yet let 
none be discouraged as they look at the 
steady steps and more rapid progress of 
Christians of maturer growth. The babe's 
effort to walk and the young child's unsteady 
steps are none the less appreciated 
by the Lord. With continued effort will 
naturally come the strength in due time. 
If you cannot command sufficient courage 
at first to do some parts of the work which 
cost much in the way of self-denial, let 
yourself come to it by degrees. Do something 
at first which you can do, and keep 



on gradually increasing your efforts and 

trying your strength, and while thus endeavoring 

to develop strength go to the 

Lord and ask for more. Ask him to give 

you a fuller realization of the privilege of 

engaging in the work and of suffering for 

the truth's sake. Tell him of your weaknesses 

and your desire and determination 

to overcome them by his help. Do you 

imagine for a moment that he will leave 

you to struggle alone with your infirmities, 

or allow you to be overcome by them 

when you thus lay hold upon his strength? 

Never! no never! 

"That soul which on Jesus hath leaned for repose 

He'll never, no never, desert to its foes. 
That soul, if all powers should endeavor to shake, 
He'll never, no never, no never forsake." 

None are so matured and so sure footed 
as to be able to tread steadily onward in 
the narrow way without constantly invoking 
and laying hold upon divine strength. 
Even our Lord sought frequent opportunities 
for private communion with the 
Father. And if he, the perfect one, needed 
divine help to enable him to sacrifice 
himself, how much more do we need to lay 
hold upon that power to carry us through. 

Watch then and pray that the fire of 
zeal may not go out until it has entirely 
consumed your sacrifice. And when the 
reproaches of them that reproached your 
Lord fall upon you rejoice in your privilege 
of showing your sympathy with his 
sufferings by sharing in the same to the 
extent of your opportunity. When for 
your sake he agonized in Gethsemane's 
Garden you were not there to speak a 
word of comfort. When he stood before 
the High Priest and false witnesses testified 
against him and the lawless authorities 
pronounced him guilty of death, you were 
not there to defend him. When they spat 
in his face and buffeted him and smote 
him with the palms of their hands and 
taunted and reviled him, you were not 
there to resent such treatment, or to give 
him even a look of sympathy. When 
they scourged him and derided him and 
planted the cruel crown of thorns upon 
his brow and nailed him to the cross you 
were not there to sympathize or pity or 
to appreciate the love that prompted to 
such suffering for you. But to fill up our 
measure of the sufferings now, manifests the 
same love which would then, had we fully 



comprehended the situation, have hastened 
to comfort and help so far as possible. 
It is our privilege to share some of the 
ignominy, some of the reproach, and the 
promptness and zeal with which we do it 
will manifest the strength of our devotion 
and love. Mrs. C. T. Russell. 



R914 : page 6 

RISEN WITH CHRIST. 



"If ye, then, be risen with Christ, seek those 
things which are above, where Christ sitteth on 
the right hand of God. Set your affections on 
things above, not on things on the earth; for ye 
are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in 
God."-Col. 3:1-3. 

It is evident that the apostle Paul is 
here addressing a particular class— not 
the world, nor mere believers, but that 
comparatively small class who have 
made a covenant with God of entire consecration 
to his service, even unto death. 
This class, he affirms, is dead (reckonedly), 
and his language also implies that 
they have (reckonedly) risen as new 
creatures, and from these two facts the 
apostle draws certain reasonable conclusions, 
and upon them bases a timely 
exhortation. 

Let us consider first the sense in 
which the consecrated are dead and 
risen, that we may clearly see our present 
position and its responsibilities. 
Once we were dead with Adam in trespasses 
and in sins. That is, we with all 
the rest of mankind were under the condemnation; 
the death sentence had 
passed upon us; and, as we sometimes 
say of a condemned criminal, "he is a 
dead man," although the sentence is not 
yet executed, so we were likewise all 
dead men— reckoned dead already. But 
being redeemed, purchased, from that 
condemnation, we, by faith in that transaction, 
passed from death unto life— from 
under God's condemnation of death, into 
his favor and into justification of life. 
And yet it was only a reckoning— a 
right or title to life, secured, and not yet 
the actual possession of it. 

In due time ("the times of restitution") 



that title would have been made 
good, had we not again lost it— disposed 
of it. None have lost it except those 
who have first accepted of it, and then 
presented themselves to God as living 
sacrifices— holy (because justified), and 
(therefore) acceptable unto him. (Rom. 12:1.) 
This covenant of sacrifice, even 
unto death, is the same covenant which 
Jesus made. All who make it, thus solemnly 
engage to die, to spend and surrender 
human life in God's service. By 
faith (i.e., reckonedly) we are risen 
from the Adamic condemnation (death); 
we have consecrated the life reckoned as 
restored; we have counted ourselves dead 
with Christ as actually we were dead 
with Adam; and further we reckon ourselves 
as though risen with Christ and 
now, like him, no longer human, but 
"new creatures," "partakers of the divine 
nature," and as though seated with 
him "in heavenly places." We are thus 
reckoning to ourselves all the promises 
of God in advance, because we realize 
that "It is a faithful saying: If we be 
dead with him we shall also live with 
him."— 2 Tim. 2:11,12. 

It is in this sense that the apostle 
speaks to us of being both dead and 
risen— dead and risen a second time: 
first dead through sin with Adam and 
redeemed and risen with him and all 
men to human perfection; but now dead 
with Christ our Redeemer as sharers in 
the sacrifice for sin, and risen with him 
as new creatures. 

Actually, we are not yet either dead or 
risen with Christ, but if our covenant 
was sincere, and if our faith in the 
promise of God, who raised up Christ 
from the dead, and that he will raise up 
us also, is firm, we may reckon the transaction 
as sure as though it were already 
actually performed, as though we were 
already in actual possession of the glory 
which shall be revealed in us. 

It is to these embryo "new creatures," 
before whom is set such a sure and glorious 
hope, that Paul gives counsel and 
exhortation, saying: "Mind the things 
above, not the things on the earth; for 
you [as a human being] died, and your 
life has been hidden with the Anointed 
One by God. When the Anointed One, 
our life, shall be manifested, then you 



also will be manifested with him in glory. 
Put to death, therefore, those members 
on the earth— fornication, impurity, 
passion, evil desire, and covetousness 
[money loving], which is idol-worship; 
on account of which things the wrath of 
God is coming [the "time of trouble"]. 

It would scarcely seem necessary to 
thus exhort those who have covenanted 
to become dead to all earthly things, 
even to the sacrifice of life itself; yet 
Paul saw the necessity and did not 
neglect the duty of faithfully warning 
those inclined to forget or ignore their 
covenant. We find him again writing 
to the Philippians, "Brethren, become 
joint-imitators of me, and watch those 
who are thus walking, as you have us 
for a pattern. For often I told you, and 
now even weeping, I say, many walk as 
the enemies of the cross of Christ; whose 
end [if they pursue that course to the 
end] will be destruction, whose God is 
the stomach, and their glory is their 
shame; they who are engrossed with 
earthly things. "-Phil. 3:17-19. 

Our acquaintance with the truth and 
the remembrance of our covenant is all 
that should be necessary to inspire zeal 
and constancy in the Master's service; 
but alas! such is not always the case, for 
many of those called to be saints we now 
see walking as men— minding earthly 
things, cumbering themselves with earthly 

R915 : page 6 

cares, hampering and fettering themselves, 

so as to hinder their usefulness in 

the great work of the present hour, and often 

cutting off all opportunity in this direction. 

The heart thus turned to earthly 

things, and the attention fastened there 

by increasing earthly cares, it becomes 

an easy matter to let the whole current 

of thought and interest turn toward 

earthly things— food, raiment and the 

provision for present and future emergencies. 

In every condition in life it is 

much easier to follow the bent of the old 

nature than to crucify it. 

The earthly things are present with 
us; the world and its ideas and interests, 
in which we also formerly shared, still 
draws us, and we must resist its spirit 
and influence, else we are in no sense 



overcomers. We must be willing to be 
thought peculiar, to be separated from 
their company and to bear the reproach 
of Christ as we go forward, steadily 
pushing aside the earthly interests, while, 
denying ourselves, we spend our time 
and strength and means for the advancement 
of the heavenly kingdom. 

If we are minding the heavenly 
things and not the earthly, we will be 
planning and arranging and endeavoring 
to devise ways and means to advance 
the Lord's work, to spread the 
knowledge of his truth. If our sphere 
is narrow, we will be seeking to enlarge 
it, just as a prudent business man will 
study to increase his business and to 
make the most out of it. 

Some will undoubtedly find that they 
cannot do a great deal in this direction, 
but in all probability they can do something; 
they can at least try. It is a 
very indolent and indifferent steward 
who concludes without an effort, that 
almost nothing, is the full measure of 
his ability to serve the Master. And 
while it is far from our province or intention 
to pass judgment upon any one, 
yet the aggregate of the effort put forth 
to advance the truth is far short of what 
it should be if all the consecrated were 
fully awake to their opportunities and 
privileges, minding chiefly the heavenly 
things, and studying how to most advance 
the heavenly interests, and giving 
to the earthly things only the needful 
thought and attention, such as decency, 
order and honesty require. If all the 
Lord's stewards were spending time, 
physical and mental effort, money, influence 
and every talent as wise stewards, 
and in full harmony with their 
covenant, we would be able to see much 
larger results than we do see. And yet 
the results show a degree of faithfulness 
which gives evidence of some effort on 
the part of many, and great effort on 
the part of some. Our desire here is 
not to discourage any, but to awaken to 
greater diligence the many who should 
be more active and faithful. 

Paul advised the church to take himself 
as an example, and to mark for imitation 
others who walk in harmony with 
their covenant. The daily walk and 
conversation of all the saints, and their 



untiring zeal in the Master's service, 
should be such as to be worthy of imitation. 
Paul's zeal for the truth would 
have made him active and useful in any 
position in life, and we may be sure that 
no position would have held him long 
which furnished no opportunities for the 
divine service to which he had consecrated 
all. He did not permit business 
or worldly prospects, or friends or foes 
to interfere. Nor did he take upon 
himself domestic cares to limit and fetter 
him in the service. Dearly beloved, 
mark Paul and all who so walk, and let 
your zeal abound yet more and more to 
the glory of God. Spend and be spent 
in the service. If you grow weary 
mentally and physically in the service, 
rejoice in the privilege of wearing out 
in it; for when worn out you shall receive 
the crown of life. 

To walk otherwise than in full accord 
with our profession is to walk to that 
extent as the enemies of the cross of 
Christ. To claim to be running for the 
heavenly prize, while actually grasping 
after and minding chiefly the earthly 
things, is to misrepresent the truth; and 
others who mark our course will do 
likewise, mistaking the way. Thus we 
would be misleaders and "enemies" or 
opposers. Let us faithfully push aside 
the earthly cares and ambitions, and 
run with zeal and patience to the end, 
taking heed that we be not stumbling-blocks 
in the way of other runners. If 
ye be risen with Christ, seek and set 
your affections on the things above, not 
on things on the earth; for your interests 
are heavenly. The earthly blessings 
of restitution, and all the good 
things in store for the redeemed natural 
man are not your future portion. Look 
into the exceeding great and precious 
promises of the blessings in store for 
the new creatures in Christ, that you 
may catch more of the inspiration of 
that glorious hope. Then forgetting 
the things behind, press toward the 
mark for the prize of the high calling of 
God in Christ Jesus. 



R954 : page 6 



Dr. S. G. Howe found that the parents 
of one hundred and forty-five, out of three 
hundred idiots, were habitual drunkards. 
He attributed one half of the cases of idiocy 
in the state of Massachusetts to intemperance, 
and he is sustained in his 
opinion by the most reliable authorities. 



R915 : page 6 

"WHOSE WIFE SHALL SHE BE?" 

"They which shall be accounted worthy to 
obtain [attain] that world [age] and the resurrection 
from the dead, neither marry nor are given 
in marriage, neither can [will] they die any 
more; for they are equal [like] unto the angels, 
and are children of God— being children of [by] 
the resurrection."— Luke 20:34-36. 

This passage seems to open up anew 
of late, and furnishes a light upon the 
future not elsewhere provided. We at 
one time held the view that the resurrection 
here referred to was the First 
Resurrection, the resurrection of THE 
CHURCH to spiritual perfection. But if 
so, the Greek word translated resurrection 
should be emphatic, so as to show 
that a special or particular resurrection 
is meant. But on critical examination, 
we find that anastasis as here used is 
not specially emphasized. Besides, as 
we examine the context it is evident 
that not the resurrected condition of the 
Church is discussed, but the resurrected 
condition of the World, as represented 
by the woman who had been married 
successively to the seven husbands. 
Our Lord's reply as above is an answer 
to the query, "In the resurrection, 
whose wife shall she be?" 

The Saducees with whom our Lord 
held this conversation were disbelievers 
in a resurrection. They held that death 
ended all existence forever, as much to 
mankind as to beasts; and they held up 
the case of this woman with seven husbands, 
as an argument to prove that if 
a resurrection should take place, it 
would produce an endless jangle by 
reason of mixed and confused social 
arrangements. 

Our Lord's answer is that they erred 



from not appreciating the power of God 
to control and arrange all the minutia, 
as well as the grander and greater features 
of his plan, and from not understanding 
the Scriptures. The Scriptures 
now opening up in the dawn of 
the approaching Day, disclose to us the 
fact that the world's resurrection (Greek 
anastasis— raising up) will be a gradual 
work covering a period of a thousand 
years, and not a momentary work as 
the Saducees and others, and ourselves 
until four years ago, supposed.* 

Our Lord's answer steps right over 
the Millennial Age or period of attaining 
perfection (resurrection), with the 
answer that they must learn to trust "the 
power of God." His explanation shows 
how it will be in that great everlasting 
future which stretches out beyond the 
Millennium, and to which the Millennial 
Age serves but as a gateway, to admit 
the willing and worthy, and to "cut off" 
the unwilling and disobedient. 

Thus viewed, mark the import of our 
Lord's words: "They which shall be 
accounted worthy to obtain that world 
[age] and the resurrection, neither marry 
nor are given in marriage." It is 
evident from a close examination that 
our Lord refers to a period after the 
world has been tried. The words 
"shall be accounted worthy," show that 
those referred to were not yet accounted 



*The resurrection (lifting to perfection) of the 
Gospel Church will be an instantaneous or momentary 
work, because it will consist only of 
"overcomers" who in the present life shall have 
been tried and found worthy. (1 Cor. 15:51,52 
—"We shall all be changed in a moment") 
But the world's trial or judgment belongs to the 
Millennium or Judgment age, and their resurrection, 
lifting up to perfection, will keep pace with 
their obedience under their trial, the one ending 
with the other in the close of that age— the willing 
or worthy being then fully lifted up, and all 
the unwilling or unworthy and "abominable" 
being cut off in the second death. 

R915 : page 7 

worthy; and that some future trial must 
be undergone by them, which would 



demonstrate their worthiness to attain 
the resurrection, and their right to live 
under the new order of things, where 
sin and sinners are inexcusable and will 
not be permitted. 

The Bible teaches that "in death there 
is no remembrance of God, and in the 
grave [Hebrew sheol, Greek hades,] none 
can give God thanks (Psa. 6:5); and 
that there is no knowledge, nor wisdom, 
nor device, in the grave [sheol, hades,] 
whither all go (Eccl. 9:10.) Hence we 
know that no progress can be made by 
these in attaining or being "counted 
worthy," until the great Redeemer shall 
become their Deliverer to set them free 
from the curse or penalty of the first failure, 
under the first trial, in Eden, and to grant 
each for himself a second trial under 
himself as Judge and Teacher. Thus 
Jesus' words teach a future trial for mankind 
in general, in which the woman 
and seven husbands who were already 
dead, and who were not believers in 
Christ, may have a part. For if the woman 
and her husbands and such like 
were not to have a further trial for attaining 
that world, in which they might 
be "accounted worthy," it certainly would 
have been in order for our Lord to have 
then and there stated the fact plainly. 
We know that some theologians of our 
day would from their erroneous views 
have answered quite differently. Instead 

R916 : page 7 

of saying those who "shall be [future] 
accounted worthy" to attain to the resurrection, 
they, would probably have 
said nothing about a resurrection and 
an age to come and a future trial, but 
would have stated it thus— Those who 
lived perfect lives before they died [that 
would be none] and who believed in and 
fully accepted Christ before they died 
[none of them] went at death [past tense] 
to heaven, while the others all went to a 
place of everlasting torture, where they 
will have too much pain to think about 
their marriage relationship. But, thus 
modern theologians differ in their teachings 
from the Great Master whom they 
claim as the author of their faith and 
teachings. Surely they have gone far 
from the truth, and are teaching for doctrines 



the theories and traditions of men. 
"LIKE UNTO THE ANGELS." 

The word "equal" here is a poor 
translation; the sense is like, as rendered 
above. See Diaglott and Young's Trans. 

Man in his perfection is "a little lower" 
than angels, a human, earthly being, 
while angels are spirit beings. The work 
of perfecting or raising up the fallen 
race to the perfection from which it fell, 
will not change man to a spirit-being 
such as angels are. 

But while men and angels are of different 
natures, they will be alike in some 
respects. The Lord mentions the particular 
point of likeness here referred 
to, viz., that they will no longer marry, 
neither will* they die thereafter. 

The thought is this, the trial or judgment 
of the Millennial age will be so complete 
and the lessons of obedience so well impressed 
upon men that only the "worthy" 
will attain to that condition of perfection 
and on these the lesson of the bitterness 
of sin and the blessedness of obedience 
will be so deeply impressed that eternity 
will not efface it, and they will never again 
choose sin; and consequently "neither 
will they die thereafter. " All who 
attain that age at all will be so, because 
all not "counted worthy," the great Judge 
will "cut off," or "destroy from among 
the people."— Acts 3:23. 

Now let us notice the likeness of men 
to angels, which will abolish marriage after 
the Millennium. Marriage is proper in 
this age. It is of divine arrangement. 
It is the method by which it pleased God 
to create a race— by creating one pair with 
whom he lodged the powers of procreation, 
to "multiply and to fill the earth." 
—Gen. 1:28. And our Lord signified 
his approval of marriage by his presence 
at the Cana wedding, and by his endorsement 
of the Mosaic law which prohibited 
the separation of man and wife. Therefore 
"Marriage is lawful in all etc." 
(Heb. 13:4.) even though this and other 
lawful things be generally inexpedient 
to the saints (1 Cor. 6:12.). See article, 
The Time is Short, February TOWER. 

Angels are probably without sex— neither 
male nor female as we use those terms, 
though like God generally referred to as 



masculine. Man as originally created in 
God's image was probably the same in 
that regard, like unto the angels. Afterward 
"male and female created he them" 
for the very purpose of thus filling or 
populating the earth. And the reasonable 
deduction is that when the earth shall become 
as the "Garden of Eden" and shall 
be fully populated, then the "filling of the 
earth" by the multiplying of the race will 
cease, according to the proper outworking 
of the plan of him who formed 
the perfect man into a perfect pair, for the 
purpose of filling the earth. And we inquire 
why God chose to make the man 
perfect in himself at "first," and then to 
sex him into twain, if it were not for an 
intimation and illustration of what the 
race shall be, when God's plans concerning 
it are full-filled? 

The fact that Adam was without companionship 
among the beasts, and that 
woman became his help-meet does not 
prove that he would not have been as happy 
among companions like himself as originally 
created. Angels are surely meet 
companions for each other, yet not male 
and female. But in the plan God had in 
view, of producing a race from one, who in 
trial would represent all, in order that by 
one also he might redeem all, prevented 
the creation of a companion like himself 
and made proper the division of the one 
into two, mutually adapted to the various 
necessities of the situation. 

So then our Lord's words teach us, that 
when the restitution age and its restoring 
or resurrecting work are complete, all who 
being worthy shall be thus perfected, shall 
be as Adam was at first— in regard to sex, 
and freedom from death— "like unto 
the angels." 

These worthy ones will be "children of 
God,"— becoming such by the resurrection. 
To appreciate this we must remember 
God's manner of using the word 
"children". Only those who bear his 
image and are in harmony with Him, does 
he recognize as His children; others who 
are impure and disobedient and who bear 
the image of Satan, are called "children 
of wrath," "children of the devil," etc. 
In accordance with this, angels are called 
"sons of God," and Adam in his first 
estate (sinless) is called a "son of God," 
and we though not actually released from 



the imperfection are reckoned perfect, being 

justified by faith, our acceptableness 

being in and through merits and perfections 

of our Lord Jesus imputed to us. 

Yet in the fullest sense God will not recognize 

us as sons until our Lord shall present 

us actually perfect before the Father 

in the end of the Gospel age. Then we 

shall in the fullest sense enter into the fullness 

of sonship.— Compare Jude 24,25; 

Col. 1:22,23,28; 2 Cor. 4:14; 5:1-6. 

So too it will be with the world, in the 
Millennial age. Though God has planned 
the work in its every particular, and 
though he so loved the world while sinners 
as to give his Son for their redemption 
and restitution, yet he will not recognize 
them as children, until the "worthy" 
ones have been perfected (raised up to perfection) 
in the end of that age. Meantime 
the world can only recognize God as their 
Father by faith, aspiring to be counted 
worthy to come to that perfect condition 
in which alone they can be recognized as 
God's children, and dealt with as such. 
To be recognized as God's child is to be 
recognized as one entitled to the "liberty 
of the sons of God"— freedom from pain, 
death, etc., etc. Until that grand consummation 
is reached the world can deal 
with the Father only through the Royal 
Priesthood of which our Lord is the head 
or High Priest. 

When this Royal Priest has completed 
the work of judging the world, and shall 
have destroyed evil in every form (including 
wilful sinners of whom Satan is chief) 
he will present to the Father perfect and 
complete, all those counted worthy to attain 
to that age and full perfection of being. 
He will present them then (even as 
the Gospel little flock now) blameless and 
unreprovable before him. (Phil. 2:15; 
Col. 1:22.). Their perfection will be 
that of manhood, while ours is that of the 
new nature to which we were begotten as 
joint-heirs with Christ. (2 Pet. 1:4.). 
Thus the Royal Priest and King will deliver 
up the Kingdom of earth to God 
even the Father, that God may be "all in 
all." God will then be recognized fully 
by all his creatures as they could not recognize 
him while in imperfection and 
sin. And all will then realize that the 
plan of salvation from first to last was of 
the Father and by the Father, however he 



may have used others as co-workers by 

whom to accomplish his glorious and successful 

plan. 

The figure of husband and wife is used 
frequently to represent the closeness of 
union and interest existing between the 
Lord and the church; particularly as 
showing the period of interest before and 
at the time of their uniting: but in no 
case does the figure go farther, to represent 
anything akin to motherhood on the 
part of the church. On the contrary the 
figure, generally used in reference to the 
period beyond our union, represent the 
twain as one— Head and Body; the Prophet, 
Priest and King of the world, during 
its age of trial. 

So then we, in the light of the dawning 
Day, seeing more clearly the teachings of 
the Scriptures and the power of God to 
be revealed during the age of restitution, 
can appreciate the Lord's answer to the 
Sadducees' question— Whose wife of the 
seven husbands shall she be?— in a way 
which it was not possible for them to understand. 
We see, that this woman and 
her husbands, and all other men and women 
who during the Millennial age of 
trial may be proved worthy to reach perfection 
and to enter upon the great Eternity 
beyond, will no longer be male and 
female, but reaching perfection— full restitution 
—each individual will be complete 
and perfect in himself, as Adam was 
before made twain. 



*We here prefer will, or may, rather than can 
as the translation of dunamai, because it gives 
the thought of the text more clearly. Can, would 
make it appear that even though they should 
desire to die, they would be unable to do so; 
whereas the thought is that life is a blessing 
which none would willingly part with, but which 
now, because of sin and its penalty, men cannot 
hold on to. 



R917 : page 7 

HIGHWAY OF HOLINESS. 

C. NORTHRUP. 



"Continuing instant in prayer." (Rom. 12:12.) 
To continue steadfastly in prayer 
is of vital importance. Prayer is necessary 
to the continuance of our spiritual 
life. We cannot continue alive to God 
without prayer any more than we can 
continue to live without breathing. We 
should have stated seasons of prayer, and 
should be continually in the spirit of 
prayer. There is so much for which to 
pray, that we cannot afford to be slack in 
this Christian duty. We are dependent 
upon our heavenly Father for everything 
we need, and it is our privilege to come 
to Him like little children, and to ask 
Him to supply our wants. Are we sorrowful? 
we can go to him for comfort. 
Are we tempted? we can pray for grace to 
overcome. Are we in danger? we can 
cry to Him for help and deliverance. Are 
we in distress? we can seek relief at his 
hands. Are we poor, broken-hearted, despised 
or persecuted? He can supply our 
necessities, heal our wounded spirits, and 
clothe us with blessing and salvation. 
Does the answer to our prayer seem to 
linger; let us not be discouraged and give 
up, but persevere till the desires of our 
hearts be fulfilled, so far as they are according 
to the will of God. Let us continue 
steadfastly in prayer both for ourselves 
and for others, and for all things 
which pertain to the coming of the kingdom 
of God, when his will shall be done 
in earth as it is done in heaven. 

"Distributing to the necessity of saints." 
(Rom. 12:13.) As a rule, God's saints 
are poor. But some are better supplied 
than others. Those who have more than 
they need should share with their brethren 
in necessity. By so doing they benefit 
themselves more than those whom they 
supply. Moreover they know not how 
soon matters may be reversed, so that 
they may need the benefactions of those 
whom they had relieved. By this interchange 
of benefits we show that we are 
members one of another. In ministering 
to our brethren in Christ we minister to 
Christ himself. What saint would not regard 
it an inestimable privilege to minister 
to the blessed Master? It is blessed 
to receive, but it is more blessed to give. 
By distributing to the necessity of saints, 
brotherly love is demonstrated and nurtured 
and increased. The giver and the 



receiver are drawn more closely together. 
It also calls forth thanksgiving and glory 
to God from the recipients, and checks 
the spirit of selfishness in the donors. 
[The greatest necessities to the saints are 
spiritual ones;— THE TRUTH therefore is 
the greatest gift to such; her price is 
above rubies. Hence while doing them 
good in any way we can let us not forget 
their greatest necessity and our grandest 
opportunity of ministering to it.— EDITOR 
Z.W.T.] 

"Given to hospitality." (Rom. 12:13.) 
Hospitality is the "reception and entertainment 
of strangers or guests without 
reward, or with kind and generous liberality." 
It is the opposite of narrow-heartedness 
and selfishness. Abraham 
showed hospitality when he entertained 
the three angels with the best he had. 
Lydia showed hospitality, when, after her 
baptism, she besought Paul and his companions, 
saying, "If ye have judged me 
to be faithful to the Lord, come into my 
house and abide there," and constrained 
them. Publius showed hospitality to Paul 
and his shipwrecked companions, when 
he received them and lodged them three 
days courteously. The Apostle Paul says, 

R917 : page 8 

"Be not forgetful to entertain strangers; 
for thereby some have entertained angels 
unawares." And the Apostle Peter exhorts 
the brethren to "use hospitality one 
to another without grudging." We lose 
nothing by the practice of hospitality. 
There are a thousand ways in which the 
Lord can repay us for our generosity. 
But above all, He enriches us with his 
grace. Our hearts are made better; our 
souls are ennobled. 

"Bless them that persecute you; bless 
and curse not." (Rom. 12:14.) It requires 
grace to bless those who persecute us, but 
grace shall be given if we seek it. The 
Spirit of Christ teaches us to return good 
for evil. Nothing will so break down those 
who ill-treat us as to manifest a Christian 
spirit towards them. Moreover, by so 
acting we adorn the doctrine of Christ 
which we profess. God is thereby pleased, 
and the religion of Christ is commended 
to the world. We should bless others 
as we hope to be blessed of God. To 



curse our fellow-mortals does not become 
us, even though they may have sorely 
wronged us. God has called us that we 
should inherit blessing, though we had 
done worse to Him than our enemies 
could do to us. Amiable is that Christ-like 
spirit which returns blessing for cursing. 
Valiant is the Christian soldier who 
can face the enemy with weapons of peace. 
Victor indeed is he who so rules his own 
spirit as not only to bear reproach, but so 
as to bless the reproacher.— Dawn of 
Morning. 



R917 : page 8 

SHAMEFUL TRAFFIC IN THE CHURCH 
OF ENGLAND. 

A London correspondent writes as follows: 
"The public are not probably aware 
that the system of purchase in the church 
of England is as rife at the present time 
as it ever was in the army. Some interesting 
disclosures on the subject appeared 
in the Pall Mall Gazette recently, from 
the chairman of the 'National Committee 
for Abolishing Purchase in the Church.' 
According to his statement, the traffic had 
almost become a scandal. Livings are 
offered in the most open way by clerical 
agents, the prices are stated in the advertisements, 
and the incomes and advantages 
are set forth as matters usually are 
in the bills of auctioneers. For instance, 
the following advertisement recently appeared 
in a paper:— 

'"Bershire: First presentation, or a 
moiety of advowson; gross income from 
tithe rent charge, and about 230 acres of 
glebe, $8,780 per year. Four beautiful 
churches, about two miles apart. The 
parish can be worked with the assistance 
of two curates. Superior residences, numerous 
principal and secondary bedrooms, 
etc' The very desirable rectory of Crayford, 
near Dartford, has, he says, been 
very much offered for sale.— The net income 
is nearly $5,000 per year. The rectory 
has 'well timbered pleasure grounds.' 
The price was— there is no knowing what 
it now may be-$42,500 in March, 1882. 

"Among the big properties there is also 
'a very valuable and desirable rectory' 



within a short drive of some of the most 
favorable parts of the river Thames. Net 
nominal value of the living, close upon 
$6,000. 'A beautiful church rebuilt and 
enlarged under Sir Gilbert Scott. There 
is a prospect of immediate possession.' 
The clerical agent has much pleasure in 
calling attention to this unusually choice 
property; $60,000 is the price asked for 
it. The same clerical agent offered a rectory 
in the Diocese of St. Alban's; net 
value upwards of $5,000 per annum; price, 
$52,500. Also a very valuable living in 
Yorkshire, of the net value of about $7,000 
a year; price, with a prospect of immediate 
possession, $75,000. For the pastoral 
charge of Yalding, near Maidstone, a very 
old standing dish of certain clerical agents, 
$60,000 was asked, 'subject to the life of 
the present incumbent in his 81st year.' 

"Numerous other instances are given of 
equally fat "livings," which are at the 
disposal of the highest bidder. The publication 
of these facts will not, of course, 
check the traffic in the least; but it will 
undoubtedly give an impetus to the agitation 
for the disestablishment of the 
church, which is fast taking hold in this 
country." 



R917 : page 8 

MARVELS OF PROVIDENCE. 

A celebrated skeptical philosopher of 
the last century— the historian Hume- 
thought to demolish the credibility of the 
Christian Revelation by the concise argument: 
"It is contrary to experience that 
a miracle should be true, but not contrary 
to experience that testimony should be 
false." Contrary to experience that phenomena 
should exist which we cannot 
trace to causes preceptible to the human 
sense, or conceivable by human thought! 
It would be much nearer the truth to say 
that within the husbandman's experience 
there is no phenomena which can be rationally 
traced to anything but the instant 
energy of creative power. 

Did this philosopher ever contemplate 
the landscape at the close of the year, 
when seeds, and grains, and fruits have 
ripened, and stalks have withered, and 



leaves have fallen, and winter has forced 

her icy curb even into the roaring jaws of 

Niagara, and sheeted half a continent in 

her glittering shroud, and all this teeming 

vegetation and organized life are locked 

in cold and marble obstruction; and, after 

week upon week, and month upon month, 

have swept, with chilly rain, and howling 

storm, over the earth, and riveted their 

crystal bolts upon the door of nature's sepulchre 

—when the sun at length begins to 

wheel in higher circles through the sky, 

and softer winds to breathe over the melting 

snows— did he ever behold the long-hidden 

earth at length appear, and soon 

the timid grass peep forth; and anon the 

autumnal wheat begin to paint the field, 

and velvet leaflets to burst from purple 

buds, throughout the reviving forest, and 

then the mellow soil to open its fruitful 

bosom to every grain and seed dropped 

from the planter's hand; buried, but to 

spring up again, clothed with a new, mysterious 

being; and then, as more fervid 

suns inflame the air, and softer showers 

distil from the clouds, and gentler dews 

string their pearls on twig and tendril, 

R918 : page 8 

did he ever watch the ripening grain and 

fruit, pendent from stalk, and vine, and 

tree; the meadow, the field, the pasture, 

the grove, each after its kind, arrayed in 

myriad-tinted garments, instinct with circulating 

life; seven millions of counted 

leaves on a single tree, each of which is 

a system whose exquisite complication puts 

to shame the shrewdest cunning of the human 

hand; every planted seed and grain 

which has been loaned to the earth, compounding 

its pious usury thirty, sixty, 

a hundred fold, all harmoniously adapted 

to the sustenance of living nature, 

the bread of a hungry world; here a tilled 

cornfield whose yellow blades are nodding 

with the food of man; there, an unplanted 

wilderness— the great Father's 

farm— where he "who hears the raven's 

cry" has cultivated, with his own hand, 

his merciful crop of berries, and nuts, and 

acorns, and seeds, for the humbler families 

of animated nature, the solemn elephant, 

the browsing deer, the wild pigeon 

whose fluttering caravan darkens the 

sky; the merry squirrel who bounds from 



branch to branch, in the joy of his little 
life— has he seen all this? Does he see it 
every year and month and day? Does he 
live, and move, and breathe, and think, 
in this atmosphere of wonder— himself the 
greatest wonder of all, whose smallest fibre 
and faintest pulsation is as much a 
mystery as the blazing glory of Orion's 
belt? If he has, and if he does, then let 
him go, in the name of heaven, and say 
that it is contrary to experience that the 
august Power which turns the clods of the 
earth into the daily bread of a thousand 
million souls, could feed five thousand in 
the wilderness.— Edward Everett. 



R918 : page 8 

A RANSOM-IN WHAT SENSE? 

Those who hold to the Word of God 
on the subject of the RANSOM, have no 
need whatever to go outside of that word 
for full denunciation of all who oppose it. 
Our Lord and the apostles use words 
stronger and severer than we would otherwise 
feel at liberty to use. But it is right, 
nay, a duty incumbent upon us, to apply 
their words "damnable heresy" etc., 
where they belong— to the doctrine of 
NO RANSOM, to which they apply them. 
What else is a teacher's duty? He has 
no other duty. He must not speak his 
own opinions, and he must not neglect to 
call attention to the errors which the inspired 
apostles fortold and described, 
though of course the advocates of such 
errors will not appreciate either the 
apostle's words or the faithfulness of those 
who call attention to them. This, too, 
is what we must expect. These think the 
only possible application of the apostle's 
words uncharitable. So also the great 
Master of the apostles was considered uncharitable, 
when He declared that there 
was only one door into the sheepfold. No 
other name is given under heaven or 
among men whereby we must be saved, 
and no other way than by the ransom. 
All who attempt to lead to salvation in 
any other way are branded by the Lord 
"thieves and robbers." So long, then, 
as we have strength, we shall endeavor to 
point out to these leaders, and those led 



by them, that they are building on a sandy 
foundation, without the only ROCK for a 
foundation, and that consequently, all 
their faith building reared thereon, must 
sink, and ultimately fall. 

Yet we must be content, as were the 
Apostles and the Master himself, to be 
counted of such their enemies, because we 
tell them the truth. But even at this cost 
thank God, we are able to save some from 
the snare of the "great Adversary"— 
"that old serpent." 

We cite the no ransom advocates to 
1 Tim. 2:6., which alone out of hundreds 
of texts, should convince them of their 
error. It is right to the point, and no 
amount of twisting can turn it aside. 
Will they not take it up, and convince 
and convict themselves of the "damnable 
heresy" of their teachings, and abandon 
the heresy, and accept the truth? Why 
not? We know this would cost the overthrow 
of much of the error built upon 
their sandy foundation, and we know that 
this would be hard for the self-willed to 
do, but is it not the best thing they can 
do,— turn right around, and confess the 
error of their teachings, since they left the 
rock, and return to it? But if they have 
done this willingly— if they have knowingly 
and deliberately counted the blood 
of the covenant wherewith once they had 
been sanctified, common, (Heb. 10:29.) 
denying its redeeming and sin-cleansing 
power, such, we know, will not return, 
for the Apostle declares their repentance 
"impossible." (Heb. 6:4.) But doubtless 
some, we hope many, of the deceived 
ones are merely blinded, and have not 
wilfully rejected the only gateway to the 
fold of God, and to lasting life. 

These no ransom advocates, by the way, 
will never admit that they deny it; but 
claim to believe in a ransom in some other 
sense, just as if there could be any other 
sense than the one— a price instead of— 
"a corresponding price." We request 
them to take that text (1 Tim. 2:6.) 
with its connections, examine the word 
ransom therein in the Greek and in the 
Syriac, as well as in the English, and 
please show in WHAT sense they believe in 
the ransom therein taught. It is high time 
for honest men who do not wish to be deceived, 
who think the word ransom as 
here used, may have a sense different 



from bought, to examine the matter, and 
find out to a certainty what it does mean. 
It not only meant bought, but bought 
with a price which CORRESPONDED to the 
thing purchased— a life for a life, a being 
(soul) for a being, in the sense of instead 
of or in the place of. We hope they will 
not dodge the question by telling us what 
they think the text does not mean, but 
take up the text and handle it thoroughly 
and show in WHAT SENSE "the man Christ 
Jesus gave himself a corresponding price 
for all." Handle this text thoroughly 
and honestly, and accept of its teachings 
as final, and you accept of the ransom in 
the same sense we do,— the only sense 
which lutron and antilutron have. There 
is no getting around this text. If they 
are resolved not to accept of its testimony, 
it would be far more honorable to deny it 
and reject it as uninspired, and cast it 
away; and with it all those Scriptures 
which teach that our Lord was the ransom 
or substitute for all men, giving for them 
the thing which they had lost all right to, 
—a "corresponding price." 



R918 :page 1 

VOL. VIII. PITTSBURGH, PA., APRIL, 1887. NO. 



R926 : page 1 



LET HIM that hath two papers loan one 
unto them that have none. And as this 
number is specially suited to new readers, 
order as many copies as you can use to 
advantage— free. 



WE commend to every earnest reader 
desirous of spreading the truth, the plan 
set forth in last month's "VIEW FROM THE 
TOWER." Many have acted on it. One 
brother sold 59 copies of the paper bound 
DAWN, in part of one week, after the price 
was reduced. The book sells itself best. 
Do little talking about it. The Table of 
Contents and the book itself will do it better. 
Expect that every intelligent Christian 
should want the book and talk and 
act in harmony with that conviction, and 
your success will be accordingly. We feel 
sure now of selling the 50,000 proposed, 
and if the TRACT SOCIETY'S funds will justify, 
we will certainly try to make it 
eighty or one hundred thousand. 



R918 :page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

As this issue of the TOWER will be used 
largely as a sample paper, and will, we 
trust, reach at least one hundred thousand 
readers, we take this opportunity of extending 
to such the right hand of friendship. 
The common brotherhood of all 
mankind, through Adam, is cemented and 
bound tighter by our sympathy for each 
other as common sufferers under the curse 
of death, which passed upon us all. And 
the weaknesses, and aches, and pains, the 
blindness and lameness, mental as well as 
physical, under which we all labor, should 
quicken our sympathy and love for those 
who have fallen lowest, or become most 
blinded. This broad love, thank God, is 



ours, as we believe it is His for all his 
creatures. We come to greet you, and to 
point you to the cure for all our maladies, 
and inspire hope and incite you to love 
toward God, whom you only need to 
know, to love; and whom you may come 
to know through his word and his plans 
therein revealed, which embrace and provide 
for you and all mankind abundantly. 

But our message is specially to the 
saints, those already consecrated to God, 
the truth-seekers, the "children of the 
light," the "little flock," the "Royal 
Priesthood," the "holy people," the "peculiar 
people," "The church of the first 
born" ones, "whose names are written in 
heaven," the living "members of the one 
body," of which Christ Jesus is the only 
head, prospectively "the Bride, the 
Lamb's wife" and "joint-heir"— you we 
specially greet, extending to you both 
hands, sympathizing and rejoicing with 
you as "new creatures," "partakers of the 
divine nature," and also sympathizing 
with you in the weaknesses of the flesh; 
for we have our treasure (the new mind or 
spirit,) in earthen vessels. 

We trust that our non-recognition of 
sectarian names, in which some glory, 
may be no barrier to your communion 
with us; for let us remind you that the 
Scriptures recognize sects, and divisions, 
and party fences, and lines among the true 
saints of God, only to condemn them as 
evidences of carnality, contrary to the 
spirit and teaching of our Lord and Master. 
The apostle suggests— While ye say 
I am of Luther, I of Calvin, I of Wesley, 
is it not a sign of carnality? Is Christ, 
the head, divided? If so, his body, the 
church, may be excused for dividing and 
separating themselves by creeds and party 
names from others. But were Luther 
or Calvin crucified for you? Or were you 
baptised in the name of Wesley?— See 
1 Cor. 1:11-13 and 3:4-8. 

We address you, then, and desire to 
know you and to be known of you, not as 
members of earthly, human, carnal sects, 
but as we above addressed you, as members 
with us, and with all saints, of the 

R919 :page 1 

ONE BODY of Christ, whose names are written 
in heaven, in our Lord's book of life. 



We come to you with a message which 
fills and overflows our own hearts with joy 
and praise. The night of the permitted 
reign of evil is near a close and the prince 
of darkness, and error, and superstition 
will soon be bound by the prince of light 
— Immanuel; and all his works of darkness 
shall be scattered and undone by the 
bright shining of the "Sun of righteousness" 
with healing in his beams, to bless 
all the race of men for whom he died. 

"Go ye forth to meet him"— separate 
yourself from the world and the spirit of 
it; come forth out of Babylon, as well as 
out of Egypt, and flee ye by the narrow 
way that ye may meet your King and 
Bridegroom. The time for presentation 
to him is at hand, and as the Bride makes 
herself ready (Rev. 19:7), we have no 
time to waste. Only the fellow-members 
of the one body can help you, and your 
assistance is needed to help such that all 
may shortly enter into the joys of their 
Lord. 

Once we supposed that the grand consummation 
of the hopes of the Bride would 
be the death-knell of the world's hope, but 
now, thank God, as the distorted shadows 
of the night scatter before the rising Sun 
of the grand Millennial day, we can see 
that God's ways and plans are higher and 
wider than we once supposed. And as it 
is written, He has put a new song in our 
mouths— even the loving-kindness of our 
God. The dawning light shows us that 
our fear was taught us not of his Word, 
but by the precepts of men (Isa. 29:13). 
We find that the prince of darkness, taking 
advantage of the natural fears of the 
fallen race, distorted horribly the punishments 
prescribed for sin by God, making 
death, the sentence, to mean the very opposite 
—life in torment, so as to prevent 
our seeing God's love, wisdom, and justice, 
and to prevent our full reconciliation 
to him and our recognition of him as our 
FATHER. 

But now, beloved, as we awake and 
arouse ourselves, and look unto the Redeemer 
and Life-giver, we find that the 
terrible things we supposed so real were 
only nightmares, from which it is so refreshing 
to escape. 

We have so much to tell you, and it is 
all so good, we scarcely know where to 
begin; but in this issue we present some 



of the simpler thoughts, just to give you a 

taste of our heavenly food which is meat indeed, 

giving spiritual health and strength 

which we never knew before, instead of 

the spiritual lassitude, and doubts, and 

wavering hopes, and fears and gropings 

in darkness, which once were ours. 

The TOWER comes to you as unpretentiously 
as the ministers of the early church. 
We present no list of titled and world-renowned 
contributors, none whose fame 
would command your attention to the subjects 
we present. But we come to you 
with the Bible as God's Word, and seek 
to enlist your attention to its statements, 
and your obedience to its requirements, 
and thus we hope to lead the hearts and 
minds of some of God's children away 
from the jarring confusion of precept and 
doctrine, prevalent among the various 
sects (divisions) of Christians, into the 
harmony, beauty, simplicity, and confidence, 
which come from the study of 
God's Word and its acceptance as a harmonious 
whole and a self-interpreter. 

It would be natural that you should 
wonder how these things could be true, 
yet not recognized long ago by earnest 
Christians; and why so many of those in 
the churches manifest such a bitter opposition 
to things so full of harmony with 
God's Word, and so fully vindicating the 
justice, wisdom and love of our heavenly 
Father. 

In answer to your supposed queries, we 
suggest that if a broad view of God's dealings 
and revelation be taken, it will be 
seen that he has a broad, comprehensive, 
and benevolent plan with reference to 
men, the order and details of which began 
to be recognized since Pentecost. The 
light of revelation shines with special 
brightness on the ends of the ages. Upon 
the ending of the Jewish Age, which was 
the beginning of the Gospel Age, new and 
special light shone out relative to the 
blessed privileges about to be enjoyed in 
the Gospel Age. Remember, too, that it 
came from the Scriptures, written long 
before, but which were never before appreciated 
or understood. Matthew, Mark, 
Luke, John, Peter and Paul, all quoted 
the prophecies and applied them to the 
events taking place in their day— the 
opening of the Gospel Age. The prophecies 
had been there for centuries, but the 



revelation or understanding of them was 

reserved for those in the ends of the ages. 

(See 1 Cor. 10:11.) So now, in the closing 

of the Gospel Age and dawning of the 

grand Millennial Age, we should expect 

the light to shine out brightly relative to 

God's plans for this incoming age. And 

so it does. Search and see. Gem after 

gem of precious truth now glows with unparalleled 

lustre to the diligent searcher, 

not because of his superior ability to find 

it, but because God's due time has come 

for such to understand it. Soon the blessed 

bow of promise shall be seen to span 

the whole heavens, and weeping earth 

shall dry her tears and shout for joy. 

It is no more surprising that these truths 
relative to God's plan for the blessing of 
all mankind should have been but dimly 
seen heretofore, than that the call of the 
Gentiles to be heirs of the Abrahamic promise, 
(Acts 11:18; Eph. 3:5,7; Gal. 3:29,) 
should have been but dimly seen until 
the Gospel Age began to dawn. We 
can understand scriptural statements only 
as they become due. Thus— "Light, 
(truth, was long ago) sown for the righteous." 
When due, the light springs up 
and gradually unfolds. Thus our Father 
has made abundant provision for the 
household of faith; and the true servants 
shall bring forth things both new and old, 
that the household may have meat in due 
season. The cause of the opposition on 
the part of many to the truth now due, is 
the failure to recognize this progressive 
and unfolding character of God's revelation 
of his plans. Most Christians take 
for granted that good men of the past, 
who walked in the light then due, had all 
the truth worth knowing. Knox, Calvin, 
Luther, Wesley and others were, we believe, 
good men and sincere, earnest 
Christians; but more truth is due in our 
day than in theirs. According to God's 
plan, the light should shine more and 
more until the perfect day. Many Christians 
of to-day make a great mistake, and 
sit in comparative darkness, when they 
might be walking in glorious light, because 
they search the theology of these 
men instead of the Word of God. 

Turn away from musty creeds of times 
past and give more earnest heed to the 
ever living, ever fresh, ever unfolding, 
ever new Word of God. Again, others 



take the Bible and search it only for the 
purpose of seeing how nearly they can 
make it to fit either their mental or written 
creed. If your habit has been such, 
we hope you will at once resolve to lay 
aside all human teachings as authoritative, 
and hereafter judge all you hear or read 
by the statements of God's Word. If you 
believe anything, make sure that you have 
Scriptural statements warranting it. Prove 
all things, hold fast that which is good, 
and cast away all else. 

The action of the nominal church today, 
relative to the light now shining, 
clearly resembles that of the Jewish church 
relative to light in the end of their age. 
They reject every new ray of light because 
it would conflict with some cherished theory 
or statement of their creed. They are 
so full of their own plans and arrangements 
for converting the world, that they are 
unwilling to hear that God has a better, 
grander, and infinitely more comprehensive 
way of dealing with evil, and blessing 
and teaching the world. Their ears are 
so stopped by the din and confusion of 
their own religious efforts that they cannot 
discern the plan of Jehovah. 

Satan is doubtless interested in the promotion 
of the confusion of sects, and stimulates 
and encourages that zeal which is 
not according to knowledge, and thus hinders 
their hearing Jehovah's voice, saying, 
"Be still and know that I am God; I will 
be exalted among the heathen: I will be 
exalted in the earth" (Ps. 46:10). Even 
so, let every heart respond, "Thy kingdom 
come, Thy will be done on earth as 
it is done in heaven." 



page 1 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 

St. Louis, Mo., March 7th, '87. 
DEAR BROTHER C. T. RUSSELL:-I am 

highly delighted with the February No. 
W. TOWER, especially so with "The Time 
is Short" and "No Variableness, Neither 
Shadow of Turning," and with the March 
No. which came in this A.M. Indeed I 
am always refreshed, strengthened by each 
Z.W.T. more and more, and my heart 
(mind) swells with gratitude and love to 



page 2 

God for such interpretations of His Word. 
The Article "Whose Wife Shall She Be?" 
is clear, reasonable, manifestly Scriptural, 
deep, logical and convincing, on a subject 
which I never saw so plainly before. This 
only shows how many mysteries are no 
doubt hidden in God's Word, yet to be 
revealed to his faithful ones. 

I preach more or less every day. My 
heart is in the work and must do it. O 
how I would like to spend an hour or two 
with you, but I am afraid I shall not be 
able to visit you this next anniversary 
Supper. If I should have no one with 
me, I will celebrate the Supper alone, with 
the Lord, and hope you will not forget me 
in your feasting and prayers. 

Truly yours in the Service of the truth, 
DR. J. R. M . 

Kansas, February 10th, '87. 

MY DEAR FRIEND:-I enclose money 
for two of the paper bound DAWN. The 
book is beyond rubies. I am also very 
thankful for the "TOWER" and pray our 
loving Father may long bless you to 
hold up the standard of truth. Such articles 
as "The Time is Short" bring us 
into very close fellowship: every word is 
as a nail in a sure place. 

I am respectfully D. B . 

Buffalo, NY. 

DEAR SIR:— I have enclosed herewith 
a money order for five dollars, which I 
desire to give to the TRACT FUND. I received 
knowledge of the truth through the 
distribution of tracts in Buffalo by the Society, 
and I have taken this opportunity 
to slightly repay for what I have received. 

Yours in Christ, C. B . 

BROTHER ADAMSON writes concerning 
the plan suggested in the March "VIEW:" 
"Of course 50,000 DAWNS can be sold and 
should be, before 1888 A.D. I was reckoning 
what would be my proportion and 
concluded on 1000. So I order 20 copies 
paper bound and find I will have to order 
20 every week. Having sold about 100 I 
must sell at least 20 per week for the remaining 
43 weeks of the year. If 1000 
subscribers to TOWER would sell each 30 



copies during the year, the big part of the 
job would be over. All could do this at 
the very low price now decided on, 25 cts. 
each. I have a small boy here who sold 
several DAWNS at former prices, 50 cents. 

While the discussion concerning the Second 
death of the incorrigible is going on, 
I call your attention to Amalek and their 
figure in history and the Bible. I believe 
both agree that Amalek was utterly destroyed 
nationally and individually. But 
while I saw plainly for some time that 
Amalekites appear to type those who enter 
the second death, the reason being given 
seems to add force. They lifted up their 
hand against the throne of the Lord after 
they knew it as such, and never was the 
Lord's hand lifted to bear so heavily on 
any other people.— Exodus 17:14-17 and 
margin. 

Well, Rochester is pretty well worked. 
I have six sets of boys loaning packets. 
Have articles every week in Sunday papers. 
I shall encourage all correspondents 
to try hard to sell 50 to 100 DAWNS a piece 
this year. Regards, Christian love, and 
joined by Sister A. J. B. ADAMSON. 

New Lebanon. 

MY DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I have just 
laid aside DAWN; I was reading "Jehovah's 
Day;" I am much impressed by 
what I have just read. Although I have 
read this chapter previously, yet it came 
to me under many new and impressive 
features; hence I conclude that I am but 
a child in the primary department of the 
school of Christ; that I have but tasted of 
the spring-branch, and that the fountain 
is farther up the mountain side, of which if I 
desire to drink I must continue to climb. 

Well, I am become unpopular to the 
Reformed sect; they became fearful; so 
I don't preach for them any more. My 
own sect begin to mistrust me, but I am 
not sure what they will do, as I am about 
the only minister they know of who will 
preach for them caring nothing as to 
whether they pay him or not. All that is 
wrong with me, is that I care as little whether 
my preaching pleases them, as I do 
whether they give me anything for it. I 
am not popular and what is worse (to them) 
I am not trying to be. I do what I can to 
spread the truth while earning my living by 
farming. Yours in our Lord, J. P. M 



R919 : page 2 

TELESCOPIC AND MICROSCOPIC VISION. 

The human eye is beautifully adapted 
to human needs and human enjoyment, 
yet only when aided by the telescope and 
the microscope, do we discover those 
wonders of nature which hold us in mute 
astonishment. The naked eye gathers 
in much of the glory that surrounds us, 
but unaided it cannot explore the seeming 
secrets of nature. 

Assisted by the telescope men view the 
distant heavenly bodies, and study their 
order of arrangement, magnitudes, distances, 
motions, periods of revolution, 
eclipses, etc., and the causes of their 
various phenomena; and aided by the 
microscope we are enabled to study forms 
of earthly life and agencies of power invisible 
because of their minuteness. Thus 
telescopic and microscopic vision together 
display the glory of God's work. But 
suppose the eye were so formed as to have 
naturally both the telescopic and microscopic 
vision; would it be to human advantage? 
No, the vision of immensity, 
were it continually spread before us, 
would be wearisome to eye and brain, 
and leave no field for investigation and the 
joy of finding something new; and the constant 
vision of infinitesimal matter and life 
would mar almost every thing of beauty. 

As the natural eye is aided by the telescope 
and the microscope, to behold the 
wonders of the material universe, so we 
find the Word of God furnishing both 
the telescope and the microscope of divine 
truth. By the aid of the divine telescope 
we have been enabled to view God's plan 
as a whole, and to see that it contemplates 
the highest perfection, glory, and 
permanent establishment, of all things in 
the heavens and in the earth. By its aid 
we are enabled also to study the order of 
God's plan, to estimate the relative magnitudes 
of his various promises, to compute 
the distances in time, to observe the 
orderly motions in the various parts of 
God's plan, to mark the periods of the 
revolving ages and dispensations, and also 
to discover the causes by which such 



changes are brought about. 

You who have learned to use it, adjust 
your telescope again, that you may view 
the wondrous plan of God, which is wide 
as the material universe which he created, 
and includes in its gracious provisions all 
of his creatures both heavenly and earthly. 

Viewing it as a whole, we have seen its 
order to be, first creation; secondly, discipline 
and development; thirdly perfection, 
blessedness and eternal glory. We 
first find that Jehovah's direct creation 
began and ended in his Son, our Lord 
and Saviour, the Alpha and the Omega, 
the beginning and the ending, the first 
and the last— Rev. 22:13. 

R919 : page 2 

He was the first and only begotten, and 
by him as Jehovah's agent, is all the 
divine purpose to be accomplished (Rev. 1:8). 
In the works of creation he was 
Jehovah's active agent— "all things were 
made by him and without him was not 
anything made" (John 1:3). And now 
we find him the agent in the development 
and perfecting of all things. It was Jehovah's 
power delegated to the Son, and it 
was Jehovah's glorious plan which he delighted 
to accomplish. All glory and 
praise then to Jehovah's infinite wisdom 
and power and boundless love displayed 
in his marvelous plan, and honor and 
praise to Jesus, who delighted to accomplish 
his will, though it cost him humiliation 
unto death— even the death of the 
cross; and praise again to the Father who 
hath therefore highly exalted him and 
made him partaker of the divine nature 
and given him all power in heaven and in 
earth— that henceforth all may honor the 
Son even as they honor the Father also. 

R920 : page 2 

Let glory, honor and praise echo and re-echo 
to the utmost bound of the vast created 
universe, planned by Jehovah and 
accomplished by his power through his 
worthy, well beloved, and highly honored 
Son, the beginning and the ending, the 
first and the last, the Alpha and Omega of 
his creation. The Father's delight is in the 
Son, and the Father's glory is manifested 
in him. Yet the glory of the Son never 



has and never will eclipse the glory of the 
Father. The Father has declared, "I am 
Jehovah: that is my name; and mine 
honor to another I give not." (Isa. 42:8.) 
The Son never attempted to diminish the 
Father's glory, but always to add to it, 
saying, "My Father is greater than I," 
and it is my delight to do his will. (John 14:28, 
Psa. 40:8, John 4:34.) The 
glory of the wondrous plan, displayed in 
creation, redemption, restitution, and 
eternal perfection and glory of all things in 
heaven and in earth, belongs chiefly and 
primarily to Jehovah, and secondarily to 
his Son, who has been the honored chief 
instrument in its accomplishment. 

Leaving our observations of his creative 
work, we turn to view the great plan for 
the discipline and development of his intelligent 
creatures. We have seen that 
all were created perfect, yet free to choose 
good or evil, and that for wise and benevolent 
purposes in God's economy, evil 
has been permitted to run its dreadful 
course in the human race and among 
some of the angels. We see also that the 
great plan for human redemption and restoration, 
is so far reaching in its results 
as to finally settle the great controversy 
between good and evil for all time and 
for all creatures. Evil is now permitted 
to exist and flourish for purposes of discipline 
and development, and when this is 
accomplished, it shall be forever banished, 
never again to mar the face of 
God's finished work. 

But again, leaving these observations, 
turn your telescope to the still more distant 
future. Dimly outlined because of 
its greater distance, the glorious future of 
eternal blessedness bursts upon our enraptured 
vision, beginning at the close of the 
Millennium with the great jubilee of jubilees, 
the jubilee of the universe, when 
Christ shall have put all enemies under 
his feet (1 Cor. 15:25). There all tears 
shall have been wiped away, and there 
shall be no more death, neither sorrow 
nor crying, neither shall there be any more 
pain, for the former things will have passed 
away. And God himself will be with them 
and be their God.-Rev. 21:3,4. 

Having taken these telescopic observations 
of the outlines of God's great plan, 
we note the order of its development, and 
from the data furnished in the Scriptures, 



and our observations of passing events, 

we are enabled to compute the distance in 

time, even to the final consummation— to 

the great jubilee of jubilees. We have already 

marked the completed revolution of 

several great dispensational periods, and 

now realize that we are in the ending of another 

and just approaching the dawn of 

the Day of Christ, whose blessed reign 

shall wipe out the last vestige of evil and 

usher in the universal jubilee. 

As we study these great revolutions in 
their minor details, we discover the principles 
and causes of their movements. We 
see that the first dispensation, under the 
ministration of angels, completed its revolution 
at the time of the flood, proving 
the inability of angelic power to rescue 
man (Heb. 2:2,5); we see the law dispensation 
closing at the first advent of 
Christ, proving the inability of man to 
save himself by obedience to the law; now 
we see also the gospel dispensation ending, 
completing the selection of God's 
anointed priest, who alone can accomplish 
the great work. At the same time we see 
the reign of evil completing its course. 
In all these great and the many minor 
movements of the various agencies of God's 
plan which have been brought to our attention, 
we see the one central and unchangeable 
purpose of God— the final, 
permanent establishment of righteousness, 
peace and everlasting bliss on a basis 
which recognizes the freedom of the individual 
will, yet by the tender cord of love 
links that will indissolubly to the divine 
will as the only condition of everlasting 
life and favor. 

Seeing the grandeur of the work to be 
accomplished through our Lord Jesus, 
and the high honor bestowed upon him 
by the Father, we are enabled to estimate, 
to some extent, the exceeding great and 
precious promises to the members of his 
church— the "eternal weight of glory" to 
be shared by his joint-heirs. And indeed 
this is the chief object and value of 
these glorious telescopic visions of the divine 
purpose; and that we may be encouraged 
to pursue the narrow way to its 
end, we should take frequent observations. 
Astronomers, as they study the material 
universe, become completely absorbed in 
it, and seem to live in an atmosphere and 
to be filled with a joy above other men; 



but how much more inspiring are the views 

which we have been permitted to take, 

and the wonderful truths and calculations 

deduced from them? Here is a science 

which towers above every other, and a philosophy 

which, divinely directed, probes 

the hitherto hidden things of God. 

But, none can enter the watch-tower of 
Zion, or use the divine telescope, who do 
not come with meek and teachable spirit, 
with consecrated hearts, and a student's 
purpose to know the truth. To such the 
Lord will blessedly disclose the riches of 
his grace. 

But what of the microscope? Thus far 
we have only been glancing briefly at the 
telescopic visions of God's Word; but 
what, in comparison, we may term the 
microscopic views, also wondrously declare 
the glory of God. They declare his 
glory most emphatically to the natural 
man, for they are such as the natural man 
can more readily grasp and accept. 
These relate to the natural man, and his 
restoration to human perfection. The 
telescopic views are chiefly for those who 
are "new creatures" and heirs together 
with Christ. We turn the telescope 
heavenward, the microscope earthward; 
and the latter discloses the promises of 
restitution. Close examination shows the 
blessedness of that restored estate— perfect 
human nature— and the necessary 
discipline to lead the race to it; the judgments 
of God in the punishments of the 
wicked for their correction, and rewarding 
the righteous; and the doom pronounced 
against present evil systems, ecclesiastical, 
civil and social, which, defying 
the power of the Almighty, bind and 
oppress mankind. 

These microscopic views disclose to the 
vision of faith a physical earth that shall 
be man's Paradise restored— "The wilderness 
and the solitary place shall be glad 
...and the desert shall rejoice and blossom 
as the rose. It shall blossom abundantly 
and rejoice even with joy and 
singing. The glory of Lebanon shall be 
given unto it, the excellency of Carmel 
and Sharon.. ..And the parched 
ground shall become a pool, and the 
thirsty land springs of water." They 
point us to the fact that all obstacles shall 
be removed from the way to holiness— 
"No lion shall be there, nor any ravenous 



beast shall go up thereon; it shall not be 
found there, but the redeemed shall walk 
there." They show that all eyes and 
ears shall be opened to receive the truth, 
to be instructed in the right ways of the 
Lord— "Then the eyes of the blind shall 
be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall 
be unstopped. Then shall the lame leap 
as a hart, and the tongue of the dumb 
sing." They tell of the joyful progress of 
mankind toward perfection under that 
wise and beneficent reign of Christ— "And 
the ransomed of the Lord shall return and 
come to Zion with songs and everlasting 
joy upon their heads; they shall obtain 
joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing 
shall flee away."— Isa. 35. 

Thus these microscopic views reveal the 
blessed transformation which not only 
awaits mankind, but which also awaits the 
earth, which was "made to be inhabited." 
"And still new beauties do we see, 
And still increasing light." 

Let every child of God search out these 
treasures of divine truth, long buried by 
divine wisdom, for our present comfort 
and joy, and proclaim to the world the 
blessed assurance that its paradise is to be 
restored, and that the great Restorer is 
soon to begin the glorious work. 

Truth on every subject has always met 
with opposition. Science and philosophy 
have had to contend for every inch of 
footing gained. The use of the telescope 
and microscope were once condemned as 
improper prying into God's secrets. And 
none the less is the searching of the Scriptures, 
thus making use of the Divinely-given 
telescope and microscope, opposed 
to-day on the very same ground— an improper 
prying into the mysteries of God. 
Blinded indeed is that child of God who 
cannot discern such sophistry, and the 
dark source from whence such suggestions 
come. Does our Father give us a revelation 
of his will and purposes, and forbid 
our study of it? Let us search and see, 
and be filled with the spirit and inspiration 
of these blessed truths; so shall we 
be enabled to run joyfully and with patience 
the race set before us. 

MRS.C. T. R. 



R921 : page 3 



IS THIS YOUR GOD? 

The fool hath said, there is no God; 
And skeptics sanction with a nod; 
Because the churchling cannot tell 
Why God has made a burning hell: 
A burning hell, and full of woe, 
Into which the race must go: 
A place where Satan rules supreme; 
Where Saints look on calm and serene: 
A place where all must howl in rage, 
Except the few whom grace engaged— 
A few whom God is pleased to save, 
And plant above the fiery wave, 
To view with joy and happiness, 
Their brethren in their deep distress. 
No deep concern in these is found 
For fallen man in misery bound. 
A drop of water is asked in vain, 
And scoffed at by the elect train. 
A wailing host bemoan their fate; 
A chosen few laugh, ah! too late!! 
An idol, grim, o'errules, with rod, 
This scene of riot, as a God. 
Is this your God? Not such I own 
Whose will in heaven and earth be done. 



Man views himself and sees within 

A noble creature marred by sin; 

But from the debris of the wreck 

A promise rises as a speck, 

And in the darkness of that day, 
Shines as a dim lamp, far away: 
Amid that darkness as of night, 
The lamp gives forth a feeble light. 

In course of time the promised oil, 

In this same lamp makes night recoil; 

The night will flee, but leave behind 

A lasting lesson to mankind— 

A lesson in which he learns to know 
The awfulness of sin and woe; 
Of death, and what it cost to save 
Man from the power of the grave. 



There is a God, the humble say, 
Whose plan reveals a coming day, 
In which His Judgment will disclose 
The cause of all our pain and woes. 

When Christ, the Mighty One, shall be 
The king of heaven, and earth and sea, 
His Saints shall share with him the Throne, 



With Him shall reign, from zone to zone. 

The scepter wielded in His name, 

Shall make the nations know His fame. 

His power shall reach from land to land, 

And lead sin's captives by the hand 

From out the charnel-house of death, 

To reinstate them by His breath. 

In that great age the Law will be 

So clear and plain that all can see 

Its purpose, and His right to reign, 

And Law and Order to maintain. 
When thus far God's revealed plan 
Shall have been wrought with sinful man, 
Then each abiding soul shall claim 
A right to live in Jesus' name. 

But he, who will the Law abuse, 

Shall be cast out as base refuse; 

Deprived of life, deprived of breath, 

A victim to the "Second Death." 



When every soul which Jesus bought, 
Shall have been to perfection brought, 
The Age of glory will begin, 
With man forever freed from sin. 
No evil then will mar the race, 
The cause of it will have no place; 
For God has said and cannot lie, 
The soul that sins shall surely die. 
Hence into the lake of burning fire, 
He casts the tempter with all his ire, 
From which there can be no salvation, 
It simply means— annihilation. 
A glorious host exulting sing 
Hosannas to the heavenly King, 

Whose plan to full perfection brought, 
By far transcends their highest thought. 
Is this your God? Him do I own: 
His will in earth and heaven be done. 
J. P. MARTIN. 



R967 : page 3 

"THEIR fear toward me is taught by the 
precept of men."— Jehovah (Isa. 29:13). 



R888 : page 3 

ENDEAVOR to be always patient with the 
faults of others, for thou hast faults and 
imperfections of thine own that require a 



reciprocation of forbearance. If thou art 
not able to make thyself that which thou 
wishest to be, how canst thou expect to 
mould another in conformity to thy will? 
— Kempis. 



R921 : page 3 

I AM NOT ASHAMED OF THE GOSPEL. 

"I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it 
is the power of God unto salvation— to every one 
that believeth."— Rom. 1:16. 

The gospel, the good news or good 
tidings, is so good and so grand, that 
those who really see and understand it, 
have no occasion for feeling shame when 
they tell to others all they can of its 
height and depth, and length and 
breadth. 

It needs no apology on God's part, 
neither on the part of any of his ambassadors. 
In this respect it differs from all 
human theories which claim to be the 
gospel; for all schemes of human origin 
are necessarily imperfect, like their formulators. 
Of God's work alone can it be 
said, "His work is perfect." His thoughts 
are not as our thoughts, nor his ways as 
our ways; for as the heavens are higher 
than the earth, so are his ways higher 
than our ways, and his thoughts higher 
than our thoughts.— Isa. 55:9. 

Much is taught by those claiming to be 
true shepherds of God's flock which God 
has never authorized— much that misrepresents 
his character and plan. To ascertain, 
therefore, what is God's truth we 
must have some way to decide what is 
human theory, and what is really the plan 
of God, which he declares is much higher 
than human expectation. 

Some feel bound to take some very 
generally received view and therefore inquire, 
What do the majority of mankind 
believe? But they soon find that the vast 
majority are heathens who have purely 
their own human ideas, and are entirely 
unguided by a divine revelation. The 
next inquiry is, What do those believe 
who accept of the Bible as a divine revelation 
of God's plan? When the answer 
comes, that those who accept the Word 



R922 : page 3 

of God, are divided into hundreds of sects 
and factions, some larger and some smaller, 
some older and some newer, and that 
these contradict each other and oppose 
each other on almost every point of doctrine, 
while all have earnest advocates, 
and include among their adherents some 
pious, God-fearing people, the question 
becomes a most perplexing one— Which 
of these sects of Christendom is right? 

Interviewing the various sects we are 
warmly received, and by each assured 
that they have the matter right— they have 
the "good tidings of great joy" and 
know well the great plan of the Infinite 
God. And then they begin to tell us, 
some with one modification and some 
with another, that the good news which 
God has declared shall be for all people, 
is really good news for only a few, and 
dreadful in the extreme for the vast majority. 
They tell us that the vast majority 
are to be tortured unpityingly throughout 
ages of ages— eternity; and that a "little 
flock" a mere "remnant" or "handful," 
is to be saved from that awful torture 
(whether by an election with which they 
have nothing to do, or whether otherwise 
chosen, these sects do not agree). And 
the eternal and monotonous service of 
this handful of favored ones shall be to 
watch their groaning, agonizing, tortured 
fellow beings, among them close relatives 
and dear friends, and the meanwhile sing 
praises to God for such a manifestation of 
his love (?) and justice (?). To do so, 
their tender feelings of sympathy and 
compassion would have to be changed to 
feelings of fiendish brutality— otherwise 
they could not enjoy such an eternity. 

We confess that if offered our choice 
between the two classes, whether we would 
be with such a God to all eternity and 
hypocritically sing his praises, while witnessing 
such fiendish torturing of fellow 
creatures, perpetuated by his will and 
power, to gratify such horrible malignity, 
or whether we would choose to honestly denounce 
his injustice, and to share the torture, 
we know not which would be preferable. 
Surely we would a thousand 
times prefer to be blotted from existence, 
rather than share in such a carnival of 



horror, anguish and woe. Ah! there is 
no "good tidings" about that message. 
Not only is the joy for all people lacking, 
but it contains joy for none. Satan himself 
would weary of such horrors and diabolic 
pleasures, before eternity had fairly 
begun. 

Heart-sick, we turn from their revolting 
description, inquiring if this be the "good 
tidings of great joy which shall be to all 
people," what would bad tidings be, in 
their estimation? With confusion and a 
blush of shame, our friends begin to apologize 
for God and his plan, and finally 
they confess, that they do not understand 
it, and that their Confessions of Faith 
contradict their own sentiments of justice 
and right, that they received their ideas 
largely through the traditions of their 
forefathers, from which they only find relief 
in the thought, that the Judge of all 
the earth will do right.— Gen. 18:25. 

Ah! well we know that their hearts are 
better, purer, more just and more Godlike, 
than their creeds. Thank God that it is 
so. But as reasonable beings why accept 
and teach that which their own hearts as 
well as the Scriptures brand as a most 
wicked slander and blasphemy on the 
character of the God they worship, and 
whom in spite of their false theology they 
love? All should see that such confusion 
of thought and such misrepresentation of 
the character and plan of God comes of 
the blinding influence of Satan through 
sects and creeds. And why blindly support 
the various clashing creeds which 
your conscience in spite of long years of 
training, declares unjust, ungodlike and 
unholy, and a libel against the all-wise 
and benevolent Jehovah? It is very evident 
that such a message is not the gospel, 
not the "good tidings of great joy, which 
shall be to all people." It is very bad tidings 
—the most awful tidings which ever 
reached the ears of men. But thank God, 
this is not his message, his gospel. It 
originated with the great Adversary of 
God and men, who took advantage of 
man's fallen condition, selfish ambitions, 
etc., mixed these horrible and distorting 
errors with a little truth, called it gospel 
and placed it in the hand of Papacy, who 
in turn caused all nations to drink of her 
mixed wine of "wrath" (Rev. 18:3). 
Her message has intoxicated the world, 



taken away reason and blinded the eyes 
of men to the truth. 

If this doctrine of eternal torment were 
true, it would be better far that man had 
never been created; for the torture of 
billions of beings eternally could never be 
compensated for by the joys (?) of others 
witnessing their torture, even if the numbers 
were reversed— if the few were in 
torture and the majority witnesses in glory. 
In fact, for those of noble mind and 
impulses to witness the tortures of others, 
would more than mar every joy; it would 
be torture to them, from which they 
would gladly escape in annihilation. 

If such be the natural feelings of fallen, 
imperfect men, what would be the sentiments 
of the perfect man, as originally 
created— in the likeness of God? To 
worship such a God, as we have described 
to us by the various Christian sects, to 
sympathize with such a plan, and to be in 
full harmony with it, would require the 
obliteration of every impulse of love and 
pity, the extinction of every noble trait 
and feeling. The logic of such a gospel 
would be to prove the great Creator an 
arch-fiend, cruel and malignant in the 
extreme. And all who now are seeking 
nearness to God and to his spirit would 
need to be changed to fiends also, to enjoy 
witnessing such an awful, eternal carnival 
of torture. 

But thank God! His ways and plans 
are higher, not lower than ours, and even 
our best minds and most just and noble 
hearts, need the direction and inspiration 
of his Word to enable us to grasp even 
measurably, the heights and depths and 
lengths and breadths of that wisdom, love 
and power which his glorious plan reveals. 
We must enter into closest sympathy, before 
we can see what God has wrought 
and praise him as we ought. 

The great cloud of error which overspread 
the plan of God in the second and 
third centuries, and which deepened into 
a death pall under Papacy's supremacy, 
has been but partly cleared away since 
the thunder-storm of the Reformation, 
and nothing will scatter it fully, until the 
Sun of Righteousness shall be fully risen. 
But now in the dawn of that grand Day 
the "friends" of God are privileged to 
see and know concerning his plans, that 
which the masses of God's professed 



children, blinded by the various obscuring 
influences and agencies of Satan- 
priestcraft, tradition, etc., cannot yet see. 

The gospel which the apostles preached 
was not such bad tidings, and they were 
not ashamed of it and had no need to 
blush or apologize for any part of it. 
Nor did they keep back a part: Paul declares, 
"I have not shunned to declare 
unto you all the council of God." (Acts 20:27.) 
In every part of it he could 
greatly rejoice, and of none of it was he 
ashamed. In all of this whole council of 
God, Paul said not one word about the 
everlasting torture, mental or physical, of 
a single member of the human family. 
Why? Because that is no part of God's 
plan. Not one creature that God has 
made will be tortured everlastingly. The 
thought is absurd in the extreme and contradictory 
not only to every element of 
the divine likeness in us, but contradictory 
to every testimony of God's word. 
The theory is supported only by creeds, 
formulated in the darkness of past centuries 
by mistaken men, who had not fully 
escaped from the influence of Rome's mixed 
wine of wrath, many of whom undoubtedly 
were conscientious and all of them probably 
much better than their creeds- 
much more just and benevolent than they 
represented God to be. 

Even in the Bible this blasphemous 
doctrine has sought to entrench itself, 
putting a gloss and coloring upon certain 
passages, favorable to this wrath-intoxicated 
view, as for instance the misuse of 
the words hell, damnation, etc., which, 
with the meaning generally attached, 
grossly misrepresent the true sense of the 
Greek and Hebrew terms. (See TOWER 
for May, 1886.) They have succeeded 
also through hymns and commentaries 
and catechisms in twisting and coloring 
some of the parables and "dark sayings" 
of our Lord and certain parts of the symbolism 
of the book of Revelation (which 
book as a whole they do not profess to 
understand), so that under this false light 
these seem to favor their bad-tidings. 
But when the light of the knowledge of 
the goodness and glory of God, shining 
in the face of Jesus Christ, shines into our 
hearts and illuminates our understanding, 
it makes every parable and every symbol 
eloquent in the praise of divine justice, 



wisdom, love and power; and to form 
part of the "Good-tidings of great joy, 
which shall [sometime] be to all people." 

Thank God, all who thus see light in 
his light, from his standpoint, are "not 
ashamed of the Gospel of Christ." The 
question then arises, Whence this light, 
by which we may see the glory of God, 
in the harmony and symmetry of his plan. 
If none of the various sects claiming to 
be the church of Christ possess it, where 
shall we look for it? We answer, It 
beams from 

THE WORD OF GOD. 



While the various denominations each 
claim to accept the Bible as the rule of 
faith, the fact is, that they do not do so: 
hence the jarring discord of their teachings 
on almost every doctrine. 

While education and habit of thought 
have much to do with our way of looking 
at matters, yet to suppose that honest 
minded men, whose sole desire is to learn 
the will and plan of God could each go 
to the Bible, desiring to there be taught 
of God, and then arrive at all the dissimilar 
religious views we see about us, would 

R923 : page 3 

certainly imply one of two things: either 
that God's Word is not a revelation, but 
a deceiving enigma— a labyrinth of confusion, 
or else that man in his fallen condition 
is so wretchedly twisted, that it is 
impossible for him to reason with his 
Creator or to understand the Scriptures. 
But the Lord and the Apostles as well 
as common sense contradict both of these 
views. Paul says "The holy Scriptures 
are able to make thee wise"— "That the 
man of God may be perfect, thoroughly 
furnished." (2 Tim. 3:15-17.) And 
our Lord said, "If any man will do his 
[my Father's] will, he shall know of the 
doctrine" (John 7:17). Consequently 
we must look elsewhere for the fault, the 
cause of this discord of jarring sects and 
creeds. And if it is not the Bible that is 
to blame, it must be that professed Bible 
students do not study it properly. Yes, it 
is here that the fault lies. Earnest, zealous, 



Christian men and women come to 
the Bible with prejudiced minds, full of 
creeds and theories of various sects, to 
which they are strongly attached by 

R923 : page 4 

chains of veneration, and habit, and family 
ties, and social ties, and fears, and pride, 
and spiritual laziness. They come to the 
Bible not to be taught of God, but to 
prove to themselves and others, that their 
theories or the theories of their sect ARE 
RIGHT. And by ignoring passages or 
their contexts, which do not suit their 
views, and by bending and straining others, 
each seeker generally gets what he 
seeks, and confirms himself in his prejudices. 
At the same time, thank God, he 
that seeketh truth and submits his own 
will, and the theories of all others, to the 
light of God's Word, desiring to find the 
truth and to discover the error, is not left 
in darkness, doubt and confusion, but 
"shall know of the [true] doctrine." 

Nor should we ignore the assistance of 
any of God's children in seeking an understanding 
of the Scriptures, but we 
should give attention to them only so far 
and so long, as they teach and explain 
the Bible, in harmony with the Bible. 
Whenever we find a brother, a teacher, 
either of high or low degree, in learning 
or talents, ABLE TO EXPOUND and to harmonize 
the Bible with itself, our attention 
should be earnestly given; for such a one 
is a teacher sent of God, and we are safe 
so long as we prove all things by the 
Word of God, and accept of theories and 
interpretations not because of the teacher, 
but because of the Scriptures, which his 
teachings show forth and harmonize. 

But religious teachers of to-day would 
be almost ignored, if this rule were followed, 
for they know little of the Bible 
except some passages committed to memory 
in youth, and some looked out for 
special occasions. And three-fourths of 
all the discourses, delivered in Christian 
pulpits, if examined by the average hearer 
in the light of the text chosen and its connections 
with the preceding and succeeding 
verses, would be found at wide variance and 
often directly contradictory of the Word of 
God. But satisfied with their sect, the 
many "at ease in Zion" think not of 



searching the Scriptures, nor of proving 
or disproving the doctrines proclaimed. 

As for the teachers, with many it is a 
business or rather a "profession" merely. 
They were taught in seminaries not how 
to search the Scriptures, but the reverse- 
not to study the Bible, nor to expect to 
learn anything from it; for if they should 
learn anything new by their search, it 
would of necessity be something their sect 
would not endorse, and hence they would 
come in conflict with their party and its 
theology and be cut off. They are taught 
the theology of the sect controlling the 
seminary, and are expected to know and 
teach neither more nor less so long as they 
are in its ministry. In fact, generally 
they are bound by a solemn vow to believe 
and teach according to the creed of the 
sect strictly. Why then should they urge 
their students to "Search the Scriptures?" 
Rather, like the Church of Rome their 
influence is exerted to restrain investigation 
within the sectarian limits. With the 
implied threat of disfellowship, they urge 
their ministers and students not to search 
continually for truth, but to accept the 
voice of their sect as infallible. They do 
not openly proclaim their sectarian infallibility 
and the bondage of their ministers 
for very shame, remembering that this 
was the very ground on which their founders 
originally protested against the church 
of Rome, claiming the right of individual 
judgment in the interpretation of the Scriptures— 
hence the name Protestants. 

Were it not for this sectarian influence 
over the members and teachers of the 
sects, how quickly might all the saints 
who hunger and thirst after truth come 
into unity and harmony of spirit and 
doctrine— all teachable and all "taught of 
God." The Word of God would be 
more reverenced and would be "quick 
and powerful," while an "ear-tickling," 
world-serving, sect-bound clergy would 
be justly despised. This state of things is 
even now at the doors. The reason it is 
not more noticeable is, that the saints, 
the truth-seekers, are comparatively few, 
the great mass of the nominal church (all 
sects) being children of the world, unconsecrated, 
deceived by their teachers into 
the false assumption that they are Christians, 
and that by joining the sect and 
adding to its numbers and wealth they 



are joining the real Church of Christ, 
whose "names are written in heaven." 

Convinced then, that we must individually 
seek the good tidings in God's 
Word, let us next inquire, What is the 
Gospel, of which we and the apostles and 
our Lord need not be ashamed?— 

WHAT IS THE REAL GOSPEL? 



The real gospel is like a tree, it has a 
trunk or central part and out of this central 
glad tidings as branches, proceed 
various favors, each of which is a special 
additional feature of the "glad-tidings." 
The trunk, the primary "good tidings," 
is the news of our ransom: That Christ 
died for our sins, and thus redeemed us 
from sin and its penalty, death, by paying 
a corresponding price (1 Tim. 2:6) for 
Adam and all his race. And in consequence 
of this redemption he shall in due 
time deliver all from the dominion of sin 
and death into the liberty and favors of 
children of God, forfeited for all by Adam. 
The assurance which this gives is, that 
all that was lost through Adam shall be 
restored through Christ, who declares that 
he came into the world to seek and to 
save that which was lost. 

Adam held the blessings and favors of 
God (life, etc.) conditionally: If obedient, 
he might enjoy life and home and divine 
favor forever. His failure terminated his 
trial, and God sentenced him to death as 
unworthy to ever enjoy the blessings originally 
offered to him. Our Lord Jesus 
redeemed all the race from that condemnation, 
by enduring the death penalty for 
all as the representative of Adam, and 
thus he provides a renewal of the original 
favor of life, and renews the trial, making 
it this time an individual test of worthiness 
or unworthiness to enjoy the divine 
favors everlastingly, the condition again 
being obedience. 

God's plan is, to make the sinner a party 
to his own recovery, by arranging that 
an interest in Christ's meritorious sacrifice, 
our ransom price, can be had upon one 
condition only, namely: The sinner must 
desire and strive for reconciliation with 
God and must recognize Jesus' sacrifice as 
the only ground for that reconciliation. 



In other words faith in the ransom is made 
as indispensable to the sinner's salvation 
from condemnation, as the giving of the 
ransom. Being thus justified by faith in 
Christ, he is granted a new trial for everlasting 
life, the condition of which is obedience 
to the extent of ability, as step by 
step they are directed and disciplined up 
to full perfection of being. Hence the 
importance of telling all men of the redemption 
accomplished, and the importance 
also of their accepting the message 
by faith. Everyone believing in him shall 
not be ashamed. Whosoever shall call for 
mercy and reconciliation, upon the name 
of the Lord, shall be saved, recovered, to 
that which was lost. But none can call 
upon the Lord without knowing of him; 
hence the necessity not only that Christ 
should give "himself a ransom for all," 
but also that it should be "TESTIFIED [to 
all] in due time." Compare Rom. 10:13-15 
with 1 Tim. 2:6.* 

So then this message, that a ransom has 
been given for all, which guarantees a 
restitution of great privileges and favors 
once forfeited, is the very center and body 
of the "good tidings," and it is proclaimed 
in order that sinners may believe it and 
thus obtain its favor of reconciliation and 
a new trial for life. But so fallen and 
prejudiced has mankind become, that he 
is an easy prey to his great enemy, Satan, 
who blinds the eyes of the vast majority, 
so that they cannot and do not see the 
simplicity and beauty of the divine remedy 
for sin and its sting— death. He blinds 
many with superstition and degradation, 
many more with priest-craft and false theologies, 
which misrepresent and distort 
the plan of God; and those in a fair way 
to receive the light, he blinds and chokes 
with thorns of care and thistles of wealth, 
so that few thus far have really heard 
with unprejudiced ears this gospel of great 
joy, which shall yet be unto all people. 

So then, if there be not a future time 
more favorable to their hearing than the 
present, the "good tidings" would not be 
"to all people." But the plan of God 
provides for all and the ransom covered 
all and the declaration is, that it "shall be 
to all people;" and this implies not only 
a testifying, but also a hearing. This implies 



*The context to the above, Rom. 10:18, will be 
treated in our next issue and will be shown to be in 
fullest accord with all the deductions of this article. 

R924 : page 4 

also an awakening from death of 

those who have not heard, and also the 

binding or restraining of Satan's power at 

such a time, so that all may hear of God's 

favor, call for the favor he provides, be reconciled 

to God through the death of His 

Son, and have their second or individual 

trial for life everlasting. 

Meantime God knew of the blinding influences 
of the world, the (fallen) flesh and 
the devil, and could have counteracted 
them as easily during the Gospel age as in 
the Millennial age, but another feature of 
his plan made proper the permission of 
Satan and evil until the end of this age. 
This part of the plan constitutes an additional 
feature of the gospel or "good tidings," 
which applies not directly to all 
people as the other, but to a "few," a 
"little flock." This feature or branch of 
the gospel is concerning a "high calling," 
a "heavenly calling." It is not independent 
of the other "good tidings" however; 
quite the reverse, it grows out of the 
good tidings of the ransom, as a branch 
grows out of a tree trunk, and yet rests in 
it as a foundation. In this figure of a tree 
the roots illustrate the divine wisdom, 
love, justice, and power, which though 
entirely out of sight, are the real sources 
of every favor and blessing, which has 
been or shall yet be developed in the full 
completion of the plan of redemption. 
The main central branch, representing the 
call during the gospel age of the little 
flock to the divine nature, is an ingrafted 
branch, whose fruitage will be very choice, 
(the few of the divine nature), while the 
many natural branches, proceeding from 
the trunk of this tree, will represent the 
manifold favors and blessings of God; and 
the fruit from these brought to perfection 
will be humanity in general. As in our 
figure every branch, natural or ingrafted, 
depends upon the nourishment supplied 
by the root, through the TRUNK, so all favors 
are from and directly supplied to us 
by divine wisdom, love and power, the 
root which holds and supplies all favor, 



and yet all comes through the RANSOM, 
which our Lord Jesus gave for all, which 
is the central trunk. A branch or twig, 
attempting to grow up out of the roots 
directly and not out of the trunk, we call 
a "sucker." It can bring no fruit to maturity 
and is cut off. So every one attempting 
to deal directly with the divine 
supply, ignoring the ransom, is cut off as 
a thief and a robber. 

During this age the natural (favors) 
branches have been kept pruned off, so 
that they could not bear fruit until the 
special or ingrafted branch "of the divine 
nature" had brought forth its fruit— the 
"little flock," "the body of Christ." 
Their portion is that of favor added to 
favor, good tidings added to good tidings. 
Redeemed and reconciled and offered a 
new trial for life, like all the rest of their 
race, these who have heard and accepted 
during this age, have been invited to become 
joint-heirs with Christ in his glory 
and honor and kingdom to come, by 
which Satan will be bound, and the "good 
tidings" of ransom and restitution made 
known to all, for faith and acceptance. 
With Christ, their Redeemer, as well as 
their chief or head, these are now being 
prepared by obedience and suffering and 
trials of faith and patience for opening the 
blind eyes, unstopping the deaf ears, and 
lifting up the fallen, until all shall know 
the Lord from the least to the greatest— 
until the knowledge of the Lord shall fill 
the whole earth, until all branches of divine 
favor, proceeding out of the ransom 
for all, shall have brought forth as fruitage 
a perfect race enjoying all that was lost 
and redeemed. 

Even now amid opposition and weaknesses 
and discouragements, at the cost of 
much self-sacrifice the members of the 
body of Christ delight to do what they can 
of this work of blessing and lifting up the 
fallen and depraved, and thus they prove 
themselves worthy of the grander, glorious, 
and successful service as God's co-workers 
and ambassadors of the future. 

So then we find, that the message which 
God has sent us, preaching peace and life 
by the blood of the cross to every one that 
believeth, is indeed the central good tidings. 
And since it shall be testified to all 
in due time, we see, how it will be good 
tidings "to all people." This is the "everlasting 



[good news] gospel," mentioned 

in the symbol of Rev. 14:6. It already 

is being sounded forth and must during 

the Millennial age now dawning, reach 

every nation and kindred and tongue and 

people. 

Paul says, that God declared this gospel 
beforehand to Abraham, in the promise: 
"In thee and thy seed [Christ, and his 
little flock of overcomers— members of his 
body, Gal. 3:16,29] shall all the families 
of the earth be blessed.— Gen. 28: 14. 
This good tidings, given to Abraham, is 
exactly the same we here present, the 
blessing is the reconciliation and a second 
trial under most favorable circumstances 
for all the families of the earth, secured 
by God's favor through the ransom for all, 
given by Christ. The message to Abraham, 
of the blessing of the world, incidentally 
hints at the "high calling," showing 
the "seed" to be highly exalted as 
God's agency for blessing all. And Paul 
points out this seed, saying— "Which seed 
is Christ" (Gal. 3:16); and "If ye be 
Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed and 
heirs [of this high honor] according to the 
promise."— Gal. 3:29. 

When the angels announced the birth 
of our Saviour (though they saw not the 
philosophy of the divine plan of redemption 
and reconciliation, as God has since 
revealed it to his saints by his spirit) they 
added the Hallelujah chorus, "Glory to 
God in the highest, and on earth peace, 
good will toward men." They sang prophetically 
of the grand outcome of the 
message they bore, the "good tidings of 
great joy, which shall be unto all people." 

This is indeed the glad tidings, and 
who that realizes it as such, does not feel 
that God's plans are higher than man's 
plans, and his ways higher than man's 
ways. With the Apostle Paul we may 
well with reverence exclaim, Oh, the 
depths of the riches both of the knowledge 
and wisdom of God! 



R924 : page 4 

"JUST AND TRUE ARE THY WAYS." 

"I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ... 
for [i.e. because] therein is the righteousness [justice] 



of God revealed to [our] faith, for [our further] 
faith."-Rom. 1:16,17. 

While the gospel which Paul preached 
was "good tidings" to men, it was tidings 
which did not dishonor God, but on the 
contrary showed forth and magnified his 
justice and his law. Suppose Paul had 
preached, saying— "Ho sinners! God 
sends you a message of joy, that he has 
concluded, that the original sentence upon 
mankind— death— was too severe, and 
he now sends you a word of promise, that 
he will release you and restore you to life 
by a resurrection, shortly. So many of 
you as believe, rejoice and enter his service." 
Such a message would have been 
good tidings to men, but therein would 
be revealed not the justice [righteousness] 
of God, but injustice, unrighteousness. 
Such a message would be an admission of 
error and injustice on God's part in the 
original sentence. 

Or secondly, suppose Paul's message 
had been, "Give ear, O sinners, God now 
sends you a message of pardon. You are 
guilty, and under condemnation of death 
justly; not one feature of the death sentence 
was unjust or unmerited, but God 
has changed his plans, and proposes to set 
aside his own just verdict and allow his 
love to rule him now, as he at first allowed 
his justice to rule him. He therefore offers 
pardon to all who will accept of it, and full 
restoration to all he once took from us." 

Such a message might seem to men to 
be good tidings, but therein would be revealed 
unrighteousness, or lack of justice 
on God's part; for while claiming, that 
his original sentence was just, he would 
thus be undoing his own just work, which 
would be rank injustice. According to 
Justice it would be as wrong, as unjust 
[unrighteous], to let a guilty one go free 
from the just penalty of his guilt, as to 
punish one not guilty. Justice would be 
equally violated in either case. So if this 
had been God's plan, Paul would have 
been ashamed of it; for therein would 
have been revealed injustice on God's part. 

Besides, if God was sincere and honest 
and just in his original sentence upon the 
sinner— death— were he afterward to as 
sincerely and honestly reverse his own decree 
and pardon the guilty, it would show 
change on his part: that he like fallen imperfect 



R924 : page 5 

human beings is ruled by impulse, 

whiles just and whiles unjustly loving. If 

such were our view of our Creator, what 

dependence could we place upon his promises 

more than on his threats? If he 

should change and clear the guilty, whose 

life he once declared forfeited, might he 

not change again and rescind and recall 

the unjust pardon and inflict the just penalty? 

If he changes his plans even once 

in six thousand years, we have no security 

for eternity. Such a plan would leave us 

as uncertain of God's promises and threatenings, 

as many earthly children are uncertain 

of the promises and threatenings 

of their parents. Such a message, when 

thus examined, would not really be very 

good tidings, and Paul would be ashamed 

of it, for therein would be revealed the unrighteousness 

and changeableness of God. 

Or thirdly, suppose Paul's message had 
run thus: "Beloved, I have a glorious 
message for you from God; it is this: God 
wishes you now to know, that he is about 
to restore and bless you, and wishes you 
to come into harmony with him and his 
arrangements. God in the past has only 
deceived us, but thus did evil that good 
might come; but now he will deceive us 
no more. Adam's trial and fall, and 
through his fall from divine favor, the fall 
of all, was a farce, and the sentence of 
death, dust to dust, pronounced in Eden, 
was a mere deception. God never meant 

R925 : page 5 

such a penalty, though he pronounced it. 
And for thousands of years God has simply 
been pretending wrath and death against 
sinners, and has brought pain, and trouble, 
and death on the world, to carry out his 
great deception. Really, God never meant 
what he said, that death should be the wages 
of sin; and he never will inflict such 
a penalty— it was all a deception. Now 
God is telling us the truth, telling us of 
his love and favor; he is no longer trifling 
with us; and presently he will remove present 
evils, which he put upon our race not 
as a penalty, for we never really and justly 
deserved it, but he put them upon us as 
a blessing, which shall be for our good." 



What kind of "good tidings" to men 
would this be? It might be considered 
good news in that it would hold out a 
hope of escape from the pretended but unmerited 
chastisement for sin, never imputed 
to them by God; but such a message 
would proclaim God a liar; and any 
message from so unscrupulous a being 
would be unworthy of the slightest acceptance 
or credence. And such a message 
should not be heeded at all. 

So, then, none of these is the gospel of 
Christ which Paul preached, and of which 
he was not ashamed; for Paul's message 
revealed the righteousness, the justice of 
God, which these do not. Besides, in 
none of the above is Christ a necessity, 
though some of our day who preach one 
or other of the above gospels of the unrighteousness 
of God, drag into their message 
the name of Christ and his example. 
But Paul's message was not good tidings, 
with which Christ's name and example 
merely were connected, but good tidings 
of Christ, making him and his sacrifice 
the basis or foundation of the good tidings. 

And fourthly, let us suppose Paul's message 
to drag in the name and example of 
Christ, as so many now preach it and believe 
it, thus: "Oh! sinners, I come to 
you with the message of reconciliation! 
God is pining for your love and favor. 
He has been trying to draw you to himself 
for thousands of years, and finally sent his 
Son to tell you that he loves you and 
wants you to love him. Do not believe 
those parts of the Scripture which teach 
that 'God is angry with the wicked;' ignore 
those also which speak of the wrath 
of God now revealed against sin and 
sinners, in death and misery, as we see 
them all about us; endeavor to bury your 
senses and believe that God is not, and 
never was angry with the wicked; and believe 
also that death never was and never 
will be the wages of sin. Cast such Scriptures 
and facts from your minds, if you 
find no way of twisting them to fit this 
message. Then, accept of this as God's 
message: God wants you to look at Jesus 
and his perfect, sinless life and to follow 
his example perfectly. Do this and you 
shall have life and every favor of God. 
But you had best, when talking of this 
matter, use the words Ransom and Sacrifice 
for sins, often, so as to draw attention 



away from the fact that this gospel contains 
no thought of a ransom from guilt, 
condemnation and death, and no thought 
of a sacrifice, except it be that each sinner 
would thus sacrifice his own sins. This 
thought we could not admit unless by supposing 
that Christ Jesus was a sinner and 
sacrificed his sins, and that thus sinners are 
to follow his example and sacrifice each 
his own sins. Should this point be noticed 
by any who do their own thinking, 
pass it over by saying that the philosophy 
of the plan of salvation cannot be understood; 
and thus smother the objections." 

Of all the foregoing this is the most deceptive, 
in that it furnishes greater opportunities 
for misapplying those scriptures 
which applied and were given to the Jew 
under Law, and not under favor in Christ, 
and those also which mention the privilege 
of saints, already justified from sin by 
faith in Christ's blood, to join with Him 
in sacrifice, becoming so far as possible 
imitators of him, not in putting away their 
sins, (He had none and theirs are already 
reckoned as blotted out), but in sacrificing 
pleasures and interests not sinful, for 
the good of others. 

This is the weakest of all these four false 
messages for it embraces all the defects of 
the others and adds to them. This message 
ignores the Scriptural penalty for sin, 
as well as the fact of death, offering no 
solution for the same. It thus implies, 
either that no sentence was pronounced 
and that man has been unjustly punished 
thus far, or else that God will unjustly ignore, 
and set aside, and cancel that sentence, 
having changed his plan. And lastly, 
after all this, it has no "good tidings" 
in it; for it lays down conditions which 
no sinner can comply with: namely, following 
Christ's example perfectly. No 
saint (justified from sin and restored to 
divine favor through faith in the sacrifice 
for his sin which Christ gave, and supported 
and helped in every time of need), can 
hope to follow his Master's example perfectly, 
and how useless would it be for a 
sinner to attempt it (unjustified by faith in 
the ransom, unreconciled, still under condemnation, 
the merits of Christ not imputed 
to him, to cover as a robe of righteousness 
his filthy rags;) and how absurd 
to tell such to go to God and be reconciled 
by following the example of Christ. 



No, there is no good tidings in this to any 

who can and do use their reasoning powers. 

They see how the whole Jewish nation 

for hundreds of years tried to commend 

themselves to God by good works, 

yet all failed; and by works and sacrifices 

none were reconciled or justified. Faith 

—faith in Christ's finished work on our 

behalf— a ransom, corresponding price, 

given for all, is the only ground of reconciliation, 

on which the sinner can come 

to God. All his works and sacrifices are 

blemished, dead and unacceptable, until 

he is reconciled to God through the death 

of Christ, the just one who died for the 

unjust, to bring us to God. Thus we who 

were as sinners afar off, under condemnation, 

are brought nigh to God— within 

reach of divine favors, blessings, and promises, 

by the blood of Christ. -Eph. 2:13. 

The Gospel, the good tidings of great 
joy which Paul preached, not only did not 
reveal God as changeable, unreliable, and 
unrighteous, but on the contrary it did reveal 
a plan, by which the justice, as well 
as the love of God came to our rescue, for 
having so loved us as to provide our ransom, 
He is just to forgive us our sins once 
atoned for "by the death of his Son." 
This gospel admits of our guilt. It admits 
the death-penalty to be the just wages of 
sin. It acknowledges the facts of dying 
and death all about us, as effects of that 
penalty pronounced upon our perfect representative, 
of whose condemnation to 

death we partake by inheritance. It acknowledges 
that this penalty, being a just 
one, can never justly be set aside. Paul's 
gospel shows how the Son of God became 
a man, perfect and sinless like our representative, 
and then gave himself a ransom 
or corresponding price for Adam, and 
hence for all who were condemned with 
him, through his failure. This was the 
foundation fact of Paul's gospel. The second 
part was, that Christ having thus 
paid our ransom price, by meeting the 
full demands of justice, against Adam and 
all whom Adam represented in his failure 
—a man for a man— his resurrection in 
another and higher nature proved that 
God had accepted and rewarded his sacrifice 
of himself, by thus creating him again 
and highly exalting him even to the divine 
nature; and this not by taking back 
our ransom price— his sacrificed humanity 



—but allowing it to remain dead to all 

eternity, that we might go free. He now 

lives, the divine Christ, to accomplish for 

all in due time the blessings which as a 

ransom for all he secured by his death as 

"the man Christ Jesus." God can and will 

now justly, JUSTIFY freely all who call upon 

him for it, through him who is the 

"way and the life," who redeemed us with 

his own blood and now lives, exalted and 

powerful, in due time to release, restore, 

and bring back to harmony with God all 

the redeemed ones who will accept of his 

favor, when brought to a full knowledge 

of it. This basis of all that Paul preached, 

he declares in few words, saying: "I delivered 

unto you first of all [as the foundation 

of the gospel] that which I also received 

[first of all], How that Christ died 

FOR OUR SINS according to the Scriptures," 

and rose again the third day for our justification. 

-1 Cor. 15:3,4; Rom. 4:25. 

Another feature of the Apostle's message 
built upon this, was, that as the ransom 
had been given for all, and as believing 
thereon was the only way by which 
any could receive the benefits of that ransom 
(a second chance or trial for life) 
THEREFORE it must sooner or later be testified 
to all.— 1 Tim. 2:6. 

Another feature of his message was concerning 
further favor, open to justified believers 
during the Gospel age, namely, 
"access into this grace (favor) wherein ye 
stand," rejoicing "in hope of the glory of 
God" (Rom. 5:2). Access to justification, 
divine favor, harmony and peace, 
came first through faith in the ransom. 
But next came access to the glory of God, 
the privilege of becoming heirs of glory, 
joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, their Lord, 
on a specified condition: namely, If they 
would suffer with him. Access to this 
high calling, this invitation to suffer with 
Christ now, and afterward to reign with 
him, and be made like him partaker of 
the divine nature, was offered not to sinners, 
but only to those justified from sin 
through faith in his blood. Faith in his 
blood changed them from being children 
of wrath under condemnation, and made 
them children of God through faith, under 
his love and favor. And it was not until 
we ceased to be condemned sinners and 
became justified human sons of God, that 
we were invited to sacrifice our human 



rights and privileges, and reckon ourselves 
thus followers in Jesus' footsteps, and 
heirs with him of future glories. 

R926 : page 5 

We praise God, then, not only that the 
time is coming, when the good tidings of 
great joy, of redemption and forgiveness 
of sins through him that loved us and 
bought us with his own precious blood, 
shall be made known unto ALL PEOPLE, 
but we praise him also, that the plan he 
has chosen is wise and just, as well as loving. 
We thank him that we can see how 
he can be just while justifying the guilty 
ones whom he once justly condemned, 
through him whom he set forth to be the 
propitiation (satisfaction) for our sins, and 
not for ours only, but also for the sins of 
the whole world. Thanks be to God! 
Paul was not ashamed of this gospel, and 
we are not ashamed of this gospel of which 
we also are made ministers and ambassadors; 
for therein is revealed the righteousness 
of God, appealing to our faith as reasonable, 
and furnishing us a firm foundation 
for faith and trust in all his future 
dealings— those revealed to faith and those 
unseen as yet. Truly it is written, that 
all who have the harp of God in tune 
and have gotten the victory over the doctrines 
of the beast and his image, etc., can 
sing heartily of this gospel, saying, "Great 
and marvelous are thy works [plans], Lord 
God Almighty; JUST AND TRUE ARE THY 
WAYS. "-Rev. 15:2,3. 



R926 : page 5 

EVERLASTING TORMENT. 

Nowhere in Scripture is everlasting torment 
set forth as the wages of sin. The 
nearest approach to such a declaration is 
in Matt. 25:46. "These shall go away into 
everlasting punishment." What the punishment 
is, is not shown in this connection, 
except in the symbol "fire" (verse 41). 
The fire is as much a symbol as the 
other features of the parable, sheep, goats, 
etc. Fire is always a symbol of destruction, 
never a symbol of preservation. The 
nature of the punishment for willful sin, 



which is to last forever, is elsewhere stated 

plainly and explicitly to be death— destruction. 

"Who shall be punished with 

[or by] everlasting destruction [i.e. a 

destruction from which there shall be no 

recovery— no resurrection] from the presence 

of the Lord and from the glory of his 

power." (2 Thes. 1:9.) "The wages of 

sin is death" everlasting,— not life in torment 

everlasting. 

Consider well the fact, that our Lord 
Jesus took the place of sinners under the 
first condemnation for sin (Adam's). Had 
the penalty for sin been "everlasting torment," 
he, in paying our penalty, would 
have been compelled to suffer whatever 
the sinners were condemned to suffer as 
sin's penalty. It is written, Jehovah hath 
laid upon him the iniquity of us all. He 
bore our sins in his own body on the tree. 
He died the just one for the unjust. He 
gave himself a ransom— a corresponding 
price for all. 

"He died for our sins," but he did not 
suffer everlasting torment for our sins. 
Hence if there was no other evidence on 
the subject, this alone would prove that 
"The wages of sin is death" and not everlasting 
torment. 

We have heretofore examined in these 
columns various figurative passages of the 
Bible, which from the prejudiced standpoint 
of early education, seem at first 
glance to favor everlasting torment. We 
refer new readers to the following articles 
in the October, 1886, issue: viz., "Undying 
Worms and Quenchless Fires," "Turned 
into Hell," and "The Lake of Fire and 
Brimstone." See also March, 1886, issue, 
"As the Serpent Beguiled Eve." 



R926 : page 5 
LOST AND SAVED. 



"For the Son of man is come to seek and to save 
that which was lost."— Luke 19:10. 

Nearly two thousand years ago Jesus, 
then present, affirmed this to be his mission; 
but as yet no visible evidence of 
its accomplishment appears. The world 
moves on in its downward course now, 
as then. Sin and misery triumph still, 



and century after century plunges successive 
generations into death. Have we 
failed to understand the import of the 
Master's words? or has he been unable 
to accomplish his purpose? or may it be 
that his purpose is so far reaching as to 
be of future fulfillment? With these 
queries in view, let us consider the subject 
before us. 

The words lost and saved each have a 
significance known to all: A thing lost 
is a thing once possessed, and a thing 
saved is a thing once possessed and then 
either kept from being lost, or else recovered 
after having been lost. Jesus 
said the thing he came to save was the 
thing that men had lost; and the implication 
is, that since he had come to save 
the thing lost, men were unable to save 
it for themselves, which experience and 
many scriptures clearly prove. Now if 
we can determine just what man lost, we 
will know just what Jesus came to save. 
Man could not lose what he never had. 

Adam, who stood as the representative 
of our race, had a perfect human organism 
and a right to everlasting continuance of 
life, on condition of obedience to God. 
He was privileged to enjoy all the delights 
of his Eden home, and the communion 
and blessings of God; in short, all the 
privileges that everlasting life under perfect 
human conditions is capable of enjoying 
and looking forward to were his. 

All this Adam lost through sin, both for 
himself and for his posterity. Home, 
happiness, communion with God, health, 
and life itself, were lost. Consequently, 
mankind lies in utter wreck and ruin, 
dead and dying. In having lost his right 
to life, he fell under the dominion of 
death, whose successive steps of misery, 
depravity, sickness and pain, end in total 
extinction of being, from which he can 
never recover himself. 

Jesus came then to save and restore 
that which was lost; to restore man to 
his original (human) perfection, and to 
communion with God, to give him back 
his paradise restored, and all the pleasing 
prospects of future blessings that accumulating 
ages can bestow, and that the powers 

R926 : page 6 

of perfect humanity will be capable of 



enjoying. What! does some one say, Is 
so much implied in those words of our 
Lord? Yes; this is one way in which 
our Lord foretold the restitution of all 
things. All this is implied in the word saved. 
Think of it; could the words mean less than 
this? Certainly not; and, from this and 
many other scriptures, we have learned to 
trust in the living God, who is the Saviour 
of all men, specially of those that believe. 
(1 Tim. 4:10.) There is a special salvation 
for some, as well as a general salvation 
for all men, as Paul here intimates, 
but we are not considering the special 
salvation now. 

In the above text, Jesus was speaking 
of the general salvation of all men— the 
saving of that which was lost. For God 
"will have all men to be saved and to 
come unto the knowledge of the truth." 
(1 Tim. 2:4.) When men are actually 
saved, their restored existence will be as 
at first, dependent on obedience under trial 
for its continuance, and obedience will be 
easy and productive of constant happiness 
when evil and temptation are finally removed, 
and the great deceiver and tempter 
is bound and finally destroyed, and 
when the law of God is written in their 
hearts.— Jer. 31:33. 

But, we might inquire, when does our 
text indicate that Jesus will thus save 
the lost? However crude and indefinite 
the ideas of the Jews and the early disciples 
at first were concerning the promised 
salvation, they had learned both 
from the prophets and from Jesus' teaching, 
that it would be accomplished, when 
the kingdom of God should come. And 
when Jesus stated that he had now come 
to save the lost, they at once concluded 
that the Kingdom of God should immediately 
appear. 

Because they had drawn this inference, 
and to correct their false impression, 
Jesus spoke a certain parable, the import 
of which was, that he must first go away 
and receive for himself the kingdom, and 
return. "And he called ten servants of 
his and gave them ten pounds, and said 
unto them, Trade ye herewith till I come." 
(Luke 19:13. R.V. and Diaglott and 
Rotherham's translation.) They, in the 
meantime, as faithful servants, were to use 
the talents entrusted to them according to 
his directions, and in the interest of his 



cause and of his coming kingdom, patiently 
waiting for their reward at his coming. 

But Jesus implied that in some sense he 
came at that time, to save the lost— "The 
Son of Man is come," etc. And in one 
sense it was true, for he then purchased 
them with his own precious blood, and 
though not yet liberated from the prison 
of death, they may be truly reckoned as 
saved ever since their ransom was paid; 
for their raising out of death was from 
that moment made sure. Just as you 
might say of a pardoned criminal, that he 
is a saved man, although even he himself 
may not yet know of his pardon nor have 
yet experienced a release. 

Though no one is actually saved now, 
yet the Scriptures speak of believers as 
now saved by hope; that is, by accepting 
of God's promises as unquestionably sure, 
they may reckon themselves as already 
fully saved; not as merely awakened from 
death, but as saved from the last vestige 
of death and sin— as made perfect. "We 
are saved by hope; but hope that is seen 
is not hope, for what a man seeth, why 
doth he yet hope for?" We do not see 
our salvation yet, except by faith. "But 
if we hope for that we see not, then do 
we with patience wait for it." (Rom. 8:24,25.) 
Our hope and faith would indeed 
be vain, unless salvation means 
much more than we now enjoy. 

The Apostle's statements that God "is 
the Saviour of all men, especially of those 
that [now] believe," and that God "will 
have all men to be saved and come to a 
knowledge of the truth," as well as many 
other scriptures, prove to us that all men 
are to be saved by Christ from degradation, 
misery and death now upon all 
through Adam's disobedience. And yet 
they show us two classes of saved ones- 
all mankind and the Church. While all 
are saved, one class is specially saved. 
That is, by special arrangement, some (all 
believers of the gospel age) are reckoned 
saved in season to run for the prize offered 
during this age. One class will not be more 
saved than the other; both the Church 
and the world will be completely saved 
from Adam's sin and its penalty: and 
all the world will realize this in due time, 
in their restoration to perfect human 
life, while those reckoned saved now, as 
though they had already received the perfect 



human life, are privileged to relinquish 
this new claim and title to it, presenting 
it as a sacrifice to God, holy and 
acceptable to him, when offered in the 
acceptable time (the gospel age). And 
being thus sacrificed with Christ, they 
will be privileged to partake with him of 
a new nature. (2 Pet. 1:4.) These 
will receive glory, honor and immortality 
—the divine nature; while the world in 
general will receive the glory, honor and 
blessedness of the perfect human nature, 
which is an image of the divine (Gen. 1:27). 
The former class, the church, is specially 
saved, severely disciplined and highly 
exalted, that through them the blessings 
of restitution may flow to all the world, 
when God's due time shall come. 

We see, then, that while the full import 
of our Lord's words has not been understood 
by many, and while many believe, 
that he is unable to save the lost, as he 
promised to do, the fact is, that his 
plan was so far reaching that short-sighted 
dying men, could not measure or 
comprehend it. As now seen, the truth 
uttered in those few words required nearly 
three thousand years for its full accomplishment. 
At his first advent Jesus gave 
himself a ransom to save all (1 Tim. 2:6); 
during the centuries since, he has been 
developing the class who have in this time 
followed him in sacrifice, and who are to 
share with him in the work of saving or 
restoring all things; and within the coming 
thousand years the work of saving men 
will be actually accomplished. If, then, 
"when we were enemies we were reconciled 
to God by the death of his Son, 
much more being reconciled, we shall be 
saved by his life."— Rom. 5:10. 

Because in God's order men could only 
be saved by a payment of their penalty 
which would be the BASIS of their reconciliation 
and atonement with God, therefore, 
as a means to an end, we see that 
Jesus' mission at his first advent was to 
save in the sense of redeeming, while his 
second advent will complete the work by 
restoring to perfection all the redeemed— 
all for whom Christ died, and by the 
grace of God he tasted death for every 
man.-Heb. 2:9. 

There is one other thought of special 
importance in this text. It is that the 
Son of Man came to seek that which was 



lost. Now we inquire, Is there any evidence 

of very earnest seeking of lost ones 

on the part of our Lord? Some would 

think not. All men were lost, and this 

text implies, while John 12:47 clearly 

declares his purpose to save all; but he 

said, "I am not sent but unto the lost 

sheep of the house of Israel." (Matt. 15:24.) 

He did not seek out any of the 

lost Gentiles, and charged his disciples 

not to do so for some years. But Jesus 

did seek out a certain class— the meek— 

who were waiting for the promised salvation; 

and it was his purpose to begin 

with Jerusalem, to save such as would believe, 

and to give to those of the seed of 

Abraham who believed, the first offer of 

the "high calling." And during the centuries 

since, he has only been seeking out 

and saving (reckoning saved) the same 

class (the meek) among the Gentiles, and 

making to such believing ones the same 

offer of the divine nature— a heavenly 

calling. 

But a grander time of seeking is yet to 
come, for all the millions that are completely 
lost in death are yet to be sought 
out and saved. And where shall they be 
found? Notwithstanding the theories of 
men to the contrary, the Scriptures plainly 
teach that in death man's being is dissolved, 
that he is destroyed, blotted out of 
existence, that he is nowhere to be found. 
And with this fact in mind we might inquire 
with the Prophet Job, "If a man 
die shall he live again?" With men such 
a thing seems quite impossible, but "Why 
should it be thought incredible that God 
should raise the dead?" (Acts 26:8.) 
He that was able to create is also able to 
re-create those once completely destroyed. 
And through the prophet Isaiah the Lord 
speaks of the restitution as a new creation, 
saying "Behold I create new heavens and 
a new earth"— not the physical earth, for 
that abideth forever (Eccl. 1:4)— but 
the world of mankind is to be re-created. 
And the Lord says: "Be ye glad and rejoice 
forever in that which I create." 
(Isa. 65:17,18.) That the restored and 
re-created being will recognize himself 
and also his neighbors of former 
acquaintance, is unquestionably proven 
by many scriptures (Ezek. 16:61,63; 
20:43; 36:31; Zech. 12:10; Psa. 22:27), 
and illustrated in the few cases where 



the dead have been measurably restored, 
as Lazarus and others. 

Job answers our question very clearly 
when he says (chap. 7:21), "Now shall I 
sleep in the dust; and thou shalt seek me 
in the morning, [the morning of the resurrection 
or restitution] BUT I SHALL 
NOT BE"-I shall be destroyed, blotted 
out of existence. But nevertheless, though 
thus destroyed, he says, "Thou shalt call 
and I will answer thee." (Job 14:15.) 
Like Lazarus, at the call of Jesus, earth's 
dead millions shall again spring into existence. 
David declares the same truth 
when he says, "Thou turnest man to destruction 
and [then] sayest, return, ye 
children of men." And with him we 
must say, "Bless the Lord, O my soul; 
who redeemeth thy life from destruction!" 
(Psa. 90:3; 103:1,4.) O that all the 
world could now realize the glorious import 
of those words of our Lord, "The 
Son of Man is come to seek and to save 
that which was lost." It was a glorious 
truth to realize at his first advent, that the 
plan of God had so far developed that 
the promised Messiah had actually come 
to save men by the sacrifice of himself; but 
it is still more glorious now to realize that 
our Lord comes a second time, to apply 
the benefits of that sacrifice, to claim and 
restore his purchased possessions, to actually 
and completely save that which was lost. 

While we have thus stated what we believe 
to be the Scriptural teaching concerning 
the salvation of men, we would yet more 
particularly answer the inquiry of some— 

WHAT MUST I DO TO BE SAVED? 

Perhaps the reader already sees that he 
has nothing to DO. All that was necessary 
to procure your salvation was done long 
ago, before you were born; and in consequence 
of the redemption provided, all 
mankind, whether they ever knew it, or believed 
it or not, are going to be awakened 
to life again, are going to be saved from 
the Adamic condemnation. God will have 
all men to be saved; and though they may 
never have known him before, to be then 
brought to a knowledge of the truth— of 
the love of God exhibited in the gift of 
his Son as our ransom price. 

Well, we seem to hear some one say, 
that is a strange answer. I thought you 



would tell me to pray, or to get some 
Christian friends to pray for me, that I 
must try to realize that I am the chief of 
sinners, that I must kneel at a mourner's 
bench, or something of the kind, but you 
have not even told me to repent or believe. 
You simply say that I am saved, 
and that I have had, and can have nothing 
to do with it, but to accept of it with 
thanks and love. 

No, friend, we do not say that you are 
saved, but that you will be saved; and 
that you have had, and can have nothing 
to do with the means which procured 
your salvation. It is a free gift of God, 
in consequence of which all will be saved 
or recovered from Adamic condemnation 
now or in the coming age; but you are in 
no sense saved now unless you have come 
to believe in Christ your Redeemer. If you 
do believe this Bible truth, then you may 
through that faith reckon yourself as saved 
now— saved by hope; but you must wait 
for the actual salvation until God's due 
time. (2 Thess. 3:5.) Of course faith 
in and reliance on Christ as your Redeemer 
implies a realization of your need 
of a Redeemer, and a repentance and 
turning from sin. You may have been 
one of the very chief of sinners, or you 
may not have been so bad as some others; 
however you were bad enough to merit 
the just condemnation of God's law, for 
he who offends in one point is guilty of 
all. (James 2:10.) He is a violator of 
the law, and as a consequence is under 
condemnation. If you have always lived 
just as morally and as carefully as you 
could, you have fallen short of perfection, 
because of the weakness of nature, you 
inherited through Adam's fall. (Rom. 5:12.) 
But though nothing that you 
have done or could do could save you 
from death, that which Christ has done 
procures your release from it. 

Paul said, "Believe on the Lord Jesus 
Christ and thou shalt be saved." This 
is the condition on which we receive the 
reckoned salvation now, and it will also 
be the condition on which the world will 
receive their actual full salvation in the 
age to come. We must bear in mind 
that the awakening of men from death is 
only the beginning of their salvation. 
Not until they have, under the discipline 
of the next age reached perfection, are 



they fully saved. Although we might 
truly say, men are saved when first awakened 
from death, yet they are not "saved 
to the uttermost" until brought to full 
perfection of being. But none will be 
thus "saved to the uttermost" who do not 
accept of their release from death as the 
direct result of the sacrifice of Christ. 
And realizing this, they must repent of 
past sins and turn to God. Otherwise 
they die the second death, from which 
there is no ransom and no release. 

Well, says our inquirer, this seems true 
and Scriptural, but what advantage is to 
be gained by being reckoned saved now? 
Would it not be as well to wait and give 
ourselves no concern about it, but let 
God's plan take its course? O no, we 
answer, there is an advantage, a great advantage 
to be gained by prompt faith and 
obedience as soon as we can gain sufficient 
knowledge on which to base our 
faith and obedience. 

The special privilege of those justified 
by faith (or reckoned saved) during the 
gospel age has been their right to present 
themselves as acceptable sacrifices to God 
—joint-sacrifices with Jesus Christ, and 
thereby to become joint-heirs with him of 
all things. That privilege, we believe, 
began with the day of Pentecost and 
ends with the Gospel age.* 

While this special privilege was not offered 
to any before or since that time, another 
special privilege was granted to believers 
before this age, and we see no 
reason why a similar privilege may not be 
granted to believers after the gospel age is 
ended. Those justified by faith in past ages 
will have no need of trial and discipline in 
the next age, for their judgment is past; 
and consequently in the instant of their 
awakening they will be raised to perfect 
human existence. 

A similar blessing, we believe, is in 
store for those of the world who now repent 
of sin, believe on the Lord Jesus 
Christ as their Redeemer and rightful 
Lord, and wholly turn to God. As heretofore 
frequently shown, we find that we 
are now living in the Day of the Lord, in 
the beginning of the Millennial Age— the 
Times of Restitution. And since it is 
appointed for the very purpose of restoring 
life and all things, we think it possible 
for such to remain without ever passing 



into the tomb. For it is just as easy 
when God's due time comes, to keep men 
from going into farther death, as it is to 
raise them out of it. This is not possible in 
the case of those who are to change their 
nature and become "new creatures"; it 
applies only to those justified ones who 
never started for the high calling. Therefore 
we should expect that such should in 
answer to prayer be healed from sickness, 
etc., but they cannot be brought to full 
perfection until the saints are first glorified; 
for "They without us shall not be 
made perfect."— Heb. 11:40. 

Probably very few will come to realize 
their privilege now. The tendency of 
the world is more and more towards skepticism, 
and few can claim this privilege; 
nevertheless, we believe it to be the 
privilege of any such who have faith to 
claim it. 

In answer then, to the question, What 
must I do to be saved? we would say, 
"Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and 
thou shalt be saved." Your salvation 
may begin now, and progress until you 
are restored to the perfection of your 
being— saved to the uttermost. For "he 
(Christ) is able to save to the uttermost 
all that come unto God by him."— 
Heb. 7:25. 
[-ED. D. R. (See R605:4)] 



*It may be proper, to guard against misunderstanding, 
to say, that sacrifice to the extent of CONSECRATION 
is not all; such have yet to complete the 
sacrifice and it will not be complete till actually dead. 



R927 : page 1 

VOL. VIII. PITTSBURGH, PA., MAY, 1887. NO. 9. 



page 1 

REMEMBER that the paper-bound DAWN 
VOL. I. took the place of three numbers 
of the TOWER, for Nov., Dec. and Jan. 
last. All numbers since are in regular form. 



THE SUPPLY of "FOOD FOR THINKING 
CHRISTIANS" is exhausted. For a still 
better plan of work see "View" in this 
and in last March number. 



IF YOU meet any TOWER readers who 
do not get their papers, tell all who desire 
it continued that they should write to us. 
Those who have not written us for two or 
three years should remember that we gave 
due notice that all such would be discontinued 
until heard from. Many names 
were stricken from our list. We desire to 
re-enter them, if they desire the paper on 
the conditions named above and especially 
referred to in last March TOWER. 



R935 : page 1 

THE APRIL '87 TOWER is the very paper 
you want, to loan to friends. We have 
some pink slips prepared for pasting by a 
narrow margin on the edge of the paper. 
We (publishers) are not allowed to do this, 
but you can each do your own. We send 
as many of these pink slips as of extra copies 
of April TOWER. Order all you can 
use judiciously, GRATIS. But do not waste 
them, by handing them about like "hand 
bills." Not to the swinish, but to the 
"meek," are we sent with the glad tidings. 
Save time and papers by passing by all, 
except this class, whom alone the Gospel 
will effectually reach, during this age. 
(Isa. 61:1.) Who cannot do something 
for the Lord, the Truth, and his error-blinded 
brother, who desires to find the 



"old paths" of Jesus and the Apostles? 
Such precious opportunities should not 
be neglected; we may not have them long. 



R927 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

HOW WE MAY EACH BE ABLE MINISTERS 
OF THE GOSPEL OF CHRIST. 

"Blow ye the trumpet, blow 

The gladly solemn sound, 
Let all the nations know, 

To earth's remotest bound, 
The year of jubilee is come; 

Return, ye ransomed sinners, home." 

Observation and experience enable us 
to offer the following suggestions which, 
we trust, will be serviceable to all who are 
endeavoring to spread the truth, which 
should be with all the consecrated the main 
object of life. 

MILLENNIAL DAWN VOL. I.-The Plan 
of the Ages— is the ablest Bible teacher and 
preacher that we know of, and one that can 
visit every city, town, and farm house and 
preach incessantly without exhaustion, 
without expense for food and clothing or 
need of rest. Hence all who love the glad 
tidings and desire to spread it should welcome 
this preacher, seek to open the way 
before it, and to introduce it to honest 
hearts and heads everywhere. Or, to state 
the matter in another way, this book provides 
the means by which every child of 
God, no matter what his natural ability as 
teacher or preacher is, may become an able 
minister of the glorious gospel. 

Though "FOOD FOR THINKING CHRISTIANS" 
has done, and is still doing a great 
work, yet being more brief, it necessarily 
touched only a few of the prominent features 
of the great plan, and therefore is 
much inferior to DAWN as a teacher. The 
latter also, by reason of its wider scope, 
presents the plan and its orderly arrangement 
in such a gradual way that the reader 
actually finds himself basking in the sunlight, 
before he is fully aware that it is 
morning. Notice its design and provision 
to lead even the skeptically inclined by 
gradually progressive steps to a clear refreshing 



view and a full assurance of the 

great Creator's benevolent and glorious 

plan. It begins by laying a foundation 

for faith in the Creator and in the Bible 

as the Creator's revelation to man of his 

plan. The reader thus has confidence established 

not only in God and the Bible, 

but also in the book, "The Plan of the 

Ages." He will rightly reason that the 

work which at the very outstart has given 

him clearer and truer ideas regarding God 

and the Bible, and has opened up matters 

never before noticed, and given a foundation 

for faith and trust, is a safe counsellor 

to heed in seeking a knowledge of God's 

plans through His Word. 

Thus the first three chapters lay a foundation 
which subsequent chapters build upon, 
showing "The Plan of the Ages" to be 
gloriously and truly the Plan of God, which 
the Bible reveals. No living teacher and 
no kind of preaching will so effectually 
reach the intelligent thinking class of 
Christians. There are two reasons for this: 
First, If you attempt to explain the plan 
orally, the hearer will interrupt you with 
questions which he cannot have answered 
to his satisfaction until first other truths 
are clearly seen. And therefore in a conversation 
it is almost impossible to keep 
close to the right line of exposition, not 
only because of the questions of your hearer, 
but because of the interruptions, and 
the further fact that neither you nor your 
hearer can spend enough time at once, to 
make the truth clear and convincing. The 
book on the contrary goes right along and 
refuses to be interrupted by questions or 
general conversation. And if business or 
other matters interrupt and it is laid aside 
the reader goes back and repeats enough 
to get the thread of thought or argument 
where dropped. 

Besides, if you possessed the rare gift of 
oratory, or could in any measure speak 
and expound the Scriptures in public, you 
well know, if you have tried it, that it is 
almost impossible to get a congregation of 
intelligent people to stand long enough 
hearing a "street corner preacher" to get 
even a faint idea of the glorious gospel 
we proclaim. 

Another difficulty which attends such 
preaching is, that you could not (unless 
backed by a small fortune) long sustain 
yourself or perhaps a dependent family by 



such a course without a miracle, which 
God does not authorize us to expect. This 
last is to many an insurmountable obstacle 
and hindrance preventing them from 
spending all their time and talent in making 
known the glad tidings. 

We take for granted that you will be 
glad to learn of a plan which meets all 
these difficulties satisfactorily. It is as 
follows:— 

Go to a town in which you are not 
known,— in which misrepresentation has 
not prejudiced the people against you and 
the truth. Take with you a lot of the 
Contents Circulars with pink slip attached 
and a blank book in which to write the 
name and addresses of all who subscribe, 
and take a big heart full of love for God 
and for those you would lead into the light, 
full of faith in God and trust in his promises, 
and full of hope that God will be 
pleased to use you to his glory now as 
well as hereafter. 

Learn to act quickly upon whatever your 
judgment dictates. Go first to a store to 
inquire for a respectable place of lodging; 
arrange for boarding "a few days" showing 
your circular and stating that you are 
there as a colporteur. Next get quickly 
to work; distribute the circulars, being 
CAREFUL to say nothing whatever about 
the doctrines of the book, nor about your 
own belief regarding God's plan. Ignore 
all questions on such subjects and merely 
speak of the one fact— that its object is to 
furnish a firm foundation for faith in God, 
and in the Bible as the true revelation of 
his purposes, touching man's past, present 
and future. Let your theme be constantly 
-The TRACT SOCIETY wants me to get 
this book into every family and specially 
into the hands of the skeptically inclined, 
as a guard against the growing skepticism 
of our day, which is rapidly sapping true 
piety and reverence for God and the Bible 
in our Colleges, Theological Seminaries, 
Business houses, Banks and Homes— everywhere. 
You cannot well say too much for 
the book, as one that will show in interesting 
style that the Bible is a self-interpreter 
and its teachings grandly harmonious, 
when viewed in the light of sanctified 
reason and common sense. You can surely 
say, too, that the book is not dry musty 
reading, but truly "meat in due season" 
to the truth-hungry; and (in the language 



of a sister) that the light, which this precious 
volume reflects, has made the Bible 
a new book, a treasure, a mine of wealth 
to many as well as to yourself. 

But don't stop to talk or argue; be on 
the move, and let all see that your time is 
precious, that the King's business demands 
haste, and that you intend to take their 
order and the order of every intelligent 
family in the town. Do not spend more 
than two or three minutes at each house, 
and if they do not readily subscribe say to 
them: I do not accept the money now, but 
merely take your orders; but be sure to 

have the money ready by ? day— fixing 

a time when your canvass of the town 
will be complete. Remark also that though 
they feel no inclination to disbelieve the 
Bible now, they do not know the day when 
they or some of their family may come 
under the influence of that pestilence and 
need "a helping hand," and the very 
knowledge of God and his word that this 
book affords. 

You can safely say too, "When this book 
is in the hands of all your neighbors and 
they are talking about its contents, you 
will have more than 25 cts. worth of curiosity 
to know as well as they, of its teachings 
and explanations. Then I will be 
gone and you will feel ashamed to borrow 
when you can now purchase for the paltry 
sum of 25 cents. You can sell the book 
for waste paper after reading it and surely 
not lose much. But many who have read, 
would not take ten dollars for the book, 
if they could not get another copy." Take 
the name and go on to the next house, and 
so on. Don't stop long— let them see 
that you are in haste, and they will decide 
quicker in favor of having the book. 

Large towns and cities you will need to 
canvass and deliver to in sections, but 
towns of 5000 to 10,000 inhabitants, you 
should be able to canvass in from one to 
two weeks, and make your delivery when 
through, and ready to go to the next town. 

But do you say— This is not preaching! 
I want to preach. We answer, It is preaching 
of a most effective sort, and will probably 
yield a thousand times as much fruit 
as any other method you could adopt. Besides, 
you should arrange to revisit the 
same town about five weeks after leaving 
it. Go then, to see whether some want 
DAWN in cloth binding, or whether they 



want five or ten copies of the paper bound 
edition to send to their friends, east, west, 
north and south, throughout the world. 
The interested ones will also want ZION'S 
WATCH TOWER, and then will be the time to 

R927 : page 2 

mention it. Show a sample and take yearly 
or half-yearly subscriptions. Then the 
interested will have questions to ask, too, 
which you may assist them to find answers 
for in the Bible, or DAWN, or Z.W.T., 
and at that time hold such public or private 
meetings as your judgment of your talents, 
surrounding circumstances, etc., may 
dictate. 

R928 : page 2 

The object of thus canvassing quietly is 
to avoid the prejudice which many zealous, 
but blinded and misguided Christian 
people would be sure to awaken in the 
minds of each other, which would hinder 
a candid, honest, earnest study of the great, 
grand subject, treated in DAWN. And we 
know that prejudice is one of the strongest 
foes of the truth. 

Very seldom will you be questioned 
about a license, but should you be, tell your 
questioner that ZION'S WATCH TOWER 
TRACT SOCIETY is a chartered, benevolent 
religious Society; and besides that, the 
paper bound book represents three numbers 
of ZION'S WATCH TOWER. This you 
can show them upon the last page of its 
cover. It has therefore the same rights 
for public sale that all newspapers enjoy. 

Those who are specially good canvassers 
may do as well to omit from the above 
plan the distribution of the circulars. 
Such might take a clean circular in their 
hand and perhaps read brief extracts from 
the "Words of Commendation" on it and 
then take the order. These would thus 
save one visit to every house. The first 
suggestion would make three trips— once 
with circulars, once to collect circulars 
and take orders, and once to deliver books 
upon the day appointed. The last suggestion 
would save the first of these trips. 

This plan of two trips is the one pursued 
by Brother Adamson, which has worked 
very successfully with him. His first effort 
with this plan was on leaving Pittsburgh, 



after having spent some days with us, after 
the celebration of the Lord's Supper, 
April 7th '87. Knowing that we would be 
interested to know of his success on this 
plan, Bro. A. wrote us the following letters 
regarding his first two days' work:— 

Leech Corners, April 15th. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I now give you 
an account of my success. I think there 
must be forty names on my book— results 
of five hours' work yesterday. I am sure 
in good towns I can average forty names 
daily. I refer chiefly to the book as an 
antidote for infidelity and to open the 
Scriptures to Christians. If I say more, 
I merely glance at the Chart as an example 
of "object-teaching," making plain the 
relationship between God's plan and the 
history of mankind. 

I found some people whose talk showed 
that those DAWNS will be seed on good 
ground. With no introduction from me 
to that line of thought, some began to tell 
me the confusion of their minds on Bible 
subjects. 

I rode out from Greenville with a young 
man who, taking me to be a minister, began 
on Bible subjects. Why, said he, after I 
answered several of his questions, you talk 
like ZION'S WATCH TOWER -kind of sensible. 
You will find, said he, that such 
views are beginning to influence this whole 
country. 

I find your directions as to promptness 
very valuable, and very few cases need to 
be urged to take DAWN at the paltry 25 cts. 
If workers could all get the spirit of your 
directions and use the method you propose, 
all could succeed and could readily 
clear their personal expenses and even 
support a family. 

I speak of the circular which I carry in my 
hand as being an array of commendation 
from every side— sometimes pointing out 
one or two of them. As old Satan introduced 
the deceptive errors insidiously, let 
us use this method to uproot them. I will 
write often and report. Most kind expressions 
of regard and love from us both. 
J. B. ADAMSON. 

A later letter from Bro. Adamson says: 

April 15th.— evening. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I find my average 
of 40 names per day still holds good and 



as I have nearly names enough for the 
80 DAWNS with me, I think best to arrange 
for 300 DAWNS to be sent by freight, so as 
to reach here by the close of next week. 
I will need nearly 300 for this town alone. 

I urge all correspondents to engage in 
selling DAWN, and not to stay over five minutes 
in any house, making the average three 
minutes. We can sell to about every second 
house, if we obey this rule. 

You may count on my selling at least 
5,000 of the books this year and as many 
more as possible. In this way, I expect 
to do much more preaching than ever before, 
though for years, as you know, I have 
given my time almost entirely to it. 

A still later letter says:— I take a simple, 
easy course, generally like this, "I am taking 
subscriptions for a book of 350 pages 
at 25 cts.— will deliver it in two weeks. 
If you like the subject, you want it." Then 
I say that the various ages and their work, 
when clearly seen, give a clue to the meaning 
of every Scripture passage as commentaries 
do not and cannot. 

I mention the chapters that do this— 
those antidoting infidelity— the permission 
of evil— the three ways— the Ransom vs. 
New Theology— the clear distinctions of 
the following chapter and Jehovah's Day 
—so acceptable to business men of THE 
WORLD etc. Price on back, 50 cts., calls 
out the fact that about 10,000 were sold 
at that price, before the TRACT SOCIETY 
lowered the price to 25 cts.— about cost. 

I had an excellent offer to take agency 
of a Cyclopedia at about $150. per month. 
The man opened his eyes, when I told 
him $500 per month would be no inducement 
whatever to leave my present 
engagement. 

You may put me down for 10,000 DAWNS 
to be sold within a year instead of 1000, 
as first proposed. In dense population I 
expect to average 50 names daily instead 
of forty as at present. 

Great satisfaction is expressed everywhere 
at the moderate price, character of 
the paper binding, the beautiful type, and 
good paper. 

As before stated, I carry in one hand 
my ready pencil and in the other my sample 
DAWNS, sheet of commendations, and open 
memorandum book, ready for names. 

Every man in town soon knows that I 
am "the book man" that sells THE BOOK. 



Yesterday I took the order of every minister 
and S.S. teacher, and almost every 
man who thinks or reasons. 

After canvassing a few towns, I will 
move toward New York state, though 
Ohio is, I think, better territory, and Bro. 
Slote says Kansas and the West generally 
are more open to receive truth. 

Yours in fellowship and service, with 
kindest regards, love and remembrance, 
J. B. ADAMSON. 

The pay referred to in Bro. A.'s letters 
is the "Expense money" allowance of 10 
cents each on paper bound DAWN, mentioned 
in VIEW FROM TOWER of March '87, 
—which see. Having explained this plan 
fully, we trust, let us suggest a plan for 
another class. 

A PLAN FOR THOSE WHO CANNOT GIVE ALL 
THEIR TIME AND CANNOT LEAVE HOME. 

This plan is as follows: Write to us and 
we will send you a lot of April '87 TOWERS, 
and a lot of pink slips, which you can attach 
to the edge of the TOWER by pasting 
a very narrow edge of the slip. These you 
can take around town in a basket: leave 
them for a few days, and when you call for 
them, try to sell DAWN in paper covers at 
25 cts. as above suggested. Take the order 
only and the next day deliver the book. 
You cannot sell as many, but you can thus 
reach many of the truth-hungry. Those 
who cannot go themselves, could send a 
child of 12 to 15 or any suitable person. 



But all must not expect to sell 40 copies 
per day as Bro. A. is doing. Only persons 
with experience and ability can do so well 
as this; but many with the same effort they 
spend in other enterprises, yet with more 
zeal and love, because this is the service 
of the truth, can sell readily half as many 
and clear expenses. 

Now who wishes to engage in this Crusade 
against error? Who wishes thus to 
call the attention of Christians to the Dawn 
of the Millennial day? Who wishes to help 
"Lift up a standard for the people" that 
they be not swept wholesale before the 
great tidal wave of infidelity already 
advancing? 



"Stand up, stand up for Jesus, 

Ye soldiers of the Cross; 

Lift high his royal banner, 

It must not suffer loss." 
Take Notice. Those who engage in this 
work will need an outfit— a sample of the 
cloth bound as well as of the paper bound 
M. DAWN. You will need circulars also, 
or April TOWERS, depending on which of 
the above methods suits your circumstances. 
And you will need to order 
books as soon as you have made a start 
and know about how many you will be 
able to sell in the town you canvass. It 
will save time and trouble for you and us, 
for us especially, for you to pay cash in 
advance on each order, and hence we require 
it. If you have not the means at 
first to send for a large supply, as a wise 
steward begin small and increase your 
work gradually and as rapidly as possible. 
In writing to us, keep your order and all 
business matters, separate from your letter; 
and in your order figure it out plainly; 
thus for instance, 

25 copies of Paper bound DAWN 

Vol. I. @ 25 cts $6.25 

Less 10 cts. per copy TRACT 

FUND Credit for Expenses $2.50 

Money order enclosed for 

balance $3.75 

We wish however to provide for those 
who cannot at first pay in advance. To 
these we would say: If you have been a 
regular subscriber to the Z.W. TOWER for 
one year or more you can have outfit and 
books for delivery on credit for the first 
time, after which the "expense money" 
allowed you, will enable you to pay in 
advance. 

R929 : page 2 

All books must be sold at the fixed price 
—cloth bound $1.00; paper bound 25 cts. 
—no more and no less, except that in each 
town you may make a reduction in price 
of your soiled samples, to some who may 
be glad to get them. Thus in starting 
each town you can have a clean sample. 
Though you should have a cloth bound 
DAWN with you do not try to push or sell 
it; for you can sell probably ten of the 
paper covered in the time you would spend 



selling one cloth bound. Use the cloth bound 
book merely as a contrast to make 
them see how very cheap the paper book 
is at 25 cts. You will remember how and 
why the paper edition is reduced from 50 
to 25 cts. as explained in "View" in March 
1887 TOWER. 

We are glad to say to you that the present 
prospect is that by the united effort 
of all those now in the light, we shall be 
able to more than accomplish our first hope 
of putting 50,000 copies of DAWN into 
circulation before January 1888. Possibly 
we shall double that estimate. 

Here am I, Lord, send me! should be 
the attitude of every consecrated one who 
can possibly control circumstances so as 
to engage in the work, to any extent. 

Pray ye the Master of the harvest to 
send forth more laborers and then begin 
to use your own talents in the service. 
The Master says "Go ye also into the vineyard 
and whatsoever is right I will give 
you"— full pay to every laborer of whatever 
class, he guarantees. 



page 2 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 

[The following letter, written to Brother 
and Sister Adamson, was forwarded 
for my reading, and I take the liberty of 
showing it to you all.— EDITOR.] 

Buffalo, April 15th, '87. 
DEAR BRO. AND SR. ADAMSON:-Your 
postal card received. I am so glad that 
you had so profitable a meeting. I shall 
hope that I may have the blessed privilege 
of meeting with the brethren at Pittsburg 
in another year. I think it would not 
have been right for me to leave our small 
company here, this Passover; for it was 
the first of the kind, I think, that ever met 
in this city, as we did— seven in all. Our 
Lord was in our midst. Sr. Baker read 
the article on "The Lord's Supper," from 
the February Tower; and among us was 
an old German lady, who has been a 
member of the Methodist church a long 
time, who, after listening attentively, said 
"There! That is the first time I have ever 
understood! I never saw it so plain before." 



And we all felt that we were celebrating 
the Lord's Supper truly for the 
first time. It was a happy season. 

I think I shall sell two or three paper 
"DAWNS" this evening. If I do, I shall 
feel so encouraged that I shall want many 
more. 

Give my love to Bro. and Sr. Russell. 
I long for the good time coming, when I 
shall see them face to face— if not in the 
flesh, when the race has been run, if worthy. 

the thought! How grand! It 

is worthy of all sacrifices made now. Like 
Paul, I have "an earnest desire for the returning 
and being with Christ." Love 
to Sister Adamson, and will be glad to 
welcome you back again. H. R. M. 

Toledo, O., April 26, 1887. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-At the appointed 
time, four of us commemorated the 
Lord's death by partaking of the emblems, 
bread and wine. We had a refreshing 
season. We were with you in spirit, and 
were blessed. 

Your brother in Christ, J. B. Z. 

Cook Co., 111., April 2, 1887. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Some of the 
seed sown is already up; and I think the 
happiest I have ever been was when Bro. 
Dickinson and his wife said to me that 
they had found more happiness in this 
than in all else in life. Some others are 
interested, and perhaps after a little there 
may be a half-dozen or so meeting once 
or twice a week, to talk these things over. 

1 find more happiness in it than in any 
thing else. In fellowship your brother, 

JOHN H. BROWN. 

New Lebanon, O., April 25, 1887. 
MY DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Some time 
has elapsed since I last wrote you a letter, 
but it is not because I have forgotten you, 
or become cold toward the cause of Truth. 
To-day I am as free from the trammels of 
sectarianism as the winds that play about 
me. I have bid a long, long adieu to the 
nominal church; I have stepped out of 
"Babylon;" I am feeding in the valleys 
of God and on the hill-lands of truth. Oh! 
how sweet those rich pastures! The flesh-pots 
of Egypt are not to be compared to 
the rich viands of promise. Their savor 
has become a nauseating stench in my 



nostrils. Let those who cling to the sluggish 

streams of tradition drink of their 

foul waters and feed on the garbage they 

accumulate; but for me, the cool, refreshing 

waters of truth only can make glad 

the waste places of my existence. 

I have separated myself from the church 
with which I stood identified, and now 
consider that I am a member of the 
"body." Perhaps I am not as strong as 
some, but by the grace of God I am what 
I am. 

I am still preaching in New Lebanon 
every Sunday night. My preaching is 
troubling a good many people. They fear 
it will undermine sectarianism, and their 
fear is well founded. The truth is slowly 
spreading, and not infrequently in directions 
unlooked for. I set no stakes as to 
what I will do, but go on unpretentiously 
in the discharge of my duty, little concerning 
myself as to where it may place 
me. 

With pleasure would I have come to the 
"feast" at your place, if it had been permitted 
me; but since I was not permitted 

[Continued on Eighth Page.] 

page 8 

EXTRACTS FROM LETTERS-CONTINUED. 

this time, I hope better things for the next 
time. When the hour of our exaltation 
comes, then all these temporal contingencies 
will lose their power. May the Lord 
keep us humble to the end, is my prayer. 
Yours in hope, J. P. MARTIN. 

Elk Creek, Mo. 
BRO. AND SR. RUSSELL: -Greeting to 
you: Bound by the same cord, rejoicing 
in the same truth, we did not forget our 
privilege of celebrating our Redeemer's 
death, realizing our right to life, being 
purchased with his blood (life), and our 
right to his perfection by eating the bread, 
and also the glorious privilege of sharing 
the sufferings of our Head, that we may 
be also glorified together. Hoping to see 
you face to face when suffering is ended, 
pray the Lord that our faith fail not. 
M. E. M. 

Florida, April 12, 1887. 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-We, a few, did 
not forget to assemble ourselves together 
to keep the feast. It was a blessed time; 
we felt it the more so, as it was at the 
same time that our dear Lord partook of 
the same supper. We remembered and 
spoke about you, and I have no doubt 
you remembered us and all of the household 
of faith. Love to all, from us all. 
C. DURANT. 

Preston Co., W. Va. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I have the great 
pleasure to report a very interesting and 
profitable meeting, on the evening of the 
7th inst, of a little company, sixteen in 
number, who "kept the feast" in remembrance 
of "our Passover, slain for us." 
We remembered the more isolated ones, 
who were not so privileged; also the little 
bands of twos and threes, and companies 
like our own, here and there all over the 
earth. We prayed also for the dear brothers 
and sisters in Allegheny; and we 
doubted not that we were also remembered, 
and the assurance gave us courage 
and strengthened us in our glorious 
privilege. 

We all join in sending our love and 
sympathy to you and Sister Russell, and 
to all the dear household that are privileged 
to see you face to face. Yours in 
fellowship of the Master, H. L. GILLIS. 

St. Louis, Mo., April 8, 1887. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-About 8 
o'clock, p.m., April 7th, self and wife 
alone, except with our Master, celebrated 
the Lord's Supper. After reading the 
record of Matthew, Mark, Luke and Paul, 
and praying, and blessing bread and wine, 
breaking the bread, we partook of these 
emblems in commemoration of the Lord's 
death and sacrifice for the redemption and 
salvation of all that was lost in Adam. 
And especially for the called, and those 
selected, elected, chosen by consecration 
—the saints, for his bride. We did this 
in harmony with the command of our 
blessed Lord Jesus Christ, given to his 
disciples at the time when they met with 
him to celebrate his last Passover, before 
he suffered death, and thus paid the ransom 
price (antilutron). 

The papers and ten books, M. DAWN, 
came all right. We suffer reproach from 



some of whom we expected better things. 
I expect to leave here on next Monday 
for a trip to the southwest, and will trust 
the Lord for success. Hoping to hear 
from you soon, with kind regards to Sister 
R. and yourself, 
Yours in Christ, P. R. M. 

Kansas, April 13, 1887. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Seven of us met 
on the evening of April 7th, and after a 
short social meeting we commemorated 
the Lord's supper. Your brother in Christ, 
D. W. WRIGHT. 

Pomona, April 10th, '87. 
C. T. RUSSELL, DEAR BROTHER:-I 

drop a few lines to let you hear from this 
part of the Master's vineyard. The Church 
at Huggen's Creek met and celebrated 
our Passover on the evening of the 7th 
inst. This is our first attempt. A devoted 
little company of ten assembled at the 
place appointed. After prayer and a few 
appropriate remarks we partook of the emblems 
in remembrance of the death and 
sufferings of our Lord. We enjoyed the 
presence of the Lord and felt that it was 
good for us to be there. Yours in Fellowship 
and Love, P. N. KING. 

R937 : page 8 

Grant, Pa., April 23d, '87. 

DEAR BRO:— I have read your book, 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN," VOL. I., with deep 
interest, and wish to express to you my 
hearty thanks for it. While not ready to 
give unqualified consent to all its contents, 
I can see no reason for rejecting the main 
tenor of its teachings. Some time ago I 
was led to the investigation of the dogma 
of eternal torment, as the destiny of all 
who die without the saving knowledge of 
Christ, and was obliged to confess that it 
lacked scriptural foundation; and so was 
constrained to change my manner of 
preaching, to conform more to the infallible 
Word— "the only rule," according 
to the standards of our church, Presbyterian. 
With the discovery that I did not 
know as much as I had supposed, I was 
led also to see more clearly that I am to 
call no man master. 

While reading your book, I thought of 
some of the brethren— wishing that they 



might give it a careful perusal. There is 
so much in it that all true Christians must 
agree upon— the redemption from sin by 
Christ, the supreme authority of the Word. 
Dr. J. H. Brooks, of St. Louis, editor of 
'The Truth,' is an old friend, an honest, 
sincere man, and fearless in defence of 
what he believes to be truth; but his articles 
on "Future Punishment" and "Annihilation" 
some months ago, I thought 
marked by a spirit of intolerance, bigotry 
and unfairness— tending rather to demolish 
than establish his own doctrines. 

Spurgeon's sermons I have delighted to 
read, as of a man taught much by the 
Spirit, but, I have noted occasional hellfire 
utterances of the old stamp, with 
sneers at those who did not believe in 
them, yet without proof from holy Scripture. 
Yet he is not too bigoted to read 
a book advocating different views from his 
own, and hails as a brother one who holds 
the cardinal doctrines of Christianity. I 
wish both these brethren might read your 
book, and if they would only look into it 
a little, I think, they would not be satisfied 
to leave it unread. Praying that the 
Spirit of truth may guide you and me into 
all truth, Fraternally, (Rev.) . 



R916 : page 3 

OUR BOW OF PROMISE. 



A raveled rain-bow overhead 
Lets down to earth its varying thread. 
Love's blue, joy's gold; and fair between 
Hope's shifting light of emerald green. 
On either side in deep relief 
A crimson pain, a violet grief. 
Wouldst thou amid their gleaming hues 
Snatch after those, and these refuse? 
Believe, could thine anointed eyes 
Follow their lines, and sound the skies, 
There where the fadeless glories shine 
Thine unseen Savior twists the twine! 
And be thou sure what tint soe'er 
The broken ray beneath may wear 
It needs them all that fair and white 
His love may weave the perfect light. 
Mrs. Whitney. 



R929 : page 3 

THE BODY OF SIN TO BE DESTROYED. 

AN Exchange asks: "When Paul says, 
'Knowing this, that our old man is crucified 
with Christ, that the body of sin might 
be destroyed' (Rom. 6:6), what force 
could there be in such a crucifixion with 
Christ unless his crucifixion had reference 
to the same end— the death of sin? Or 
what meaning could there be in the next verse 
which says 'For he that is dead is 
freed from sin.' Was Christ freed from 
sin by death? In some sense he must have 
been, or the words would be without meaning. 
And this idea is not gained by mere 
inference. The tenth verse asserts it, 'For 
in that he died he died unto sin once, but 
in that he liveth he liveth unto God.' Some 
have endeavored to modify, we might say 
weaken this statement by translating it, 
In that he died he died by sin etc' But 
the whole passage shows that the old translation 
is correct, as for instance the question 
'How can we that are dead to sin live any 
longer therein?' This shows that the point 
is leaving the sin state. This is confirmed 
by the eleventh and following verses, the 
exhortation of which is based on the statement 
of the tenth verse that Christ died TO 
SIN: 'Likewise reckon ye also yourselves 
to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto 
God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Let 
not sin therefore reign in your mortal body 
that ye should obey it.'"— World's Hope. 

Though, at the first glance, the above 
seems to fit as it is applied, upon closer 
examination we will find it seriously out of 
joint in several particulars, chief among 
which is its unavoidable implication that 
our Lord, the holy, harmless, undefiled, 
was a sinner and died to sin as our example, 
to show us how to die to it. The writer 
of the above extract evidently saw the conflict 
between other Scriptures and the construction 
he was putting upon Rom. 6:6-11, 
and attempts to shield himself and his theory 
by saying "If the above position, based 
on Rom. 6, teaches that Christ was a 
sinner, it is the Apostle that so taught. 
We simply quoted his words. To some 
it may seem that the apostle contradicted 
himself [Heb. 4:15], but we do not so 
regard it." 

Assuredly, we answer, If the Apostle at 



one time (and the entire Scripture as well), 

teaches that our Lord was never anything 

else than holy and undefiled, and if in 

Rom. 6 he declares that he died to sin, 

that is, ceased from sin, he certainly did contradict 

himself. And if our contemporary is 

correct, its discovery of this contradiction 

would amount to a proof that Paul was not 

inspired, and lead to the expurgation of 

all his writings from the Bible. But there 

stands the word if, and we venture the 

assertion that the discord and contradiction 

is all in our contemporary's theory 

and the construction it forces upon the 

apostle's words in Rom. 6, in its endeavor 

to use those words to support its theory. 

Note carefully, then, the following exegesis 

of the Apostle's words, in harmony 

with the unanimous testimony of Scripture 

that our Lord had no sin to die to, or 

cease from. 

To pick up a fragment of a discourse on 
any deep subject and attempt to apply it, 
without being aware of the underlying 
principle and fact upon which it is based, 
would more than likely lead to a false interpretation 
of it; and so with the apostle 
Paul's deep reasoning on the greatest of 
all sciences. We must first get his bearings 
and understand something of what he 
discourses upon, before we can know assuredly 
his meaning when he uses figures 
of speech as in this discourse. 

That the epistle to the Romans was 
written to all the Church of believers in 
Rome, beloved of God, called to be saints, 
and was intended as a vindication of the 
plan of God and his dealings with the 
world, Israel, and the gospel Church, past, 
present and future, is evident from the first chapter. 
In its conclusion he shows that 
God cannot be held responsible for the 
ignorance and degradation of the world, 
especially the heathen, for they had degraded 
themselves, and blotting out the 
image of God, had come to resemble more 
the beasts. God simply gave them over, 
or did not interfere with them. Paul shows 
that God is not guilty of producing the sin 
and degradation, but that the entire responsibility 
rests upon man: upon Adam 
the representative first, and upon all since 
who wilfully departed further and further 
from God. He lays this broad premise in 
order to show afterward that God was just, 
and that man has no claim upon him for 



recovery (salvation or restitution) from 

this fallen and degraded state of condemnation 

and death. 

Having shown up thus the state of the 
heathen world, Paul turns to the Jews, and 
in chapter 2, shows that they have no 
ground for claiming anything from God, 
—they could no more claim that they had 
a right to life everlasting, and salvation 
(restitution) to original perfection than 
the heathen. The giving of a perfect law 
to a man does not justify him— if he would 
be justified to life under the law given him 
he must keep it perfectly (ver. 13). And 
if he violated but one of its precepts he 
could claim nothing under it, but must be 
condemned as a violator, unworthy of life. 
(Jas. 2: 10.) Hence the Apostle argues 
that while the Jew had a special Law on 
stones given him, which the heathen world 
did not have, yet they were not so much 
advantaged thereby as they had supposed; 
for if a man, not a Jew, could do perfectly 
the will of God, he would be acceptable 
with God (v. 26), and this and no more the 
Law offered to the Jew. God knew from the 
first what experience has since demonstrated 
to all men, namely, that because of 
our weakness and fallen dispositions inherited, 
none can live up to God's perfect law, 
no, nor even up to his own warped idea 
of RIGHT. 

Chapter 3 shows how the Law given 
to the Jew, though of no advantage in the 
way of justifying them to salvation (restitution) 
from death, was of great benefit as an 
educator to show them their own weakness 
and their need of salvation, by grace (favor) 
and not by law and merit. He on the 
other hand shows that the Jew is in no 
worse case than the Gentile, for all are 
under sin, all are condemned, all are unworthy 
of life; as it is expressed by the 
prophet, "There is none righteous, no, 
not one."— See Rom. 3:9,10. 

So then he argues, the Law, written to 
the Jew and unwritten to the heathen, 
condemns all the world as guilty and unworthy 
of life, and silences them from any 
reply as appeal from this eminently just 
verdict— Verses 19 and 20. 

The Apostle then introduces faith in 
Christ as a door of hope for all, both Jews 
and Gentiles. He says, But now, aside 
from the Law [though in perfect harmony 
with it], God has provided a plan [for 



man's recovery] in perfect harmony with 

justice; and under this plan it is, that favor 

and recovery is offered, conditioned on 

faith in Jesus Christ— to all that believe; 

for there is no distinction, all are fallen 

sinners. And this plan which God has 

adopted and put into operation, aside from 

the Law, but in perfect harmony with its 

spirit, is this: He will justify, clear from 

guilt, freely, by his divine favor [not because 

of their merit, but] THROUGH THE 

REDEMPTION accomplished in Christ Jesus; 

whom he set forth as the one in whom satisfaction 

was made, for all who exercise 

faith in his blood (verses 24-26). Thus 

God not only exhibits his love for his condemned 

creatures, but He makes it at the 

same time an exhibition of his own unswerving 

justice, while enabling him justly 

to forgive sins that are past as well as 

those that are present. This plan was so 

arranged that in releasing the sinner from 

the penalty justly upon him, and giving 

him another, an individual trial for life or 

death, God might still be just, and his law 

be manifested to all as unchangeable and 

perfect, even when pardoning the sinners 

he had once condemned, who by faith laid 

hold of Jesus as their justifier from their 

guilt and condemnation. 

Ah! who can boast now? (ver. 27.) All 
boasting of works of charity, all boasting 
of the slaying of sin in one's self, is shut 
out; for by the terms of this plan of God, 
each must confess at the outstart that he is 
a sinner and POWERLESS to justify himself 

R930 : page 3 

before God, in any sense, or by any works: 
he must fling from him, all hope of self-justification 
in order to grasp with both 

hands, life, favor, forgiveness and reconciliation 
as an unmerited favor of God, obtainable 
through faith in the merit and 
sacrifice of Christ, and in no other way. 
In Chapter 4 Paul shows that favor in 
response to faith and not as a reward for 
works, has in all the past been foreshadowed 
as being God's plan for reconciling 
the world to himself. David attests this 
when he says, "Happy are they whose iniquities 
are forgiven and whose sins are 
covered; happy the man to whom the Lord 
shall not impute his sins." Our sins by 
the arrangement of God are imputed to 



the Lamb of God, who "bore our sins in 
his own body on the tree"— "died for 
our sins." 

Nor is there ground for supposing that 
this favor of forgiveness was to come only 
to those under the Law (Israel) whose sign 
was circumcision, for Abraham himself received 
the promise of a blessing to all 
nations through his posterity before he was 
circumcised. No; the plan of God embraces 
all who believe, for Jesus our 
Lord was delivered to death for our 
trespasses and raised from it for our justification 
(ver. 25). 

Having proved the justification (clearing 
from guilt and condemnation) of all 
believers, in chapter 4, the Apostle in 
chapter 5 exhorts all believers to rest upon 
Christ's finished work on our behalf. 
Realizing our forgiveness and acceptance 
through him, let us cease from picking our 
own characters and those of our fellow 
saints to pieces by the Law, which we 
could not keep, but which Christ kept for 
us. It is our hearts' intentions and best 
endeavors that we must look to now, and 
not expect absolute perfection of thought, 
word and deed. If we grasp God's free 
favor and forgiveness through Christ, we 
must let go of the Law entirely and abandon 
all hope of self -justification, else we 
will not have full peace with God. Therefore 
having been justified (cleared, forgiven) 
by faith, we may have peace with God 
through our Lord Jesus Christ, (verse 1.) 
And in addition to the peace we obtain 
through being justified or cleared of guilt 
before God, we have more, we also then 
gain access into the additional favor (wherein 
we now are rejoicing) of hope and opportunity 
for gaining a share with Christ 
in the glory soon to be bestowed upon 
our Lord and Redeemer (verse 2). In other 
words, we are granted the privilege of walking 
in his footsteps, following our Lord 
and being associated with him as joint-sacrifices 
and joint-sufferers in the present, 
as well as joint-heirs of future glory. And 
this enables us to rejoice even in present 
tribulations.— Verse 3. 

This favor of God is so great that we 
might reasonably doubt it, but reflect, says 
Paul, how much he loved us and did for us 
while we were yet sinners: It was while 
we were enemies that he gave the price of 
our reconciliation and opened the door to 



our acceptance with God— much more now 
that WE ARE RECONCILED we may readily 
believe and accept of all the marvelous 
favors promised us as followers of the Lamb 
who justified us.— Verses 6-11. 

In order to see clearly the firm foundation 
upon which our reconciliation rests, 
consider the philosophy of the plan of God. 
Note that all were condemned in one man, 
Adam, and see now the same principle operating 
for our release, for all are justified 
through the obedient sacrifice of Christ, 
as all were condemned through the disobedient 
act of Adam (verses 12-20). The 
law covenant given to the Jew has nothing 
whatever to do with this plan of free favor 
extended to all, on condition of their acceptance 
of Christ as the satisfaction for 
sin. That law was given (ver. 20,21) that 
the sin and weakness of the race might be 
more fully recognized; it did not cure sin, 
but exposed it, showed it up. But where 
sin was greatest, because of greatest light 
to see it, there God's favor was great in 
proportion, and the light to recognize it 
was fullest. 

ROMANS 6. 

What then, shall we say, seeing that 
God's favor is thus bountiful, and covers 
sins past and weaknesses present and future? 
Shall we feel indifferent on the subject, 
and transgress when we please, trusting 
to God's provision for our forgiveness 
in Christ? No, God forbid. Rather, seeing 
the evil of sin, seeing that it cost the 
death of our Lord as our substitute, our 
ransom, we should regard that substitute's 
death "for our sins" as though it was our 
former sinful selves that had died. In that 
Christ has paid our penalty for us, we 
should regard the sin which caused his 
death, as though it had caused our death 
once and we had gotten free from it. We 
should repulse and oppose sin as our great 
enemy, which had once caused our death. 
How could we, under such circumstances, 
take pleasure in sinning, and thus attempt to 
take advantage of the favor and forgiveness 
provided us in Christ, to continue in sin? 

While this is a good reason why all believers 
should abstain from (wilful) sinning, 
some of us have another and still more powerful 
reason for abstaining from sin, says 
Paul (verse 5): I refer to those of us who 



after being justified from sin by our Lord's 

sacrifice, advanced another step and consecrated 

ourselves to walk in his footsteps, 

to drink of his cup of ignominy, reproach 

and dishonor; and to be baptized [immersed] 

into his death, that thus sharing 

with him his sufferings and death, we might 

according to God's promise be reckoned 

overcomers and joint-heirs with him, and 

R930 : page 4 

granted a share with him in the "divine 

nature" in his future glory and kingdom. 

"Know ye not that so many of us as are 

baptized [immersed] into Jesus Christ [as 

members of his body] are immersed into 

his death?" It is by consecrating ourselves 

entirely to him, [after being cleansed 

from sin by his blood], reckoning ourselves 

dead to the world and alive in God's 

service even unto death, as he did, that we 

gain a place in his "body" and become 

joint-heirs with him. And in thus becoming 

dead with him, we trust the Father's 

promise of also having a share in his resurrection 

(see Phil. 3:8-15); a resurrection 

not to human nature, such as others will 

enjoy, but to the fulness of the divine nature, 

"like him" and "with him." And 

this is illustrated in our water immersion, 

which to us thus symbolizes our death with 

Christ: our rising from the water symbolizing 

our coming resurrection as new creatures. 

For if we are sharers in his sacrifice, 

his death, we shall unquestionably share 

also in his resurrection.— Verses 3-5. 

Realizing the matter thus,— that our former 
selves as justified human beings are delivered 
up to die (be crucified) with Christ, 
as the condition upon which we may be 
associated with him, in the great work of 
utterly rooting out and destroying Sin, the 
great Monarch, at present ruling the 
world, we must see that we can no longer, 
in any sense, serve Sin, the Destroyer, 
whom we are pledged to help overthrow, 
(ver. 6.)* We once were sin's slaves, but 
we were justified or released from his dominion 
[by Christ] before we consecrated 
ourselves to die with Christ [consecrated 
to death as our baptism showed, v. 4], because 
we believed we should be granted 
life with him.— Verse 8. 

For Christ, though he had our sins reckoned 
to him, or "laid upon him," and 



though he died for our sins, is no longer 
subject to death since his resurrection. 
For the death which he died was because 
of sin [our sins] once for all, while his life 
since resurrection, as a spiritual being, is 
a gift of God. And so we must reckon 
ourselves, though [after being first justified 
by his sacrifice] we be joined with our 
Lord in the great sacrifice for the sins of 
the whole world, like him, our sin-bearing 
and suffering, is not for our own sins 
[which were blotted out by his sacrifice] 
but for the sins of others, even as was his 
death. And, let us thus keep on reckoning 
ourselves in our entire course, as represented 
and illustrated by our Leader, in 
whose footprints we are walking. Let us 
reckon ourselves dead to all things earthly, 
hopes, ambitions, and often comforts; cut 
off from them all, crucified to them all, by 
or because of Sin. Thus we will hate Sin, 
and do our utmost to destroy it. 

And reckon your life as a new gift of 
God, as a life not subject to Sin, and not 
under bondage to Sin in any sense, but 
wholly subject to the will of God. And 
thus viewing Sin as the foe you are dying 
to destroy, and God as the new Master 
who promises life, let not Sin REIGN in 
your mortal body, let it not control you. 
True, sometimes it may overtake you and 
stumble you through the weakness of the 
flesh, but see that you encourage it not. 
Let not your mortal body, nor any talent 
or power you possess come into the service 
of this your enemy, but bring your talents 
more and more into the active service of 
the new master— God.— Verses 11-14. 

What then shall we say to the original 
question (verses 1, and 15), Shall we sin 
because we are not under the Law but 
under favor through Christ? By no means; 
for though we claim to have changed over 
from being the servants of Sin, our former 
master, to be the servants of God, yet if we 
are really and willingly serving Sin and 
forwarding it, we are really its servants, 



*Sin is here represented in figure as the great oppressive 
Monarch whose reign with his servant death 
has brought so much distress on the world, all of 
whom he has enslaved, but from whose power we 
have been delivered by Christ's ransom, and regaining 
our liberty we have become associated with 



the Redeemer of all the slaves of sin and death, offering 
to suffer with him now and share his ignominy 
for the joy of future association in the next age 
in the great work of destroying the usurping ruler 
Sin, and setting at liberty his captives.— See Rom. 5:21; 
Isa. 42:7; 61:1; Psa. 102:19,20; Luke 4:18. 

The "Body of Sin" which is to be overthrown is 
here contrasted with the "Body of Christ" which is 
to overthrow it. As once we were slaves to this 
monarch, Sin, opposing God, now as soldiers under 
Christ, our chief Captain, we have become bondservants 
[slaves] to God, to carry out his plan in the 
overthrow of Sin. 

R931 : page 4 

no matter what profession we have made 

of a change. His servants we are to whom 

we render service. But, thank God, your 

change is not merely a change in name 

or profession, but a change indeed. You 

obeyed the doctrine delivered to you [laying 

hold by faith upon Christ's sacrifice 

for your sins], and were thus set free from 

sin, and then by consecration ye became 

the servants of righteousness. Now, remember 

to be as faithful to your new service, 

to your new master, as you were 

formerly to your old master, Sin. As 

formerly you disregarded the claims of 

God upon your time and talents, now disregard 

and ignore the claims of Sin. 

You know how much evil fruit you bore 
while in Sin's service, for the reward of 
death; see, now, how much fruit you can 
bring forth in your new service whose end 
is lasting life. The wages of Sin is death, 
but God's free gift through the anointed 
one is lasting life.— Verses 17-23. 

Carefully compare the above with the 
first six chapters of Romans, and then 
note the gross error of the exposition of 
Rom. 6 by our Exchange quoted in the 
beginning of this article. To one who is 
wholly ignorant of the plan of salvation 
revealed in the Scriptures, or who forgets 
all the other testimony of the preceding 
five chapters, our Exchange's theory might 
be delusive. To such, its claim that the 
plan of salvation is, that each sinner shall 
slay his own sinful nature as Christ slew 
his sinful nature, and that thus each should 
commend himself to God or justify himself, 
might seem to find support in Rom. 6. 
Such erroneous teaching would indeed be 
delusive to the worldly, for their ideas always 



have run in that direction. They always 

have desired to justify themselves by 

works of their own, or what they term the 

sacrificing of their sins, and have disdained 

or ignored God's favor as a free gift secured 

to them by Christ's sacrifice. Thus 

it has ever been— the cross, the sacrifice 

of Christ for our sins, has been from the 

first what it is to-day,— "To the Jew a 

stumblingblock and to the Greek [worldly-wise] 

foolishness." But to us it still is, 

what it was to the apostles— "The power 

of God and the wisdom of God."— 

1 Cor. 1:24. 

The idea of a sinner sacrificing his sins 
to God, as our Exchange claims, is too 
foolish for a heathen mind to entertain. 
The Bible everywhere declares, in types as 
well as literal statements, that blemished 
or imperfect sacrifices are not acceptable 
to God. Over and over again the Israelites 
were told that their sacrifices for sin 
must be without spot or blemish, to typify 
the perfect sacrifice for our sins, which 
our Lord gave. 

Cannot all see, then, that we could have 
no share in Christ's sacrifice as members 
of his "body," until first we had been 
cleansed or justified by his sacrifice— by 
his blood, shed for the remission of our sins? 

Who is so blinded with prejudice that he 
cannot see that the apostle, in Romans, 
sixth chapter, is not addressing sinners, 
but saints? He is not, therefore, telling 
them how they should justify themselves by 
crucifying their sins, but he is telling those 
who are already justified by faith in the 
sacrifice of Christ, how they have consecrated 
to death in God's service their 
former selves— the "old" or former manhood 
which Christ had justified fully and 
freely and made acceptable as a sacrifice. 
Remembering that our former selves (as 
human beings— justified) are crucified with 
Christ, and remembering why we so consecrated 
—that we as new creatures in 
Christ might be members of the "body of 
Christ," whose great work is to destroy the 
adversary— "the body of Sin," we therefore 
cannot consent to serve or obey, in 
any sense, the great enemy, from whose 
control Christ's redemption has delivered 
us, and whose empire we are pledged with 
Christ to destroy. 

Thus seen, "our old man" which is crucified 
(consecrated to death) with Christ 



is not the "body of Sin" (verse 6). Far 
from it, the "Body of Sin" is a figurative 
personification of Evil or Sin, the great 
enslaver and destroyer of our race, while 
our old man represents our justified manhood, 
which we consecrated to death, in 
order that thus sharing with Christ in his 
death as a ransom for all, (to deliver all 
from Sin, the Destroyer) we might share 
also with Christ as the great Deliverer and 
Restorer of the race. Such should no longer 
be slaves of Sin (ver. 2); for he that 
hath died with Christ (as symbolized in 
baptism, verses 4 and 5) was first released 
or justified from Sin by Christ, and should 
now seek life with Christ, and not again 
to Sin for its wages of death. He that 
hath an ear to hear, let him hear. 



R931 : page 4 

IT IS FINISHED. 

"When Jesus therefore had received the vinegar, 
he said, It is finished: and he bowed his head and 
gave up his spirit."— John 19:30. 

Thus ended the awful tragedy of Calvary. 
Our Lord's last breath with all his 
remaining strength was exhausted in his 
effort to utter with a loud voice that last 
grand truth, "It is finished." 

Down to his very latest breath his mind 
was clear, as shown by every expression 
during those hours of agony on the cross. 
There he preached the gospel to the dying 
thief— "Verily. ..thou shaltbe with 
me in Paradise;" he commended his weeping 
mother to the care of the beloved 
John; and when in the last agonies of 
death he cried, "My God, my God, why 
hast thou forsaken me?" And then again 
his clearness of intellect, and his complete 
submission to, and trust in God, and his 
desire to utter a last word of instruction 
to his followers is manifested in his very 
last words, "It is finished; Father into 
thy hands I commend my spirit." 

If such was our Lord's dying effort to 
make this last announcement, how carefully 
should we consider his words. What 
was finished there? Taking the standpoint 
of this dreadful moment we find him 
in prayer referring to the same thing a few 



days before, saying, "I have finished the 

work which thou gavestme to do" (John 17:11,4). 

Referring again to his death 

(John 12:27) he said, "Now is my soul 

troubled; and what shall I say? Father, 

save me from this hour? But for this cause 

came I unto this hour. Father, glorify 

thy name." 

Then it was for this cause— viz., death, 
as the world's sin-bearer, for the world's 
redemption— that he came to that hour; 
and this was what he finished when 
he bowed his head and gave up the 
spirit of life— existence. There it was 
finished; the substitute, the corresponding 
or equivalent price for the life of 
Adam and all who lost life through him, 
was paid. The death penalty which could 
not be annulled, was thus assumed and 
paid by another, and henceforth that glorious 
fact was to be made known to all. 
Our dying Lord with his latest breath 
was the first one to proclaim the glorious 
message— "It is finished;" and after his 
resurrection he sent his disciples forth to 
tell to every nation the same blessed truth. 

The other side of the great work of atonement 
yet remains to be accomplished, 
viz., the converting of the world to God. 
By this sacrifice which was finished on 
Calvary, the way of access to God was 
opened up; the claims of justice were fully 
met, "That God might be just and yet 
the justifier of him that believeth in Jesus." 
(Rom. 3:36.) And now God can receive 
all who come unto him acknowledging 
the merit of the sacrifice and trusting for 
acceptance through it. The promise that 
the Redeemer will shortly take control of 
the world, open the sin and prejudice 
blinded eyes and bind or restrain their 
great deceiver, is but another way of assuring 
us that this great truth— the ransom- 
so necessary to be believed, shall be testified 
to all in due time (1 Tim. 2:6), when all 
shall have full opportunity of accepting it. 



R931 : page 4 

HE REASONED OF RIGHTEOUSNESS, TEMPERANCE 
AND JUDGMENT TO COME. 

(Acts 24:25.) 



It was not often that Paul turned aside 
from what he considered the work of first 
importance— viz., the care and teaching 
of the church— to exhort those of the world 
to righteousness and temperance. But 
whenever a favorable opportunity offered, 
to instruct those of the world without interfering 
with his special work, Paul was 
quick to see and to improve it, and did it 
with all the fervor of his earnest soul. The 
rule which he gave to us— "Do good unto 
all men as you have opportunity, ESPECIALLY 
to the household of faith"— he strictly 
observed in his own course. His care and 
labor for the church were constant and untiring, 
literally wearing out his life. 

Seeing the breadth and scope of God's 
plan, Paul realized that the church developed 
during this age, is to be the instrumentality 
for the conversion and blessing of 
the world in the next age, and that therefore 
the great and all-important work of 
the present time is the teaching, training 
and developing of the meek of the earth, 
who gladly receive the truth and constitute 

R932 : page 4 

the church of God. It was this same 
knowledge of the order and arrangement 
of God's great plan of the ages, which enabled 
our Lord to devote his attention almost 
entirely to the meek, to whom he said 
he was called to preach. (Luke 4:18.) 
Though he loved the balance of the world 
still enveloped in darkness and steeped in 
sin, he also knew that his Father so loved 
the world, while they were yet sinners, as 
to devise a plan broad enough to bless 
every son and daughter of Adam with a full 
opportunity to regain the right and title 
to everlasting life, in his own due time. 

Both Paul and Jesus worked in harmony 
with that plan, and the results of the 
labors of each during his lifetime looked 
small. Jesus had gathered about him and 
spent the greater part of his time, in instructing 
a few disciples, all of whom forsook 
him and fled in the hour of his sorest 
trial. And Paul's labors for the church 
were often misunderstood even by those 
for whom he was sacrificing every earthly 
good. And so with the labors of all the 

R932 : page 5 



saints: the glorious fruitage of their sacrifice 
and toil will only be manifested, when 
the rich harvests of both the Gospel and 
Millennial ages have been gathered in. 

But we want here to notice particularly 
Paul's preaching to Felix, a Roman Governor 
before whom he stood to be judged. 
Felix was not a Christian in any sense and 
therefore Paul had nothing to say of the 
Christian's higher hopes and privileges, 
nor did he even present the foundation 
truth of the gospel— Redemption through 
the crucified Christ. For none of these 
things was Felix yet prepared. Paul realized 
this, and concluded to give only 
such truths as he was prepared to understand 
and appreciate. There was no attempt 
on this or any other occasion to 
scare the unbeliever with threats of eternal 
torment, if he did not embrace the doctrine 
of Christianity; for this was not true. 
This base blasphemy against God found 
no place in the theology of Paul's day; 
he knew nothing about it. 

Paul took the most sensible and proper 
course with Felix. He took his standpoint 
of observation, and showed how even from 
his standpoint righteousness and temperance 
was the wisest course for any man to 
pursue. He took what truth Felix already 
admitted and showed the reasonable deductions 
which should be drawn therefrom 
by every thinking man. For instance, 
any man, whether he believes in Christ 
or not, unless he is a fool (Psa. 14:1), 
which probably Felix was not, believes 
there is a God, wise and good and powerful, 
the Creator of all things. This much 
nature alone teaches. And if this be true 
it follows that he is the rightful Sovereign 
over all his works, and that all beings are 
subject to his control. These being the 
plain inferences even from the light of nature, 
it follows that at some time, God 
will call men to account for their present 
course of action; and a righteous God will 
surely punish evil deeds. And therefore 
righteousness, and temperance in all 
things, at the present time, is the wisest 
course even if the future be but very 
vaguely and indefinitely seen. 

But Paul had something more than mere 
reasonings from the light of nature on this 
subject: he had positive proof of a coming 
judgment, when all of the wrongs of the 
present time must be accounted for and 



righted, and fearful, he knew, would be 
the penalty of those who heaped iniquity 
upon iniquity and added crime to crime; 
for every man must receive a just recompence 
of reward for his deeds, whether 
they be good or evil. 

Paul was acquainted with God's plan 
and spoke as one who understood it, and 
who had full faith in it. "The eyes of 
the Lord are in every place beholding the 
evil and the good." 



R932 : page 5 

AN UNCANDID EVASION. 

It is a very common thing to hear the 
defenders of the old dogmas about human 
destiny upbraiding those who dare to call 
them in question, as if they were not satisfied 
to leave the future of the heathen, and 
all such questions, where the Bible leaves 
them, when it asks, "Shall not the Judge 
of all the earth do right?" Such critics 
ought to know that this question is a very 
different one from the inquiry. Are our 
standards right in their precise definitions 
of what the Judge of the earth intends to 
do? If the standards left this whole 
question on this ground of absolute faith 
in God, no one would have the right to 
say a word against them. But they do 
not. They define in precise terms that 
he will raise up the wicked, whose souls 
are in hell, and send them back to hell 
to be punished with unspeakable torments 
of soul and body, without intermission, 
in hell fire with the devil and his angels 
forever. It is a dishonest evasion of the 
issue to charge one who raises the question, 
whether these words perfectly represent 
the whole teaching of Scripture upon 
this subject, with an unwillingness to submit 
to its teaching, or, still worse, to impugn 
his motives, as if he were distrustful 
of the righteousness of God. And 
the men who bring this accusation may 
well inquire whether this show of zeal for 
a principle which no one questions may 
not be a pretence behind which they hide 
from themselves and others the inconsistency 
of standing by doctrinal formulas 
which they no longer preach.— Words of 
Reconciliation. 



R932 : page 5 

HOLINESS. 

"Follow peace with all men, and holiness, 
without which no man shall see the Lord."— 
Heb. 12:14. 

Seeing the cold, lifeless formality that 
increasingly prevails in the nominal 
church, the evident lack of growth in 
grace, and its growing disposition to imbibe 
the spirit and conform to the customs, 
ideas, etc., of the world, many of 
God's children, still fettered in a measure 
by her supposed divine authority, are becoming 
interested in what is generally 
termed the holiness movement. Holiness 
meetings, holiness camp-meetings, conventions, 
etc., as well as holiness periodicals 
are becoming quite common. 

That the movement is one actuated by 
right motives, and measurably in the right 
direction, we do not question; yet, were 
these courageous enough to cast off the 
slavish fetters of Babylon, and to walk out 
fearlessly into the liberty wherewith 
Christ has made them free, trusting in 
him alone, they would come much nearer 
the true idea of holiness. Holiness means 
a setting apart, sanctifying, separating 
from the world, by divine authority, and 
for the accomplishment of the divine purposes. 
That holiness means separation 
from the world all will agree, though few 
consult the Scriptures sufficiently to know 
to what intent the Lord would have them 
separate. 

May we not be separate from the world 
and still be far from the narrow path to 
which we have been called? The class 
termed holiness people, generally believe, 
that their single aim should be to so subdue 
sin in themselves as to be able to stand 
approved of God, being in complete conformity 
to all his requirements in thought, 
word and deed. Some claim to have 
reached this desirable perfection, while 
others, painfully conscious of their weakness 
and discouraged by their repeated 
efforts and failures, are almost in despair 
of ever reaching it. And not discerning 
the Lord's purpose in calling them to 



separation from the world, they fall into 

the error of looking upon these efforts as 

a means to their salvation. Many become 

self-righteous and boastful of their attainments, 

and consequent hopes of salvation, 

while the more humble, discouraged, almost 

lose faith in God and entertain but 

a faint, indefinite hope of salvation. 

After all the lessons given, it should be 
plain to all, that no imperfect man is able 
to keep blamelessly God's perfect law. 
The law is the full measure of a perfect 
man's ability, and Adam and Jesus were 
the only perfect men, and hence the only 
two, who could keep it. Israel tried it 
for nearly two thousand years, and though 
that people have furnished us many worthy 
examples, not one of them was able 
to merit life by keeping the law, save 
Jesus only. The very object of the giving 
of the law to men, who were unable to 
keep it, was to convince of shortcomings, 
and to lead to trust in Christ, alone, for 
salvation. It is only self-deception to 
claim actual perfection, though the weakest 
child of God, clothed with the imputed 
merit of Christ, is reckoned perfect 
by our Father. 

This trusting in the merit of Christ, 
and striving to live in exact harmony 
with his revealed will, implies the diligent 
searching of the Scriptures to know what 
that will is, and this is the true life of 
holiness— of separation from the world 
—and of union and communion with God. 
Such cannot help bearing fruit. 

It should be borne in mind, that the 
statement of Heb. 12:14 is addressed to 
the Church. The Church were taught to 
look for the Lord's appearing, which Paul 
explained would be in a manner unobserved 
by the world, and as a thief in the 
night. When his presence is due, only 
those will be able to see (Gr., horao— discern) 
it, who are separate from the world 
in spirit, and who are searching the Scriptures 
to know the signs of his presence. 
Without holiness [separation, setting apart 
to God's service] no man shall see [discern] 
the Lord. 

But a time is coming, when many 
who are not holy, will discern the Lord's 
presence; for we are told, that "every 
eye shall see him." The world will see 
—recognize him, when his judgments 
make his presence manifest to all.— 



Isa. 26:9. 

This text (Heb. 12:14.) has very frequently 
been misused in urging the world 
to become Christians. Christian people 
who have not carefully considered its 
meaning, tell the world that without holiness 
they shall not see the Lord; and 
then, when controverting the truth as to 
the manner of Christ's coming, the very 
same class will confidently quote, "Every 
eye shall see him." Do they believe that 
all shall become holy? No; this is far 
from their thought. Where then is the 
harmony? Is there discord in the statements 
of God's Word? To believe so is 
to believe the Scriptures unsound and unworthy 
of confidence. But such is the 
sad confusion into which the teaching of 
the nominal church has led, and such the 
results which its too careless handling of 
the word of God has brought about. The 
confusion is fast ripening into open 
infidelity. 

May God help his children to see the 
confusion, and then courageously to come 
out of it and pursue holiness, without 
which no man shall be able to discern the 
Lord's second presence, until it is manifested 
in judgement and retribution. 
MRS. C. T. R. 



R933 : page 5 

HONESTY IS THE BEST POLICY. 

This is a very common proverb, and 
one very generally admitted to be correct; 
and it is correct, if we consider the ultimate 
consequences; but if we consider 
the immediate consequences it is not always 
true. It is the immediate consequences 
that are generally considered, 
however, and therefore a dishonest course 
is very often decided upon by worldly 
people, who seldom look far beyond the 
present. 

But strange to say, the ultimate consequences 
are not always considered even 
by some of the consecrated children 
of God, and almost unconsciously, they 
sometimes pursue a dishonest course, considering 
it the best policy in view of the 
immediate consequences. We do not believe 
for a moment, that any sincere Christian 



would knowingly and deliberately 

act dishonestly, and yet it is necessary that 

we should specially guard ourselves on 

this point. There are many ways of acting 

dishonestly, deceptively, aside from 

business matters, in which dollars and 

cents are concerned. It is just as blameworthy 

to deal dishonestly with the truth, 

as to do so with dollars and cents; and 

yet with many there seems to be a great 

temptation to do it. It generally arises 

from a tendency towards approbativeness, 

a desire to be thought well of; and it 

is a great hindrance to real progress in 

the knowledge of the truth. When several 

are met together for Bible study, the 

tempter often whispers to one and another, 

Now, here is the place to win your 

laurels in Bible exegesis; now state your 

opinion and stick to it; don't let that insignificant 

little brother or sister there 

change your mind and prove your mental 

caliber inferior; if you are even driven to 

the wall in argument, don't own up to it, 

gloss it over with a few ecstatic expressions 

to divert attention from the real issue of 

the argument, and thus make your doubtful 

position appear more plausible at least. 

The temptation is a severe one to some, 
and almost before they have time to recognize 
it as a temptation, or to hear the 
voice of conscience protesting against it, 
they have yielded to it; and a few repetitions 
of the same thing soon confirms 
the habit. Thus erroneous ideas become 
stereotyped, and no reasoning, however 
forcible and scriptural, can change them. 
Beyond these barriers of self-deception we 
cannot grow. We may have grown rapidly, 
before we set up these barriers, but 
further growth in the direction thus 
blocked up, is impossible. 

This is not the teachable, humble, 
childlike spirit, which can be led step by 
step along the narrow way. The narrow 
way is too narrow to admit of pride and 
vain-glory. Every child of God should 
strive against these, especially where 
self-examination reveals an inherited or 
acquired tendency in that direction. 

Aside from personal considerations, the 
effect upon others of this double dealing 
with God's truth, is dangerous. Some 
will quickly discern the selfish principle 
which vaunts itself at the expense of the 
truth, and will begin to lose confidence in 



the Christian character and integrity of 
the erring brother or sister, while others 
will be confused and hindered in their 
efforts to comprehend the truth. Few 
have keen perceptive powers and the majority 
need to be helped, not hindered in 
the way. 

"Let saints be on their guard, 

Ten thousand foes arise. 
The hosts of sin are pressing hard 

To draw them from the prize. 

"O! watch and fight and pray. 

The battle ne'er give o'er, 
Renew it boldly every day, 

And help divine implore." 



R935 : page 5 

THE CHURCH NOT A RESTAURANT. 

There is sarcasm in the following extract 
from an article by a city pastor in a 
late number of the Congregationalist, but 
there is also a good deal of truth:— 

"I have the best lot of people in my 
church I have ever met with. They get 
up entertainments, suppers and dinners 
which are models of their kind. They 
pay their bills with more promptness than 
any people I ever saw. In fact, they do 
everything in the world except the things 
for which the church was legitimately designed. 
And what can I do about it?" 

The church certainly was never intended 
to be a restaurant or a place for fashionable 
entertainments.— Presbyter. Banner. 



R933 : page 6 

THE SECOND COMING OF CHRIST AND 
THE GIFT OF LIFE. 

There is one fact which is beyond all 
controversy; and that is, that in the early 
ages of the church, the hope, the principal 
hope, of the church was the return of her 
Lord. It is an equally incontestible fact 
that this faith faded and died; and it is 
only in our own days that it has risen to 
any great extent. For ages the church 
slumbered and slept, and was not aware 



of any such hope as the return of the Lord. 

What was the reason that this hope sank 

and disappeared? There is no effect without 

a cause. It is an unquestionable fact 

that this hope, which was so bright, the 

hope of the church, disappeared. What 

was the cause? This I think is a legitimate 

inquiry, one which we are bound to 

face. Can we suppose that the blessed 

hope died from inanition, that it was insufficient 

to comfort the church? I think 

it is not possible to take such a view as 

that. It has always been a living hope, 

one that has been able to purify the affections, 

and support the Christian in the 

midst of his trials. It could not sink for 

that reason. It is also equally impossible 

to suppose it would have been dropped 

unless some other hope had taken its place. 

The Church could not land itself in a hopeless 

position. It must always have a hope. 

What was it, then? I speak a fact that is 

incontestible, that the cause of the disappearance 

of this hope of the Church was 

the introduction of the doctrine of natural 

immortality. There is no question of 

the fact. It is sometimes said that the 

reason was that, when Constantine became 

a Christian, the idea got abroad that the 

Church and the world were to be one, and 

that with the spread of the Christian Empire 

with a Christian Emperor at its head, 

a triumphant Church would become universal. 

That no doubt, had its effect upon 

Christian truth. But we must go further 

back than that, if we wish to trace the 

source of this error. It goes back to the 

third century. Men— philosophers of the 

Greek school— were not willing to give up 

their heathen philosophies. Therefore they 

made a sort of compromise between heathenism 

and Christianity; and the man who 

thus signalized himself was Origen, who, 

of all the early Fathers, did most to mystify 

and degrade Christian truth. 

This philosophy taught that instead of 
receiving the gift of life from Christ alone, 
we have the element of it within us already, 
that we have the Divine essence, that cannot 
go out, and that we live, whether we 
accept God's offer or not, as long as God 
lives. It is false. It is not taught in the 
Book of God. But it was the introduction 
of this that did havoc with that grand 
and glorious hope of the return of the 
Lord. Just think of it. It worked its 



own natural result. Men could not possibly 
believe that they themselves possessed 
natural immortality, and yet look with 
anxious hope for a return of the Life-giver. 
The two positions are irreconcilable. And 
here you have the cause and the effect. I 
put it to you to consider it. 

Further, we find that the resurrection 
suffered the same process of being put 
away as an active and definite hope of the 
Christian. The two things are inseparable. 
A man believes that he possesses life in 
himself; and it is all one to him whether 
the resurrection takes place sooner or 
later. But let a man be fully persuaded 
that on the return of Christ and on the resurrection 
of the dead depends all; that 
unless the Lord come, then there is no 
hope for him, I say it is impossible for 
him to put off to an indefinite future the 
return of his Lord. 

In 1 Cor. 15 the apostle Paul speaks of 
the resurrection of Jesus Christ. He supposes 
for a moment that Christ had not 
risen, and the consequences that would 
have followed; and he sums up a telling 
argument in these words, concerning those 
who had fallen asleep in Christ, that if 
Christ be not risen, then their faith was 

R934 : page 6 

vain, they were yet in their sins, and 

"then they also which are fallen asleep in 

Christ are perished;" and he concludes 

with saying, "If in this life only we have 

hope in Christ, we are of all men most 

miserable." Therefore, surely, on this is 

built the whole of the Christian's hopes, 

that Christ is risen and become the first 

fruits of them that slept; that on the resurrection 

of the Christian himself depends 

the hope of what he looks forward for in 

the future life. 

If you wish to see the danger of the false 
theology in all its virulence, go to the 
Church of Rome. There you will find 
worshipers offering prayer to the dead, to 
dead men and to dead women, offering 
perpetually to the Lord of glory as a babe 
in its mother's arms or as transfixed to 
the cross. They have forgotten that the 
Lord is risen from the dead and become 
the first fruits of them that slept. But, 
my friends, this whole Roman system is 
based on the dogma of immortality of the 



soul. Take away the coming of the Lord 

from Roman Catholics, and it makes no 

great difference; but take away the immortal-soul-ism 

and you sap its existence, you 

cut off the stream from its source.— Sel. 



R926 : page 6 

PAPACY IN THE PROTESTANT CHURCH. 

The Protestant Church repudiates the 
Pope. It has much to say of the right of 
private judgement. And yet while it dismisses 
the Pope at the front door, it admits 
the Papal principle at the back door. 
Not content with framing its creeds out 
of the facts of Christianity, which no true 
Christian will dispute, the Reformed 
churches constructed systems of theology 
into creeds, and substituted for the rule 
of the Spirit, which is the only true substitute 
for that of the Pope, the domination 
of the system. Hence, in them all, 
there is more or less of this papacy of 
creed. If any one discovers some new 
truth out of harmony with its statements, 
or error inwrought at some point, he 
must either be silent, or run the risk of 
loss of standing and preferment, and 
perhaps of excision. It is amazing, when 
one reflects upon it, how the Protestant 
Church has thus abandoned the principles 
of private judgement, and the liberty of 
the Spirit, upon which it was based. One 
need not go far to find churches where 
honest thought and high aspiration are 
repressed, where the gates of free inquiry 
are closed, and new light from the Word 
of God, and from other sources in Nature 
and Providence, is barred out. A fatal 
domination of recognized leaders, keeps 
the body within the strict lines of its tradition, 
and puts its ban upon any who dare 
transcend them; unless, indeed; it be 
done in some such covert way as not to 
excite suspicion that the integrity of the 
system is to be endangered. 

To illustrate what we mean. A member 
of a prominent Presbyterian church 
remarked that his pastor, in conversing 
with him upon these themes, told him that 
he believed a great many things which 
gave him comfort which, as a Presbyterian 
minister, he could not preach. The 



admission has more than once been made 

to us by brethren of the highest standing 

that they found relief in the belief that 

God's ways in redemption were not exhausted 

in this world, and that sinners 

who proved irreclaimable under them finally 

suffer extinction of being. And yet 

none of these men would dare give public 

utterance to such convictions. They 

regard themselves as under a sort of bond 

not to do so. And certainly their standing 

in the church would be jeopardized 

if they did. This is what we mean by 

Protestant Papacy. How, we would ask, 

can there be honest progress in the knowledge 

of the truth, if honest convictions 

must thus be concealed?— Words of 

Reconciliation. 



R934 : page 6 
CHRISTIANIZING THE WORLD. 

Canon Farrar, who is as liberal minded 
as he is fearless and able, in a recent sermon 
declared that where England made 
one Christian in heathen lands, she made 
a hundred drunkards. This was a bold 
assertion— almost too bold to at first seem 
true, but the more one examines into it 
and reads the authorities upon the conditions 
and recent history of the uncivilized 
countries where missionary effort has been 
directed, the more painfully truthful does 
the statement become. Of course, the reports 
sent out by missionaries give a more 
sanguine coloring, but with all due respect 
to the zeal and self-sacrifice of these worthy 
gentlemen, the way to arrive at a true appreciation 
of the situation is to examine all 
the evidence. When that is done it will 
be found that what Canon Farrar has said 
was not a false alarm, but a great evil that 
the mission work must face squarely and 
endeavor to remedy. 

Remarkable testimony of the correctness 
of Canon Farrar's assertion comes 
from an unexpected quarter. Mr. Joseph 
Thomson is a distinguished African traveller. 
He has conducted three expeditions 
in East Central Africa. He is a Christian, 
thoroughly imbued with the spirit and interests 
of his religion. He goes further 
than Canon Farrar, and says: "For every 



African who is influenced for good by 
Christianity, a thousand are driven into 
deeper degradation by the gin trade." 
He declares that four hundred years of 
contact with Europeans have only succeeded, 
along the greater part of the coast, 
in raising a taste for gin, rum, gunpowder 
and guns. Mr. Thomson says he had seen 
so much of this sort of thing that he began 
to believe that the negro was not capable 
of development. But when he reached 
the heart of Africa, his pessimism suffered 
a severe shock. These are his words: 

"I could hardly believe I was not dreaming 
when I looked around me and found 
large, well-built cities, many of them containing 
10,000 to 30,000 inhabitants. The 
people themselves, picturesquely and voluminously 
dressed, moved about with that 
self-possessed, sober dignity which bespeaks 
the man who has a proper respect for himself. 
I saw on all sides the signs of an industrious 
community, differentiated into 
numerous crafts— evidence sufficient to 
show, how far advanced they were on the 
road to civilization. I heard the rattle, 
the tinkle, and the musical clang of the 
workers in iron, in brass, and in copper. 
I could see cloth being made in one place, 
and dyed, or sewn into gowns or other 
articles of dress in other places. In the 
markets crowded with eager thousands, I 
could see how varied were the wants of 
these negro people, how manifold the productions 
of their industry, and how keen 
their business instincts. Almost more remarkable 
than anything else, no native 
beer or spirits, nor European gin and rum, 
found place in their markets. Clearly there 
were no buyers, and therefore no sellers." 

What had caused this? Christianity? 
No, it was Mohammedanism; and not only 
had it done that, but it had established 
schools, built churches and made the 
people as devout as they are prosperous.— 
Baltimore American. 

All this teaches three important lessons. 
First, It shows the folly of calling any of 
the "kingdoms of this world" Christian 
kingdoms. These kingdoms and the masses 
of the people would do anything for 
money and power. Whatever good is done 
is not to be credited to these kingdoms, 
but to the "Salt of the earth" in them. 

Secondly, It blasts the hope which so 
many seem to cherish, that the missionary 



and civilizing progress of the present century, 

if kept up, would in a few thousand 

years bring about the Millennium of peace. 

It shows that vice is spreading more rapidly 

than Christianity and the same is attested 

in other ways. It proves that, if 

God is waiting for the church militant to 

bring about the Millennium, we need not 

expect it ever. Thank God, that we see 

his plan more clearly— that by making 

bare the arm of his power, He is even now 

about to overthrow, (in a great time of 

trouble) every agency of evil and corruption, 

degradation and sin, and to give 

"the dominion under the whole heavens" 

to the saints— the anointed Church triumphant, 

of which Christ Jesus is the head 

and Lord. 

Thirdly, We should draw the lesson that 
morality and Christianity are not the same 
thing, as so many seem to suppose. While 
all true Christians practice morality, all 
who live a moral life are not Christians. 
These moral, temperate Mohammedan negroes 
of Africa, described above, have 
daily and hourly in their pleasures, comforts, 
etc., a reward for their morality and 
obedience to laws of nature, but they are 
not Christians. A Christian is one who 
after believing in and accepting of the 
RANSOM provided for him, in the death of 
the perfect "man Christ Jesus," comes 
into harmony and communion with God. 
Strictly speaking no others are Christians. 
Many others however are nominal Christians, 
or Christians in name only. 



R935 : page 6 

IS THERE A SAFER TRUST? 

Now that skepticism, in so many varied 
forms, is assailing our Christian religion, 
it is eminently proper for all mankind to 
inquire,— is there anything more certain 
and sure in which to trust? The wish to 
trust something or some power outside of 
and apart from itself, is inherent in the 
human heart. To throw aside all trust is 
to blot out any hope in the future, and 
limit existence to mere mortality. Few 
will be satisfied by so doing. Almost every 
individual's future, self-sketched, has 
in it something beyond mortality's boundary, 



and is contingent upon some kind of 
religious belief. That belief which promises 
most certain fulfilment is the one 
most earnestly desired. 

And while the enemies of Christ seek to 
do away with all faith in him as the personal 
Saviour of humanity, and sneer at 
that grand plan of salvation which has the 
Crucified Son of God as its central figure, 
do they offer any faith better and more 
desirable, any scheme which shall hold 
a surer guarantee of redemption? Claiming 
Jesus the Nazarene to have been 
but the carpenter's son, though a man 
of exceeding cleverness, do they present 
for our consideration any other mediator 
between the All-Father and ourselves? 
Is there, in the whole range of skeptical 
philosophy, any theory, promise 
or hope to which, turning away from 
God and the Redeemer we believe he 
sent into the world, the soul can cling 
with more satisfaction and peace? 

R935 : page 7 

These questions cannot be easily answered 
in the affirmative. Skepticism, trying 
to tear down the truest and most vital 
part of Christian faith, has never offered 
to build up a truer and worthier one,— has 
never developed any rock upon which 
mankind may rest with the assurance that 
it will prove more solid and enduring. 
Skepticism, atheism, deism, pantheism, infidelism, 
and all other isms preaching aught 
beside Christ and him crucified, have as 
yet failed to do what the simple Christian 
faith has done,— hold out a hope of eternal 
life and sustain the believer through 
manifold afflictions until the hope loses itself 
in fruition.— Restitution. 



R934 : page 7 

WHAT WILT THOU HAVE ME TO DO? 

The heart that is truly in love with the 
Master, and which from his word has 
partaken of his spirit, cannot be either 
indifferent or idle, and the magnitude 
of his great work will be the continual spur 
to activity. The prayer of every such 
one will be, Lord, what wilt thou have me 



to do? A proper zeal will not engage in 
mere hap-hazard work, but will diligently 
study the Lord's plans and methods. 

Paul says, "As we have opportunity, let 
us do good unto all men, especially unto 
them who are of the household of faith." 
-Gal. 6:10. 

Here are three points to be specially 
observed: First, our obligations are limited 
to our opportunities. Secondly, our 
best energies should be devoted as far as 
possible to the household of faith, while 
any incidental opportunities for benefiting 
the world may also be improved, in so far 
as they may not interfere with the work 
of special and prime importance. Thirdly, 
if we can find no opportunities to do 
good to the household of faith, then all 
our energies may be devoted to others. 

This teaching through Paul thus points 
out the work for each one, however obscure, 
or however limited may be his talents. 
You may be a mother surrounded 
with the many necessary cares of a large 
family, or a father whose small earnings 
by hard toil and long hours are constantly 
required by the necessities of a family. 
And these cares may have gathered about 
you, so as to almost overwhelm you, before 
you realized your higher calling and 
work, and they cannot and must not now 
be cast aside; hence these things are now 
a part of your duty, and if faithfully performed, 
as unto the Lord, will be acceptable 
to him as a token of your love and 
devotion. 

Some mothers may be so constantly and 
necessarily engaged in their homes as to 
find very little opportunity for working 
outside, yet there may be a few neighbors 
similarly situated with whom they may 
speak quite frequently. Then here and in 
your own home is your work. Perhaps 
not one of them is of the household of 
faith, and you say, It is of no use to talk 
to them about these things. They pay no 
attention and will only think me peculiar. 
But that will depend in some measure on 
how wisely you deal with them. To those 
who have no interest in spiritual things, 
it would be unwise to talk of spiritual 
things; for the natural man receiveth not 
the things of the spirit, neither indeed can 
he, for they are spiritually discerned. But 
they can understand natural things, such 



R935 : page 7 

things for instance as relate to the restitution 
of natural men. Nor can your young 
children understand beyond this, for they 
are on the natural plane; but whatever of 
instruction or discipline they receive now, 
will be but a part of that general schooling 
which must ultimately bring them up 
to perfection. Your work will not be lost, 
even though death may interrupt it. If it 
does not make a very large showing in this 
age, it will appear in the next. 

The weary father's evening hours may 
aid in this delightful and blessed work both 
in his family and neighborhood; and if on 
the alert for every opportunity to honor 
the Master, he may find some either of the 
household of faith, or of the worldly class, 
with whom he comes in daily contact, to 
whom he can communicate some truth, or 
at least before whom he can let the light 
of a consistent Christian character shine. 

To these opportunities may sometimes 
be added the writing of letters to distant 
friends, bearing some portion of the glorious 
message. And here is a way in which 
many an invalid even, who is otherwise 
shut in to a very narrow sphere, may find 
some opportunity for spreading the good 
news. And such can often glorify God 
in the midst of suffering, by patient endurance 
and unwavering faith, or a word of 
counsel and cheer to those who attend to 
their wants. O how many ways there are 
for letting our light shine, when we begin 
to recount them; and there are just as 
many ways of hiding it under a bushel. 
And perhaps you can think of many other 
ways of enlarging your sphere of usefulness. 
It is a part of our privilege and duty 
to study how we may best invest our 
talents in order to secure the largest results. 
This duty is plainly set forth in the 
parable of the talents (Matt. 25:14-30), 
and is just as necessary in investing for the 
Lord, as in investing money for financial 
profit. 

But the classes we have mentioned are 
some of those of most limited opportunities; 
and while these, if their devotion to the 
Lord is very strong, will put their one or 
two talents to the best use, some may have 
many more talents and opportunities. 
Some may have small sized or grown up 
families, or none, and these with economy 



of time and arrangements, may find many 
hours for outside work. You may think 
before you make the effort that it is of no 
use, as the people in your community are 
all wedded to sectarian churches. But is 
it really so? Have you tested the matter, 
and proved beyond doubt that there is not 
one of the real household of faith in your 
town or village or within reach of you? 
Have you tested the matter wisely, too? 

If so, then you have at least done your 
part faithfully, and that fact will not escape 
the Master's notice; be assured of that. 
But even if this is the case, in all probability 
there is still a field of usefulness for 
you in that very neighborhood yet. There 
are some of the world's children, perhaps 
very poor, perhaps very ignorant or even 
degraded. None have ever thought of 
looking after or caring for them. What 
an oasis it would seem to them in their 
desert life, if you, a person of acknowledged 
respectability would call on them 
as a friend or neighbor, and not with the 
air of a charity call. 

Many such heard our Master gladly. In 
all probability they would hear you gladly. 
Possibly in some localities all of the wheat 
is gathered out of the nominal church, and 
you may find no result of your labor or 
opportunity for further labor in that direction, 
as they resolutely refuse to hear, 
though often some of those who oppose 
for a time, are merely doing so to find the 
strength of our position. Glorify God, 
then, by letting them see it. In due time 
the fruit will appear though it may be very 
slow. But at least the poor of this world 
you have always with you. And just here we 
are reminded of the words of Paul to some 
of the blinded Jews who wilfully rejected 
the truth— "It was necessary [a part of 
God's arrangement] that the Word of God 
should first have been spoken to you: but 
seeing ye put it from you, and judge yourselves 
unworthy of everlasting life, lo, we 
turn to the Gentiles. For so hath the Lord 
commanded, saying, I have set thee to be 
a light of the Gentiles, that thou shouldest 
be for salvation unto the ends of the 
earth. "-Acts 13:46,47. 

The anointed ones are set for a light to 
all the world. Let it shine as much as possible 
now. If those who claim to be of the 
household of faith reject the truth, it is 
your privilege to turn your light upon the 



world around you. No faithful consecrated 

one can be idle where so many avenues 

of usefulness are open, and where 

there is so much need of service, unless he 

should forget his calling and become lukewarm 

and indifferent. 

Such going forth to preach the Gospel 
will bring the reproaches of many of your 
former friends upon you. You know it 
will; but you took that into consideration 
long ago, when you covenanted to lay 
your all upon the altar. Do not think of 
reconsidering the question now. "No man 
having put his hand to the plow, and 
looking back, is fit for the kingdom of 
God." (Luke 9:62). You will meet with 
many rebuffs, if not violent opposition, 
but you will lightly esteem these, if your 
chief and only concern is to spread the 
good tidings. Be not discouraged if your 
efforts now seem fruitless, for "He that 
goeth forth and weepeth [is touched with 
sympathy for the blinded and suffering 
ones], bearing precious seed, shall doubtless 
come again with rejoicing, bringing his 
sheaves with him."— Psa. 126:6. 
MRS. C. T. R. 



R936 : page 7 

SACRIFICE YOUR LIFE. 

"He that findeth his life shall lose it, and 
he that loseth his life for my sake shall find 
it."-Matt. 10:39. 

Some of our Lord's teachings were addressed 
to the mixed companies of worldly 
people around him, but the most of his 
attention and teachings were specially 
given to his disciples. And to them he 
said many things which they were not 
able to comprehend at the time, but which 
he promised should be brought to their 
remembrance and made clear to the 
church afterward. 

Among these was the statement of the 
above text. To the disciples at that time 
it was simply incomprehensible, but in 
the light of the fuller teaching under the 
spirit dispensation it is quite clear and 
plain. The statement is applicable to 
those who have consecrated their life, 
who have presented themselves to God as 



living sacrifices. Their consecration implies 
their intended faithfulness in spending 
their life in the divine service even 
unto death. 

Having made this solemn covenant 
with God, and therefore been accepted of 
him through Christ, it is not in either 
our right or power to take back that 
which we thus relinquished all right to, 
viz., our life as human beings with the 
hopes and blessings etc., which belong to 
it. We are now (reckonedly) new creatures, 
begotten of God to a new nature, 
the divine, which we cannot fully possess, 
until the human nature is entirely dissolved 
—dead. To take up our cross and 
follow after the Master, thus dying daily, 
until the last spark is spent in His service, 
is no light thing, and some may limp and 
falter and hesitate, and yet press on 
through all their weaknesses looking to 
the Lord and accepting his proffered 
assistance. 

But to turn entirely back from our purpose, 
and to lay hold on what remains of 
our earthly life and begin again to live 
after the flesh, is to lose all claim upon 
the spiritual life, the only life to which 
such now hold a title. To such then, 
how forcibly the statement, He who keeps 
hold of the life already consecrated to 
sacrifice, thereby loses all life, while he 
who is obedient to his covenant, shall find 
life much more abundantly, than now 
possessed— in God's due time. 



R936 : page 7 
IN DUE TIME. 

"He that believeth and is baptised shall be saved, 
and he that believeth not shall be damned 
[condemned]." 

"That whosoever believeth on him might not 
perish, but have everlasting life." 

A Brother wants to know whether these 
two texts are not contrary to our teaching. 
We answer, No, they are in exact harmony 
with our teachings, and in opposition 
to the general views of Christians. 
We teach that no man will be saved without 
faith in Christ as his ransom; but with 
Paul we believe that our Lord Jesus Christ 



gave himself a ransom for ALL, and that 
it must consequently be testified to all in 
"due time." To some the testimony is 
given in this age, but they, compared to 
all, are only a few. The vast majority 
must therefore hear the testimony in the 
coming age during which God declares, 
The knowledge of the Lord shall fill the 
earth, and all shall know him from the 
least to the greatest. Those who in "due 
time" [in this or a coming age] hear, believe 
and accept of our Lord, shall be 
saved; and all who reject, will perish. 

It is those who claim that all infants 
and the mass of the heathen will be saved 
without believing, that do violence to these 
texts and not we. Sticking to a theory, 
a tradition of men, that probation is limited 
to the present existence and ends with 
death, they are blinded from seeing the 
plain scriptural teaching of a blessed age 
to come. And in order to satisfy reason 
and yet hold to their traditions, they are 
forced to their position in contradiction 
to the Master's words quoted above, 
claiming that babes and heathen can be 
saved without believing in the only name 
given under heaven and among men. 

But will faith be possible for the world, 
when it sees its salvation actually beginning? 
We answer, Yes, they must believe 
the testimony then given, that this salvation 
which they will then see begun (for the 
awakening from death is only the beginning 
of the salvation or restitution which 
will be completed within the limits of that 
age— a thousand years,) has been brought 
about, not by any merit of their own, but 
as the result of the ransom— the death of 
Christ— which secured for all, the right 
and privilege of a second, an individual trial. 



R926 : page 7 

FOUNDED UPON LOVE. 

Napoleon standing on the brow of St. 
Helena, said to Montholon: "Can you 
tell me who Jesus Christ was?" Without 
waiting for an answer he continued: 
"There is something about him which 
I cannot understand. Alexander, Caesar, 
Charlemagne, and myself have 
founded great empires. But on what 



did these creations of our genius rest? 
Upon force. But Jesus founded his upon 
love; and this very day millions would 
die for him. I have inspired multitudes 
with an enthusiastic devotion, such that 
they would have died for me; but to do 
this it was necessary that I should be present 
with the electric influence of my 
looks, my words, and my voice. When I 
saw men, and spoke to them, I lighted up 
the flame of devotion in their hearts. But 
Jesus by some mysterious influence, reaching 
down through a lapse of eighteen hundred 

R926 : page 8 

years, so draws the hearts of men toward 
him that thousands, at a word, would 
rush through fire and flood for him, counting 
not their lives dear unto them." 



R936 : page 8 

OUR ANNIVERSARY SUPPER. 

On the evening of April 7th, the anniversary 
of the institution of the bread and 
wine as symbols of our Lord's broken body 
and shed blood, as the Lamb of God which 
taketh away the sin of the world, the Church 
at Pittsburgh celebrated the same. The 
company numbered about one hundred and 
fifty, and included probably forty from 
neighboring towns, and a few from distant 
points— New York, Ohio and Wisconsin. 
We need scarcely say that it was, as usual, 
a very impressive occasion. 

We briefly reconsidered the significance 
of the bread and wine as emblems, and the 
importance and value of that which they 
symbolize— the broken body and shed 
blood of our Redeemer. We saw that the 
eating of the flesh signified our acceptance 
and appropriation of the perfect humanity 
and all its rights, which our Lord sacrificed 
for Adam and all his race. We saw that 
when our Lord said, "My flesh. ..I will 
give for the life of the world" (Jno. 6:51), 
he meant, I give up, or sacrifice my perfect 
(unleavened) human nature that the 
world may have perfect human nature 
("that which was lost"), by accepting of 
my sacrifice and appropriating (eating) 
my rights and perfections, freely given on 



their behalf. 

We saw that thus the bread is for all who 
would be restored, and must be accepted 
and digested (appreciated), before it will 
benefit any, either in this, the Gospel age, 
or in the Millennial age. All who would 
recover that which was lost must accept of 
the ransom, and thus obtain restitution 
(actually or reckonedly) as its result. We 
saw that all who eat of the flesh of the Lamb, 
do not drink of his blood. In the type— 
the Passover— the doorposts and lintels of 
the house were sprinkled with the blood 
of the Lamb; and so, too, with all who 
would "eat the flesh" of the "Son of Man" 
(partake of his merits and justification); 
they must all recognize and own the blood 
—the precious life shed for all, for the remission 
of the sins of the whole world. 

But the privilege of drinking of "the 
cup"— Mark 10:38— (sharing in the sacrifice 
of life) is offered only during the 
Gospel age. It is the favor or privilege 
of this age, to "fill up that which is behind 
of the afflictions of Christ," and to get the 
reward with him of sharing also his glory 
to follow. So, then, as the eating of the 
flesh (bread) signifies justification to all 
human rights and privileges, so the drinking 
of the blood (wine) signifies our sharing 
with our Lord in his sacrifice, our becoming 
"dead with him," our participation 
in his sufferings— crucified with him. 

This being true, how appropriate that 
the giving of the wine was after the eating 
of the bread, and to those only who had 
eaten it. This teaches, in harmony with 
all the Scriptures, that only those who are 
justified from all sin by faith in the merit 
and sacrifice of the Lamb of God (and no 
others) are invited to crucify their (justified) 
humanity and share in the afflictions 
of Christ in this age, and in his glories 
which shall follow in the Millennial age 
and the eternity beyond. 

Only those who both eat his flesh (appropriate 
his merits— justification) and 
drink his blood (share with him in his 
sacrifice by rendering their justified humanity 
a sacrifice to his service) dwell in 
him, and he in them, as members of the 
one "body of Christ," as members of the 
"true vine." (Jno. 6:56). Only such 
(verse 53) can have inherent life: that is, 
life independent of all conditions— Immortality. 
(See MILL. DAWN, VOL. I., 



Chap. X.) 

The balance of mankind, however, may 
by eating (appropriating) the sacrificed 
rights of the "man Christ Jesus" obtain 
a dependent life, which will be supplied 
to the willing and obedient everlastingly. 

These must all be first brought to a 
knowledge of the Lord, of the sacrifice 
which he gave, and of the justification and 
restitution provided in it, and may then 
partake of it freely and live. Of such it 
is written, "He that eateth of this bread 
(without sharing "the cup") shall live forever," 
and "He that eateth me, even he 
shall live by me"— a dependent life, but 
surely supplied to all who rely upon Christ, 
the life-giver, for it. The distinction is, 
that the Gospel church now being selected 
—the body of Christ— will, with the head, 
have immortality, have inherent life, and 
will be the source of supply to the world, 
who will come continuously to the fountain 
for life, and live thereby. 

We noticed particularly also the statement 
of the apostle that "He that eateth 
and drinketh unworthily— not discerning 
the Lord's body— eateth and drinketh 
condemnation to himself." (1 Cor. 11:27-29.) 
We saw the import of this to be, 
that to all who fail to recognize Christ's 
sacrifice for their sins, the eating of those 
emblems implies their guilt as his murderers, 
in the same sense that the Jews cried 
out, "His blood be upon us and on our 
children." As the Jews made themselves 
guilty of innocent blood (death), so do all 
who now by eating the emblems say, his 
blood is upon us— unless they discern the 
Lord's body and blood as their ransom. 
To all who do not recognize it as their 
ransom— it must signify an increase of their 
condemnation as sharers of the guilt of the 
breaking of his body and shedding of his 
blood, seeing that to them it speaks no 
forgiveness— no remission of sins. 

The succeeding four days were wholly 
given up to meetings in which were discussed 
various topics of interest which we 
cannot here recast. These meetings seemed 
to be specially and deeply interesting to 
the visiting friends who, we trust, went 
back to their respective fields of service 
refreshed and strengthened by the strong 
meat of God's Word, and the new wine of 
joy and hope, distilled from the exceeding 
great and precious promises examined. 



During their visit the following nine 
brethren and sisters embraced the opportunity 
to symbolize their consecration 
"even unto death" (Rom. 6:3,4), to be 
immersed in water in the likeness of the 
real immersion into death, as per our Lord's 
request (Mark 16:16), and the apostles' 
command (Acts 10:48). Their names 
are as follows. Brother and Sister A. Bowen, 
Bro. J. W. Mason, Bro. Thos. R. Jackson, 
Sister J. Vero, Sister M. J. Wagner, Sister 
M. Thompson, and Sisters Carson and 
Mitchell. 

Many letters received show that the 
Brethren and Sisters in every direction 
remembered the Master's words, "This do 
in remembrance of me." In some places 
the gatherings were of a considerable number, 
while in others only one or two. We 
know that all who did "do this" from the 
right motives, discerning the Lord's sacrifice 
for their sins and their consecration 
with him, were surely blessed greatly. 
Many letters received bear the same testimony. 
You were not forgotten by us, as 
we assembled here, and your letters assure 
us, that we were not forgotten by you. 
This mutual interest of the "body" in all 
of its members is right, and rejoices our 
hearts often. 



R937 : page 1 

VOL. VIII. PITTSBURGH, PA., JUNE, 1887. NO. 10. 



page 1 

THE APRIL TOWER we have in good 
supply, for your use in loaning and mailing 
to your friends. Order as many as 
you can judiciously use— free. We send 
with them some pink slips to be pasted at 
the edge on the upper corner. 



R948 : page 1 

DAWN, VOL. I., is now in its twenty-fifth 
thousand. Many hearts are praying 
and many hands laboring for God's blessing 
upon it; hoping that fifty thousand or 
possibly one hundred thousand may be in 
circulation before 1888. Work the works 
of him that sent you while it is day, for 
the night cometh, when no man can work. 
(John 9:4.) "The time will come when 
they will not endure sound doctrine."— 
2 Tim. 4:3. 



R939 : page 1 

THE WORK AND THE WORKERS. 

Zealous Brethren and Sisters in every 
direction are seizing opportunities and devising 
plans for the work outlined in the 
"View" of MAY TOWER. One Sister here, 
went forth filled with zeal and encouraged 
by Bro. Adamson's success, and her first 
day's labor was very successful: She took 
thirty-one orders for the paper bound 
DAWN. Others, in various quarters, have 
varying success, proportionate generally to 
their strictness in following the plans suggested 
in the May View. We suggest that 
all who are out at work would do well to 
read, yes, study that advice carefully and 
try it. 

While many can use the Contents Circulars 
to good advantage, the majority of 
those who are meeting with the greatest 
success, find it best not to leave a circular 



and call later, but to take a couple of clean 
circulars in their hand (along with the 
sample books, a blank memorandum book 
and a pencil). Introduce yourself as The 
Representative of that wonderful book, 
which is making such a stir everywhere. 
Hand the lady or gentleman of the house 
one of the circulars, and pointing to the 

R940 : page 1 

pink slip on it ask them to read it, (or 
read it to them,) saying that it will introduce 
you and your business most quickly. 
Then proceed to talk of the book— its 
character as a faithful Bible exponent 
and antidote to Infidelity— its rapid sale 
—the absolute necessity that all should 
possess the very knowledge this book affords, 
in order to be released from present 
skepticism, or protected from its baneful 
influence in days to come, when it will 
become even more wide-spread and popular 
than now, catching specially the young 
minds, the rising generation. 

You should, first of all, see for yourself 
that the book does this. Note the first 
three chapters, how they in simple language 
which the humblest may understand 
point out the fact of a great Creator and 
the proofs that the Bible is his revelation 
of himself and his plans. 

This done, what could be more convincing 
to the Bible student, (whether he be 
full of trust, or full of doubts, concerning 
its inspiration) than the harmonious presentation 
of the great fundamental teachings 
of the Bible which chapters IV. and 
onward present. Other books attack infidelity 
and fight it vigorously, yet leave 
the stumbling stones which caused the infidelity 
unremoved. This book does its 
work in an opposite manner and with 
much greater success. It simply disarms 
infidelity by showing that though men 
have stumbled, it has been over misconceptions 
of God's plan, and that the Bible 
reveals a plan of God now in progress 
which SATISFIES REASON and harmonizes 
known facts, as nothing else would do. 
This is therefore the best antidote for infidelity 
known to us, and we ask, whether 
you know of a better. 

And this is the line of argument to use 
in canvassing, because though few would 
confess it, nearly all nominal Christian 



people nurse their skeptical thoughts in 
secret, and really long for the firm foundation 
for faith and trust which an appreciation 
of the ransom and its results, Restitution, 
etc., alone can give. 

Bro. Adamson still continues to lead 
all others, though some are following his 
method and success closely. Brothers 
Van der Ahe, Cain, Grable, Hughes, and 
Sisters Raynor and Vogel and others are 
doing remarkably well, and we trust that 
before next month many others will be 
doing as much or more. 

We have been unable to fill orders very 
promptly of late, because our bindery 
could turn out only about 300 copies per 
day; but now this is bettered, so that we 
can supply 600 to 700 per day and increase 
it. So let the orders come, and let 
the glad tidings spread, and let the people 
be fed, to the praise of our Head— Amen. 



R937 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

Among the questions of the hour awakened 
by the more vigorous independent 
thought and increase of knowledge of our 
day, is what is known as The Land Question. 
Briefly stated the question is: Can 
one man rightfully hold thousands of acres 
more than he can or does use, while his 
brother man who desires to use land can 
obtain none without paying a speculative 
price for it, which in many cases he cannot 
do, if he would? 

Going back, we inquire: Who held the 
original right, title and claim to earth as 
a whole with all its privileges, rain, sunshine, 
air, water and land. All must admit 
that God, the Creator, owned it all; 
and he gave the control of it to our father 
Adam for his use and the use of all his 
children. So then every foot of land is 
God's property and men are merely granted 
the privilege of using it, and not of hoarding 
it for speculative purposes. Surely no 
one could claim that the heavenly owner 
had given him a right to appropriate that 
which others have need of, and which he 
does not need. 

This principle God laid down clearly 
in his dealings with Israel. His arrangement 



with them in giving them the land 
of Canaan, was on the principle of a lease 
and not of ownership of the land. It was 
to be a perpetual lease, subject to certain 
conditions, one of which was, that they 
must not work the land to death (as because 
of a violation of other parts of the law, 
the reservation of vast parks, etc., etc., the 
tenantry of Ireland are obliged to do, 
bringing on repeatedly failure of crops and 
famine). When God brought the tribes 
into Canaan he divided to each a portion 
according to their numbers and requirements; 
and another of the conditions of 
their lease was, that though they might 
trade with each other and thus be hindered 
from sloth, indolence, and lack of healthful 
ambition, yet they must not permanently 
take advantage one of another, so as to 
create class distinctions, making a permanently 
poor class and a permanently wealthy 
class, as we see it in Europe to-day, and 
as we see that time would bring about in 
America. 

To keep this equilibrium, God arranged 
that he would lease them the land for only 
fifty years at a time. They might treat 
the land as their own, buying and selling 
as their changing circumstances might 
require for fifty years, but at the end of 
that lease all title reverted back to God, 
the owner, who then gave it again as at 
first on another fifty years' lease to the 
same families, or their representatives 
according to their number and needs. 
This fiftieth year of restitution was known 
to the Jews as the Year of Jubilee: and 
concerning it God's regulations were as 
follows: "In the year of Jubilee ye shall 
return every man unto his possession. 
And if thou sell aught unto thy neighbor, 
or buyest aught of thy neighbor's hand ye 
shall not oppress one another: [but] according 
to the number of years after the 
jubilee thou shalt buy of thy neighbor and 
according to the number of years of the 
fruits, he shall sell unto thee: According 
to the multitude of the years [to the next 
jubilee] thou shalt increase the price, and 
according to the fewness of years thou 
shalt diminish the price of it." (Lev. 25:13-16.) 
These are exactly the terms of 
a lease. And the ground and reason for 
this arrangement is specified in a succeeding 
verse (v. 23). "The land shall not be 
sold forever: FOR THE LAND IS MINE; for 



ye are strangers [without ownership] and 
sojourners [tenants] with me." 

While this Jubilee had a typical lesson 
as a prophecy of the Millennial age, "the 
times of restitution of all things" (Acts 3:21), 
yet it had as well a practical blessing 
in it for the Jew: and experience will yet 
prove to the world the wisdom and necessity 
of some such arrangement. Not until 
now, could this necessity be so fully appreciated 
for various reasons. The world for 
several hundred years has found a vent for 
its rapidly growing population in emigration 
to America, Australia, etc., whose 
millions of acres attracted many of the 
most ambitious and enterprising from 
crowded Europe, drawing attention and 
reflection away from the fact that an 
aristocratic class, styled the "Nobility," 
had gradually acquired, some by fair and 
some by foul means, far more than their 
proper proportion of God's land, which 
under present arrangement is really the 
basis of all wealth; while others are forced 

R938 : page 1 

by circumstances to be, and to continue, a 
pauper class, with but slight hope of bettering 
their condition, except by emigration, 
because the wealthy aristocracy holds the 
basis of wealth— the land. 

The time was, that this class did not 
think or hope beyond the liberties and 
stations of their fathers, but not so now; 
now men are thinking vigorously and 
independently— too much so, often extravagantly 
and foolishly, to their own injury 
and to the injury of the cause they seek to 
serve. They are no longer willing to be 
dumb driven cattle, but now demand that 
whatever inequalities the wrong ideas of 
the past have produced, these shall not go 
on increasing, but that the masses shall so 
rule and legislate that, while individuality 
shall remain and individual energy and 
ability have its reward, the conditions 
which produced and perpetuated class 
distinctions shall give place. 

In America where the people rule themselves, 
the laws are being examined and 
overhauled as the best and surest means 
of preventing the evils so manifest in the 
Landlord system of Europe. They see 
that here as there, land is at present the 
basis of wealth, because it is a necessity 



whose value increases with every birth, 
and with every shipload of immigrants. 
They see that present laws and arrangements 
are favorable to land speculation, 
favorable to the acquisition of immense 

R938 : page 2 

tracts of land, the rentals of which may at 
no distant day be as onerous and burdensome 
to the people here, as they are to-day 
in Ireland and Europe. 

The sentiment of the people cries out 
for a wholesome law on this subject, to 
secure to every man an opportunity of a 
share in God's land under his lease. Admitting 
the truth of the principle that 
wealth should be represented in buildings, 
factories, etc., in personal property, representing 
labor, and not in land, which 
is God's and which is given us all to use, 
the question arises: How can this truth 
be gradually approached, so as to work 
the least rupture of society, and the least 
possible injury to those who, under existing 
laws, have and hold title to land as 
representing labor, or wealth? 

Complex and almost unanswerable as 
this question at first sight appears, we are 
living in a time— "the time of the end," 
when knowledge was to be increased (Dan. 12:4.) 
—when we should expect the answer 
to come from some quarter; and sure 
enough, it has come. So far as we know, 
the answer does not come from one of the 
"saints," (We know nothing of the man's 
religious views,) nor should we expect it 
from a saint. It should come from one 
of the world, whose time and talent would 
be absorbed in presenting this truth to the 
world. The saints minister specially to 
the saints, and in spiritual things mainly, 
and would have neither the time nor inclination 
to forsake their higher work for 
the "body of Christ"— the Church, to 
take hold of any of the various reforms of 
the hour among and specially bearing upon 
the World in this dawn of the Millennium. 
It is proper, however, that all the 
saints have right ideas on all the living 
questions of the hour; that he who sees 
the great truths of God's plan may at least 
not oppose by word or deed the grand 
outworkings of that plan in any direction. 
And though the holders of these general 
truths may not appreciate spiritual truths, 



in fact cannot do so, since they must be 
spiritually discerned, yet we should remember 
the words of the Apostle, "He 
that is spiritual judgeth all things, yet he 
himself is judged of no man." (1 Cor. 2:15.) 
The saints can understand others, 
while others cannot comprehend the saints. 
We see the plan from God's standpoint, 
and act our part intelligently, while others 
are unwittingly used in its accomplishment, 
and ignorant both of our interest 
and co-operation. 

The answer to the question to which we 
refer has awakened much opposition on 
the part of many intelligent people, some 
of whom do not understand clearly either 
the question or its proposed solution, but 
hastily jump at the conclusion that it is a 
communistic idea of dividing all the property 
of the world alike among all the 
people. This they rightly conclude would 
be useless; because if divided in the morning, 
some would be paupers before night, 
having sold their all for some momentary 
gratification. But this is not at all the 
plan proposed. 

The answer to this land question— the 
remedy proposed for bringing about gradually 
a recognition of the fact that God is 
the real Landlord and leases it to each 
man in such proportion, as he can and 
shall use it, and thus divert capital from 
land, where it is burdensome upon the 
masses, into manufacturing, building, etc., 
where it will benefit all, by giving increased 
employment to laborers— is advanced 
and championed by Mr. Henry 
George, of New York. 

A brief synopsis of this proposed scheme 
of remedial legislation and its effects, as 
we foresee them, is as follows: The plan 
is to assess all general taxes on the basis 
of land holdings, at market value. This 
would be placing the responsibility and 
expense of government and improvements 
upon those claiming and holding the land 
whose value is improved; while the man who 
has none of the land would have no tax. The 
effect of this legislation would be, first, to 
discourage investments in land, except for 
actual use; secondly, to induce all who 
have surplus or idle lands to sell them; 
thirdly, since much of the surplus land 
would be for sale, it would stimulate the 
sale of building lots and small farms, to 
those who cannot now purchase, by 



reducing values of unimproved lands and 
inducing present holders to sell on long 
time and low interest. This increase of 
land and home owners would give additional 
stability to the government which 
protects them, and of which they are factors. 
The capital taken out of land would 
seek investment in building, manufacturing, 
and kindred enterprises, which would 
not only tend to increase the demand for 
labor, but also to cheapen rents and bring 
more of the luxuries of life within the reach 
of the "lower classes," which it would 
thus help gradually to lift to the level of 
manhood, by stimulating in all, the laudable 
ambition to be in every way the 
equals of their fellow men. 

This would not, as some have asserted, 
put the brunt of all the taxes upon the 
farmers and let the owners of small city 
lots go practically free of tax; for the market 
value of the land— what the bare land 
would sell for— would determine the tax, 
and not its size. Thus a city lot on a 
business street might be worth ten thousand 
dollars, and a good sized farm might in 
some places be worth only one thousand 
dollars. In this illustration the city lot 
would pay ten times as much as the farm. 

With most of farms and most of city 
properties the taxes would vary little from 
present rates; the exceptions would be in 
the large increase of the taxes upon "wild 
lands" and upon unimproved city property. 
At present, the man of enterprise 
who invests his wealth in a handsome 
building is taxed every year for having 
thus given employment to artisans and 
helped to beautify his vicinity and thus 
increase the value of his neighbor's unimproved 
property, which pays little tax, 
benefits no one but the owner, and is a 
drawback to the general community. 

If we see this to be a correct principle, 
it will not do to oppose the right. What 
if you have some "wild lands" or unimproved 
town lots, which you bought on 
speculation, whose value would be injured, 
you should be glad to share a part in forwarding 
a general good, even if it costs 
something. And if you are one of the 
saints, while you cannot neglect your work 
to forward this cause, but must wait on 
your special ministry— preaching the glad 
tidings, yet you certainly must not oppose 
any feature of right. Remember, too, 



that while the "little flock" is in a special 
sense "The King's own," and while he 
in a special sense is the "Captain of our 
salvation," yet in another sense there are 
many troops and divisions, in the great 
army by which present arrangements and 
institutions are to be overthrown.— 
Rev. 19:15-21. 

But will this solution of the question be 
accepted and acted upon by the people? 
Will this great change, this peaceable social 
revolution, accomplish the object desired? 
By no means! Those whose selfish 
interests are at stake will misrepresent 
the matter: men of wealth and influence 
will jump at the conclusion that it is a 
form of communism and anarchy, the secular 
and religious press will make light of 
it, and the majority of the people of influence 
and culture will pay no attention 
to it, thinking it a wild fanatical dream. 

The result will be, that this like other 
safety-valves of legislative reform, will be 
closed tight, until finally the pent up force 
of the lower stratum of society will upheave 
and shatter the entire social structure in a 
reign of terror and anarchy which Scripture 
foretells, in which all bounds will be 
passed, leveling all claims to land ownership 
and all values of every sort, as portrayed 
in MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., 
Chapter XV. From our standpoint, therefore, 
we see it would be the part of wisdom 
for all to come into harmony with 
this new land movement; for the holding 
of vast tracts of land away from others 
is certainly contrary to the spirit of the 
dawning Day. Whether Mr. George and 
his co-laborers succeed or not, landlordism 
is sure to go down under the reign of 
Immanuel. 

A ROMAN CATHOLIC PRIEST 

known as Dr. McGlynn, has become an 
earnest advocate of Mr. George's land 
theory, and though opposed by Archbishop 
Corrigan, silenced from preaching and 
ordered to Rome, he has thus far not only 
defied and resisted papal interference, but, 
having the sympathy of many Catholics, 
he bids fair to create a wide split in the 
Church of Rome. Dr. McGlynn seems 
to be an honest man and a thinker, and 
the more he thinks and reasons as at present, 
the wider will be the breach between 



him and the Pope. The following Press 
dispatch is probably truthfully reported:— 

R939 : page 2 

St. Louis, May 16.— Dr. McGlynn was received 
by a large audience last evening when he came to 
the front of the Opera house stage to deliver his 
lecture, "The cross of the new crusade." From an 
interview it is understood that he will never go to 
Rome to recant, even if excommunicated. Dr. McGlynn 
outlines his faith as follows: "I would as 
soon go to Constantinople for my politics as to Rome. 
I believe the teachings of the church to be infallible, 
but the infallibility of popes, prefects, propagandas 
and bishops is quite another thing. 

"Galileo discovered a great truth, but the popes 
and prefects denied it. This did not make it less a 
truth. The inquisition tried to convince him that 
right was wrong, but he explained his truth and refused 
to believe it aught else than a truth. Then 
he was cast into prison, and, being an old man, he 
soon grew tired of prison life and after four days 
he recanted. He knew he was right, but he got 
down on his knees and perjured himself like a 
gentleman. Afterwards the heads of the church 
were compelled to acknowledge that Galileo was 
right and they were wrong. What Galileo ought to 
have done was to go to jail and rot there. If they 
had said: 'You will die without the sacrament of 
the church unless you relent,' he should have said: 
I want none of your sacrament under such conditions; 
I will die without it' Galileo was right and 
the world at the time was wrong. We are now 
right on the Land question and the world is wrong. 
We are not revolutionists; we are not going to hurt 
anybody. We are trying to secure equal justice to 
all men by a peaceful political revolution." 

The Church of Rome has long boasted 
of her invincibility, and that her ministers 
were obedient and her doctrines one. 
That this has been so in the past is largely 
owing to the superstitious hold she has 
had of her subjects; but she cannot expect 
to be free in the coming years as in the 
past. While other sects and systems are 
tottering and falling under the weight of 
their errors, she too must go to fragments. 
She has had many questions to settle and 
has settled many— right and wrong— but 
in this "Evil Day" questions are arising 
which cannot be straddled, and which 
mean disaster to her system, whichever 
side she takes. Two of these questions 
are now before her, the Land question and 
the Labor organization question. The 



Labor problem confronts the Church of 

Rome from the fact that in her desire to 

hold her subjects completely, mind and 

body, through the Confessional, she forbids 

their joining any secret society whose 

affairs might not be freely submitted to 

her priests for their approval. The 

"Knights of Labor" organization has enrolled 

hundreds of thousands of Catholics 

among its members who are bound to act 

according to the commands of the order, 

irrespective of the opinions of priests and 

confessors. Many Catholic Bishops saw 

this to be a question vital to the control 

of Papacy over her subjects: If she sanctions 

liberty of conscience at all, it becomes 

the entering wedge for full liberty 

of conscience on every subject, and hence 

the end of her power. On the other hand, 

she dreads to force an issue with so large 

a number of her subjects on a point which 

they feel is all-important, essential to their 

future earthly well-being. But advised by 

American bishops who appreciate the influence 

and strength of the Labor movement 

in this country, the Pope has recently 

consented to recognize Catholics holding 

membership among the Knights of 

Labor. 

This is a great step, a great concession, 
and is being interpreted as expressive of a 
great sympathy between the Church of 
Rome and the "lower classes"; as indicating 
that she is championing the cause of 
Labor as opposed to Capital. Not so, 
however. She more than any other system 
on earth has been the foe of liberty of conscience, 
and it is her own boast that she 
changes not. This concession to the K. 
of L. is not of choice: it is wrung from 
her. She more than any government on 
earth, is dependent on the servility, unmanliness, 
and mental bondage of the 
people for her influence and continued 
control over them. Hence in the struggle 
of this "Day of Trouble" she will be found 
on the side of monarchy, capital and oppression, 
notwithstanding the fact that the 
masses of her subjects are among the poor. 
She well knows that political liberty is a 
sure forerunner of general freedom of conscience, 
and her chief concern is to keep 
her shackles on men's consciences. Her 
interests bind her to support the thrones, 
and the interests of the thrones of earth 
will bind them to the Church of Rome 



and all others favorable to their maintenance 
—and this in the end will also include 
Protestant "orthodoxy." 

We say, then, that the approval of the 
Knights of Labor organization by the 
Church of Rome will surely not stand; it 
will ere long be revoked. Is this a prophecy 
on our part? No; it is but the 
reading in the light of the past history of 
that apostate church, of the prophetic statement 
of Revelation 19:19, which clearly 
shows that in this struggle the Beast [symbol 
of the Church of Rome] will be found 
on the side of, and banded with, the 
"Kings of the earth" and their armies. 

The Land question she hopes to nip in 
the bud by squelching Dr. McGlynn, one of 
the leaders; but so far he gives evidence 
of being of the sort willing to be martyred 
rather than deny an important truth. The 
above report of Mr. McGlynn's sentiments 
shows him to be a veritable Luther, 
raised up by other issues. Here seems to 
be the entering wedge of a great trouble 
in the Church of Rome, represented in 
Rev. 16:10,11. The darkness represents 
the perplexity rapidly coming over 
that hierarchy; and the gnawing of their 
tongues represents the painful controversies 
and contradictions one of another by 
those who act as Papacy's tongues. Mr. 
McGlynn has already contradicted Archbishop 
Corrigan and has cited the utterances 
of other tongues of Papacy, other 
writers and teachers honored in the past, 

[Continued on Seventh Page.] 

R939 : page 7 

View From The Tower— Concluded. 



to support him. In contradicting and 
controverting Dr. McGlynn, the Archbishop 
has been obliged also to call in 
question the testimony of records and 
writers long regarded by Catholics as 
sacred. Thus the gnawing of tongues in 
pain begins. 

If Dr. McGlynn will stand firm to the 
sentiments above quoted, he will surely go 
farther. He states his belief in the infallibility 
of the Church of Rome, but not in 
the infallibility of popes and bishops. This 



means that he accepts as infallible only 
the utterances of the great Councils of the 
Church of Rome, if we understand him. 
But if this be his position, he must go farther 
and deny the infallibility of Councils; 
for was it not the Grand Council of the 
Church of Rome which in 1869, sitting in 
the Vatican at Rome, declared for the first 
time the Infallibility of the Popes? So, 
then, Dr. McGlynn must come to the 
conclusion reached by unprejudiced, thinking 
men long since, that neither the 
Church of Rome nor its popes are beyond 
the possibility of error— infallible. 

The jangle and turmoil, political and 
religious, which is preparing for the world 
and coming from every quarter, is agonizing 
indeed to those who see not that by 
such means God is working out a great 
blessing, preparing for the permanent 
overthrow of error and wrong on every 
subject and in every quarter, and the establishment 
of the Kingdom for which we 
have long prayed: "Thy Kingdom come, 
Thy will be done on earth as it is done 
in heaven." 

In the little interval of peace before the 
storm gets under way, every saint should 
esteem it a privilege to share in the great 
work of the hour— the sealing of the servants 
of God (not the servants of sects), 

R939 : page 8 

the Israelites indeed, in whom is no guile, 

in their foreheads— providing such with 

the intelligent, intellectual, Scriptural understanding 

of God's plan, which alone 

will enable them to "stand" and not "fall" 

in this evil day. And if, while seeking 

out and sealing these, you are able to put 

into the hands of the deluded, Satan-blinded 

world some of the eye-salve of 

truth, you should do so— "doing good unto 

all men as you have opportunity, especially 

to the house-hold of faith." 

Surely those who are getting "The Plan 
of the Ages" (M. DAWN. VOL. I.) into the 
hands of the people so generally, are doing 
just such a work— sealing the saints, 
blessing many, and honoring our Father. 
He that honoreth God shall be honored. 
He that watereth others shall be watered. 



R940 : page 3 
CLEAR THE WAY. 

"Men of thought, be up and stirring 

Night and day. 
Sow the seed, withdraw the curtain, 

Clear the way. 
Men of action, aid and cheer them 

As you may. 
There's a fount about to stream; 
There's a light about to beam; 
There's a warmth about to glow; 
There's a flower about to blow; 
There's a midnight blackness changing 

Into gray. 
Men of thought and men of action, 

Clear the way. 

"Once the welcome light has broken, 

Who shall say 
What the unimagined glories 

Of the day? 
What the evil that shall perish 

In its ray? 
Aid the dawning, tongue and pen; 
Aid it, hopes of honest men; 
Aid it, paper, aid it, type; 
Aid it, for the hour is ripe: 
And our earnest must not slacken 

Into play. 
Men of thought, and men of action, 

Clear the way! 

"Lo, a cloud's about to vanish 
From the day; 

Lo, the right's about to conquer- 
Clear the way! 

Many a brazen wrong to crumble 
Into clay. 

With that right shall many more 

Enter smiling at the door; 

With the giant wrong shall fall 

Many others, great and small, 

That for ages long have held us 
For their prey. 

Men of thought, and men of action, 
Clear the way!" 

—Charles Mackay. 



R940 : page 3 

"MORE THAN THESE?" 



During the three and a half years of our 
Lord Jesus' ministry, the disciples who had 
sacrificed reputation, business, etc., to devote 
time and energy to heralding Messiah's 
presence and the establishment of his 
kingdom, had necessarily crude ideas regarding 
the manner and time of their 
Master's exaltation, and their exaltation 
with him as joint-rulers. It was quite 
sufficient, too, that they should faithfully 
take each step as it became due; hence 
the Master told them not all that he knew, 
but little by little as they could bear it- 
saying to them, "I have many things to 
tell you, but ye cannot bear them now." 

Who can tell how great was their disappointment, 
when they saw him whose 
kingdom and glory they had been declaring, 
ruthlessly murdered, and that as a 
felon. What though they knew him to be 
a "good man, mighty in word and deed," 
falsely accused and wrongfully crucified, 
this did not alter the fact that their long 
cherished national hopes of a Jewish king 
who would restore their nation to influence 
and power, were dashed suddenly. Yes, 
and their own individual hopes, ambitions 
and air-castles of important offices on the 
right and left of this king, in whose service 
they had left all else to engage— these 
were all suddenly and ruthlessly demolished 
by the unfavorable turn which matters 
had suddenly taken in the crucifixion 
of the expected king. 

Well did the Master know how desolate 
and aimless and perplexed they would feel 
at and after his crucifixion, for thus it 
was written by the Prophet: "I will 
smite the Shepherd, and the sheep will be 
scattered." And during the forty days 
between his resurrection and ascension, it 
was therefore his chief concern to gather 
them again and to re-establish their faith 
in him as the long-looked-for Messiah, by 
proving to them the fact of his resurrection, 
that he that was dead had come to 
life again, and that since his resurrection, 
though retaining the same individuality, 
he was "changed," and was no longer a 
human but a spiritual being, with all that 
this "change" implied, illustrating it by 
his appearing or manifesting himself in 
different forms and then vanishing from 
their sight. He also corrected their misapprehensions 
and kept them from going 
back to former occupations, by making 



them further acquainted with their future 
work. 

It is interesting to note how our Lord 
gave this instruction— not all at once, 
hastily, but little by little, and in such 
manner as to make the deepest impressions. 
Though we know of only seven appearings 
during those forty days, and those but 
brief, we cannot doubt that he was often 
invisibly present with them, hearing them 
express their doubts and fears and hopes 
and wishes, yet manifesting himself to 
their sight only when he had some lesson 
to impart which would best be given in 
that way. 

He broke the news of his resurrection 
gradually to them through the Marys, to 
whom he first revealed himself— women 
naturally catching more quickly than men 
the truth in such a matter. Then he overtook 

R941 : page 3 

two of the sad, downcast disciples 

as they walked into the country, and as a 

friend inquired the cause of their trouble 

and despondency. Their hearts overflowed 

at the touch of his sympathy, and 

they told him of their Master who had 

been crucified three days before. They 

told how they had been with him for over 

three years, having left former employment 

and made themselves foolish in the 

eyes of their fellow men by believing that 

Jesus of Nazareth was indeed God's anointed, 

mentioned in the prophecies as 

the one who should re-establish their nation, 

and finally rule and bless the world. 

Ah! said they sadly, this is what we "had 

hoped," but these hopes, and our own personal 

ambitions, founded on his promises 

that we should reign with him, are all suddenly 

dashed. We cannot tell you how 

we feel— we have no heart, no ambition 

left for anything. After having such great 

expectations, the ordinary things of life 

seem common and distasteful. Our Master 

seems to have deceived both himself 

and us, for he was truly a good man, 

"mighty in word and deed before God 

and all the people." 

Then the stranger preached them a stirring 
sermon from the prophecies, showing 
them that the very things which had so 
disheartened them were the things which 
the prophets had foretold concerning the 



true Messiah,— that before he could rule 
and bless and lift up Israel and the world, 
he must first redeem them with his own 
life from the curse of death, which came 
upon all through Adam, and that afterward, 
raised to life and glory by Jehovah, 
their Master would fulfill all that is written 
by the prophets of glory and honor, 
as well as shame and death. 

A wonderful preacher and a wonderful 
sermon was that: It started new ideas and 
opened new expectations and hopes. Years 
afterward they remembered it, and drew 
strength and hope from it, and said, "Did 
not our hearts burn within us while he 
talked with us by the way and while he 
opened to us the Scriptures." 

Again he appeared to the disciples, except 
Thomas, assembled in an upper room. 
And again, Thomas having said he would 
not believe unless the Master should appear 
and show the nail prints and the spear 
mark, our Lord did appear just so, and 
showed that he could as easily appear so, 
as in any other form, and that he wanted 
to meet every reasonable doubt with satisfactory 
proof. Yet he also showed Thomas, 
and all, that he was no longer flesh, 
but spirit, by vanishing from their sight. 

Five weeks after the crucifixion, when 
the excitement of that event and of the 
appearances of the risen Lord had passed 
off, the practical questions of life began 
to present themselves to the disciples. 
They gradually settled down to the conviction 
that though somehow God had 
been doing something with them, and had 
used them somewhat in his service, yet 
that whatever it accomplished, that work 
was at an end. Peter, the oldest, and 
James and John, the youngest of the 
disciples, had formerly been partners in 
the fishing business, and had left their 
boats and nets at the Master's call to become 
"fishers of men." These at Peter's 
suggestion formed their partnership anew, 
taking with them Thomas, and Nathanael 
(he whom Jesus termed "an Israelite indeed, 
in whom there was no guile," who 
though not one of the apostles was one of 
the "brethren"), and two other of the 
disciples, probably Andrew and Philip. 

They knew not what a turning point 
that was in their lives. Hear Peter, usually 
a leader and spokesman among them, 
address the others, saying: Brethren, we 



must do something, we cannot spend the 
remainder of life as we have recently been 
doing. We followed the Master, and taught 
from city to city that the King had come 
and that the kingdom of God was at hand, 
to be set up in glory and power. And 
though we still have evidence that our 
Master was Jehovah's special messenger, 
and that divine favor still rests upon him 
and has raised him from the dead, yet, 
after all that has happened, we certainly 
cannot go about now with the same message 
—we would be adjudged insane. From 
the four manifestations of our Lord made 
to us shortly after his resurrection, we got 
new hopes and thoughts, and wondered 
whether he would not after all somehow 
continue the work. But still, all things 
move on as usual, and we see no sign of 
his kingdom, and he has not even appeared 
to any of us for a long time now. So my 
counsel is that we seven, bound by unusual 
sympathy, become partners in the fish 
business, and in some degree bury our 
hopes of kingdom honors. And they all 
assented. 

Arrangements made, boats, nets, etc., 
procured, they make a fresh start at the 
old business. Who can doubt that the 
Lord was among them often, whilst they 
were preparing, and that he had all things 
arranged which would make this a valuable 
lesson. If they should have great success 
and become swallowed up with interest in 
the business, they would soon be unfit for 
the higher service, yet if they should have 
no success, it would seem like forcing them, 
so the Lord adopted a plan which taught 
them a lesson which he often teaches all 
his followers, viz., that the success or failure 
of our efforts in any direction he can 
control if he please. 

They toiled all night and caught not a 
fish and began to feel disheartened. A 
stranger on shore calls to them to know 
of their success. Poor success! they answer, 
Caught nothing! Ah! says the stranger, 
now cast your net on the other side 
the boat and try. No use, stranger, answers 
one, we have tried both sides all night 
long, and if there were fish on one side, 
there would be on the other. But we will 
try again and let you see. They did so 
and got an immense haul. It is strange, 
said some! but the quick and impressible 
John at once got the correct idea, and 



said, Brethren, the Lord only could do 
this; don't you remember the feeding of 
the multitudes, etc.? That must be the 
Lord on shore and this is another way, 
"another form" and time, that he has 
chosen to manifest himself to us. Don't 
you remember too that it was just so when 
the Lord first called us? Then, too, we 
had toiled all night and caught nothing 
until he told us, "Let down your nets for 
a draught" (Luke 5:4-9). Yes, surely 
that is the Lord, notwithstanding we do 
not recognize him by his appearance and 
form, since his resurrection. He now appears 
in a variety of forms, but we know 
each time, that it is he, by some peculiar 
circumstance like this. 

And when they got to shore, they found 
that Jesus had bread as well as fish, and 
learned the lesson, that under his direction 
and care, they would not be left to 
starve, because he "knoweth that ye have 
need of these things." They did not ask 
him, if he were the Lord; for on this as on 
other occasions, the eyes of their understanding 
being opened, they knew him, 
though he had "another form," different 
from the one they had been used to seeing 
before he died.— John 21:12. 

This was the Lord's opportunity to impress 
a lesson upon them all, so specially 
addressing Peter, the leader, pointing to 
the fish, and boats, and nets, he said, 
Simon Peter, lovest thou me more than 
these?* You left these things once to 
follow me and be a fisher of men; have 
you changed your mind, Peter? Are you 
sure which you love most— me and my 
service, or this business to which you have 
returned? When our Lord asked this the 
third time, it began to imply to poor Peter 
that the tendency with him was to love 
and serve business more than Christ. And 
he no doubt remembered also the three 
times he had denied the Lord. Peter was 
grieved; he felt remorse, and no wonder, 
but he immediately threw himself upon 
the Lord's mercy and answered, "Lord, 
thou knowest all things," thou knowest 
my weaknesses, yet "Thou knowest that I 
love thee." Then said Jesus, Feed my 
sheep and lambs; make that, not fishing, 
your business, Peter. Peter heeded and 
left the fishing business, and while feeding 
the flock over whom God had made him 
an overseer, proved by his faithfulness even 



unto death in his service, that he did really 
and truly love the Lord more than the 
fishing business, and that his love was not 
in word only, but in deed and in truth. 

Had Peter continued in the fishing business 
and neglected the sheep and the 
lambs, which the great Shepherd had asked 
him to seek out and feed, would his actions 
not have contradicted his reply to our 
Lord's question— "Thou knowest that I 
love thee" above all? This would have 
been loving in word, but not in deed and 
in truth. (See 1 Jno. 3:18.) Had this 
been the course of the apostles, had they 
loved the Lord with their mouths, or professedly 
only, and not acted in harmony 
with their profession, we know they would 
not have been acceptable as members of 
the body of Christ; they would have been 
"castaways" from the heavenly calling. 
Called, but not faithful to the conditions 
of the call, they would not be among the 
chosen. Had their love for the Lord been 
overcome by their love for business, or 



*Some have supposed that our Lord's question referred 
to the other disciples standing about— that he 
asked Peter whether he loved him more than the 
other disciples loved him. But such a supposition 
is quite unreasonable. Our Lord would not ask 
Peter a question which he could not answer; for 
how could Peter tell the depth of love which his 
fellow disciples bore for the Master. Neither would 
our Lord ask a question so impolite, for it would 
certainly be very unkind to ask one friend among 
others, whether he loved more than they. And furthermore 
the structure of the Greek indicates that the 
comparison is with impersonal, inanimate things; 
such as nets, boats, etc., would be. 

R941 : page 4 

honor, or family pride, or love of peace 

and ease, they would have been "drowned," 

or "choked," and would have become 

unfruitful. And what would thus 

have been true of them, applies with equal 

force to us who are now living in the 

world, the consecrated, anointed representatives 

of the Shepherd, to seek and feed 

his scattered and starving sheep. 

R942 : page 4 



The Lord tells us that he is seeking a 
choice little flock to be his Bride, to be 
with him and to behold and share his glory; 
and he tells us the character of the 
class he seeks, and that he will have no 
others. He tells us plainly (Matt. 10:34-38.) 
that such as love business, pleasure, 
self, ease, honor of men, or family, or even 
life itself, more than they love him, so 
that they would not sacrifice more for him 
and his word than for these, are NOT WORTHY 
to be of the class he is now selecting. 

Let us be very much in earnest, dear 
brethren and sisters, fellow racers for the 
first grand prize. We cannot serve 
both God and mammon; we will please 
neither, if we try it. We will by a half-hearted 
service fail even to please the world, 
get its chief favors; and more than all, 
surely the Bridegroom would accept of and 
crown as an overcomer and his joint-heir, 
no such faint-heart. Let us not deceive 
ourselves; that is love in truth, which works 
by deeds and sacrifices, and consists not of 
professions of love merely. Let us each, 
then, scan carefully his own life. Let each 
ask himself how his life must seem to the 
Master's eye. What does he who reads 
the thoughts and intents of the heart see 
to be your chiefest love, your chiefest aim 
in life? The world or even loving brethren, 
not knowing the heart, might misjudge 
you, but the Lord knows, and you 
should also know— whether you love him 
and his will more than self, family, business, 
etc. Let us not deceive ourselves, 
unless our love is active and full of that 
joy which esteems it a privilege to bear 
the cross in following Christ, it is not the 
supreme motive of our hearts. 

Do not dodge the question, it is all important 
—answer the Lord's question: 
"Lovest thou me more than these?" And 
if you answer with Peter, "Yea, Lord," 
then like Peter obey the call, Feed my 
sheep and lambs, rather than the calls of 
business, the world, the flesh, and the devil 
to selfishness and ease. So, like Peter, you 
shall be accounted meet [worthy] for the 
inheritance of the saints in light, and to 
be confessed by the Master as his fellow 
overcomer and joint-heir, before his Father 
and the holy messengers.— Col. 1:12; 
Rev. 3:5. 

Do not offer as an excuse for not feeding 
the sheep, that there are others more 



capable of feeding them, and you prefer 

to let them do it. That is not the language 

of love. The loving servant will anxiously 

inquire, Lord, how much can I do? 

Show me how to manage my temporal affairs 

and how to cultivate my one or many 

talents to secure the largest possible results 

in thy service. The Chief Shepherd is responsible, 

and he will see to it that every 

true sheep shall now get the "meat in due 

season," whether you do what you can in 

the service or not. The question is, Will 

you accept of the honor of sacrificing other 

interests in his service to which he thus 

invites you, and thereby prove your love 

for him to be SUPREME, above all other 

loves. He is passing by the great and 

wise and prudent, according to the wisdom 

of this age and is calling to his service 

just such as you (Matt. 11:25). This has 

always been his plan from the first. He 

chooses "babes" who will babble forth the 

truth unceremoniously, to confound the 

wise and great, while, as it is written, "He 

taketh the wise in their own craftiness."— 

ICor. 3:19; Job 5:13. 

The worldly-wise are often ensnared by 
their own boasted wisdom, or rather conceit, 
which from God's standpoint is foolishness. 
So then, no matter how unlearned 
any may be in earthly learning, no matter 
how uncouth in speech and address, no 
matter how many are more able naturally 
to represent the shepherd and call and feed 
the sheep in his name, let each appreciate 
his own privilege of showing his love for 
the shepherd, by laying down time, influence, 
money, yea, life itself, in feeding the 
sheep. Such shall be approved and accepted 
of the Master as his joint-heirs, no 
matter how humble and ignoble and unworthy 
they may be now, in the eyes of 
the world. 

It is thus— in the service of the church, 
our fellow sheep, that we are exhorted by 
the apostle to sacrifice present interests, 
when he says, As Christ laid down his life 
for us, we ought also to lay down our lives 
for the brethren (1 John 3:16). We begin 
laying down life, by laying down luxuries 
and worldly advantages and end the 
service with the actual death of our human 
self. It was to this, the great business of 
life, that Paul exhorted believers to consecrate 
themselves, saying: "I beseech you 
brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye 



present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, 
acceptable unto God."— Rom. 12:1. 

How many of the Lord's professed followers 
are to-day making fishing for earthly 
things of some sort, the chief business 
of life— fishing for money, or influence, or 
a great name, or self-gratification, or some 
thing of the sort— leaving the great work 
which the Master gave all his followers, 
viz., to be fishers of men, feeders of his 
sheep and lambs. 

True, all are not apostles, as Peter, and 
all are not called to such special service, 
as his, requiring all their time. But each 
one is called upon to improve and use 
whatever openings and opportunities he 
does possess in preaching the good tidings. 
The apostle Paul said, we should follow 
his example, which was truly worthy and 
noble; and Peter refers to all the members 
of the body of Christ, as the "Royal 
Priesthood" that "should show forth the 
praises of him who hath called you out of 
darkness into his marvellous light" (1 Pet. 2:9.) 
This should be the chief business 
of all the saints. To this work we were 
anointed as members of the body of Christ 
by the same spirit which anointed our 
Head, and for the same purpose. See 
what was the purpose of his anointing, and 
learn therefrom the purpose of your own 
anointing under him. It is written of 
him, and of us as members of him, "The 
spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because 
he hath anointed me TO PREACH THE GOSPEL 
to the meek."— Isa. 61:1; Luke 4:18. 

We have no hesitation in saying that 
every member of the anointed body of 
Christ will be a preacher of the gospel, 
though probably few of them will be of 
those known as "clergymen." The fact 
is, that those who have the truth and are 
governed by its spirit, could not avoid 
preaching as much as they have opportunity. 
Such will not need pay (neither 
money, honor, nor flattery), as inducement 
to enter the ministry (service) of the 
gospel, but would be glad to preach regardless 
of these and even at a loss of honor, 
money, etc., like Paul counting it joy 
to be considered worthy to suffer loss for 
the truth's sake, and to be God's ambassadors. 
The spirit of the truth had taken 
firm hold of some in the early church 
whom the Apostle addressed saying: "Ye 
endured a great fight of afflictions," "Ye 



were made a gazing-stock both by reproaches 
and afflictions," "and took joyfully 
the spoiling of your goods." (Heb. 10:32-34.) 
True, earnest preachers imbued 
with the spirit of the truth were those 
also, mentioned in Acts 8:4. In the 
persecution for the truth they hid not their 
light under a bushel, but openly declared 
the truth; therefore they were scattered 
abroad. But even as exiles, "they went 
everywhere preaching the word." They 
all preached, but seldom did they get a 
chance to preach in a synagogue, and few 
probably had ability for public speaking. 
They preached as Jesus and the disciples 
did, from house to house, or by the wayside, 
wherever they found hungry hearts 
and hearing ears— the "meek." 

Why was it that these and the apostles 
did not say to themselves: We must be 
prudent, and not let it be known that we 
believe this gospel; for we have our business 
and family interests to attend to, and 
if we are zealous for the gospel, it will result 
in breaking up our business prospects, 
and we and our families will be unpopular 
and may be driven from home or cast into 
prison— Why did they not reason thus? 
We answer, because they had the spirit of 
the truth, the holy anointing was on them 
and they delighted to do God's will, and 
to be engaged in his service at any cost. 
Peter and John, when commanded to 
preach this gospel no more, answered, 
"We cannot [help] but speak, the things 
which we have seen and heard" (Acts 4:20). 
Paul tells how the fire of the truth 
and its service was burning in his heart 
and must find vent through his mouth, 
cost it what it might and did, when he 
says: Woe is me [Wretchedly unhappy 
would I be], if I preach not the gospel of 
Christ. To be obliged to keep silent and 
not declare the boundless love and glorious 
plan of God, would have been misery 
indeed to Paul, while he could rejoice 
with joy unspeakable, if permitted to 
preach it, even at the cost of home, comforts, 
fame, honor, wealth and "all things." 

YOUR REASONABLE SERVICE. 

None should gather from the foregoing, 
that God expects the same service from 
each of the consecrated, regardless of talents 
and opportunities. There is just one 



sense in which the same exactly is expected 
of each; that is, each to be accounted 
worthy of joint-heirship with Christ must 
DO WHAT HE CAN. Those who have one 
talent, may do what they can as really and 
truly and as acceptably with God, as those 
who have ten talents, who at most can do 
no more. And none who have consecrated 
all, and who have seen how little their all 
is, in comparison to the favors of God, 
past, present and future, can conscientiously 
offer less than all, the little service they 
can render. 

But some inquire, What can I do? My 
life seems so hemmed in, and my opportunities 
for testifying to the truth and suffering 
for the Master and his word in feeding 
his sheep, seem so small, that I fear I 
am not one of the sacrificers at all. Can 
that be so? Now brother, tell us of your 
case. Well, I am a miner; I work alone 
and have only Sundays and my evenings 
to myself, and my neighbors are ignorant 

R943 : page 4 

and seem irreligious. Very well, begin 
by using the advantages you have, and 
trust God to open larger and wider doors 
of usefulness before you by and by. First 
think over the good tidings of great joy 
yourself, and let it fill and overflow your 
own heart. Then think, how much good 
the joy and peace which you possess would 
do your fellows. Think, how much they 
need it, and how it might lighten and 
sweeten all the future of their lives. Think 
then of the privilege of being God's messenger 
to tell your neighbors of the great 
ransom price given for sin, and the full 
atonement which is made, and the grand 
results to follow, urging them to investigate 
and accept and be reconciled to 
God. Then pray God for wisdom to use 
the privilege he has granted you. By this 
time your heart will be full of love, fervor 
and zeal in your work as God's representative, 
and fear and shame will be cast out 
of your heart. Gradually with study and 
care you will learn to be wise as a serpent, 
as well as harmless as a dove, in presenting 
the truth; and sooner or later you will 
find proof of your ministry (service) being 
acceptable, in the fruits it will bear. Some 
will be interested and hear you gladly, 
while more will revile you and say all manner 



of evil against you falsely, for the 

truth's sake, because the world knoweth 

you not, even as it knew Him not (1 Jno. 3:1). 

Rejoice and be exceeding glad of 

this evidence of your faithfulness and at 

these promised present rewards, for great 

is your reward in heaven. Do not unwisely 

intrude your message at inopportune 

times, nor in a rough blunt manner, nor 

in harsh language, but let your speech be 

with wisdom seasoned with grace. 

But a mother in moderate circumstances 
with a large family inquires, What can I 
do? I find no opportunity to sacrifice in 
the Lord's service. My time is wholly 
consumed in the care of my home and 
children— their morals as well as their persons. 
Ah! Sister, much depends upon 
how or to whom you sacrifice. Most of 
mothers know well what it is to sacrifice. 
To properly raise a family costs much self-sacrifice 
as every good mother knows. You 
sacrifice your health, your convenience, 
your time and comfort by night and by 
day. All good mothers find it thus, whether 
consecrated or not. But there is this 
difference: The majority do it simply from 
pride and selfish motives, in the desire to 
be honored in their children's honor and 
display. But the consecrated mother should 
regard the matter thus: I have given myself 
and my family for the present and the 
future to God; He has given me charge 
to use and dispose of these as so many talents 
according to my judgment for his 
glory; His word clearly teaches me that my 
children are my first charge; and it is God's 
will that I do my best to train them for 
usefulness to themselves and society. This 
part of your sacrifice rendered to God, 
results much the same as though you had 
not consecrated— in sacrifices for your 
children, yet in your case it is as actually 
a sacrifice of your talents to the Lord, as 
though done more directly to him. In fact, 
it is more acceptable to him, than if you 
were to leave your little ones to grow up 
like weeds, while you go abroad to preach 
the Gospel. 

But if the spirit of consecration is back 
of all you do for your children, and not 
selfish pride, it will have this effect: while 
anxious and careful for their best interests, 
you will remember that you have no more 
right to simply gratify pride in their dress, 
etc., than in your own, and they, though 



neat, will not be so extravagantly dressed 
as some of your neighbor's children whose 
care is backed by pride and vanity. You 
will seek to economize the Lord's money 
and time in dressing them as well as yourself, 
and you will not always naturally like 
to have them, just as your consecration 
will lead you to have them. But you will 
say to yourself, It is the Lord's time and 
money and must not be wasted; he wants 
me to care for my children, but not to 
make dolls of them and cultivate pride in 
them, to spoil their dispositions and unfit 
them for the present as well as future true 
pleasure and usefulness. Soon you will 

R943 : page 5 

find, that thus doing all things as unto the 
Lord, you will be able to save some time, 
etc., for use in more direct service of the 
truth; and you will find time and inclination 
to speak to a thoughtful neighbor or 
caller, or to write of the message to a 
friend, sending or giving a suitable paper 
with the seasonable word. Thus your life 
is as truly consecrated and acceptable with 
God through Christ, as that of one whose 
every day is spent in public preaching to 
multitudes. And just so it is, in whatever 
circumstances we may be placed— If we 
use the opportunities we possess, to the best 
advantage according to our best judgment, 
with an eye single to the Master's glory, 
it is as acceptable unto him, as the faithfulness 
and greater results of those possessing 
greater opportunities. And every faithful 
one will be able to increase his opportunities 
and service and shall thus increase 
his joy.- 1 Cor. 7:20-22. 

Is not this a reasonable service? Surely 
it is; and furthermore, it is the most enjoyable 
use you can possibly make of your 
talents. Think you, that those who spend 
their lives in attempted self-gratification 
are truly happy? Nay, none ever succeeded 
in pleasing himself— in gratifying 
all selfish desires. But he whose life is 
entirely given up to God and whose aim 
is to do God's will and honor him, is supremely 
happy. Even though it brings 
persecution and trouble he can rejoice, 
and be exceeding glad with a joy that the 
world can neither give, neither take away, 
and which even death cannot quench. 

"Let us not love in word, neither in 



tongue; but in deed and in truth. And 
hereby we know that we are of the 
truth and shall assure our hearts before 
him. For if our heart condemn us, God 
is greater than our heart and knoweth all 
things. Beloved if our heart condemn us 
not, then have we confidence toward 
God."-l John 3:18-21. 



R943 : page 5 

"WHO IS MY MOTHER? AND WHO 
ARE MY BRETHREN?" 

It is well for those who have entered into 
the new relationship of spiritual sons 
of God to consider carefully and frequently 
the changed relationship into which it 
has brought us. Our most intimate relationships 
are no longer those of earthly 
origin. Our interests, hopes, and aims 
are now bound up with those of the heavenly 
family; and as we come to realize 
this more fully, our affections reach out 
after the family of God and our communion 
one with another should be such as 
to deepen and broaden that love one for 
another. 

The above expression of our Lord shows 
how he regarded the heavenly relationship. 
When one said unto him: "Behold 
thy mother and thy brethren 
stand without desiring to speak with 
thee," he answered, "Who is my mother? 
and who are my brethren? And he stretched 
forth his hand toward his disciples, and 
said, Behold my mother and my brethren! 
for whosoever shall do the will of my Father 
which is in heaven, the same is my 
brother and sister and mother."— 
Matt. 12:47-50. 

As new creatures, we are spiritual sons 
of God, soon to be joined in heirship with 
his dear Son; we are the espoused virgin 
who, forsaking all earthly ties, is to be 
joined in marriage to our heavenly Bridegroom, 
and with joy we are now making 
all possible preparation for the great event. 
When this new condition is fully entered 
upon, we shall no longer be husbands and 
wives, parents and children, brothers and 
sisters, etc., with those on the earthly 
plane; for we shall be "kings and priests 
unto God," prepared to rule and to bless 



all the families of the earth, every member 
of which will then be as dear to us as 
to God. Our love to our former dear ones 
will be no less than now. Our love will 
be greatly intensified, though not bounded 
by the former narrow limits of blood 
relationship. 



R943 : page 5 

SON OF MAN AND SON OF GOD. 

BY B. WILSON. 

In what sense was Christ the son of man? 
There is no doubt whatever as to Christ 
being "the Son of Man"— but in what sense 
it is asked. Did this phrase mean that he 
was simply a man— one of human kind; 
or did it imply something more than this? 
I think more is comprehended in the 
phrase. Jesus very frequently spoke of 
himself as the Son of Man, and must have 
meant something beyond the idea that 
some have advanced, that he was the son 
of the man Joseph, the husband of his 
mother Mary. I will give a few references 
for the reader to examine, where Jesus 
calls himself the Son of Man. Matt. 20: 18; 
18:11; 16:13-16; 12:8; 20:18,19; 
25:31; 26:64. These are all from 
Matthew's testimony. They prove that 
the Son of Man was the anointed one, and 
are to be so understood. The Jews also 
understood the term as synonymous with 
Messiah. What other conclusion could 
they or we arrive at after reading Dan. 7:13,14? 
Let the reader turn to this reference, 
and see if it does not refer to the 
Messiah. But why is he called the Son of 
Man? Surely not in the same sense that I 
am the son of a man, because begotten by 
him; nor as the term is so frequently applied 
to Ezekiel the prophet; nor as used 
by David in the eighth Psalm, and as 
quoted by Paul in Heb. 2:6. The phrase 
as used by Jesus is always in the emphatic 

R944 : page 5 

form, though our English versions do not 
show it. The Greek is— ho whyos tou 
anthropou, "the Son of the Man." This 
definite form of expression implies that 



Christ was the son of some particular man. 
Shall we say the son of Joseph, the carpenter? 
Did Jesus mean this every time, when 
he used this emphatic form of expression? 

1 trow not. Then whose son was he? I 
answer, "the son of David." The Messiah 
was to be the seed of David, according 

to the Prophets, and the genealogical 
records as given by Matthew and Luke, 
prove that Jesus was the Son of David, 
with whom Jehovah made an everlasting 
covenant, saying, "His seed shall 
endure forever, and his throne as the sun 
before me," Psa. 89:36. The genealogical 
records prove him to be the Son of David. 
The prophets foretold that the Messiah who 
should sit on David's throne, and order 
his kingdom, was to be the Son of Jesse 
and David. Isa. 9:6,7; 11:1; Jer. 23:5; 
33:15; Psa. 132:11. The apostles 
believed that Jesus was the Messiah and 
the son of David. Peter, in his discourse 
on the day of Pentecost, tells the Jews 
that Jesus, according to the flesh, was from 
the loins of David; and Paul says that he 
was "made of the seed of David according 
to the flesh," Acts 2:30; Rom. 1:3; 

2 Tim. 2:8. And the glorified Jesus himself 
declares: "I am the root and offspring 

of David," Rev. 22:16. From these 
testimonies I conclude that Jesus the 
Christ was the Son of Man, not in the sense 
of simply being a man, but because he was 
the son of the man David, with whom Jehovah 
made an everlasting covenant, that 
the throne and kingdom of Israel should 
belong to him and his seed forever. 

[Our Lord was "Son of David" according 
to the flesh through his mother, who 
was of the lineage of David. As to how 
it was possible for our Saviour to be born 
of a woman who was of the fallen, condemned, 
imperfect race, and yet be perfect, 
undefiled and free from the condemnation 
which came upon every other member 
of the race through Adam, we refer the 
reader to an article in the TOWER of Sept. 
1885, entitled "The Undefiled One."- 
EDITOR OF Z.W. TOWER.] 

In what sense was Christ the son of God? 
He was called the son of God while in the 
flesh. But it is asked in what sense? I 
answer, because he was God's son, in the 
sense of being begotten by him. Christ 
called God his Father, and God acknowledged 
him as his son. See Matt. 3:17; 



17:5. If Christ was the Son of God 
only as we are sons of God, then he 
was not the son of God, but a son; nor 
would there be any more reason in confessing 
him to be the Son of the living 
God, as Peter and all the apostles did, than 
in confessing some other believer to be 
God's son. But Jesus claimed to be the 
Son of God, and consequently the Messiah. 
He also required his disciples to 
believe this truth. See John 9:35-37; 
10:36. The belief that Jesus, the Son 
of Man, was also the Christ, the Son of 
the living God, lies at the very foundation 
of Christianity— on it the Church was to 
be built. Matt. 16:16-18. Jesus was more 
than an adopted son by faith— was more 
than a begotten son by the word of truth; 
he was "the only begotten of the Father," 
John 1:14; 3:16; 1 John 4:9. The 
Father with audible voice, proclaimed him 
as his beloved Son, Matt. 3:17; 17:5. 
Paul calls him God's own Son, and his 
dear son, Gal. 4:4-5; Col. 1:13.- 
Millenarian. 



R944 : page 5 

"COME OUT OF HER!" 



Auburn, Ills., April 25th, '87. 
DEAR MRS. RUSSELL: -Pardon me for 
troubling you so soon again. I am so very 
much alone in the world, because of my 
peculiar belief, that I find it a relief to 
open my heart to you. I wish I could make 
you realize the change that has come over 
me regarding worldly affairs, since I have 
taken the liberty to think for myself. I 
was first impressed with these newly discovered 
ideas regarding the teaching of 
God's Word, in the fall of 1881. I 
grasped the central idea, the Atonement, 
from the first; also the Restitution of all 
things, through justification. These central 
points seem to me as clear as the 
noon-day. Some other points, and in 
comparison to these, minor ones I should 
say, such as the Trinity— the exact state 
of the being after death, the Communion, 
Baptism (the outward symbol and its correct 
form), and the Law touching the 
keeping of the Sabbath— these four questions 
have caused doubts and arguments 



for and against, to harbor within my mind. 

In regard to "the spirits in prison" (1 Pet. 3:18-20): 

Does this not teach that Christ, 

during his stay in the tomb, went in spirit 

to the spirits in prison? In regard to 

Baptism: It appears to me unimportant as 

to the form. It also appears immaterial, 

whether the person baptized be an infant 

or an adult. Children are bidden to come 

to Christ. And they are readier to believe 

and to love a Savior, than older ones. I 

feel that it is right to bring God's children 

to his altar, leaving them in the care 

of the Spirit. I feel that no time should 

be lost in putting them into his care. I 

feel deeply upon this subject, because I 

wish to do what is right. 

Though I keep every day holy to God, 
yet, to be conscientious, I must keep one 
special day. 

Perhaps now you will say, I have not 
truly been begotten of the Spirit. Dear 
Sister, I can echo your fears upon this subject. 
And that brings me to the principal 
part of my trouble. My life is one of 
small trials and vexations. Like Mary I 
have chosen the better part, but I am a 
veritable Martha, though indeed with all 
the aspirations and ideas and longings of 
a Mary. That is, I am so surrounded with 
worldly anxieties and petty cares— having 
the care of my family, trying to make ends 
meet and working from morning till night, 
with miserable health continually, which 
of itself is a cause of nervousness and 
fretfulness. Do you wonder I doubt my 
own position in the Plan of the Ages? I 
do not presume to know where I stand in 
this matter— whether upon the spiritual or 
human plane. But I can say, with a conscience 
void of intentional, wilful offence, 
that I shall be grateful, if I may be accounted 
worthy even to be a doorkeeper 
in the house of our God. 

In my present circumstances I am unable 
to take a stand even as a Christian, 
unless I attend a nominal church. My 
mother is a staunch Episcopalian. She is 
determined I shall either be a "somebody" 
in the Church, or a "nobody" 
out of it. She has influence. This is my 
position here. I speak not against my 
mother— all honor be to that sacred name! 
I only mention the fact, that you may 
see how I am placed. 

Now, what is my duty? Can I do more 



good in my peculiar position, by going 
with my mother, thus making manifest 
my interest in religion and introducing 
my own views, as I see opportunity— or 
shall I continue as at present— in obscurity, 
almost absolute seclusion from society, 
for the sake of my principles? I am 
perfectly willing to do so— if it is right. 
I have made no secret of my way of 
thinking; nor can I. My nature is too 
frank and open to admit of that. Hence 
the estrangement between myself and 
every one. But is this as it ought to be? 
I know I must suffer persecution, and 
gladly have done so— yet I may be standing 
in the light of others, if I cannot see 
plainly myself. I fear, I have not made 
myself plain. I will try and send some 
money soon— for O! I want this work to 
go forward! My husband and myself 
took Communion this year by ourselves, 
and it seemed a blessed season. I remain 
Yours lovingly, MRS. S 



REPLY. 

MRS. S , MY DEAR SISTER:-Your 

esteemed favor of the 25th April is at 
hand and be assured that in your questionings 
and fears I fully sympathize with 
you. I do not look upon them however 
as evidence of any lack of consecration to 
God, or that you are not begotten of the 
Spirit. They come only as the result of an 
imperfect understanding of God's great 
comprehensive plan. 

What you need, then, is to take plenty 
of time, and with patient carefulness and a 
meek and teachable spirit which is intent 
on knowing and doing God's will only, 
to study his great plan of the ages. Keep 
well in mind its deep foundation— its complete 
satisfaction of the demands of justice 
in our redemption through the precious 
blood of Christ; its righteous principles 
recognizing God's absolute and universal 
sovereignty and man's individual free 
agency; and then mark the wonderful scope 
of the plan— so far reaching in its grand 
results as to affect all creatures "in heaven 
and in earth," to establish once and forever 
the absolute authority of God in all 
the universe, and to establish all his creatures 
in righteousness and joyful and loving 
obedience. 

Seeing that such is the wondrous scope 



of the divine plan, we should not be surprised 

to learn that it requires 7,000 years 

for its development— the 6,000 past and 

1,000 future. The plan will have reached 

its culmination when Christ gives up the 

kingdom to the Father at the end of his 

millennial reign. Taking this grand view 

of the subject, many otherwise troublesome 

questions will settle themselves; for instance 

your anxiety for your children and your 

responsibility as a mother. God says: "All 

souls are mine: as the soul of the father, 

so also the soul of the son is mine" (Ezek. 18:4). 

God does not leave the eternal 

destiny of a single soul to the faithfulness 

of father or mother, or pastor or teacher, 

or any one. They are all his; he knows 

them every one individually, and every 

R944 : page 6 

phase of their character and disposition, 
and all their surrounding circumstances 
from earliest infancy. And each one of 
these individuals must stand on trial for 
himself: their eternal destiny, whether 
it be life everlasting in its glory and perfection, 

R945 : page 6 

or death— the blotting out of existence 
(Job 10:19; 7:21; 14:21.) must 
be decided by each for himself, when 
brought to a full knowledge of the truth- 
trie plan of redemption and reconciliation 
accomplished through Christ. God himself 
has made full and complete arrangements 
for the eternal welfare and blessedness 
and glory of every individual, who 
will appreciate and submit to his authority. 
And he has also made arrangements for 
the discipline so necessary to their development 
and final perfecting. Where then, 
you ask, is a mother's responsibilities? It 
is simply this: In view of your greater influence 
over the child, your opportunity, 
and THEREFORE responsibility to God, for 
the right use of that influence, is greater 
than that of any other person. We are 
each accountable to God for the right use 
of whatever talents and opportunities we 
have, and no more. If you have naturally 
good judgment and make good use of it 
in training your children to righteousness 
and obedience to God, you will not only 
receive the divine approval, but without 



doubt you will see at least some of the good 
effects of your training in the present life, 
though your children will not reach perfection, 
until the better and effectual influences 
and agencies of the next age complete 
the work. 

But if naturally you have poor judgment, 
and if much of your own life before your 
children, was spent out of harmony with 
God, so that the opportunities of the early 
years of your children's training were 
lost, and in consequence you now find it 
impossible to train them as you would, 
and you see them wandering from God 
and with no disposition to submit to either 
God's authority or yours, and though you 
try to do the best you can for them, your 
efforts all seem fruitless, still take courage: 
God says, "All souls are mine;" they are 
in his care whether you realize it, or have 
placed them there or not, and he will see 
that they get the discipline they need. 
He may in the present life let them run 
their course and see the result of their folly, 
though it be painful indeed to you, 
and then in the next age put on the brakes 
and check, restrain, punish, and encourage, 
and help them, as his wisdom and 
love will see best, until their reform is 
thorough and complete, or they are adjudged 
incorrigible and cut off from life. 
The mistakes of injudicious parents will 
all be overruled under the discipline of 
Christ whom God hath appointed as Prophet, 
Priest and King for that very purpose. 

As a mother do the best you can with 
your present knowledge and ability and 
dismiss all anxiety, casting your burden 
upon the Lord, who is able to sustain you, 
and to make all things work together for 
the accomplishment of his purposes— "in 
due time." God only holds us accountable 
to the extent of our ability and opportunity 
since we became his children; all 
our sins and short-comings, previous to 
that time, having been freely forgiven for 
Christ's sake. 

Now about giving your children to God: 
They are not yours to give; they are his 
already— "All souls are mine." But it is 
your privilege at the very dawn of their 
existence to recognize God's right and 
authority over them whom he redeemed 
by the gift of his Son, and to ask for wisdom 
to so train them that they may early 
learn to love and obey him and to recognize 



his love manifested through Christ. 
But what has baptism to do with this? 
Nothing at all. Study carefully the subject 
of baptism as presented in TOWER of Oct. 
'84. The sprinkling of babes is entirely 
out of harmony with the significance of 
either John's baptism or Christ's. 

And again, Our Lord did not institute 
any ordinance in the Church to be practiced 
in an indefinite, haphazard way. 
Both the ordinances and the only ones 
which he did establish were very simple 
and clearly defined, both in form and in 
significance, and it will not do for Christians 
to say, I am not quite sure what they 
mean and how they are to be performed, 
because there is difference in men's opinions 
about them. There is no necessity for 
difference of opinion when the Scriptures 
are plain and explicit. And it is our business 
to make sure of what the Scriptures 
teach, and then to follow their directions, 
though a thousand opinions prevail to the 
contrary. 

On the subject of the trinity (which is 
not a Bible subject) I would refer you 
to the TOWER of July '82, if I had it to 
send you. I presume you have no TOWERS 
so far back. I will suggest to Mr. R. 
however that he republish that article for 
the benefit of yourself and others. It 
would not be possible to satisfactorily canvass 
the subject in a letter; but if you study 
carefully Chap. X. of M. DAWN you will 
see that the common view is unscriptural 
and unreasonable. 

On the other subjects I would refer you 
to the following articles: "The Spirits in 
Prison" in TOWER of Dec. '84, "The Ten 
Commandments" Oct. '83, "Sunday and 
The Law" Dec. '85, and recent articles 
relating to "The Lord's Supper." 

With reference to going back into the 
Nominal Church your duty is clear if you 
are of the class designated "My People" 
in Rev. 18:4. You know that it is Babylon. 
Its Babel, confusion, mixture, is manifest 
even to the world. You were called out 
of her that you might not be a sharer 
of her sins, and that you receive not of her 
plagues. Her sins are those of conformity 
to the opinions and ideas and manners 
and customs of the world irrespective of 
God's will, and also the rejection of his 
truth to an increasing extent. If you return 
to Babylon and give that system the 



support of your influence in permitting 

your name to swell the list of its membership, 

or your money to support and extend 

it financially, or your presence to encourage 

its teachers in proclaiming as gospel 

that which is not gospel, then you are 

partaking of its sins and must share in its 

plagues. Your mother's wishes or the opinions 

of your friends should not have a 

feather's weight with you when God speaks 

—and remember he does not speak to us 

by mere impressions or imaginations, but 

plainly and unmistakably by his Word. 

He has shown you Babylon's confusion. 

You know that you are in it. And now 

he says, "Come out of her my people" etc. 

You need to remember that you belong to 

God, and while you love and honor your 

mother for her care and good influence in 

your youthful days, neither she, nor any 

one else must now be permitted to come 

between you and your God. And should 

your fidelity separate you from every earthly 

tie, rejoice that it links you closer to 

the throne of God. Consider it a privilege 

to be a "nobody" for Christ's sake 

and let others see by your cheerfulness that 

you enjoy the privilege. Perhaps after all 

as you decidedly wear his yoke you will 

find that his yoke is easy and his burden 

light, being lightened by the love you 

bear with it. 

Now take courage dear sister— walk in 
the light, obey the truth as fast as you 
see it and study the plan of God with care, 
that you may be firmly established— rooted 
and grounded in the faith. Yours in 
Christian love, MRS. C. T. RUSSELL. 



R945 : page 6 

LIGHT FOR THE RIGHTEOUS. 

"Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for 
the upright in heart."— Psa. 97:11. 

Light is a most beautiful and fitting symbol 
for truth; and not only do the Scriptures 
so use it, but it is a symbol in common 
use to-day. Men frequently speak 
of the "light of our day," and in contrast 
speak of the ages past as "the dark ages;" 
they speak of the light of civilization, the 
light of truth, etc.; and that remarkable 



statue recently erected in New York harbor 
is an apt illustration of this symbol in 
present use. It represents liberty enlightening 
the world— liberty as an aid to the 
finding of light, truth. And truly as men 
gain liberty, and make proper use of it, 
truth on various subjects begins to open 
up, and brings with it its train of blessings. 
But liberty and light abused are as sure to 
sink those who abuse them, in deeper darkness 
and greater evils. 

In the above text reference is made particularly 
to one certain class of truth, 
nevertheless we recognize it as a principle 
in the divine economy in dealing with mankind 
in general, that to the extent that 
men observe the principles of righteousness, 
they are correspondingly favored 
with truth and its attendant blessings. 

The Scripture saith, "There is none 
righteous; no, not one." All mankind 
are unrighteous, they are under the penalty 
of death. But thank God, a redemption 
has been provided, and those who lay 
hold of it by faith, are justified, reckoned 
righteous in God's sight. And it is for 
these justified (reckonedly righteous) ones, 
who by faith have accepted the righteousness 
of Christ, and who in gratitude and 
love to God for such favor are endeavoring 
to live lives of obedience and faithfulness, 
that light is specially sown. 

It is not for those who once by faith accepted 
of justification through the ransom, 
and who, simply consoling themselves 
with this thought, straightway turned back 
to the world to revel with it and stifle all 
thought of responsibility. Truth is not 
for such, but for the righteous who not 
only thankfully accept the righteousness 
of Christ, but who go further and consecrate 
themselves to the divine service, their 
rightful, reasonable service. Only such 
grow in grace and in knowledge. 

It is in the Word of God that this light 
for this special, justified and consecrated 

R946 : page 6 

class, is sown; and while the justified and 
sanctified of past ages enjoyed a measure 
of light, all that was then due, the justified 
and sanctified of this age have far greater 
privileges in this direction than any of former 
times; for in the ages past the light, 
the truth, was being sown for our special 



benefit. Unto the prophets, to whom so 
much truth was given, yet in such a way 
that but little of it was understood by them, 
it was revealed, in answer to their earnest 
searching, that not unto themselves, but 
unto us (the Gospel Church) they did minister 
(1 Pet. l:12)-that the truth which 
God was sowing, through their instrumentality, 
was not then due, but was being 
sown for the righteous some centuries 
down the stream of time. 

The faithful prophets were not left in 
darkness, however, to blindly grope their 
way along without special evidence of divine 
favor. They had their measure of 
light, and because faithful to it, great will 
be their advantage in the resurrection. 
And while it is true that a great store-house 
of divine truth was prepared for the Christian 
Church through the instrumentality 
of the prophets of past ages, and while 
much more was added to it by the Lord 
and the Apostles, yet it has only been revealed 
by degrees, as the age advanced 
toward its termination; consequently the 
early church did not enjoy as great light 
as it is our privilege to enjoy to-day. Occupying 
our present position on the stream 
of time, it is the privilege of the Christian 
Church to enjoy such views of God's plans 
and doings as none before our day could 
possibly have. Yet only this special class, 
the righteous, are so privileged; and their 
continuance of the privilege is conditioned 
upon their faithfulness, both in searching 
for and in using the light. 

It is a very noticeable fact that those 
who have been greatly blessed with light 
and have made no use of it, have not been 
privileged to retain it. The truth always 
brings with it its measure of responsibility, 
and to the extent that we measure up to 
that responsibility, more light is given. 
And vice versa— to the extent that we ignore 
that responsibility, further increase 
of light is denied, and the light that is in 
us, begins to wane. 

If we accept the truth, and begin to act 
from its standpoint, very soon we find 
ourselves marked as peculiar, very different 
from the world, and very different too, from 
merely nominal Christians. This is as it 
should be. If this be your experience, 
brother or sister, go on; you are on the 
right track. But if you find yourself very 
much like other people, then take heed. 



Quite likely you are looking and acting 
from the world's standpoint, and not from 
the divine standpoint in which the truth 
has placed you. 

You have made a covenant with God, 
and have received favors from him, which 
alter your position and responsibility entirely. 
Think of this: Let your mind run 
back to your earliest experiences as a child 
of God. When you first realized that you 
were bought with a price, even the precious 
blood of Christ, that you were redeemed 
from death through faith in that 
blood, call to mind how your heart was 
filled with joy and praise to God for his 
loving favor toward a justly condemned 
sinner. And when you turned the sacred 
page on which you read your title clear to 
everlasting life, and read further the exhortation 
of our brother Paul— "This is 
the will of God, even your sanctification," 
—"Present your body a living sacrifice, 
holy, acceptable unto God, which is your 
reasonable service" (1 Thes. 4:3; Rom. 12:1), 
you said, Yes, surely all that I can 
do to express my love and gratitude for 
such favor is at best but a poor return; 
and then on bended knees you said in all 
sincerity and fervency, Here, Lord, I give 
myself away; 'tis all that I can do. 

Then you joined a church— as you 
supposed, a company of people all justified 
and consecrated like yourself. Your own 
heart was full of warm, fresh zeal: you 
meant to do just what you had covenanted 
to do. Your heart's inquiry was very much 
like that of Brother Paul, "Lord, what 
wilt thou have me to do?" Then the Lord 
began to show you what you should do, 
how you should make your life one worthy 
of imitation, how you should let the spirit 
of God rule in your heart, conforming 
every feature of your character to the principles 
of the gospel, how in eating, and 
drinking, and wearing of apparel, in manner 
and conversation, and home and business 
life, you should first of all be a living 
epistle known and read of all with whom 
you come in contact. Then he began to 
point out fields of usefulness in his service, 
which would afford you the privilege of 
cross-bearing. 

But do you remember how the love that 

R946 : page 7 



was in your heart helped you to set a vigilant 
watch over yourself, and to bravely 
and cheerfully take up your cross and follow 
the Master? And as thus for a time 
you stepped along joyfully in the narrow 
way, you said, Yes, truly I am proving 
day by day that his yoke is easy and his 
burden light. 

But by and by your first love began to 
cool a little, and turning your thoughts 
upon yourself you began to think, How 
weary I am ! how much I have to suffer 
by conforming so strictly to these principles. 
No one thinks more of me for it. 
Why there is brother A. and sister B.; 
they don't seem to trouble themselves 
about cross-bearing; they do very much 
as others do; they look and talk and act 
very much as others do, except that they 
make long and seemingly very earnest 
prayers in public, and make themselves 
generally agreeable, particularly in the 
church. And they are considered the very 
cream of the church, and most devoted 
Christians. As you looked around a little 
further, you noticed that nearly all were 
doing just so, except perhaps a poor old 
saint very generally overlooked, or else 
considered an extremist or a fool, unworthy 
of respect and attention. And 
verily you began to feel that you also were 
losing ground in their estimation. Why, 
surely, you thought, these are good Christians, 
and you must have taken an extreme 
view of your obligation to God. As you 
thus looked more and more at the examples 
of those around you, and less and less 
at the Word of God and the noble example 
of the Lord and the apostles, your own 
zeal became cold and you concluded that 
your first impressions of the Christian life 
must have been erroneous. 

But they were not erroneous; they were 
right, and were derived from the right 
source, the Word of God, and should have 
been followed regardless of consequences. 
You would have had plenty of cross-bearing, 
but your Christian character would 
to-day be much stronger and more symmetrical. 
But thank God, he considered 
your unfavorable surroundings, and that 
while you were still willing to follow him, 
your flesh was weak; and so he sent you 
a special message of meat in due season 
which wonderfully awakened and encouraged 
you. Wonderful love! Do you suppose 



the Lord would so tenderly call you 
by his grace, and encourage and help you, 
if he did not desire to make you his bride? 
Rejoice, and be exceeding glad, O favored 
one, to whom God has granted present light, 
and forget not that if thou wilt prove faithful 
unto death, faithful is he that hath called 
you, who also will exalt you in due time, 
according to his promise.— 1 Thes. 5:24. 

Take for your examples the noblest runners 
on this course. They looked not at 
the things behind, to pine and fret for 
those things they had covenanted to sacrifice, 
but walked according to the light 
they had. Consider, for instance, the 
daily life of Jesus after his consecration: 
While with his unequaled abilities as a 
man he might have had the esteem and 
honor of his fellow men, and while he 
might have had an honorable fame throughout 
the world, and while he might have 
spent time in accumulating wealth, and in 
the gratification of other legitimate earthly 
ambitions, he turned aside from all these 
and chose the life of continuous service 
of his Father esteeming it a privilege 
to preach the gospel to one or two or many, 
as opportunity might offer. With it came 
reproach, poverty, persecution, ingratitude 
from those he benefitted, and finally death 
by ignominious crucifixion. 

Then look at our beloved brother Paul: 
With all his talents and advantages of birth 
and education, his worldly prospects were 
fair, but he resolutely curbed all ambitions 
in that direction. And when he inquired, 
"Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?" 
he conferred not with flesh and blood, but 
set himself at once to doing what the Lord 
directed. And though the Lord said he 
would show him how he must suffer great 
things for his name's sake, Paul counted 
the sufferings as not worthy to be compared 
with the glory which shall follow, 
though as yet he only saw that glory by 
faith. Truly, Paul suffered great things, 
but mark how he rejoiced even in those 
sufferings. When he and Silas were publicly 
beaten and then cast into prison, did 
they complain and say, they had had about 
enough of this, that some of the other 
apostles up there at Jerusalem ought to 
come out now and take their turn, that 
he was getting old and it was about time 
for him to settle down and take care of 
number one, he couldn't stand this kind 



of thing much longer? 

No, you never heard a word of that kind 
from Paul. He had no notion of giving 
up, or of resting on his oars; he had 
learned the valuable lesson of contentment 
in whatever condition duty required him 
to be in (Phil. 4:11). Nay, more! he 
had learned to rejoice always, and in every 
thing to give thanks; and so he rejoiced even 
in tribulation, and sung for joy even in prison. 
The light of God's truth received in 
unfaltering confidence gave him a joy which 
the world could neither give nor take away. 
And no amount of persecution stopped 
Paul from rejoicing; for he remembered 
that all the sufferings endured for Christ's 
sake, work out a far more exceeding and 
eternal weight of glory. 

But he warns us, that if we would so run 
as to obtain the prize of our high calling, 
if we would receive the light of divine 

R947 : page 7 

truth and walk accordingly, we must look, 
not at the things which are behind, which 
we have covenanted to sacrifice, but at the 
things which are before, and which are yet 
unseen, except by the eye of faith. 

To look back is one step, and a long 
one, towards ignoring and breaking our 
covenant. It is the first step in unrighteousness, 
and if not quickly retraced, it 
will sooner or later lead to darkness and 
apostacy; and the joy and peace we once 
experienced in believing will be taken 
away. He that looketh back is unfit for 
the Kingdom.— Luke 9:26,62. 

We cannot too strongly urge upon God's 
covenant people their duty and responsibility 
in view of the light they have received 
—the duty of living for the heavenly things, 
and using the earthly things only as necessary 
aids in the divine service; the duty 
of viewing every matter of an earthly character 
from the standpoint in which the 
truth has placed us, from God's standpoint; 
the duty of acting promptly upon our convictions, 
and thereby giving no advantage 
to the adversary; the duty of enduring 
toil and persecution in the Master's service 
with uncomplaining meekness and joyful 
thanksgiving for the privilege; the duty 
of preaching the truth at any cost and at 
any sacrifice. 

Light was indeed carefully sown centuries 



ago for the righteous, and it is now 

being most gloriously revealed to those 

for whom it was sown; but take heed, ye 

that have received it; for if through unfaithfulness 

the light that is in thee be 

turned to darkness, how great is that darkness! 

The messengers of darkness were 

never so active as in this "evil day," to 

overthrow the faith of the consecrated 

children of God; and never were their 

methods so subtle and so deceptive. Truly, 

they are calculated to deceive if it 

were possible the very elect. But thank 

God, that is not possible. The elect are 

those who faithfully, carefully study to 

know the will of God and are very earnest 

and faithful in doing it. Take heed that 

you make your calling and election sure. 



R947 : page 7 
PERILOUS TIMES. 

It is frightful to contemplate the rapid 
increase of crime in all parts of our country. 
Scarcely a newspaper can be opened 
that does not contain the account of the 
perpetration of some horrible offence 
against society. The enormity of the 
crimes keeps pace with the rapid increase 
of their number. One day a man shoots 
his wife— the next a son stabs his father, 
a brother kills his brother for some slight 
difference of opinion, then a father murders 
his whole family. Common robberies 
and murders are of everyday occurrence. 
Forgery, swindling, and speculation are 
carried on by the wholesale. Private houses, 
banks and the government are indiscriminately 
robbed. Men of established reputation 
for business integrity, suddenly disappear, 
taking with them fabulous sums 
of money, the property of others. By perjury 
and other means the nation is defrauded 
of money more than enough to 
pay the interest upon the national debt. 

Licentiousness prevails to an alarming 
extent. It appears as though Satan was 
let loose, and was exerting himself to the 
utmost, knowing that his time is short. 
What is the meaning of all this? Are the 
last days in reality upon us? Is the world 
[society] ripening for destruction? Look 
upon the face of society and see how perfectly 



its features correspond with the likeness 

by the pen of inspiration. "This know also 

that in the last days perilous times shall 

come. For men shall be lovers of their 

own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, 

blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, 

unholy, without natural affection, 

truce-breakers, false accusers, incontinent, 

fierce, despisers of those that 

are good, traitors, heady, high-minded, 

lovers of pleasure more than lovers of 

God; having a form of godliness but denying 

the power thereof— from such turn 

away." Did not modern society sit for 

this picture? Could the Camera reflect 

a more accurate resemblance? Can this 

striking agreement be the result of 

accident? 

It is time for the followers of Jesus to 
be up and doing. But the perpetrators 
of these high outrages are generally among 
those who call upon his name and attend 
upon his worship. They own pews in 
magnificent temples, or belong to a 
church which boasts of the imposing character 
of its rites, and the liberality of its 
terms of communion. Would you not be 
carried away with the current of ungodliness 
which appears to be sweeping all before 
it? You must build upon the rock 
for the storms are upon us. You must 
bear an unequivocal testimony against 
prevailing sins, and like Lot in Sodom, 
vex your righteous soul from day to day 
with their unlawful deeds. From a quiet 
acquiescence to active participation the 
transition is gradual, easy, imperceptible 
and well-nigh certain. Above all let us 
call upon God in mighty prayer, to lift up 
a standard against the tide of iniquity 
which is poured out like a flood. Help 
Lord; for the godly man ceaseth; for the 
faithful fail from among the children of 
men.— The Earnest Christian. 



R948 : page 7 

"WHAT selfishness asked for, was vain; 
What came for that asking, was pain. 
Gain! none save the giver, receives; 
Yet who that old gospel believes? 
But one way is Godlike. Then give! 
Then pour out thy heart's blood, and live. 



R947 : page 7 

PREJUDICE. 

Prejudice is pre-judgment. It is forming 
an opinion without examining the facts; 
it is hastily accepting a conclusion without 
investigating the evidence upon which 
it rests; it is allowing ourselves to be hoodwinked 
and deceived, when the slightest 
reflection would keep us from such a mistake; 
it is being satisfied with hearsay, 
when we should demand the proof; it is 
rejecting everything at first sight, which 
does not confirm our former convictions 
or suit our former tastes or agree with our 
preconceived ideas; it is a revolt against 
the unpalatable and distasteful; it is a deep-seated 
reluctance to part with that to which 
we have been accustomed— a persistent 
hesitation to accept as true what we have 
not hitherto believed; a wicked unwillingness 
to admit that we can be wrong and 
others right. It favors or condemns upon 
the slightest pretext; it recoils or embraces 
as it is moved by caprice. It is not limited 
to persons— has to do with places, 
and creeds, and parties, and systems: hence 
its influence is extensive, and its evils manifold. 
Prejudice does not hold opinions; 
it is held by them. Its views are like 
plants that grow upon the rocks, that stick 
fast, though they have no rooting. It 
looks through jaundiced eyes; it listens 
with itching ears; it speaks in partial and 
biased accents. It clings to that which it 
should relinquish and relinquishes that to 
which it should cling. When beaten it 
remains defiant; when disproved and vanquished, 
it is sullen and obstinate. There 
is nothing too low for its love, or too noble 
for its hatred; nothing is too sacred for 
its attacks, or too deserving for its aspersions. 
It is as cruel as it is universal, as 
unjust as it is relentless; as unforgiving as 
it is conceited and ill-informed.— S el. 



R947 : page 8 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 

page 8 



New York, May 8th, 1887. 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-"The 
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with 
your spirit!" You have received no report 
from me recently because of sudden, recurring 
and very painful sickness. The 
physician said yesterday I must keep quiet 
"for another week." At present, therefore, 
I am but a broken reed. I have before 
suffered great mental agonies, but this 
is my first experience in long-continued, 
intense physical pain. I received the 25 
hymn books safely, and can only thank 
you for them now. 

Because "Christ, our Passover, is sacrificed 
for us: therefore" we "kept the 
feast" on the evening of April 7th last. 
A very precious season we enjoyed, as we 
remembered Him who laid down his life 
for us, and as we covenanted anew to follow 
our Head in sacrificing to the death 
our reckoned-perfect humanity that we 
may also possess with Him the Divine nature. 
Bro. Bowen and Mrs. Hickey went 
with me to Newburgh and about twenty, 
in all, partook of the emblems. 

The May TOWER which came yesterday 
was weighted with blessed, refreshing 
Truth. Your article on Rom. 1 to 6 is 
logical, convincing, and destructive of the 
"damnable heresy" it strikes at. God 
bless you, my beloved Brother! May He 
strengthen and encourage you day by day! 

Yours in loving sympathy in Christ, 
S. I. HICKEY. 

Scotland, April 7th, 1887. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Enclosed find 
money-order which pays for two copies of 
the Tower in advance, from April, 1887, 
and three copies of "Millennial Dawn," 
which you were kind enough to send me. 
Any balance can be devoted to whatever 
fund you think most useful. Through 
reading your articles in the TOWER, and 
your valuable books, I have got much 
light, and I wish to take this opportunity 
of thanking you for help received, and of 
assuring you of my sympathy with and 
good wishes for your good work. Believe 
me yours, in fellowship and service, 
JOHN McLEAN. 

[Joyfully we acknowledge that every 
good and perfect gift, among them the 



precious, soul-cheering truths on which we 
all feast, come from our Father in heaven. 
To Him be all glory and praise, now and 
forever. We merely give out what we receive, 
and no grateful heart could do less, 
to the honor of the giver and the blessing 
of his fellows.-EDITOR.] 

Greenville, Pa. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I have nothing 
special to write except to say that I have 
made my delivery in Greenville in part, 
and can see that the Dawns deliver well. 
One can sell more than he sets down on 
his list. Over one hundred copies delivered, 
and over one hundred names yet, to 
do on next Saturday. The people are being 
moved as by an avalanche. The results 
of Bro. Blundin's and my own lecturing 
in Greenville are apparent. One 
lady said to-day, "I pray the Lord the 
doctrine is true." I think nearly one 
hundred books to every thousand inhabitants 
could be sold. I wish you could get 
brethren and sisters awake. Those who 
need the money that the Tract Society 
donates for selling Dawn, need not fear 
that they can not pay their way. There 
is no excuse now for any who really believe 
the Dawn to be a good preacher. I 
can take forty to fifty names daily, and 
expect to sell my usual one thousand copies 
per month. I am now selling at this 
rate, and have lost time in ways I shall 
not take again. Hope you are fully recovered. 
Our love to yourself and Sister 
Russell, and the kindest remembrance, in 
which Mrs. A. always joins. Yours in 
Christ, J. B. ADAMSON. 

Youngstown, O. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-My deliveries, 
at Greenville 200 Dawns, Lewisville 25, 
and Jamestown and Conneautville each 60 
copies, were successful to the extent of 
delivering more than my list, in some 
cases. 

I do hope that the brethren who want 
to preach and teach in this practical way 
of selling Dawns will soon get started. I 
send you a very encouraging letter from 
Williamsport. I have 240 names at Sharon 
and some at Sharpsville, and will order 
books for next deliveries soon. While 
changing cars at Chenango Junction, I 
showed Dawn to the news agent. He took 



three at his own offer, 20 cents each, to 
be resold. 

Dawn's influence is a mighty one. I 
wish that brethren who could sell it, and 
do not, had a little of the blessed experience 
that comes to me. It is exerting a 
mighty power on many classes, and moving 
the masses as "Food" never did. 
J. B. ADAMSON. 

[Bro. Adamson sends the letter below, 
received by him recently. It shows the love 
and zeal of one who sees spiritually, but is 
blind physically.] 

Williamsport, Pa., May 9th, '87. 
DEAR SISTER AND BRO. ADAMSON:-I 

am glad to have an opportunity of writing 
to you. I received both of your last letters, 
and am glad that you enjoyed the 
feast of the Passover. I would have liked 
to be there, to hear Brother Russell 
preach. I have heard only a part of the 
book read, but think it the plainest and 
best work on the Bible I have ever heard 
read. Sister Garrison says she has read 
hers through with the Bible in one hand 
and the book in the other, and says she 
has never had any other reading that did 
her so much good. A few of us have 
formed a Bible class in connection with 
Mr. Russell's works. We read one half-hour 
from one of his tracts or the Tower, 
and the rest of the evening we give to Bible 
investigation. My sister Sue is one of 
the most interested of the class. We meet 
on Monday evenings. Sister Aletta is 
taking the TOWER this year. She has become 
quite interested in the reading of it. 
I have not found a suitable person to go 
out with me with the book, but expect to 
go out as soon as possible. I would like 
to go to Glen's Falls, take the book with 
me, and canvass that place, Colwell, Sandy 
Hill and Fort Edward, but I will try 
Williamsport first. I truly feel as though 
I must do something in some good work, 
and help others into the light by circulating 
the book-DAWN. 

Oh! how disappointed I was when I 
found I could not meet you all at Pittsburg. 
Well, perhaps it is better that I 
have all these disappointments. I am trying 
patiently to trust in the Lord and be 
led by his hand. He only knows how 
many thorns are in the way of his blind 



child. It is such a comfort to realize that 
he does know and care; and though at 
times I am very weary, yet I can sweetly 
rest in his promises. Accept kindest regards. 
Your sister in Christ, A. B. E. 

R947 : page 8 

Middlebrook, Arkansas. 

ED. Z.W.T., DEAR SIR:-I received 
an April copy of your paper last Saturday 
evening, and must say that I was truly astonished 
at its doctrine. I sat down, and 
in about two hours had devoured its contents. 
After seven years of hard study of 
the Word of God, to the exclusion of all 
theological writers, am I so near-sighted 
as not to see that God is intending to give 
to the heathen who have died without the 
advantage of gaining a knowledge of the 
ransom prepared by Him for all, a chance 
to hear and accept the truth? Great God, 
is this thy word, or am I in a dream? 
What can it mean? How good, how merciful, 
how grand and beautiful thy plan, 
so far as I have seen! If this glimpse of 
light proves true, Great God, what other 
adjectives can I employ to describe more 
fully thy love and mercy. I am too weak 
even to contemplate the sublime grandeur 
of thy lovely purposes to man, thy fallen 
creature. Indeed I can only fall at thy 
feet and allow to pass through my mind 
the words, Holy, most holy, art thou, O 
Lord God. 

I believe that man fell, that Jesus became 
the ransom, and I believe that the 
times of the restitution of all things, 
spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets, 
is near at hand. But does that restitution 
embrace the restoration of all 
Adam's fallen race to the first estate, that 
they may individually have a chance to 
render obedience to the great King of 
kings? O God, the knowledge of thy 
word is replete with goodness toward man. 
What can I say? Wonderful! wonderful! 
most wonderful! and mercifully loving art 
thou, O God. It is almost too good to 
be true, and yet God is good. 

Dear Sirs, I am astonished, amazed, 
confounded, and even the tears start. I 
thought I was rooted and grounded in 
the faith. For years I have taught that 
the heathen had had their portion of light, 
and they that had received it and walked 



by it, would gain a reward, while those 
who rejected it, were dead to rise no more, 

R948 : page 8 

and though I had proved it by the word. 
But O, if those who had not light are to 
see light, and be permitted to accept that 
light, what a throng, what a glorious 
throng, praising God day and night! Why 
surely, there will be but few that will not 
accept it under the glorious reign of our 
King. Why friend, they will rend the 
heavens and burst the bars of space by 
their united shouts of praise. 

If this be true, O King Jesus come, and 
come quickly! Amen. Yours in hope of 
more light, O. S. G . 

Toronto, Canada, May 6th, 1887. 

MY DEAR BROTHER:--! came across 
the following clause in a very old work of 
the third century known as "Constitutions 
of the Holy Apostles," which may interest 
you, in the matter of the Lord's Supper, if 
you have not seen it before,— Book V. 
Chapter XVII. 

"It is therefore your duty, brethren, 
who are redeemed by the precious blood 
of Christ, to observe the days of the Passover 
exactly, with all care, after the vernal 
equinox, lest ye be obliged to keep the 
Memorial of the one passion twice in a 
year. Keep it only once in a year for 
Him that died but once.... Keep 
it when your brethren of the Circumcision 
do so. ...If they err in their 
computation, be not you concerned.... 
While they are lamenting and eating unleavened 
bread in bitterness, do you 
feast." 

Various instructions follow about fasting, 
etc., etc., but I copy enough for the 
point in view, as showing what was the 
probable custom of that early period, though 
one of much defalcation in the matter of 
truth, and of much introduction of error 
into Christianity. Love to all yours. 
Ever in Him, W. BROOKMAN. 

London, March 14, 1887. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-A sister in 
Christ, whose acquaintance I made only 
ten days ago, and who is having her house 
open for meetings on these subjects, invited 
me to come to her meetings. I went, 



and was surprised to see that the truths 
dealt with there are the very same that the 
Lord revealed to me, since I came to the 
knowledge of God in Christ Jesus. She 
also lent me a few copies of the WATCH 
TOWER, which I read with much interest, 
and I praise God for you and your fruit. 

Allow me to give you my life's history 
and testimony in as few words as possible. 
I was born in Austria. My parents were 
very bigoted Jews. Of course their aim 
was to train me according to their knowledge. 
When six years of age I began to 
study the Talmud. When thirteen I entered 
the Rabbinical schools in Hungary, 
where I continued for six years. When I 
was seventeen years old, my eyes were 
opened to see the emptiness of my religion, 
consequently I turned to infidelity. 
All I then thought of Christianity was, 
that Christ was an impostor, that it was a 
sin to mention his name, and that I ought 
to hate him and all those who worship his 
images and crosses; for I knew only Roman 
and Greek Catholic Christians. 

I lived in infidelity for about twelve 
years, though leading a moral life and always 
active in different philanthropic 
works and institutions. In 1883, while in 
Roumania, I felt inclined to emigrate to 
Palestine and to work there for the idea 
of "Colonization of Palestine by persecuted 
Jews from Russia and Roumania." 
Having to correspond with Hebrew 
periodicals, and to write and think on the 
subject of the restoration of the Jewish 
nation, I was obliged to read and study 
the Bible. This led me to see Christ as 
revealed in Moses and the Prophets. In 
order to inquire after the truth more freely, 
I went to Jerusalem, and on Easter 
Sunday, 1884, 1 made public confession 
of my faith in Christ. I soon began to 
see, by comparing the New Testament 
with church theology, that the theology 
was unscriptural and misleading; and 
the spirit of truth led me into the truth as 
revealed by God's prophets and apostles. 
I obeyed the voice of the spirit to "come 
out from Babylon and be separate." In 
February 1885, 1 left Jerusalem for London, 
with the hope to find here some 
Christians, as a Church of my opinion, 
but alas, I only found a greater variety of 
Satan's works, in sects and divisions, 
and that only confirmed me in my idea 



that the Church of this age is a Babel of 

confusion. I made up my mind to have 

Christ as my only Priest, Friend, and 

Guide, and to be joined to the saints of 

"the Church," "the Christ," "Head and 

Body," who are scattered all over the 

world, living the life of Christ as joint-self-sacrifices, 

waiting for his appearing to 

gather them in as joint-heirs and to reign 

with him for ever and ever. The Lord 

has laid it as necessity upon me to carry 

the Glad Tidings of Peace, to my own nation, 

the Jews, as a reasonable service. 

In order to do this, I was led to consecrate 

myself as a living sacrifice to God, and to 

make this my life's mission. 

Your precious publications will always 
be to me an odour of a sweet smelling 
savour. Yours in Christ, L. K . 

[We are glad to hear from our Hebrew 
brother, and in our next issue will have 
something of interest to him and his race, 
under the caption, "To the Jew First." 
-EDITOR.! 



R948 : page 1 

VOL. VIII. PITTSBURGH, PA., JULY, 1887. NO. 11. 



page 1 

WRITE plainly; give full address each 
time. In giving a new address say also 
where from. 



IF ANY who desire the TOWER do not 
receive it regularly, it is probably the fault 
of their Post-Master, or their own fault. 
We gave repeated notice that all who want 
the TOWER and were unable to pay up 
arrearages, or to renew their subscription, 
could have it the same as ever, by sending 
a card stating the facts and requesting its 
continuance. Others were dropped as we 
had warned them and are themselves alone 
to blame. We shall be glad however to 
learn from time to time of those who 
hunger and thirst after truth, and shall be 
glad to re-enter them on our lists. 



R950 : page 1 

THE HARVEST FIELD 



While many brethren and sisters are 
taking hold of the work and pushing 
DAWN, VOL. I., grandly, none should get 
the impression that the field is so full of 
reapers and that their service is not needed. 
Our Father has so arranged the work, now 
as in every time, that there not only is 
need for every member of the "body" to 
be active in the service, for his own development, 
but also that there shall be a real 
need for the labor and sacrifice of each 
consecrated priest— 1 Pet. 2:9. 

As a matter of fact, if five thousand of 
our readers could and would use their time 
entirely in the work, it would require 
quite a long time to thoroughly introduce 
DAWN to God's children in every town 
and city of this land. The present number 
of laborers, with all their zeal, would 
not exhaust the field in ten years. One 
city like New York, Philadelphia, or 



Brooklyn, would furnish busy work for 
ten canvassers for nearly a year, and other 
large cities proportionately. God leaves 
us without this excuse. We cannot say, 
that we saw no necessity for our labor, 
and knew of no way to render it. It will 
then be simply a matter of whether we 
loved his truth and our fellows so as to be 
willing, nay, glad to accept his offer of 
being his ambassadors, and to leave some 
of the nets of business ambition and the 
boats of present worldly custom. We do 
not mean to say that all can or ought to 
engage in this crusade— some cannot— 
ought not, and must do what they can 
otherwise: but surely many more have 
this opportunity than have yet improved it. 

Neither do we urge any to leave sure 
situations for an untried work, especially 
if they have dependent families: such can 
get "a day off" and take a sample and 
make a trial to see how many orders they 
can get, following closely as possible the 
instructions in "View" of May TOWER. 
Others, out of employment, can surely 
find in this the grandest opening, and may 
afterward thank God that absence of other 
work forced them into the ministry (service) 
of God and his church. 

Do not think that you need a lot of 
books before you begin. You need only 
a sample of cloth and paper bindings. 
Order when you know pretty surely how 
many you can use. 



R948 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER 

We scarcely realize the great revolution 
of thought now in progress on every subject, 
on every hand and among all classes. 
Everything is apparently tending toward 
unwholesome liberalism and reckless freedom 
of thought and action. Many whose 
fears are aroused quiet them by supposing 
that the present must be only the ordinary 
course, that it has always been so; or 
as Peter (2 Pet. 3:4) expressed their sentiments 
prophetically, they say, "All 
things continue as they were from the beginning 
of the creation." Only those 
taking heed to the sure word of prophecy 
are aware that these things are caused by 



the parousia of the Son of Man, and are 
evidences that we are in the "harvest," or 
end of this age. Others do not realize 
that every age has its close or "harvest." 
They remember not that the ark and the 
flood were the end of a former epoch, and 
that present and approaching events are 
as much out of the usual rut of this epoch, 
as the closing events of that "world" were 
out of the usual order of that time. 

Only those enlightened by the "lamp" 
of truth, God's Word, can really see the 
great revolution now in progress and appreciate 
its immediate and its future results. 
It is perhaps a blessing for those 
who cannot see the future grand outworkings 
of the impending trouble, that they 
cannot yet see the immediate terrible confusion 
which the present revolution of 
thought is rapidly leading to. We can 
therefore scarcely estimate the amount of 
good we are doing to the worldly in bringing 
to their attention the great Millennial 
reign and times of restitution of all things, 
which the impending time of trouble 
serves to introduce, and for which it prepares 
the way, by leveling classes and 
overthrowing monopolistic systems, secular 
and religious, built upon evil principles, 
errors, in whole or in part. Even if the 
truth is not now received by all whose 
attention is called to it, it will be remembered 
and afterward give comfort, help 
and light in a dark hour to many who now 
oppose it. 

The more of liberty and truth any system 
contains, the sooner and the sharper 
will be the conflict between that truth and 
liberty and the errors and superstitions 
held in conjunction. The conflict may 
at times seem to leave error the victor, 
but in the end it shall fall. Meantime the 
conflict serves to judge or test the people, 
and by causing them to take sides, it accomplishes 
a sifting and separating work, 
preparing some for more and some for less 
stripes and plagues in this day when every 
evil and wrong shall be uprooted and consumed, 
root and branch. "The fire of 
that day shall try every man's work, of 
what sort it is," is a statement which will 
prove true of all the world, as well as especially 
of all in the church. None among 
us, for instance, need try to be neutral on 
the great question which is testing us now 
—the Ransom. You must come to it, 



and be for or against it sooner or later. 

R949 : page 1 

We well know that as they get awake the 
vast majority will forsake this, the foundation 
of the gospel of Christ, for it is written 
—"a thousand shall fall at thy side 
and ten thousand at thy right hand." It 
has not yet reached this condition, but it 
is rapidly approaching it, as all must see 
who keep watch of the so-called liberal 
utterances of "leading ministers." 

Those who discard the long-cherished 
dogma of the eternal torture of those who 
die out of Christ, generally do so under 
the false impression that the Bible teaches 
the doctrine; hence in rejecting it, they 
are also rejecting the Bible which they 
suppose teaches it. Thus they are cutting 
loose from all anchorage, to be driven 
about by the changing winds of their own 
vain imaginings, unguided by the divine 
chart and compass, whose marks under 
false instructions they misunderstood, and 
which now they have ceased to respect and 
use. Thus they fall an easy prey to the shifting 
lights of science, falsely so-called, rejecting 
the ransom and the entire plan of 
God as revealed, and land on the barren 
shores of skepticism, saying, If there is a 
God, I believe he is too loving to punish his 
creatures, or to require an atonement for 
sin, a ransom for the sinner. In their effort 
to be more charitable than God, they not 
only promise that all shall be everlastingly 
saved and that the second death is to be 
a blessing, but apologize for the first death, 
promising full amends for that injustice 
which they claim has been done to man. 
Professing themselves to be wise, they have 
become so foolish as to charge the great 
Creator with injustice. But these, with 
other errors, shall not proceed much further, 
for the folly of their argument shall be 
manifested to all in the great time of 
trouble just before us. It will then be 
manifested fully that God is not so loving 
as to be unjust, or to in anywise clear the 
guilty; for every man shall receive a just 
recompense of reward for his deeds— 
though eternal torment is not that just 
recompense. 

Another class— who, as they begin to 
think, will see that either the doctrine of 
a ransom, a corresponding price for all, is 



an error, or else that eternal torment is 

not the penalty for sin, (because Christ 

did not suffer eternal torment for us)— 

will find their attachment to the tradition 

of eternal torment so strong, and their 

knowledge of the ransom so slight, that 

they will speedily reject the ransom and 

hold to eternal torment, when they find 

them in conflict. Undoubtedly the statement 

that a thousand to one will stumble 

and fall over this truth, is what we should 

expect. How important, then, is our 

present work to the real children of God 

in all branches of the nominal church, 

showing them the fact, the value, and the 

grand results, of the ransom— how it is in 

harmony with the just penalty pronounced 

against sin— death— and the grand exhibition, 

in one act, of God's justice and love; 

how that one act maintained his justice 

and the dignity and unchangeableness of 

his law, while at the same time it provided 

the way for mercy to the condemned. 

For as many as you can really cause to see 

the ransom for all, in its true light, and the 

restitution based upon it, you do an incalculable 

service, in preparing and helping 

them to stand and not fall in the 

day of trial now beginning. It is our confidence 

that all those who are real servants 

of God, Israelites indeed, will be "sealed 

in their foreheads" (Rev. 7:3), i.e., 

they will obtain an intellectual comprehension 

of this truth, sufficient to sustain 

them before the conflict becomes general. 

This being our expectation, we are less 
surprised than some of you at the wide 
circulation which MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
VOL. I., is having. It has a mission not 
only to seek and separate the saints, but 
also to fortify those who fear God's name, 
small and great; and it may serve to counsel 
and prepare many of the poor Godless 
world. As a sharp threshing instrument 
of the Lord in the hands of his 
faithful children, it is already showing 
large results. 

As an illustration of the workings of 
error in its effort to combat unfolding 
truths, we give here some utterances of a 
prominent "orthodox" minister of this 
city— Rev. W. R. Mackey— regarding a 
future probation for the heathen. He 
claimed there could be no possible object 
in giving the heathen a future probation, 
because, he asserts, they have all had a 



knowledge of Christ,— even those who 

R949 : page 2 

lived and died long before Jesus came into 
the world, had, he claims, a saving 
knowledge of Christ. In explanation of 
this seemingly insane statement, he said, 
as reported in the Pittsburgh Times:— 

"The real Christ (that is the incarnation 
of God's character,) has been in the heart 
of every man in every time and land who 
has loved truth and helped his fellow men. 
Every heathen who has so lived, goes to 
heaven, because he belongs to heaven and 
can't go anywhere else. He has not 
known Christ as he came in Galilee, but 
he has known and loved the real Christ, 
though he never heard his human name." 

This serves to illustrate the fact that 
men professedly the servants of Christ and 
the truth, are so prejudiced against the 
Bible and its teaching of "a ransom for 
all, to be testified in due time" (1 Tim. 2:6), 
and so prejudiced in favor of their 
own theories, that when the two come in 
conflict, they do not hesitate to make a 
cipher of the man Christ Jesus and his 
work of redemption, in order to support 
their own ideas. No one would think it 
worth while to ask this man, who represents 
one of the leading denominations, 
whether he believes that men were redeemed 
by the precious blood of Christ. 
We all know that his answer, to fit his 
theory expressed above, would be, No, the 
blood of the historic Christ was nothing; 
it is contrary to advanced thought to suppose 
that the actual death of the historic 
Christ did any good, except as an extreme 
example which none should follow, but 
which all should admire. 

We fancy that we hear him continue 
(much in the strain of one of our Exchanges), 
to explain away the teaching 
of Jesus and the apostles relative to the 
value of the precious blood wherewith our 
Lord bought us, made reconciliation for 
iniquity and passed over our sins, bearing 
their penalty on our behalf,— saying, The 
blood of Christ which is of any value is 
the blood or life of the Christ principle: 
the vital principle of righteousness is the 
cleansing power which makes us acceptable 
with God— if there is a God other 
than the God principle of Good. 



Alas! Where do men land when they 
throw overboard the God-given compass 
and attempt to steer by their own wisdom? 
And ten-fold is the responsibility of such 
a one who presumes to be a teacher of 
others, leading astray the sheep from the 
true shepherd whom he claims to represent. 
By and by some now following their 
teaching, will awake to the fact that the 
shepherds whom they liberally paid, led 
them away from the fold. 

The unreasonableness and unscripturalness 
of this minister's teachings, it is needless 
to point out to our readers; for all 
who have learned of the fact and philosophy 
of the ransom, and of the atonement 
of which it was the basis, can see clearly 
that it was not the Christ principle, but 
"the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself 
a ransom for all," and that it is this fact 
that is "to be testified in due time" to all, 
and not a "Christ principle" born in the 
heart of every man. 

How nonsensical is this last claim, how 
opposed to the Bible teaching, and to 
every experience and observation of thinking 
people, to talk about the Christ principle 
being in men in every time, and to 
argue therefrom that all have such an innate 
knowledge of Christ as to be a sufficient 
ground for deciding their everlasting future! 
Does not the experience and observation 
of every sane man prove, that 
the Bible is correct in the statement that, 
There is none righteous, no not one, and 
that all are born in sin and shapen in iniquity, 
because of inherited weaknesses 
and imperfections started and caused by 
Adam's disobedience when on trial as our 
representative? 

Had the apostle Paul interviewed this 
gentleman, he would probably have talked 
to him much as he wrote to the Romans (10:14), 
"How shall they believe in him 
of whom they have not heard? How shall 
they hear without a preacher?" No wonder 
people are coming to believe that a 
curse and blindness attends the laying on 
of the "holy" (?) hands of the Apostolic 
succession" (?), rather than any special 
blessing or ability to discern and teach 
the truth. As a further illustration of this 
teacher's ability as an expounder of the 
Word of God, we note the fact that this 
is the same gentleman who a year before 
drew upon him the encomiums of the liberalist 



press for his skillful manipulation 
of the miracles of the Bible, showing that 
there was little or nothing miraculous 
about them. Especially did he attack and 
to his own satisfaction overturn the story 
of Balaam's speaking ass, declaring that 
the jaw bone of an ass is so formed that it 
is impossible that it could have spoken. 
Poor man, he probably knew not that the 
Scriptures are so interwoven that it is not 
so easy to get rid of even so small a miracle. 
He should remember that our Lord 
(Rev. 2:14) and Jude (1 1) refer to Balaam's 
mission at that time; and that Peter 
(2 Pet. 2:15,16), referring to the same, 
adds, "The dumb ass speaking with man's 
voice forbade the madness of the prophet." 

But let no one mistake our object in 
calling attention to such teachings: We 
accord to this gentleman or Mr. Ingersol 
the same rights, to think and teach as they 
please, that under the laws of this land we 
claim and exercise ourselves. We are 
merely using this as one illustration 
among many, of the tendency of our day. 
We note, too, the fact that though the 
Episcopal Church covers with the mantle 
of her approval this teacher and his unscriptural 
doctrines, she would be arrayed 
against any who would present the Bible 
doctrine of ransom and restitution, as her 
church papers have denounced DAWN. 
What a commentary, too, upon the membership 
of the church over which this 
gentleman presides as teacher, that they 

R950 : page 2 

are so ignorant of the Bible that they did 

not know, or so indifferent and asleep 

that they did not notice and protest 

against such "another gospel." What wonder 

if we question whether there be any 

"men" in Christ, in that and similar congregations? 

Probably there are some 

"babes in Christ" among them, who for 

the time spent ought to be teachers, but 

have need of milk, have need to be yet 

taught the first principles of the gospel of 

Christ. But alas! how poor their chance 

of getting even one drop of "the sincere 

milk of the word that they may grow thereby" 

to become able to use strong meat in 

due time, while such a man, devoid of 

even the first principles of the doctrine of 

Christ, is their teacher and shepherd. 



Alas! these are but a sample of many 
other flocks of poor sheep. Let all who 
have the truth feed it to the sheep in the 
name of the Lord. 



R950 : page 2 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 

page 2 

New Buffalo, Mich. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I enclose 
$1.00 for four paper covered DAWNS. 
Will you please send me also a few copies 
of the WATCH TOWER. I thank God for 
the TOWER and especially the March number. 
I am so thankful for your explanation 
of the "no ransom theory." I have 
been taking the World's Hope nearly a 
year, and I know that it claims that the 
Second Death brings life and salvation to 
all. I am so glad now to be fully armed 
on this subject by the article "As the Serpent 
Beguiled Eve," in March TOWER. 

The Emphatic Diaglott and cloth 
bound DAWN came promptly. May the 
Lord bless the work which I shall try to 
do. Oh! how I wish I might be one who 
would be consumed with the zeal of the 
Lord's house. Yours in the Work and 
Love of the Master. M. T. G . 

McPherson Co. Kans. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-As my TOWER 
did not come yet this month, I did not 
dare to wait for fear of missing it altogether, 
and that I should not like. I do not want 
to miss one number as long as I live. I 
am fifty-three years old, and I have learned 
more about the Bible and God's plan of 
salvation in the last three years, through 
the TOWER, than I did in all the fifty years 
before, though born, cradled, reared and 
educated in the Methodist church by a 
father who was a Methodist minister and 
whom I have many times assisted in his 
labor of love. How strange, how wondrous 
strange, this marvelous work of 
God's! We are lost in wonder, and have 
to accept the prophecy, that in the time 
of the end knowledge shall be increased, 
as the explanation. O how grand, how 
glorious, how full of hope is that increasing 



knowledge: how it proclaims with the 
sound of the trumpet, "God is love." 
Yours waiting for The resurrection, 
A. D . 

R950 : page 2 

BRO. ADAMSON writes:-I am having 
grand experiences every day. It seems 
impossible to get through New Castle. 
Yesterday took 46 names and left in afternoon 
train for home. In no other town 
have I got in so many books to the square, 
and I have excellent talks. Some careful 
thinkers are investigating, and awakened 
sleepers by the dozen. Of course there 
are bitter opposers, but as far as noted 
people are willing to investigate for themselves, 
and I have fruit already and expect 
much fruit. You may increase the 
order to here to 300 copies. 

I find quite a number of people awake 
to present truth. The legions to compose 
the Elisha company are forming and Babylon 
is being less honored preparatory 
to its destruction. 

Since April 15th (the time I began this 
canvass) I have sold fifteen hundred copies 
of MILL. DAWN, and the greater part 
are delivered; and counting at same rate 
I shall easily sell 500 more— or 2,000 in 
all, by July 15th— 3 months' work. 
DAWNS on hand, April 15th, ... 70 
taken from Allegheny, Pa. . 80 
ordered to Greenville, " . 300 
" " Sharon, " . 200 
" " New Castle, " . 300 
" " Youngstown, O. . 500 
Total:- 1,450 

Please ship now, 
To Youngstown, O., 250 
" Warren, O. . . 300 

Total:- 2,000 

This is selling at the rate of 8,000 a year, 
but I think I will increase my sales after 
the cool weather sets in. I think I can 
see where I can improve my sales. But 
if I see I am to fall short of the number I 
expected to sell this year ending April 15, 
1888, which is 10,000 copies, I shall hire 
the delivery part done by other parties. 
So you may depend on me for the sale of 
the 10,000 DAWNS in a year. 

The "Lord of the Harvest" is greatly 
blessing DAWN, which greatly strengthens 



me, since my only desire is to be a co-worker 
with God in his way. My Father 
worketh hitherto (to this glorious end) 
and (now) I work (to this end). 

In Christian love and kind remembrance, 
joined by Mrs. A., ever in Him. 
J. B. A. 

page 2 

Bro. A.'s last Postal Card, June 23d, 
says:— Took 60 subscribers yesterday and 
20 to-day (9 A.M.). I think I am good 
for 100 subscriptions to-day. 

Fayette Co. Pa., June 20th, 1887 
MY DEAR FRIEND :-The DAWN was 
duly received. I have read it once and 
have begun it the second time. Before I 
tell you, what I think of the book, I would 
like to make a little confession. I had 
heard of the same views last winter, but 
could not believe it, and if you had mentioned 
the name of the book, I never 
would have sent for it; and if I had not 
promised I would not have read it anyhow; 
for in my ignorance I thought, if 
the Bible did not teach eternal torment 
for the wicked, it did not teach eternal 
happiness for the righteous. And so I 
read it carefully with my Bible to examine 
the references, praying if it was a work 
approved of God I might receive it, if 
not, that I reject it. And as I read, God 
showed me that it was the truth, and I 
could have cried for joy. I could not 
part with it. How I thank you, my dear 
friend. But for you I might never have 
seen it, or read it if I had. May God 
bless you in your effort to spread the glorious 
truth. I will do what I can with my 
one volume. At first I thought I could 
read it, but that I would never tell such 
doctrine as that to others, but praise the 
Lord it is a joy to tell it. 
Yours truly, Mrs. E. H. B. 

[The above reply came to a sister who 
had loaned DAWN to a thinking Christian.] 

R950 : page 2 

Arkansas 
EDITOR ZION'S WATCH TOWER. VERY 
DEAR SIR:-Enclosed find $1.00, my 
subscription for Z.W.T. and 50 cts. for 



the two "DAWNS" you so kindly sent me. 

As to your teaching I cannot express 
myself now, for I am all torn up. I have 
quit preaching. My friends know not the 
cause. I cannot preach. I sometimes 
regret that I ever gave your teaching any 
notice. But some how I devour the contents 
of "Z.W.T." as soon as it comes, 
and now that I will have some leisure, I 
will review the DAWN. One thing I must 
say here: If the spirit of the Editor of the 
DAWN and Z.W.T. is not of Christ, then 
I know not the spirit of my Master. 

Please let me have a few April TOWERS 
to loan to friends whom I think will study 
them. With an earnest desire for the 
truth of the Gospel of Christ in its beauty 
and simplicity, I remain your student and 
friend, J. J . 

[We know your difficulty, dear Brother, 
and fully sympathize and so does our 
Master. It is indeed a severe trial, to 
come out boldly and acknowledge former 
errors and advocate the truth in the face 
of so much organized opposition as we 
find to day. The meekness of a little 
child is indeed requisite and the Lord 
brings the test just to this point as at 
His first advent. Others are not fit for 
the Kingdom. The trial falls most 
severely upon those who by reason of education, 
and time, and study are best able 
also to receive the truth; and this is but 
reasonable also. Surely the truth is sweet 
as honey to every saint who tastes, and 
the after bitter experiences as a test, 
were foretold, and should be expected 
from the first. (See Rev. 10:8-11.) 

Receive the truth gladly, if you 
would have its full sweetness and 
strength. --EDITOR.] 

Amboy, O. 
DEAR SISTER IN CHRIST:-I have not 
been able to do much work for the Master, 
as my mother has been very feeble and 
needed all my attention. But my heart's 
desire to do has not diminished in the 
least. And I do know that God is blessing 
me more and more with a more perfect 
knowledge of the Scriptures, and with 
it a desire to tell it to others, which I do, 
wherever I can get "an ear to hear." I 
find that prejudice is a great hindrance 
to the reception of the truth, I think 



that if I am ever so situated as to get 
away from my own town, I could with 
the blessing of God, do better. 

[Our Lord testified that a teacher is not 
without honor except among his own acquaintances. 
ED.] 

My desire is, to see M. DAWN, in 
the hands of every thinking Christian, 
and not only them but every thinking 
person. For it is destined to work a 
great revolution; in the establishing of 
truth and the demolishing of error. My 
dear mother to all appearance cannot 
survive many months, and my work 
must be mostly to care for her now, 
but if I discharge that duty faithfully, 
our Father will give me something else 
to do. I try to keep the DAWNS preaching 
where I can find a hearer. I have a promise 
from the M.E. Minister that he 
will read it when he has sufficient leisure 
and I pray that God will open his eyes to 
see the beauty and harmony of his plan 
of salvation. 

Send a few April Towers to circulate. 
God bless you in your labors. 

Yours in Christ. MRS. F. E. R 



R950 : page 3 

LIFE'S STORMS ARE PASSING. 

The storm has broken, and the heavy blast 

That stifled morn's free breath, and shook its dew, 

Is dying into sunshine; and the last 

Dull cloud has vanished from yon arch of blue. 

I know it is but for a day; the war 

Must soon be waged again 'twixt earth and heaven; 
Another tempest will arise to mar 

The tranquil beauty of the fragrant even. 

And yet I joy as storm on storm awakes;— 
Not that I love the uproar or the gloom; 

But in each tempest over earth that breaks, 
I count one fewer outburst yet to come. 

No groan Creation heaves is heaved in vain, 

Nor e'er shall be repeated; it is done, 
Once heaved it never shall be heaved again; 

Earth's pangs and throes are lessening one by one. 

So falls the stroke of sorrow, and so springs 
Strange joy and comfort from the very grief, 



Even to the weariest sufferer; so brings 
Each heavy burden its own sweet relief. 

One cross the less remains for me to bear; 

Already borne is that of yesterday; 
That of to-day shall no to-morrow share; 

To-morrow's with itself shall pass away. 

That which is added to the troubled past 
Is taken from the future, whose sad store 

Grows less and less each day, till soon the last 
Dull wave of woe shall break upon our shore. 

The storm that yesterday ploughed up the sea, 
Is buried now beneath its level blue; 

One storm the fewer now remains for me, 

Ere sky and earth are made forever new.— Bonar. 



R951 : page 3 

MADE LIKE UNTO HIS BRETHREN. NO. I. 

In all things it behooved him to be made like 
unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and 
faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God- 
to make reconciliation for the sins of the people." 
-Heb. 2:17. 

The present time is meant by the Apostle 
when he speaks of the "Evil day" in 
which it will be difficult to stand. When 
he says, Take unto you the whole armor 
of God, that ye may be able to stand, it 
implies a defensive rather than an aggressive 
fight— a necessity for defending the 
faith once delivered unto the saints, from 
assailants. This is the case now, and the 
attack upon the truth is daily becoming 
more pronounced. The fact that errors 
have long been so mixed with truths in 
the minds of men, affords the enemy a 
grand opportunity for assailing the truth, 
now that the time for the fall of error has 
come. The armor must be put on before 
the attack comes; for during the attack 
we will be kept so busily engaged meeting 
and parrying the cuts and thrusts of error 
that we will have little time for the adjusting 
or polishing of the armor. The attack 
is already commencing, and the unarmed 
are beginning to fall; and surely in the 
end none of that great host will be able 
to stand— "A thousand shall fall at thy 
side." But while the necessity of a defence 



hinders the progress of the armed, 
yet every blow and every thrust will but 
prove the strength of their armor, and give 
the greater confidence in it. 

Such an attack is now being made on 
the advance picket line, in the claim that 
our Lord Jesus was a sinner like the rest 
of mankind. The above text is cited in 
proof of this, and the argument deduced 
is like this: Our Lord was made like unto 
his brethren in order that he might be 
a faithful High Priest, able to sympathize 
with tempted, fallen men, because made 
like them a sinner. If not a sinner how 
could he sympathize with sinners? they 
confidently ask. Their theory that our 
Lord did not come to ransom the world, 
needs in some way to show some reason 
for our Lord's first advent, and hence their 
claim that it was merely and only to be 
an example to men that he then came. 
And if it was needful for our Lord to 
come down to manhood in order to furnish 
an example to sinners, the same logic 
would demand the admission that he must 
have been a sinner in order to be able 
fully to sympathize with them, or to be 
really the example as they claim. 

This is a very delusive and ensnaring 
argument to all who are not firmly grounded 
on the rock foundation, to all who do 
not see the necessity for a ransom. Those 
who have seen clearly the ransom doctrine 
taught in the Bible, know that a 
ransom (1 Tim. 2:6) means a corresponding 
price, and such see that our Lord 
became a man in order to give this ransom 
for Adam and all represented in his 
trial and fall. Such see at once that in order 
to be a ransom for the perfect Adam, 
who sinned, our Lord must be a perfect, 
spotless, sinless, undefiled, holy man; for 
nothing else would be a corresponding 
price. And God, foreknowing the character 
of the present attack, has been arming 
us upon this very subject for years. 
See articles: "Perfecting the New Nature," 
March, '83; "Himself took our Infirmities," 
January, '84; "The Undefiled One," 
September, '85. But some have not put 
on the armor and are now liable to fall 
under such attacks as the one we now 
mention. 

But let us help these opposers to a further 
logical conclusion, by suggesting, that 
if their theory be correct, if it be true that 



our Lord's mission was to gain a practical 
experience with sin in himself, in order to 
be able to SYMPATHIZE with sinners, and to 
be able to ILLUSTRATE how they should 
each put away his own sin, then the logical 
conclusion must be, that he tasted of 
every kind of sin, in order to be able to 
sympathize with and succor every sinner. 
If their theory be correct, there is no escape 
from such a conclusion, and some of 
the more candid promptly acknowledge it 
and quote in support of it the statement, 
"He was tempted in all points like as 
we are." 

But what does such a theory and such 
an interpretation of Scripture imply? It 
implies a contradiction and setting aside 
of all those other scriptures which teach 
that our Lord was pure, holy, undefiled, 
in mind and body. Let us see that this is so. 
Imagine the besotted drunkard, so weak as 
to be unable to resist even the smell of 
liquor, or frenzied by it to recklessness and 
crime; imagine the opium user enslaved to 
his habit; imagine the miser worshipping 
his money and ready to sell life, health, 
and every comfort for money; imagine 
the spendthrift with his inglorious failing; 
imagine the proud and haughty in 
their contemptible weakness; imagine 
the libertine and prostitute whose every 
thought becomes inflamed with impurity 
so as to continually beset them with temptations; 
imagine all these vices and degradations 
and temptations and then reflect, 
that if the theory we are opposing be true, 
that our Lord came to be tempted in all 
points to the extent that all sinners are 
tempted in order to fully sympathize with 
each, and to be an example to each how 
to put away his sin, then our Lord must 
have had as unholy, ungodly, unmanly, 
impure, degrading thoughts and feelings 
as we have above described. And furthermore, 
as a pure fountain cannot send 
forth impure waters and a good tree cannot 
bear bad fruit, it would follow that to 
have such thoughts and feelings our Lord 
must have had a very depraved mental and 
physical organism. And our Lord then 
must have been not only as low and degraded 
in mind, body, thought and feeling 
as any man, as any sinner, but must 
have been the worst and most degraded 
of all, possessing all the bad qualities and 
weaknesses of all men of his own and every 



day, before and since. Sodomites and 
Antediluvians were filthy sinners, but 

R952 : page 3 

our Lord, according to this theory which 
we are opposing, was as bad as the worst 
of them, and as bad in addition as the 
worst of other sinners in other ages and 
in other crimes— the vilest of the vile. 

How absurd and blasphemous this error 
thus carried to its logical conclusions. 
For be it noted carefully, that if it be admitted 
that it was not needful for our Lord 
to go into the depths of sin to be able to 
sympathize and set an example, then it 
must be admitted that it was not needful 
that he should be a sinner at all, nor have 
a single imperfection, which is just what 
we claim and the Scriptures everywhere 
teach. 

But if our opponents should grant this, 
their no ransom theory would fall, for they 
would be forced to admit that our Lord 
being a perfect man corresponded with the 
first perfect man (Adam) who sinned; 
and they would also be forced to admit 
that when the uncondemned perfect man 
Christ Jesus died, he gave the very price 
or penalty that was against Adam— exactly 
a ransom or corresponding price. Thus 
our opponents would be forced to admit 
that the ransom and no other work (no 
example) was accomplished for the world. 

Having shown what our text does not 
mean we leave the explanation of its true 
meaning for an article under the same 
caption in our next issue. 



R952 : page 3 

"TO THE JEW FIRST"-AND LAST. 

We do not stop to consider all the reasons 
why divine favors were extended to 
the Jew first, before his Gentile brother: 
we will only consider one reason, and that 
to draw some conclusions therefrom. One 
of the main reasons for preaching the gospel 
of the high calling to the Jew first, was, 
that they as a people were already justified 
from sin and consecrated to God typically. 
Typically they were in embryo the holy nation, 
the royal priesthood (Exod. 19:6), 



through whom as his kingdom God had 

promised blessings upon the world. They 

were therefore better prepared to accept 

of the realities of which they already possessed 

the types or shadows, than would 

be the Gentiles, who even typically were 

without God and without any knowledge 

of his plan, or hope of sharing in it. 

While typical justification, and consecration 
based upon it, would not serve the 
purpose of the true, it was but a short step 
for the Jew, who realized himself justified 
and harmonized with God yearly, by an 
atonement made with the blood of bulls 
and goats, to accept of the better sacrifices 
of which those were but types, and to realize 
a lasting atonement not requiring 
yearly repetition. And if he, trusting in 
the typical atonement for his sin, had come 
into harmony with God and consecrated 
himself, he would not need to re-consecrate 
when accepting of Christ: having already 
consecrated to God under Moses the typical 
Leader and Commander of the people, 
the Jew needed merely to accept of Christ 
Jesus as the true prophet, priest and king 
promised. (Acts 3:22.) The same consecration 
would serve— the better foundation 
of real justification being substituted 
under it, instead of typical justification. 

It was for this reason that Peter made 
a difference with the Jews in speaking of 
baptism. He did not tell them to be baptized 
as a symbol of consecration, as Paul, 
the apostle to the uncircumcision, tells the 
Gentiles (Rom. 6:2-4), because as a 
people they were already consecrated to 
God, and the whole trouble was that they 
had been and were still neglecting their 
consecration— sinning against the covenant 
they had made. Hence Peter said to 
them, "Repent [of having violated your 
covenant, repent of having rejected and 
crucified the real King and Mediator sent 
of God of whom Moses was only a type- 
turn back to covenant relations with God, 
accept of Christ Jesus, his son, the true 
Mediator who by the sacrifice of himself, 
the antitype of the bulls and goats sacrificed 
by Moses, has sealed and ratified the 
"new covenant" promised by the prophets, 
and is now, highly exalted by God, 
ready and willing to fulfill all the promises] 
and be baptized in the name of 
Jesus Christ.. .for the remission of sins." 

The entire nation consecrated to God's 



will, departed from its covenant so far, 
that when God sent the long looked for 
Messiah and true Mediator, all but a few 
were blinded by their sinful pride, so that 
they saw not in him the clear fulfillment 
of the prophetic record. Instead of receiving 
him, and crowning him, and obeying 
him, the consecrated nation rejected and 
crucified him; fulfilling the prophecies 
ignorantly. And of all this sin, says Peter, 
you as a nation are guilty and we urge 
you to repent. And with many other 
words did he exhort them saying: "Save 
yourselves from this untoward generation," 
by faith in Christ, repenting for 
your sin in once rejecting and crucifying 
him, and show your repentance and faith 
by being immersed in his name. This will 
testify to your faith in Christ as the real 
Messiah, the real King whom God has 
sent to rule and bless you, and your entire 
submission to his rule, his will; and at the 
same time it will signify before God and 
men your repentance of once rejecting 
him, and your return to all the original 
covenants and blessings— For the promises 
are still open to you; you may yet become 
the joint-heirs of the kingdom, 
though our nation has been cut off from 
those promises as a nation: "For the 
promise [the 'high calling' etc.] is 
unto you and your children" [as well 
as to others afar off, not yet called], 
you are already in covenant relationship, 
therefore have every advantage, if you 
will realize it fully and return to it, believing 
in Christ Jesus, in whom all God's 
promises are to be fulfilled. You are the 
children of the prophets, and of the covenant 
which God made with our fathers.... 
"Unto you first [therefore] God having 
raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless 
you, in turning every one of you from his 
iniquities"— back to his covenant relationship, 
which now is established on a better 
basis, sealed by "the blood of the covenant" 
—everlasting.— Acts 2:38,39; 
3:25,26. 

Gentiles on the contrary had never 
been in covenant relations with God, and 
had no such sin of covenant-breaking to 
repent of, or symbolically wash away, and 
when after believing in Christ and coming 
into fellowship with him through faith in 
the ransom, they learned of the high calling 
or covenant, it then was proper for 



them to make a covenant of obedience 

to God and his Anointed Son, and to 

symbolize it by baptism, signifying the 

burial of their wills and their complete 

submission to God, in Christ, as taught 

by the apostle Paul in Rom. 6:2-4. It 

is for this reason that baptism never signified 

repentance to a Gentile, but did to 

the Jew. Baptism in water is the symbol 

of entire consecration, and Gentiles never 

having been consecrated, could not repent 

of having broken a covenant with God, 

and thus re-consecrate. But to as many 

Jews as had violated the covenant, it 

would imply a regret for that violation 

and a return to the original covenant. 

Our Lord though a Jew was not a covenant 

breaker, but as he was to take the 

place of the covenant breakers and suffer 

as a covenant breaker, it became him to 

R952 : page 4 

show his own consecration to God individually, 
hence his immersion. 

The point however which we wish to 
have particularly noticed is that first stated: 
that the Jew already consecrated to obedience 
and service to God, needed merely 
to repent of his transgression of that covenant 
and accept of Christ, the true, as instead 
of Moses, the typical Leader and 
Head, in order to make his covenant valid. 
And thus his immersion signified this repentance 
or re-consecration. 

To some extent the same principle is 
seen to apply to the children of believing 
parents during the Gospel age. From 
earliest infancy such may come to God in 
prayer as fully reconciled through the 
death of Christ, even before they are able 
to comprehend the redemption through his 
blood for the remission of sins. Such are 
born in a justified, reconciled or forgiven 
state, as relates to God, and hence as they 
come to years of judgment, may ratify 
their parents' consecration and give themselves 
to God's service without becoming 
"converted" (turned), unless they 
have first turned from God, and from their 
early state of reconciliation. This is the 
significance of the Apostle's statement in 
1 Cor. 7:14— "Else were your children 
unclean [sinners, unacceptable with God], 
but now are they holy" [justified, reconciled, 
acceptable with God]. This will 



account to some for their not having experienced 

the special change or conversion 

that some do. Those born in this justified 

state, being the children of justified parents, 

and from earliest recollection endeavoring 

to live in harmony with God, 

never needed to be converted— turned 

from their course. Their course was a 

right one, and to be converted or turned 

from that, would be a turning from God. 



But another point is now due in this 
connection, and is therefore seen clearly: 
We have seen the Lord's arrangement— 
that with the close of the Gospel age the 
call of the justified to joint-heirship with 
Christ in the divine nature ceases. The 
call to consecration and its propriety does 
not cease, but the offer of the great prize 
as a reward ceases, that class being about 
complete— enough having already consecrated 
to fill the elect number of the body 
of Christ, as prearranged in God's plan 
before the foundation of the world. 

We have seen too, that the calling ceases 
before all the consecrated ones are tested 
and proved worthy, and that the Lord 
warns these to take heed, lest others take 
their crowns (Rev. 3:11), showing that 
the number of crowns are limited, and 

R953 : page 4 

that there is danger that some of these 

who are written in heaven, as (probationary) 

crown-wearers, may come short and 

their names be blotted out. The question 

then arises, If the number is fixed and the 

members of that "body" can be neither 

more nor less, and if no more are "called" 

from among the justified ones, and if all 

those called and consecrated, should they 

all so run as to obtain the prize, would make 

just the correct number— where would 

God find any to take the places of any 

who in the present trial should prove themselves 

unworthy of a crown? It will not 

do to say that God could make the truth 

clearer to some of the indifferent runners 

among the consecrated, so as to stimulate 

them to run effectually, for his arrangements 

already make the truth as clear and 

stimulating, as the runner is sincere and 

faithful to his consecration. And to do 



more would be to measurably force them. 
It is not a question as to whether God can 
force us, but as to whether his "call" will 
so stimulate us, as to lead us to force and 
crucify ourselves. God is seeking those 
who love to do his will, and who delight 
in it, and not to see whom he could force; 
for he could force all. The prize is a favor, 
which none will be forced to accept. So 
then the question stands— Who would 
take our crowns, if we should prove unfaithful, 
seeing there are not too many to 
fill the elect number, and no more are to 
be called? 

We answer: God could fill the deficiency 
from among the Jews without violating 
any law or principle, and without forcing 
any will, in any degree. Suppose that an 
earnest Jew, desirous of doing God's will, 
had consecrated during the acceptable 
time— what barrier would there have been 
to his being received? We answer, one 
barrier only— his consecration was all 
right, but it had not a good foundation. 
It was BASED on a typical justification, 
made by typical sacrifices, instead of on 
the real justification accomplished by the 
sacrifice of Christ. If, then, the blindness 
of such, relative to Christ Jesus, were removed 
and their consecration moved from 
the typical to the real justification— from 
the sandy foundation to the rock— the 
same consecration would still hold good: 
it, if sincerely made, to God was always 
good, but unacceptable with God, because 
not made acceptable by an acceptance of 
Christ's death as the satisfaction for sins. 

So, then, if a Jew should accept of 
the real Lamb of God, as instead of the 
typical, his consecration would stand 
firm and date back to its beginning, notwithstanding 
its originally unsafe foundation; 
and if made in season— during the 
"call"— an acceptance of Christ would 
bring him fully into every favor enjoyed 
by Gentiles. And thus, as Paul declares, 
the broken-off branches may be grafted in 
again. (Read carefully Rom. 11:17-23.) 

Here, then, is a reserve from which the 
Lord may select crown-wearers to take 
the places of such as prove unworthy 
among those already "written," whose 
names must be blotted out. But here 
again, none can be selected, but those 
consecrated before the end of the call. 

Some may object, that the Jews are so 



blinded that it would require a special and 
almost miraculous interposition of divine 
providence to bring such to see Christ as 
their Redeemer, and that if we object 
to forcing Gentiles as being contrary to 
God's method, we must also object to the 
forcing of the Jews. We answer, that 
there is a wide difference between the two: 
The one would be forcing a man who has 
seen and consecrated, to fulfill his vows, 
while the other would be, forcing a man 
who has consecrated himself and is earnestly 
living up to his consecration, to see 
the real basis upon which his consecration 
should stand. The latter is no violation 
of the man's will, nor of God's law and 
arrangement in the matter. Paul, for instance, 
was consecrated and very zealous 
for God, but he was blind to the true 
foundation of consecrated service— redemption 
through the blood of Christ. 
God could and did miraculously open his 
eyes to this truth, because of his honesty 
in consecration. But had Paul ignored or 
despised his consecration, God would not 
have miraculously stimulated it, but as Paul 
himself declares, would have permitted 
him to take his course and become "a 
castaway;" for if he would not be influenced 
and inspired by the exceeding great 
and precious promises, he was unfit to be 
a member of the select, anointed body- 
all of whom must be overcomers. 



Another point needs notice in this connection, 
lest any should be discouraged 
who are called and faithfully running in 
this race, for this grand prize. It is this: 
If you are able to see this prize (with the 
eye of faith) and able to endure the reproaches 
of Christ and his truth and social 
and financial losses for the same, gladly, 
then, you may recognize yourself as having 
the spirit of the priesthood, and you 
thus have good evidence both of your 
consecration and acceptance. Your zeal 
and sacrifice prove your consecration, 
while the fact that you can see the "deep 
things of God" and prize them above all 
else, is sure evidence of your being priests 
in the "holy," enlightened by the light 
of the golden candlestick and strengthened 
by the holy shew-bread of deep spiritual 
truth. Such, as called ones, should 



go on faithfully to the end of the course, 
that their names be not blotted out, and 
that no man shall be given their crown. 
Thus make your calling and election sure; 
work out your own salvation to this high 
calling with fear and trembling, letting 
God by his truth work in you, both to will 
and to do his good pleasure. 

Many doubtless were consecrated long 
before they are now inclined to think, 
because they never saw until recently the 
fulness it implied. Our consecration dates 
from the moment we first sought to please 
God and do his will. We appreciate it 
more now, because of the morning light 
now shining upon our way. Remember 
too, that some of God's consecrated children, 
in their honest search for truth, got 
away among the swine, and would fain 
have eaten of the husks of Infidelity to 
their full, but could not, and finally by 
this route, because they were honest 
children of God, they were brought to 
see the truth they sought ignorantly in 
other channels. Remember that Paul, 
the persecutor for a time, was even then 
a consecrated child of God. It was because 
he was consecrated and earnest that 
he got the light. This was proved by the 
fact that as soon as he received the light 
he walked in it with the same zeal and 
consecration. In his case the light did 
not make him a child of God, but being 
a child of God was the reason for giving 
him the light, that thereby he might walk 
more perfectly; and so it is with us all. 



R951 : page 4 

THE NEW TESTAMENT AMONG HEBREWS 

Vienna, May 13th, 1887. 
"The new Testament, which was translated 
into Hebrew by the late Rev. Isaac 
Salkinson, missionary among the Jews of 
Vienna, of the British Jews' Society in 
London, has been reprinted here in a 
second edition of 1 10,000 copies. Of 
this number 100,000 have been bought by 
the subscription of one generous Scotch 
donor, who requested that they might be 
distributed gratis among Hebrew-reading 
Jews all over the Continent. Two missionaries 
lately came from England to 



make a distribution from Vienna, and 

they have been sending copies to about 

2300 Rabbis, many of whom have undertaken 

to circulate these Scriptures among 

their co-religionists. Very few have stated 

that they had any objection to read the 

New Testament. 

"In connection with this movement it 
may be mentioned that one of the most 
learned and respected of Hungarian Rabbis, 
Dr. J. Lichtenstein, who has been 35 
years Rabbi of Tapio-Szele, has lately 
startled his co-religionists by two pamphlets 
in which he affirms the divinity of 
Christ. The pamphlets being very ably 
written, have been noticed by all the leading 
newspapers, and have raised much 
controversy, for Dr. Lichtenstein professes 
to remain obedient to the Mosaic dispensation 
while recognizing that Christ was 
the Messiah." 

—Telegram to London Times. 



R953 : page 4 

DISCIPLINE IN THE CHURCH 

Some who are not fully aware of the 
perfect organization of the Church of 
Christ, seem to think that there is not, 
neither can be, any such thing as discipline 
in it. They see its members scattered 
all over the world, many of them standing 
alone, and some in little companies, 
often numbering only two or three, and 
meeting from house to house. They see 
no record of membership, hear no talk of 
church building, church debts, collections, 
etc., and see no salaried and titled ministry. 
Their ideas of church discipline are 
drawn from what they see in the various 
sects of the nominal church, where they 
occasionally see some of the saints judged 
by the standard of human creeds and cast 
out, but very rarely one of the "disorderly." 

The organization and discipline of the 
church of Christ is, however, most perfect. 
Its invisible Lord is fully recognized, as 
its only and infallible Head; His Word 
is authority for the settlement of every 
question; his plan of work is studied and 
acted upon by the various members; his 
spirit is fostered and cultivated in the 
hearts of all; and his disciplinary punishments 



are applied when necessary. 

It is not our purpose at present to enter 
into the details of the organization and 
effectual working of the true church; this 
we have done before. (TOWER of Sept. '84.) 
We now merely call attention to the discipline 
of the church— what is the appointed 
method of dealing with offenders, 
etc. That the church has important duties 
in the direction of discipline is clearly 
indicated by many expressions of the 
Lord and the Apostles. 

Discipline includes not only the dealing 
with offenders, but it includes the entire 
process of education by instruction, 
exercise, correction and punishment; and 
in cases where these methods fail and meet 
with defiant opposition from those who 
still claim to be members of the church, 
and associate themselves with it, it includes 
the cutting off of such members 
from the church. 

All discipline in the church is properly 
under the direction of the Head of the 
church only, and the object of such discipline 
is stated to be— "that he might 
present it to himself a glorious church, 
not having spot or wrinkle or any such 
thing; but that it should be holy and 
without blemish" (Eph. 5:26,27). No 
member of the church has any authority 
in matters of discipline except in carrying 
out the directions of the Head, though 
each member has a duty in so doing. The 
talents of each must be used for the benefit 
of all as far as possible. Not only are 
our talents to be used in widely proclaiming 
the blessed gospel, but they are to be 
used for the upbuilding, protection, and 
perfecting, of those who accept it and by 
consecration have become members of the 
church, the body of Christ. 

This important work requires carefulness 
both in our judgment of each other 
and in our study of the Word of God. 
But there is much misunderstanding with 
reference to the church's duty in the matter 

R954 : page 4 

of judging, from a failure to understand 
clearly the teaching of the Scriptures 
on the subject. 

Jesus said, "Judge not, that ye be not 
judged." (Matt. 7:1.) And Paul said, 
"Do ye not know that the saints shall 



judge the world? and if the world shall be 
judged by you, are ye unworthy to judge 
the smallest matters?"— 1 Cor. 6:2. 

A superficial glance at these two expressions 
might lead some to suppose that the 
Apostle was not in harmony with the 
Lord's teaching here. But when rightly 
understood, there is no lack of harmony. 

R954 : page 5 

Our Lord addressed those who had not 
yet received the spirit of adoption, for the 
spirit had not yet been given (John 7:39); 
while Paul addressed the church— consecrated 
believers, who had received the 
spirit, who had heard and accepted the 
call to be partakers of the divine nature 
and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ as rulers 
and judges of both angels and men. 

While the class thus addressed were not 
at all perfect, as his reproof to them indicates, 
they were able, by reason of their 
understanding of the mind of God expressed 
in his Word, to judge righteous 
judgment and to act upon it. As imperfect 
men, our judgment is generally warped 
and biased by prejudice and false ideas of 
justice, etc., but as "new creatures," we 
are able to judge from God's standpoint 
if we let the mind of God dwell in us richly, 
if we freely imbibe his spirit through 
his Word. 

In the extreme case of immoral conduct 
referred to by Paul (1 Cor. 5:1), he was 
reproving the Corinthian church for not 
judging such a one unworthy to be counted 
one of their number. With their understanding 
of the general principles of God's 
plan they should have needed no such instructions 
from him, but should have acted 
promptly on their convictions. And the 
fact that they did not do so, gave evidence 
of a cool indifference to the will of God 
which needed reproof. 

Imperfect human judgment might greatly 
err in dealing with such a case. Some 
would say that the crime was so glaring 
and so base that the offender had justly 
merited eternal torment, while others 
would say, Well, he has some good traits 
of character yet; he is kind, or benevolent, 
or gives largely of his means to support 
the church, and the good must balance 
the evil. But those acquainted with 
the principles of God's government know 



that eternal torment has no place in God's 

plan, and also that the sin committed was 

not the sin unto death, but that it was by no 

means excusable; nor could it be considered 

as balanced by other good qualities. 

They know also that such a one, though 

he may have made a full and entire consecration 

of himself to God, has shamefully 

violated his covenant and brought 

reproach upon the cause of Christ, which 

must be resented by every loyal member 

of the church, that he may feel their righteous 

indignation and his own degradation. 

And not until there is evidence of sincere 

repentance should such a one ever again 

receive the hand of fellowship. 

To thus judge and deal in such a case, 
is to deliver such a one over to Satan for 
the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit 
may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus 
(1 Cor. 5:5). When thus cast off by 
the saints as unworthy and unfit for their 
society, and entirely deprived of their fellowship, 
the adversary to whose temptations 
he gave way, will buffet him yet 
more; the blows of adversity will come 
heavy in some shape or form; and God's 
object in permitting it will be his reformation. 
How painful is such a measure of 
discipline; yet had such measures been 
pursued the church would not have been 
overrun with tares as it has been, and 
great Babylon, with her millions of professors 
merely, would not have come into 
existence. 

The necessity of judging in such matters 
will thus be seen to be most necessary 
to the purity and growth of the 
church, and to the honor of her name as 
the virgin of Christ. In difficulties or 
disputes between brethren, the church 
should find in its own members some at 
least who could point out the course of 
justice as viewed from God's standpoint. 
If in the future they are to be the judges 
of angels and men, they should at present 
be able to judge in such small matters 
without appealing to civil courts to settle 
their disputes. For brother to go to law 
with brother would not indicate that either 
has much of the spirit of Christ, or much 
love for the cause they represent. If they 
had real love for the cause, they would 
prefer, as Paul says (1 Cor. 6:7), to suffer 
injustice rather than bring upon it this 
reproach. 



But some of the saints seem to misinterpret 
Paul here and think they are forbidden 
to go to law with a worldly person at 
whose hands they have suffered injustice. 
This is quite a different matter and in a 
case of real injustice brings no reproach 
upon the cause. The church has nothing 
to do with such a case, because the man 
of the world is not at the present time accountable 
to the church. Paul more than 
once appealed to the law for justice and 
protection from his enemies.— Acts 16:37; 
22:25-28; 23:17; 25:10-13; 26:32. 

In the church there are also the necessary 
duties of reproof, exhortation, encouragement, 
and teaching, and the various 
members must judge when each is necessary 
and perform them in the spirit of the 
Lord and Head of the church, who directs 
and guides the church through the ministry 
of its faithful members, imbued with 
his spirit and instructed through his Word. 
And every member of the church should 
be ready at all times to receive as well as 
to give assistance, in the spirit of meekness, 
whether it be in the way of reproof, 
exhortation, or teaching, recognizing the 
Lord's object in all discipline, whether 
painful or otherwise, to be to present to 
himself a glorious church without spot or 
wrinkle or any such thing. 

BIND HIM HAND AND FOOT 

There is another feature of church discipline 
in which also the Head of the 
church acts through the agency of its 
faithful and loyal members. Our Lord 
foretold that in the end of the age, the 
time of harvest, certain of those in the 
church would secretly become its most 
subtle enemies, and thereby not only bring 
reproach upon the church and dishonor to 
her Lord, but spread a snare for the unwary 
feet of some of the saints. The matter 
is referred to in the parable of Matt. 22:1-13. 
When the King came in to 
inspect those called to the wedding, he 
saw one there not having on a wedding 
garment. As in the illustration wedding 
robes were provided for all the guests by 
the host, the fact of one appearing without 
the robe provided, showed great disrespect 
to the host. It indicated that 
though the robe was given him he preferred 
his own clothing and considered it 



better than that provided. 

The illustration is a striking one. Its 
location just prior to the marriage, points 
to the exact time in which we are living, 
the harvest of the Gospel age, just preceding 
the marriage of the Lamb, the exaltation 
of the church as the Bride of Christ. 
The robe of Christ's righteousness, purchased 
for all by his precious blood, is the 
wedding garment. And to appear in this 
church company without this robe, is to 
appear in the filthy rags of our own righteousness 
and to do despite unto the spirit 
of grace in despising the robe provided 
by the Lord by his ransom. And to so 
appear in his own garments is a practical 
invitation for others to do likewise. 

Such an insult to our Lord, the King, 
should be promptly resented by every 
loyal member of the body of Christ, and 
those members who are strong and able 
should promptly follow the King's directions 
—"Bind him hand and foot and cast 
him into outer darkness." 

Such is part of the painful duty of the 
present hour. Some who once walked 
with us in the light of truth, clothed in the 
righteousness of Christ imputed to them 
"through faith in his blood," have since 
taken off that robe and appeared in their 
own filthy rags, boldly inviting others to 
do likewise. While it is the duty of the 
stronger members of the body of Christ to 
protect the weaker, in every way possible 
against these baneful influences, it is their 
duty to bind the offenders and cast them 
out— in other words, to disfellowship them 
—to show up their true standing, and thus 
bind them hand and foot by putting others 
on their guard, thus restraining their 
influence upon the church. Sooner or 
later they will either put on the robe or 
withdraw from the light which reveals the 
filthy rags of their own righteousness. 

Thus the church must maintain her integrity 
and loyalty— "The King said to 
his servants, Bind him hand and foot and 
cast him into outer darkness." The darkness 
is that in which the whole world is 
enveloped with reference to God's plan. 
Light is sown for the righteous, and only 
the righteous may enjoy it. Though these 
once had the light, it is for them no longer; 
and such as sympathize with them and 
do not firmly reprove their course are in 
danger of being drawn by their influence 



into outer darkness with them. Take 
heed that ye, brethren, be not deceived 
or ensnared, or hindered in the race for 
the prize of our high calling. Watch and 
pray, and be firmly established in the 
truth; be fully imbued with its spirit, that 
you may be counted worthy to be of that 
glorious church without spot or wrinkle 
or any such thing. MRS. C. T. R. 



R955 : page 5 

VERILY, THEY HAVE THEIR REWARD. 

"Take heed that ye do not your alms before men, 
to be seen of them: otherwise ye have no reward 
of your Father which is in heaven. Therefore when 
thou doest alms, do not sound a trumpet before thee, 
as the hypocrites do, in the synagogues and in the 
streets, that they may have glory of men. Verily, 
I say unto you, They have their reward. But when 
thou doest alms, let not thy left hand know what 
thy right hand doeth." 

"And when thou prayest, thou shalt not be as the 
hypocrites; for they love to pray standing in the 
synagogues, and on the corners of the streets, that 
they may be seen of men. Verily, they have their 
reward. But when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, 
and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy 
Father which is in secret; and thy Father which 
seeth in secret shall reward thee openly." 

"Moreover when ye fast, be not as the hypocrites, 
of a sad countenance; for they disfigure their faces 
that they may appear unto men to fast. Verily, they 
have their reward. But thou, when thou fastest, 
anoint thine head, and wash thy face, that thou appear 
not unto men to fast, but unto thy Father 
which is in secret; and thy Father, which seeth in 
secret, shall reward thee openly." 

With what tender care every weakness 
of our fallen nature is pointed out in the 
Scriptures, that they may be guarded 
against, and not become occasions of 
stumbling to those endeavoring to walk 
the narrow way. When we realize that 
the Christian life is a life of sacrifice, and 
decide upon that as our course, a temptation 
is ready for us at the very outstart. 
It requires no little determination to come 
to that decision, and to solemnly covenant 
with God to faithfully sacrifice all our 
human will, interests, hopes, and aims, 
henceforth to be led only by his will. 



With the firm decision to thus follow in 
the Master's footprints, comes the blessed 
consciousness of the divine approval— a joy 
which the world cannot give, neither can 
it take away, except with our consent, or 
through subsequent unfaithfulness in the 
performance of our covenant. 

Having fully decided upon this course, 
and having begun to offer ourselves as sacrifices, 
our Lord warns us to take heed, 
lest while we continue to sacrifice, or to 
do any good work, we get to looking for 
human, instead of the divine approval. 
How unconsciously and almost imperceptibly 
we fall into this snare, if not taking 
heed. And therefore, just at the door of 
this temptation, we are cautioned to set a 
guard. If you have just done a good work, 
do not go and tell your neighbor about 
it. Do it with as little ostentation and 
display as the circumstances of the case 
will admit of, without any if possible. 
If you do good deeds for the approval of 
men, you will very soon get to doing only 
such deeds as are likely to bring their approval. 
And if you study to meet their 
approval, verily you will get your reward. 
But what a mean reward it is in comparison 
to the Lord's approval. The subtilty 
of this temptation lies in the fact that those 
drawn into it imagine that while they seek 
and obtain the praise of men, they also 
merit and obtain the favor of God. 

But this is only a delusion. He who 
searcheth the heart, reads our motives, 
and judges and rewards us accordingly. 
If we do good, benevolent deeds to court 
the approval of men; if we prefer to make 
long and devout prayers in public, rather 
than to commune with God in secret, and 
to search his word to know his will; if we 
make a show of our fasting that we may 
appear unto men to fast, then we may be 
sure that we have no reward of our Father 
which is in heaven. If done skillfully for 
men's approval, we will likely get the approval 
of some men, at least; but such 
need not expect any reward from God. 
They get the reward they seek, as our 
Lord said. God is not blind to our motives, 
and will not credit and reward us 
for services not done unto him. 

Fasting, under the Jewish dispensation, 
was a symbol of self-denial and sacrificing 
under the Christian dispensation. It was 
a common thing among those who desired 



a reputation among men for special sanctity, 

to fast often and to make as much 

capital out of it as possible by advertising 

their fasting, disfiguring their faces, that 

they might appear to men to be very self-denying 

and very devout. 

Against such a spirit the Lord cautions 
us. If you would present yourself, your 
time, your means, your efforts and all your 
talents as a sacrifice, see that you are presenting 
them to God and not to men. Do 
not go about with a sad countenance, telling 
every one as you have opportunity 
that you are carrying a very heavy cross, 
that it is almost crushing you, that you 
cannot stand it much longer. Do not tell 
them that you are starved and pinched on 
every side, and ground down by the iron 
heel of oppression; that the Lord's service 
is a hard service and his yoke a very heavy 
yoke. That is not presenting your sacrifice 
unto the Lord. That is representing 
a sacrifice before men to gain their sympathy 
and perhaps their pity. And such 
a course will bring its reward. Some will 
say, It's a pity of the poor things; they 
have a miserable time of it; they must 
serve a hard master, but they are fools for 
doing it. Why don't they act sensibly, 
quit fasting (sacrificing) and take all the 
comfort and pleasure they can get out of 
life. There is nothing to be gained as we 
can see by living in such a way. And 
very soon their kindly sympathy finds expression 
in efforts to dissuade you from 
the course of sacrifice, and in temptations 
to walk with them in their way. And the 
probabilities are very strong that such a 
one will ere long turn back, or at least 
turn aside from the narrow way. Looking 
back at the things behind prepares the 

R955 : page 6 

way for turning back, and makes the onward 
progress in the narrow way more and 
more difficult, and finally impossible. 
"No man, having put his hand to the 
plow and looking back, is fit for the kingdom 
of God."-Luke9:62. 

How carefully, then, should we heed 
the Lord's counsel— When thou fastest, 
anoint thine head, and wash thy face, that 
thou appear not unto men to fast, but unto 
thy Father which seeth in secret. Bear 
the cross cheerfully, with a hearty good 



will; rejoice in the privilege of being 
counted worthy to share in the blessed 
work of proclaiming the glorious gospel 
of the blessed God at any sacrifice— at the 
sacrifice of time and money which might 
be otherwise employed in selfish gratification; 
at the sacrifice of reputation, ease, 
comfort, convenience, friends, health, and 
finally of life itself. 

To such a one the yoke actually becomes 
easy and the burden light, just as 
our Lord promised that it should be, saying: 
"Come unto, me all ye that labor 
and are heavy laden, and I will give you 
rest. Take my yoke upon you and learn 
of me [how to bear it], for I am meek and 
lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest unto 
your souls: For my yoke is easy, and my 
burden is light." (Matt. 11:28-30.) Because 
he was meek and lowly in heart, 
Jesus could ignore his own will, cease to 
do it, and take upon him the yoke of the 
Father's will, and even though it led him 
to Gethsemane and Calvary, he could say, 
I delight to do thy will, O my God; yea, 
thy law is within my heart. It is my meat 
and drink to do thy will. My meat is to 
do the will of him that sent me, and to 
finish his work. 

The more we get of that meek and lowly 
spirit which treats our own will as dead, 
and labors with singleness of purpose to 
accomplish the divine will, desiring and 
seeking only the divine approbation, the 
more swiftly we will run the race for the 
prize of our high calling. Let us take 
heed then that we do not barter away the 
heavenly approval and crown and glory, 
for the mean rewards of this present life. 
Mrs. C. T. R. 



R955 : page 6 

"HOW CAN YE BELIEVE?" 



"How can ye believe, which receive honor one of 
another, and seek not the honor that cometh from 
God only?"-John 5:44. 

The question is so frequently asked by 
those just coming to a knowledge of the 
truth— Why is it that the ministers of the 
various churches do not see these things? 
The following clipped from the Pittsburgh 



Commercial, affords so pointed an answer 
to the question that we insert it here:— 

A PROFESSOR INSTALLED. 

The First Presbyterian Church, Allegheny, was 
the scene last evening of some very interesting exercises, 
the occasion being the installation of Rev. 
Richard D. Wilson into the Chair of Hebrew, Chaldee 
and Old Testament History at the Western 
Theological Seminary. Prof. Wilson is a young 
man, being but 28 years old, and is a student of the 
Seminary, being the fourth occupant of a professor's 
chair in that institution who has risen from the ranks 
of the classes. The salary attached to the professorship 
is $3,000 per year. 

The meeting was presided over by Rev. William 
Hill, D.D., of Indiana, Pa., President of the Western 
Theological Seminary. Dr. Hill stated the 
object of the meeting, after which he called upon 
Prof. Wilson to come forward, while the Trustees 
of the Seminary rose to their feet. President Hill 
read the formula of acceptance, which consists of 
subscribing to the confession of faith and system of 
discipline of the Presbyterian Church, and promising 
not to teach or inculcate anything opposed to the 
doctrines of the Church. At the conclusion of the 

R956 : page 6 

reading Prof. Wilson subscribed his name to the 
above pledge upon the official records of the 
Seminary. 

Dr. Oscar A. Hills, of Wooster, O., delivered the 
charge to the newly-inaugurated Professor, in which 
he said:— "You now belong to a picked company 
of men selected from among six thousand students. 
You should feel this a great honor, although at first 
you will feel a great responsibility resting upon you 
as being selected as a teacher of teachers." 

Prof. Wilson then delivered his inaugural address, 
which treated mainly of the necessity for a thorough 
study of Hebrew by Presbyterian ministers. He 
held that a thorough knowledge of the language in 
which the Scriptures were originally written was 
necessary for a true comprehension of disputed passages 
upon which many doctrinal points hinge. 

The above will serve to illustrate why 
they do not see, and to show the manner 
in which the yokes of bondage are so securely 
fastened about the necks of those 
who constitute the "clergy" of the nominal 
church; and especially of those in positions 
of special prominence. 

First, Everything is done in a manner 
to cultivate the spirit of pride, and to impress 



upon the people the idea of the superior 
learning, dignity, and sanctity of 
the clergy. For instance, the young gentleman 
referred to is pointed to the fact that 
he is the specially chosen one out of a 
company of six thousand, in a manner to 
indicate that of the six thousand he is 
manifestly the superior, the star; and then 
he is told that he should feel such honor, 
in other words, that his pride should be 
puffed up by such a comparison, and by 
the fact that he had been chosen as a 
teacher of teachers. An easy, honorable 
position is then furnished, together with 
a comfortable salary, and quite naturally 
such are disposed to let well enough alone, 
and take no thought for the future, especially 
if such thought would tend to unsettle 
present satisfactory conditions. 

How different is this from the manner 
in which the apostles and teachers in the 
early church were counseled. They were 
forewarned of the crosses and persecutions 
they must surely encounter if faithful to 
their ministry, urged to be faithful unto 
death, to endure hardness as good soldiers, 
and to expect nothing else in this life; to 
make full proof of their ministry, and to 
look for the reward only at the end of the 
race— "the reward which cometh from 
God only." 

Under the influence of present favor 
and flattering prospects, how readily the 
gentleman signed away his liberty and 
submitted himself to the yoke of bondage: 
—"The young gentleman was called 
upon to come forward, while the Trustees 
of the Seminary rose to their feet. The 
President then read the formula of acceptance 
which consists of subscribing to the 
confession of faith and system of discipline 
of the Presbyterian church, and promising 
not to teach or inculcate anything OPPOSED 
TO THE DOCTRINES OF THE PRESBYTERIAN 
CHURCH." To this pledge he subscribed 
his name. 

And what does that mean? It means 
that whatever of truth or error the Presbyterian 
church holds, he is bound by this 
covenant with them to believe and teach, 
or to teach it whether he can believe it or 
not. It means either that the Presbyterian 
creed expresses the whole of divine 
truth and nothing but the truth, or else 
that he must ignore all Bible truth not 
contained in that creed. In other words, 



if true to his covenant with the Presbyterian 
church, it is impossible for him to grow 
in the knowledge of divine truth. 

And yet professedly the object of his 
study of Hebrew, Greek, etc., is that he 
may grow in knowledge, and gain a more 
perfect understanding of the Scriptures, 
and teach others to do likewise. This he 
claims to be his object in accepting the 
office, and it is the professed object of the 
Trustees in inviting him to fill the Hebrew 
Professorship, and yet he is pledged 
beforehand not to teach what new truths 
he may discover, before he even enters the 
office. How absurd and inconsistent! Any 
man or set of men should be ashamed to 
make such claims regarding Bible study, 
in the face of their own public pledge beforehand 
to repudiate them. They must 
be sure that the people are sound asleep. 
We are unable to see how such hypocrisy 
could gain even self-respect. How could 
the most thorough knowledge of Greek or 
Hebrew or Chaldee help one to an understanding 
of the Bible, if he is pledged not 
to believe any advanced truth, even if 
his investigations should point it out? 

These are some of the reasons why clergymen 
as a class cannot see and are either 
non-committal or denunciatory with reference 
to present truths. They are pledged 
not to receive any truth not contained in 
their creed, and not to reject any error 
that is contained in it, so long as they 
stand in that relationship to their church. 
They are blind leaders of the blind and 
unless they apply the eye-salve of truth 
and come out of Babylon they will all fall 
into the ditch together. 

But we rejoice to find some true wheat 
among the great mass of tares in the nominal 
church, among the ministers as well 
as among the people, who recognize the 
truth and prove their fidelity to God by 
their willingness to endure hardness for 
the truth's sake. And upon no class does 
the trial come with greater force than upon 
ministers; and in this any who are 
struggling to be free should have our fullest 
sympathy. With them it means truly 
the loss of all things, and very naturally 
the flesh shrinks even when the spirit is 
more willing. It means the sacrifice of 
reputation, friends, and often even those 
of the family circle; it means the sacrifice 
of the present means of earning a living, 



and necessitates the turning to something 
new and untried. Yes, it is the finding 
of the cross which, if faithfully borne to 
the end, secures the eternal crown of 
glory. Truly, "Straight is the gate and 
narrow is the way, and few there be that 
find it." But who in his right mind, who 
believes the Word of God and the exceeding 
great and precious promises to the 
faithful, would barter away the eternal 
glory for the mean rewards of this present 
life. Mrs. C. T. R. 



R956 : page 6 

"HAVE THEY NOT HEARD?" 

"But I say, Have they not heard? Yes, verily 
their sound went into all the earth and their words 
to the ends of the world."— Rom. 10:18. 

By many, this scripture is understood 
to mean, that in Paul's day the gospel had 
been preached everywhere and heard by 
everyone. This is a mistake, as we shall 
see. To make such a statement, would 
not only contradict Paul's utterance in the 
fourteenth verse of this same chapter and 
elsewhere, but it would also contradict 
facts, for we know that the gospel was not 
preached before Jesus came, and that since 
then— during the few years after, when 
Paul wrote this epistle— it never reached 
in the remotest sense, one-tenth of all the 
world. It could not have reached the vast 
countries then undiscovered and unknown 
—America, Lower Africa, Eastern Asia, 
Australia, etc. 

The Apostle's meaning will be clear 
when his discourse is considered as a 
whole. The ninth, tenth and eleventh 
chapters should be taken together, and 
studied as one subject. Then it will be 
seen that the apostle, reasoning from 
the Old Testament Scriptures, is showing 
that the gospel is to be preached to all the 
world, and not to Israel only, as some had 
imagined. To support his argument he 
repeatedly quotes from the Prophets. This 
is not clearly shown by the ordinary translation, 
in reading which it is difficult to 
discern which are Paul's words and which 
the statements of the Prophets. 

It should also be borne in mind that the 



prophets seldom speak of things as future, 
but instead, they take a future standpoint 
and speak of things future as though they 
were present, or accomplished in the past. 
Thus Isaiah, in referring to the birth of 
Jesus, a thing then future, spoke of it as 
though already accomplished, saying, 
"Unto us a child is born, unto us a son is 
given." (Isa. 9:6.) Thus also "went," 
in the above text, should be understood; 
and the real meaning of the passage is seen 
to be Verily, their sound goeth, or shall 
go into all the earth. 

To set our view of Paul's argument 
clearly before you, we will briefly paraphrase 
Romans 9:30 to 1 1:36, placing 
Paul's quotations from the prophets in 
italics. 

[Rom. 9:30-33.] What must we conclude, 
then, concerning God's dealings 
with Israel and the Gentiles? We conclude 
that though Israel has been seeking 
to be right and justified before God, for 
over 1800 years, and the heathen nations 
were indifferent to and ignorant of needed 
justification, yet now that it is offered, 
Israel will reject and the heathen accept 
the gospel of justification and reconciliation. 
Why? Because Israel, as a nation, 
is really hindered, for they expect it by 
works, while the heathen will be better 
prepared to accept it by faith in Christ's 
finished work. Israel, feeling so confident 
that she can approve herself to God by 
works of obedience, stumbles at the simplicity 
of the Gospel and cannot believe 
that Jesus was the propitiation (satisfaction) 
for our sins, and paid it all. Therefore, 
instead of accepting of Christ's ransom, 
they stumbled over and rejected the 
only way to God. This was foreshown by 
the prophet's words: "Behold I lay in 
Sion a stumbling stone, and rock of offence; 
and whosoever believeth on him shall not 
be ashamed." 

[Chap. 10:1-4.] Though I speak thus 
plainly about Israel and their stumbling, 
do not understand me to rejoice in their 
fall, for I desire and pray that they might 
be saved. I do not accuse them of indifference 
and wilful unbelief; nay, they 
have great zeal for God, but they have a 
plan and way of their own, and are thus 
blinded and cannot see God's way and 
plan of justifying through a ransom. Hence 
they hope for salvation through the keeping 



of the Law in every particular, which 

in their degenerate condition is an impossibility, 

and reject Christ, who before the 

tribunal of justice became the ransom, 

substitute, or representative, of all who 

will accept of his service; and for all such 

he met and fulfilled the penalty of the 

Law-DEATH. 

[Vs. 5-10.] Moses explains (Lev. 18:5) 
that the man who does right according 
to the Law shall continue to live, and not 
die; but in all the time since Moses thus 
wrote, none have succeeded in meriting 
life; death claimed all. It is therefore 
useless to longer look to works. We are 
proclaiming that Christ is the end of the 
law for righteousness to every one that believeth. 
Jesus' death settled the claims 
of the law upon all who accept of his ransom, 
and this is the good tidings which 
we now proclaim— that a right to life may 
be had by accepting of the redemption 
provided through Christ's sacrifice for 
our sins. 

But, my brethren, as Moses also said 
(Deut. 30:11-14), this thing is not hidden 
from them, neither is it far off, difficult 
to understand. And those who banish prejudice 
and exercise faith will not say, Who 
ascended into heaven to bring Christ down 

R956 : page 7 

from above, or who descended into the 
grave to bring Christ back from the dead? 
But what will faith say? Faith will say 
just what Moses said (Deut. 30:14). The 
word (that is, the truth which we preach,) 
is nigh thee, even in thy mouth and in 
thy heart— it is reasonable and plain, that 
you may understand. Faith accepts the 
fact of the coming of Christ from above, 
his death, his resurrection and ascension, 
and finds abundant foundation in the 
words of Jesus, the Prophets and Apostles 
—unimpeachable witnesses. Unless you 
believe this, you of course cannot accept 
of his sacrifice as being the end of the law 
and the canceling of its death-penalty 
against you as a violator of it. 

But if you would lay hold of this great 
salvation, you must publicly and openly 
confess that Jesus is Lord— your Master; 
that by his death he purchased you and 
thus became your owner; for "To this 
end Christ both died and revived, that he 



might be LORD [owner, master] both of 
the dead and living" (Rom. 14:9). And 
you must not only own and believe that 
he is your purchaser, Redeemer and LORD, 
but also that he is a living LORD, that God 
raised him from death and highly exalted 
him to a higher nature than that which he 
gave as our Ransom. To believe and thus 
confess is acceptable with God, and to 
such believers it will be plain that Christ 
settled all the condemnation of the Law 
against them, and such may have joy and 
peace in thus believing. After all, it is with 
the heart that men believe. No matter 
how much their minds may be convinced 
of the truth, if their hearts are stubborn 
they will not believe. Brethren, get your 
hearts right, and then you will be able 
both to believe on and confess Jesus as 
your Lord. 

[Vs. 11-13.] This general principle, 
that faith is the condition of release from 
condemnation before God, is proved by 
the Prophet's words to apply not only to 
Israel but to all mankind, for the Prophet 
declared: "WHOSOEVER believeth on him 
shall not be ashamed." This shows that 
no matter how much preference was shown 
the Jew under the Law, there is to be no 
difference shown under the gospel, for the 
same Lord over all is rich enough to settle 
the claims of all that come unto him and 
ask for a share in the benefits of his ransom 
sacrifice. We have proof of this also 
in the prophecy which says: "WHOSOEVER 
shall call upon the name of the LORD shall 
be saved." 

[Vs. 14-17.] And this brings us to another 
question, namely: Is it not very proper 
to preach the good tidings of ransom and 
salvation through Christ to the Gentiles, 
as well as to Israel? Certainly; the quotation 
last made implies this; for how 
could they call on Christ as Lord without 
believing? and how could they believe on 
him except they should hear? and how 
could they hear without a preacher? and 
how can preachers go forth with this message 
unless authorized of God? Hence it 
is evident that God meant this good news 
to be preached to all the Gentiles as well 
as to Israel— to every creature. Not only 
can we reason it out logically thus, but 
we find a positive statement that the good 
tidings will be preached, which implies 
that the Law will be at an end, to every 



one who heareth and believeth. The 
prophets Isaiah and Nahum testify of this 
preaching, saying; "How beautiful the 
feet of them that preach the gospel of peace 
[reconciliation through his blood— the remission 
of sins] and bring good tidings of 
good things," which come as a result. 

But we must not hastily suppose that 
when preached all will receive the good 
tidings; for the Prophet, speaking of things 
future as though they were past, again testifies 
of the result of the preaching, saying: 
"Lord, who hath believed our report," or 
preaching? This implies that the real believers 
and confessors would be few, at 
least for a while. But this proves that 
faith is to be the result of hearing— of 
hearing God's truth— and not a result of 
keeping perfectly the Law. 

[Vs. 18-21.] Now we inquire, Will 
the fact that few will believe, prove that 
the testimony will reach only a few? No, 
it is bound to reach all, in proof of which 
I again quote from the Prophet. He says, 
speaking from a future standpoint: Their 
sound went [i.e. shall go] into all the 
earth, and their words to the ends of the 
world." This proves that all the Gentiles 
shall yet have this gospel preached to them. 
But what about Israel? Shall not they as 
a people come to know— understand and 
appreciate— the good tidings? Yes, but 
not for a long time; they are yet a stiff-necked 
stubborn people. As Moses said, 
God will [have to] provoke you to jealousy 
by them that are no people, and by a foolish 
nation will He anger you. Isaiah speaks 
yet more pointedly of Israel's rejection of 
the message and the acceptance of it by 
the heathen, saying: "I was found of them 
that sought me not, I was made manifest 
unto them that asked not after me." And 
speaking of Israel he says, "All day long 
I have stretched out my hands to a disobedient 
and gainsaying [self-willed] people." 

[Chap. 11:1-5.] In view of these declarations 
of the Prophets showing that 
Israel will have to be thus dealt with and 
disciplined, I ask: Hath God utterly cast 
away his people Israel? God forbid; for 
I also am an Israelite, of the seed of 
Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin. God 
hath not utterly cast away his people whom 
he formerly recognized and favored. Call 
to mind Elijah's prayer against Israel, saying: 
"Lord, they have killed thy prophets 



and digged down thine altars, and I am 
left alone, and they seek my life." But 
mark God's answer: "I have reserved to 
myself seven thousand men who have not 
bowed the knee to Baal." Even so at this 
present time there is a remnant who through 
God's favor will accept the good tidings 
and will not stumble. I Paul, rejoice, that 
I am of that favored remnant. 

[Vs. 6-8.] But now another point: this 
remnant is not saved by works of the Law, 
nor because they almost kept it, but by accepting 
of salvation as God's free favor 
through Christ. While Israel as a nation 
fails to receive the blessing sought by works 
of the Law, the chosen ones, the remnant 
of Israel, and those of the heathen who 
receive the gospel, will obtain a special 
blessing far higher than Israel ever dreamed 
of. These being justified, not by works, 
but by faith in Christ as their Redeemer 
(substitute), thereby gain the privilege of 
becoming sons of God on the divine plane 
and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, the Redeemer, 
in the coming kingdom. The 
rest, both of Israel and the nations, will 
be blinded to this privilege. The God 
of this world will blind all except those 
who by faithfulness make their calling and 
selection sure— a "little flock." 

[Vs. 9-10.] David also foretold Israel's 
stumbling saying: "Let their table be made 
a snare and a trap and a stumbling-block 
and a recompense unto them" [i.e., their 
downfall shall be over the very blessings 
which God gave them; over their blessings 
they shall stumble. God had given them 
food such as he gave to no other people. 
To them God had committed the oracles 
of truth, the prophecies, and the types 
which shadowed forth the sacrifice for sin 
and the blessings following that atoning 
sacrifice; yet becoming proud and vain 
of the honors conferred, they thereby 
stumbled over the very graciousness of 
God's plan shown to them in types]. Thus 
their eyes were darkened, and they were 
bowed down to see only the earthly 
promises. 

[Vs. 11-14.] But now we come to another 
question— admitting that Israel will stumble 
and is stumbling as foretold— I ask: Have 
they stumbled to fall irrecoverably? will 
they never again come into fellowship with 
God? God forbid that they should forever 
remain cast off. The significance of 



their fall is rather to be a blessing to the 
Gentiles, than a permanent injury to Israel. 
And we may reason, that if their fall from 
favor results in riches to the world (the 
Gentiles), then their restoration to favor, 
which God's promises guarantee, will imply 
an abundance of divine favor both to 
Jew and Gentile. I speak to you Gentiles 
thus, because being the apostle to the 
Gentiles I desire to show the importance 
of the Gentiles in God's plan, and to stimulate 
my countrymen to emulation, and 
thus recover some of them from blindness. 

[Vs. 15-21.] Thus is seen the breadth 
of God's plans. We know that there are 
certain promises made to Israel which must 
yet be fulfilled; and if they be temporarily 
postponed and a blessing unexpectedly 
given to the Gentiles, it argues that God's 
plans, as we now see them, are broader 
than we had at first supposed, and include 
Gentiles as well as Jews; for if the casting 
away of them opens a door of favor to the 
Gentiles, what shall the receiving of them 
be, but life from the dead. That is to say, 
God's promises to Israel are such as imply 
their resurrection from death, their restitution; 
and now that we learn that the 
world in general is reconciled to God and 
their sin atoned for by the ransom, we 
may reasonably conclude that "life from 
the dead"— restitution— will come to all 
the heathen as well as to Israel. We see 
Israel to be merely a first-fruit of the world, 
the first favored; and if God has a blessing 
for them, as promised, it follows that he 
has the same blessing for other nations; 
for if the first-fruit, or sample, be holy- 
acceptable and blessed of God— so also 
the mass which it represents, (the world 
in general) will be. 

The covenant promise of God out of 
which the kingdom classes are being developed 
is the root, and fleshly Israel as 
branches were first developed. But because 
of unbelief and pride, most of these 
were broken off, and wild heathen branches 
grafted in instead, with them to partake 
of the life of the root, yea, the very fatness 
of the promise; yet they should not be 
puffed up against the broken-off branches, 
but humbly and thankfully remember that 
they are occupying the place originally 
belonging to the natural descendants. 
Walk humbly, for if because of pride and 
unbelief they failed and were cast off, God 



would be as likely to cut off the wild branches 
under similar circumstances.* 

[Vs. 22-24.] Here we find two prominent 
characteristics of our Heavenly 
Father, illustrated— his love and his justice 
—his goodness and severity. He is abundant 
in mercy and goodness, but will 
by no means clear the guilty. His goodness 
is manifested by the promise and the 
blessings it contains, and his just severity 
in the cutting off from those favors of all 
the unfaithful. But even in cutting Israel 
off, God is merciful and kind; for even 
though cut off as a people from the chief 
favor, they still have every advantage as 
individuals, and as such, any may be re-engrafted, 
if they exercise the needful 
faith, though as we have already seen, 
their hearts are hardened by the past favors 
of God, so that most of them are less ready 
to accept of the gospel than the Gentiles. 

"THIS MYSTERY." 

[Vs. 25-27.] Here is a fact not generally 
known; it is a secret as yet— a mystery— 
and will show you that God's plan is more 
comprehensive than you have yet appreciated; 
and by showing you that you have 
not all wisdom, it will enable you to keep 
humble and to search for the further unfoldings 
of God's plans. The mystery is 
this: The blindness and breaking off of 
Israel will not continue forever, it will 
only last until the choicest, fittest branches 
from the Gentiles have been properly engrafted 
on the root— the Abrahamic promise. 
Then the broken off branches shall 
be reunited to the root. The fact is, the 
root or promise contains a double set of 
branches, first, the select branches, natural 
and engrafted, the spiritual seed of Abraham, 
the Christ which is to bless all nations; 
and secondly, a lower order of re-engrafted 
branches— Israel restored— the 
natural seed of Abraham through which 
the spiritual seed will principally operate 
in blessing all nations. 

Thus seen, Israel as a whole will be 
saved FROM THEIR BLINDNESS in due time, 
and will yet share in the very blessings 
they expected when they were broken off, 
viz.: the natural or earthly part of the 
blessings— the better or spiritual part of 
the Abrahamic blessing being conferred 
upon the elect, the chosen, who through 



much tribulation and crucifixion of the 
flesh and following of the Master are 
counted worthy of the chief honor, the 
spiritual blessings. In proof of what I 
state as to the recovery of Israel from her 
cast-off condition, I quote Jehovah's 
words by the prophet: "There shall come 
out of Zion the Deliverer, and shall turn 
away ungodliness from Jacob: For this is 
my covenant unto them when I shall take 
away their sins." 

[Vs. 28-30.] This prophetic statement 
shows us, beloved Gentile grafts, that 
though the natural branches are treated as 
enemies for the present, for your exaltation, 
yet really they are still beloved of God, 
and he has blessings yet in store for them, 
as promised to their fathers; for any free 
gift and promise which God makes is sure 
of fulfillment. He knew all about this 
temporary lopping off, before he made his 
promises concerning them, and knowing 
the end from the beginning makes it unnecessary 
for him ever to repent of 
a promise. 

Let us now analyze this prophecy and 
see that it implies what we have before 
suggested to be God's plan, viz., to bring 
the natural branches again into God's 
favor. Jacob clearly means fleshly Israel, 
and from these, ungodliness is to be turned 
away— but not until God himself shall 
"take away," or "put away," or "blot 
out" their sins. As elsewhere shown, the 
sins of the world are not put away, until 
the close of the Gospel age, until the sufferings 
of the body of Christ are ended. 
During this age, only the sins of those 
who now believe are canceled or put out 
of sight by God. But he who now justifies 
believers, will then justify them also, as believers 
in the ransom, and he will thus 
take away their sin through the same ransom 
which he gave for sin— even his Son. 

In turning away ungodliness a Deliverer 
is made use of. This is none other than 
Christ, the great Deliverer whom Moses 
promised. He shall deliver from all evil, 



*How we see this fulfilling in the breaking off of 
many of the Gentile branches— now blinded and 
being cast off. Only the elect few branches, "the 
little flock," will remain. They are no more respected 
than were the natural branches, and are 



broken off for the same cause.— Rev. 3:15-17. 

R956 : page 8 

from death, from pain and sickness, from 
ignorance and blindness, from every oppression 
of the devil. He shall bind Satan 
and set free his captives, for he is Jehovah's 
Deliverer. This Deliverer is the 
complete Christ, the members of the body 
with the head united, complete, no more 
twain, but one. This deliverer comes out 
of Zion; it is the first-born of Zion, the 
overcomer and heir of all things. Hence, 
before the promised blessings come to Jacob 
(fleshly Israel) the heir of the spiritual 
blessings must first be developed. 

Nor should we suppose that the blessings 
and deliverances will stop with Jacob, for, 
as already shown, they are but a first-fruits 
of restored mankind, and when they are 
turned to God, they shall become a channel 
through which the Deliverer will bless 
and release "all the families of the earth." 

[Ver. 31.] Lift up your eyes and take 
now a comprehensive view of God's dealings 
with Israel— both spiritual Israel and 
"Israel after the flesh"— and see how grand 
and large is the plan of God which as yet 
is only budding. As for a long while you 
(Gentiles) were strangers and aliens from 
God, and seemingly unloved and uncared 
for, yet now you have obtained mercy and 
favor, while fleshly Israel is cut off, even 
so these of the fleshly house are now unbelievers 
and cut off, that by and by they 
may obtain mercy and find favor through 
you: that is to say, God is blessing them 
at the very time he is cutting them off, for 
in blessing you and preparing the spiritual 
seed and Deliverer, he is making ready to 
bless them through you, when you as the 
body of Christ are complete (Gal. 3:29). 
Thus through the mercy which God now 
shows you, he is also providing mercy for 
them, to be manifested in his due time. 

[Ver. 32.] God treated Israel as a nation 
of unbelievers, and cast them aside nationally 
in order that he might have mercy 
upon them, and bring them as a people to 
inherit the earthly promises made to them. 

Looking at the deep workings of God's 
plan thus, in the light of what he tells us 
is future, as well as past, how wonderful it 
is! Oh, the rich depths of God's wisdom 
and knowledge! how useless for us to try 



to discover his dealings except as he is 
pleased to reveal his plans to us. His doings 
are all mysteries to us except as enlightened 
by his Spirit. Who knew this 
gracious plan, so much beyond human 
conception? Who helped the Lord to 
arrange such a plan, think you? This is 
not human wisdom. God only could be 
its author. A Jew never would have planned 
to graft in Gentiles to share the chief 
blessings of the promise! A Gentile never 
would have arranged the original stock and 
branches Jewish and himself a favored 
graft. No, the plan is clearly of God, and 
well illustrates both his goodness and just 
severity. Of him is all the plan, through 
his power it is all brought to pass, and to 
him be the glory forever. 

When the Spirit of Paul's argument is 
caught, it can be clearly seen that he 
quotes Isaiah's words "Their sound went 
into all the earth and their words to the 
end of the world," AS PROPHECY yet to be 
fulfilled, not to prove that the gospel had 
been universally published, but that it 
would be in due time. 



R957 : page 8 

REVEALED IT UNTO BABES. 

Some ask: How shall we answer those 
who reproach us with self-conceit and presumption 
in daring to believe and teach 
what Wesley, Whitefield and Knox did 
not, and great men of to-day do not believe 
or teach? They reproachfully inquire, 
Are you better or wiser than they? 

We answer, The path of the just is indeed 
the shining light, which shineth more and 
more, unto the perfect day. Consequently, 
those who walked even very closely 
with God could only have the light due 
in their day— instance, Daniel and all the 
prophets. (Dan. 12:9,10; 1 Pet. 1:10-13.) 
Were Wesley and Whitefield and 
Knox, etc., better than Moses, and Daniel, 
and all the prophets? 

And if some of to-day, who stand before 
the people as the exponents of Christianity, 
do not really walk in the shining light, or at 
most walk very slowly, should the humblest 
child of God stumble over them? Not at 
all. We have God's own word by which 



to prove all things, and if we do not do 

it, we alone as individuals are to blame 

for it. God's word assures us that it is 

not possible to deceive the elect— the faithful, 

who ignore all prejudice, and pride, 

and ambitions for human praise, etc., and 

simply follow the divine word, testing all 

things by it, though others great or small 

might reject it. 

We cannot judge the hearts of others in 
these matters, but we can judge our own. 
And by the grace of God we can stand 
firmly by our convictions, and boldly contend 
for the faith of which we cannot be 
ashamed. 

We can heartily concur in our Master's 
expression of gratitude to God when he 
said— "I thank thee, O Father, Lord of 
heaven and earth, because thou hast hid 
these things from the wise and prudent, 
and hast revealed them unto babes. Even 
so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy 
sight. "-Matt. 11:25,26. 



R956 : page 8 

INQUIRE YE, WHO IS WORTHY. 

The Lord and the Apostles seemed to 
regard the gospel message and the privilege 
of hearing it as marks of great favor. 
Our Lord, when sending the disciples out 
to proclaim to Israel the kingdom of heaven 
at hand, told them to seek for the worthy 
ones, when going into any city. (Matt. 10:11.) 
He told them that they had 
pearls of truth which the swinish would 
not appreciate, and upon whom it would 
be useless to waste valuable time, and that 
even when sowing seed on good ground, 
much would be wasted— choked with the 
cares of life and the deceitfulness of riches. 
Our Lord followed this course in his own 
teaching, also. With what a disregard 
of their favor or following he upbraided 
the Pharisees, How can you believe who 
receive honor one of another [who are 
puffed up with pride], and seek not that 
honor only which cometh from above. 
In contrast, note how patient he was, and 
how careful to make clear his Messiahship 
to the meek ones who, like Nathaniel, 
were Israelites and truth-seekers indeed 
and without guile. See how much time 



he spent in preaching to a congregation 
of one, and that a Samaritan woman 
who in sincerity desired to know the 
truth, and was willing to confess it. 

Nor should we regard this as merely 
our Lord's preference: it was more, it 
was his mission (as it is ours as his followers,) 
to preach the glad tidings to the 
MEEK, as it is written; "The spirit of the 
Lord God is upon me, because the Lord 
hath anointed me to preach good tidings 
unto the meek."— Isa. 61:1. 

But some one, misinformed as to the 
object for which the gospel is preached in 
this age, and perhaps as to what the gospel 
is, may suggest, Why to the meek? 
Why should not our Lord, and we, preach 
especially to those who are not meek? 
Why not preach to the proud, and to the 
wise and great, who professing to be much 
and highly esteemed among men, are abominable 
in the sight of God— blind leaders 
of the blind? Why not preach to such? 
Because it would be useless. The gospel, 
the real gospel, has no attraction for such, 
and time is always wasted, when thus spent. 
"Have any of the Scribes or Pharisees believed 
on him?" was asked at the close of 
our Lord's ministry; and had he confined 
his labors to that class, he perhaps would 
have made no disciples. 

The truth, the gospel, affects and influences 
any heart into which it enters, but 
it can only find root in a good, deep and 
prepared soil. If doubts and hopes have 
alternately plowed and harrowed the heart, 
so that the desire for the truth is deep and 
strong, and if the mind is free from the 
crust of prejudice and open to receive the 
seed of truth, there is good ground for the 
gospel message; for such a one has reached 
the point of meekness, and is ready to receive 
the Word of God, whoever may 

R957 : page 8 

scatter the seed. The Gospel appeals to 
such to-day, as well as at the first advent. 
It satisfies the longings of such, as nothing 
else could. But now, as then also, 
the bigoted self-satisfied ones who are at 
ease in Zion, who say, We are rich in 
learning and increased in good works and 
have need of nothing; let us alone that 
we may enjoy our ease, and glory, and honor 
of men— these are not "the meek"; 



and the true gospel will not be received 
by such. Seek those who are worthy, 
those who hunger after righteousness- 
truth. 

And, beloved, as we seek to teach the 
meek the glad tidings which we have received, 
let us see to it that we maintain 
always the meek childlike spirit, without 
which we would not have been worthy of 
the truth either. Let us remember the 
meekness of our Master, though Master 
and Teacher above all. The promise is, 
"The meek will he guide in judgment, 
and the meek will he teach his way," and 
"The meek shall increase their joy in the 
Lord."-Psa. 25:9; Isa. 29:19. 



R957 : page 8 

GOD WILL NOT FORGET. 



"For God is not unrighteous to forget your work 
and labor of love, which ye have showed toward 
his name, in that ye have ministered to the saints, 
and do minister."— Heb. 6:10. 

"Can a woman forget her sucking child? Yea, 
they may forget, yet will I not forget thee [Zion, 
the Church]. Behold I have graven thee upon the 
palms of my hands; thy walls are continually before 
me."-Isa. 49:15. 

As we read these assurances of tenderest 
love on the part of our heavenly Father, 
and then consider our low estate, we can 
scarcely realize that we are indeed the objects 
of that love. Yet if we are humbly 
walking in the narrow way, these assurances 
are for our comfort and consolation. 

Your sphere may seem to be a narrow 
one; your opportunities for engaging in 
the special work of the present hour may 
be necessarily very limited: yet if you are 
lovingly laboring to do all you can under 
circumstances which you cannot control 
to improve, and doing that service with 
your whole heart cheerfully, then be assured 
that the Lord appreciates it. And 
he is not unrighteous to forget it because 
it is small and does not amount to much. 

God is not measuring us by the magnitude 
of the results of our labors, but by 
the spirit which we develop and manifest 
in their performance. If we have the spirit 



of our Master, our constant aim and effort 
will be not only to do something, but to 
do all we can in the special work which 
God has marked out for this special time. 
In some cases that all is a great deal more 
than in other cases. We are more likely 
to under-estimate than to over-estimate 
our abilities and opportunities, and 
thus to accomplish much less than 
we might. But if faithful stewards, 
we will endeavor to invest our talents to 
the best possible advantage, according to 
our best judgment, so as to secure the 
largest possible results. The efforts of such 
will also be directed in the exact line which 
the Lord indicates— first to the saints, to 
minister to them and build them up in the 
faith, and to encourage and strengthen the 
weaker ones among them, and in brief to 
serve them in any way. 

Such service and labor of love the Lord 
will not forget. Sooner could a mother 
forget her infant child than could God 
forget these precious ones. 



page 8 

Tipton, Mo. 

DEAR SIR:— Having a desire to do 
more in the Master's service, I write to 
inform you how I am situated, and ask 
your advice as to how I could serve best. 
I am a woman, and obtain a livelihood as 

a servant at the Hotel. I wait on 

table and make beds, and what spare time 
I have I use to introduce your paper and 
book in this town. I conclude that there 
is not much wheat here to gather, but 
every kernel must be tested; therefore I 
write to you for advice as to the best course 
to pursue. I am free, I have nothing to 
hold me at one place and think I could 
do more for the Master to take some work 
that would require traveling from town to 
town. I will soon get over this town. 

On the evening of April 7th. last I commemorated 
the Lord's death alone with 
great joy and peace. This is the second 
time I have commemorated, this time as 
a blessed privilege and understandingly, 
while at the first partaking I thought it a 
duty and did not understand its import. 
That was in 1870 while a member of the 
Christian Church. Yours in fellowship 



and service, M. D. V 



[Since the above was written, the sister 
has seen the plan of work suggested in 
May TOWER and gone heartily into the 
work taking orders for DAWN. As a result 
her first order was for fifty copies, and 
we doubt not, she will soon average one 
hundred copies per week.— EDITOR.] 



R957 : page 1 

VOL. VIII. PITTSBURGH, PA., AUGUST, 1887. NO. 12. 



page 1 

WE HAVE about a hundred copies of 
cloth-bound DAWNS VOL. I. which are 
slightly scuffed, "shop-worn" outside, but 
clean and perfect inside. They are just 
the thing for loaning. While they last 
you can have them at 40 cents each,— by 
mail 10 cents extra for postage. 



R958 : page 1 

DAWN VOL. I. IN ITS THIRTY-SEVENTH 
THOUSAND. 

You will be glad to learn that the thirty-seventh 
thousand of M. DAWN VOL. I. is 
now on the press. The extreme heat of 
the past month reduced the demand somewhat 
and enabled us to get fully caught 
up. We are now ready again to fill orders 
from the new lot. New laborers are 
continually entering the harvest field, and 
the sixteen chapters of DAWN, as sixteen 
sermons, are thus being delivered daily to 
hundreds who could not be reached so well 
in any other manner. In each case too a 
special blessing seems to be upon the 
laborers. 



R957 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER 

We are impressed with the fact that 
the present is a most favored time for the 
saints in every respect. It is favorable 
for personal growth in grace and knowledge. 
How the early truth-seekers of 
this age, the Bereans, etc., would have 
rejoiced at such student's helps as the 
Diaglott, Young's Concordance, Dawn, 
and the monthly Towers furnish; besides 
which, are the numerous histories, cyclopaedias, 
dictionaries and other works of 
reference accessible to all in the public 



libraries of even moderate sized towns. 
With such helps more can be learned of 
God's Word and plan in a day, than it 
formerly would have been possible to 
gather in a year. The only obstacle is, 
that now science, philosophy, politics, 
pleasure-seeking, and above all money-seeking, 
are also alive, and so absorbing, 
that only those well consecrated have grace 
enough to resist these many claims upon 
time and strength, and to use the abundantly 
provided helps, to grow thereby. 

And if the opportunities for getting good, 
discerning the truth, etc., be favorable 
far beyond every other time, how does the 
present compare with the past in opportunities 
for letting the light shine upon 
others? There never was a time so favorable 
as the present for Christian effort in 
the vineyard. While it is true that sectarianism 
has closed the churches of to-day 
against the truth more thoroughly four 
fold than the Jewish synagogues were 
closed against it in Paul's day,— while he 
could go into the synagogue and preach 
Christ among the Scribes, Pharisees and 
hypocrites without hindrance, for a while 
at least, until he laid the plan before 
them, and while you have found it impossible 
to do this, being debarred by the stricter 
usages, regulations, etc., established not 
by the Lord or his Apostles, but by a self-constituted 
"clergy"— yet, for all this our 
day is far more favorable than Paul's day. 

If we would travel from place to place 
to meet with believers we can do as much 
traveling in a week, as Paul could do in a 
month or more, and with much more 
comfort. If we would preach, though we 
cannot often do so to large gatherings by 
voice, we live at a time when every one 
can read and write, which only the very 
few could then do, and when the printed 
gospel is cheap and convenient, and often 
more effective than oral sermons. 

The anxious willing heart can do far 
more thus, than Acquilla and Priscilla 
could do in their way and time with the 
same amount of effort. Nay, our arms are 
not shortened; for we can preach with 
both the printed and written page through 
the agency of the wonderful mail systems 
of our day, to friends and strangers the 
world over, and at almost no cost. 

Another and not the least of our privileges 
and advantages over those of the 



early church, is that the ministry of to-day 
can be self-supporting. While Brother 
Paul was compelled to labor at tent-making 
at times while preaching the gospel, when 
necessary means failed to come from the 
brethren, Brother Adamson and others 

R958 : page 1 

of to-day may most effectively preach the 
gospel from house to house while the necessary 
provision for the daily bread falls as 
noiselessly as did the manna from heaven. 
Selling DAWN they are able to pay their 
way and reach far greater numbers and in 
a much more comfortable manner than 
was Paul's privilege. 

Then, too, our day is favored in that 
though still there are religious bigots who 
correspond to those shrine-makers to Diana 
whom Paul encountered at Ephesus, 
ready to incite the people against us because 
their craft is in danger (Acts. 19:23,35-41), 
yet now even more than then, 
the civil authorities protect our persons 
from violence, as the "town clerk" 
helped them; and those who go about the 
Master's work now with earnest sobriety, 
wise as serpents and harmless as doves, 
will not be either beaten with stripes or 
stoned. 

Seeing what grand opportunities the 
Lord has given us, should we not bear 
much fruit? and will he not look for much 
fruit on every branch of the vine truly 
united to him? Surely the Master will 
expect fruit, not only in the beautiful graces 
of Christian character but also in faithful 
earnest effort for the spread of the glad 
tidings to honor him and bless our fellows. 

Out of the abundance of the heart the 
mouth speaketh. This is a close test of 
our spiritual condition always; for if the 
Lord, the truth, the kingdom, and the 
service of others is uppermost in our hearts, 
they will come most freely from our lips 
and pens, and will find some outlet. 

The above is the present outlook; the 
outlook for the future we leave for the 
"View" of next issue. 



R958 : page 1 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 



Falls Church, Va., June 26, 1887. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I read in this 
month's Tower a selected article entitled 
"The Son of God and the Son of Man." 
The question is asked, Why does Jesus call 
himself the Son of Man? and the writer 
seems to think the answer is found in the 
fact that he descended from David, and calls 
attention to the fact that the Greek emphasis 
makes the term read— The Son of 
the Man. 

It seems to me that the answer must be 
sought for farther back than David, who 
was not the man, but a man. Adam might 
be called the man, because God created 
him by a special act, but David was the 
natural son of Jesse. When God promised 
a Deliverer who should bruise the Serpent's 
head, he was to be the seed of the 
woman. Adam was not mentioned because 
he was legally dead, as were all his 
descendants, David with the rest— In 
Adam all died. But if we come down to 
the giving of the law to the children of 
Israel we get further light on what is to 
many a very strange provision of that law. 
If a man died without heirs his brother 
took his widow and raised up seed unto 
the dead brother. The children were 
literally the children of the living man, but 

R959 : page 1 

were counted to the dead brother. We 
see by the light of this typical provision 
of the law, why God promised the Deliverer 
through the woman and not through the 
man. Adam had sinned and was legally 
dead, and therefore could have no living 
children; all would be like himself dying 
and reckoned dead, while justice demanded 
as a ransom from death an exact equivalent, 
the sacrifice of a living, perfect, 
man. In due time God raised up just 
that man, in the person of Jesus, born 
of the virgin Mary; not by the will of 
man, but by the power of God. He became 
so to speak the son of the widow of 
the dead Adam by a living father, and by 
the provision of the law he came to fulfill 
was reckoned unto the dead Adam the 
only living son, therefore he had a right 
to be called the son of the man. 
G. E. R 



page 1 

Ohio, July, 1887. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-It is getting to 
be something of a task for me to write 
even a short letter. 

It seems a long time since I received a 
letter from you, but I know that the 
Master's work makes a demand on all your 
time, and I will not complain. I am 
quite feeble and not able to do much more 
physically than to sit in my easy chair 
from morning to night. But the Lord is 
very gracious to us, and bestows blessings 
more than I can enumerate. Among them 
we number the visits of the TOWER. 

We enjoyed the May WATCH TOWER 
much. Glad there was so much interest 
in last Passover meeting. I never saw before, 
that the cup is drank only by the Priest 
class, while the bread is eaten by all believers. 
If this be correct, (and I do not doubt 
it) how true is the counterfeit, (Papacy) to 
the genuine. She gives the cup to the 
priest only, and the wafer to the people. 

Am greatly pleased with "The body of 
Sin destroyed." Those who are misled after 
a careful study of that article, are not, it 
would seem to me, very anxious to find the 
truth. All I can now do, is to pray that 
God may keep the eye single that the 
whole body may be full of light. 

I deem Sister R.'s article in July TOWER 
"Discipline in the church" very timely. 
It surely is time that any who deny the 
great foundation, that the Lord bought 
them, should be cut off; [ignored as brethren]: 
else the body would be without 
spot, etc. 

I think I am gradually failing, as my 
strength is growing less, my lungs seem 
to be worse, and I am losing my flesh, 
but though heart and flesh fail, my trust in 
God shall never fail. He most gloriously 
sustains us day by day. 

We send our love to you both. 
Affectionately, S. T. TACKABURY. 

Texas Co., Mo. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I have canvassed 
about one half of Mountain Grove, and 
got 36 subscribers. I think I will get 
65 or 70 there, and will want 10 or 15 
extra copies to sell to acquaintances between 
there and Seymour; therefore 
please send me 80 copies, paper bound 



DAWNS. 

I have desired to sell M. DAWN ever 
since I read it last fall, but was not able 
to pay my expenses and do so, and I did 
not think I could sell enough of them to 
pay expenses. My intention now is to 
spend the remainder of my life selling 
MILLENNIAL DAWN. My reason for supposing 
I could not make expenses selling 
DAWN was that I had tried to sell FOOD and 
take orders for Z.W.T. and failed to 
clear expenses. 

May the Lord continue to strengthen 
you in the work. Yours in fellowship 
and service. J. R . 

Lebanon, O., June 18, 1887. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I am laboring 
on slowly in the way which the Lord 
seems to have outlined for me one in which 
self is wholly subjected to the law of the 
Spirit, and no allowance made for the 
flesh. I am slowly passing from the milk 
stage of the gospel into that in which I can 
endure some stronger meat; I strive to 
forget the things of my gentile state and 
press on and reach after the things which 
pertain unto godliness. 

My Z.W. TOWERS samples are about exhausted. 
I sent many of them by mail, 
and I am constantly receiving letters from 
those of the faith and oh! how wonderful! 
they all speak the same things, having the 
same mind and judgment. 

page 2 

How easy to be of one mind when once 
we reach the fat place in God's unlimited 
pasture lands. It matters little how lean 
the sheep may be on leaving their sectarian 
enclosures, soon after reaching the rich 
succulent pastures of Christ's fold they 
begin to improve. Some of us are having 
a weekly Bible meeting in which we search 
the Scriptures to see if these things be true. 
The Lord is with us and we are getting 
stronger and stronger. 

In conclusion, I cannot refrain from 
saying that I am so glad I am free; free from 
those awful shackles of a benighted and 
misguided mind and conscience. I shall 
always thank God for your instrumentality 
in lifting this burden from my tired 
shoulders, and pointing me to the glorious 
light. I remain Yours in Hope and service. 



J. P. M . 

Johnson Co. 111. June 20, 1887. 

BRO. RUSSELL:-I received the circulars 
and followed the plan of using them in 
canvassing our town for a while. But I soon 
found this too laborous, so I adopted the 
talk plan and put energy and soul into 
the work with the following results: I 
went from home two miles to town and 
took 48 orders for the paper bound DAWN 
and 3 for the cloth bound, 5 1 in all, in 
less than one half day. 

I enclose on a separate sheet an order 
for more books; also Money Order for the 
same. Yours for the Master's honor. 
H. N. A . 

Willow Springs, Mo. 
C. T. RUSSELL, DEAR BROTHER:- 

Since writing to you before, I have had a 
severe attack of Pneumonia Fever in which 
I came near dying, and from which I have 
not yet recovered. I am now so that I 
cannot walk more than a quarter of a mile 
without resting, and every one or two 
hours I have to lie down and rest, so that 
in four days and a half, I have been able 
to put in only sixteen hours work. But 
during that time, I have taken fifty orders 
for the paper bound DAWN, and eight for 
the cloth bound. I am going from here 
to Cabool, to canvass there while I am 
waiting for the enclosed order to come. I 
desire to spend the remainder of my days 
canvassing for the DAWN. Fifty eight 
copies in sixteen hours beats any preaching 
I ever knew, 16 sermons to the copy 
makes 928 sermons in 16 hours. 

The advice of the Doctor is that I go 
West for my health; so I wish to canvass 
in that direction. Hoping to hear from 
you soon, I am yours in the service of our 
Lord. J. R . 

R959 : page 2 

London, England. 
DEAR SIRS:-I have been both reading 
and praying with friends over the truths 
contained in the book entitled "Food for 
thinking Christians"— and we do feel that 
our loving Father has caused us so to do. 
I have had that book by me for about five 
years, and never thought of reading or 
becoming in any way, interested in it or 



the subjects upon which it dwells: but 
blessed be God! He has caused us (a few 
young men and women) to thirst and hunger 
after righteousness, and also implanted 
within us a desire to "come out and be 
separate," and to fully consecrate ourselves 
to Him who has redeemed us: and also 
to know of the things of God that we 
may be the better able to serve Him. 

Will you kindly send me any further 
matter upon these or other truths which 
will be to the glory of God. We do 
earnestly ask for your prayers. We pray 
for you: May the grace of the Lord Jesus 
be with you. I remain Yours in the Lord, 
FRED S. D . 

Columbus, O., July 4, '87. 
DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL: 

—It has been sometime since you have 
had a letter from me, but it has not been 
from lack of love or zeal, but because I 
wanted to give a good account of myself. 
Of course the Master knows, but one 
wants the brethren to know also; for "we 
all are one in Christ." 

I have wanted to canvass with the DAWN 
ever since it came out, but from one 
cause or another I could not get out with 
them until the 24th of June. I am naturally 
very timid with strangers, and that made 
it quite hard for me, but with the aid of 
the Master, I have succeeded, not in 
selling the DAWN, but in overcoming the 
flesh. I trembled like a leaf in the first 
house, but was treated so well that I soon 
gained composure and retained it throughout. 
I think the Lord was with me. Although 
I did not take any names, I found 
quite a number of truth-hungry people to 
whom I loaned the TOWER. 

I have great hope of selling a few DAWNS 
at least. I suffer with terrible headaches, 
which lay me up for several days, and have 
to be careful about getting too tired. I 
tried to follow as carefully as possible the 
directions in reference to canvassing. I 
shall never forget my first effort, how I 
stood at the gate and said, Dear Lord I 
cannot. But now I can say, My Master I 
can, I must. Our Father is able to help us 
in every undertaking that is right. Blessed 
be his holy name. 

Enclosed find Money Order for $5.00. 
Please send DAWNS as soon as possible. 
Your sister in Christ. B. F. M 



page 2 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Enclosed 
you will find $5.00. Please send MILL. 
DAWN to the following persons:... 

Please send some April TOWERS for distribution 
and for the balance of the money 
please send me M. DAWNS, paper bound. 
I am more thankful than I can ever express 
for a knowledge of these grand truths, and 
desire to do what I can to give them to 
those who will accept them. 

With much love to dear Sister Russell 
(whose articles in Z.W.T. do me so much 
good) and gratitude to yourself so generously 
permitting us to spread this knowledge 
of God's plan, I remain Yours in 
Christian love. MRS. O. W. SEELEY. 

Oceana Co. Mich. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-A few of us 
here who are rejoicing in the freedom 
wherewith Christ hath made us free, met on 
the evening of April 7th and united in 
celebrating the Anniversary of our Lord's 
death. A blessed season to all was the 
result. 

While we continue to be denounced by 
the blinded worshipers of the "image," 
yet our God is with us, and the truths we 
proclaim are becoming more manifest in 
the sight of men, as from God. 

I have discovered a movement, among 
the Swedes similar to ours, a family of 
them rented a farm joining mine. They 
are good pious people. I paid them a 
visit after they had become settled, and 
learned that they in common with numbers 
of their countrymen here had discorded 
sects and sect names, salaried ministry, 
etc., etc. They believe that where two 
or three meet, there is the true Church, 
and every one is encouraged to use his or 
her own talents as the Lord has endowed 
them. The Bible and the Bible only is 
their rule of faith and practice. I found 
that from a study of Scripture they have 
discovered many truths similar to those 
we rejoice in. 

Mr. B , the head of the family, was 

highly interested in the account I gave 
him of our Church with no name, but 
Christian. He would like to have a 
sample copy of the SWEDISH TOWER; he 
can speak but not read English. I believe 



my dear Brother this is the very class (the 
meek) which it is our privilege to feed, 

and Mr. B . may desire to spread the 

truth among his countrymen. 

We have meetings once a week for 
studying, praise and prayer, and the members 
of the Lord's body are realizing daily 
growth in grace, and in the knowledge of 
the truth. 

May the Lord bless you and Sister Russell 
with all who in your city call upon the 
Lord in sincerity and truth. The Church 
here sends love and greeting. 
Your brother for the truth. 

THOS. BREWER. 

Tuscola County, Michigan. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-May the grace 
and peace of God be with you and all the 
"elect." May the Giver of every good 
and perfect gift endow you with wisdom 
and courage, and strengthen your faith. 
May you be able to discern and expound 
the truths contained in God's Word; for 
we realize that the days are evil. I am 
fully persuaded that the time when "the 
very elect" should be deceived, if it were 
possible, is upon us. Within the past 
year or two I have seen quite a number of 
new periodicals purporting to give advanced 
light, pointing out unmistakably 
many of the errors of "Orthodoxy," and, 
although somewhat garbled, many of the 
truths of God's Word; and holding up 
the example of Jesus Christ, as the beacon 
to guide us up to everlasting perfection. 
These teachings will be very apt to mislead, 
and indeed are misleading many 
thinking Christians who are unlearned in 
the Word. A noticeable characteristic of 
these new doctrines is an ignoring of 
God's ransom for the lost, but taking, for 
imitation, the example of our Lord's suffering 
for the right, just as any general 
might inspire his soldiers by telling them 
how Napoleon's soldiers faced death at 
Austerlitz or Lodi, or how Leonidas stood 
at Thermopylae. They thus ignore the 
fact that the penalty for sin is death, and 
that man having sinned is in death; that 
the laws of God are absolute and eternal, 
and that there is no escape from the penalty 
of these laws until the uttermost farthing 
is paid. How easy for the flock to 
be deceived by some of these "strong delusions;" 
these thoughts have induced me 



to write to you now, instead of waiting 
longer until I could get a little money to 
send. I can sell a few "Dawns," to some 
that I have talked with. I have been an 
invalid for two years but I am some better 
now. If you will send me ten April 
"Towers," I will place them discreetly; 
also send me ten paper-bound DAWNS. 
But if the interest of "Tract Fund" will 
suffer by it do not send them. I perceive 
that there is so much to do that I want the 
means used that will accomplish the most. 
I do not expect to be able to do much for 
awhile yet but I can do a little. 

W. C. M . 

Ohio, July 28, '87. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Card received. 
Thanks. Took 60 subscribers to-day. Best 
day (though hot), except the day I expected 
to take 100 and ran out of territory, 
after I had 70. I shall yet take 100 subscribers 
in a day. But it is not safe for 
me to go more than a slow jog in this great 
heat. It is very hard not to preach as we 
canvass. I think this almost a model day 
in respect to refraining from it. DAWN is 
preaching, and will— the separation goes 
on rapidly and every DAWN agent is a 
bright and shining light— a repetition of 
those who at the first Advent preached: 
"The Kingdom of heaven is at hand." 

Much love, regard and sympathy joined 
by Mrs. A. to you and yours, 

J. B. ADAMSON. 

Willow Valley, Neb. 
DEAR FRIENDS:-A few days ago a 
friend handed me MILLENNIAL DAWN and 
asked me to read it. As soon as I looked 
it over, I saw I had received it as an answer 
to my prayer for more light on the 
teaching of the Scriptures. I had been 
fed on the diluted "Milk of the Word" 
so long that I was nearly famished, and 
when I saw a table before me loaded with 
such soul-satisfying food, I could hardly 
sleep until I had devoured it, and now my 
hunger is appeased for the first time in my 
life. Pray, do not think by my ready acceptance 
of this, that I am one of the kind 
that is "blown about by every wind of 
doctrine." I had previously searched the 
Scriptures enough to know that this doctrine 
harmonized perfectly with its teachings 
the attributes of God, and the need 



of the whole human race, and what more 
could any one ask. I had seen long ago 
that sectarianism was contrary to the spirit 
of Christ's prayer for the unity of the 
church, and that the Scriptures did not 
teach any kind of lasting life to the wicked. 
But I had not seen the restoration of the 
human race to human perfection during 
the Millennial age. When you showed me 
that, it shed such a flood of light on the 
Scriptures that God's plan for the redemption 
of mankind seemed to stand out in 
capital letters all through the Bible. How 
could I have been so blind! My almost 
one prayer for myself has been that God 
would not let me fall below the highest 
possibilities of his grace, and so when I 
received for bread what to all appearance 
was a stone, I knew it must be just the 
kind of food I needed. I see now that he 
was preparing me to receive "meat in due 
season." I hope to send you with this 
my subscription for "Dawn" and "Tower." 
Please send me what reading matter 
you think best for distribution. I am a 
farmer's wife and do my own work, but 
have many acquaintances in town whom 
I hope to interest in this work, and I 
think I can get quite a list of subscribers 
for the paper and book. I shall consider 
it not only a duty but a blessed privilege 
to assist, by every means at my command, 
in proclaiming this gospel. Sincerely 
yours, O. E. S . 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I feel grateful 
to you for your kindness and generosity 
in sending the WATCH TOWER so 
long, and that, too, without remuneration. 
I am an old man— in my 87th year, I can 
labor but little. 

Be assured, dear brother, that the WATCH 
TOWER is a welcome visitor. It is always 
freighted with the "meat in due season." 

Your "View" article in the June TOWER 
is truly seasonable, but to the world at 
large, and even to the nominal church, it 
will be "all Greek." But few can tell 
whereabouts we are in the world's history, 
and what relation the "land question" or 
any other question sustains to prophecy. 
Darkness more dense, (if possible) than 
that which pervaded Egypt, enshrouds the 
people on all of the vital questions which 
are coming, or are already come. 

"The perilous times," in which we now 



find ourselves engulfed, should intensify 
our desire for the kingdom to come, and 
the will of God to be done in earth as it 
is done in heaven. 

Our God is not slack concerning his 
promises, as some men count slackness. 
Everything is hastening to its final end. 
Human governments are very fragile, and 
they will be able to stand the strain which 
is brought to bear on them but a short 
time longer. M. I. LEWIS. 

DEAR BROTHER:-Not long since I was 
busily engaged in reading Charles Reade's 
novels. A friend whom I esteem dearly 
sent me MILLENNIAL DAWN with the request 
that I cease my novels and try to 
become interested in it. I did so to please 
my friend, without the least notion of 
being anything but bored, still I wanted 
to be able to say, "I have read it." 

Now I will digress into a little autobiography 
that you may understand how I 
feel since reading DAWN. I was educated 
with a view of entering the Presbyterian 
Ministry, and on various accounts abandoned 
that and with it all interest in 
religious affairs. I became skeptical and 
had no patience with either churches or 
preachers. In this condition came DAWN, 
and you can understand why I did not 
expect to be interested. I had not gone far 
until the scales began to fall from my eyes 
and the light to pour in upon my darkened 
mind. I finished the book almost before 
I gave it up and I thank God this day for 
the glorious results to me, in which I have 
the assurance beyond a doubt that I have 
found the "narrow way" and am rejoicing 
in the truth. I have passed through a 
very severe ordeal of sickness and have 
felt that my remarkable preservation from 
death must have a purpose. So strongly 
had I been impressed that months before 
I heard of DAWN I promised that if God 
would show me his will I would devote 
myself to his service. I trusted I should 
be shown and when DAWN came I saw. 
I felt that whatever it was I would accept 
the work for Christ, however humble, and 
I started out with my volume of DAWN 
last Monday morning, and while the heat 
was intense and my crippled condition 
made the work very laborious, I have today 
(Thursday noon) 58 orders for DAWN 
to be delivered in two weeks. I am much 



encouraged— hope to sell 200 volumes here. 
I make this an order then for 200 copies 
of DAWN to be shipped by freight to this 
place at once so I may meet my engagement. 
I expect if my health admits it to 
push the work as rapidly as possible. 
I am very faithfully, Yours believing. 
G. W. DALE. 

Chatham Co., N.C. 

DEAR BROTHER:-I now give you an 
account of my success in Durham. I was 
one week in canvassing the place, I sold 
twenty the first day, twenty three the next 
day by eleven o'clock, and so on, thirty-six 
being the highest sold in any one day, 
my average per day was thirty. I enjoy 
the work very much. 

I enclose an order for 210 copies of 
paper-bound DAWNS VOL. I. Please send 
at once. 

I wish that every Christian could realize 
that there is a work for him to do. I wish 
that they would come and help us to roll 
this large wheel. It is rolling fast but we 
need more help, we want the labor of more 
thinking Christians to carry on this grand 
work of God. Yours truly, J. G. C 



R958 : page 3 

THE GOSPEL OF GRACE 



God, in eternal counsel, planned 

To form in space this rounded earth; 
And in response to his command, 

Submissive nature gave it birth. 
A perfect human pair was formed 

In their Creator's image pure, 
While 'round them Eden was adorned 

With all perfection could insure. 

Upon this Adam (man and wife) 

But one restriction God did place: 
To disobey would forfeit life, 

And bring destruction on the race. 
The serpent, subtle more than all, 

Beguiled the woman, she the man, 
And from their station high, they fall, 

Thus bringing death on all the clan. 

The sentence just, must take effect. 
God's purpose, then, defeated is? 
His work, by Satan's malice wrecked? 



Has all He planned thus gone amiss? 
Ah! no; "A RANSOM!" gracious words: 

God says, "A RANSOM I have found!" 
What wondrous joy the cry affords, 

As from thy Throne is heard the sound. 

A little less than angels formed, 

JESUS we see, God's only Son, 
With glory, honor, He's adorned, 

By death for sinners to atone. 
"Lo, I come; of me 'tis written, 

To do thy will, Jehovah God." 
For Adam's sin the Lamb was smitten; 

For us He bore the chastening rod. 

And in our stead, instead of ALL, 

He bore the curse, and tasted death 
For every man, who, by the fall, 

Must yield to God his vital breath. 
The "CORRESPONDING PRICE" is paid: 

Our God is just, and will restore 
All those who in the dust are laid, 

To give them life forever more. 

But one condition here we find, 

In off ring all this gift sublime: 
The human will, the human mind, 

Must then accord with the Divine. 
And to secure this harmony, 

The SEED— the Christ— hath been prepared, 
And we of that blest seed shall be, 

Who, here, his sacrifice have shared. 

And those (their number must be few,) 

Who, in "Times of RESTITUTION," 
Reject the offer to make new 

And be raised up to full perfection, 
Must be destroyed in "lake of fire" 

(Not "life in pain," but sure destruction) 
With him who to God's place aspired, 

And all who share like condemnation. 

Then "ALL-in-all" our God shall be: 

His creatures all (now to his will 
Brought into joyous harmony) 

Shall their respective stations fill. 
O'er every name, THE CHRIST, divine, 

In heavenly glory e'er shall shine, 
And every being on each plane, 

That exaltation shall proclaim. 

This is the "Plan" the WORD reveals, 
"The Church," attired in harlot dress, 

Rejects the light, the truth conceals; 
But God has cast her from her place 

Who holds truth in unrighteousness, 



And to his saints He makes it known, 
As the blest Gospel of his grace, 

To ALL, "in due time," to be shown. 

If this be true, WHEN dawns the day 

Of this exultant Jubilee? 
And when shall saints in "Narrow-way" 

Be like their Head, as Him they see? 
E'en NOW the light begins to break, 

Of that blest day when all shall wake. 
Then lift your heads, exalt them high, 

For your Redemption draweth nigh. 
S. I. HICKEY. 



page 3 

THE writer of the above signed it A Believer, 
but I take the liberty of putting his 
full name, knowing that our readers will 
appreciate it the more. You will remember 
him as the brother whose letter appeared 
next to last among the "Kind 
Words of Commendation" to DAWN published 
in April TOWER. For several months 
Bro. H. has been in a furnace of severe 
trial, prostrated by sickness. He was obliged 
to remove, and to abandon the meetings 
so favorably started in Brooklyn and 
also the canvassing, but is still strong in 
the Lord. We print his last letter that 
you may be able the more closely to sympathize 
with him. --EDITOR. 

July 13th, 1887. 
MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: -Grace 

unto you and peace, from God our Father 
and Jesus Christ our Lord! 

I have been again prostrated by my enemy, 
if so I can term that which is God's 
instrument in consuming the sacrifice, so 
freely presented. Since writing you, I 
have suffered prolonged, intense and fearfully 
weakening pain. I am now at very 
low ebb, but mending slowly: perhaps to 
regain strength, and perhaps only to be 
again suddenly and violently attacked. 
But all is peace, joy, and confiding trust 
in my blessed God and Savior. He doeth 
all things well, and I bow in glad submission. 
My physician here advises me, as 
the very best thing to do, to go to Saratoga 
and drink certain of the waters there 
for the removal of the gravel by dissolving. 
My wife wrote, last week, to an old physician-friend 



residing there, stating my 
case. He replies in indorsement of this 
opinion, and says "I can find a place in a 
private boarding house at $7.00 per week 
—my services free to him." 

Now I thought that if I continue to gain 
strength for another week, I might be able 
to go and to pay my way by selling DAWN 
in Albany and Saratoga, if these places 
have not been canvassed. Please write 
me as to this immediately. 

In patient waiting, Your brother in 
Christ, S. I. HICKEY. 

P.S. My wife read above and says, I 
must not try to do any thing. Well, perhaps 
not. But I hope for strength. 



R959 : page 3 
CHRIST CRUCIFIED. 

In an age when human ingenuity taxed 
itself to the utmost limit to invent cruelties 
to torture the victims of public revenge 
or hate, crucifixion certainly had 
a bad pre-eminence. Among the Romans 
it was reserved, with few exceptions, 
for slaves and foreigners, being considered 
too horrible and disgraceful for a Roman 
citizen, no matter what might have been 
his crime. It was the greatest possible 
indignity that could be heaped upon any 
offender whether considered in the light of 
a public disgrace, or of physical anguish. 

Crucifixion was a slow, lingering, horrible 
process of dying, lasting always many 
hours, and often for several days. The 
victim was usually bound to the cross as 
it lay upon the ground; the hands and 
feet were then nailed to the wood, and 
the cross elevated and planted in the 
socket prepared to receive it. This gave 
the body a terrible wrench and great was 
the agony which followed. The hot sun 
beat upon the naked body and uncovered 
head, (which in our Lord's case was 
pierced with the additional cruelty of the 
crown of thorns). The ragged, undressed 
wounds festered and inflamed and shooting 
pains darted from them through the 
quivering flesh. Added to this was the 
agony of an increasing fever, a throbbing 
head and a raging thirst; and even the 
slightest movement intensified the anguish. 



As death drew near, swarms of insects 
gathered about to increase the torment 
from which there could not be the slightest 
relief. As no vital organ was directly 
assailed, life lingered on until the power 
of endurance was completely exhausted. 

Over the head of the sufferer was usually 
an inscription describing the crime 
for which he had been condemned. This 
was generally borne before him as he wended 
his way on foot to the place of execution 
bearing his heavy cross. In the 
case of our Lord, he bore his cross to the 
gates of the city where they met a man 
from Cyrene, Simon by name, whom 
they compelled to bear it the remainder 
of the way, doubtless because Jesus 
was too faint and exhausted. 

It appears from certain rabbinical writings 
that a society of Jewish women was 
formed to alleviate the sufferings of those 
condemned to die. They accompanied 
the condemned to the place of execution 
and administered a prepared drink which 
acted as an anodyne to allay their pain. 
It was probably these who offered to our 
Lord the "vinegar and gall" (more properly 
—sour wine and myrrh) which he 
refused, preferring his mind to be clear 
and awake to the end. The drink offered 
him on the cross by one of the Roman 
soldiers, and accepted, was not the anodyne 
proffered and refused before, but 
simply sour wine, the common drink of 
the soldiers. 

The ultimate physical cause of Christ's 
death is believed to have been literally a 
broken heart. Otherwise he would probably 
have lingered much longer. Crucifixion 
seldom produced death in less 
than twenty-four hours, and victims have 
lingered as long as five days. Pilate and 
the guard were surprised on learning of 
Jesus' death so soon. Instead of lingering 
long, he died suddenly, and before he 
was fully exhausted; for he had conversed 
with the thief and had commended his 
mother to the care of John; he had declared 
his great work finished and then 
with a loud [literally, a strong] voice 
which indicated considerable remaining 
strength both of body and mind he cried, 
"My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken 
me?" and instantly died. In the 
agony of Gethsemane the heart and blood 
vessels were affected. The palpitation of 



the heart was so intense then as to cause 
bloody sweat, a phenomenon rare but not 
unknown, produced by intense mental 
excitement. Already weakened by such 
an experience, a repetition of the anguish 
probably ruptured the membrane of the 
heart causing instant death. 

Such was the awful tragedy of Calvary 
which ended the human existence of our 
Lord, who thus gave himself as a lamb to 
the slaughter. "As a sheep before her 
shearers is dumb, so he opened not his 
mouth" when falsely accused, condemned 
and crucified. Had he exerted himself 
in self-defence either in Pilate's judgment 
hall, or in Gethsemane's garden, 
to speak again to the people as before, 
again doubtless they would have said 
"Never man spake like this man," and 
would have hailed him their king as 
they did only five days before, saying 
Hosanna to the son of David, blessed 
is he that cometh as Jehovah's king. Or 
had he prayed to the Father, He could 
immediately have had a life-guard of 
more than twelve legions of angels. 
-Matt. 26:53. 

He could have escaped the awful experience, 
but he did not do so, but willingly 
gave himself a ransom for sinners. 
He knew that his hour had come, when 
according to his Father's plan the world's 
redemption price should be paid. Remember 
his words to a disciple who 
attempted his defence— "Thinkest thou 
that I cannot now pray to my Father and 
he will presently give me more than 
twelve legions of angels? But how then 
shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, that thus 
it must be?" 

Yes, the Scriptures must be fulfilled, 
they expressed the Father's will which he 
had come to do, hence the fulfilling of 
what was written, was the all-absorbing 
interest with him; the plan of God must 
be carried out at any cost, and to the execution 
of that plan he submitted himself 
in perfect obedience, even unto death, 
even the horrible, torturous, ignominious 
death of the cross. 

Though our Lord submitted himself to 
death at this time because he recognized 
this to be the hour foretold by the prophets, 
he did not seem to understand 
clearly why so much public disgrace and 
torture of mind and body should accompany 



it. Hence his prayer, "O my 
Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass 
from me. Nevertheless not as I will, but as 
thou wilt." (Matt. 26:39.) He well 
knew that baptism (immersion) into 
death, was his mission, and not for one 
moment could he think of avoiding it: 
and he knew too that with it must also 
come a bitter cup of suffering and shame: 
but not until his hour was almost come, did 
he seem to fully realize how bitter would 
be the dregs of that cup. Seeing that 

R960 : page 3 

death was the penalty for our sins, and not 

shame and misrepresentation, left room 

for our Lord to question the Father's wisdom 

and love, in apparently asking him 

to endure more than was needful to redeem 

mankind. But he bowed to the 

Father's wisdom and love in it all, saying 

—Thy will, not mine be done! In the 

light of the Apostle's words we can see 

that the perfect "man Christ Jesus" was 

not only redeeming men, but by his obedience 

even unto death— even the death 

of the cross, he was proving himself worthy 

of high exaltation to the perfection of the 

divine nature, which because of this implicit 

and even blind obedience he has 

now attained. (Phil. 2:9.) So too in 

his last moments, in being treated exactly 

like the sinner whose ransom he was giving, 

when mental communion with the 

Father was interrupted and he felt for the 

moment alone, separated from the Father, 

cut off and condemned as the sinner whom 

he represented, it was more than he could 

bear— He cried with a loud voice My 

God! My God! Why hast thou forsaken 

me? This was more severe than all else, 

the very dregs of this cup of suffering. 

Not until afterward was the necessity and 

wisdom and love of this part of the Father's 

plan made manifest. Up to that hour he 

had communion with his God.— See 

Jno. 16:32. 

What a lesson on obedience was thus 
furnished to every creature of God, in 
every age, and on every plane of existence 
—an obedience which bowed in loving 
submission to the will of God even in 
blindness as to why it should be so, and 
even under the most heart-rending trial. 
What a glorious character for our example 



and imitation! perfect submission to the 
will of God and perfect confidence, which 
implicitly trusted the Almighty Father 
where it could not trace him. 



R960 : page 3 

CRUCIFIED WITH CHRIST. 

Having above examined briefly the 
actual crucifixion of our Lord, the 
actual death of the Lamb of God who 
put away our sins by the sacrifice of himself, 
let us now glance briefly at a figurative 
use of the word crucified, not by way 
of setting aside the foregoing actual occurrence, 
but to learn the proper significance 
of the figure as used by our Lord and the 
apostle Paul in the following passages:— 

"Whosoever will come after me, let him 
deny himself and take up his cross and 
follow me. "-Mark 8:34. 

"They that are Christ's [members of 
the "anointed body"— "the Bride"] 
have crucified the flesh with its affections 
and desires."— Gal. 5:24 compare 3:29. 

"I am crucified with Christ, nevertheless 
I live, yet not [the old] I [any longer] but 
Christ liveth in me."— Gal. 2:20. 

R960 : page 4 

"Our old man [our former selves, justified 
by faith in Christ's sacrifice] is crucified 
with Christ [that we might be members 
of his body, spiritual new creatures, and] 
that the body of sin [the entire sin system 
with all its members and branches] might 
be destroyed." Rom. 6:6. See fuller 
treatment of this text and context in 
May '87 TOWER. 

We have seen that actual, literal crucifixion 
signifies to deliver up to a torturous, 
slow, but sure death. And the figurative 
closely resembles this, so that the same 
definition fits it perfectly. When we say 
then that any one is taking up his cross to 
follow Christ, it signifies that such a one is 
consecrated and is taking the first step of 
self-denial in espousing the cause of Christ, 
though it be with fear and trembling; submitting 
willingly to painful humbling and 
contempt in the sight of the world and of 
the chief priests and their blind followers, 



to share with the Master and all the members 

of his body the coldness and the scorn 

of the world and of many they seek to bless; 

to be alone, and yet not alone as was 

our Head, for we have comfort and sympathy 

from him as our High Priest, and 

from our fellow members in his body. 

With him none could sympathize: he was 

the fore-runner on this race-course, and 

of the people there was none with him. 

But where does our cross-bearing begin? 
and where our crucifixion?— where does 
it end? and how much does it involve? 
some may inquire. We answer, Circumstances 
alter cases to some extent, and 
each must apply the matter in his own case. 
To enable all to do this, let us notice three 
notable examples of such cross-bearing 
—our Lord, Peter and Paul. 

Our Lord, born under the conditions 
of the Jewish Law, could not begin his 
service (ministry) until he was thirty years 
old, though his earlier years were spent in 
studying prophetic utterances concerning 
God's plan and his share therein. This is 
made evident by the only record of his 
boyhood days. When twelve years old, he 
was seeking information concerning the 
Father's business and was found among 
the eminent teachers hearing their explanations 
of the prophecies and asking them 
questions. 

When he was thirty, was his first opportunity 
to begin the work which he had come 
into the world to do. We might say then, 
using the figure, that he took up his cross 
when at thirty, he came to John to be 
baptised of him in Jordan. This was a cross, 
a humiliation, because the masses of the 
people like John were ignorant of the deep 
meaning which our Lord attached to 
immersion as a symbol or figure of death. 
John, and the people, used it only as a 
symbol of washing, cleansing or reformation 
from sin. Nor was it proper for our 
Lord then to explain to them a symbol which 
belonged to an age and work not proper to 
be known until Pentecost. 

Nor would they have understood him if 
he had explained. But it became him to 
set the example, which as their leader 
he would afterward expect all his disciples 
to follow, and hence as in his actual death 
he who knew no sin was counted among 
transgressors, so in its symbol, the water 
immersion, he was "numbered with transgressors," 



(Isa. 53:12) who were there 

figuratively washing away a sinful past to 

start anew. 

For the sinless Lamb of God to be thus 
misunderstood was no doubt a heavy cross, 
but it opened the way to a still clearer 
appreciation of the Father's will which he 
had come to perform. Obedience in taking 
up the cross proved him worthy of 
continuing in the Father's service— even 
unto death. The holy power of God came 
there upon him enabling him to see more 
and more clearly his future pathway down 
to Calvary, but bringing also clearer and 
clearer apprehensions of the exceeding 
riches of divine favor and high exaltation 
in reservation for him at the end of the 
"narrow way." 

Under the increased light of his fuller 
insight into the plan of God and where 
the narrow way would lead, his spirit of 
consecration led him to turn aside into 
the wilderness, there to more fully consider 
in private the Father's plan and his future 
course in obedience thereto. There the 
cross grew heavy as he more fully realized 
the shame, ignominy and self-abasement 
to which his consecration would lead. 
And the tempter bore his weight upon the 
already heavy cross by suggesting other 
ways of doing good more agreeable to the 
flesh than sacrifice. But after counting the 
cost our Lord refused any other methods 
either Satan's or his own, of doing good, 
and chose to have God's will done in God's 
way, saying: I have come to do thy will, 
O my God. And with his victory he was 
stronger, and his cross seemed be lighter as 
he came out of the wilderness crucified, 
willingly delivered up to die— hands, 
feet and all and every talent and power 
restrained from self-service— all offered up 
a sacrifice to God in the carrying out of 
God's plan, whatever that might involve, 
whether the dying should prove to be of 
longer or shorter duration, or of more or 
less pain. As a man, then, our Lord's will 
was already dead to every human hope 
and ambition— dead to his own plans and 
control as a man. And yet he was not 
dead in the sense of being insensible to 
scoffs and pains and piercing words, but 
crucified, delivered up unto death. The pinioned, 
bleeding members (human talents, 
rights etc.) quivered and twitched but always 
remained pinioned (crucified, delivered 



up to death) to the last, as when he 
prayed that the cup of ignominy might be 
omitted. 

During all those three and a-half years 
of our Lord's ministry, he was crucified 
in this figurative sense; that is, he was 
delivered up to death— his will, his talents, 
his all, bound and pinioned— in harmony 
with the Father's plan. And every 
deed of his by which "virtue [vitality, 
life] went out of him" to bless and 
heal in mind or body the condemned 
sinners about him, was part of his dying, 
and finally ended in death— even the literal 
death of the cross. 

Brother Paul was not literally crucified 
but ended his course by being beheaded. 
Yet figuratively he tells us long before his 
literal death, "I am crucified with Christ." 
That is to say: I am delivered up to death 
—my will and self-control, my talents and 
powers, my rights and lawful ambitions as 
a man, are all pinioned and stopped by my 
consecration, so that having no will or 
plan or way of my own, I may be fully 
able to let the holy spirit or mind (will) of 
the Master dwell in me and rule my every 
act to his service— not so dead that I will 
not occasionally feel a twinging of the 
flesh, and have a suggestion as to another 
way and as to what would or would not 
be necessary, but I keep my body and its 
wishes under (1 Cor. 9:27.), subject to 
the will of God, saying as did the Master 
under similar circumstances, "Not my will 
but thine (Father) be done." 

Many get the idea that our Lord and 
the Apostle referred only to sinful desires 
being crucified. They read it as though the 
Apostle meant, My sinful ambitions and 
desires I keep under and crucify, and as 
though our Lord meant— Not my sinful 
will be done, O Father, but thy holy will. 
This is a mistake: our Lord was holy, 
harmless, undefiled; as such he could not 
have a sinful will or desire: His will was 
not to kill, steal, blaspheme, covet the 
things of others, nor to bear false witness 
of others, nor to backbite, nor to do any 

R961 : page 4 

sinful thing toward God or man. His will 
on the contrary was to do good only, to 
honor God and to bless men. But as a 
man— a perfect man, he had a mind, a 



strong mind or judgment as to how good 
could best be accomplished, how God could 
be most honored and men most blessed. 

Had our Lord followed his own judgment 
and will as to best methods of honoring 
God and blessing man, it would probably 
have been in the line which naturally 
suggests itself to other good judgments and 
wills— in the line of political and social 
reforms, in establishing pure government 
for the people, in meeting out justice to the 
oppressed, in establishing hospitals, asylums 
and colleges, and in cleansing the religious 
system of his day. But such a good will, 
though it would doubtless have accomplished 
much temporary good, would never 
have worked out the grand deliverance for 
the race, which we now see God's greater 
comprehensive "plan of the ages" is designed 
to work out. Such a plan did not occur 
to the mind of even the perfect man Christ 
Jesus. It is beyond the scope of human 
thought and planning. But knowing that his 
Father was greater than he, he rightly reasoned 
that implicit submission to Jehovah's 
will was the proper course whatever it 
might involve. 

To be God's messenger and accomplish 
his will, our Lord must crucify (deliver up 
to death) all of his own good, holy, 
harmless, pure will, and must say fully, 
"Not my will (Father) but thine be done" 
—Thy will in thy way entirely. 

The nearer a person is to perfection the 
stronger will be his will, and the more 
difficult to crucify it. The more confident 
one is that his will is good and for good 
and blessing to others, the more 
difficult it is to see good cause for surrendering 
it. Thus our dear Lord knew that it 
was needful for him to DIE as the ransom 
price for the world and shrank not from it; 
but knowing also that pain and public 
scorn and contempt as a criminal was not 
part of the penalty, he questioned its necessity, 
whether the Father was not asking of 
him as the Redeemer more than the penalty 
of man's sin and therefore prayed, "Father, 
if it be possible, let this cup pass from me" 
—nevertheless I claim no rights, I attempt 
not to follow my own ideas nor to exercise 
my own will; my will is fully surrendered; 
I leave all to thy wisdom— Thy will be 
done. Our Lord evidently saw not then, 
what for our advantage and strengthening 
he has since showed us who are following 



his footsteps, crucifying our own wills, etc. 
—that extreme trial of obedience, even 
unto death, even the death of the cross, 
was expedient and proper, because of the 
very high exaltation to the divine nature, 
for which his implicit obedience to the 
Father's will in giving our ransom, was to 
be the test of worthiness. 

We as followers in the our Lord's footsteps 
have neither such strong wills to 
overcome and crucify nor the proportionate 
strength of character whereby to 
overcome them. But we have the advantage 
of knowing clearly why so extreme 
and exact obedience is necessary, in all 
who would be accounted worthy of a place 
in that select "body of Christ", which is 
to be so highly honored with its Head, 
Lord and Redeemer, Jesus. 

As with our Lord, so with the Apostle 
Paul crucifying did not mean the crucifying 
of a sinful will, or sinful desires, plans, etc.; 
for he says "I am crucified with Christ," 
and elsewhere he calls it being "dead with 
Christ" and having "fellowship in his 
sufferings." So then if Christ's crucifixion 
was not the crucifixion of a sinful will, and 
desires, neither was Paul's; and neither 
are yours and mine as followers of the 
spotless Lamb of God, crucified with him. 

True, Paul and all other followers of 
Christ were by nature sinners and children 
of wrath even as others, and hence very 
much less than perfect in will, compared 
with the undefiled one. But their first 
step of faith in Christ showed them that 
they had no right or privilege, to will or to 
do wrong, and in accepting of JUSTIFICATION 
through Christ's death, they not only 
confessed sorrow for sins past, but repentance 
and change from sin for the future 
to the extent of their ability, realizing also 
that the imputed merit of the ransom not 
only covered sins past, but also all unwillful 
weakness and errors future. And this justification 
through Christ and change of 
will from sin to righteousness preceeded 
their "call" to follow Christ and to suffer 
with him and to share his glory and high 
exaltation to the divine nature. Thus we 
see that with us as with our Lord, it is our 
good human wills, our good intentions and 
good plans, (not actually perfect as our 
Lord's, but reckonedly so through his 
imputed merit) that are to be crucified, 
delivered up to death with, and like Christ 



to share in his sacrifice. 

As our Lord set aside and crucified his 
own will, and accepted of the Father's will 
instead, so we set aside or crucify our wills 
or desires, no matter how good and wise 
they appear to us, to accept of the guidance 
and direction of our Lord Jesus who, now 
glorified, delights still to carry out the 
Father's plan, and the grandeur perfection 
of which he can now fully appreciate. 



R961 : page 4 

CONSECRATED BUT NOT CRUCIFIED. 

Practical illustrations of how some who 
love the Lord are not crucified with him, 
may be seen everywhere. Thousands of 
Christian people (zealous, but not according 
to knowledge) are striving, each in his 
own way, to do good. Because their own 
wills have not been crucified, but still live, 
they are unable to see clearly God's will 
and way. Hence many are spending time 
and talent in moral, political, and social 
reforms, which though good are not so good 
as the Lord's way. The uncrucified will 
however always thinks its own way the best, 
not learning to obey orders from the head, 
and to trust to his superior wisdom where 
they cannot trace him. 

Thus though our Lord prayed not for the 
world (John 17:19.) and shows us that 
the work of the present age is not the world's 
conversion, but the selecting of his "body," 
"his bride," out of the world (Acts 15:14) 
to be joined in heirship with him in the 
great work of blessing the world afterward 
—yet these have a will and plan of their own 
uncrucified and do not submit themselves 
to the will and plan of the head. Their 
will and plan is to convert the world now, 
to the neglect of the special selecting and 
fitting for that work of a royal priesthood 
and they feel sure their Lord must admire 
and accept and bless their plan and their 
work in his name. 

They are worried, anxious, fearful, perplexed, 
because their plans do not work 
out as expected, like a hen who hatches a 
brood of ducks. Yet they are always 
hopeful and full of confidence that the 
working out of their cherished schemes 
will yet be grand, because sure that the 



Lord must approve their plans. Such 
when they pray to God generally tell him 
what they want him to do and how they 
need his help in carrying out their plans. 
Such because their plans are so urgent 

R961 : page 5 

have no time to search God's Word to 

know his will and plan. They go to it to 

find some statements which they can fit 

and apply to their plans, to convince themselves 

and others that God approves of 

their plans, and they have no time, they 

think, for more. 

Poor foolish ones! How different the 
anxiety and fear with which they labor, 
from the composure with which our Lord 
and the Apostles labored. The difference 
is that the latter had crucified their own 
wills and had accepted the plan and will 
of God, and were confident that all things 
were working for the accomplishment of 
that plan whether they see how or not. On 
the contrary these who are striving to carry 
out their own wills and plans and praying 
to God to help them, can have no such deep 
grounded confidence. Their prayers in 
this direction go unheeded, and they continually 
see their cherished plans miscarry. 
Many such in coming days must be more 
disappointed than ever. Those who have 
loved and labored for sectarian systems and 
who have mistaken them for the one true 
church "whose names are written in 
heaven" will experience bitter disappointments 
when they see these all broken to 
pieces, that the false may be completely 
stumbled and separated and leave the 
saints alone, the only adherents to the 
ransom foundation. 

Only those who completely ignore their 
own will and plans, and thus are ready 
and willing to learn and co-operate in 
God's plans, can appreciate his statement. 
"My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither 
are your ways my ways saith the Lord: 
For as the heavens are higher than the earth 
so are my ways higher than your ways, and 
my thoughts than your thoughts." (Isa. 55:8,9.) 
Only such can pass through 
the trying times, present and coming, unmoved, 
for such only can see intelligently 
the cause and necessity of the trouble and 
overturning, and the grand outcome of it 
all, as delineated in the plans and specifications 



of the great divine Architect. 

Would that such consecrated ones could 
see the necessity of sacrificing, crucifying 
themselves and do it. The time for 
sacrificing is nearly ended. Those who do 
not fulfill their covenant are not worthy, 
and their crowns must soon be given to 
others. 

We see in this the reason that some of 
the very humble and comparatively unlearned 
of God's children are able and do 
see his plan much more clearly than some 
others, whose natural advantages are greater 
—the one has crucified his own will and 
has no obstacle in the way of his progress; 
the other has not crucified his own will and 
cannot get beyond it, even when seeking 
to grow in grace and knowledge. 



R962 : page 5 

THE BODY-MEMBERS IN PARTICULAR. 

In illustrating the complete subjection of 
the now crucified, will-dead little flock to 
their once crucified but now exalted Lord, 
it is difficult to find a more perfect figure 
than that which Paul suggests, viz., the 
human form, head and body. As a human 
body is composed of many members with 
various functions, yet all perfectly controlled 
and ordered by the one head, and 
without any will or desire to control themselves, 
so is "the body of Christ" under its 
head, Jesus. Every member must be in 
perfect accord with the head, that the 
great work of the Christ in the coming age 
may be accomplished perfectly. 

That perfect "body of Christ" is as yet 
only an ideal: it is a body of the future 
and not of the present, and will not be 
complete until the last member has been 
tried and proved worthy and glorified 
—made like unto, though subject to its head 
Christ Jesus. During the Gospel age the 
prospective members have been called or 
invited (none but the justified believers, 
are called) and this is styled "a high calling" 
and "a heavenly calling" because it invites 
these to so high and grand a station, and 
to a heavenly nature and glory and honor 
and perfection which is to be restored to 
in exchange for, and instead of the 
earthy glory and honor of the world 



in general. The joining together of this 
body in the present life is only probationary 
—a membership on trial, to 
ascertain who are worthy. Hence 
it is that those already called members of 
the body of Christ, are exhorted to make 
their calling and election sure, or permanent, 
by full and hearty submission to 
all the tests which their Lord and forerunner 
on the course shall impose. Such, 
too, have the assurance that their head 
sympathizes with them, and will not permit 
them to be tempted and tested beyond 
what they are able to withstand, but who at 
the very moment when their strength and 
endurance would fail— not through lack of 
desire to do his will, but through weakness 
of the flesh— will open a way for their escape 
from the trial. 

Under misconceptions, false teachings, 
etc., many are nominally counted as members 
of Christ's body, or church, whom 
the Lord in no sense recognizes as such, 
whom he does not enter among the probationers 
on trial for permanent membership 
in that choice "little flock," because 
they have never taken even the first step 
toward becoming members. 

Every one answering to the "high calling," 
(already justified believers) was informed 
of the conditions of membership, 
namely, that such must deny themselves, 
set aside and entirely ignore their own wills, 
and plans and ambitions however noble, 
must crucify their human wills with all their 
human affections and lusts (desires) no 
matter how pure and good, and must submit 
everything to the will of Christ, whether 
they see or do not see the wisdom of 
his arrangements. To the worldly-wise 
this is foolishness and those who obey this 
call are considered fools, even as was their 
Master for the same cause: For the world 
knoweth us not, because (for the same reason 
that) it knew him not.— 1 John 3:1. 

The narrow way of self-sacrifice through 
which the high calling invites us, is so 
contrary to worldly wisdom that few find 
it in the sense of knowing or realizing it; 
and fewer yet, after finding it, will walk in 
it; it is so narrow, so difficult and painful 
to crucify the flesh with its human affections, 
hopes, aims and desires; so difficult 
to have a mind and judgment and will of 
your own and yet obey not their dictates, 
but crucify them and take and follow the 



will of another which often seems so much 
less complete than our own, and whose 
ultimate advantage we so often cannot see. 

The conditions therefore upon which we 
become probationary or trial members of 
the body of Christ, are that we covenant, 
or solemnly consecrate ourselves and all our 
interests as human beings, to the Lord's will 
and service. This the probationary member 
symbolizes by baptism into water. 
His immersion into water is a figure of his 
death to all earthly things, chief among 
which and representative of all, is his 
HUMAN WILL. It must be buried in order 
that the consecrated one may be reckoned 
a fellow-member in that will-less body, 
whose will is the will of the head only. 
"Therefore are we buried by baptism INTO 
CHRIST" into membership in that "body 
of Christ;" for as many of you as were 
baptised into JESUS CHRIST were baptised 
into his death, "Crucified with Christ" to 
earthly hopes, etc., and risen by faith to 
heavenly hopes, plans, etc., under his 
direction, to which we shall attain if we 
faint not, but continue firm unto the end, 
keeping our wills fully subject to the will 
of Christ, and our bodies as much so as 
possible. 

Every such consecrated one is recorded as 
a prospective member among those "whose 
names are written in heaven:" but the 
record is such as can be erased. The final 
inking of the record, so to speak, is not 
done until the probationary membership 
is ended, and all the consecrated ones 
adjudged either worthy or unworthy of a 
place in that perfect glorious "body of the 
Anointed" whose record in the Lamb's 
book of life is indelible; among, and a part 
of that company which God foreknew or 
intended from the foundation of the world, 
as his honored instrumentality for blessing 
all the families of the world. 

Not all the consecrated, probationary 
members shall be of the real body of Christ, 
but only the overcomers. Of such the Lord 
says "I will not blot out his name out of 
the book of life, but I will confess his 
name before my Father and before his 
messengers." (Rev. 3:5.) And, blessed 
thought, our overcoming consists not in 
perfect works, but in a perfect heart or 
will. His own will fully crucified, the 
will of Christ dwelling in his heart richly, 
none need be barren or unfruitful in the 



knowledge of the Lord, but shall renew 
his strength, and go on from grace to 
grace in the knowledge and service of his 
head; and finally such shall be accepted 
into the everlasting permanent membership 
in the body glorified. 

And there is a thought beyond crucifying 
our own wills. We should not only crucify 
our own wills, but fully accept of and 
use the Lord's will instead. "Let the 
word of Christ dwell in you richly," and 
Let the mind be in you which was also 
in Christ Jesus. (Col. 3:16; Phil. 2:5.) 
A human body whose members were merely 
without will or plan of their own, 
would be aimless, lifeless, and useless, and 
so probationary members of the body of 
Christ, if merely dead to the world will be 
cold, aimless, idle, languid and lifeless, 
and hence profitless. The apostle therefore 
exhorts that we be not only dead to 
present hopes, and aims, and hoping for 
the future glorious body and its glorious 
work, but our mortal body which with its 
will we have crucified, we should partake 
so thoroughly of the holy spirit of our Master's 
consecration, that the mortal body 
alive, and active in God's service— delighting 
to do his will engaging heartily in his 
plan and work. (Rom. 8:11.) 

Until our own wills are crucified, we 
are not truly prepared to seek to know the 
will of our Lord. The uncrucified will, 
if it goes to the Word of God to learn his 
will, is not prepared to receive it, and 
stumbles over it, blinded by its own plans, 
desires and ambitions. Misled by these 
it wrests and misapplies the word of God 
to fit its wisdom or plan. Alas! how many 
of the consecrated are crucified only in 
part, and how many not at all. How many, 
failing still worse, see nothing of the high 
calling, and have passed by justification by 
faith in the ransom and are trusting to 
secure justification by crucifying their sins. 
Let us walk in the light as he is in 
the light, and have no fellowship with 
the unfruitful works of darkness, but 
rather reprove them. And in order to do 
this and attain the great prize let us see to 
it that we can say with Paul "I am crucified 
with Christ, yet I live, yet not [the 
former] I, but Christ liveth in me." 
His will being fully mine I can call myself 
his and feel confidence before him. I 
being fully his, he can own me as a member 



of his body and use me as such now 
and forever. 



R962 : page 5 

AFTER THE ORDER OF MELCHISEDEC. 

"Jehovah hath sworn and will not repent, Thou 
art a priest forever after the order of Melchisedec." 
Psa. 110:4. 

A priest, in the only true sense, is a 
mediator between God and fallen creatures, 
the object of such mediation being 
to restore and establish harmony. 

The office of the priest or mediator between 
God and man is to restore to perfection 
and consequent harmony with 
God, a whole race of beings condemned 
to death, and already dead or dying. 
Hence this priest must of necessity be 
"mighty to save". (Psa. 89:19.) He 
must have both the right and the power 
to recall the dead to life, and ability to 
instruct and discipline, and thus to lead 
every willing subject back to the perfect 
estate from which Adam, and the race 
through him, fell. To secure this right, 
he must first satisfy the demands of Justice, 
which required the extinction of the human 
race; and these demands of Justice 
could only be met by a corresponding sacrifice 
—a human life for a human life. The 
life of Adam, and all represented by him, 
could be redeemed by another perfect human 
being only. And so it was— "Since 
by man came death, by man came also 
the resurrection from the dead." (1 Cor. 15:21.) 
By the sacrifice of a perfect human 
existence, then, the right of the priest 
to restore is secured. 

But beyond the right, or privilege, of 
restoring, the priest must have the power, 
and power would of necessity presuppose 
his own everlasting existence. He must 
have power to create, since to restore to 
being that which had completely lost existence, 
is to re-create it, and is a greater 
work even than the first creation; he must 
also have perfect knowledge, both of 
God's requirements and of human necessities, 
as well as perfect ability, to guide 
a race so destitute, back to the glorious 
heights of perfection and blessed harmony 



and communion with God. 

What an office! Who would presume 
to assume such a title? It belongs really 
and only to Jehovah's Anointed. Even 
Jesus, "the Anointed one, did not glorify 
himself to become a High-Priest," but he 
has "been declared by God a High-Priest 
according to the order of Melchisedec." 
(Heb. 5:5,10, Diaglott.) Jehovah 
honored him by inviting him to that position, 
and giving him all power to fill it. 
In harmony with God's plan, not only 
has Jesus, his Anointed one, been chosen 
as the Chief, or High Priest, but the little 
flock, who follow him in sacrifice now, 
are called to be joint-heirs with him in 
the same honor. "If we suffer with him 
we shall also be glorified together." Jesus 
alone is the Priest, but when redeemed 
by his death and associated with him in 
sacrifice now, and in divine power hereafter, 
we are counted in with him, and together 
with him constitute the great 
Prophet Priest and King promised, to liberate 
and bless the groaning creation— 
the Seed of promise.— Gen. 22:18; 28:14; 
Gal. 3:29; Acts 3:20-23; Psa. 110:4. 

From these considerations it should be 
plain to all that the real Priest is just as 
truly a King, in whose hand absolute power 
is vested. And in looking back to the 
types or illustrations God has given us, 
we find just such an illustration in Melchisedec, 
to whom we are cited as an illustration, 
both by the Psalmist and by the 
Apostle Paul (Psa. 1 10:4; Heb. 5:5,10.), 
who show that he was a priest upon his 

R962 : page 6 

throne. Illustrations of the Christ as a 
Priest are given in the Aaronic Priesthood, 
where the special features of the redemptive 
sacrifice are shadowed forth— its perfection, 
its completeness, its acceptableness, 
as also the share which the little 
flock has with him in that sacrifice. 

Christ was not constituted a priest of 
the Aaronic order, that priesthood was 
only the type or figure. The Aaronic 
priesthood sprung from the tribe of Levi, 
while "our Lord (according to the flesh) 
sprung from the tribe of Judah, of which 
tribe Moses spake nothing concerning 
priesthood"; and the members of his body 
are chiefly chosen from among the Gentiles. 



As a man, Jesus was not a priest, 
neither as men are the saints members of 
the royal priesthood, but as "new creatures" 
they shall hold and execute their 
office. Jesus as a "new creature," "partaker 
of the divine nature" (to which he was 
begotten at the time of his baptism), was 
the priest, and as a priest he offered up 
his perfect human nature an acceptable 
sacrifice to God. He consecrated or offered 
himself in sacrifice before he became 
the priest, but the anointing was necessary 
to enable him to accomplish the sacrifice 
as well as to apply its benefits to men. 
The human nature, when sacrificed, could 
do nothing more; it must remain a sacrifice 
forever; but the new nature, fully 
developed in the resurrection, has "all power 
in heaven and in earth."— Matt. 28:18. 

The new nature (the priest) is not of 
the Aaronic order, it does not trace its 
lineage to any human source. This fact 
is strikingly typified in the priesthood of 
Melchisedec, whose lineage and death 
are not recorded. He was a priest 
without having inherited the office from 
his father or his mother— thus typifying 
Christ's priesthood, which came not of the 
lineage of the flesh, as did the Aaronic 
priesthood, which Israel thought to be the 
real. Neither was Melchisedec's death 
recorded, nor a successor named (Heb. 7:3 
Diaglott), that thus might be typified 
the endlessness of Christ's priesthood. In 
this type the work of sacrifice is not shown, 
as he represents the Christ glorified and 
reigning, after the work of sacrifice has 
been completed, and the divine nature 
fully perfected. 

In Heb. 7:4-10 Melchisedec is declared 
to be greater than Abraham, thus showing 
that the divine Christ will be greater, and 
therefore able to bless every "friend of 
God" on the human plane. 

"Wherefore he [Christ] is able to save 
them to the uttermost, that come unto 
God by him, seeing he ever liveth to 
make intercession for them." "For such 
a High Priest became us, who is holy, 
harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, 
and made higher than the heavens" [lifted 
higher than the highest— to the divine nature]. 
(Heb. 7:25,26.) And this blessed 
assurance of such a priest, so mighty to 
save, is confirmed unto us by the oath of 
Jehovah. (Heb. 7:21; Psa. 110:4.) 



What strong consolation, then, may those 
have, who have fled to Jehovah's Anointed 
for refuge: "Jehovah has sworn, and will 
not repent. Thou art a priest forever after 
the order of (or typified by) Melchisedec." 
What believer, then, may not 
read his title clear to the promised restitution? 
and what justified one who has offered 
himself as a living sacrifice may not 
read his title clear to joint-heirship with the 
Head in that glorious anointed body. He 
is authorized and is able to save completely 
all that come unto God by him— of 
whatever plane, he can deliver them to 
perfection. 

"Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers 
of the heavenly calling, consider the 
Apostle and High Priest of our profession, 
Christ Jesus. ..for we have become 
associates of the Anointed, if indeed we 
hold fast the beginning of our confidence, 
firm to the end."-Heb. 3:1,14- Diaglott. 

We conclude, then, that while the 
Aaronic priesthood furnishes typical illustrations 
of the sacrifices and sufferings of 
Christ and the blessings to follow, yet it 
did not completely illustrate the glorious, 
everlasting and unchangeable character 
of his priesthood during the Millennial 
age; and for this cause Melchisedec was 
presented as a type, that thus might be 
shown his glorious office of priest and king 
—a priest upon his throne. Here, too, 
the body of Christ is no longer shown as 
separate individuals, but as one, complete. 
In the work of sacrifice we have seen the 
head or chief priest and the under priests 
more or less separately sacrificing, as represented 
in Aaron and the under priests; 
but in the future glory all will unitedly 
share as represented in Melchisedec alone. 



R963 : page 6 

MADE LIKE UNTO HIS BRETHREN. NO. 2. 

In all things it behooved him to be made like 
unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and 
faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God- 
to make reconciliation for the sins of the people." 
-Heb. 2:17. 

In our previous paper (in July TOWER) 
under this caption we showed, we trust 



conclusively, that this passage of Scripture 
in no way signifies that our Lord was a 
sinner in any sense or in any degree, 
—neither the vilest of the vile, nor vile in 
the least degree, but that, as emphatically 
stated in Scriptures, he was holy, harmless, 
undefiled, separate from sinners. Now, 
we hope to show clearly in this paper what 
the above and kindred passages do teach. 

Who are the "brethren" whom he was 
"like unto." Surely the Sodomites and 
antediluvians are not the "brethren" 
referred to; so he was not like unto them, 
and was not tempted like as they were. 
Nor are sinners of any age, of these 
"brethren" like unto whom our Lord was; 
nor was he tempted like unto any or all 
sinners. Our Lord himself tells us who 
are his brethren saying "Whosoever shall 
do the will of my Father which is in heaven, 
the same is my brother and sister and 
mother." No sinner can measure up to 
this requirement; only the saints can fill 
the measure, and they, only by having 
their sins passed over, covered by Christ's 
meritorious sacrifice, and having their 
motives accepted now, through Christ, as 
instead of their actual works. Only these, 
in whom the righteousness of the law is 
reckoned as fulfilled through Christ— who 
walk not after the flesh, but after the 
spirit, fully consecrated to God, are the 
brethren of Christ, brethren, too, whom 
he declares he is not ashamed to own, 
—brethren of holy desires, justified and 
sanctified. 

Like unto these our Lord was, and like 
unto these he was tempted i.e., tested, 
tried, and proved obedient to his covenant 
of consecration. 

He was not tempted with the depraved 
tastes and desires of a drunkard or dissolute 
person, nor with the besetments and 
frivolities of present day "society," nor 
with wealth, nor with the perplexing 
annoyances of a parent, nor in a thousand 
other ways that men and women are perplexed 
and annoyed; but he was tempted 
or tested in all points like as we, the 
consecrated, are tested. Thus: We as 
followers in his footsteps find three points 
from which our covenant of self-sacrifice is 
tested— the world, the flesh and the devil 
—and so did our Lord. 

"The world" tests us by presenting 
opportunities for the use of our faculties 



and talents which are good, and right, 
sometimes benevolent and grand, and often 
more in sympathy with our human wisdom 
and tastes than God's plan which we have 
covenanted to follow. It is not only 
difficult to ignore and overcome the 
thousands of besetments from this source, 
but the greater the talents and the more 
nearly perfect the individual, the severer 
the test; because the clearer the head, the 
better and more benevolent the plans 
conceived of; and the greater the ability 
for executing those plans, the more difficult 
it will be to set them utterly aside and act 
merely as the tool of another— God's tool. 

"The flesh," or earthly desires, here 
comes in— not in us "his brethren" desires 
to do evil of any sort (for none of 
"his brethren" have pleasure in sin,) 

R964 : page 6 

but desires to do good of an earthly sort, 
congenial to the laudable tastes and 
ambitions of perfect men and women, to 
use time and talent in such a way as would 
afford pleasure and comfort and worldly 
approval and praise, rather than in a way 
to cost sacrifice of worldly praise and ease 
and comfort, in being "crucified to the 
world," its aims and rewards. 

"The devil" (we use this word devil to 
represent not only the being called Satan 
but evil influences started originally by 
his temptation in Eden,) takes advantage 
of the attractions of earthly things for our 
(consecrated) flesh and uses his influence 
against us powerfully. He operates through 
various agencies, and sometimes in opposite 
directions, to hinder the consecrated; 
and he is permitted to do so, to test those 
running for the prize and to make manifest 
the "overcomers"— the body of Christ. 
He rules the world in general, but not the 
"brethren." These he recognizes as 
opponents, whom he would deceive, 
ensnare, and hinder in their race, and he 
will succeed in doing so with all except a 
little flock, the "brethren" who, like their 
Lord, and by his aid, will overcome. 

To deceive the consecrated, he must 
counterfeit the true consecration, and get 
them to feel satisfied by some outward 
forms and ceremonies, united to benevolent 
worldliness, which will gratify the flesh 
instead of crucifying it. How skillfully 



the adversary has operated to carry out 
this plan, we all know. Great systems, 
each claiming to be the church— yet composed 
almost entirely of the unconsecrated, 
and in great part of unbelievers, full of 
the spirit— the plans, ideas and dispositions 
—of the world, full of pride and very 
unchristlike, have been organized to suit 
every shade and degree of spiritual 
derangement, each posing before the world 
as "the little flock" of overcomers, crucified 
with Christ. Those only who are free from 
these systems, standing fast in the liberty 
wherewith Christ hath made them free, 
can see the hollowness and falsity of such 
claims. These can see that not one of these 
human systems is "the church of the first 
born ones whose names are written in 
heaven," though some of the members 
of that true church are bound in those 
systems. Such can see, too, the absurdity 
of supposing that all of these various 
"bodies", with their various heads, and 
various and contradictory faiths and 
baptisms, can be the one body whose only 
head or Lord is Christ, whose only faith is 
that once delivered to the saints— the Bible 
—whose baptism is into Christ and into 
his death. 

But many are deceived by these immense 
sectarian systems which Satan, by operating 
in harmony with the spirit of the world 
and the flesh, has succeeded in getting 
many of the truly consecrated to organize 
and uphold. Such feel continually opposed 
to the methods of these systems, and 
realize that their spiritual natures are not 
fed and are not growing, and see that the 
descriptions of his church given by its Head 
does not fit these systems, when he declared 
it would be a "little flock," despised and 
rejected by the world, reviled because of 
its faithfulness to his word. But they are 
overawed by the greatness of their systems, 
and by the influence of the world, and by 
their respect for the word of men, and by 
the honor they have one of another, so 
that they find it impossible to accept of 
God's Word only, and His approval only, 
and of a membership only in the church 
written in heaven, but ignored and despised 
on earth. 

Such are the temptations, tests, or 
besetments of the "brethren;" and the 
Master was tempted or beset or tested by 
the same. If the world offers opportunity 



to us for doing good with our limited 
talents, energies and ambitions, and our 
known likelihood to miscalculate, etc., 
what must have been the temptation to 
the perfect "man Christ Jesus" with sound 
judgment as to what would be practicable 
and what he could accomplish in the way 
of moral, social and political reforms for 
the world. Thus his flesh (holy, harmless 
and undefiled) would powerfully draw him 
toward that course which would be in 
harmony with its judgment and plan of 
well-doing, and draw away from the total 
surrender of those plans, talents and powers, 
which the Father's Word mapped out. 
[Our Lord evidently was guided as to the 
Father's will concerning him and his work 
on earth by the prophetic Scriptures and the 
Mosaic types— just as we are, though seen by 
him with a clearer, a perfect mental vision, 
instead of which we, his "brethren," have 
his and the apostles words and examples 
to aid us.] 

Our Lord also was tested and proved by 
religious systems— "like as we are." 
Judaism, with its various sects, Pharisees, 
Sadducees, etc., was in the very zenith of its 
glory as a religious system. Its laws had been 
made doubly strict, its votaries fasted two 
days in the week, made long prayers, and 
gave much alms to the poor. As a religious 
system it was very zealous, compassing sea 
and land in missionary efforts (Matt. 23:15.) 
and not without success, for the 
whole civilized world was beginning to 
respect it; and to its holy feasts came yearly 
devout men out of every nation (Acts 2:9) 
— Parthians, Medes, Elamites, dwellers in 
Mesopotamia, Cappadocia, Pontus, Asia, 
Phrygia, Pamphylia, Egypt, Lybia, Cyrene, 
Rome, Crete, and Arabia. It was gaining 
favor with men of influence in the world, 
who not infrequently built and donated 
synagogues for divine worship and even the 
ungodly king Herod had built them a 
Temple which in magnificence far surpassed 
that of Solomon. Here, then, stood a great 
temptation: none could see more clearly 
than our Lord how easily, with his perfect 
power, he could have associated himself 
with the great ones of that system, 
soon have made himself their leader, and 
then have spread the influence of that 
religious empire over the world, gradually 
bringing about social and political reforms 
and greatly blessing the world. How 



thorough a crucifixion of the flesh it implied 
when he deliberately set aside all these 
positive, grand opportunities of doing good, 
to accept of another, the Father's plan, 
the full out-working of which he evidently 
could not at first see. But our Lord knew 
that the way it was written in the Law and 
the prophets, was the way God had designed 
the work of blessing the world 
should be accomplished, and that if he 
would be acceptable with the Father as 
the one who was to do the blessing, he 
must follow the Father's plan, and fulfill 

R964 : page 7 

all that was written in the Law and the 
prophets concerning the Anointed. He 
knew that though it was written that 
Messiah should be great, and reign, and 
bless, it was also written, that first, he 
must be despised and rejected by those 
who could appreciate neither the Father's 
plan nor his obedience to that plan, and 
that he must die to redeem men before he 
could have the right to permanently bless 
them. (Isa. 53.) And he bowed to the 
plan of Jehovah; crucifying his own 
gracious plans he meekly obeyed, even 
unto death— even the death of the cross. 

Here, then, we recognize the Lord's 
"brethren"— those who seek, love, and do 
the will of the Father in heaven, in preference 
to their own. Here we see how he 
was tested in all points like as we are, yet 
without yielding— without sin. Our Lord, 
holy, harmless, undefiled, was like unto 
these, his justified, sanctified "brethren," 
who in him and through him are also 
recognized by the Father as holy, harmless, 
undefiled, and separate from sinners. 

That this is the correct understanding 
of the Apostle's words is proved by the 
verses preceding the text we are examining: 
(Heb. 2:11-13.) "For both he 
that sanctifieth and they who are sanctified 
are all of one, for which cause he is not 
ashamed to call THEM brethren: Saying 
[as it was prophetically written], "I will 
declare thy name unto my brethren; in 
the midst of the church [the "little flock"] 
will I sing praise unto thee." And again 
"I [the entire head and body— one] will 
put my trust in him." And again, Behold, I 
and the children which God hath given me. 

So, then, argues the apostle, our Lord's 



mission into the world was to save those 
whom God foresaw would accept of his 
favor, and become children of God. 
These were all under sentence of death, 
and therefore Christ became a man, 
partook of flesh and blood (human nature). 
But he partook not of its depravity and 
imperfections. To have done so would 
have frustrated the design of his coming; 
for the Apostle declares that he partook 
of our human nature in order that by his 
DEATH he might break the power 
(authority or control) of death and release 
these foreseen children of God and bring 
them into life, that through these, in turn, 
in the coming age, all might be blessed. 

Yes, dear "brethren," our Head, our 
Lord, was perfect as a man and gave a 
perfect sacrifice, without spot or blemish, 
for our sins, and not for ours only, but also 
for the sins of the whole world; and as 
our blemishes were laid upon him and he 
bore our sins in his own body on the tree, 
so his perfections were imputed to us so 
that we bear his righteousness. He, the 
holy, the pure one, was made a sin offering 
on our behalf, in order that we might 
be made the righteousness of God in him. 
2 Cor. 5:21,Diaglott. 

For such an high priest, holy, harmless, 
separate from sinners, became us [suited 
us, was necessary for us]. He was tempted 
in all points like as WE ARE, and is 
able to sympathize with and assist us in 
our efforts to be dead to every worldly 
ambition, and alive only to the will of 
God. Wherefore, let us go to him in 
confidence and trust his every direction 
as to every step of the way; for he will 
not suffer [permit] us to be tempted above 
that we are able to withstand, but will 
provide a way of escape. (1 Cor. 10:13.) 
Trust him, then, unflinchingly, confidently, 
and do your part as far as you are able, 
assured that you shall not be tried further. 

"Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers 
[with Christ Jesus] of the heavenly calling, 
consider [think of, notice carefully] 
the Apostle and High Priest, of our profession, 
Christ Jesus, who was faithful." 

R965 : page 7 

(Heb. 3:1-2.) Consider the necessity 
of his being tested before being so 
highly exalted, and you will not wonder 



that you as partakers of the same "high," 
"heavenly calling" should be severely 
tried to prove faithfulness to God's word 
and plan, that you may be worthy to 
share in his glory. Consider that though 
your Master was perfect before he became 
a man, and perfect as a man, yet before 
being so highly exalted as he now is, it 
was proper that he should be tested to 
perfection, to the last degree (Heb. 2:10); 
that when he shall command obedience of 
all to Jehovah, it will not be possible for 
him to demand more of any, than he 
would and did himself yield to the Father. 
Thus the already perfect, sinless, holy, 
"man Christ Jesus" was proved worthy 
of, or perfected for, the divine nature and 
great exaltation, upon which he entered 
fully at his resurrection. 

Rejoice, "holy brethren:" our Lord's 
obedience and his aid provided us, insures 
our victory, if like Paul we "press along 
the line [marked out by our Head and 
Fore-runner] toward the prize of our 
high-calling which is of God, through 
Christ Jesus our Lord." He was tempted 
like as we are, and will succor us, and is 
not ashamed to call us "brethren." 



R965 : page 7 

IS LIFE A GIFT OR A PURCHASE? 

A Brother writing us asks: If Christ 
Jesus our Lord, as our ransom or substitute, 
bought us and all our rights to life, how 
shall we understand the Scriptural statement 
that "The gift of God is eternal 
life?" If a purchase for us by Jesus, how 
can it be a gift of God? or vice versa, 
If a gift of God, how can we say that 
Jesus purchased it for us? 

We reply: It is just such short sighted 
reasoning that is causing the general 
sectarian confusion on all Bible doctrines 
—the setting of one Bible doctrine against 
another, instead of seeking to see in what 
way they harmonize. Now, the brother 
cannot question that the Bible does teach 
clearly that the wages of man's sin was 
death, and that it passed upon all, and 
that Christ DIED for our sins, and hence 
paid our penalty. Nor, can he contradict 
the Lord when he says that He came into 



the world that he might give his life a 

ransom (a price) for many lives (Matt. 20:28); 

nor the apostle Paul when he says 

that Christ Jesus gave himself a ransom 

[Greek, a corresponding price] for all (1 Tim. 2:6), 

nor Peter when he says that 

Christ purchased us with his own precious 

blood. (Acts 20:28; 1 Pet. 1:18,19.) 

But our brother seems to think that all 

these very exact statements and many more, 

as well as all the typical sacrifices of the 

Jewish Age, are all opposed, contradicted 

and upset by the one text he quotes, that 

"the gift of God is eternal life." 

Our brother errs in this; for these are 
not contradictory: he has merely misquoted 
the last text and omitted the part 
which shows the harmony between this 
and the others which he thought it contradicted. 
Now see: "The wages of sin is 
death, but the gift of God is eternal life 
through JESUS CHRIST OUR LORD." 

God has no gifts for sinners, but stands 
pledged to pay to such, the wages of sin, 
which is death. Our Lord Jesus, by becoming 
our substitute, ransomed us from 
the wages of original sin, and brought us 
into that harmony where we could receive 
from God, not the wages of Adam's sin, 
but the gift of everlasting life. So far as 
men are concerned, the gift of life and 
forgiveness of sins is as directly of the 
Father as though our Lord had not redeemed 
us. But in order that we may 
have full confidence in our heavenly 
Father, he explains to us the process and 
philosophy of the redemptive plan, by 
which he remains just and maintains his 
just laws, which condemn sinners to death, 
and yet has provided a way for justifying 
the sinner, releasing him from the just 
penalty and granting him life— through 
Jesus Christ, our Lord. 

Notice some other statements of this 
same Apostle in this same epistle, regarding 
other favors of God conveyed to the sinner 
through his Redeemer, and in no other 
way. For instance:— 

"We have peace with God THROUGH our 
Lord Jesus Christ."— Rom. 5:11. 

"That as sin reigned unto death, even 
so might favor reign through righteousness, 
unto eternal life by [THROUGH] Jesus 
Christ our Lord."— Rom. 5:21. 

"Reckon ye also yourselves to be dead indeed 
unto sin, but alive unto God THROUGH 



Jesus Christ our Lord."— Rom. 6:11. 

"For the wages of sin is death, but the 
gift of God is eternal life THROUGH Jesus 
Christ our Lord."— Rom. 6:23. 

Every divine favor is granted in and 
THROUGH Christ.-"He is Lord (master, 
owner,) of all." All things are of the 
Father even as all things are by or THROUGH 
THE SON.-l Cor. 8:6. 



R965 : page 7 

UNSUCCESSFUL WORKERS. 

Desponding Christians do not make 
successful workers or valiant soldiers. 
"Feeble-Hearts," and "Ready-to-Halts," 
and "Little-Faiths" win no battles, and 
wear no crowns. They are so occupied 
with themselves, with their own experiences 
their own evidences, their changing moods 
and feelings, that they have no time for 
manly, noble service. They are so busy 
in trying to perform "acts of faith"; and 
having performed them, they are so intent 
upon analyzing them, in order to ascertain 
whether they be all of the exact quality or 
quantity which will recommend them to God, 
that they leave no space for "joy in blessing," 
and no room for the free, large-hearted 
labor which such joy cannot fail to 
lead to. Tossed up and down on the 
waves of unbelief and fear, they have no 
heart to work. Shutting their eyes against 
the light, they grope their way uncertainly, 
and cannot run the race. Afraid to 
believe, but not afraid to doubt; afraid to 
trust, but not afraid to distrust; doubting 
themselves, and making that a reason for 
doubting God; putting away peace, and 
giving full scope to gloom; refusing light, 
but letting darkness reign within them; 
they are not in a condition to do hard work 
—nay, to do any work at all. Strength 
comes from joy, and of that joy they have 
none. They refuse both food and medicine, 
and they become lean and sickly. 
They are fitter for the hospital than for the 
battle-field. They seem, too, to get more 
and more emaciated, though the food provided 
is abundant. Laboring under what 
physicians call atrophy, the more they 
eat the less they seem to be fed.— Bonar. 



R965 : page 7 

THE MORNING COMETH. 

It is a self-evident truth that the age of 
doctrinal uniformity has gone past; equally 
obvious that no doctrinal platform whatsoever, 
however comprehensive and liberal, 
can serve as the gathering-place of deep, profound, 
and Christ-like thinkers. This raises 
an issue at once threatening evil and disorder, 
and yet prophetic of good and 
harmony. The only truth capable of 
bringing about a reconciliation of divergent 
opinions, or which will help to spread 
genuine charity, is that there is a church 
forming within all churches, and in the 
minds of all true and noble thinkers, disclosing 
to all true minds higher views of 
truth than the sects can any of them hold, 
and imparting to all intellects that turn to 
the Lord, a life which the sects as such 
cannot give; that the Lord Jesus Christ is 
coming nearer and nearer in spirit, and 
that this energy is creating a new thought, 
and an entirely new affection among men; 
that this spirit is not evolving a new sect 
or ecclesiasticism to which men point and 
say, Lo! here, or Lo! there; it is a quickened 
spirit from the Lord, and out of that 
spirit a new theology will arise, more reverent, 
more heavenly and practical, before 
which the old scragged dogmas will melt 
off and fall away.— Progressionist. 



R967 : page 7 

THE LAMB OF GOD APPROVED FOR 
SACRIFICE. 

"Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away 
the sin of the world."— John 1:29. 

"We are reminded that he is THE 
SPOTLESS LAMB-a lamb without blemish 
and without spot. Now I need not remind 
you who are at all familiar with the 
Old Testament history, how important it 
was that the lamb that was offered up 
should be without blemish. So vital was 
this, that it was required that the priest 
who was appointed for that purpose should 



carefully inspect the victim that had been 
selected, to be sure that there was no blemish 
in it, and then seal it with the Temple 
seal, in token that it was fit for sacrifice 
and for food; and now we find our Lord 
Jesus Christ taking up the thought, and 
saying, "Labor not for the meat that 
perisheth, but for that meat that endureth 
unto everlasting life, which the Son of 
man shall give unto you; for him hath God 
the Father sealed." On the banks of the 
Jordan, the heavens opened, and the Spirit 
descended like a dove, and rested upon 
him, and God spoke saying, "This is my 
beloved Son, in whom I am well 
pleased."— A. J. Gordon. 



R988 : page 7 

THE OLD Pharisees rejected Jesus because 
He taught men that God's plans of 
grace were wider than they had believed 
them to be. The Gentiles, the outcasts, 
the whole world of humanity, was included 
in them. The Pharisees believed that the 
Jews, and especially their own sect, had a 
monopoly of the grace of God. It is 
strange how this old spirit of human nature 
comes out in our day. Many in the 
church seem to be just as averse to any 
view of the gospel which widens its scope 
beyond the narrow lines in which they 
have conceived of it. The idea that there 
can be any blessing in it for the countless 
masses of the dead who passed out of life 
before Christ came, or who have since 
died with no knowledge of Him, is something 
they cannot admit. Nor have they 
an ear for any interpretations of Scripture 
which do not pass current in their sect, 
or which bring within the scope of God's 
love and blessing those whom they have 
always regarded as outside of His covenant. 
Men love to think that they belong 
to that favored class who have a monopoly 
of both the truth and the grace of 
God.— Words of Reconciliation. 



R965 : page 7 

BABYLON'S NEW SUBURBS. 



THE PUBLIC SCHOOLS. 

NEWFOUNDLAND has adopted the system 
urged by Catholics in this country and 
divided its school money among the religious 
denominations in proportion to their 
numbers. The total sum is $96,065. Of 
this, again divided, the church of England's 
share will be $32,138, the Methodists' 
$24,488, while something over $1,000 
goes to other sects, the Baptists getting 
the least, their share being only $29. 



R967 : page 8 

"K. OF L." BREAKING UP. 

POWDERLY'S REPLY TO THE ASSERTION. 

We are breaking up as the plowman 
breaks up the soil for the sowing of new 
seed; we are breaking up old traditions; 
we are breaking up hereditary rights and 
planting everywhere the seed of universal 
rights; we are breaking up the idea that 
money makes the man and not moral 
worth; we are breaking up the idea that 
might makes right; we are breaking up the 
idea that legislation is alone for the rich; 
we are breaking up the idea that Congress 
of the United States must be run by millionaires 
for the benefit of millionaires; 
we are breaking up the idea that a few 
men may hold millions of acres of 
untilled land while other men starve for 
want of one acre; we are breaking up the 
practice of putting the labor of criminals 
into competition with honest labor and 
starving it to death; we are breaking up 
the practice of importing ignorance bred 
of monarchy and dynamite, in order to depreciate 
intelligent skilled labor at home; 
we are breaking up the practice of employing 
the little children in factories, thus 
breeding a race deformed, ignorant, and 
profligate; we are breaking up the idea 
that a man who works with his hands has 
need neither of education nor of civilizing 
refinements; we are breaking up the idea 
that the accident of sex puts one-half of 
the human race beyond the pale of Constitutional 
rights; we are breaking up the 
practice of paying woman one-third the 
wages paid man, simply because she is a 



woman; we are breaking up the idea that 

a man may debauch an infant girl and 

shield himself from the penalty behind a law 

which he himself has made; we are breaking 

up ignorance, intemperance, crime and 

oppression of whatever character and 

wherever found. Yes, the Knights of 

Labor are breaking up, and they will 

continue their appointed works of breaking 

up until universal rights shall prevail; 

and while they may not bring in the Millennium 

they will do their part in the 

evolution of moral forces that are working 

for the emancipation of the race.— T. V. 

Powderly. 



R966 : page 8 
WORLDLY PLEASURES. 



Bradford Co., Pa. 

DEAR. BRO. RUSSELL:-MILLENNIAL 
DAWN received, many thanks. If you can 
find time would very much like an answer 
to the following question. 

Could any one who had not the Holy 
Spirit take your book and read it and understand 
it? Would any one care for 
those things if they did not have the 
Spirit? You think, do you not, that any 
one who desires to do the will of the 
Father no matter what it may cost, is begotten 
of the Spirit? that this mind to 
do his will is the DIVINE MIND and is the 
"earnest of our inheritance". If you can 
get time please answer. 

Should I sacrifice everything— all the 
innocent pleasures of my home life, or 
could I enjoy such things as come to me 
which do not seem to be wrong and in 
which I may be happy. I wish to do the 
Lord's will in all things, so far as it is 
made known to me. 

Do you think I can say that God is revealing 
his will, his plan, through your 
works? or if I had his Spirit should I be able 
to take up the Bible and understand it all? 

Yours in hope of being one of the 
"overcomers," MRS. W. L. M . 

[DEAR SISTER: -It is my judgment that 
the evidences you mention are sufficient to 
identify you with the spiritual children of 
God. If you appreciate those things 



which are above, so that your affections 
are centered on the heavenly things in 
preference to the earthly, and to such an 
extent as to lead you to sacrifice earthly 
things, then I would judge that you are 
not of the earthly class, but that you are 
begotten to a higher nature through the 
word of divine truth. 

Now keep your eye of faith fixed on the 
prize of your high calling which is of God 
through Christ, and carry out your consecration 
faithfully and thus make your 
election sure. 

If you were on the natural (human) 
plane, you might still take pleasure and 
delight in learning God's great plan as all 
the world shall, by and by. But your 
hopes, ambitions and aspirations would 
still be earthly. The prospect of the 
earthly glory would be your delight, 
although aware of the higher spiritual 
glory. 

Not all of those begotten of the Spirit are 
able to understand the Scriptures without 
assistance, but such can do so by assistance 
which others cannot accept of. God has 
always raised up some in the church, in every 
age, to be teachers and helpers of others, 

R967 : page 8 

to bring forth from his storehouse of truth 
"meat in due season," "things new and 
old." Call to mind an article in the 
TOWER of March, '85, "If the whole body 
were an eye." Every member of the body of 
Christ has not the same office of service, 
but every member has some ministry 
(service) to perform for the benefit of 
other members. 

It is not wrong but right to examine 
yourself in the light of God's Word to 
determine what part you are to take in his 
plan. The test as to pleasures is not as you 
suppose; if entirely crucified the doing of 
the will of God will afford you greatest 
pleasure. The saints are never miserable 
though others would often be if in their 
places without their hopes and aspirations. 
It is a part of God's will that we do a 
reasonable share to make others happy, 
only, moderation must govern and in this 
as in all things we must seek to honor our 
Master and his principles, while not 
neglecting other duties and privileges. 

May the Lord bless you and give you 



grace to endure hardness as a good 
soldier.-EDITOR.l 



R966 : page 8 

DAWN VOL. II. WANTED. 

Janesville, Wis., May 7, 1887. 

TOWER PUB. CO., GENTLEMEN:-I 
have finished reading "M. DAWN," Vol. I. 

Evidently this is a work of too great 
importance to be left incomplete. It is 
also one of such interest to those who are 
interested, that (speaking as one) we would 
prefer the ideas to be included in volume 
II. in a rough dress and without the polish 
of the well rounded sentences which characterize 
Vol. I. rather than wait a single day 
longer than is absolutely necessary— and 
trust to time and opportunity for the 
author to do the polishing on a second 
or subsequent edition. 

Will you kindly let me know where, 
and the very first moment when, Vol. II. 
can be procured. 

Very Truly Yours, WM. W . 

[We are glad to learn through this and 
sother means that the truth is finding the 
truth-hungry and causing their hearts to 
rejoice in hope of the glorious outcome of 
the great divine plan of the ages. Vol. II. 
of MILLENNIAL DAWN will be pushed as 
rapidly as limited opportunities will permit. 
We hope to have it out early in 
1888. Meantime let a thorough acquaintance 
with the plan of God and its Bible evidences 
prepare the way for the stronger 
meat of Vol. II. which will further establish 
the truth upon a chronological basis, 
showing how the great clock of the ages 
marks with wonderful precision the exact 
time for every advance step in the great 
plan of the ages. -EDITOR.] 



"HE WHO has learned to seek nothing 
but the will of God shall always find what 
he seeks." 



BROTHER BOWMAN writes as follows:- 



Moultrie Co., S.C. 
MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Having 

spent part of the winter and the early 
spring in the city of Wilmington and three 
or four counties in N.C. in preaching the 
grand and glorious truths set forth in the 
(incomparable) MILLENNIAL DAWN, I am 
now here staying with one of my sons, 
where I expect to remain the balance of 
the summer. The greatest opposition I 
meet with in proclaiming these truths is 
from Second Advent preachers. O how 
strange! I am the first man that ever 
preached Second Advent doctrines in S. 
Carolina, and now because I have taken, 
as I conscientiously believe, another step 
in advance, I am branded the second time 
as a heretic. Well, be it so. The good 
Lord be praised. Wherever I go the 
people receive me and these truths with 
gladness. If I live until next September, 
I will be 78 years old; so you see what 
I do must be done quickly. Please send 
me here some reading matter for distribution. 
If I had a dollar in the world, I 
would send it to you. May a holy God 
bless you and your dear wife in the great 
work you have undertaken. I am yours 
in giving all for Jesus and his glory. 
PEYTON G. BOWMAN. 

[DEAR BROTHER B.:-I well remember 
hearing you speak as a champion of Second 
Adventism in Philadelphia, Pa., about 
twelve years ago. You had come among 
them from the Baptists, I think. I then 
thought you honest, and longed to have 
you see "the way of God more perfectly" 
and afterward I sent sample TOWERS to 
your address. I am glad to note your 
present clearness and zeal. Surely our 
Lord's words are fulfilled to each and all: 
—"If any man will do my Father's will, 
he shall know of the doctrine." 

Though old, you have a strong constitution 
Brother, and the Master is able to 
sustain it in his service. I therefore suggest 
to you the sale of paper bound DAWNS 
throughout southern cities and towns. The 
"expense allowance" will pay your way, 
and as one brother writes, so you can say to 
yourself: "If I can sell 100 books per week 
that is preaching 16 sermons to 100 people 
counting each chapter a sermon." May 
the Lord richly bless and use you in the present 
"harvest" work, is my prayer.— ED.] 



R966 : page 8 
A BAPTIST Brother writes:- 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Enclosed is 
one dollar for TOWER for this year and 
please send me two copies of M. DAWN, 
paper covers. There are some excellent 
things in DAWN, but to my mind some 
chaff as well as wheat. 

I appreciate your writings. I am pastor 
of a Baptist church. You do not quite 
understand the Baptist freedom and privilege. 
I preach the truths your paper contains, 
and am not hindered from doing so 
by my congregation, and I am under no 
other earthly jurisdiction. You seem to 
think, a Baptist church is a monarchy. It 
is not so. Yours truly, W. C . 

[DEAR BROTHER:-We greet you, glad 
indeed to learn of your liberty. I am well 
aware that Baptist churches are independent, 
in the sense of not being under the 
control of Conferences and Presbyteries. 
I know, too, that once they occupied the 
same position that we hold regarding the 
division of God's people into sects by 
names and formulated creeds outside the 
Bible, and that the name "Baptist" 
was attached to them slurringly by their 
enemies, while they, as we do now, simply 
called themselves Christians. 

But, dear Brother, I also know that today 
the liberty of Baptists is in name 
mainly; for they follow closely the practices 
of other sects except in the matter 
of immersion. If you have come across 
a company of people among them, who 
will "endure sound doctrine," and to whom 
you do not shun "to declare the whole 
counsel of God," you have certainly come 
across a rarity, or else have been a very 
faithful and successful pastor whose flock 
is highly favored. What a power such a 
church should be— full of zeal and of the 
spirit of truth. 

If such is your church, it is a proper 
Christian, earthly organization, but no 
more. It is still true, that the real church, 
the body of Christ, is only that whose 
names are written in heaven, and whose 
only name is Christian. Of this however 



be assured, that unless your congregation 
consists of overcoming saints only, there 
will ere long come divisions produced by 
your faithful presentation of the truth, because 
we are in the "harvest," the separating 
time. And the more advanced your 
teachings, and your people, the sooner will 
come the separation by the sickle of truth. 
Thrust in the sickle for the harvest is come. 

As for not seeing eye to eye with the 
Editor of the TOWER on every point, 
I would say: We do not limit our recognition 
of the Brotherhood thus. We recognize 
every believer in the ransom living 
a moral life, as a justified child of God: 
and every such one who went further and 
in the acceptable time presented himself 
a sacrifice and was baptized into the body 
of Christ by being baptized into his death, 
we recognize as a fellow-member and joint-heir 
in "the body of Christ"— the church, 
the little flock. As such fellow-members 
we are all growing in grace and knowledge, 
building one another up continually. 
But we believe the time is near, if 
not present, when all such may and should 
see eye to eye— for the set time to favor 
Zion has come. The thought of some 
that "of course" we cannot see alike and 
have unmixed truth, is often a fruitful 
cause of stumbling over plain clear truths. 
-EDITOR.! 



R968 : page 1 

VOL. IX. PITTSBURGH, PA., SEPTEMBER, 1887. NO. 1. 



R967 : page 1 

HINTS ON SELLING DAWN. 

Any one desirous of engaging in the 
spread of the truth can find grand opportunities 
and plenty of them, selling paper-bound 
DAWN, VOL. I. The present price, 
25 cents, brings it within the reach of all. 
We state again that ten cents per copy is 
allowed for expenses out of the Tract 
Fund. According to your zeal, faith and 
talents united, will be your success. Take 
your sample book and make a trial before 
ordering books. For particulars of how 
to succeed in selling DAWN, write to us 
for a copy of our Hints to MILLENNIAL 
DAWN Canvassers, just printed. It will 
be sent free by mail. 



MISSIONARY ENVELOPES. 

Another plan for spreading the "glad 
tidings" has been conceived. It is to 
print some pointed Scripture passages 
briefly showing our glorious hope, across 
the face of an envelope at the top, leaving 
plenty of room for addressing and stamps, 
and on the back of same some friendly 
mentions of MILLENNIAL DAWN. 

The suggestion is that if all our readers 
used envelopes printed thus for their correspondence, 
it would call the attention 
of thousands to the "blessed hope," which 
fills our hearts, and to the book which 
presented that hope, briefly, strikingly, 
and often more effectively than any other 
tract or paper would do, and without extra 
cost to you, by the plan we have arranged. 

Buying and printing envelopes in quantities, 
we can pay postage to you and all 
expenses, and sell them at a lower rate 
than you could buy them for blank, in 
small quantities. We can supply you at 
35 cts. a hundred, or 300 for one dollar, 
postage or expressage prepaid. And for 
any one wanting 2,000 at a time, we will 
print a neat small business card in the 



corner below the above mentioned Scripture 

texts, without extra charge, i.e., 

2,000 for six dollars ($6.00) expressage 

prepaid. Cash in advance must accompany 

all orders, as it will busy us to attend 

to the extra work, without trouble and 

worry about accounts and collections. 

In this way those at home also, can 
find room to do something in the harvest 
field, can help spread the good tidings of 
great joy, and bring it before the eyes of 
thousands. And if brethren in business 
will adopt the plan, hundreds of thousands 
of these messengers may soon be running 
to and fro through the earth and knowledge 
be increased thereby. We can offer 
no variety— they will be full sized No. 6 
Envelopes, of either a green or blue tint. 
We need not say to you that they will be 
neat and respectable. 

Less than 100 we do not care to sell, as 
the time consumed does not justify; hence 
we say, Less than 100 will be one cent 
each. Address orders to TOWER PUBLISH 
CO., Allegheny, Pa., U.S.A. 



R968 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

"Watchman, What of the night? The morning 
cometh, and also the night." 

Our last "VIEW" scanned the advantages 
of the present over all past time, to 
the consecrated child of God, both for 
his own up-building and for preaching the 
glad tidings to others; but now we look 
beyond the present, into the future. We 
see beyond, the brightness of the Millennial 
Day whose dawn-streaks may even 
now be seen as we look from the WATCH 
TOWER in the right direction. We know 
that there the Sun of Righteousness, with 
healing in its beams, shall ultimately dispel 
all darkness— every error and wrong; 
but between the present comparatively 
favorable hour, though it is not without 
its difficulties, and that coming time of 
unhindered righteousness, what may we 
expect? Will it continue to be as favorable 
for study and helps as the present, or 
more so, or less so? Will it be favorable 
as the present for labor in the vineyard, 



or more or less favorable? That is the 
query now. 

We have no desire to draw a dark 
picture; we prefer rather to think of and 
point out the glory to follow, the joys of the 
grand incoming Millennial Day, than the 
afflictions and discouragements of the 
nearer future, which precedes full sunrise. 

But it is necessary as a portion of "meat 
in due season," that the saints should be 
at least in a measure forewarned of impending 
events, that when they come to 
pass they may not be alarmed or disheartened, 
but being fore-armed may know 
how to meet them; and also that they 
may more fully appreciate the blessings 
of the present, so as to most diligently 
"Work while it is called day, for the night 
[a much darker time in comparison 
with the present, which is called day,] 
cometh wherein no man CAN WORK." 
Though the Watchman proclaims to the 
inquirer that the Millennial morning 
cometh, he should also forewarn of the 
approaching night between, darker than 
the present. 

The Apostle asserts that "The time 
will come when they will not endure sound 
doctrine." (2 Tim. 4:3.) He speaks 
of the general or nominal Church, which 
in our day includes "all sorts" of what a 
prominent Methodist Bishop has styled 
"the ring-streaked and speckled of Christendom.' 
While this is true now in the 
same sense that it has been true for 
centuries, is it not to have a more forcible 
and clear fulfillment future? It is true 
now that the Church nominal will not 
endure preachers who ignore their creeds 
and "preach the Word," the "whole 
counsel [plan] of God;" but having 
"itching ears" they love human speculations 
on evolution, and philosophies falsely 
so called, rather than the Word of God, 
which to them, seems old and unrefreshing; 
for none get the refreshing "meat in due 
season" from the Word, except those who 
possess its spirit and are walking in obedience 
to its light. And yet because they 
cannot hinder it, they endure the sound 
doctrine to some extent— to an extent far 
beyond what Rome in her palmy days 
would have endured. Men have been 
burned at the stake, imprisoned, etc., 
for expressing truths with far less force 
and plainness than is used in the TOWER. 



Just before the words we are considering 
(2 Tim. 4:3), the Apostle refers 
directly to the perilous times of the last 
days of this age, (Chap. 3:1-13), pointing 
out its high minded, pleasure-loving 
and good-despising characteristics, with 
its formalism, covetousness, pride and unthankfulness; 
and declares that (in the 
church) Evil men and leaders -astray (from 
the truth) shall grow worse and worse, 
deceiving others and being deceived themselves 
by their sophistries. And since the 
Apostle was thinking and writing specially 
about the last days, and not about the 
middle ages, we are surely justified in 
querying whether a time may not be but 
a short distance before us, when sound 
doctrine will not be endured, or permitted, 
to any degree in the "last days." 

While it is true now, to a large extent, 
that none are permitted to buy or sell 
[trade in the truth] in the common marts 
or synagogues, except those who have the 
mark of the beast or the number of his 
name, (Rev. 13:17) yet we manage to 
do considerable trading outside— among 
the people. And the question is, May not 
this statement of the Revelator mean still 
more than our present experience, and like 
the Apostle Paul's statement imply that a 
time will come in the last days, in which 
sound doctrine will not be endured at all? 

In back numbers of the TOWER, we 
have shown that the true Church, while 
in the flesh, is the antitypical Elias or 
Elijah, which introduces and prepares the 
way of the true Spiritual Church— the 
Christ in glory. We showed that the 
prophet Elijah's ministry was typical of 
the Church's ministry, and that his tribulations 
at the hand of Jezebel and her 
priests and Ahab, were typical of the 
persecutions of the true saints at the hand 
of the antitypical Jezebel, the false church 
—Rome, and her priests, and her husband 
—the Roman Empire etc., etc. We also 
showed that John the Baptist was another 
type of the Church in the flesh during 
this Gospel age, in that he fulfilled the 
work of the antitypical Elijah to the Jewish 
people, when the kingdom was offered 
them formally and figuratively at the first 
advent. John was called the Elias because 
he was another figure, as Elijah was, of the 
real Elijah, antitypical— the true church 
in the flesh. (Matt. 11:14.) So, then, 



whatever we find in the life and experience 
of either Elijah or John, which seems to 
fit well to the experience of the Church, 
and to the testimony regarding her future 
earthly course, we are justified in recognizing 
as typical. 

We shall not here refer at length to 
Elijah and the wonderful correspondence 
between his experience and that delineated 
in the Revelations, in which even his 
persecutor Jezebel is mentioned by name, 
and the application made of it to the 
Church's persecutor, nor to the exact correspondence 
of time there pointed out and 
the fulfillment of all these in the history 
of the true (not the nominal) Church. 
For this we refer you to your file of 
TOWERS. (See, Nov. '83.) We here draw 
your attention merely to the closing events 
of the lives of Elijah and John, as illustrative 
of what we may expect to be the 
closing events in the history of the "little 
flock" in the earthly condition— the true 
antitypical Elias which was to come, and 
whose failure to turn or convert the hearts 
of the world before the great Millennial 
day of the Lord, makes necessary the 
smiting of the earth with a curse (Mai. 3:23,24.) 
—the time of trouble such as 
was not since there was a nation, needful 
to prepare the world for the reign of the 
Prince of Peace. 

Elijah passed from earthly scenes in a 
chariot of fire, representative of the spiritual 
glory and exaltation awaiting at the 
end of the earthly race course, those of 
the Church alive and remaining to the 
last; but we should also remember that it 
was by a whirlwind or storm-burst that he 
was taken away; and a storm is the symbol 
of trouble as much as the fiery chariot 
would be a figure of victory and glory in 
that trouble. 

John the Baptist's closing experiences 
mark the trouble feature more clearly. 
Though he was not obeyed by the people 
(Matt. 17:12), they for a short time 
recognized him as a sincere man, a servant 
and prophet of God (Jno. 5:35), yet 
when he had announced Jesus as Messiah, 

R968 : page 2 

his work soon began to wane, as he had 
testified it should do, saying of Jesus, 
"He must increase, but I must decrease." 



So it must be in the end of this age: the 
work of the John class or Elijah class, 
closes with the announcement that The 
Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, and the 
King is present. This is now being done; 
and strange to say the testimony is in almost 
the same words used by John, who 
declared: "There standeth one [present] 
among you whom you know not," "whose 
fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly 
purge [cleanse] his [threshing] floor, and 
gather his wheat into the garner; but he 
will burn up the chaff with unquenchable 
fire" [in a time of trouble].— John 1:26; 
Matt. 3:12. 

As John decreased— his work being 
done when this message was delivered 
—so the Church in the flesh must decrease 
when its last message is given, until the 
last member has laid down his consecrated 
life and passed beyond the vail into 
"glory" thenceforth to be a member of 
the glorious reigning Christ. As John 
said that Jesus must increase, so now that 
the real Kingdom is about to be established, 
we can confidently say, that the King 
is present, and that his kingdom must 
increase until it fills the earth. And, 
John's announcement of the "harvest" 
work— the gathering of the wheat, and 
the trouble coming upon the chaff, finds 
its parallel in the present time. 

John's liberty was restrained soon after 
the delivery of this message announcing 
the present One and the work before him; 
he was cast into prison because he had 
reproved the king of improper union with 
a woman (Matt. 14:4); and though the 
faithful children of God have often pointed 
out that union between the church 
and the civil power was out of order, being 
in the Scriptures termed harlotry (Rev. 17:5), 
and though in great measure the 
world has separated from the churches, 
the union still exists and bids fair to 
increase; for the Scriptures seem to point 
out that in the time of trouble approaching, 
the churches, professedly virgins of 
Christ, will be on the side of and will be 

R969 : page 2 

united to the kings of the earth; and the 
true church like its prototype, John the 
Baptist, will be unpopular and restrained 
of liberty, because of faithfulness in opposing 



and condemning this error. 

In John's case and Elijah's, it was a 
woman that persecuted, a king acting as 
her agent and tool: with the true church 
it has been in the past, that which these 
symbolize, and doubtless will be so in the 
future— the nominal Church represented 
by a woman and civil government by a 
king. Not only does prophecy point 
out a closer union between these than at 
present exists, but common sense teaches 
us the same; for any one can see, that the 
principal lever by which the aristocratic 
classes rule the masses, is the superstition 
that God appointed these "great men," 
often both weak and vicious, to rule over 
them; and that to rebel against tyranny, 
and injustice, and to claim justice, liberty 
and equal right, is to oppose God's will. 
The church of Rome laid the foundation 
for this when she had power over the 
nations. She made and unmade kings 
and emperors, and claimed to do so as 
God's representative, and taught that when 
such were appointed, they reigned by 
divine authority. 

Protestants followed in her footsteps 
and tacitly admitted these claims; and 
hence to-day Protestants and Catholics 
stand virtually pledged to the monarchies 
of Europe, and will be bound to deny 
the right of the people to redress their 
wrongs, or assume self-government, except 
by constitutional means, which is impossible, 
except in such countries as Great 
Britain, whose present liberal constitution 
whereby the majority of the people are 
able without violence to redress their 
wrongs, was gained by revolt against the 
autocratic power of their kings. (See, 
"Magna Charta" in English history.) 

Not only so, but the coming struggle 
between the Aristocracy and the Masses of 
every civilized land, will be so peculiar, 
so unlike any former experience, that 
moderate, conservative, religiously and 
peaceably inclined people, fearing the utter 
wreck of society in chaos and anarchy, 
will naturally prefer monarchy, oppression 
and bondage, to anything certain to be 
worse. Hence such will side with church 
and empire, with wealth and aristocracy, 
in the general effort to repress and prevent 
that irrepressible conflict.— "The battle 
of the great day of God Almighty." 

Eventually almost the only exceptions 



to this course, among the lovers of peace 

and true religion, will be such as ourselves, 

to whom the King of kings is pleased 

through his Word to reveal his plans 

(John 16:13), and who have full confidence 

in his wisdom and love, as well as 

in his power to make all things work out 

according to his prophetic promises. 

Only such among the conservative, order-loving 

people as see the part which the 

coming social revolution must play in 

God's plan, in removing effete systems 

whose day is past, and in preparing the 

world by a great levelling process, for the 

Millennial reign of righteousness, will be 

able to comprehend the situation and to 

act accordingly. But these will be misunderstood, 

and their endeavors to point 

out the true state of the case, and the real 

and only remedy, will probably be interfered 

with by those who see not the grand 

outcome, and who because unwilling to 

submit their own wills, ideas and plans, 

are unable to see God's plans. When 

repressive, restrictive and coercive measures 

are thought to be necessary, such measures 

will probably include not only labor 

organizations and the organs which advocate 

their rights and wrongs, but probably 

such publications as point out the 

plan of God, and the real cause and only 

remedy for the great distress of the nations. 

Yes, the time may not be far distant when 

repressive measures may be brought to 

bear against the TOWER, the MILLENNIAL 

DAWN, and against every efforts of the saints 

to spread the good news of the coming 

Kingdom, all on the plea that the general 

interests and the public welfare demand 

such a course. 

Thus will be fulfilled the predictions of 
the second Psalm, and probably in the end 
with more bitterness than can now well be 
imagined, though it has been partially 
fulfilled already upon the Head of the 
body.-Acts 4:25-29. 

The same necessity for restricting liberty 
on political and social questions, will probably 
be seen to apply equally to freedom 
of expression on religious questions, which 
really lies at the foundation of all liberty. 
It would not surprise us if a "strong 
government," a monarchy, would some 
day replace this present Great Republic; 
and it is entirely probable that a common 
standard of religious belief will be deemed 



expedient and will be promulgated, to 

teach outside of which, will be treated and 

punished as a political offence. Such a 

persecution would not only furnish in the 

end or harvest of this age another parallel 

to the harvest of the Jewish age (Acts 4:10-13,23-30; 

5:29-41; 11:19), 

but would also give a wider and deeper 

meaning than we had before expected, to 

the words of the Apostles Paul and John, 

quoted at the beginning of this article, and 

to the typical illustration of the close of 

the earthly career of the true church, as 

represented in Elijah's whirlwind and 

John the Baptist's imprisonment and 

beheading. 

Two lessons we may draw from this to 
advantage, whether future developments 
shall prove that we have read the prophetic 
testimony correctly or incorrectly, and 
they are these: First, we should be so prepared, 
so armed, and so thoroughly furnished 
with the invincible truth, that persecutions 
would move us only to greater zeal, 
and not lead us through surprise or fear to 
lower our standard, nor to surrender when 
the Kings of the earth stand up and with 
the religious rulers of the people are 
gathered against us and the truths to which 
God has granted us the privilege of witnessing, 
as his servants and ambassadors, to 
them who know us not, even as they knew 
not our Lord. (1 John 3:1.) Second, such 
reflections relative to the future, contrasted 
with the privileges of the present (See 
last month's VIEW) should serve to stimulate 
every consecrated child of God to 
make diligent use of the present grand 
harvest opportunities and privileges, remembering 
that "he that reapeth receiveth 
wages," as truly as they that planted and 
watered, and that now is pre-eminently a 
time for gathering fruit unto eternal life. 
The little quiet of the present favorable 
time, with its greater liberties and advantages 
in every way, is divinely arranged in 
order to the sealing of the true servants 
of God in their foreheads (intellectually). 
-See Rev. 7:3. 

The Master saith: "Work while it is 
called day; for the night cometh when no 
man can work." Ask yourself, What 
am I doing? Then lay aside weights and 
hindrances, and multiply your efforts. 
Be assured that if you are not a servant of 
the truth in some of the many ways now 



open, you are unworthy of it, and will 

lose your hold on it, because now is the 

harvest, the sifting and separating time. 

Various things will tend to draw you away 

from the truth; fathers, mothers, sons and 

daughters, brothers and sisters will oppose 

and seek to separate you from the 

truth and its service. You must remember 

the Lord's words, that the "harvest" 

is not a time for peace, but on the contrary 

it will surely produce separation and alienations 

between true wheat and all else. 

See, and treasure up his words on this 

subject-Matt 10:30-39 and Luke 18:28-30. 



page 2 

BROTHER HICKEY'S ANNIVERSARY. 

Saratoga Co., N.Y., Aug. 23d, 1887, 

MY DEAR BRO. RUSSELL: -Grace unto 
you, and peace be multiplied! Surely, I 
have great joy and consolation in thy love, 
being refreshed by thee. 

The August TOWER is a very precious and 
grateful supply of the satisfying food 
God so graciously permits you to dispense 
to the household of faith. Thank you for 
the very kind personal allusions. I know 
you meant all in love (including letter, 
though its publication was embarrassing). 
The articles from your pen are verily "meat 
in due season." And I am greatly rejoiced 
to learn that the number of harvesters 
is increasing; that their enthusiasm is so 
great; that the seal of divine approbation 
is so evidently set upon their efforts; and 
that each zealous worker seems to realize 
it, in his or her inner consciousness. 

In my own case, I am frank in confessing 
that I believe that the prime object 
my Heavenly Father had in view in the 
severity of his dealings with me during the 
three months (just past) of physical suffering, 
was to bring me to see what is now 
manifestly my plain duty. 

That is, to devote all the strength God 
gives me to the work of carrying to others 
and to as many as possible, that same 
blessed instrumentality which served to 
dispel the darkness from my own pathway, 
and to carry me forward and upward to 
such sublime heights of vantage ground, 
as to make me spurn forever anything and 



everything that is of the earth earthy; and 
to so fill and sway and agitate my throbbing 
heart as to all but burst, it in the sudden 
and mighty inflow of the knowledge 
of the glory of the Lord; and to plunge 
me into such fathomless depths of the 
boundless ocean of God's love as to cause 
me to struggle and gasp, and— in my supreme 
joy, to wonder what possibilities 
there must be— can be, when we see face 
to face. God, I say, has been teaching 
me by exceedingly severe dealings that 
my bounden duty is "go and do likewise!" 
I can see very plainly now as I look back 
at the various stages of my sickness, how 
that God, in love permitted a severe and 
sudden attack when I thought I was gaining 
and began to plan for "my way." 
That happened so often, that at last my 
dull comprehension has been sharpened 
and I have answered my Master with a 
"Yea, Lord, thy servant heareth!" 

And now my health improves every day 
and my strength increases, and instead of 
being called hence, as I delusively imagined 
I was to be, I was only being vigorously 
shaken up, to a realizing sense of 
what I ought, long ago, to have seen to 
be my very plain and bounden duty. 
Now it might be of some use to print some 
of this letter. For it might serve to arouse 
some other of the sickly ones to vigorous 
action in dispensing to others that which 
has blessed them beyond all power of expression. 
I came here two weeks ago last 
night, "a physical wreck;" the next day 
I dragged myself out in the heat and began 
to work. The result is, I have gained 
steadily with the thermometer "among 
the nineties," and can now work about six 
hours a day without very great fatigue. 

Of course I have not done as well in 
point of numbers of DAWNS sold as some 
of the beloved brethren, (chief among them 
Bro. Adamson) whose letters in TOWER 
cheer and enthuse us. One reason probably 
is, it isn't in me, and another is, that 
there could probably be no less favorable 
spot chosen than this wicked, brilliant, 
flashing Summer resort. Still, I can sell 
from 10 to 15 daily notwithstanding all 
disadvantages of my still weak condition 
and the character of place and people. 
And I expect to reach yet many more per 
day elsewhere and in cooler weather. 
"Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye 



steadfast, immovable, always abounding 
in the WORK of the Lord, forasmuch as ye 
know that your labor is not in vain in the 
Lord." 

It is just one year this day since I wrote 
you of the great and unspeakable blessing 
God had so graciously sent me through 
that marvelous production, "MILLENNIAL 
DAWN: The Plan of the Ages." Its effect 
upon me after careful and prayerful study, 
and testing by the Standard of God's 
Word, was instantaneously revolutionary. 

I know of no other instance of a conversion 
so sudden and complete, from 
gross error honestly embraced and its conclusions 
sincerely acted upon, to the joyous 
reception of the truth and hearty conformity 
to its requirements as far as light 
was given, excepting that of Saul on his 
way to Damascus. Though I doubt not 
there have been many other like turnings. 

I withdrew from the body of the Presbyterian 
Clergy at the earliest opportunity, 
henceforth to know no name but 
Christ. Numerous predictions were made 
concerning me by friends, relatives, and 
former clerical associates. One was to 
the effect that I would soon go into infidelity; 
another, that I would lose my 
reason; another, that I would return to 
the fold of Orthodoxy and Calvinism. 
As to the first, Infidelity (unbelief), I am 
deeply sensible that my trust, my confidence, 
my faith in God and the precious 
truths of his Word, has grown and strengthened 
constantly. And this is not surprising, 
for it is in the very nature of things that 
increased knowledge of God and his Divine 
Revelation should inevitably bring 
increased belief. As to the mental status, 
my honest conviction is that the subject 
is much further removed from the condition 
of lunacy then when he was literally 



The continuation of this letter will be 
found on Page, 8. 

page 8 

Continued from Page, 2. 



crushed under the "burden of souls" 



doomed to "eternal torment." 

As to the last named prediction; am I 
a dog, that I should return to my vomit, or 
a sow, that I should return to my wallowing 
in the mire? Shall I return to the 
musty husks and polluted waters of former 
things, after revelling in broad fields 
of tender grass and drinking from crystal 
streams of living waters? Sooner would 
the eagle cleaving the blue expanse, return 
to the iron-barred cage of its former captivity. 
Surely the truth hath made me free! 

The conviction that the best and only 
way to keep the blessing, and to increasingly 
realize its preciousness, is to give it 
out freely to others, deepens and strengthens 
daily. Accordingly I shall devote all 
the time, talents and energy God gives 
to proclaiming the "Glad Tidings" to as 
many others as I may be able to reach, 
and that through the same instrumentality 
by which I was reached: "MILLENNIAL 
DAWN-The Plan of the Ages," while 
this is so manifestly the work to be done. 

I enclose a cheering letter from my 
Brooklyn Physician. 

Affectionately and gratefully Your 
brother in Christ, S. I. HICKEY. 

We give some extracts from the letter 
mentioned above:— 

MY DEAR BRO. HICKEY:-Someway, in thinking 
about you, after I realized that you had gone 
and that I might not see you again face to face, I 
felt the truth of that old adage about "blessings 
brightening as they take their flight." I felt that I 
had suffered a dear friend to go away without 
talking to and with him about what was nearest his 
and my heart, those things for which you have 
suffered much reproach and contumely. 

I had refused to listen to you, or had changed 
the subject whenever you had approached it, and 
my heart smote me. Thinking of this, I grieved a 
little over it, and in my grief I took up M. DAWN 
to learn more about it. I confess to you that I had 
not read the book through, I think I read the first 
three chapters, and then threw it aside. There 
were many good things in it which I could heartily 
accept even then— but the conclusions were what 
strangled me. I had heard the conclusions from 
you, but not the full course of reasoning and Scripture 
proof; and that reminds me of an error too 
often made: that of stating conclusions first, and so 
awakening such antagonism, that no subsequent argument 
will be effective. For instance, to state 



that "there is no hell," or "there is probation after 
death," etc. With most people you may as well 
stop right there. I speak of it because at first you 
approached the subject in that way, though I doubt 
not you have learned better by this time. Now, as 
I have said, I have read "MILLENNIAL DAWN"- 
have just finished it, and I can truly say, I regard 
it as a wonderful book, and as throwing a flood of 
light on the Word. It harmonizes in a remarkable 
manner, things which were before all confusion and 
discord. It plainly shows a plan, and moreover, a 
plan which on the whole is reasonable. I believe, 
too, that, on the whole, it is Scriptural. Certainly 
there is great good in it. 

My appetite is whetted by the taste, and I want 
more, more time to study and compare Scripture and 
think and pray over it. I must look at it from all 
sides. 

So you see your going away has worked some 
good where you least expected it. 

Yours truly S. C . 



R969 : page 3 

ACQUAINT THYSELF WITH HIM. 

God works in silence, and His vast designs 
Are brought to pass in quietness and peace; 
Unheralded the sun comes forth at morn, 
And without tumult on the nation shines; 
Unwept again its ministrations cease, 
And twilight worlds are born. 

The years sweep onward, but their chariot wheels 
Vouchsafe no echo to our yearning call; 
The swift attendant seasons as they pass 
Are shod with silence, and no sound reveals 
The rapid hours, whose steps are as the fall 
Of snowflakes on the grass. 

In quietness through dreary winter days 
The buds of next year's summer take their rest, 
Assured of happy waking by-and-by; 
Though long the sweetness of the spring delays, 
Though tempests move in wrath from east to west, 
They neither strive nor cry. 

Patient in long reserve of hidden power, 
God's judgments tarry their appointed time, 
But from His love, wherein all fulness dwells, 
Mute tokens come about us hour by hour, 
In silence sweeter than the voiceless chime 
Of fragrant lily bells. 



The perfect bliss for which His people crave- 
The final victory— He sees across 
The cloud and sunshine of a thousand years; 
While the frail garland on a baby's grave 
May circumscribe life's utmost gain and loss 
To eyes grown dim with tears ! 

Oh troubled heart! no storms of adverse fate, 
No wave of circumstance may overleap 
The jasper borders of eternity; 
Acquaint thyself with Him, nor zeal abate, 
He shall appoint a rest, and for thee keep 
The white robe and the palm!— Selected. 



R970 : page 3 

THE SABBATH DAY. 

THE JEWISH SABBATH AND THE LAW 
OF WHICH IT WAS A PART. 

Though our views are widely different 
from those of most Christian people on 
this subject, yet let us say, we are very 
glad that one day of each week is set apart 
for rest from business and for the worship 
of God, without regard to which of the 
seven days is thus observed, or by what 
law or lawgiver it was appointed. We 
greatly enjoy the day, and think it not only 
a blessing to those who use it for worship 
and study, but also for those who use it 
merely as a day of rest and recreation from 
toil, to enjoy the beauties of nature, or to 
visit with their friends and families as they 
cannot do on other days. 

But we must totally dissent from the idea 
of Sabbath common to the majority of 
Christian people, for two reasons. First, 
because if their claim that we are under 
the Law, of which the Sabbath day observance 
was a part, were true, the day they 
keep as a Sabbath, is not the day mentioned 
in that command. They observe the 
first day, and the command designated the 
seventh day of the week. If the command 
is binding at all, it cannot be changed, 
any more than any other of those commands 
can be changed. Second, If bound 
to the Law, we object to the keeping of 
the Sabbath in any other than the strict 
way in which its keeping was therein 
prescribed. If the command is binding 
upon us, the manner of its observance, its 



very essence, is no less binding. If the 

strict observance of it has passed away, 

surely whatever destroyed its strict interpretation 

destroyed the command entirely. 

So then, it should be observed with all its 

former strictness, so that even the gathering 

of sticks on that day would be 

punishable with death, now as then, 

(Num. 15:32-36.) and on the day prescribed 

and observed then, or else it has 

no binding force whatever: unless it can 

be shown that God, the giver of that Law, 

changed it himself. Men have no right to 

change God's laws; no, not if an angel 

from heaven sanctioned it. 

The Law stands exactly as it was given 
and applies only to those to whom given, 
or if it is claimed that it was altered in any 
degree, or made applicable to other people, 
the evidence should be no less clear and 
positive than that of its original giving at 
Sinai: and no such evidence of its change 
to another day, or another people, nor of 
any relaxation of its original severity, 
exists. On the contrary we shall find 
abundant proof that it was neither altered 
nor amended, but fulfilled and set aside, 
abolished by our Redeemer. 

We claim that God never authorized a 
change in the Law; that not one jot or 
tittle of it could fail, until all should be 
fulfilled. (Matt. 5:18.) We claim on 
Scriptural testimony, that our Lord, as the 
man Christ Jesus, was born under the Law, 
a Jew, and fulfilled its every requirement, 
and thus fulfilled it as a whole. He became 
the heir of its promises or covenants, 
and "redeemed them that were under the 
Law"— the Jewish nation— from the condemnation 
which that Law brought upon 
them all, because of their inability to live 
up to its requirements. 

Many Christians fail to recognize, that 
in the beginning of the Gospel age, the 
church was composed of converts from 
both Jews and Gentiles. The Jews as a 
nation had been released (typically) from 
the Adamic curse, or condemnation, and 
put under the Law given at Sinai, as a 
covenant under which they were to have 
life if obedient. The Gentiles (heathen) 
was the name by which all the great bulk 
of the human family was known, except 
this one little nation, which God typically 
justified by typical sacrifices, and placed 
again on trial under the Law given at 



Sinai. The Law proved valueless to them 
so far as giving them the hoped-for life 
was concerned, though it as a schoolmaster 
taught them some good lessons. 
Consequently Jews and Gentiles were both 
under condemnation when our Lord came. 
Both were condemned to death— the Jew 
by the Law from which he had expected 
so much, but which, because of the weakness 
of his flesh he was unable to comply 
with, was condemned as unworthy of life; 
while the Gentiles were condemned to 
death under the original sentence upon 
father Adam, from which they had in no 
sense escaped, not even typically as the 
Jew had. 

Both Jew and Gentile, therefore, 
needed deliverance from the same curse, 
condemnation, viz., death; and the Deliverer 
whom God provided was sufficient 
for both, and in the one sacrifice of himself 
he accomplished the redemption of 
both, and reconciled both unto God in 
one body by the cross. (Eph. 2:16.) 
For the Jew, by fulfilling all the demands 
of the Law, he gained all the promises 
which that Law offered; and by his death 
for that people he redeemed them all from 
its curse or penalty— death; and ended 
that typical covenant. The ending of 
that covenant and the redeeming of that 
people from its curse or condemnation, 
took place at the same time, and was accomplished 
by the same sacrifice, that 
paid the ransom (the corresponding price) 
for Adam and all who were still under the 
curse of death through him; because our 
Lord was the representative not only of 
the Jew, but was also at the same time a representative 
of all mankind. Thus we see 
further, that had our Lord not been born 
under the Law, he could have redeemed 
all others yet under the Adamic condemnation, 
but the Jew, under a special law and 
its special condemnation, would not have 
been benefited. Hence God's arrangement 
that salvation should be of the Jews, 
(John 4:22) in order that His special 
typical dealings with them as a people 
should work them no injury. 

So then we see that none were made 
free from the Law except Israelites who 
had been under it, and consequently there 
is an error in the thought of those who 
sing and apply to themselves the words— 

"Free from the Law, O happy condition: 



Jesus hath died and there is remission. 

Cursed by the Law and bruised by the Fall, 
Christ hath redeemed us once for all." 

An Israelite after the flesh, converted, 
could properly express this sentiment, but 
no one else, except it be understood to 
apply to the church as a whole, some of 
whom were redeemed from the curse of 
the Law, and some from the curse of the 
Fall. 

When the Apostle declares, "Christ is 
become the end of the Law, for righteousness 
to every one that believeth," he evidently 
refers to those who were under the 
Law— Jews. But we can apply the same 
principle to all, thus: The first Law 
against which Adam sinned, and whose 
penalty brought death upon all, like the 
one which the Jews failed to keep, was a 
law of obedience to the will of God. The 
principles or knowledge on which the 
obedience was based with the Jew, was the 
Ten Commandments written upon tables 
of stone, but in Adam's case it was the 
knowledge of God's will written in the 
heart, in that he had been created a mental 
and moral likeness of God. The 
penalty or curse for the violation of both 
of those laws was the same, death: so 
while the Jew was redeemed from the 
curse of the one given at Sinai all other 
men were redeemed from the curse of 
the original Law violated in Eden. 

So then as it stands to-day, the Jew's 
covenant or Law, though they are not 
aware of it, is at an end, as much as 
though it never had been given them. It 
never gave them the blessings they had 
hoped for through it, and now they are 
free from it. The Jew born since that law 
covenant ended, is now, with all the rest of 
the world, under the penalty of the first 
disobedience— the death penalty. The 
ransom FOR ALL has been given, but its 
benefits are only applicable to those who 
believe, and thus far the believers are only 
a few compared with the mass of mankind. 
This few have escaped from all condemnation 
of all broken laws, while the remainder 
—the world in general— still continues 
under the original condemnation. 
He that believeth is passed [reckonedly] 
from death unto life (John 5:24) while 
he that believeth not is damned [condemned] 
—"condemned already." (John 3:18) 
He was condemned six thousand 



years ago, and has not escaped the condemnation 

that is on the world. (Rom. 5:16.) 

The only ones who have escaped 

from this condemnation so long upon all, 

are referred to by Paul (Rom. 8:1), "There 

is therefore now no condemnation to them 

which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not 

after the flesh but after the spirit." 

These are the free ones; free from all 
laws and all penalties— free indeed. "If 
the Son shall make you free, ye shall be 
free indeed."— John 8:36. 

But can it be that God has released these 
entirely from both the Law given in Eden 
and that given at Sinai? Just so; being 
justified and released from its former condemnation 
by the death of Christ, and 
having received his spirit of love for and 
obedience to God, so long as they 
are in Christ they are free: free to 
abide in him, by continued submission to 
his will, the essence of which is LOVE, to 
God and to man. All who come into 
Christ submit themselves to his will and 
voluntarily make it their law; and those 
who willingly violate this law will cease to 
"abide in him" and will be "cast forth" 
(Jno. 15:6) as dead branches. Through 
him our best endeavors to do his will are 
acceptable, and we have thus passed out of 
condemnation to death into justification 
to life so long as we abide under the blood 
of the covenant. In no other way could 
any be accepted by God; for the law 
given in Eden was one that required 
obedience, and that given at Sinai demanded 
the same. And since we know 

R971 : page 3 

that God could not give an imperfect law, 
(James 3:11.) and we could not obey a 
perfect one fully, we see the necessity for 
our being freed from all law and accepted 
through Christ. 

Thus we see that those in Christ, 
whether they were Jews or Gentiles, are 
in no sense under the Law given at Sinai 
—neither the ceremonial laws relating to 
typical fasts and feasts and sacrifices, nor 
those graven upon stones termed the "Ten 
Commandments." The sanctified IN 
CHRIST JESUS need no such commands. 
Love to God and men, laid down by Jesus 
and the apostles, is the only rule under 
which the new creature in Christ is placed; 



and it is the very essence of his new mind 
—the spirit or mind of Christ. 

THE LAW ON TABLES OF STONE. 

Look at those commandments given to 
the Jew, singly, and see if it would not 
be useless to address such commands to 
the saints. 

I. "Thou shalt have no other gods beside 
me." What saint would think of such a 
thing? 

II. "Thou shalt not make unto thee any 
graven image, nor the likeness of any form 
that is in heaven above, or that is in the 
earth beneath, or that is in the water 
under the earth: thou shalt not bow down 
thyself unto them nor serve them; for I 

am a jealous God visiting the iniquity of 
the fathers upon the children, unto the 
third and fourth generation of them that 
hate me; and showing mercy unto thousands 
of them that love me and keep my 
commandments." For whom is such a law 
needful? Surely not to the saints in Christ 
who love the Lord with all their heart, 
soul, and strength, and who are laying 
down life itself in his service. 

III. "Thou shalt not take the name of 
the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord 
will not hold him guiltless that taketh 
his name in vain." Again we remark, 
Surely none of the saints will have any 
desire to blaspheme or profane their 
Father's name, but the reverse, they are laying 
down their lives to glorify his name. 

IV. This we will examine last. 

V. "Honor thy father and thy mother: 
that thy days may be long upon the land 
which the Lord thy God giveth thee." 
This is distinctively an earthly promise of 
the land, while the promise to the saints 
is not long life here but hereafter. He 
that sacrifices his life, lands, etc., becomes 
in Christ heir to the heavenly promises. 
Such, too, having the spirit of Christ, delight 
to honor their earthly parents, but 
especially to do the will of their Father 

in heaven. 

VI. "Thou shalt do no murder." Do 
not the saints delight to bless others and 
do good even to those who despitefully use 
them and persecute them? If so where 
would be the propriety in telling such that 
they must not murder— must not do the 
thing farthest from their desires? It 



would be useless to say the least. 

VII. "Thou shalt not commit adultery." 
The sanctified in Christ Jesus who walk 
not after the flesh but after the spirit of 
Christ, could not thus wrong others. 

VIII. "Thou shalt not steal." Do the 

R971 : page 4 

saints desire to steal? Do they desire to 
defraud others? Is it not rather their 
spirit to "labor, working with their hands 
that they may have, to give unto the needy? 

IX. "Thou shalt not bear false witness 
against thy neighbor." How could one 
of the sanctified in Christ thus injure his 
neighbor? It would be entirely foreign to 
the Spirit of Christ— the spirit of truth, 

and would prove that the one who knowingly 
and willingly bore such false testimony, 
had not the spirit of Christ and was 
none of his. (Rom. 8:9.) 

X. "Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's 
house, thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's 
wife, nor his man-servant, nor his maid-servant, 
nor his ox, nor his ass, nor anything 

that is thy neighbor's." Covetousness 
is wholly foreign to the spirit of Christ, 
and to the extent that the spirit of Christ 
dwells richly in his members, they will be 
free from covetousness. The spirit of 
sacrifice having in the saints taken the 
place of self-love, covetousness is 
forestalled. 

All these commands were proper and 
suitable enough to the Jew to whom they 
were given, or would be suitable to any 
fallen man, but not to any new creature 
in Christ, whose very nature, as new 
creatures, is to do right; yet because of the 
weakness of the flesh they cannot do perfectly 
even though they desire and endeavor 
to do so. But though we can easily keep 
the outward letter of this law, yet under 
our Lord's teachings we see that it really 
means more than its surface indicates: 
that he who hates a brother without a 
cause has the murder spirit and is a murderer 
and he that desires to commit adultery 
lacking only the opportunity is in heart 
an adulterer, (Matt. 5:28) and he who 
loves and serves money and spends time 
and talent for it, more than in God's 
service, is an idolater. Our Redeemer's 
teaching regarding the obligations under 
that Law is— "Thou shalt love the Lord 



thy God with all thy heart, mind, soul, 
and strength, and thou shalt love thy 
neighbor as thyself." From this we see 
that even we who are in Christ with all 
our holy desires and aims could not keep 
that Law according to this our Master's 
definition of it, because our new mind is 
hindered by the weakness of the sin-degraded 
and marred earthen vessel— the 
flesh. We should find it impossible to get 
rid of inherited selfishness, so as to be 
able to love our neighbor as ourselves, or 
even to love and serve God with all our 
hearts and talents, much as our new minds 
might choose and seek to obey this, the 
spirit of the Law. 

So then, as we could not be acceptable 
under that Law, we are made free from it 
entirely and put under the rule of love to 
God and our fellow man: and our best 
heart-endeavors to fulfill this law of love, 
are accepted as a perfect fulfillment of his 
law of love, and all we lack is continually 
compensated for out of the fullness of 
Christ— which is imputed to us. 

So then ye are not under law but under 
grace— favor. (Rom. 6:14.) You are 
not acceptable with God because there is 
no fault in you, but because favor covers 
your unwilling imperfections of thought, 
word and deed. 

So far as these Ten Commandments are 
concerned, there is no question that they 
were given only to Israel after the flesh. 
The preface in Exod. 20:2 shows this, 
saying, "I am the Lord thy God which 
brought thee out of the land of Egypt, 
out of the house of bondage." So too 
in repeating them again Moses declares 
(Deut. 5:1-5.) "Hear, O Israel, the 
statutes and judgments which I speak in 
your ears THIS DAY, that ye may learn them 
and observe to do them. The Lord our God 
made not this covenant with our fathers, 
but with US, even us who are all of us here 
alive this day. The Lord spake with you 
face to face— saying" etc. etc. Also, see 
Ezek. 20:10-13 and Neh. 9:12-14. 

THE FOURTH COMMANDMENT. 

Consider now the IV. Commandment 
given to the Jew, written upon tables of 
stone:— "Remember the Sabbath day to 
keep it holy. Six days shalt thou labor 
and do all thy work; but the seventh is a 



Sabbath unto the Lord thy God: in it 
thou shalt not do any work, thou nor thy 
son, nor thy daughter, thy man-servant, nor 
thy maid-servant, nor thy cattle, nor thy 
stranger that is within thy gates: for in six 
days the Lord made heaven and earth, 
and sea, and all that in them is, and rested 
the seventh day: wherefore the Lord 
blessed the Sabbath day and hallowed it." 

This command merely enjoins idleness 
on the seventh day of each week. It does 
not say to cease from ordinary work and 
engage in spiritual work, as many of its 
advocates seem to suppose; but on the 
contrary it prohibits all kinds of work. 
Many who think themselves bound by 
this command, neither REST on the seventh 
day nor on the first day of the week, 
which without orders they make an effort 
to keep instead of the Seventh day which 
the Law appointed for those under it. On 
the contrary, to very many the first day is 
as busy a day as any. The ruling under 
the Law, was, that any one who even 
picked up sticks or kindled a fire was a 
violator of this command and must be put 
to death. (Num. 15:32-36. Exod. 35:3.) 
How many of those who claim to keep 
this commandment do far more work in 
the way of cooking, etc.— they, their sons, 
and their daughters, their men-servants and 
maid-servants? If that law is now in force, 
and if it has by any means gotten beyond 
the Jew on whom alone it was put, so as 
now to cover Christians, then every 
Christian violates it repeatedly, and is 
worthy of death for each offense, for "they 
that violated Moses' Law died without 
mercy. "-Heb. 10:20. 

But some one will ask, Was not the 
Sabbath observed before the giving of the 
Law? and does not the reference to God's 
resting on the seventh day prove that the 
Sabbath was observed from the time of 
creation? We answer, No; during all 
the two thousand years from Adam to 
Jacob, the record shows no command to 
keep the Sabbath, not even a hint on the 
subject. The Mosaic or Law dispensation 
began with Israel, the night they left 
Egypt. The Passover was the first feature 
of Law instituted; and it was instituted 
that night. And that Law covenant is 
continually referred to as dating from that 
time "When I took them by the hand 
to lead them out of the land of Egypt." 



Heb. 8:9, Jer. 31:32. 

The observance of the seventh day as a 
rest day, or Sabbath, was instituted as a 
part of the Law of God some two weeks 
before the formal giving of that Law in 
tables of stone at Mt. Sinai, namely, at the 
giving of the manna, in the wilderness, 
where a most favorable opportunity occurred 
for giving them an object lesson in 
the double supply of manna on the sixth 
day, and none on the seventh. But from 
the entire account it is evident that it was 
something new to the Israelites. Its explanation 

R972 : page 4 

to them, (Exod. 16:22-30) as 

well as Moses' uncertainty in the case of 

the first transgression of this law (Num. 15:32-36.), 

prove that it was new, that 

it had not been known among them or 

their fathers previously. The reason 

given for this command, to observe the 

Sabbath because God had rested on the 

seventh day— after the six days of creation, 

could not be understood by Israel, 

as we can now understand it in the light 

of the New Testament. They probably 

got the idea that God was weary after the 

six days work of creating, and rested as 

they did; but we see and will shortly 

show that he rested in a very different way, 

and for a different reason. 

INFLUENCE OF THE LAW AMONG EARLY 
CHRISTIANS. 

In the introduction of the Christian 
dispensation, the new church was composed 
largely of proselytes from the old 
Jewish church; and these, used from childhood 
to the requirements of the law of 
Moses, could scarcely realize the greatness 
of the change which there occurred. 
They were continually adding Christ's 
teachings and his law— of love, to their 
Mosaic Law, thus adding to their already 
too heavy burden, instead of accepting of 
the sacrificial death of Christ as the 
atonement for their sins under the Law, 
and as the end of that Law Covenant 
which had always condemned them. 
(Rom. 10:4; 3:20,28.) It is not 
surprising when we remember their early 
prejudices in favor of the Law, that the 
spirit of truth was able to guide them but 



slowly into the full truth on this subject. 
Even the Apostles were slow to learn, and 
we find Peter so slow to follow the lead 
of the spirit, that he had to be taught by 
a special vision that Gentiles needed no 
longer to become Jews and conform to 
the Law of Moses before they could share 
divine favor, but that they had access to 
God through Christ's cleansing work regardless 
of the Law. 

Some complained to the other apostles 
and brethren about Paul's recognition of 
Gentiles and this brought the question 
before them all, and led to an investigation, 
and others learned their first lesson 
as Peter had by hearing from him of God's 
dealings in the matter. "When they heard 
these things they held their peace and glorified 
God, saying, Then hath God also 
to the Gentiles granted repentance unto 
life. "-Acts 11:18. 

Paul, most easily led of the spirit, got 
clear views on the subject earliest, and had 
to oppose others among the apostles less 
strong and spiritually clear-sighted. (Gal. 2:11.) 
Jerusalem was long considered 
the centre of the Christian religion, the 
largest number and oldest believers and 
apostles living there, and as Paul got 
clearer and clearer views of the changed 
condition of things and preached the truth, 
some prejudiced ones wanted to know 
whether the brethren at Jerusalem would 
concur in the advanced views, and Paul 
and Barnabas and others went up to Jerusalem 
to lay the matter before them and 
to bring back a report. A great debate 
and examination of the question on all sides 
followed. Peter and James finally agreeing 
with Paul, influenced the entire council. 
Peter reminded them of God's wonderful 
dealing with Cornelius, whose heart was 
purified or justified and made acceptable 
to God through faith in Christ, and not 
through keeping the Law, and urged, 
"Now therefore why resist ye God to put 
a yoke [Moses' Law] upon the neck of 
disciples which neither our fathers nor we 
were able to bear." James said, "My 
judgment is that we should not burden 
them which from among the Gentiles are 
turned unto God." Then the council so 
decided and sent a written message to the 
confused Gentile believers, saying:— 

"We have heard that certain ones who 
went out from us [here] have troubled you 



with words subverting your souls [destroying 
your faith], saying, 'Be circumcised 
and keep the Law'— to whom we gave no 
such commandment.... It seemed good 
to the Holy Spirit and to us to lay upon 
you no greater burden than these necessary 
things: That ye abstain from meats offered 
to idols, and from blood, and from 
things, strangled, and from fornication." 
-Acts 15:9-29. And even these 
things though they were good as advice, 
we shall see by further testimony were 
so much law that no one had a right to 
place upon any made free by Christ, 
—nor are these stated as law, with 
penalties, etc. 

Paul's principal failure was in allowing 
them once to overpersuade him on this 
very matter of Moses' Law.— Acts 21:18-28. 
Here overcome for a time by the 
opinions and weakness of those apostles 
whose home was in the centre of Judaism, 
and whose progress in following the lead 
of the spirit into the full truth had been 
less rapid than his own, Paul erred greatly. 

Paul's course was a brilliant one, and 
his great work was known far and near, 
and everywhere it exasperated the prejudiced 
Jews. So when he came to Jerusalem 
for the last time to see the Apostolic 
brethren, and had given them a detailed 
account of his great work among the Gentiles, 
they were glad and glorified God. 
Their Jewish prejudices did not blind them, 
but they were too prudent (Matt. 1 1:25.) 
and said unto him, "Thou seest brother, 
how many thousands of Jews believe; and 
they are all zealous for the Law: and they 
are informed concerning thee, that thou 
teachest all the Jews that are among the 
Gentiles to forsake Moses [law] saying, That 
they ought not to circumcise their children, 
neither to walk after the customs"— common 
to the Jews. 

The difficulty with the apostles at Jerusalem 
was that in their anxiety to make 
converts to Christ, they had failed "to 
declare the whole counsel of God," and 
had kept themselves as well as others from 
growing in grace and knowledge more 
rapidly, in their desire to fasten the 
law, to the Gospel, as a bait to catch Jewish 
fish. And now that Paul was come, 
whom they knew to be very outspoken, 
they feared he would drive off some of 
their only half-converted thousands, and 



that thus the cause might seem to lose some 
of its prestige, its seeming prosperity. 
Really far better would it have been had 
the company been hundreds instead of 
thousands, and thorough out-and-out furnished 
and equipped soldiers of the cross. 

How many to-day as teachers are filling 
church rolls with thousands by compromising 
with the World as James and 
others did with the Jewish prejudices concerning 
the law! How much injury it is 
doing now as then, and how careful some 
are now not to scare the goats out 
from among the sheep lest the numbers 
and influence would be less! Ah! What a 
great mistake! 

They said further to Paul: It will not 
be long until the masses of the people 
learn of your presence; therefore at once 
take such steps as will lead them to think 
that you are misrepresented, and that you 
are still a faithful Jew and law-keeper: 
take with you therefore four men of our 
company here which have a vow on them, 
and go into the Temple and both purify 
thyself according to the Jewish custom, and 
also pay the temple tax for these others, so 
that the Jews and Jewish Christians seeing 
you thus bearing the expense of others 
as well as conforming to the Law yourself, 
may conclude that you are very zealous for 
the Law, and that you certainly were misrepresented 
in the reports which reached 
them of your preaching. This seems to 

R972 : page 5 

be the substance of their argument. See 
Acts 21:18-26. 

Alas! that grand, noble, bold Brother Paul 
should let slip so favorable an opportunity 
for testifying as he afterward did to the 
Galatians (5:2-6) that whosoever justified 
(purified) himself by the Law and circumcision, 
Christ would profit him nothing. It 
was the grandest opportunity Paul ever had 
of setting straight the brethren at Jerusalem. 
But overcome for the moment by 
the influence and prominence of those 
who made the request, Paul yielded, and 
committed the only act of weakness marking 
his long and noble record— he went 
into the Temple and pretended to be a 
law-keeper and to trust in the typical 
purifyings, and misused some of the Lord's 
money in the insincere forms, and all to 



no purpose: to his own discredit and 
tribulation, merited no doubt as a 
chastisement. 

Similar besetments surround us all to-day: 
how often many teaching brethren 
are tempted now, as were James and the 
Elders at Jerusalem, to keep back part of 
the truth in the endeavor to swell numbers 
and influence; how many are tempted as 
Paul was, to consent to unwholesome 
advice for the sake of peace, and because 
of love and respect for brethren. Instead, 
each should have been anxious only to 
please the "Head of the body," and to declare 
the whole counsel of God. 

But Brother Paul's wavering course was 
only momentary, and we have abundant 
proof of this in his various epistles to 
the churches, in which he repeatedly 
sought to counteract the teachings and 
influence of some who were overthrowing 
the foundation, bringing in another gospel, 
another version of the good news, namely, 
that believers in Christ would be saved if 
they kept the Law. (The other apostles 
also got more clear gradually, so that the 
epistles of Peter, James and John fully 
coincide with those of Paul, and give 
no uncertain sound on this all important 
point, that Christ is become the 
end of the Law to every one who believeth.) 
And it is because this same 
error has continued since, and is even 
to-day opposing the cross of Christ 
as the redemption price, and claiming 
that we are justified not "by faith in his 
blood," but by keeping the Law as Christ 
kept it, that it is needful now, to show 
that the Law never was given to any 
except Israel after the flesh; and it did 
them no good except to show them their 
inability to justify themselves, and as a 
schoolmaster to point them to Christ as 
the end of the Law to every one that 
believeth. Paul's epistle to the Galatians 
was written expressly to counteract this 
Law teaching, which was subverting the 
true faith in Christ and pointing men away 
from the cross of Christ, to a hope of 
acceptance with God by keeping the Law. 
This he calls "another gospel," yet really 
not another, for there can be but one, 

R973 : page 5 

hence it was a perversion of the real 



gospel. (Gal. 1:7-9.) And here Paul 

points out what we have already shown, 

that he knew that the Apostles at Jerusalem 

had at first only a mixed gospel, and 

that he went up to see them on the occasion 

mentioned in Acts 15:4, by 

revelation, to communicate to them that 

fuller, purer, unmixed gospel, which he already 

had been able to receive, and which he 

had been teaching: and, he says, he communicated 

it to them privately lest their 

reputation should hinder them from receiving 

the truth— and even then they 

compelled Titus to be circumcised, (Gal. 2:2-5.) 

though this would not have been 

insisted on, had it not been for some who 

stole into their confidence to spy out their 

liberties. Thus the unconverted additions 

hindered the true seed, as always. 

It is further along in this same epistle 
that Paul tells of Peter's vacillation on 
the question of the Law (Chap. 2:11-16) 
and his words of reproof to Peter— We 
who are Jews [under the Law] knowing 
that a man is not justified by the works of 
the Law, but on account of faith in Christ, 
even we have believed in Christ that we 
might be justified by faith in Christ, and 
not by obedience to the Law— why then 
should we attempt to fetter others, or bind 
ourselves longer by that which has served 
its purpose and has ceased as a covenant 
—has passed away. 

Oh foolish Galatians! who has deluded 
you? As many as are trusting to obedience 
to the Law are under its condemnation 
or curse. Christ hath redeemed us 
[Jews] from the curse of the Law that the 
blessing of Abraham might come to the 
Gentiles through Christ Jesus, and that we 
[Jews] might receive the spirit through 
faith. And surely God's covenant with 
Abraham made four hundred and thirty 
years before the Law was given, cannot be 
annulled by that Law. -Gal. 3:1,10,13,17. 

Next, Paul answers a supposed inquiry 
as to what was the object of the Law, and 
why it was given if not necessary to the 
attainment of the Abrahamic promises. 
He says the Law was added because of sin, 
to manifest sin in its true light— that sin 
might be seen to be a great and deep-seated 
malady— to act as a school teacher 
pointing Israel to Christ as a good and 
only Physician who could cure their malady. 
But this Law schoolmaster was not 



intended to hold dominion over us [Jews] 
always, but only until the remedy should 
come, and to prepare some at least to 
receive the great Physician. 

As children are under nursery laws and 
subject to teachers until an appointed time, 
so were we [Jews] under the Law, and 
treated as servants rather than as sons. 
We were kept under the Law which is to 
govern the World in the next age, though 
we were the heirs through whom, according 
to the promise, the others were to be 
blessed. But in the fullness of time God 
sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made 
under the Law, to redeem them that were 
under the Law that we [Jews] being liberated, 
might receive the adoption of sons. 
And so also, because ye [who were not 
under the Law, but were Gentiles or 
heathens] are [also now] sons [therefore] 
God hath sent forth the spirit of his son 
into your hearts. We were sons under 
tutelage and ye were of the servant class, 
but now you and we who are accepted of 
God in Christ, are fully received into sonship 
and heirship, and neither of us are 
subject to the Law. --Gal. 3:19-4:7. 

Tell me, ye that desire to be under the 
Law— do you not understand what the 
Law is? It is a bondage merely at present, 
and this is allegorically shown in Abraham's 
two sons. Abraham becomes here 
a figure of God; Sarah the real wife is a 
figure of the real covenant of blessing, 
out of which the Christ should come as 
heir of all, to bless the world. For a 
long time Sarah was barren; so too for a 
long time the real covenant of God 
brought forth no fruit— until Christ Jesus. 
Hagar the servant of Sarah in the meantime 
was treated as Sarah's representative, 
and her son as the representative of Sarah's 
son. Hagar represented the Law covenant, 
and fleshly Israel was represented by 
her child Ishmael. For the time they 
represented the true covenant and the true 
seed of blessing, though they were always 
really servants— child as well as mother. 
When the true son of the real wife, the 
heir, was born, it was manifest that the 
son of the bondwoman was not the heir 
of promise. And to show that the Law 
covenant was not to have any rule over the 
spiritual sons of God, Hagar was not allowed 
to become the governess of Isaac, 
but in his interest was dismissed entirely. 



-Gal. 4:21-31. 

The Apostle's argument based on this 
allegory, is, that we brethren as Isaac was, 
are the seed to whom the promise was 
made; we are not children of the bondwoman, 
the Law Covenant, but children 
of the Covenant of Grace born free from 
the slavery and conditions of the Law. 
And not only so born, but the Law is 
entirely put away from us, and has nothing 
whatever to do with us. "Stand fast 
therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ 
hath made us free, and be not entangled 
again with the yoke of bondage"— the 
Law. "If ye be led of the spirit ye are 
not under the Law."— Gal. 5:1,18. 

But Paul asks— "Shall we sin [wilfully] 
because we are not under the Law?" (Rom. 6:15.) 
—because we are sons and heirs 
and no longer commanded, Thou shalt and 
thou shalt not? Shall we take advantage 
of our liberty to break away into sin? 
No, no; as SONS begotten of the spirit of 
adoption, partakers of the spirit of holiness, 
the spirit of the truth, we delight to 
do our Father's will; and the law of obedience 
to his will is deeply engraven upon 
our hearts (Heb. 8:10 and 10:15,16). 
We gladly sacrifice our lives in opposing 
sin and error, and in forwarding righteousness 
and truth; hence we answer 
emphatically, We will not take advantage 
of our liberty from law, to commit sin. 

We are not under Law but under favor 
(Rom. 6:14.) through Christ, hence we 
delight also to show forth a similar favor, 
bearing one another's burdens and thus 
fulfilling the "law of Christ"— love. 
Christ's word is our law— not a law of 
bondage, but of liberty. Whoso looketh 
into the perfect law of liberty and continueth 
therein [free], being not a forgetful 
hearer, but one who exercises his liberty, 
this man shall be blessed truly thereby. 
Such fulfill the royal law— love and liberty. 
-Jas. 1:25. 

This law of love to God and our fellowmen 
which we delight to obey to the extent 
of our ability, not of compulsion, but 
of a willing mind as partakers of the 
spirit of Christ, is the only LAW with 
which we have to do. While it entirely 
ignores the Mosaic Law, its thou shalt, and 
thou shalt not, and its penalty of death: 
yet really it accomplishes far more than the 
Mosaic Law; for with his heart ruled by love 



for God and man, who would desire to dishonor 
God or to injure his fellow-man? 
But as of the Mosaic Law it was true that 
its utterances were only to those under it 
—Israelites— for "whatsoever the Law 
saith it saith to them who are under the 
law" (Rom. 3:19.)— so of the Law of 
Love, it speaks only to those who are under 
it, and these are only the consecrated 
believers in Christ. It is a law of liberty, 
in that all who are under it, are under it 
from choice. In this it differs greatly from 
the Law put upon fleshly Israel as a nation, 
in which individually they had no liberty 
or choice, but were born under bondage 
to that Law. Our Law is also the Royal 
Law; because the "little flock" developed 
under this law of liberty and love is the 
royal family— the divine family, selected 
under their Lord and Head to be heirs 
of God, joint heirs with Jesus Christ- 
partakers of the divine nature. 

During the Millennial age, after this 
little flock is completed, the law of liberty 
and love will again be superseded by a 
law of commands and threats and penalties; 
because then the dealing will be with 
enemies, with sinners, who will require 
coercion and "ruling with a rod of iron" 
until they shall learn the exceeding sinfulness 
and undesirableness of sin. The 
new Covenant will be like the old Law 
Covenant in many regards, but will have a 
priesthood able as well as willing to help 
and lift up to perfection every one sincerely 
repentant of sin and desirous of 
holiness. 

Those now being selected as members for 
the body of Christ, are only such as delight 
to do God's will, sons of God and 
"brethren of Christ" having this likeness 
of Christ. And at the close of the Millennial 
age, when the rod of iron shall have 
broken the proud hearts, and shall have 
caused the stiff knees to bend in obedience, 
or else cut them off as incorrigible, 
willful sinners,— then the law of love and 
liberty will again be virtually in force— over 
all God's creatures; for all who shall be permitted 
to enter upon that grand age of 
perfection following the Millennial reign of 
Christ will first have been tested, and will 
have given abundant proof that they delight 
to do God's will and that his righteous law 
is continually their hearts' desire. 

The Sabbath, then, no less than the 



other commandments of the Mosaic 
dispensation, never was over us Gentiles, 
and is at an end to every Jew that believeth 
in Christ as his Redeemer from its 
condemnation and penalty. 

Some will claim that it was Circumcision 
that Paul referred to, as being 
abolished, being superseded by circumcision 
of the heart. Yes, we answer, that is 
true, but it is also true that every element 
of the Law was abolished. In proof of 
this we cite the fact that Abraham and 
Isaac were circumcised (Gen. 17:24; 
21:4.) and that the Law at Sinai was not 
given for four hundred and thirty years 
afterward. And Paul's language clearly 
and distinctly shows that this four hundred 
and thirty years later law, was the one that 
was added because of sin until Christ, the 
promised Seed, should come. (See Gal. 3:17,19,23-25; 

R974 : page 5 

4:4-7.) This proves 

exactly what Law Paul referred to, as already 

shown. 

Others, to avoid the force of the Apostle's 
arguments, divide Moses' Law into 
moral and ceremonial laws, but wholly 
without authority, and claim that the 
ceremonial law passed away, and that the 
moral law represented in the Ten Commandments 
is still in force. The Scriptures 
do not thus divide it; but if they 
did, we have the Scriptural proof that what 
our friends call the "moral law" was 
made an end of by Christ. Thus: When 
the Apostle wrote to the new Gentile converts 
respecting the law— determined not 
to put upon them the yoke of the Law 
which they as Jews had been unable to keep 
—and contradicting certain teachers who 
had said that they "must be circumcised 
and keep the Law," James remarked incidentally 
that the law of Moses to which they 
referred was that "read in the synagogue 
every Sabbath day:" and we know that 
the Ten Commandments were thus read. 
Compare, Acts 15:9-11,24,28,29 and 19-21. 

THE NEW COVENANT VS. THE LAW COVENANT. 

Again, the Apostle repeatedly refers to 
the Law, which he said had passed away, 
as the Covenant which God made with 
Israel through Moses. He points to the fact 



that Christ is the mediator of a new covenant, 
more favorable every way to the 
necessities of sinners. He shows that all 
along, God, by speaking to the prophets 
of a coming New Covenant, had indicated 
his intention of superseding the Law 

R974 : page 6 

Covenant which they had found to be a 
covenant which condemned them all to 
death "a covenant of death," because they 
were unable under the weakness of the 
flesh to fulfill its just requirements— by some 
other covenant more favorable to them; and 
he shows that the New Covenant is now 
in force, having been sealed by the blood, 
the death of Christ— "the blood of the 
new covenant." His logical reasoning is 
that when the new covenant came into 
effect, the former or old covenant must of 
necessity have ceased— must have vanished 
away entirely.— Heb. 8:6-9-13. Nor 
are we in doubt as to what constituted 
that covenant which was ready to pass 
away: It was the covenant made with 
their fathers in the day when God took 
them by the hand to lead them out of 
the land of Egypt. (Heb. 8:9.) And 
it was not merely the ordinances that 
constituted that covenant; for he expressly 
tells us that the ordinances (ceremonies) 
were added to it as incidentals saying: 
"Verily the first [or former] covenant had 
also ordinances of service." Then follows 
a description of the typical tabernacle, its 
furniture and sacrifices. (Heb. 9:1-20.) 
These ordinances went with that Law 
Covenant; but that the ordinances and 
ceremonies were not the covenant itself, 
is clear, and proven beyond question by 
Moses' statement of it Deut. 5:1-21. 
Here he recites the Ten Commandments 
(and makes no reference to the ordinances 
which accompanied it) and declares this 
to be the covenant made with them at Mount 
Horeb. 

Paul further refers to that covenant, now 
passed away, as the "Ministration of death, 
written and engraven in stones," which 
Moses communicated to the people. (2 Cor. 3:7-12.) 
Thus he shows that the 
Ten Commandments written in stones was 
the covenant which was unto death, and 
which had passed away, giving place to 
the New Covenant. Paul's further 



argument here is in harmony and is 
profitable: He reasons that if God 
introduced that covenant with so much 
pomp and glory, he will introduce the 
new covenant with glory far surpassing 
its type? Moses' face shone with 
glory, will not the Christ, of which Jesus 
is the head and the church the body, be 
more glorious then? And if the typical 
must be vailed from the sight of Israel, 
surely the glory far excelling that must 
also be vailed, when the antitype, the New 
Covenant, is promulgated to the world by 
the great antitype of Moses— the Christ. 

But Paul argues that we (the body of 
Christ) already, before the coming of our 
glory, are authorized ministers of this new 
covenant to every one who now has an ear 
to hear. We cannot indeed preach to 
others, nor yet ourselves keep the very 
letter of that perfect new covenant; for in 
the present condition of imperfection this 
is not possible; but we can conform as 
nearly as possible to its spirit. For the 
letter of it would condemn us, but the 
spirit of it is acceptable through Christ; 
and when that which is perfect is come, 
that which we can now fulfill only in spirit 
and intent, we then shall fulfill in its very 
letter, joyfully. -2 Cor. 3:7-12,5,6. 

Coming again to the Fourth Commandment 
we find that while it like all of those 
Commands never was given to Gentiles, 
but to Jews only, yet belonging to the old 
Covenant it is no longer in force even 
over the Jews. And while there would be 
nothing wrong in our observing any day 
in the week, or several of them as days 
for the worship of God and the special 
study of His Word, yet if any one should 
observe any day to fulfill this part of the 
Mosaic Law, or with the intent thus to 
merit divine favor and the reward of life, 
he would be ignoring Christ, and the New 
Covenant through his blood. So too with 
all the other nine commandments. To 
obey them as the Jew did, hoping thereby 
for everlasting life, is to fail as the Jew 
failed, only to learn by and by that "by 
the obedience of the Law shall no flesh be 
justified"— that no fallen being can keep 
that Law. To trust to the Law, is to trust 
to works, for justification, and is useless. 
Faith in Christ as the fulfiller of the Law 
and the justifier under the new covenant 
of every one that believeth, is the only 



ground of our acceptance with God. 

Speaking of the tendency to go back to 
the Law, Paul says to the Galatians (4:9-11) 
"I am afraid for you, lest I have 
bestowed upon you labor in vain" [lest 
my teaching of the New Covenant become 
useless to you]. After that ye have known 
God, or rather have been recognized by 
God [as sons], how can you turn again to 
the inferior rudiments intended for the 
world [in the next age], and which now 
are powerless to help you? Why do you 
desire to be in bondage again? Your 
observance of days, and months, and times, 
and years, indicates that you do not realize 
your liberty from that old covenant. 

In his letter to the Colossians he urges 
them also, to appreciate and guard their 
liberty in Christ. He urges, that because 
Christ had abolished the originally written 
dogmas [of the Law] nailing them to his 
cross, therefore you should let no man 
judge you in food, or drink, or in respect 
of a festival, or of a new moon, or of 
Sabbaths, which are but shadows of realities, 
now coming to pass through Christ. 
-Col. 2:14-17. 

CONSIDERATION FOR THE WEAK BROTHER. 

In Rom. 14:1-13, the Apostle puts 
this question in another light. He says 
we should remember that we are not all 
alike strong in the faith. Some weak in 
the faith can see that Christ is our Redeemer, 
but cannot as yet realize the liberty 
we have in Christ. For one realizes his 
liberty in eating whatever agrees with him, 
while another one who is weak [in bondage] 
eats vegetables only, lest he should violate 
some law which he thinks himself under. 
Each should learn to grant the other full 
liberty of conscience; the stronger should 
not despise the weaker, nor should the 
weaker judge others by himself. It should 
be sufficient for us to know that God 
accepts even of the weakest ones. So it is 
also with reference to the observance of 
days: One man esteemeth one day above 
another, while another esteems all days 
alike. Let each carry out fully the conviction 
of his own mind. 

The Apostle does not teach here as so 
many suppose from the common translation 
that each should make up his mind 
and stick to it right or wrong; nor does 



he teach that one is as right as the other. 

On the contrary he urges growth into the 

full liberty of Christ, but counsels patience 

and consideration on the part of the 

stronger for the weaker. He approves of 

the stronger, and plainly states that the 

brother who thinks himself under a bondage 

regarding meat, or regarding Sabbath 

days, fast days, etc., is the weak brother. 

But he urges that if such a weak brother 

observes such a bondage not as an attempt 

to keep the Law and to justify himself 

before God ignoring Christ's redemption-sacrifice, 

but because he thinks that our 

Lord the Redeemer wishes him to be 

bound by such ordinances, then the 

stronger ones should not rail at, or make 

light of his conscientious weakness, but 

rather receive him fully as a brother, 

trusting that discipline and experience 

and growth in grace and knowledge will 

gradually bring him to the liberty which 

others might reach more quickly. 

For if the stronger brethren by sarcasm 
and influence were to force the weaker 
ones to use a liberty they did not realize, 
it would be forcing them into sin; for any 
violation of conscience is sin. So then 
the weaker brethren must be left to the 
liberty of their conscience and should be 
received as brethren, and the truth alone 
must gradually educate them. So then 
the body may be full of charity and unity, 
each one carrying out the convictions of 
his own mind as to the Lord's will, and 
each seeking to grow in grace and knowledge 
out of childhood's weakness into 
manhood's strength as rapidly as possible, 
being developed as he feeds upon God's 
Word.-Heb. 5:13,14. 

The Apostle again refers specially to 
the observance of days as a sign of weakness, 
childishness, and lack of development: 
He says (Gal. 4:10,11), "Ye 
observe days, and months, and times, and 
years. I am anxious on your behalf lest 
my labor for you has been in vain." He 
recognized by these weaknesses for the 
things commanded by the Law, an evidence 
that they were not coming up to the 
liberty of sons of God, but going backward 
to the servant condition, to say the 
least (See verses 6 to 9 and 19 to 31.), and 
he was even fearful that this weakness and 
failure to realize the liberty of sonship, 
this subservience to the Law, might lead 



them to reject the true gospel that Christ 

R975 : page 6 

gave himself for our sins, and to accept as 
a gospel that which would be no good 
news at all— that Christ would save them 
if they kept the Law.— Gal. 1:4-8 and 5:2. 

In Col. 2:14-17 the Apostle declares 
the same truth with reference to the liberty 
of all who are in Christ, in respect to the 
Law: especially singling out the festivals, 
new moons and Sabbaths. He declares 
pointedly (verse 13) that those believers 
who had been Gentiles were pardoned 
fully and freely from all condemnation, 
while concerning those who had been Jews 
he says (verse 14), Christ blotted out the 
written Law which was against us [Jews], 
he removed it from our way, nailing it to 
his cross; having stripped away from the 
original [law] and its authorities [all obscurities] 
he made a public illustration of 
them [in his life of obedience to them] 
triumphing over them by it— [in obedience 
even unto death, even the death of the 
cross]. "Therefore," reasons the apostle, 
because our Lord has made both you 
Gentiles and us Jews free in his own 
fulfillment of all, "permit no man to 
judge you in meat, or in drink, or in respect 
to an holyday, or of the new moon, or of 
the Sabbaths, which are shadows of future 
things, the substance of which belongs to 
the anointed."— Col. 2:16,17. 

The Sabbaths of the Law were shadows 
of something very precious to those in 
Christ— no less the Sabbath day than the 
Sabbath year, which we have already shown 
in its grand culmination, the Year of 
Jubilee, typified or foreshadowed the Millennial 
kingdom, the times of restitution of 
all things. The Sabbath day under the 
Law was solely and only a day of rest from 
work and typified or shadowed forth the 
rest from their own works, from all attempts 
at self -justification by their own 
imperfect works, of all who accept of the 
finished and perfect work of Christ as 
their Redeemer. 

The Jews, and for that matter Gentiles 
also, who sought communion and fellowship 
with God, were continually striving 
to do something which would atone for their 
sins and open their communion and 
harmony with God; and the most earnest 



were "weary and heavy laden" and almost 
discouraged with their failure. It 
is to such that our Lord addressed himself 
saying to them, Come unto me and I will 
give you rest. (Matt. 1 1:28.) He lifts 
off the burden of sin and condemnation 
from every Jew under the written Law, 
and from every Gentile under the original 
Adamic condemnation, and gives all who 
come unto him in faith, true rest in the 
full assurance that He has "paid it all" 
for both Jew and Gentile— for all. 

Have you this rest of faith in Christ, 
under no yoke but his yoke of love, which 
to all in him is easy, light, and pleasurable? 
If you have, then you have the REST of 
which Israel's Sabbath was but a shadow 
or temporary figure, as far inferior to the 
real as their Passover was inferior to our 
Passover, and their sacrifices to our sacrifices, 
and their altar and candle-stick and 
table of shew-bread are inferior to ours. 
The realities in all these, are a thousand 
times grander than their shadows. 

The Apostle makes this clear, in Heb. 4:1-11. 
He there shows that our present 
REST of faith in Christ, is but a foretaste 
of the coming perfect rest [literally 
Sabbath] when we shall be made fully like 
him and be with him where he is. Verses 3 and 10 
speak of the rest already entered 
upon by believers, and verse 12 shows the 
future rest. The Sabbath day which could 
be observed anywhere, represented our 
present rest of mind which we can even 
now enjoy, while the Sabbath years and 
Jubilee which could be celebrated only in 
their own land, represented the rest which 
remains for us when we shall enter into 
our promised heavenly inheritance. Here 
too we learn how God rested. He was not 
weary of labor, and did not rest in the 
sense of recovering from fatigue. 

The Sabbath, then, as commanded the 
Jew, must have been very different from 
the Sabbath observed by God, yet as suggested 
in the command there was a resemblance 
between their resting and God's 
resting. The Apostle shows that the resemblance 
was not between it and the 
shadowy Sabbath which Israel observed, 
but between God's rest and our real rest 
of faith: "For he that is entered into 
his rest, HE also hath ceased from his 
own works as God did from his." 

What resemblance then can be traced 



between our rest of faith in Christ, and 
God's rest? The true Hebrews, under the 
Law worked, labored incessantly, to do 
good works acceptable to God, and were 
heavy laden with a sense of their 
failure to find acceptance with God: 
Gentiles also labored to help themselves 
out of the slough of sin and imperfection, 
but ineffectually; and now both Hebrews 
and Gentiles find rest as they find Christ; 
for he promises and will accomplish for both 
more than could have been hoped for by 
either. So we each give up working for 
ourselves and trust our salvation to a future 
life to Christ, and we now as restfull, 
saved ones, work not to save ourselves, 
but to serve our Lord. That is, those 
who believe in, and accept of Christ, as 
their Redeemer, thus "cease from their 
own works" and enter into rest, confidently 
trusting all to him. 

The resemblance between this and God's 
rest is marked. The sixth epoch, or 
"day" of creation, closed with the creation 
of man, and there God's direct work 
ceased; for the six thousand years since 
and another thousand (the Millennium) 
to come (seven thousand years in all) 
Jehovah God has ceased (rested) from 
work, and has let humanity measurably 
take its own course in sin or degradation, 
leaving all the great work of restitution 
and perfecting, to be accomplished by 

R975 : page 7 

Christ in the thousand years of his reign. 
Thus as our Lord said: "The Father 
worketh hitherto, and [now] I work." 
(John 5:17.) The Father judged or 
tried the race in Eden in its representative 
Adam, and then left all in condemnation, 
entrusting the entire work of restitution 
to Christ. Now therefore, "The Father 
judgeth no man, but hath committed all 
judgment unto the Son."— John 5:22. 
At the end of this Seventh day (an 
epoch or "day" of seven thousand years) 
during which the Father rests, Christ 
having redeemed all the race and having 
restored all proved worthy of being called 
Sons of God, will present the world 
blameless and unreprovable, perfect, before 
the Father (1 Cor. 15:24-28, and 
Matt. 25:34). Thus we see, that we are 
now resting as God rested. God rested 



because in his plan everything was fully 

arranged for, so completely that it might 

be said "the works were finished from the 

foundation of the world." (Heb. 4:3.) 

So we on coming into harmony with God 

through Christ, are able to see God's plan 

as though completed, though its completion 

will require another thousand years, 

and we rest, confident of its final glorious 

outcome, as God does. 



R975 : page 7 

OUR SABBATH OR REST DAY. 

Some may now inquire, Do you then 
advocate a total disregard of Sunday, as 
well as the Jewish Sabbath? And if not 
do you not consider it more proper to call 
it Lord's day' than Sunday? 

We answer the last question first by 
saying: Some men esteem one day above 
another and some esteem one name above 
another. As for us, one name will do as 
well as another and with the mind and 
heart clear, Sunday can contain as much 
beauty and force as Lord's day or any 
other name. The Lord's day for his 
great work of restitution is really the seventh 
day— the seventh thousand years, the 
Millennium just opening before us, and 
not the first day. Sunday suggests the 
fullness of light and glory from the Sun 
of Righteousness which will belong to the 
new and everlasting age following the 
Millennium of restitution. It suggests 
too the new dispensation and fullness of 
light unto which the Gospel church, the 
little flock, is ushered even now, breaking 
in upon our darkness first at and by the 
resurrection of our Lord. 

Answering the previous question we 
would say: We have great sympathy 
with the idea of one day in seven being 
set apart from general work and business. 
It is good that the world should have a 
day for studying either from God's great 
book of nature written in hill and vale and 
sky, or if desirous, to inquire of his children 
and his written Word concerning his 
present and future plans. As for God's 
children, surely it is well, since any day 
can be well employed by them. It furnishes 
a specially favorable time for assembling 



together— no matter which day 

of the seven might be selected. We surely 

have none too much time and opportunity 

for personal upbuilding in the 

truth. But while we would not willingly 

part with an occasion so favorable, we 

would that all the saints should enjoy it 

as a favor and not observe it as in obedience 

to the Jewish Law. Many are in "bondage" 

to that Law and fail to reap the 

greatest blessing from the privilege of the 

day because conscious all the while that 

they are condemned by that Law if under 

it, well knowing that they do not live up 

to its strict requirements. 

However, while God has not put us under 
a law to keep any day, the law of the 
country, made by the world, does bind us 
—for we must be "subject to the powers 
that be." The world's law is sufficiently 
liberal to give each well-doer an opportunity 
to use his conscience as to his own 
preference or manner of observing the 
day. On this as on other points, God 
has put no fixed law upon the world as 
upon the Jew, but has allowed the other 
nations to fix their laws according to their 
best judgment; and strangely enough all 
have copied more or less the Jewish laws 
as those best calculated to give them peace 
and prosperity. When the Church ("the 
little flock") is exalted and given the 
Kingdom and dominion under the whole 
heavens, with power to enforce its laws 
and direct all its affairs, then the whole 
world, every nation, will be put under a 
law which will produce grand results 
under the administration of the great 
Law-giver whom Moses foreshadowed. 
-Acts 3:22. 

R976 : page 7 

How blessed is the state of all in Christ, 
as mature Sons of God under favor, not 
servants nor infants under Laws! (John 15:15; 
Rom. 8:15; Gal. 4:1-6.) 
How blessed to us is the true rest in 
Christ's finished work, which rest neither 
the world nor the Law could give, and 
which from us that are free, they cannot 
take away. We can rest [enjoy Sabbath] 
whether the world has a Sabbath or not; 
whether any day or no day is commanded 
by human law, our rest abides. It lasts 
seven days in each week and twenty-four 



hours in each day, and is not broken by 
physical labor, nor is it dependent on 
physical ease. It is deep and lasting rest, 
and can be broken only by doubt— by a 
rejection of the basis on which it must 
abide— the ransom. 



R976 : page 7 

VIEWS OF THE REFORMERS ON SABBATH. 

We do not cite these as of any weight 
or authority on the question, for the words 
of our Lord and the apostles are the only 
authorities we recognize; yet it is worthy 
of note that as the early reformers, Luther, 
Calvin and others, came to get their eyes 
open to even some few of the truths belonging 
to this Gospel dispensation, they 
saw at once that the Jewish Law was not 
given to, nor intended to be a yoke of 
bondage to the Gospel Church. They saw 
what every casual reader should observe, 
that the apostle Paul contrasts the righteousness 
or justification which comes by 
faith, with that which none could attain 
to be deeds of the Law. Thus he contrasts 
the Law, with the Gospel substitute. 
The leaders in the Reformation 
all recognized the difference between 
Moses a prophet, and Moses a law-giver, 
maintaining that as law-giver his 
authority only extended to Israel. They 
therefore denied that the Ten Commandments 
were laws for Christians, though 
they recognized them as valuable indications 
or interpretations of principles, to 
all time and to all people. 

Says Luther: "The Ten Commandments 
do not apply to us, Gentiles and 
Christians, but only to the Jews. If a 
preacher wishes to force you back to 
Moses, ask him if you were brought by 
Moses out of Egypt." 

Calvin is no less explicit. He declares 
that "the Sabbath is abrogated," and 
denies "that the moral part of it, that is, 
the observance of one day in seven, still 
remains;" while he adds, "it is still customary 
among us to assemble on stated 
days for hearing the word, breaking the 
mystic bread and for public prayers; and 
also to allow servants and laborers a remission 
from their labor." 



Justification by faith and not by the 
observance of either Mosaic Laws or 
Roman Catholic fasts or penances was 
the plea upon which the Reformation 
was started. 



R976 : page 7 

"KEEP MY COMMANDMENTS." 

"If ye love me, keep my commandments." 
-Jno. 14:15. 

We must not leave this examination of 
the Law, without pointing out some of the 
differences between the Ten Commandments 
of the Law Covenant made with 
fleshly Israel, the penalty of which was 
death, and the Commandments relating to 
those voluntarily under the favor of the 
New Covenant. 

We have already shown that the Apostles 
taught that Israel's Law Covenant 
ceased, when fulfilled and abolished as a 
covenant by Christ at Calvary. We note 
for the benefit of some that up to that 
moment of its nullifying, it was binding 
and was the only way or hope of future 
life; and hence when the young man 
came to our Lord saying, "Good Teacher, 
what good thing must I do that I may 
obtain lasting life?" our Lord said "If 
thou desirest to enter into life, keep the 
Commandments," and then enumerated 
the ten commandments of the Law. Our 
Lord could not and did not ignore the 
Law while it was in force, neither in his 
own conduct nor in his teaching, but on 
the contrary testified that not a jot or 
tittle of the Law could fail or be ignored 
until all was accomplished, and therefore 
any one violating or teaching others to 
violate one of the least of them, would, if 
he got into the kingdom of heaven at 
all, be of a lower grade; and whoever 
would practice and teach those commandments 
would be greatest in the kingdom. 
Our Lord himself was the only being 
under that Law who ever kept it and He 
is the greatest in the Kingdom.— Matt. 19:16 
and 5:19. 

Our Lord knew that neither the young 
man who inquired, nor any of the fallen 
race, could keep those commandments: 



He therefore said, If thou desirest life do 
this,— and then, in view of his soon fulfilment 
of the Law, and the divine acceptance 
of truly consecrated ones under the 
new Covenant at Pentecost, he added: 
"Come, follow me," in consecration and 
sacrifice for others. Had the young man 
obeyed, he would have been one of those 
accepted of the Father at Pentecost, an 
heir of life under the New Covenant. 

But while our Master was obeying and 
fulfilling the commandments of the Jewish 
Law Covenant, he was giving "a New 
Commandment," not to the world, but to 
his followers, the letter, substance, and 
spirit of which, was LOVE. In various 
ways he illustrated and amplified this, his 
one command, which thus was made to 
summarize all his commandments— in 
honor to give each other preference, to 
forgive one another until seventy times 
seven times, to follow his example in 
sacrificing their lives for each other's and 
the truth's sakes, to love even their 
enemies and feed them if hungry, and 
pray for even those who persecuted them, 
—to obey all these commands was the new 
command, Love, which was the substance 
also of all the commandments to the Jews. 

Of these commands of our Lord, and 
not of the Ten Commandments of Israel's 
Law as a covenant, does John the apostle 
speak, saying:— 

"Blessed are they that do his commandments." 
-Rev. 22:14. 

"And by this we know that we have 
known him,— if we keep his commandments." 
-1 Jno. 2:3. 

Whatsoever we ask we receive from him 
because we keep his commandments and 
do what is pleasing in his sight. [The 
Jewish Law cannot here be referred to, because 
"By the deeds of the Law shall no 
flesh be justified in his sight." And so 
we read in the next verse, that the commands 
which we keep, are not those given 
from Sinai, but] "This is his Commandment 
[to us, under the New Covenant] that 
we should believe in the name of his Son, 
Jesus Christ, and love each other as he 
gave us commandment. And he who 
keeps his commandments dwelleth in 
Him, and He in him; and by this we know 
that he abides in us, by the spirit which 
he gave us."— 1 Jno. 3:22-24. 

These commandments, under which we 



are placed, are not grievous and impossible, 
as the Jewish law was to them under it; 
for his yoke is easy and his burden is light 
to all who have his spirit; and if any man 
have not the spirit of Christ he is none 
of his. 

The fact however, that we are not under 
the Jewish Law Covenant, and not 
dependent on it for life, but are hoping 
for life as a favor, or gift from God, 
through him who fulfilled the Law and 
canceled all claims of both the Jewish and 
the original Law against both Jew and 
Gentile— this fact does not hinder God's 
free children, justified through faith in 
Christ's redemption and not by the Law, 
from using the Jewish Law and every other 
expression, fact, figure and type, at their 
command, whether from nature or Scripture, 
in determining what would be acceptable 
and well pleasing to their Heavenly 
Father. Thus for instance Paul, who 
repudiated over and over again the dominion 
of the Law over any, quotes one 
of the Commandments as an evidence to 
Christian parents of what God's will would 
be with reference to their government of 
their children. (Eph. 6:2.) But mark 
that he does not in any wise thunder it 
at them as a command. (It never was a 
command to parents, but to children, 
even before being abolished.) Nor does 
the Apostle intimate any justification as a 
reward; for he writes to those who are already 
justified, not by deeds of obedience 
to the Law, but by faith in Jesus, their 
Lord and Redeemer. 



R976 : page 7 

THE LAW COVENANT EXTINCT. 

AN ILLUSTRATION. 

It was not as an expression of the will 
of God, but as a Covenant, that the Law 
was annulled and completely set aside. To 
illustrate: Suppose you owned a glassware 
establishment and employed help 
and had written out rules and penalties 
and posted them conspicuously; suppose 
that they provided as a penalty for each 
breakage, one day's salary, and that on 
hiring your men you sent them first to 



read those rules, and then bargained with 
them and then engaged them with the 
understanding that the penalties mentioned 
in the rules were a part of your contract, 
covenant, or agreement with them. 
Suppose that at the close of the week their 
breakages had been so many as to more 
than offset their wages, and left them 
each in debt to you. 

Suppose that on the same day a legacy 
had come to you, and that after letting 
your employees realize their carelessness 
and its cost, you said to them, I propose 
to meet all your breakage losses out of 
this legacy I have just received; and now 
the week for which we covenanted is expired, 
I engage you all for another week without 
asking you to enter into this agreement 
for next week. The rules however will 
remain posted up, and you will recognize 
them as the general expression of my wishes 

R976 : page 8 

and will break as little as possible through 
respect for my interest, and by and by 
when you have become skilled, I will put 
substantially those same laws into the new 
covenant that I will then require each to 
enter into. 

Though perhaps not a perfect illustration, 
this may help some to see how the 
Law given by Moses to Israel was violated 
by all, and at the end of their age there 
was no reward of life for any of them 
—they were all in debt according to their 
Covenant or bargain, made at Sinai. 
(Exod. 19:3-8. Deut. 27:9-26.) The 
legacy applied to cancel their debt was 
Christ's sacrifice, arranged for by the 
Father, and freely given by our Lord the 
Redeemer. The second week represents 
the Gospel age, the Law still hangs before 
all, and is an indirect expression of our 
Father's wishes supplemented by other 
rules and arrangements which show that it 
is no longer a covenant though its spirit 
pervades all the new rules. We may still 
use the old rules or laws to guide us as to 
the Master's wishes, where we find nothing 
explicitly stated in the new supplementary 
rules (the New Testament provisions). 
But to refer to those Rules thus to seek 
the mind of the Master, and to esteem 
them a bondage and Covenant over us, 
are totally different matters. 



R977 : page 8 
MENTAL LOAFING. 

IT is considered a disgrace to be lazy. 
He who is too indolent to work for his 
own living becomes a by-word and reproach. 
But there is a very common form 
of laziness which is not always noticed. 
It is that of mind. We first become 
conscious of it in our young days, when 
we "don't feel like study." We dawdle 
over our thoughts half asleep, and, as a 
result, give a fine exhibition of stupidity 
in the recitation room. It is true that 
disinclination to study sometimes grows 
out of fatigue and illness. The liver is 
responsible for much of it; but in the 
majority of cases it is pure laziness, as 
young people will discover if they will 
shake themselves up and go resolutely 
to work. 

This sort of indolence in youth is very 
dangerous, for it becomes a habit, and the 
mind grows rusty and dull in the very prime 
of life, when it should be at its best. And 
on the heels of this form of laziness comes 
another bad habit, that of intellectual 
loafing. What loafing is in the common 
sense, all know. It is hanging about with 
no definite aim or purpose, idling away 
the time without method and without 
profit. Well, there is mental loafing as 
well, and it is known in the dictionary as 
reverie. It is a dreamy state of the mind, 
when the thoughts go wool-gathering. 
The fancy sails away into fantastic seas, 
and revels in unreal things till the wits are 
fairly benumbed and unfitted for sober 
work. 

This habit, so common to young people, 
is fatal to mental growth. Many a promising 
youth is ruined by over-indulgence 
in it. It wastes time and enfeebles the 
mental powers. It is really a form of laziness, 
and it should be sternly corrected at 
the very outset. The action of the mind 
should be kept under control. When the 
thoughts begin to wander, it is time to 
whip them into order. A resolute will 
will do it.— Selected. 



"EVERY true disciple has often found 
that the work he took up painfully from a 
sense of duty became to him a source of 
special joy. On this path are the shining 
footprints of the Master." 



R977 : page 8 

PROFESSOR F. L. PATTON'S article in 
The Forum, on the Andover doctrine, 
assumes that the Calvinistic view of a 
sovereign election of a portion of the 
race to salvation, with the consequent reprobation 
of the rest, is more logical and 
scriptural than the view which supposes 
that all must have a chance under the 
gospel, if not in this life, then in the life 
to come. The Professor's view of election 
explains truly the method of the 
divine dealings under the economy of 
redemption up to a certain point. Salvation 
in this dispensation of His grace 
seems to be confined to a chosen few. 
And there is no other explanation but 
that it has thus seemed good in His sight. 
So far, then, as Prof. Patton sees into this 
mystery, he sees truly. But he is wrong 
in supposing that there are no summits of 
God's grace beyond the hills that bound his 
horizon. He mistakes in supposing that 
the purpose of God in ordaining some to 
eternal life terminates upon these favorites, 
whereas He never chooses any person or 
class except as He makes them channels of 
blessing to a wider circle. If He selects 
a church of the first-born, it is because 
there is to be a later born. If we are "a 
kind of first fruits of His creatures, of His 
will begotten," it is because there are later 
fruits to be harvested. If we are "a 
chosen generation, a royal priesthood," 
there must be those, to whom we are to 
fulfill these offices. It is because the strict 
Calvinist fails to see these wider stretches 
of God's great plan of grace that his system 
is so inadequate, and not because he 
errs in tracing everything back to the will 
of God. This age does not bound everything 
in redemption. Most of mankind 
fail of salvation in this age. So far as 
the results of trial in this life are concerned, 
their failure is final. Only a little flock 
enter into life. The gateway into it is 



much more narrow than even the preachers 

of orthodoxy represent it. "Few there be 

that find it." But these few are "baptized 

for the dead." If no resurrection has 

been provided for the unjust dead, there 

would be no hope for any but the elect. 

But "He gave himself a ransom for all, 

to be testified in due time." The mistake 

of the Andover school is in overlooking 

the fact that souls in sheol are not under a 

prolonged dispensation of grace, but under 

the penalty— "in prison." The only door 

of hope for the dead is the hope of resurrection. 

Any trial for the prize of eternal 

life must come in after punishment has 

been visited, and the dead have been recovered 

to the life and opportunities of 

manhood.— Words of Reconciliation. 



R977 : page 8 

A SEETHING CONTINENT. 



A perusal of Saturday's usual collection 
of European cablegrams cannot fail to 
impress the reader with the fact that the 
continent of Europe is literally seething 
with social seditions and political acerbities 
which seriously threaten not only its 
peace but in many places the very existence 
of society. 

France is not only threatened with war 
at the hands of her old enemy, but her 
social condition presents some most profound 
problems for the solution of capable 
statesmen, whom it will be difficult to 
discover among her would-be political 
leaders. Already the anti-rent agitation 
has appeared in Paris after a fashion ominously 
threatening to the rights and interests 
of landlords, while many other cities 
of the republic are anticipating serious 
street riots on account of the rise in the 
price of bread caused by the late legislation 
protective of agricultural products. 

Of the condition of Ireland the American 
public are already too well aware. 
That country is rapidly moving in the 
direction of an agrarian revolution, the 
limits of which cannot at present be 
defined. 

It is, however, in eastern and central 
Europe that the most threatening aspect 
of social and political affairs and the angry 



strife of race is graphically presented. 
Russia is making war on the most important 
industries of a country with which a 
year since she had been in the closest 
political alliance. Already this war has 
destroyed the iron industry of Silesia, 
shutting up numerous works in that and 
other provinces of Germany. Germany 
retaliates by preparing a bill again raising 
the duties on grain and wool. Later, the 
St. Petersburg press propose as a 
reprisal for Germany's increase of the 
duties on cereals a poll-tax on German 
workingmen in Russia. Nor is the Russian 
government backward in this social and 
commercial war. The czar has issued an 
edict suppressing the German language in 
the colleges and schools of the Baltic 
provinces. And so the contest goes on in 
every leading country on the continent, 
each individual nation apparently laboring 
commercially for the destruction of the 
trade of all the others and politically for 
the extirpation of the nationality of some 
offending neighbor. 

At present the entire continent presents 
the appearance of a seething mass of different 
and opposing materials in the crucible 
of the chemist anticipatory of crystallization. 
But whether such crystallization will 
bring peace or war is an open question. 
If the outcome of the present unparalleled 
turmoil proves to be a peaceful one certainly 
it will not be because the efforts of 
the leading powers and the leading statesmen 
tend in that direction.— Daily Journal. 

R967 : page 8 

"GOD is a God of order, but not necessarily 
pledged to that particular form of order 
by which your quiet and wealth seem to be 
best secured. He will not be taken into 
your pay. He will not act as a preventive 
police for you. God stands neutral in the 
strife of human selfishness. Those that 
honor Him, He will honor. He is on the 
side of those who are on his side, whose 
hearts and actions are on the side of brotherly 
kindness, and truth, and holiness." 

"WHEN alone, guard your thoughts; 
when in the family, guard your temper; 
when in company, guard your word." 

TRUE trust is always joined with the use 



of proper means. "Trust in the Lord, 
and do good." 



R978 : page 1 

VOL. IX. PITTSBURGH, PA., OCTOBER, 1887. NO. 2. 



R977 : page 1 

THE MISSIONARY ENVELOPES. 

These were mentioned in last TOWER 
for the first time, and we already have 
more orders than will be supplied by the 
first lot of fifteen thousand. Those who have 
ordered, among whom are several brethren 
in business who can use quantities, 
express themselves as highly pleased with 
the plan. It is both a cheap and an unobtrusive 
way, of preaching the good tidings 
of great joy to many. 

The appearance of these envelopes has 
been generally approved as neat, and we 
expect you will all want them. It is 
written of this time: "His lightnings enlightened 
the earth;" and these as one of 
the agencies of the truth, the light, have 
their mission to perform. How like the 
lightning they will be, as borne on "Fast 
Mail" trains they rush hither and thither 
over the entire civilized world, unobtrusively 
putting before the eyes of intelligent 
business people and friends and their families, 
pointed Scripture texts which set 
forth our hopes; calling their attention 
also to the DAWN. Those who might refuse 
to hear you, or whom you could not 
approach in conversation or in any other 
manner on these themes, will be led by 
their curiosity to listen to your representative 
—to hear this preacher's message. 

We repeat the price, postage prepaid 
by us: One hundred 35 cts., three hundred 
$1.00, one thousand $3.00. Those 
who order two thousand for $6.00 (or more 
at same rate) can have their business card 
printed on the corner without extra charge. 
Order only in quantities here specified, 
(Do not therefore order 50 cts. worth, 
nor 150, nor 200, nor 500,) as we get 
them put up in packages thus and cannot 
spare the time to prepare special quantities. 
For this reason also we charge one cent 
each for quantities less than one hundred. 

Address as above. 
-TOWER PUBLISHING CO. 



R979 : page 1 

THE FIFTIETH THOUSAND. 

Still they go, you will be glad to learn. 
MILLENNIAL DAWN VOL. I. is now in its 
fiftieth thousand. Forty thousand have 
already gone out, and ten thousand more 
are now being printed and bound. 

This was our first proposition— the hope 
first expressed— that before 1888 fifty 
thousand copies of DAWN would be in the 
hands of the people. Three months yet 
remain of this year and we want to suggest 
what is possible through still further 
faithfulness of the harvesters. It is possible 
to have twenty-five or fifty thousand 
more out by Jan'y 1st. 1888. How?— 
By the Colporteurs who are selling DAWN 
continuing their present averages, or increasing 
them as the cool weather will permit; 
by more of the brethren and sisters 
entering this branch of the "harvest" 
work; and by all others of the readers of 
the TOWER doing what they CAN. 

What can the others do? They can 
each sell from four to twenty copies, or 
can use that number for loaning, though 
to sell is better, because people are almost 
sure to use what they pay even a small 
price for. So then, God knows and we 
know the possibilities; and as the New 
Years' TOWER comes to you, all will see 
how faithful the servants have been as a 
whole. Some we are sure can do no more 
than they are now doing, though some 
others we fear are "slothful servants." But 
the "View" in the September TOWER has 
seemed to awaken and quicken many previously 
asleep, or overcharged with the affairs 
of this world, for which we thank God. 



R978 : page 1 

A CHINAMAN'S VIEW OF CHRISTIANITY. 

The following extracts from a paper in 
the North American Review by Wong 
Chin Foo, a Chinaman, and evidently a 
graduate of one of our New England colleges, 
gives his reasons for preferring the 
religion of his fathers to Christianity. 



True Christianity and its teachings he of 
course does not comprehend and against 
it his pointed sarcasm has no power; but 
against much, very much, nay, against the 
generality of what is called Christian it 
strikes a sharp blow which should have 
some good effect in stimulating thought 
on the part of many who feel that their 
religion only must be an unreasonable 
matter. And yet we know that this educated 
heathen man voices the sentiment of 
thousands of sensible thinkers, who, merely 
because they have less moral courage 
than he, do not express themselves. How 
much need there is, then, to "Lift up a 
standard for the people"— the truth— and 
how energetic all should be who have been 
entrusted with the honor of being standard 
bearers in this time "when the enemy 
shall come in like a flood." 

Wong Chin Foo says:— 

The main element of all religion is the 
moral code controlling and regulating the 
relations and acts of individuals toward 
"God, neighbor, and self;" and this intelligent 
"heathenism" was taught thousands 
of years before Christianity existed 
or Jewry borrowed it. Heathenism has 
not lost or lessened it since. Born and 
raised a heathen, I learned and practised 
its moral and religious code; and acting 
thereupon I was useful to myself and many 
others. My conscience was clear, and my 
hopes as to future life were undimmed by 
distracting doubt. But, when about seventeen, 
I was transferred to the midst of 
your showy Christian civilization, and at 
this impressible period of life Christianity 
presented itself to me at first under its 
most alluring aspects; kind Christian 
friends became particularly solicitous for 
my material and religious welfare, and I 
was only too willing to know the truth. 
But before qualifying for this high mission, 
the Christian doctrine I would teach 
had to be learned, and here on the threshold 
I was bewildered by the multiplicity 
of Christian sects, each one claiming a 
monopoly of the only and narrow road 
to heaven. 

I looked into Presbyterianism only to 
retreat shudderingly from a belief in a 
merciless God who had long foreordained 
most of the helpless human race to an 



eternal hell. To preach such a doctrine 
to intelligent heathen would only raise in 
their minds doubts of my sanity, if they 
did not believe I was lying. Then I dipped 
into Baptist doctrines, but found so 
many sects therein of different "shells," 
warring over the merits of cold-water initiation 
and the method and time of using 
it, that I became disgusted with such trivialities; 
and the question of close communion 
or not, only impressed me that 
some were very stingy and exclusive with 
their bit of bread and wine, and others a 
little less so. Methodism struck me as a 
thunder-and-lightning religion— all profession 
and noise. You struck it, or it struck 
you, like a spasm,— and so you "experienced" 
religion. The Congregationalists 
deterred me with their starchiness and 
self-conscious true-goodness, and their desire 
only for high-toned affiliates. Unitarianism 
seemed all doubt, doubting even 
itself. A number of other Protestant sects 
based on some novelty or eccentricity- 
like Quakerism— I found not worth a serious 
study by the non-Christian. But on 
one point this mass of Protestant dissension 
cordially agreed, and that was in a 
united hatred of Catholicism, the older 
form of Christianity. And Catholicism 
returned with interest this animosity. It 
haughtily declared itself the only true 
Church, outside of which there was no 
salvation— for Protestants especially; that 
its chief prelate was the personal representative 
of God on earth; and that he was 
infallible. Here was religious unity, power, 
and authority with a vengeance. But, in 
chorus, my solicitous Protestant friends 
beseeched me not to touch Catholicism, 
declaring it was worse than heathenism— 
in which I agreed; but the same line of 
argument also convinced me that Protestantism 
stood in the same category. In 
fact, the more I studied Christianity in 
its various phases, and listened to the animadversions 
of one sect upon another, 
the more it all seemed to me "sounding 
brass and tinkling cymbals." 

[The following portion shows the great 
evil of calling things what they are not 
—of calling civilized nations Christian 
nations and calling the worldly, unbelievers 
and the unconsecrated Christians, because 
they outwardly respect religion and draw 



nigh to God with their lips while their 
hearts are far from him.] 

"Call us heathen, if you will, the Chinese 
are still superior in social administration 
and social order. Among 400,000,000 
of Chinese there are fewer murders and 
robberies in a year than there are in New 
York state. True, China supports a luxurious 
monarch whose every whim must 
be gratified; yet, withal, its people are 
the most lightly taxed in the world, having 
nothing to pay but from tilled soil, 
rice and salt; and yet she has not a single 
dollar of national debt.... 

Christians are continually fussing about 
religion; they build great churches and 
make long prayers, and yet there is more 
wickedness in the neighborhood of a 
single church district of one thousand 
people in New York than among one million 
heathen, churchless and unsermonized. 
Christian talk is long and loud 
about how to be good and to act charitably. 
It is all charity, and no fraternity 
—"there, dog, take your crust and be 
thankful ! " And is it, therefore, any 
wonder there is more heart-breaking and 
suicides in the single state of New York 
in a year than in all China? 

The difference between the heathen and 
the Christian is that the heathen does 
good for the sake of doing good. With 
the Christian, what little good he does he 
does it for immediate honor and for future 
reward; he lends to the Lord and wants 
compound interest. In fact, the Christian 
is the worthy heir of his religious ancestors. 
The heathen does much and says 
little about it; the Christian does little 
good, but when he does he wants it in the 
papers and on his tombstone. Love men 
for the good they do you is a practical 
Christian idea, not for the good you 
should do them as a matter of human 
duty. So Christians love the heathen; 
yes, the heathen's possessions; and in 
proportion to these the Christian's love 
grows in intensity. When the English 
wanted the Chinamen's gold and trade, 
they said they wanted "to open China for 
their missionaries." And opium was the 
chief, in fact only, missionary they looked 
after, when they forced the ports open. 
And this infamous Christian introduction 
among Chinamen has done more injury, 



social and moral, in China, than all the 
humanitarian agencies of Christianity 
could remedy in 200 years. And on you, 
Christians, and on your greed of gold, we 
lay the burden of the crime resulting; of 
tens of millions of honest, useful men and 
women sent thereby to premature death 
after a short, miserable life, besides the 
physical and moral prostration it entails 
even where it does not prematurely kill! 
And this great national curse was thrust 
on us at the point of Christian bayonets. 
And you wonder why we are heathen? 
The only positive point Christians have 
impressed on heathenism is that they 
would sacrifice religion, honor, principle, 
as they do life, for— gold. And they 
sanctimoniously tell the poor heathen: 
'You must save your soul by believing 
as we do!'... 

We heathen are a God-fearing race. 
Aye, we believe the whole universe-creation 
—whatever exists and has existed— is 
of God and in God, that, figuratively, the 
thunder is His voice and the lightning 
His mighty hands; that everything we do 
and contemplate doing is seen and known 
by him; that he has created this and other 

R978 : page 2 

worlds to effectuate beneficent, not merciless 

designs, and that all that He has 

done is for the steady, progressive benefit 

of the creatures whom He endowed with 

life and sensibility, and to whom as a consequence 

He owes and gives paternal care, 

and will give paternal compensation and 

justice; yet His voice will threaten and 

His mighty hand chastise those who deliberately 

disobey His sacred laws and 

their duty to their fellow-men. 

'Do unto others as you wish they would 
do unto you,' or 'Love your neighbor as 
yourself,' is the great divine law which 
Christians and heathen alike hold, but 
which the Christians ignore. This is 
what keeps me the heathen I am! And I 
earnestly invite the Christians of America 
to Confucius. 



What can the nominal Christian Church 
answer to this charge and arraignment of 
heathenism? Nothing; they themselves 



have counted in under the name Christian, 

millions of the unregenerate, wholly 

opposed to the true principles of the doctrine 

taught by the Founder of Christianity 

and his apostles. They have with 

pride acknowledged all the civilized nations 

of earth as Christian nations, even 

going so far as to speak of them as Christendom 

(Christ's Kingdom); and hence 

to be consistent they must bear the Chinaman's 

reproach as against Christianity, 

for the nefarious acts of these kingdoms 

which the Scriptures declare to be beastly 

and subject to the machinations of the 

devil, the prince of the power of the air 

who now worketh in the children of disobedience, 

but is to be dethroned, bound, 

and finally destroyed by the true kingdom 

R979 : page 2 

of Christ, when he shall take his great 
power and reign. 

How pointed, too, are the thrusts of 
this heathen man: He agrees with Paul 
who says— While one saith I am of Paul, 
I of Apollos, I of Peter, etc., are ye not 
carnal? So the Chinaman wants to know 
whether the various sectarian claims— I 
am of Wesley, I of Luther, I of the Pope, 
I of Calvin, Knox, etc., etc., does not 
imply gross carnality among Christians 
to-day. 

And how well merited are this heathen's 
strictures upon what has come to be the 
fundamental doctrine of "Christendom?" 
—that all but a small handful of humanity 
are on their way through a world of 
sorrow, pain, disappointment and tears, to 
a place of untold and everlasting agony, 
prepared for them by a God of love, 
whose unerring wisdom saw this to be their 
fate and portion before they were born. 

Oh! what blasphemy upon the wisdom, 
love, justice and power of our Creator. 
What a terrible misrepresentation of his 
gracious plans. It is creditable indeed 
to the fairness and justice of the heathen 
world, that they spurn such— bad tidings 
of great misery, to all people. It is a 
shame, a disgrace to the intelligence of 
the civilized world to-day, that such an 
unreasonable, cruel misrepresentation of 
God and his plan finds credence among 
them, and has their millions for its support 
and spread. Even if the real plan 



of God were not seen by them, the civilized 
mind like that of its heathen brother, 
should be able to recognize such a hideous 
distortion, and should regard the teachers 
of such things, as would the heathen— 
"as insane, if not liars." 

But the fact is that the majority of the 
intelligent people of "Christendom" do 
not believe in this doctrine, that God's 
chief work is to create men by the billion 
for eternal torment. The trouble is that 
they are not honest, not righteous, 
not upright. They are willing to sail under 
false colors, from selfish motives. 
They are lovers of self more than lovers 
of God, and hence are willing to join in 
this blasphemy of his character and plan. 
They, like Baalam, love the reward of 
unrighteousness, and hence practise deceit 
to get that reward. Verily, they 
have their reward! 

Oh! for more noble men and women 
whom Satan cannot rule by either fear or 
favor. Honesty is a pre-requisite to 
growth in grace and knowledge; for 
"Light [truth] is sown for the RIGHTEOUS 
and gladness [such as comes from confidence, 
inspired by the true plan of God] 
for the UPRIGHT in heart." Since the 
truth is only for the upright, the honest, 
is it any wonder that so many morally 
dishonest people of intelligence fail to 
find the truth? How can they believe 
who seek honor one from another and 
seek not (exclusively) that honor which 
cometh from God only? 



page 2 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Akron, September 25th, 1887. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I am thankful 
for many things! I am grateful for the 
September TOWER! I am so glad for 
Brother Hickey's excellent (anniversary) 
letter, so comforting to you and all the 
dear saints. I like the Sabbath article 
and yet believe that because it robs religionists 
of the Sabbath they love so much 
and regard so little, that it tends greatly 
to make your prediction of hindrance to 
our free teaching of truth, brought out in 
the View— a fact. 



I was at Kent part of Friday and Saturday 
delivering DAWNS previously sold. 
A large proportion of them are in good 
hands. Although the necessity and glory 
of the work I do in selling DAWN is a 
compensation, yet I can scarcely tell you 
how much your letters are to me. You 
mention that some of mine are timely, 
and my words and deeds helpful to encourage 
some, especially you and Sister 
Russell, and that knowledge is a great joy 
and encouragement to me. How often 
Brother Tackabury must, now that he is 
himself helpless, look back joyfully upon 
the record of his faithfulness. 

A little coterie of Henry George's adherents 
are warm friends of DAWN and 
June TOWER View; they sold many books 
for me. The headquarters is in a store 
owned by a McGlynn Catholic. 

I suppose TOWER readers who consider 
DAWN selling to be preaching the Word, 
if they hear that for the last two weeks I 
fell below 200 names per week, will be 
surprised. The chief reason is that the 
main industry here has been suspended 
for several months; and it is natural that 
when house after house pleaded poverty, 
the colporteur should make his talks 
longer, even to debating the matter of 
the book sale with the people. I am more 
than ever convinced of the folly of this 
course. Our strength should be taxed 
less and not more at each house when 
sales are slow. And the able colporteur 
who is always sure to make his canvass interesting 
is the party who must guard 
most against delay from this cause. We 
should be sure not to stay so long that our 
greeting at parting will be less cordial 
than when we introduced ourselves. 

But to-day in another section I made 
my old record of 50 names, so that a few 
days in this neighborhood will be apt to 
raise me to 500 names for 2-1/2 weeks work. 
I made no long talks to-day, having learned 
by my late experience that lesson, I 
was forward to teach to others, and had 
not learned thoroughly myself, viz., Do 
not preach, nor debate, nor indulge in 
long talks of any kind while selling DAWN 
—be brief and to the point. 

In close affection, and fellowship, joined 
by Mrs. A. Yours in Christ, 

J. B. ADAMSON. 



Sept. 20th, 1887. 

BROTHER RUSSELL:-Mr. Tackabury 
has regained strength to quite an extent, 
being able to walk about the house and 
sit up most of the day. His lungs show 
great power of resistance to the advance 
of the disease, much to the surprise of all, 
but he is scarcely more than a skeleton. 
He wishes me to remember him to you 
and Sister Russell with much love. 

We feasted on the contents of the last 
TOWER. Mr. T. said he thought it one 
of the best he had ever read. We find 
many things in the Bible that we would 
like to hear you talk about. Almost every 
reading reveals something new, something 
that throws light on the grand plan which 
God has designed for a lost world's recovery. 
How it all increases our love 
and gratitude to our heavenly Father! 

Write us whenever you can spare time 
from your numerous duties. Your sister 
in Christ, MRS. S. T. TACKABURY. 

Clear Water, Neb. 

MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, MY DEAR SISTER: 
—I received a number of April TOWERS 
and have a good many loaned out. I do 
hope and pray the Lord will hear and answer 
my prayer, that the eyes of their understanding 
may be opened that they may 
behold God's wondrous plan of Salvation. 
I received a very interesting letter last 
week from a lady whom I have never seen 
and know only through the glad tidings 
preached in MILLENNIAL DAWN. I think 
it will interest you and Brother Russell, 
so I enclose it. May the Lord continue 
to bless you and make you a blessing to 
others still more, is my daily prayer. 

With love and respect to Brother Russell 
and yourself, I remain your humble 
Sister in Christ, J. A. M . 

[We publish the letter referred to, that it 
may encourage all to further efforts.— ED.] 

Willow Valley, Neb. 
DEAR MRS. M.:-You will doubtless 
be surprised at receiving a letter from a 
stranger, but I want to let you know that 
you have been instrumental in bringing 
to me such joy, peace, and rest, as I had 
not thought it possible to possess in this 
life. Our mutual friend, Mrs. L., gave 
me MILLENNIAL DAWN and several copies 



of ZION'S WATCH TOWER to read. As 

soon as I had looked them over, I saw 

that I had received them in answer to my 

prayer for a better understanding of God's 

Word, if so be I should use that knowledge 

aright. That book proved to be the 

key for which I had long been searching. 

And Oh! the rich treasures of God's 

boundless love and mercy to this sin-stricken 

world, it opened up to my view. 

No wonder, Paul could say, I am not 

ashamed of the gospel of Christ. I shall 

esteem it a blessed privilege to preach this 

gospel to every one with whom I come in 

contact. I have already been able to interest 

several, though I have only had it 

a few days myself. In looking over the 

letters of the "Little Flock" to Brother 

Russell, I noticed that there seemed to be 

a great scarcity of "this world's goods" 

among them, and I thought, what a poor 

little flock it is, to be sure,— and it made 

me feel rather sad for a moment, thinking 

of the multitudes of truth-hungry ones needing 

food. Then I remembered the multitude 

of hungry ones that were following Jesus. 

How he satisfied their hunger with the 

seven loaves and a few small fishes, which 

he blessed and brake and gave to his disciples 

to be distributed among them. And 

I knew that that was intended for a lesson 

for us now. We are to give him what 

loaves and fishes we possess, and it shall 

be sufficient to feed the hungry multitude 

who are now following him; and not only 

that, but we will have more for ourselves 

than we had in the beginning; for 

"they took up of the fragments seven baskets 

full." Then let us go forward in the 

full assurance of faith, knowing in whom 

we have put our trust. All the honor and 

riches of this world seem now as "filthy 

rags" compared to that which I see by 

faith "beyond the vail." Now I know 

what it means to "be dead to this world." 

May the Father give me strength to never 

"look back," for I know full well that 

the flesh is weak. I am a farmer's wife, 

and do my own work, so of course my 

time is pretty well occupied with the necessary 

duties of this life. But this I 

know, If we make the best use we can of 

the opportunities given us, it is all God 

requires of us. If our heart is really in 

any work, we can and will find many opportunities 

for engaging in it; for instance, 



while my hands are busy with 
household work, my mind is devising 
ways and means for spreading the truth, 
or studying the meaning of some text of 
Scripture, for it nearly all has a new 
meaning to me, since I have the key. 
I hope the knowledge that you have 
been the means of helping me to see the 
truth, will encourage you to persevere. 
I shall be pleased to hear from you if convenient. 
Sincerely yours, O. E. S . 



R979 : page 2 

A CHINA MISSIONARY WRITES. 

Chefoo, China. 

MY DEAR MRS. RUSSELL:-Many thanks 
for your kind letter, and for the copies of 
MILLENNIAL DAWN and the WATCH TOWERS. 
It is such a comfort to know that 
Jesus calls us his "friends" and is making 
known to us "all things that he heard 
from his Father." (John 15:15.) In 
the far away days of my youth, and the 
not so far away days of my orthodoxy I, 
thought I knew it all, but now I see how 
blindly I read my Bible. And how I thank 
God for having compassion on me, and 
touching my eyes, and giving me sight. 
May I follow Him as did those of old 
whose eyes were opened. 

I am giving away and lending my 
copies of MILLENNIAL DAWN and my 
papers, and any time you can send me 
extra copies of the WATCH TOWER I can 
use them to advantage. I expect to see 
a good many missionaries from other parts 
of the country during the summer, as this 
is a health resort, and I shall scatter my 
TOWERS, and lend MILLENNIAL DAWNS. 
The last bound copy I gave away before 
taking the wrapper off. 

Wishing you abundant success in your 
efforts to spread "the everlasting gospel," 
the "good tidings which shall be to all 
the people." I remain Yours in Christ, 
C. B. D . 

page 2 

Lebanon, O. 
MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have 
probed the mystery of selling MILL. DAWN 



and find that I can sell it with some success. 
Day before yesterday I went to a 
village of several hundred inhabitants, 
and in about three hours worked about 
one third of the place and took twenty 
orders. Tomorrow I am going back to 
finish. I am not certain but that I may 
put the greater portion of my time, the 
next year, to this work, if my affairs will 
permit. If I could turn my whole attention 
to it, I believe I could sell six or 
seven thousand in the next twelve months. 
However I am pleased to do what I can, 
be it much or little, feeling that every 
book I sell is a footprint in the sands of 
time to guide some discouraged, disheartened 
fellow-mortal to the fount of truth 
at no far distant day. I wish I could 
flood the world with it. I am surprised 
at myself in this work; it seems that I am 
particularly adapted to it. 

A week from next Sunday I go to Miamisburg 
or near it to preach. Bro. Van 
Hook filled my pulpit last Sunday morning. 
Yours in faith and service, J. P. M. 

In a later letter the same Brother says:— 

This Sabbath afternoon finds me at leisure 
to write you a few lines. I am quietly 
leaving my hold go on secular business 
and as quietly laying it on the Lord's 
business, and within the next six months 
I expect to be able to turn my attention 
largely to canvassing. The harvest is a 
big one, and the laborers are few. I think 
the Lord will have us go on until every 
country, where the Bible is read, will be 
canvassed for MILL. DAWN. I have only 
canvassed our little town, and have taken 
40 orders. I am confident I can make a 
living for my family at it, and therefore I 
shall drift into it as fast as circumstances 
permit. Of course the world thinks me 
foolish, but that is just what I think of the 
world; so no difference as to that, I am free. 

I do not talk much in canvassing, only 
explain how much the Chart of the Ages 
facilitates Bible reading; speak of the book 
in a general way, showing its qualities of 
workmanship, leading them to expect it 
to be a tolerable high priced book, and 
then tell them the price of it a quarter; 
some have actually taken a long breath 
on hearing the price, and have me repeat 
it, for fear they misunderstood me. 



It sells; it is bound to; but Oh! what 
a commotion it will create! how it will 
dig into their former belief! What a 
struggle! and how many of them will wish 
they had never seen it; and yet how they 
will return to it again and again, until, at 
last, the conflict over, how they will rejoice 
in their freedom ! Lord haste the 
day when all shall know. J. P. M 



YOUNG'S CONCORDANCE now $3.50 to 
our subscribers. See notice on eighth page. 



SUPPLEMENTS this month, order freely. 



R979 : page 3 
MY SHEPHERD. 

"He leadeth me!" 
And so I need not seek my own wild way 

Across the desert wide; 
He knoweth where the soft, green pastures lie, 

Where the still waters glide, 
And how to reach the coolness of their rest, 

Beneath the calm hillside. 

"He leadeth me!" 
And though it be by rugged, weary ways, 

Where thorns spring sharp and sore, 
No pathway can seem strange or desolate 

When Jesus "goes before." 
His gentle shepherding my solace is 

And gladness yet in store. 

"He leadeth me!" 
I shall not take one needless step through all, 

In wind, or heat, or cold; 
And all day long he sees the peaceful end, 

Through trials manifold. 
Up the far hillside, like some sweet surprise, 

Waiteth the quiet fold. 

—Selected. 



R980 : page 3 

THE SPIRIT OF ANTICHRIST. 



While the world and its spirit are quite 
contrary to Christ and the Spirit of Christ, 
and might therefore without impropriety 
be termed anti-Christ (against Christ), 
yet this term as used in Scripture is never 
applied to the world, but always to professed 
Christians who have turned aside 
from the truth, and who, by becoming 
advocates of error, are in Christ's name 
opposing him, his followers, and his 
doctrines. 

We are well aware that many regard it 
in a contrary light,— considering the term 
antichrist as belonging to worldly opponents 
of all who profess Christ in any 
manner— infidels, heathens, Mohammedans, 
etc. That this view is incorrect we 
can prove readily by citing here every 
text in the Bible containing the word 
antichrist, and pointing to some statement 
in the context which unmistakably 
fixes it upon some professing to be Christ's 
followers. This is an important point, as 
it overthrows completely a wide-spread 
belief, and opens our eyes to look for 
antichrist in a quarter in which many 
may not have thought to look hitherto. 
In fact, the prefix anti, signifies more 
than against, it contains the double thought 
of instead and against. 

The word antichrist occurs five times, 
1 Jno. 2:18,22; 4:3; 2 Jno. 7. The 
class meant is easily discerned from the 
general tenor of John's epistles and from 
the following pointed statements: "They 
went out from us, but they were not of 
us." They are [really] of the world 
[though professing otherwise], therefore 
speak they of [or according to the spirit 
of] the world, and the world heareth 
them." (1 Jno. 2:19; 4:5.) Other 
scriptures mention and describe the same 
class, but by different names. Paul in 2 Thes. 2:3, 
following the same vein of 
thought as in Rom. 6:6, personifies the system 
of error which he saw would arise, and 
speaks of it as the "Body of Sin," counterfeiting 
and opposing the "Body of Christ," 
naming it here as an organized body, "The 
man of Sin." He makes no reference to 
a sinful individual; for there are and have 
been in the past, and were in and before 
Paul's day, horribly depraved creatures 
of the human race, than whom worse 
could scarcely be conceived of; and the 
Apostle was not passing all these by to 



speak of some individual pre-eminently 
vile and vicious. No, he sees and tells 
us of a system of evil and error, the 
embodiment of evil, the opponent and 
counterfeit of the Body of Christ,— the 
antichrist Body. But only those who 
have learned that the true church is the 
"Body of Christ" can appreciate how the 
counterfeit nominal system, the "Man of 
Sin," is the antichrist. But we refer to 
this merely to note the fact that the 
Apostle Paul mentions that this "Man of 
Sin" system arises in the church, and 
professes to be in and of the true temple 
—the Church of the living God (Compare 
2 Thes. 2:4 with 1 Cor. 3:16,17; Eph. 2:21.) 
and not of the world. He declares 
this to be an apostasy, a falling 
away from the truth. 

But it is not our purpose here to discuss 
antichrist: this we have done heretofore and 
may again, but now we simply call attention 
to one point of antichrist's erroneous 
teaching which is very injurious 
as a source of many other errors. This 
point of error is particularly pointed out 
to us by John, the Apostle who specially 
represented us who are alive and remain 
unto the parousia (presence) of our Lord 
(John 21:22.); and he tells us that it is 
common to every theory and class claiming 
to be Christ's followers and soldiers of 
the cross, who are really opponents to 
and counterfeits of the true body of Christ. 
Remember that the individuals in these 
great counterfeit systems, and bound by 
their errors, are not all of them, and do 
not all properly belong to them, and hence 
it is, that by the truths now being uncovered 
and presented to such, as "meat 
in due season," God is calling his people 
out of those systems to which they do 
not really belong, saying "Babylon is 
fallen! Come out of her, my people." 

But what, you inquire, is this one notable 
point of error upon which all antichrist 
systems agree, and which blinds 
many to other truths, and opens the way 
to errors? Surely, we answer, it is a point 
long and deeply covered under hoary 
traditions which are esteemed venerable 
and sacred. The adversary buried this 
first and deepest, realizing the necessity 
for keeping the truth out of sight and of 
arousing prejudice against it. This being 
the case, prepare yourselves to find it a 



test which you would never have thought 
of had the Apostle not pointed it out, 
but which, once clearly seen, proves to-day, 
to be an oracle in the light of which 
every system of doctrine may be quickly 
tried, whether it be of the spirit of truth 
or of the spirit of error, the spirit of 
antichrist. 

The passage to which we refer is found 
in 1 John 4:3, which in the oldest and 
the most correct, the Sinaitic MS. reads 
thus: 

"Every spirit [theory, doctrine] that 
confesseth not that Jesus the Lord is come 
in flesh, is not of God: and this is the 
spirit [theory] of antichrist, whereof 
you have heard that it cometh; and even 
now already is it in the world." 

Ah! you say, that is not a test, for all 
Christians and all theories, even the 
worldly, confess that. Not so, we answer; 
you do not get the depth of the Apostle's 
statement; your view of his words would 
make them and him foolish indeed. The 
world does not confess Jesus to be 
"Lord;" so that shuts the world out; and 
as we examine closely we will find few 
of the professed Christian systems ready 
to confess that Jesus, our Lord, came in 
flesh. To do so, would contradict their 
creeds old and new. it is the general 
view, that the real man is not flesh, but a 
spirit being which lives for a while in a 
body or house of flesh; hence by such the 
flesh is no more recognized as the person, 
than the garments put on and off. Moreover 
it is claimed by many, that in our 
Lord Jesus' case, he was really and truly 
the Father, Jehovah, who thus for a time 
appeared in flesh, but that he himself was 
not flesh; that he appeared to be tried 
and tempted in all points, but was not 
really tried at all; that he appeared to suffer 
and die, but did not actually suffer, nor 
did he really die for our sins, but merely 
dropped the flesh as a garment remaining 
really alive as before, for, they say, God is 
immortal and cannot die, and their claim 
is that in leaving the glory which he had 
with the Father before the world was, he 
did not become flesh or "come in flesh," but 
still remained a spirit being and came into a 
flesh body and only appeared like men, like 
the seed of Abraham, though all the while 
really was the almighty immortal Jehovah. 
They say that it was the God Christ Jesus 



who appeared to or pretended to die for our 
sins, and contradict the Apostle's statement 
that it was "the man Christ Jesus" 
who gave himself a ransom, a corresponding 
price [Greek, antilutron] for all. (1 Tim. 2:6.) 
Yet we see some go to a 
further extreme and hear them sing— 
"Well might the sun in darkness hide 

And shut his glories in, 
When God the mighty Maker died 
For man the creature's sin." 

But in this poetic slip only a few can 
recognize the inconsistency. Some even 
going so far as to deny God's immortality, 
claim that it required the death of a God 
to atone for the sin of man, not seeing 
that this is contrary to scripture which 
demands not a God's life for the life of a 
man, but a perfect man's life, as a ransom 
or substitute for the forfeited life of the 
first perfect man— a corresponding price. 

Still others, anxious apparently to get 
away from the straightforward, simple 
doctrine of ransom, figure the dying out of 
their way by saying that the real, spiritual 
Christ died to sin, and let his flesh 
body die as an example of how we should 
do the same. They do not stop to account 
for the uselessness of such an example, 
to those who cannot avoid dying. 

But all these, with their various shades 
of difference, stand firmly, shoulder to 
shoulder, on the one point mentioned by 
the Apostle— they deny that Jesus the 
Lord "came in flesh" or "was made 
flesh," as the same writer elsewhere states 
it. (John 1:14.) That his body was 
flesh and bones cannot be denied directly, 
hence their claim that the spirit being 
came into the flesh, but was always 
separate and distinct, and not flesh. But 
this does not fit: the Apostle does not say 
into [Greek eis] flesh, but "in [Greek en] 
flesh" and "was made flesh" [Greek sarx 
egeneto— literally, "became flesh."] (Jno. 1:14). 
So we see that the test of believing 
that Jesus the Lord came in flesh, i.e. 
became flesh, would draw the line outside 
of so called "Orthodox" doctrines. The 
theory of Universalists and Unitarians, as 
generally held, is likewise opposed to 
Jesus being "made flesh," for they generally 
claim that our Lord had no existence 
before, and that he was born after the 
ordinary manner of men: these, then, 
make no confession which would imply a 



pre-existence of our Lord in order to be 

made flesh or to come in flesh. Swedenborgians, 

Spiritists, etc., etc., all come 

in on the same side of the question— all 

deny that the Lord Jesus was "made 

flesh," "came in flesh"— became flesh. 

Next notice that all these are not only 
without Scriptural sanction for their 
theories, but are positively and directly 
contradicted by the Apostles. We need 
not again quote the many passages in 
which our Lord and the Apostles declare 
that the Father and the Son are not the 
same person, etc., but notice the fact 
that the death, even the death of the 
cross, was the death of the real person, 
and not a pretended death of a body, 
while the real person or being slipped out 
alive and watched the proceedings. Every 
text touching on the subject, in both the 

R981 : page 3 

Old and the New Testaments, treats it in 
the most positive manner, declaring that 
our Lord made his soul (his being, himself,) 
an offering for sin (Isa. 53:10), 
that he poured out his soul (being, existence) 
unto death. (Isa. 53:12.) They 
declare that his soul was in hades (the 
state or condition of death) three days 
and not left there longer; that he died, 
that he was dead, and that on the third 
day he was raised to life by the Father's 
power. Our Lord himself said that he 
came into the world to give his psukee 
(being, existence,) a ransom, a price, for 
all [for the psukee, the being, or existence, 
of all men]. Speaking of what he 
gave for the life of the world, he represents 
himself in a parable as giving all that he 
had to purchase the field (the world) with 
its treasure— all those whom he will bring 
back into harmony with God, chief and 
a first fruit, forever pre-eminent, being 
his Bride. 

The Apostle Peter declares that he was 
our price, that he redeemed us, purchased 
us back out of death. Paul assures us 
not only that we were "bought with a 
price," (1 Cor. 6:20,) but in 1 Tim. 2:6, 
he tells us all about the purchase, 
saying "There is one God [not three] 
and one mediator between God and men, 
the man Christ Jesus." It was something 
that this man did that mediated between the 



race of sinners and God, something that no 

one of them could do for another because 

all were sinners, and as such, each one 

himself condemned to death. As a spirit 

being, as our Lord was before being 

"made flesh," he could not have mediated 

between God and men, because under 

God's arrangement a ransom, a CORRESPONDING 

price for the first sinner who 

precipitated the trouble, was the only way 

out of the difficulty. Neither an angel 

nor an arch-angel could give what he 

did not possess. They could not give a 

human nature in exchange for that which 

Adam had forfeited, for they had not 

human, but angelic, spiritual nature. So 

then, our Lord also a spirit being, with 

the Father in glory and honor before 

coming into the world, could not give 

the price of our redemption. In order 

to be able to give the price he must become 

flesh, must be a man: not imperfect 

and sinful as the fallen race has become, 

but perfect and sinless as the original of 

our race was before he sinned. Hence he 

"came in flesh"— "was made flesh"— "became 

flesh," in order, as the Apostle 

expresses it (1 Cor. 15:21), that "as by 

man came death, by man also should 

come the resurrection of the dead." He 

became flesh (holy, undefiled) in order to 

pay the price or penalty against us, 

—death. The Apostle urges (Phil. 2:7,8) 

that though the obedience implied in 

becoming a man, in being made flesh, 

was great, yet the trial was severer still 

when our Lord found himself man and 

learned that the divine plan by which he 

was to prove his entire submission to the 

Father's will would lead him to death as 

and for the sinner— even the ignominious 

death of the cross. But he was obedient 

even to the full, and died for us as our 

ransom: Wherefore God hath highly 

exalted him, giving him station, dignity 

and authority far above angels, and far 

above the glory and honor which he had 

with the Father before the world was 

created. 

What our Lord gave is clearly stated by 
Paul; for continuing the above quoted 
testimony, that "There is one God and 
one Mediator, the man Christ Jesus," he 
tells us how he mediated, what he gave 
for us. He says— "Who gave himself a 



R981 : page 4 

ransom for all." This settles the matter 
that our Lord was flesh, a human being, 
and a perfect one at that, for as usual 
with Paul he expresses himself in unequivocal 
terms. He uses the Greek word 
antilutron which signifies a corresponding 
price, where in English we have the word 
ransom. 

Now consider well the import of this, 
and you will see that it contradicts every 
antichrist system; for Paul shows that 
before sin entered the world there was no 
death, (Rom. 5:12) hence the one 
(Adam) who first sinned was a perfect human 
being, and if our Lord gave a corresponding 
price, he must have been a perfect 
human being when he gave himself 
for Adam and all who shared in Adam's 
sin and penalty. 

John recognized the tendency or spirit 
of antichrist in his day. Though the 
system had not organized, some were already 
going out from them because not 
of them, denying Jesus "in flesh," claiming, 
with the heathen, an impersonation, 
that the real one was inside the seen one, 
and preparing themselves by this error to 
deny their Lord, their Master, the man 
Christ Jesus who gave himself a ransom 
for all. To-day, after centuries of triumph 
over the words of our Lord and of the 
Apostles, and over reason and common 
sense, this doctrine or spirit of antichrist 
known as that of the Trinity, is so firmly 
intrenched in the hearts of many, that 
they prefer to deny the Master's words 
—"The Father is greater than I," and 
the Bible teaching that Christ came in 
flesh and gave himself a ransom— prefer 
to deny anything rather than this theory 
of antichrist, which twists and disjoints 
every truth of Scripture, so long as it is 
held. 

Note then the test of every spirit or 
doctrine, the test which will prove whether 
or not any faith is well founded, surely 
founded on the ROCK, the true and only 
basis of faith, of which the Apostle declares 
"Other foundation can no man lay than 
that which is laid, Jesus Christ." This 
test is given in few words, as we have seen, 
and can be easily and quickly applied to 
every doctrine or spirit with which you 
may come in contact. If it will not 



stand this God-given test you may be 
sure it is error and at once set it aside. 
If it agrees with this test you have proved 
it to be on the right foundation, and you 
may go on proving all its details. This 
test, 1 Jno. 4:3, in the oldest and most 
exact Greek MS., the Sinaitic reads:— 

"Every spirit [theory, doctrine,] that 
confesseth not that Jesus the Lord is come 
in flesh [become flesh] is not of God: 
and this is the spirit [theory,] of antichrist, 
whereof you have heard that it cometh; 
and even now already is it in the world." 

Remember that many good people, 
many of God's children, have been blinded 
by the errors and sophistries of Satan, 
and while not anti or opposed to Christ 
at heart, have been beguiled by the great 
deceiver's falsities, promulgated even in the 
Apostle's days and fully headed up and 
brought to a climax in Papacy and only 
partially gotten rid of by the Reformation. 
Now, in the "harvest" of this age, God 
causes the light to shine more clearly, for 
the reason that he is making the truth his 
"sickle" by which he will separate wheat 
from tares completely and finally. Therefore, 
put on the whole armor of God, 
that you may be able to stand— that you 
be not among the thousands to fall in 
this time of trial. -Psa. 91:7,11,12. 



R954 : page 4 

"BE CONSTANT in what is good, but beware 
of being obstinate in anything evil; 
constancy is a virtue, but obstinacy is a sin." 



R981 : page 4 

REASONS FOR EXPECTING TOLERATION 

IN THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH. 

A Brother, the Editor of a contemporary 
Journal, publishes his reasons for 
expecting toleration in the Presbyterian 
Church as follows:— 

1 . It resides in the very idea of the 
church that there must be growth in divine 
knowledge until her ultimate unity 
and perfection are attained. To this end 



there must be room for the free operation 
of the Spirit of God in unfolding the 
truth. This requires opportunity for 
reverent investigation and discussion. 
Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is 
liberty. 

2. Because of confessed obscurity in 

the whole of the church's teaching concerning 
the last things. Our wisest teachers 
admit that the Reformed Theology 
left many of these problems unsolved, 
and that a fuller investigation of them is 
a duty put upon the church in these last 
days by the Spirit and Providence of God. 

3. Because a new era of investigation 
at points even more essential than this is 
coming upon the Presbyterian Church, 
which it is both unwise and impossible to 
resist. Whatever evils may result from 
this spirit of free inquiry, the evils of its 
suppression would be far greater. 

4. Because a wide diversity already 

exists between the views of future punishment 

current among us, and as presented 

from our pulpits, and the statements of 

our Standards that both before and after 

the resurrection, "the wicked are to be 

punished with most grievous and unspeakable 

torments, without intermission, with 

the devil and his angels in hell-fire forever." 

If fidelity to these statements is 

to be the test by which our right to remain 

in the church is to be determined, then 

we ask our brethren to honestly ask before 

God whether they are so free from sin in 

this respect as to have the right to cast a 

first stone at us. 

5. Because we honestly believe that we 
have taken up this line of testimony in 
obedience to the Spirit of God, and from 
motives of sincere love for the whole 
church, which needs this larger, better 
view of God's great plan of grace before 
it can be unified; and specially in the 
interest of the Presbyterian Church to 
whose welfare we have devoted a life-long 
ministry, and which greatly needs relief 
from the incubus of monstrous views of 
God's sovereign justice which obscure her 
own constant testimony to His fatherhood 
and grace. 



R982 : page 4 



Full of love for blinded brethren, this 
brother earnestly desires to carry the entire 
Presbyterian Church into the light, and 
so desires of it toleration, that is, permission 
to stay in its company and to 
anoint all their eyes as his own have been 
anointed— with the truth. What this 
brother desires to do for those with whom 
he spent so long a bondage, we desire to 
do for all the sects into which the great 
adversary has seduced God's children. 

But we see what he evidently has not 
yet seen, viz: That the light which ultimately 
shall be to every creature, can as 
yet reach and be appreciated only by a 
"little flock," the true church, which is 
the body of Christ. 

If the Presbyterian Church were the 
real, true Church whose names are all 
written in heaven, this brother's expectations 
of opening their eyes would be 
justifiable. But he should be able to see 
that this is not the case; none of the sectarian 
systems, great or small, are the 
Church which is Christ's body; though 
members of his "body," members of the 
heaven-recorded Church are probably still 
in bondage in every sect. 

It is because these sect-systems are not 
the true Church, and because we have 
reached the "harvest" time of separation, 
that the Lord gives present light, and 
meat in due season, and calls on all of his 
people to "come out" into the light, the 
truth, the liberty proper for children of God. 

God not only saw our day and knew 
how it would be, but he had it written in 
his Word for our learning; and it is not 
written that the tares growing with the 
wheat may be changed into wheat, but 
that the two classes may be separated. 

Our Brother evidently is in heart free 
already from the shackles of the Presbyterian 
Creed; but he should be entirely 
free. Why help to uphold in any degree 
slavery to a creed and get others under it 
who have not the moral strength to free 
themselves even in heart? Why stay in 
a human organization of any sort, where 
our company is not desired, except at the 
cost of stifling our convictions of right 
and truth? Why not, on the contrary, obey 
actually as well as mentally the Lord's command 
to separate, to "Come out" of all 
the Babylon bondage and confusion, and 
thus not only make straight paths for our 



own feet, but thus make foot-prints which 
may encourage and guide some weaker 
brother or sister out of the bondage of 
sects, into the liberty wherewith Christ 
hath made us free to follow unhindered 
and untrammeled his word and example? 

The brother is asking liberties and 
privileges granted only in the true Church 
where the spirit of the Lord is, and where 
the liberty of his Word is granted. Hence, 
one of two things is sure to happen— the 
brother will either abate his energy on 
the side of truth and liberty, (which we 
hope he will never do, but rather increase 
it,) or else he will get out of the sect and 
into closer fellowship with the true Head 
of the Church and with the "true Church 
which is his body." Like others, the 
Presbyterian sect never agreed to grant 
toleration, and never has shown any. 

When a man joins that Church, it is 
on the same principle that people join 
other human organizations, partnerships, 
societies, etc., viz.: They agree to submit 
to the rules and by-laws as they are. 
And when this brother took upon him his 
Ordination Vows as a minister of the 
Presbyterian Church, though he was already 
a minister (servant) in the true 
Church and anointed, as all the members 
of that body are, with the Holy Spirit of 
the truth, he BOUND himself in the presence 
of witnesses that so long as he was 
a member and minister of Presbyterianism 
he would "not teach or inculcate anything 
opposed to the doctrines" of that organization; 
to which doctrines he there subscribed 
as representing his faith. 

We are well aware that many, after 
changing their faith, still continue to hold 
membership and office in these organizations; 
and some, in violation of their vows, 
do teach and inculcate doctrines opposed 
to the doctrines of the sects to which 
they are pledged. But is this right? 
They generally excuse themselves by the 
claim that the denomination claims to 
uphold and believe the truths taught in 
the Bible, while they are sure they now 
have more truth and Bible support than 
the sect. But is this a sufficient ground 
of excuse for such a course? Is it doing 
by them as we would have them do by us 
if our places were changed? We think not. 

The very spirit and intent of the ordination 
vow was to bind, to compel a 



man by his solemn pledge, not to use his 
office or influence inside the organization, 
against it as it stands— to compel any who 
might come to differ on any point, to first 
get out of the ministry of their sect, cease 
from professing the faith he no longer 
holds, before he could attack it. 

To us it seems that a contract is not less 
binding on a saint, than on a worldling; 
and such a contract as Presbyterians, Methodists, 
Lutherans, Roman Catholics and 
others impose upon their ministers, should 
certainly be considered as binding as a 
note, or a bond, in the business world; 
and business honor would insist on a full 
compliance with both the letter and spirit 
of the contract— that when the faith 
changes, the minister or member should 
step down and out, before uttering a word 
of contrary teaching. 

In the case of Baptists, Disciples, and 
a few other denominations, the case differs 
a little, since some of these claim to have 
no creed or standard but the Bible. In 
such a case a minister or member is at 
liberty to teach all he finds in the Bible, and 
if interfered with, may, if he choose, insist 
on a trial of his case by the Bible. But 
with these, other means than a trial are 
generally resorted to, such as social ostracism, 
money pressure, etc., until a saint 
is glad to escape from so many "tares" 
to get a better chance for worship and 
study, "one [saint] with another," or 
where this is impossible, in private Scripture 
study alone. 

But in the case of Presbyterians, Methodists, 
etc., they guard themselves, and 
do not even claim to accept the Bible as 
the only rule of faith and practice. They 
candidly and openly state, in so many 
words, just what they want all members 
and ministers to subscribe to as their faith; 
and when any are tried for heresy by these, 
the Bible is not brought forward at all, 
but (properly according to their organization 
or contract) "the standards" of their 
organization. The Bible is the standard, 
not in name merely, but indeed, to the 
true Church; but with the sects, each has 
its own "Standards," "Creed," dogmas, 
etc., to which, on joining, members subscribe; 
and surely their trial should be according 
to their contract, which they 
agreed to be bound by, and to which 
they are therefore responsible. 



Any contract made with fellow-men is 
binding; and to violate it, even in the 
interest of truth, would be wrong. We 
must not do evil that good may result, 
but do right, and leave all results to God, 
who promises in due time to cause the 
righteousness of his saints to shine forth 
as the noon-day. If, therefore, a Christian 
finds himself bound to a creed and 
sect, he should at once look up the Faith 
he professed in joining them— the faith 
he agreed neither to add to, nor to diminish, 
so long as he remained one of them; 
he should see whether it fully and clearly 
expresses his present faith. If it does 
not, he should at once withdraw; for by 
any other course he violates his contract 
with his fellow-men. To refrain from 
teaching the truth fully and clearly, after 
God has brought us to a knowledge of it, 
would prove us unworthy of a place in 
the "body of Christ," would prove that 
we are not overcomers, and not worthy of 
a place among the Royal Priesthood, the 
true sanctuary, the Ambassadors for God 
before the world. 

We would like to impress upon every 
reader that to teach or to believe anything 
different from a Confession of Faith to 
which by membership you profess to hold, 
is a wrong to God, to the sect whose 
name is borne, to yourself, and to the true 
members of the body of Christ. Whatever 
the difference between your faith and 
the Creed of the sect to which you are 
attached, to that extent exactly your 
course is wrong, dishonest, unsaintly, 
and hence ungodly; because, to that extent 
you are misrepresenting God's Word 
and plan, and hence displeasing him; to 
that extent you are misrepresenting the 
sect, and hence offending and wronging 
them, even if they would tolerate you; to 
that extent you are dishonoring yourself 
as a child of God, one of the children of 

R982 : page 5 

the light— the truth,— not only by the 
shackles of your denominational slavery, 
which are galling to all whom the Son 
makes free indeed, but by reason also of 
the deception and misrepresentation 
practiced daily, in outwardly, to saints 
and sinners, professing by the Creed you 
uphold, doctrines which you detest and 



which sometimes and under some circumstances 
you would deny as unscriptural 
and as misrepresentations of God's character 
and plans, and also misrepresentations 
of your honest belief. To the same 
extent also you injure the true body of 
Christ, especially the "babes in Christ," 
for you not only do not give the moral 
weight of your presence, and influence, 
and talent, and means, to further the cause 
of true liberty among the saints, and true 
union on true principles, but you give 
to the opposition the weight of your 
influence, means, talents and presence, 
and constitute one of the numbers whose 
support and names are bids to the world 
for its respect and alliance. Not only do 
you serve Babylon's purpose as a decoy 
for others, but possibly the weight of your 
influence keeps many of the "babes" and 
weaker brethren in bondage, not only 
hindering their development, but keeping 
their influence, and talents, and means away 
from the free fellow-members in the same 

R983 : page 5 

true body and adding these advantages to 
the false systems, the nominal church, to 
help perpetuate and draw others into the 
errors and bondage which galls you, and 
which misrepresents you even more than 
you misrepresent it. 

Thus you become a false beacon-light 
to the poor world seeking the peace and 
joy of Christ, luring them into doctrines 
which, if honestly accepted and firmly 
held by them, will blind them and ensnare 
them, and prevent the peace, and 
light, and joy, and love of the real gospel. 
It was looking thus at the influence of 
sects in the time of the first advent, that 
our Lord said to the zealous Pharisees, 
"Ye compass sea and land to make one 
proselyte, and when he is made, he is two-fold 
more the child of hell [destruction] 
than he was before." So now, it is far 
better to let the world alone, than to get 
them into sects which will only blind them 
to the truth and misrepresent to them 
God's character and plan. Far better; 
because when the light of the now dawning 
Sun of Righteousness reaches them, 
it will have far more influence upon them 
where they are, in and of the world, than 
if converted by the spirit of error into 



tares, in imitation of real wheat. 

But when you come to examine the 
Creed to which you subscribed, Pastors 
generally say, "Oh, never mind! It 
matters little anyhow." And if you insist 
on seeing and pondering its professions, 
promises, and covenants, they will often 
unblushingly assure you that neither they, 
the pastors, nor a majority of the membership, 
believe all to which you and they 
subscribed; and that they never did believe 
or teach such and such portions. And 
they will try in every way to hold you in 
their sects (especially if you have money or 
influence— which few of the little flock 
have,— Jas. 2:5,) because naturally a 
professed field of wheat would not like to 
lose all its wheat and have only tares left. 

Such Pastors may even resort to the 
specious misleading argument that you 
joined merely the local company of which 
he is the pastor; and claim that his faith 
is the measure by which the members of 
this local organization are to be judged, 
and not the written confession of faith, and 
the written Covenant to which you assented 
and subscribed. But both of these 
arguments are wrong; all local organizations 
(except such as have what is known 
as Congregational government) are parts 
of systems, so that in joining the Episcopal 
Methodists, for instance, your covenant is 
not merely with the local organization, 
but with the M.E. Church as a system; 
and the Pastor's faith, or his violation of 
his covenant with the organization, is no 
more an excuse for you, than the fact 
that other men violate business covenants 
would be an excuse for your doing so. 
Custom and numbers can never make 
wrong right. The fact is, a large majority 
of the membership of all denominations 
are really covenant breakers, whether they 
have given the matter sufficient thought 
to realize it or not. They either do not 
know or do not care what is the Creed to 
which they have subscribed, or else, knowing 
it, they believe it only in part, if at 
all; and yet by subscribing to it all, they 
act out an untruth before the world, 
before one another and before their families. 
The demoralizing influence of this 
double dealing is unmistakable in toughening 
and searing the conscience, tending to 
make such both unworthy of the truth 
and unable to readily accept it, as they 



get into the habit of thinking of others as 
being as insincere as themselves in their 
teachings and professions. 

Duty seems plain from this standpoint: 
However others may violate covenants, 
and misrepresent themselves, the truth and 
the systems to which they are joined, the 
consecrated have no choice, as to their 
course of action. Not any of their influence, 
time, or money, must go to sustain 
error. All of it must be enlisted on the 
side of the truth, which is ever opposing 
error, even as light opposes darkness. 
As children of the light, we can have no 
fellowship with any of the unfruitful works 
of darkness, but must rather reprove them. 

Should all do so, should all honestly 
withdraw from sects and creeds which do 
not truly and fully represent their faith, 
the result would be the immediate disruption 
of all these great sectarian systems, 
which now ensnare the consciences of 
many of God's children, and dress up and 
fondle "the children of this world" in 
imitation of the children of God. Many 
of the "tares" would come out honestly 
and say that they believe little or nothing, 
and would get back to their place in the 
world from which they were never really 
converted by the truth. 

The saints would be entirely free and 
unhindered to grow up to the fullest 
measure of grace, knowledge and love. 
Others in various stages of childhood, and 
even the "babes in Christ," would be 
blessed too. At first they would make 
hundreds of new combinations of thought, 
only to be broken continually as they would 
grow up into Christ in all things, until 
finally they would reach the position of 
the early Church, and stand where we 
now do, recognizing no bondage, attempting 
to bind none, and refusing to be bound 
by any other than that faith which no 
man can ignore and yet be in Christ at 
all, viz., that the Bible is God's revelation 
of his plan, and the only guide for faith, 
and that as a race we were sinners, but 
were redeemed by the precious blood of 
Christ. Planted on this foundation, all 
God's children may grow from babes which 
feed at first only on the "milk" up to 
strong men who feed upon the "meat in 
due season" from the same storehouse. 

This union of heart and mind upon the 
rock, without other limitations, gives room 



for the exercise of every grace and gift of the 
spirit in the Church, each member of which 
is a minister, in proportion to his ability 
to minister to the needs of "the body." 
And it leaves room, too, for the Head to 
exalt or debase, to honor or to chasten, 
according to faithfulness, each member in 
"the body"— each minister, or servant. 

But all will not thus act out conscientiously; 
all cannot do so; all have not the 
strength: and so long as they are fed on 
the present diet of worldliness, pride, 
sectarian rivalry, deceit (as in professing 
doctrines not believed), etc., with a very 
little skimmed "milk of the Word," they 
cannot get the strength to come out boldly 
and oppose the majority, the strong, 
proud children of this world, who grow 
strong on the diet refused by the "meek." 

Hence our Lord pictures over and over 
again, especially in the Revelation, the 
complete fall of these systems in order to 
the liberating of the "great company" of 
the true wheat class. But we who see, 
and who have strength, and who by 
valiant energy for the truth could help 
others, shall we for fear, or any other 
motive, draw back and lend our influence 
in any degree to these systems, which in 
the name of God and of truth, are misrepresenting 
God and truth, and blinding 
and enslaving God's children? Can we 
expect our Master's approval and the 
overcomer's crown, unless we do overcome? 
I tell you, nay. And unless such 
come out of Babylon, they will be reckoned 
as partakers of her sins, and receive 
of her plagues, shortly to be poured 
out. As our Lord expressed it (Matt. 24:51.) 
they will have "their portion with the 
hypocrites" in the time of perplexity, disintegration, 
and confusion just at hand, 
though they are not hypocrites, but disobedient 
servants. 



R983 : page 5 

MY PEOPLE-OUT OF BABYLON. 

A LETTER TO THE EDITOR. 

DEAR SIR:-Apology for what follows 
is needless; this would not be written had 
the writer doubts of your sincerity and 



desire to live up to the full light. 

The June number of Z.W.T., under 
head of "Come out of Her!" contains in 
the "Reply" an error, in my opinion, of 
great harm. 

(1.) Briefly— God, at the beginning of 
the present age, and while selecting his 
"little flock," made use of apparent human 
means— an association of believers, 
who at Antioch were first called Christians. 
These associations, called Churches, were 
specially blessed, and several have special 
mention. 

(2.) These associations have been the 
means used by God to bring down the 
Truth to this day. This you will admit. 

(3.) I believe that the church rightly 
perpetuated itself— under Divine guidance 
—by regular means, and that the pedigree 
of the "Clergy" of the Church is as well 
authenticated to-day, as was that of the 
Levitical in its day: that this is not accident, 
but the result of the Divine interposition, 
and therefore is to some good end. 

(4.) Further, that the Churches each 
had its own territory in which it was the 
supreme or only visible means of identification 
of the membership or legitimacy 
of the little flock. Concurrent jurisdiction 
would not be an exception so 
long as they agreed. The original Churches 
mentioned in the New Testament have 
here in the United States of America, 
certain legitimate descendants, that can 
be readily identified-THE PROTESTANT 
EPISCOPAL CHURCH. I came out of that 
district of Babylon known as Congregational. 

R984 : page 5 

(5.) Granted that at this day many of 
the membership of The Church [Protestant 
Episcopal] are proud of their age; 
that they look with reverence at its honors 
and worldly trappings; and that the "little 
flock" may not get its rightful food, and 
may even be ministered to by "wolves" 
—this does not alter the fact of the Divine 
appointment of the institution. 

(6.) Wesley tried to keep his hot-headed 
followers in The Church and reform IT. 
And this is our right and privilege. But 
this has never been done— and this is the 
starting point. 

(7.) Simple ordering out, does not 
improve the matter. The little flock 



must be organized— and until you, MR. 
RUSSELL, have something better to offer 
them, modesty should indicate a different 
course. Very Truly Yours. 

WM. M. WRIGHT. 



The above, from a Brother in Christ 
who has not long been a reader of the 
TOWER, but who has been greatly blessed by 
the reading of MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I. 
as previous letters show, is well stated; 
and as its answer may be of interest to 
many of our readers, we give it space. 
We have numbered the paragraphs so as 
to simplify our answer, the numbers of 
which correspond or relate to the above. 

(1.) Our brother has well chosen his 
terms, calling the early churches "associations," 
rather than "organizations;" for 
they were merely associations, not bound 
and fettered by creeds and traditions, as 
the organizations or systems of to-day are. 
These associations bound themselves only 
with love and truth, and were just such as 
we have to-day, and generally small, their 
usual meeting places being private dwellings 
or rented upper rooms. (Philemon 2; 
Acts 20:8; 28:30,31; 1:13; Mark 14:15.) 
In no respect did those early associations 
or gatherings resemble those of 
Babylon, "mother" or daughters, to-day. 
Neither in size, in worldly place and 
honors, in forms and ceremonies, in display 
of dress, in choirs, nor in a titled and 
salaried "Clergy," was there any resemblance 
whatever. The "first love" and 
"first works" are gone long since, except 
among the few outside of Babylon. 
Yes, the early "associations" were blessed 
of God; and all of like spirit, even though 
only twos or threes, who have since associated 
in the name of the real Head 
and Master, and under ruling of His 
Word alone, have also been blessed. 

(2.) We cannot admit that those early 
associations, good as they were, have 
been the means of bringing down the 
truth to this day. On the contrary, they 
had nothing to do with it: they gradually 
lost their first love and first works, and 
their liberties, and became subject to ambitious 
leaders and teachers, finally drifting 
into that great system of error so 
conspicuous in Revelation, called "Babylon," 



"The Mother of harlots." "The 
Mystery of Iniquity." On the contrary, 
the Lord himself, through his Word 
written by his inspired Apostles and 
Prophets, has been the means of handing 
down the truth. What came from Babylon's 
streams has been foul with errors 
and traditions of men,— the more direct 
the more foul— and the only draughts of 
pure water have been given to the church 
by messengers whom God has from time 
to time raised up, who dipped directly 
from the fountain— the Word of God. 
These have in nearly every instance been 
raised up outside of organized Babylon 
among the associating believers; or if 
inside and faithful, God drove them out. 
Such were Huss, Wyckliffe, Zwingli, 
Melancthon, Luther and others. 

(3.) We are well aware that about the 
third century, the "Mystery of Iniquity" 
whose spirit was already working in Paul's 
day, began to rise in influence and power, 
and triumphed over the more slowly developing 
"Mystery of God" (the little 
flock). We know that this great, grand, 
powerful, organized, false church persecuted 
the dissenters, who protested against 
her errors, until she was intoxicated with 
her success, (Rev. 17:6.) and deceived 
all nations, and gained their support. 
This continued until her worldliness and 
devilishness became apparent to all except 
the blind, and forced the less corrupt of 

R984 : page 6 

nations and individuals to leave her 
bosom, protesting against her open errors 
and crimes. Such a seceding and protesting 
branch, split off and took root in 
England and still flourishes, with fewer 
of the vices, but many of the errors of 
organization and tradition inherited and 
still injuriously retained— The Protestant 
Episcopal Church of England. 

We are aware, too, that the "Mystery of 
Iniquity" has a "clergy" upon which she 
confers certain powers and honors; but 
we do not know of any such class with 
such powers in the early associations. 
The only ones recognized as having special 
authority were the Apostles, whose teaching 
the true church has always had, and 
consequently never needed popes claiming 
to be "Successor of St. Peter" in 



authority. The Apostle Peter needed no 
successors, and in his epistles opposes 
these would-be successors and their errors. 

This self-authorized and self-organized 
clergy, called by each other, and ordained 
by each other, do slightly resemble the 
Levitical priesthood; but our Lord was 
not of that priesthood, nor was he called 
nor ordained like unto either these or 
those. [See "The Melchisedec Priesthood" 
in June TOWER.] Instead, therefore, 
of considering this system of Clergy 
a divine arrangement, we consider it the 
reverse, a delusion and snare of the devil, 
by which the simplicity which is of Christ 
has been destroyed, and the development 
of the saints in that great system has been 
greatly hindered. Our Lord recognized 
no separate "clergy" class, but said, "All 
ye are brethren;" (Matt. 23:8) and all 
the brethren were to exhort one another 
and stir up each other's pure minds in 
remembrance; all the brethren were to 
seek ability to prophesy (teach publicly), 
and all were surely to be living epistles of 
God ready at all times to give a reason 
to every inquirer, of the hope that was in 
them. (1 Thes. 4:1; 1 Cor. 14:1,31,39; 
2 Cor. 3:2; 1 Pet. 3:15.) And 
these instructions the early Christians 
followed, and all preached.— Acts 8:4; 
11:19. 

The "clergy" of the nominal church 
was not organized as a priesthood, or system 
resembling the Levitical priesthood, 
by the apostles, nor until the fifth century, 
as saith the historian:— 

"With the fifth century the church 
strove more and more to perfect her outward 
temporal form as Roman Catholic, 
a theocratic institution. The conception 
of the church as a community of the saints 
is now lost. The priestly order are the 
rulers, the laity are the ruled— the clergy, 
as ecclesia representativa hold unconditional 
preferment, and form a hierarchy. 
The prominent peculiarity of the mediaeval 
church is its purely clerical character. 
The rigid distinction between the secular 
order and the spiritual, is marked by the 
external appearance. Clerical dignity and 
power are signified by a peculiar costume 
which varies with the rank of the office."* 

The same historian says again:— 

"This much is certain, that in the time 
of the Apostles, about the middle and 



even towards the close of the first century, 

there was no external union of all the 

churches, no ecclesiastical establishment, 

no visible headship with an ecclesiastical 

centre. Of 'the Church' in the later 

sense of the word, there was yet no conception. 

There was one holy mystical 

body of Christ— one great Church organism, 

hidden however from the world, 

having Christ for its soul, and by His 

Word and Spirit assured of future perfection 

and glory. And still, there were 

many local communions, made up of those 

who were believers, having a nucleus of 

true disciples [saints] but exposed to 

worldly influences, and soon embracing a 

mixture of genuine believers with nominal 

members and backsliders. These separate 

churches [congregations] were not connected 

by any external bond, but only by 

the instinct of brotherly love, and the 

tendency to mutual fellowship." 

Under the head of Episcopacy, McClintock 
and Strong's Cyclopaedia very 
moderately says:— 

"This change in the mode of administering 
the government of the Church, 
resulting from peculiar circumstances, may 
have been introduced as a salutary expedient, 
without implying any departure 
from the purity of the Christian spirit. 
When, however, the doctrine is (as it 
gradually gained currency in the third 
century) that the bishops are by divine 
right the head of the Church and invested 
with the government of the same; that 
they are the successors of the Apostles and 
by this succession inherit Apostolical authority; 
that they are to be the medium, 
through which, in consequence of that 
ordination which they have received 
merely in an outward manner, the Holy 
Ghost in all time to come must be transmitted 
to the Church— when this becomes 
the doctrine of the Church, we certainly 
must perceive in these assumptions a great 
corruption of the Christian system. It is 
a carnal perversion of the true idea of the 
Christian Church." 

Notwithstanding the errors of many 
well-meaning men in forging, out of their 
ideas of faith and forms, chains and fetters, 
which have greatly hindered many of their 
no less honest and able successors in the 
Christian pathway, it is still a fact that 
the church ("whose names are written in 



heaven," "the sanctified in Christ Jesus") 
has been perpetuated by God, begotten of 
him by the spirit of truth, through the 
word of truth (James 1:18), and neither 
created nor perpetuated by the hands of 
bishops. 



*Herzog, Vol. I., page 678. 
R985 : page 6 

(4.) Whenever and wherever Christians 
are, as fast as they become known to each 
other they will be drawn together by love 
and common interest in their one mission, 
unless, as to-day, kept separate from 
one another by doctrinal errors and party 
spirit— contrary to the spirit of Christ. 
And each such association or gathering, 
assembled in the name, not of popes, 
bishops, apostles, synods, or presbyteries, 
but in the name of their only head, Christ 
Jesus, is a Church, whatever its size, in 
the original use of the Greek word ecclesia. 
But such a Church of believers is not the 
true Church, and may contain few or none 
of the final members of the true glorious 
body of Christ. The true Church is not 
yet fully organized, and will not be until 
this age ends. During this age we are 
all probationers, who for the time are 
reckoned members of the true Church 
pending our present trial and testing, 
which must prove whether as "overcomers" 
we shall be worthy of membership in that 
glorious Church which is to be fully organized 
and fitted for the great work of 
the Millennial age. 

Failing to see that the great work of 
the Church for the world is future, the 
Church in the fifth century, seeking to 
accomplish that work of the next age in 
the present age, saw that organization was 
essential to that work, and organized 
under antichrist a system or "clergy" 
which is neither more nor less than a 
counterfeit of the true Church of overcomers, 
the glorious Royal Priesthood, 
the Kingdom of God under the whole 
heaven, which Christ is to organize shortly 
and place in control. From this serious error, 
the Reformation movement of the sixteenth 
century only partially freed a few. 
Seeing the statements of Scripture, that the 



Church was to rale and judge the world, 

and losing sight of the "ages to come," all 

predictions were crowded into the present 

age, and the Scriptures were wrested so 

as to make the prophecies of Christ's 

Millennial reign applicable to their popes 

who represented him as his vice-gerents. 

And the promises made to the overcoming 

saints, they applied to the "clergy" who 

thus constituted a hierarchy claiming to 

be Christ's spiritual kingdom, the Royal 

Priesthood. Carrying out further their self-deception, 

they thereafter recognized only 

this hierarchy or clergy as THE CHURCH, 

and the common believers, who in the 

Apostles' days constituted the church, were 

styled the laity, or children of the church. 

It should be remembered, too, that about 
the same time, the church, having mistaken 
its proper present mission, viz.: the 
selecting of the church, the body of Christ, 
to be in due time joint-heirs with him, 
and having gotten the idea that they were 
now, in this age, enjoying the reign, 
strove to do the new, kingdom work, viz.: 
to convert the world and rule it. They 
therefore baptized the heathen professors 
of Christianity, who really knew nothing 
of Christ, and endeavored to teach them 
morality, which they made impressive 
upon them by forms, ceremonies and 
rituals. And to keep all power in their 
own hands, as well as because these savages 
were unprepared to do so, the right or 
authority to teach was claimed as the 
exclusive prerogative of the church. And 
so say we, that the church and its members 
alone may teach; only we object to their 
definition of true church— "the clergy" 
—and claim the Apostolic definition— all 
consecrated believers in and followers of 
Christ. All such are brethren; all such 
are God's ambassadors; all such are ministers 
(servants) of Christ, head and body, 
each according to his talents. As yet 
there are no "children of the church," 
and there will be none until the church is 
exalted and glorified. The Church complete 
—head and body— is to be the 
"Everlasting Father," or life-giver, and 
all the restored millions will be the 
"children of the resurrection." 

From these erroneous ideas regarding 
the church, Protestants escaped in part 
only. They still organize, and still recognize 
the terms "clergy" and "laity," 



and vest the power and privileges of 
ministry chiefly in the former; and many 
of them still hold the Episcopal or hierarchal 
form of church rulers hip; and 
though under this the "clergy" rules as a 
superior and independent order, yet generally 
the "laity" is recognized as being 
part of the church, and not merely "children 
of the church." They have reformed 
this much at least over the great apostasy, 
of which the Church of Rome is the only 
full representative to-day. 

The mistake started with the supposition 
that when the church obtained influence 
with the Roman Empire, it was being 
"set up" in power by God, to rule the 
world. It was really set up by Satan, as 
clearly shown in the book of Revelations, 
to deceive the nations, and if possible the 
very elect. How well his plan succeeded, 
let all judge. 

The Reformers partially discovered this 
error among the many others they had 
received for hundreds of years, through 
the teaching of those they had, as taught, 
long revered as specially authorized exponents 
of the truth and successors of the Apostles, 
divinely inspired by the laying on of 
the holy (?) hands of the claimed Apostolic 
succession, communicating the holy spirit. 
Luther distinctly pointed out that all consecrated 
children of God are prospectively 
members of the "Royal Priesthood," of 
which Christ Jesus alone is the head or 
High Priest, and consequently that all have 
the same authority now to offer up their 
lives and talents in the service of God, 
of his truth and his children— every man 
according to his several ability or talents, 
carrying out the example and teachings of 
the Lord and the Apostles, who in no 
age have had successors. They remain 
with us ever, represented by their words 
and examples. 

So then we can say truly that legitimate 
children of God, begotten not of pride 
and formalism, nor in any sense of the 
will of the flesh, but begotten of God by 
His Word of truth, are to be found to-day 
and can be readily identified, not 
by titles or gowns, but as the early church 
of priests was identified— by their love 
for the truth (John 13:35.) and by their 
sacrificing for it and for all those who love 
and serve the truth. (Gal. 6:17; 1 Cor. 9:12; 
Col. 1:24.) 



(5.) If we grant this claim of our correspondent, 
it destroys his entire argument; 
for, to say that God established the 
"clergy" and, by the laying on of hands 
of the Apostolic succession, specially 
commissioned them, and them only, to 
feed the flock, and then to admit that some 
of these specially consecrated ones are 
"wolves," is to charge God either with 
giving them a bad spirit, or else with 
selecting and placing over the true flock 
false and improper teachers. We prefer 
to explain the prominence of these 
"wolves" in control of sheep, in the light 
of the inspired explanation of the Apostle 
Paul, who said: "For I know this, 
that after my departing shall grievous 
wolves enter in among you, not sparing 
the flock. Also of your own selves shall 
men arise, [to influence and authority as 
teachers,] speaking perverse things, to 
draw away disciples after them [and their 
systems]. Therefore watch" [beware of 
these]. 

Then the Apostle tells what God's 
means of keeping them would be if they 
were faithful— not a sacred order of 
"clergy" puffed up with pride and adorned 
with worldly titles, not wolves in 
sheep's clothing, but he explains: "Now 
brethren, I commend you to God, and to 
the Word of his grace, WHICH IS ABLE to 
build you up, and to give you an inheritance 
[not present, but future] among all 
them which are sanctified" [the true 
Church, the true Priesthood]. -Acts 20:29-32. 

Furthermore, if our brother admits 
under this head (5.) that "many" of the 
membership of the Episcopal Church are 
proud and worldly, does this not prove 
that they are not members of the true 
Church, who are the "blessed, the meek?" 
And since such are members of the Protestant 
Episcopal Church (and others of 
the sort are in all sects), does it not prove 
that none of these professed churches are 
the true Church, but only human organizations 
fashioned somewhat to correspond 
to the true Church of the future? 

And if the "little flock" are those in 
Babylon without the holy hands, and the 
"wolves" are those who have the holy (?) 
Apostolic (?) blessing, and if the true sheep 
get some food, notwithstanding the efforts 
of the "wolves" to withhold it, and if they 
live somewhat consecrated lives even in spite 



of the unfavorable surroundings of "pride 
and worldly trappings"— would they not 
be much better off, and much better able 
to perform their sacrifices to God as Priests 
under Christ our High Priest, by getting 
free and separate from all those hindrances? 

R985 : page 7 

Common sense says, that the true 

would make much more rapid progress if 

rid of those hindrances, and merely associating 

in spiritual things with the truly 

consecrated. 

(6.) One weakness of that great and 
good man, John Wesley, of which all his 
followers (who know of it) are ashamed, 
and because of which Episcopalians in his 
day despised him, was his course in staying 
himself in the Protestant Episcopal 
Church to the day of his death, while 
founding another Church which the Protestant 
Episcopal Church condemns as a 
sect, and would not recognize in her pulpits. 
Thus from your stand-point John 
Wesley stands condemned by his conduct: 
either for not leaving the Episcopal Church 
if it was wrong, or for organizing another 
if it was the true. 

Mr. Wesley, though free from many of 
the errors of the Apostacy, which for 
centuries had blinded and deluded the 
church as well as the world, still clung to 
the error that the "clergy" is a sacred 
class, specially authorized and appointed 
of God to baptize and to administer the 
bread and wine of the Lord's Supper, 
though no such limitation can be found 
in the teachings of Jesus and the Apostles. 
It is only for the "Royal Priesthood," 
and they are as capable of dispensing it 

R986 : page 7 

to each other as of partaking of it. Wesley's 
followers for years were sent for 
baptism and the Supper to Episcopalian 
ministers. As they became numerous in 
America, and especially after the Revolutionary 
War, when many of the Episcopalian 
ministers as British sympathizers 
fled the country, it was found that something 
must be done, or Methodism would come 
to naught. Wesley appealed for years to 
the Bishops of the Protestant Episcopal 
Church to lay holy (?) apostolic (?) hands 



on some of his followers if not on himself, 

to make a bishop for the new associations, 

which up to that time much resembled 

the early church, not even taking a sectarian 

name though called Methodists in 

derision by their opposers, the Episcopalians 

and Presbyterians. Mr. Wesley well 

knew that according to the laws of Episcopacy 

he could not ordain a minister 

—that only a bishop had that authority, 

and he saw that if he could only get one 

bishop ordained in harmony with him and 

his new Church, all would then be smooth, 

and as many ministers could be authorized 

as might be needed; but his appeal was 

in vain. 

Finally as a last resort, Mr. Wesley with 
two others— T. Creighton and R. Whatcoat 
—ministers (not bishops) of the Church 
of England, determined to do the best 
they could to hold to the form of Episcopacy, 
and attach it to the new Church, so 
they met and ordained Thomas Coke a bishop. 
They well knew that they were violating 
the rules and principles of Episcopacy and 
that under those rules ten thousand of the 
"inferior clergy," or ordinary ministers 
could not make a bishop, but they did 
the best they could and made the best 
imitation bishop they knew how, and this 
started the great Methodist Episcopal 
Church of the United States of America. 
On Mr. Coke's arrival a general conference 
was held at Baltimore, and sixty 
ministers who had long been preaching 
Christ were authorized to baptize and to 
officiate at the Lord's supper. These 
were ministers not in the sense of titled 
and honored "clergymen," but in the 
true and early sense of the word ministers, 
namely servants— servants of God and 
his people. 

Let us not be misunderstood; we mean 
no disrespect to Methodists in showing 
that Methodism has only the form of 
Apostolic succession and ordination; on 
the contrary it is our claim that they 
needed not even the form. Each of those 
sixty ministers (servants) of God had 
just as much authority before Mr. Coke 
authorized them, as afterward. They 
needed no such human authority, but 
had it direct from the Head of the Church 
in the Bible, and were only hindered 
from seeing it by the long standing customs 
and superstitions coming down from 



Rome. Every child of God is authorized 

to preach, everywhere, Jesus and the resurrection, 

and to immerse any believer; 

and every believer is invited to partake 

of the emblems of his Lord's body and 

blood in remembrance of him, without 

asking liberty or requiring the assistance 

of any other member of the body. 

We have referred to this in answer to 
proposition six (6.) above, to show that 
the feature of Mr. Wesley's course commended 
by our brother, was the worst 
failure Wesley made. Notice for instance, 
When he believed that divine authority 
lodged in the Episcopal Bishops as the 
representatives of the Apostles, was he not 
wrong in organizing a church contrary to 
their will, and in opposition to their 
authority?— if they had any authority, 
which we deny. 

Our brother is right in saying (6.) that 
the reform of the Episcopal Church has 
"never been done." It itself was a reform 
on a previous system, and hence its 
title Protestant. It protested and rebelled 
against the Church of Rome. It did not 
and could not reform the Church of Rome, 
for the same reason that it cannot be reformed 
from within, viz.: because all 
these systems are so carefully and thoroughly 
organized that a sufficient number of 
those who have the holy spirit of Reform 
could never get into the places of power 
and control. 

Besides, from another standpoint our 
brother's argument is unsound. If we 
concede that our Lord and the Apostles 
authorized and organized the Protestant 
Episcopal Church (which we do not), 
still it would not follow that it must 
triumph, and must be reformed, and that 
from within. The Jewish Church surely 
was organized and authorized by God, 
yet it was not reformed but cast off, and 
only the Israelites indeed gathered out 
into the Gospel favor. Our Lord declared 
the reason that he did not attempt to 
reform Judaism, and why that was not his 
"starting point;" and his wisdom is shown 
by the failure of modern reformers to reform 
present institutions from within. He 
says:— Men do not put a patch of new 
cloth on an old worn out garment, neither 
do men put new wine into old wine-skins, 
for they are not strong enough to hold it 
and the result would be a waste of the wine. 



Our Lord thus illustrates his reason for 
not trying more to put the Gospel into 
the Jewish institutions. New vessels and 
agencies were preferred by the Lord when 
opening up the Gospel age. 

Even so now, he again chooses new vessels 
for the opening work of the Millennial 
age, and for the same reason. He 
even shows us clearly that the closing of 
the Gospel age was foreshadowed by the 
closing of the Jewish age. Now as then 
great nominal Israel is to stumble in her 
blindness and be cast off from all special 
favor; and only the remnant, the faithful 
few, the Israelites indeed, in whom is no 
guile, are to be accepted into the higher 
favor of Millennial glory with Christ. 

(7.) The brother errs here; it is not 
we, but Christ, who calls his people out 
of Babylon. We merely call their attention 
to his words and show that they are 
reasonable. It was the Lord himself who 
said— Let wheat and tares grow together 
until the HARVEST, and who now in the 
harvest himself thrusts in the sickle of 
truth to separate these as he did in the 
"harvest" of the Jewish age. (Matt. 13:30.) 
His work then, as now, was a separating 
work, a gathering of the Israelites 
indeed into harmony with himself, and 
the separation from them of the great mass 
whom he never recognized as his kingdom 
or joint-heirs. Mark that Babylon had 
long been in existence as an abomination, 
and had even become a mother of other 
harlots and abominable systems (all of 
which bear her name— Babylon) and had 
been drunken with the blood of the saints 
and martyrs of Jesus (Rev. 18.), and yet 
it is not until the time of her complete 
overthrow that the message is sent by the 
Lord who is about to destroy her utterly 
(not reform her), saying, "Come out of 
her, my people, that ye be not partakers of 
her sins and that ye receive not of her 
plagues." (Rev. 18:4.) We are not ashamed 
to be the Lord's mouthpieces in this 
timely but unpopular message: and what 
timely truth has not been unpopular? 

But some may object that the Lord and 
the Apostles did not call believers out of 
the Jewish synagogues, but "went into the 
synagogues" and taught the people there. 
(Luke 4:15,44; Matt. 4:23; Acts 9:20; 
13:5.) Ah yes! The Lord and the 
Apostles could go into the synagogues, 



and could teach the people there, for a 
time, but as they shunned not to declare 
the whole counsel of God, they soon 
found little and finally no opportunity to 
teach the people in the synagogues. 
(Matt. 10:17; Mark 13:9; John 16:2; 
Luke 4:28-29; John 9:34.) But could the 
Lord or the Apostles get into the pulpits 
of any of the various divisions of Babylon 
and teach the people? We all know that 
they could not. In the Protestant Episcopal 
Church for them to preach from the 
pulpit and altar would be considered defiling, 
and they would need to be cleansed 
and possibly re-consecrated. To get into 
such office and privilege of teaching the 
people, they would require the holy Apostolic 
blessing from three bishops, or at least 
from one. And none could be found who 
would dare install either the lowly, untitled 
Nazarene, or the tent-maker of Tarsus, 
or any who humbly follow in their 
footprints. 

The system of Babylon is much more 
thorough than that of the Scribes and 
Pharisees. Law and custom has so hedged 
the sheep about, that only the regular 
shepherds have access to them to feed 
them. And the "Clergy" has so exalted 
its office and power, that it can and does 
keep out all whom God could or does use 
in feeding to the sheep "meat in due 
season." Hence the Master, the great 
Shepherd who bought the sheep, needs 
now to call his sheep "out," because they 
cannot be rightly fed while in these man-made 
systems, as our Brother admits in 
proposition (5) five. 

But this Brother and many others err 
in supposing that we or the Lord are calling 
the "little flock" into confusion and 
beyond the bounds of all authority. Not 
so; while the nominal human institutions 
have continually had trouble about their 
organizations, and have been continually 
trying to get rightly organized, as the 
names "Protestant," "Reformed," "United," 
etc., etc., indicate, the true Church 
has had no such trouble, but has had a 
temporary organization all the time. God 
has this organization under his charge. 
"The Lord knoweth them that are his," 
and their "names are written in heaven," 
and such only who prove unfaithful are 
ever blotted out. No "wolves" are of 
that organization and its teachers are the 



Lord and the Apostles only. They teach 
by the Word, using the various members 
of the "body of Christ" in building up 
and strengthening one another through 
that Word. All are led of the spirit, and all 
are priests ministering and sacrificing daily. 

Oh no! We want none to come out of 
this organization, this true tabernacle, in 
every lively stone of which, God through 
his spirit operates. Thus seen, we have 
something much better than the Babylon 
confusion with its attempted, but only 

R987 : page 7 

slightly successful reforms, to offer to the 
saints, the "little flock"; but we have 
nothing whatever to offer to the proud, 
worldly-minded masses of Babylon now. 
Their imitation churches will all fall, being 
"cages" of unclean birds. (Compare 
Rev. 18:2 and Matt. 13:4,19.) We 
can only promise them something much 
better than their present systems and 
Kingdoms,— after the "little flock," the 
true Gospel Church, is glorified. Then 
they will be taught better than the "many 
wolves," and the machinations of the 
devil blinding them, will now permit. 
They will come to a knowledge of the 
Lord and can then worship him in spirit 
and in truth, and not as now, draw nigh 
with their lips, while their hearts are far 
from him. 

"Love not the world, neither the things 
of the world" [the World's churches, etc.] 
says the Master, and so we urge. As saints, 
seek not the favor of men, but of God 
only, and learn of him. Hear his voice 
and come out of Babylon into the sunlight 
of truth, into the green pastures where 
the good Shepherd leads. He declares, 
"My sheep hear my voice and they 
follow [obey] me!" 



R987 : page 7 

WHAT THE CZAR WANTS. 

A French traveler in the East has discovered, 
according to The Wiener Tagblatt, 
the ultimate aim of the Czar's 
policy. He would be glad enough to 
obtain Constantinople, but the real object 



of his ambition is to become "the Pope 

of Jerusalem." The war of 1054, the 

French observer remarks, had its germ in 

the quarrels over the Holy Places in 

Palestine, and was a continuation of the 

conflict between East and West which the 

crusades left still unsettled. "Every step 

of the Russians towards Constantinople," 

says he, "is a step toward Jerusalem. It 

is of great significance that the Emperor 

Alexander III. confides much more upon 

the power of religious enthusiasm than 

either of his predecessors did." He 

wishes to procure a more officious and 

ostentatious consecration of his religious 

authority, and to have his position emphasized 

as the supreme Protector of the 

Eastern Churches and the Orthodox Faith, 

and so rally all the Greek-Oriental 

Churches and peoples around the person 

and office of the Czar as the Constantine 

and Justinian of the modern world. This 

bold project has been long in preparation, 

is never lost sight of in any diplomatic 

movement, and no sacrifice of money is 

thought too great to secure this end. 

"Numbers of settlements of Eastern 

monks, of apparently harmless and unpretending 

character, have been and are 

being founded, and Russia finds the money 

for the purchase of the land. Aid and 

counsel are always to be had from the 

Russian authorities. The European 

powers restrict their attention too one-sidedly 

to the movements on the Bosphorus, 

and ignore the extraordinary but 

quiet movements in the Holy Land." 

Two of the Vienna papers— The Politische 

Correspondenz and The Wiener Tageblatt 

R987 : page 8 

—appear to put some faith in the 

Frenchman's observations and predictions. 

The latter has no doubt that the 

Czar would hold a coronation on the site 

of the Holy Sepulchre of the world's Redeemer, 

to be the highest possible consecration 

of his authority. "Many imagine 

that Alexander III. reckons much upon 

being crowned Emperor of Asia in Samarkand; 

but to have the crown of Asia 

set upon his head in the mother city of 

Christendom corresponds much more to 

his character and to the thoughts which 

he cherishes in the stillness of Gatschina." 



-Pall Mall Gazette. 



R987 : page 8 

SUGGESTIVE. 

A Presbyterian minister writes:— 
"In all defences I have seen, of the old 
dogma of eternal, endless torment, I 
think there is not one, even of those that 
claim to prove the doctrine from the 
Scriptures, in which there is not at least 
ten times as much of argument to show 
that the inspired Word must be so understood, 
as there is of solid quotation from 
the Word itself. Where so much pounding 
with the hammer of human reason is 
required to shape God's Word into conformity 
to a traditional or preconceived 
theory, or to weld something upon that 
Word to supply a supposed deficiency, are 
we not justified in challenging the right of 
such a doctrine to demand our acceptance? 

Let the explicit declaration of the 
Westminster Confession and Catechism 
be written on one side; on the other side 
place all the Scripture references or proof 
texts, with any other passages, that bear 
on this subject. Now is there any one 
in his right mind who will look carefully 
at the language on both sides, and then 
affirm that these form an equation? or 
that they can be made equal without adding, 
subtracting or transposing? And 
dare any Christian claim authority thus 
to tamper with God's Word?" 



Another says:— "Until the Church realizes 
that there is something worse even 
than being 'agitated;' until it is forced 
into a position where crying 'peace, 
peace,' when there is no peace, will be 
impossible, the real questions at issue will 
be held in the background, and as at 
Andover, the decision will be not upon 
the merits of the truth at stake, but upon 
the conformity of one's teaching to the 
artificial standards, conventionally 
interpreted. " 



R987 : page 8 

PROFESSOR BRIGGS' VIEWS 

ON CHURCH UNION. 

"Another great barrier to the reunion 
of Christendom is subscription to elaborate 
creeds. This is the great sin of the Lutheran 
and Reformed churches. Every 
one of these churches has separated subscribers 
from non-subscribers and occasioned 
the organization of dissenting 
churches. Lutherans, Calvinists and Arminians, 
and sections of the same, have 
been separated into different ecclesiastical 
organizations. These doctrinal divisions 
have done more than anything else to 
weaken Protestantism and stay its progress 
in Europe. ...These differences 
cannot be solved by conquest, but only 
by some higher knowledge and better adjustment 
of the problems involved through 
an advance in theological conception and 
definition. The question now forces itself 
upon earnest men whether these differences 
justify ecclesiastical separation, 
and whether they may not be left to battle 
their own way to success or defeat 
without the help of ecclesiastical fences 
and traditional prejudices.... 

Progress is possible only by research, 
discussion, conflict. The more conflict 
the better. Battle for the truth is infinitely 
better than stagnation in error. Every 
error should be slain as soon as possible. 
If it be our error we should be 
most anxious to get rid of it. Error is 
our greatest foe. Truth is the most precious 
possession. There can be no unity 
save in the truth, and no perfect unity 
save in the whole truth and nothing but 
the truth. Let us unite in the truth already 
gained, and agree to contend in 
Christian love and chivalry for the truth 
that has not yet been sufficiently determined, 
having faith that in due time the 
Divine Spirit will make all things 
clear to us." 



R979 : page 8 

PROGRESS IN KNOWLEDGE. 



This is the law of the church's progress 
and growth. When a Christian, or a 
church, becomes convinced that it has 
nothing more to learn, there follows stagnation 
and decay. And yet what else 
than this is the prevalent assumption that 
all Bible truth is locked up in our Confession 
of Faith, and that it is a heresy 
and crime to think beyond it? No greater 
mistake was ever made by Reformed 
churches than this quenching of the 
Spirit in the body of Christ, by the denial 
to its members of the liberty of progressing 
beyond the limits of their creeds. 
Confessions are good for purposes of 
instruction, but not to bind the conscience. 
Enforced creeds should content 
themselves with stating only the great 
facts and primary beliefs of Christianity, 
as they are given in the language of 
Scripture, such as "I believe that Jesus 
Christ is the Son of God." "I believe 
that He died for our sins, according to 
the Scriptures, and rose again the third 
day, according to the Scriptures." Human 
formulas, founded upon these facts, 
and explanatory of them, should always 
be held open to amendment, as God may 
bestow increasing light until we all come 
to the unity of the faith and of the perfect 
knowledge of the Son of God.— Words 
of Reconciliation. 



R987 : page 8 

SCOTLAND'S THREE "PROTESTANT" 
EPISCOPAL CHURCHES. 

The "Evangelical Advocate" of Edinburgh 
states that there are now three 
separate Protestant Episcopal church bodies 
in Scotland. 

The Scotch Episcopal Church, or as it 
is called The Episcopal Church in Scotland, 
is the Sacerdotal and Ritualistic 
portion of the Episcopal Churches in 
Scotland. Within its communion the most 
rampant Ritualism is in full practice, and 
it varies little from the practices and doctrines 
of the Church of Rome. It stands 
wholly on its own account, without any 
connection or affiliation with the other 
churches. 

Another portion of Episcopal Churches 



which may be called the Church of England 
in Scotland, maintaining purity of Evangelical 
doctrine and church administration, 
are in connection with the Church of 
England, under Bishop E. H. Beckles D.D. 
(the late Bishop of Sierra Leone), put 
into that position to keep the protestants 
from leaving the church's communion. 

And another portion is known as the 
Reformed Episcopal Protestant Church of 
England in Scotland. 

In the year 1873, ten thousand English 
Protestant churchmen, with Bishop Gregg 

R988 : page 8 

broke off from the church (not however 

in the way of schism) and formed a Reformed 

Church of England, and in 

January of 1880 the St. John's Episcopal 

Church, Dundee, Scotland, decided by 

the unanimous wish of the incumbent 

church-wardens, trustees, vestry, and congregation 

to place the church under the 

jurisdiction of the bishops of the Reformed 

Church of England, and this has had 

its effects upon other similarly circumstanced 

churches objecting to Sacerdotalism 

and Ritualism, thus forming the third 

Protestant Episcopal Scotch Church. 

—The Christian Family Annual. 



R988 : page 8 

MANIFESTO OF REFORMED CHURCH 
OF ENGLAND. 

EXTRACTS. 

We are Old-Fashioned, Evangelical and 
Protestant church people. We love the 
"old paths." We are not schismatics; 
but as the Church of England once rejected 
Romish error and separated therefrom, 
so now we reject those same errors which 
are destroying the spiritual fabric of the 
Church of England. 

Even at the risk of the charge of not 
"sticking to the ship," we prefer to adhere 
to our principles— rather than be carried 
to Rome by a church which is rapidly 
losing her Protestant character. 

We bear a relation to the Church of 
England similar to that which the Church 



of England bears to the Church of Rome. 
The reasons which the Church of England 
had for her separation from Rome three 
centuries ago, are our reasons for our separation 
from the Church of England to-day. 

Our mission is to complete the work 
of the Reformation which was then so nobly 
begun.— Ref. Church of Eng. Record. 



R988 : page 8 

HOW TO PREACH TO JEWS. 

The biographer of Mr. Leigh Richmond 
one day submitted to him the following 
question: "What is the Scriptural and 
right way to preach to the Jews?" "I 
know of no scriptural way," he replied, 
"of preaching to men, otherwise than as 
sinners; and why the Jews, whose sins 
are of so aggravated a nature, should be 
dealt with in a different way, I do not see. 
I would address the Jew as I would address 
any other man, that is, as a sinner; and 
till he is convinced of his sin, he will 
never believe in a Saviour. 'Christ Crucified' 
is declared to be, 'To the Greeks 
foolishness, and to the Jews a stumbling 
block; but to them that believe, the power 
of God and the wisdom of God.' No 
man will ever feel the power of God, 
whether he be Jew or Gentile, till he 
learn it at the foot of the cross." 



page 8 

MORE GOOD NEWS. 



TOWER PUBLISHING CO., 
GENTLEMEN: -The MILLENNIAL DAWN 
was handed me, by Captain A. C. Bowman, 
with a request for me to read it. 
The grip of tradition was upon me, and I 
had settled down to the current idea that 

"There is no death! what seems so is transition; 

This life of mortal breath 
Is but a suburb of the life Elysian, 
Whose portal we call death." 
I therefore commenced reading the 
volume, with a certain amount of prejudice; 
but ere I had finished the first chapter 
I perceived the pure, straightforward 



character of the writer and determined to 
give him that attention, his manifest honesty 
warranted. I resolved to note my 
objections as they occurred, and watch if 
his theory met and disposed of them, ere 
conclusions were formed. As I advanced 
the mist of tradition vanished, and the 
sunlight of God's purposes began to shine 
through the rifts of the dark, melancholy 
clouds with which tradition has obscured 
our understanding of the Bible. By the 
time my first reading was finished, I had 
become so interested, that I commenced 
a second reading, with my Bible at my 
side; so that every citation, and its connections, 
was examined and referenced. 
As I advanced my objections grew beautifully 
less, then smaller still. I was perfectly 
astonished, as I traced the Millennial 
promise from its first faint glimmer 
into the glorious sunlight of God's immaculate 
word. 

Since I have read the first volume, I 
have felt more at ease and more hopeful 
than I ever did before. A new light falls 
upon the Bible that dispels the darkness 
of mystery. I can now think of God as the 
center of love. I now feel that I can (as far 
an humble mortal is capable) comprehend 
Him. I no longer regard the Bible as 
dry and irksome, but can feel its wondrous 
utility. I never felt this or knew 
it before— it is a new light, a Helping 
Hand for which I feel a thankfulness. 

I want to have all the facts of the first 
volume fully established in my mind, and 
for that purpose, I propose to give it a 
diligent third reading. I want to get at 
the very corner stone of its ideas. I want 
removed from my shoulders entirely the 
traditional weights that I feel have hanged 
about me for years. 

I have talked much about the MILLENNIAL 
DAWN with persons of intelligence, 
since I began its reading. Some priest-ridden 
persons reject it, but I find its 
ideas a joy to many. I traveled for fifteen 
miles across my county, a few days since, 
with a gentleman, and shortly after joining 
him I remarked, I have been lately 
reading the MILLENNIAL DAWN, the most 
wonderful book of our day. I gave him 
its outline and he eagerly continued the 
conversation through our three hours ride. 
The next day I luckily had another friend 
to make a part of the return ride with. 



I mentioned the book as before, and the 
gentleman soon became interested, and 
we discussed it up to our parting. He 
then invited me to go to his community 
and lecture upon the subject, which I 
promised to do, when I thoroughly investigated 
the whole subject. I thank you a 
thousand times for having placed this 
book in my hands and will be glad to have 
the second volume on any terms. 
Respectfully yours, J. R. PHILLIPS. 



R988 : page 1 

VOL. IX. PITTSBURGH, PA., NOVEMBER, 1887. NO. 3. 



page 1 

SOME orders for the Missionary envelopes 
have been delayed. We hope to 
have the supply equal the demand 
shortly. Meantime we fill orders in rotation, 
therefore, send soon and wait 
patiently. 



THE SOILED copies of cloth bound M. 
Dawn offered at a reduced price, are all 
gone. We have about 200 copies of the 
paper bound edition more or less scuffed, 
which we will supply at 10 cts each, or 
free to any of the Lord's poor. 



IN ORDER to present a large and comprehensive 
subject in a connected manner, 
we have been obliged to omit many 
very interesting letters intended to be 
published in this number. Our View 
from the Tower is also crowded out. 



R989 : page 1 

THE "ARP SLIPS," of which samples 
were sent you with last TOWER, seem to 
meet with general approval. A sister 
greatly interested expresses the desire that 
these slips might be circulated generally 
among Christian people, believing that 
they would awaken new thoughts in many 
minds, and lead them to study God's plan 
anew, and thus prove an entering wedge 
to let in the true light. She thinks an 
excellent plan would be, to distribute these 
slips Sundays, to church-goers, either as 
they go in or are dismissed after service. 
She donates fifty dollars to pay for printing 
and mailing these, to be used thus, 
the sum to be applied to some one state, 
leaving it for the publishers to decide 
which. 

We think this an excellent plan. Should 



it become a very general it will make quite 
a stir, by throwing cold water [truth] upon 
the "hell-fire teachings." The ministers 
and officious members of churches, will 
doubtless try both arts and threats to stop 
those who engage in this crusade, but as 
the slips are free, and the sidewalks public, 
and the tract a religious one— calling 
attention to the genuine gospel, good 
tidings, there is no cause for either shame 
or fear. Since it is left to us to decide, 
and since "charity begins at home,"— the 
sister is a Pennsylvanian— we apply the 
above donation to the state of Pennsylvania, 
and accordingly invite all the friends 
of the cause in Penn'a., to send in their 
orders for as many as they will use according 
to the plan mentioned. Many can 
serve the cause we love, in this way, who 
cannot preach in any other manner. Take 
a boy or girl to help, where the congregations 
are large. The fifty dollars will 
print and stamp a great many as we now 
have electroplates to print from. 

The above offer must not hinder all 
other readers from using these slips in a 
less extravagant manner among their 
friends, enclosing them with their letters, 
etc., etc. Order freely; we have them in 
packs of pounds, half-pounds, quarter 
pounds and two ounces. Order all you 
can judiciously use FREE. 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO. 



R988 : page 1 

"TO US THERE IS ONE GOD." 

1 Cor. 8:5,6. 

"Hear, O Israel! Jehovah our God is one— Jehovah. 
-Deut. 6:4. 

The word god signifies mighty one, 
but not always the all-mighty one. It is 
used as the translation of each of four Hebrew 
words— el, elah, elohim and adonai 
in the common version of the Bible, all 
signifying, the mighty, or great. It is a 
general name, often and properly applied 
to our heavenly Father, as well as to our 
Lord Jesus, angels and men. 

In Deut. 10:17 elohim is used in referring 
to Jehovah the almighty God, as 



well as to other gods. "Jehovah is a God 
of gods." 

In Gen. 32:24,30, and angel is called 
God— elohim— a mighty one. 

In Judges 13:21,22, an angel is called 
a God, a might one-elohim. 

In Jer. 16:13, earthly heathen kings 
and governors are called "gods," and the 
Hebrew word is the same— elohim. 

In Exodus 7:1 Moses is called a god, 
a might one— elohim. 

In Exodus 21:6; 22:8,9 and 28, the 
word elohim is used evidently to refer to 
the Judges of Israel appointed by Moses, 
because they were mighty ones, or persons 
in authority, and the translators of the 
common version have rendered the word 
judges except in the last instance when 
they rendered it gods. They were 
corrected by those who arranged the marginal 
readings; but it is the same word 
remember— elohim . 

In Exodus 12:12 the princes (mighty 
ones) of Egypt are referred to as gods 
—elohim. See margin. 

In Psa. 82 the distinction of beings referred 
to by the word god, is very marked 
—"God [elohim] standeth in the congregation 
of the might [el]: he judgeth 
among the gods [elohim]." Here the first 
word god evidently refers to Jehovah the 
Almighty One, while the other evidently 
refer to other might ones— the church, 
the sons of God of whom Jesus is the 
head or chief, and of whom it is written, 
(vs. 6,) "I have said ye are gods (elohim); 
and all of you are children of the Most 
High (el yon, the highest God). 

But "though there me [many] that are 
called gods (as there be gods many and 
lords many,) to us there is but one God, 
the Father." (1 Cor. 8:5,6.) The 
Father is the mighty one over all other 
mighty ones— the One God over all. 
None others are might or great, save as 
they received their greatness as well as 
their existence from him. And it is to 
this one fact, that the attention of Israel 
is called in the above words, "Hear, O 
Israel! Jehovah our God is one— Jehovah." 

The word Jehovah is not a general 
name like the word god, but is a proper 
name, the distinctive personal name of 
the Almighty Father, not applied to any 
other being. The name Jehovah, like other 
proper names, should not be translated. 



In our common version of the Old Testament 
its distinctiveness as a name is lost 
by being generally translated LORD. 
Some erroneously suppose that the name 
Jehovah applies also to Christ. We therefore 
cite a few of the many scriptures to 
prove that this name belongs exclusively 
to the great First Cause of all things. 
— Isa. 42:8. "I am Jehovah; this is my 
name, and my glory will I not give to 
another." Exod. 6:3. "I appeared unto 
Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob by 
the name El Shaddai (God Almighty), 
but by my name Jehovah was I not known 
unto them." Psa. 83:18. "That men 
may know that thou whose name alone is 
Jehovah, art the Most High over all the 
earth." Jehovah is frequently declared 
to be the Savior of men because he 
was the Author of the plan of salvation, 
our Lord Jesus being the savior in a secondary 
sense, as the instrumentality 
through whom the plan of Jehovah was 
executed. David makes the distinction 
between Jehovah and our Lord Jesus very 
marked in Psa. 110:1. "The Lord 
[Jehovah] said unto my Lord [adon, Master 
—Christ] sit thou at my right hand 
until I make thine enemies thy footstool." 
Our Lord Jesus and Peter call attention 
very forcibly to this scripture and to the 
distinction made— .See Luke 20:41,44 
and Acts 2:34-36. 

While the Scriptures are very clear concerning 
the distinct individuality and exact 
relationship of Jehovah and our Lord 
Jesus, it seems marvelous that the idea of 
a triune God— three Gods in one, and at 
the same time, one God in three— should 
ever have gained prominence and general 
acceptance. But the fact that it is so, 
only goes to show how soundly the church 
slept while the enemy bound her in the 
chains of error. We believe in Jehovah 
and Jesus and the Holy Spirit, and fully 
accept the fact that our Lord Jesus is a 
God— a mighty one— though we cannot 
accept the unscriptural and unreasonable 
theory7 that he is his own Father and Creator, 
and must reject as totally unscriptural, 
the teaching that these are either 
three Gods in one person, or one God in 
three persons. The doctrine of the Trinity 
had its rise in the third century, and 
has a very close resemblance to the 
heathen doctrines prevalent at that time, 



particularly Hindooism. The only text 
in Scripture which was ever claimed to 
affirm, that the Father, Son and Spirit are 
one God, is a portion of 1 John 5:7,8, 
which reads: "For there are three that 
bear record in heaven, the Father, the 
Word, and the Holy Ghost: and these 
three are one; and there three that 
bear witness in earth, the spirit and the 
water and the blood: and these three 
agree in one." We state an undisputed 
and indisputable fact when we say, that 
this is the only text favorable to the Trinitarian 
view, and the words above in italics 
are a forgery, and were introduced 
here by Trinitarians in the fifth century, 
because there was no scriptural statement 
to support their theory, which was then 
becoming popular. Trinitarian themselves 
admit this, and in all recent translations 
the forged spurious words are 
omitted. See the "Diaglott," "Young's 
Translation," the "Revised Version" and 
the "American Bible Union Translation" 
and "Improved Version." The latter 
says:— 

"This text concerning the heavenly 
witnesses is not contained in any Greek 
manuscript which was written earlier than 
the fifth century. It is not cited by any 
of the Greek ecclesiastical writers; nor 
by any of the early Latin fathers, even 
when the subjects upon which they treat 
would naturally have led them to appeal 
to its authority: it is therefore evidently 
spurious." 

It will be observed that the sense is 
complete without the interpolated words 
italicized above, and the teaching in perfect 
harmony with the context, which 
would not be the case were the interpolated 
words admitted. The inspired 
Apostle is showing that the "Son of God 
is he that came by water and blood," to 
be the Redeemer of mankind; that is, he 
came by baptism into water, the symbol 
of his full consecration even unto death, 
and also by blood, the actual fulfilling of 
his consecration vow, even unto death, 
the shedding of his blood. He came 
"not by water only [not be consecration 
only] but by water and blood"— both 
the typical and literal baptism into death. 
"And it is the Spirit that beareth witness, 
because the Spirit is truth." (1 John 5:6.) 
The Spirit of God bore witness after 



the water baptism that this was his well 
beloved Son in whom he was well 
pleased. (Matt. 3:17.) And again after 
his baptism unto death the Spirit bore 
witness to his still being the well beloved 
Son, in raising him from death and highly 

R988 : page 2 

exalting him to the right hand of power. 
Thus as verses 7 and 8 assert, There are 
three that bear witness that this Jesus is 
the Son of God— the Spirit, the water, 
and the blood. The testimony of the Spirit, 
as well as our Lord's consecration, and 
death, in obedience to the Father's plan, 
mark him as indeed the Son of God. 

Touching the rise of the Trinitarian 
view Abbott & Connant's Religious Dictionary 
page 944 says:— 

"It was not until the beginning of the 
fourth century that the Trinitarian views 
began to be elaborated and formulated 
into a doctrine and an endeavor made to 
reconcile it with the belief of the church 
in ONE GOD." "Out of the attempt to 
solve this problem sprang the doctrine of the 
Trinity." Trinity "is a very marked feature 
in Hindooism, and is discernible in 
Persian, Egyptian, Roman, Japanese, Indian 
and the most ancient Grecian mythologies." 

In Lange's Critical Commentary, in 
reference to this spurious passage, we read: 
"Said words are wanting in all the Greek 
Codices; also in the Codex Sinaiticus [the 
oldest known MS.] and in all the ancient 
versions, including the Latin, as late 
as the 8th century; and since that time 
they are found in three variations. Notwithstanding 
the Trinitarian controversies 
they are not referred to by a single Greek 
father, or by any of the old Latin church 
fathers." 

The passage is pronounced an interpolation 
by such authorities as Sir Isaac 
Newton, Benson, Clarke, Home, Griesbach, 
Tischendorf and Alford. 

In Hudson's Greek and English Concordance 
we read: "The words are 
found in no Greek MSS. before the 15th 
or 16th century, and in no early version." 
Says Alford, "unless pure caprice is to be 
followed in the criticism of the sacred 
text, there is not a shadow of reason for 
supposing them genuine." Tischendorf 
says, "That this spurious addition should 



continue to be published as a part of the 
epistle, I regard as an impiety." T. B. 
Woolsey inquires: "Do not truth and 
honest require that such a passage should 
be struck out of our English Bibles— a 
passage which Luther would not express in 
his translation, and which did not creep 
into the German Bible until nearly fifty 
years after his death?" 

Dr. Adam Clarke, the learned Methodist 
commentator, in his notes on this 
passage, says: "It is likely this verse is 
not genuine. It is wanting in every MS. 
of this epistle written before the invention 
of printing, one excepted— Codex 
Montforti, in Trinity College, Dublin; 
the others which omit this verse amount 
to one hundred and twelve. It is wanting 
in both the Syriac, all the Arabic, 
Ethiopic, the Coptic, Sahidic, Armenian, 
Slavonian, &c; in a word, in all the ancient 
versions but the Vulgate; and even 
of this version many of the most ancient 
and correct MSS. have it not. It is wanting, 
also, in all the ancient Greek 
Fathers; and in most even of the Latin." 

John Wesley, the founder of Methodism, 
endeavored to support the doctrine 
of the Trinity, because he supposed this 
text to be genuine: yet in one of his sermons 
from this text, he quoted the words 
of Servetus— "I scruple using the words 
trinity and persons, because I do not find 
those terms in the Bible"— and added, 
"I would insist only on the direct words 
unexplained, as they lie in the text." 
Wesley labored hard to prove the doctrine 
of the Trinity, because he believed 
this spurious passage was genuine, the information 
regarding the ancient manuscripts 
of the Bible being recent. For 
instance at the time of the preparation of 
our King James' or Common Version, 
the translators had the advantage of but 
eight Greek MSS., and none of them 
of earlier date than the tenth century. 
Now, however, there are about 
seven hundred MSS., some of which, especially 
the Sinai tic MS. and the Vatican 
MS. No. 1209, are very old, reaching 
back to the second century. 

Like some other doctrines received by 
Protestants through Papacy, this one is 
received and fully endorsed; though its 
educated adherents are aware that not a 
text of Scripture can be added in its 



support. Nay more, any one who will 
not affirm this unscriptural doctrine as 
his faith, is declared by the articles of the 
Evangelical Alliance to be nonorthodox 
—a heretic. 

However, it behooves us as truth seekers, 
to deal honestly with ourselves and 
with our Father's Word, which is able to 
make us truly wise. Therefore, ignoring 
the traditions and creeds of uninspired 
men and corrupt systems, let us hold fast 
the form of sound words received from 
our Lord and the Apostles.— 2 Tim. 1:13. 

Let us inquire of these standards and 
authorities of the true church, what is 
truth on this subject. Paul answers clearly 
and forcibly,— There is "one God and 
Father of all." (Eph. 4:6.) And again 
he says, (1 Cor. 8:5-6.) "There be 
gods many and lords many, but to us 
there is but one God, the Father, out of 
whom are all things, and we of him; and 
one Lord Jesus Christ through whom are 
all things, and we through him." We 
believe this exactly: All things are of 
our Father: He is the first cause of all 
things; and all things are by our Lord 
Jesus. He, "the beginning of the creation 
of God," (Rev. 3:14.) has been 
the agent of Jehovah in all that has since 
been done. "Without him was not anything 
made that was made." John 1:3. 

Jesus' testimony is the same. His 
claim was that he was "a son," an obedient 
son, who did not do his own will, but 
his Father's who sent him— "not my 
will but thine be done." Again Jesus said 
"The Son can do nothing of himself" 
—"The Father that dwelleth in me, He 
doeth the works." (John 5:19 and 14:10.) 
True, he also said, "I and my 
Father are one," but he shows in what 
sense they are one, by his prayer that 
just so his disciples all might be one. 
(John 10:30 and 17:11.) It is a oneness 
which results from having the same 
mind or spirit, a oneness or harmony of 
heart, plan and action. 

Those do far from honor the Master, 
though they think they do so, when they 
contradict his direct teachings, affirming 
that the Father and Son are one and the same 
being, equal in all respect. No, says 
Jesus, "My Father is greater than I." 
(John 14:28.) And he also says, God is 
not only his Father but ours:— "I ascend 



to my Father and your Father, to my 
God and your God." (John 20:17.) 
A more correct translation of Phil. 2:6. 
given in the Emphatic Diaglott settles 
the question of the Father's supremacy, 
in harmony with other scriptures, such as 
1 Cor. 15:28 and John 14:28. It reads 
thus: "Who though being in a form of 
God, yet did not meditate a usurpation, 
to be like God." See also quotations 
from other translators in Diaglott foot 
note— all giving the same idea. The idea 
here, is the very opposite of equality, as 
conveyed in the King James translation: 
Jesus did not claim equality, nor aspire to 
a usurpation of God's authority. That 
was Satan's claim and effort, who said 
(Isa. 14: 12-14.) "I will exalt my throne 
above the stars of God... I will be like 
the Most High." 

Jesus said: Ye call me Lord and Master 
and ye do well, for so I am; but call 
no man on earth Father, for one is your 
Father, which is in heaven. (Matt 23:9.) 
Peter and Paul convey the same 
thought saying, "The God and Father 
of our Lord Jesus Christ hath begotten 
us." (1 Pet. 1:3; Eph. 3:9-11; Gal. 1:3,4; 
Rom. 16:25-27.) How clear 
and harmonious are these words of our 
standards, and we could quote much more 
in perfect harmony. 

Briefly stated then, we find the scriptures 
to teach that there is but one Eternal 
God and Father— who is "from everlasting 
to everlasting" (Psa. 90:2 and Rom. 16:26,27.) 
—that the one who was the 
beginning of his creation, since called 
Jesus, though inferior to the Father, was 
superior to all other and subsequent creatures, 
in whose creation he was the active 
agent of Jehovah. When a redeemer 
was needed for mankind, in harmony with 
the Father's wish, but not of compulsion, 
the chief and first-created Son of God 
was, by divine power (the philosophy of 
which is beyond our full comprehension) 
transferred to a lower plane of existence 
—the human: he was born and grew to 
manhood— a perfect man. Hence his 
life principle was not derived from the human 
channel, and was not that forfeited 
by the sin of Adam. 

He was a fully developed, perfect man, 
according to the Law, at the age of thirty 
years, and immediately consecrated himself 



as a man to the Father's will, offering 

himself a living sacrifice on our behalf at 

baptism. The sacrifice was accepted, and 

he was filled with the holy Spirit of the 

Father. (Matt. 3:16,17.) The power 

of God came upon him there. (Acts 10:38.) 

This power of God in him, was that 

to which he continually referred. It was 

the same power that was afterward manifested 

through Peter, Paul and others, 

though in Jesus' case it was more marked, 

because he being a perfect man, could receive 

the spirit "without measure," whereas 

all imperfect members of his church may 

have "a measure of the spirit" only. 

When Jesus' sacrificial ministry was 
over, ending at the cross, he had finished 
his work— his work as a man. When 
he arose he was no longer a human being, 
but a "new creature" perfected. Since 
his resurrection, Jesus is a partaker of the 
divine nature, hence he must be of the 
same essence as the Father. This, present 
highly exalted condition of our Lord, 
was given him as a reward of obedience 
to the Father's will. See Phil. 2:8,9. 
This scripture implies that his present 
glory is greater than the glory he possessed 
before becoming a man: otherwise it 
would not have been an exaltation. Now, 
having the divine immortal nature, he 
cannot die. And being thus highly exalted, 
all power in heaven and in earth is 
now given unto him, (Matt. 28:18,) so 
that he is able to save— to awaken from 
death and restore to perfection— to the 
uttermost, completely, all whom he redeemed 
by his precious blood. 

How straightforward and simple is the 
Scriptural statement, compared with human 
traditions. For instance, in what a 
muddle of contradictions do they find 
themselves, who say that Jesus and the 
Father are one person. This would involve 
the idea that our Lord Jesus acted 
the hypocrite, and only pretended to address 
the Father in heaven, when he himself 
was the same Father on earth. Such 
must conclude too, since we read that God 
tempteth not, neither is tempted of any, 
that the temptation of the devil (Matt. 4) 
was only a sham and a farce. So with 
the death of Jesus: The Father is and 
always has been immortal and hence cannot 
die, and if Jesus was the Father, then 
he must have only pretended to die. 



Then all the statements of Jesus and the 
prophets and apostles relative to Jesus' 
death and resurrection are false, and they 
were false witnesses in testifying that God 
raised Jesus from the dead, if he did not 
really die. 

If they admit that Jesus really died, 
they take the other horn of the dilemma; 
for believing that their three Gods are one 
in person, when the person Jesus, died, 
they must all three have died. If they all 
died, who raised them to life? This, too, 
would conflict with the statement of Paul 
(1 Thes. 1:10) that the Father raised up 
Jesus from death; for if the Father and 
Son are the same being, then the Father 
was dead when the Son was dead. 

Shall we thus contradict the Apostles 
and Prophets and Jesus himself, and ignore 
reason and common sense, in order 
to hold on to a dogma handed down to us 
from the Dark Ages by a corrupt apostate 
church? Nay; "To the law and to the 
testimony; if they speak not according to 
this word, it is because there is no light 
in them." (Isa. 8:20.) We thus see that 
the Father and Son are two separate and 
distinct persons, though one in mind, purpose, 
aim, etc., the Son having submitted 
fully to the Father's will and plan in all 
things. 

THE HOLY SPIRIT. 

We next inquire, What saith the Scriptures 
with regard to the holy Spirit? The 
nominal Churches, Papal and Protestant, 
affirm that the holy Spirit is a distinct person 
in the Trinity, and in the same breath 
they also say that these three persons are at 
the same time one person— "a great mystery." 
Yes, truly it is a mystery, such 
as is characteristic of that Babylon, confusion, 
system. But to those who turn 
away from Babylon's traditions to the 
Word of God, all is clear and plain. 

We suggest, that whatever definition of 
the term holy Spirit will meet all known 
conditions and harmonize all passages of 
Scripture bearing thereon, may be understood 
to be the true meaning of the term. 
We will first give what we conceive to be 
such a definition, and then glance at a 
number of scriptures bearing on the subject 
which might be supposed by some to 
conflict with the views we shall present. 



We understand the Scriptures to teach, 
in the manner just suggested, that the 
holy Spirit is not a distinct person, but 
that it is the divine will, influence, or 
power, exercised everywhere and for any 
purpose, at the divine pleasure. God exercises 
his spirit or energy in a great variety 
of ways, using various agencies, and 
accomplishing various results. 

Whatever God does through agencies 
is as truly his work as though he were the 
direct actor, since all those agencies are 
of his creation; just as a contractor for a 
building is said to build a house, though 
he may never have lifted a tool towards 
it. He does it with his materials and 
through his agents. Thus when we read 
that, Jehovah God created the heavens 
and the earth, (Gen. 2:4) we are not to 
suppose that he personally handled it. 
He used various agencies— "He spake, 
and it was done; he commanded, and it 
stood fast." (Psa. 33:6-9.) It did not 
spring instantly into order; for we read 
that time was used in creation— six days, 
which we learn from other scriptures, 
were each seven thousand years long, or 

R988 : page 3 

in all, forty-two thousand years. This will 
be shown in M. DAWN, VOL. II. 

We are told plainly that all things are 
of or from the Father— by his energy or 
spirit; yet that energy was exercised 
through his Son. The Son of God, afterward 
called Jesus, was used in the creation 
of the world. (John 1:3; Heb. 1:8-12.) 
And when we turn to Genesis, 
we find it stated that the power which 
created was God's Spirit— "The Spirit 
of God brooded over the face of the waters." 
(Gen. 1:2.) Hence the only 
reasonable inference is, that it was the 
spirit, energy, will, of Jehovah, active 
through his Son— the plan of God, executed 
by the Son. 

Another way in which God's Spirit 
was exercised was through the prophets; 
They "spoke as they were moved by the 
holy Spirit"— by the will or energy of 
Jehovah. (2 Pet. 1:21.) That is, God 
used them to express his mind, though 
his mind, his spirit, his thoughts, were 
not in them; for though they expressed it 
they could not understand his mind. (1 Pet. 1:12.) 



God's spirit acted upon, 

but not in them. In that servant age 

(Heb. 3:5; Gal. 4:4-7,) the faithful 

servant carried the Lord's message as it 

was laid upon him; but the sons of God 

during this Gospel age are brought into 

fellowship with their Father and made 

acquainted with his plans. Thus they are 

not merely acted upon mechanically, by 

God's spirit or energy, but partake of or 

imbibe his mind or spirit through his 

revelation of his plans to them, which 

they can receive in proportion as they 

submit their own wills and plans to his. 

And having his mind they become co-workers 

together with him in carrying out 

his plans. "The servant," though faithful, 

"knoweth not what his Lord doeth," 

but the confidential son is made acquainted 

with the plans and partakes of 

his Father's spirit and interest in the work. 

The masculine pronoun he, is often 
applied to the holy Spirit, and properly, 
because God, whose spirit it is, is recognized 
as masculine— indicative of strength. 
It is called the holy Spirit, because God 
is holy, and because there are other spirits, 
(powers, influences,) somewhat similar in 
operation, which are evil. God is true 
and righteous, hence the Spirit of God is 
called the "Spirit of truth." It is thus 
contrasted with the "spirit of error," and 
the influence which error exerts. (1 John 4:6.) 
Satan is recognized as the chief 
or prince of evil, during the present 
time, and his influence or spirit is exercised 
in his servants, in much the same 
way that the spirit of God works in his 
children. This is "the spirit which now 
worketh in the children of disobedience." 
(Eph. 2:2.) 

The number seven is often used to 
represent perfection or completeness and 
so we read of the seven spirits of God. 
(Rev. 1:4, and 3:1.) And in like 
manner we read of seven wicked spirits. 
(Matt. 12:45.) The spirit or influence 
of evil proceedeth from the "father of 
lies"; and the spirit or influence of truth 
proceedeth from the heavenly Father. 
-John 15:26. 

Man is to some extent independent of 
either of these influences. He has a mind 
or spirit of his own, (1 Cor. 2:11) but 
he is so constituted as to be subject to 
influence from without, either good or 



evil. In the present time God permits 
evil to triumph to some extent, for the 
testing and development of the "body of 
Christ," and also for the discipline of 
mankind in general. Now, the spirit of 
evil oft transforms itself into an angel of 
light (truth), and what wonder if he puts 
forward the children of disobedience, in 
whom the spirit of error works, and palms 
them off for saints? (2 Cor. 11:14,15.) 
What wonder if, under the guise of greater 
honor to Jesus, he succeeds in deceiving 
many into unscriptural doctrines, thus 
beclouding the mind and covering many 
glorious truths? During this age when 
justified believers fully surrender their human 
mind to God to be moulded and 
fashioned after the divine mind, under 
the guidance and influence of the Spirit 
of truth, they are brought to the divine 
standpoint of purpose, will and aim, and 
thus to this extent of mental conformity 
they become partakers of the divine nature, 
which nature they shall receive in its 
fullness when they have obediently followed 
the Spirit's guidance even unto 
death. 

Thus the consecrated are transformed 
(made new creatures) by the renewing of 
our mind by the holy Spirit of God. 
Thus we are changed from glory to glory, 
as by the Spirit of the Lord. (Rom. 12:2; 
and 2 Cor. 3:18.) This is termed 
the begetting of the spirit: that is, it is 
the beginning of the divine life. Such 
are therefore reckoned as sons of God on 
the divine plane. In surrendering the 
mind, the whole being is surrendered, 
since the mind or will is the controlling 
power. 

Those who resign themselves to God are 
"led of God," "taught of God," and can 
"serve the Lord in newness of spirit." 
They will have a "spirit of meekness" 
and the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
the Father of glory, can give unto them 
the "spirit of wisdom and revelation" in 
the knowledge of him, the eyes of their 
understanding being enlightened; that 
they may know what is the hope of his 
calling, and what the riches of the glory 
of his inheritance in the saints.— 
Eph. 1:17,18. 

By contrast too we can see that as Satan 
is the adversary of God and his saints, 
and his plans to usward, his spirit, mind, 



energy, influence, would be exercised to 
oppose the church. He does not oppose 
openly, but under guise of the Spirit of 
God. As the "spirit of fear" he attacks 
many, and if they follow him, they never 
make progress, but become unfruitful in 
the knowledge and love of God. The 
spirit of fear says, It is a great mistake to 
think that Christ died for all, and it is 
presumption to believe that all will eventually 
be released from bondage to death. 
The same spirit of fear says, Your own 
sins are not forgiven; you are still a miserable 
sinner. Thus does the spirit of 
"error," "fear," and "bondage" give 
the lie to the statements of the Spirit of 
truth, which says, that Christ gave his life 
a ransom for all, to be testified in due 
time (2 Tim. 2:6); that all that are in 
their graves shall hear the voice of the 
Son of man and come forth, (John 5:28); 
and that there is now, no condemnation 
to them that are in Christ Jesus, 
who walk not after the flesh but after the 
Spirit.-Rom. 8:1. 

As the spirit or mind of God leads to 
peace, joy and faith in his promises, the 
spirit of error leads to faith in unpromised 
things, joy in earthly pleasures, 
and peace in slumber. As we read, (Rom. 1 1:8) 
it is a "spirit of slumber," and 
alas, how many have been deluded into 
this condition. Because the influence of 
the spirit of error is exerted in this underhand 
way, it is called a "seducing spirit;" 
and the Apostle assures us, that "The 
spirit [of truth] speaketh expressly, that 
in the latter times some shall depart from 
the [true] faith, giving heed to seducing 
spirits." (1 Tim. 4:1.) To what extent 
Satan has succeeded in seducing God's 
children, and supplanting truth with error, 
all must judge by noting the testimonies 
of the word of truth. 

THE SPIRIT OF THE WORLD. 

This is another name for the seducing 
spirit, the world being largely under the 
control of the spirit of the prince of this 
world. His spirit or influence works in 
and largely controls the children of this 
world. And the spirit or influence of the 
world is one of the mighty levers wherewith 
the prince of this world opposes the 
spirit of truth. 



Alas, how great an influence and how 
strong, is exercised by these evil spirits 
or influences:— the spirit of Satan, the 
spirit of the world under his control— the 
"spirit of Antichrist" (John 4:3), the 
spirit of bondage, of fear, of pride, error 
and sin. Hence the injunction, that we 
test, try, prove the spirits, not by their 
claims and outward appearances, but by 
the word of God. "Beloved, believe not 
every spirit, but try the spirits, whether 
they be of God"— and know "the spirit 
of truth" from "the spirit of error."— 
1 Jno. 4:1 and 6. 

Those having the mind or spirit of God, 
are said to be heavenly or spiritually 
minded. The spiritually minded are so 
transformed, so entirely different from 
their former earthly minded condition, 
that they are called "new creatures." 
However, the new mental creation, or 
transformed mind is still identified with 
the human body— the body of its humiliation. 
But when the earthly house is 
dissolved, sacrificed, dead with Christ, 
we shall have a building of God— a new 
house— a glorious spiritual body, in harmony 
with, and fit for the indwelling of 
the new mind. (2 Cor. 5:1.) As in 
Jesus' case, the new body will be received 
in the resurrection; not by all, 
but by those now mentally or spiritually 
begotten of the spirit of truth. The resurrection 
is the birth of the new creation. 
Jesus was the first thus born. (Rev. 1:5.) 
Thus we reach the perfect spiritual condition 
—spiritual beings, both mind and 
body, and shall be changed into our 
Lord's glorious likeness, (Rom. 6:5) 
who is now the express image of the 
Father's person. (Heb. 1:3.) Such 
things as pertain to the heavenly condition 
and can be seen only by the eye of faith 
through God's word, are called spiritual 
things. 

Now we are prepared to understand 
Paul's teaching in 1 Cor. 2:9-16. "Eye 
hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have 
entered into the heart of man (the natural 
man) the things which God hath prepared 
for them that love him. But God hath 
revealed them unto us by His Spirit, for 
the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the 
deep things of God." That is, having 
the mind or spirit of God, that new mind 
prompts us to search into the deep things 



of God, to study that we may know and 
do his will, as obedient sons. Having 
the mind or spirit of our Father, we will 
take heed to his word and plans, that we 
may work in harmony with him. "For 
what man knoweth the things [mind, 
plans] of a man, save the spirit [mind] 
of man which is in him? Even so, the 
things of God, knoweth no man, but the 
spirit of God."— 1 Cor. 2:11. 

"Now we have received the spirit [or 
mind] of God, that we might know the 
things that are freely given to us of God." 
But "the natural man receiveth not the 
things of the spirit of God, for they 
are foolishness unto him, neither can he 
know them because they are spiritually discerned." 
They are understood only by 
those who have the spirit or mind of God, 
the spirit of his plan, and the spirit of 
the truth. These are more and more 
filled with the spirit of the truth and 
the spirit of obedience to it, not by comparing 
spiritual things with natural things 
as the natural man does, but by "comparing 
spiritual things with spiritual." (1 Cor. 2:13.) 
"He that is spiritual 

judgeth all things"— [he is able to understand 
and properly estimate both human 
and spiritual things] "yet he himself is 
judged of no man." No natural man 
can understand or rightly judge of the 
motives which prompt the spiritually 
minded "new creature" to willingly sacrifice 
things valuable to the natural man. 
Hence we are counted as fools by the 
worldly minded, (1 Cor. 4:10,) by those 
who have "the spirit of the world." 

This mind or spirit of Christ is the 
same as the spirit of God, for Christ sacrificed 
his own spirit, (will) and was filled 
with the spirit of God— "For even Christ 
pleased not himself."— Rom. 15:3. 

Jesus said, "The words that I speak 
unto you, they are spirit and they are life." 
That is, they express the mind or spirit of 
God, in giving heed to which, is life. It is 
for this cause that Jesus said, "Search the 
Scriptures." We are not to merely read 
them as a duty, but to diligently search 
them as a privilege. We must search them 
diligently, to the intent that we may 
know the spirit or mind of God. If we 
would be filled with the spirit of God we 
must drink deeply of the fountain of truth 
—his Word. Our earthen vessels are very 



imperfect and leaky, and it is easy to let 
the spiritual things slip (Heb. 2:1,) in 
which case the spirit of the world, which 
is all around us, quickly rushes in to fill 
the vacuum. Therefore it behooves us 
to live very close to the fountain of truth, 
the Word of God, lest the spirit of God 
be quenched, and we be filled with the 
spirit of the world. But if constantly 
filled from the fountain of truth, we will 
not receive the spirit of the world, but 
the spirit which is of God. And it is 
thus that we may know the things which 
God has in reservation for us— even the 
deep things of God. Thus, we see that 
what the natural man could not know, 
we, receiving the mind, influence, or 
spirit of God, may know. (1 Cor. 2:12.) 
Therefore, "Let the same mind be in you 
which was also in Christ Jesus," for "if any 
man have not the spirit of Christ he is 
none of his."— Rom. 8:9. 

The holy spirit, or mind should not be 
confounded with the fruit of the spirit or 
the gifts of the spirit, though its possession 
always yields fruit— patience, meekness, 
charity, etc. In the beginning of this 
age its possession was often accompanied 
not only by fruit, but also by miraculous 
gifts of teaching, tongues, miracles, etc. 
(1 Cor. 12;) but these have largely 
passed away, as well as their necessity 
—the gift of teaching still remaining because 
still needful to "the body." 

Believing that the foregoing is a consistent 
and correct statement of the Bible 
teaching on this subject, which the scriptures 
quoted, we think, prove, we proceed 
to examine the texts generally supposed to 
conflict with this understanding. It 
should be borne in mind, however, that 
translators of the Scriptures from Greek 
into English were Trinitarians, and naturally 
translated as much in harmony with 
their belief as they could. 

OBJECTIONS CONSIDERED. 

(a) "Quench not the spirit." (1 Thes. 5:19.) 
To quench signifies to extinguish, 
as to extinguish a fire or light. The Greek 
word from which it is translated occurs 

R988 : page 4 

eight times in the New Testament, and in 



every other text it refers to quenching fire 
or light. Carry the thought with you 
—by reason of having God's holy mind 
or spirit, we are called "the light of the 
world" (Matt. 5:14); but if we should 
be seduced into worldliness by the spirit 
of the world, our light would be quenched, 
or extinguished. "If the light that is in 
thee become darkness [be extinguished], 
how great is that darkness!"— Matt. 6:23. 

(b) "Grieve not the holy spirit of God 
whereby ye are sealed unto the day of 
redemption." (Eph. 4:30.) To seal, 

is to mark or designate. The children 
of this world may be distinguished by 
certain marks, and so may the "new 
creatures." The mark of the one class 
is the spirit (disposition, will, mind,) of 
the world; in the other class the seal or 
mark is the spirit (mind, disposition, 
will,) of God. From the moment of true 
consecration to God, the evidence, marks, 
or sealing, may be seen in words, thoughts 
and actions. These marks grow more 
and more distinct daily, if we keep growing 
in grace, knowledge, and love. In 
other words, the spirit (mind) of God, 
becomes OUR mind or spirit in proportion 
as we give up our own will or spirit, 
submitting in all things to the will or 
spirit of God. Thus we are to let or permit, 
the same mind to be in us that was also 
in Christ Jesus our Lord— a mind to do 
only the Father's will. Hence, our new 
mind or spirit is holy or God-directed. 

In this text, the Apostle urges that we 
do nothing which will be a violation of 
our covenant, and thus a grief to the holy 
spirit or mind of God in us, or in other 
words, which would wound our conscience 
as new creatures— "Grieve not the holy 
spirit [mind] of God [in you] whereby ye 
are sealed." 

(c) The spirit of truth— "shall not 
speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall 
hear, he shall speak, and he will show you 
things to come." (John 16:13.) The 
disciples, as Jews and natural men, had 
been looking at things from an earthly 
standpoint, expecting a human deliverance 
and a human kingdom. Jesus had talked 
of the kingdom, but not until now had 

he explained that he must die, and must 
leave them to go into a far country to receive 
the kingdom and to return. (Luke 19:12.) 
Comforting them, he assures 



them of another who would lead them 
and teach them— a Comforter that the 
Father would send in his name, or as his 
representative for a time. They must not 
get the idea that the coming Comforter 
is to be another Messiah, or a different 
teacher; hence he says: "He shall not 
speak of himself;" that is, he shall not 
teach independently and out of harmony 
with my teaching, "But whatsoever he 
shall hear, that shall he speak." That is, 
the same things which I have taught, which 
you have been hearing, he will elaborate 
and teach more fully— "He shall glorify 
me, for he shall receive of mine, and shall 
show it unto you." "All things that the 
Father hath are mine (His plans and my 
plans are all one); therefore, said I, that 
he shall take of mine, and shall show it 
unto you." The new teacher will not 
turn your minds from me to himself— but 
all the teachings of the coming Comforter 
will be in harmony with my teachings 
—and to show you more fully that I am 
the Messiah. Neither might they doubt 
the truth of the Comforter's teachings, 
for it is the Spirit of truth, and proceeds 
from the Father. (John 15:26.) This 
Spirit of truth will be my messenger to 
communicate to you my matters, and shall 
show you things to come. 

Even so it has been: the Spirit of truth 
has been showing to the church during 
this age more and more of the coming 
glory and glorious work of Christ, and 
the depth of riches of God's plans to be 
fulfilled in him. Thus Christ has been 
glorified in the Church. 

Jehovah is the author or Father of 
truth, and all the truth which would reach 
the church and guide it during this age 
would therefore proceed from the fountain 
or Father of all truth, from whom 
cometh every good and perfect gift. He 
has sent it through channels long since 
prepared— the prophetic and typical teachings 
of the past, opened up to us through 
the inspired words of Jesus and the apostles. 
Thus has God's spirit, the spirit of 
the truth, led us day by day and shown us 
"things to come." 

(d) "But the Comforter, which is the 
Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send 
in my name, he shall teach you all things, 
and bring all things to your remembrance 
whatsoever I have said unto you." (John 14:26.) 



Ghost is but another and bad 

translation of pneuma, generally rendered 

spirit. 

The fact that the Father sends the holy 
Spirit shows that it is under his authority, 
just as your powers are under your control. 
(See 1 Cor. 14:31.) Only those who 
have followed in the footsteps of Jesus, 
sacrificing the human will and receiving 
the mind or spirit of God, can understand 
the import of these words of Jesus. 
To the natural man, an explanation of 
this text is impossible; but he who has 
the mind of Christ realizes that it is a 
comfort indeed. No matter how painful 
the crucifying of the flesh may be, we 
have learned to view it all from God's 
standpoint, and to esteem present afflictions 
as light, compared with the glory 
that shall be revealed in us. Thus the 
holy spirit shall be in you; your spirit or 
will having been transformed, made new, 
is now holy. Produced by the truth, 
it is the spirit of the truth and may only 
be lost through your receiving a spirit of 
error, a spirit of slumber, or the "spirit of 
the world," any of which if received will 
quench and drive out the holy spirit of 
truth from our hearts. 

The mind of Christ, or the new spirit, 
leads us to search the Scriptures, God's 
storehouse of truth: Thus the spirit of 
truth works in us. It also enables us to 
comprehend God's Word, for the more 
we can get to see from God's standpoint 
the more reasonable to us does his Word 
become, that we through patience and 
comfort of the Scriptures, might have hope, 
while enduring present afflictions.— Rom. 8:26 
and 15:4. 

(e) "And they were all filled with the 
Holy Spirit and began to speak with other 
tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance." 
(Acts 2:6.) In this case, not 
only were the disciples filled with the 
Spirit or mind of God, which was God 
working in them, but God by his Spirit 
also acted upon them, conferring special 
"gifts," for a special purpose. 

It must seem absurd to every one to talk 
about a person being in several hundred 
persons, but many feel compelled to say 
so, because of their unscriptural theory. 
In thinking of it, every intelligent person 
has to think of the power or influence of 
God in those men, no matter how stoutly 



they say that it was a person who was 
diffused into a number of persons. We 
cannot too carefully discriminate between 
the spirit of God, and these miraculous 
"gifts" by which those acceptable to God 
were at first marked out. These "gifts" 
were for the establishment of the church, 
and were different in different members: 
but they were not to be compared with 
"the fruits of the spirit"— joy, peace, 
faith, patience, love, etc. To have the 
latter proved adoption, but not so the 
gifts, for though a man had gifts of 
tongues and of miracles, he might be 
but a sounding brass and tinkling cymbal. 
The holy Spirit has abode in the members 
of the church throughout the gospel age 
as was promised, though many of the 
"gifts," no longer needful, have passed 
away as the Apostle predicted.— 
ICor. 13:8-11. 

(f) "But Peter said, Ananias, why hath 
Satan filled thine heart, to lie to the Holy 
Spirit, and to keep back part of the price 
of the land?" (Acts 5:3.) Satan had 
filled Ananias' heart with his spirit of 
covetousness. God had filled Peter with 
His spirit, and one of the gifts of God's 
spirit conferred upon Peter, was the gift 
of "discerning of spirits." (1 Cor. 12:10.) 
In verse 3, the lying is said to be unto 
the Holy Ghost (spirit or mind of God) 
and in verse 5, it is said to be unto God. 
The idea is the same, and thus we have 
the term Holy Ghost or Holy Spirit defined 
to be the mind of God, whether in 

the Father, or in his representatives and 
agents— as in this instance in Peter. 

(g) "Then Peter said unto her [Sapphira] 
How is it that ye have agreed together, 

to tempt the Spirit of the Lord?" 
(Acts 5:9.) As with Ananias, so with 
his wife, their lying was reckoned to be 
not to Peter and the church as men, but 
to God whose agent and representative 
through the Spirit, Peter was. 

(h) "But whosoever speaketh against 
the holy Spirit, it shall not be forgiven 
him, neither in this world, neither in the 
world to come." Matt. 12:32. Read 
the context: Jesus had just exercised the 
power of God by casting out a devil. 
The Pharisees saw the miracle and could 
not deny it; but, to turn aside its force, 
they said it was performed by the power 
of the devil and not by God's power. 



But in answer, Jesus claims that he cast 
out devils by the Spirit [influence or 
power] of God. Then he upbraids them 
for being so malicious— a generation of 
vipers, so set on the traditions of their 
church that their eyes were blinded against 
the simplest kind of reasoning. It was 
so plainly evident that the power which 
opposed and cast out evil must be good, 
that they were inexcusable in ascribing it 
to Satan. They might and would be freely 
forgiven for supposing him, as a man, an 
impostor, and hence for blaspheming him; 
but they were wholly inexcusable for that 
gross prejudice which would ascribe such 
a good deed to the power of Satan. This, 
their sin, would not be among those forgiven. 
It must be punished; it will neither 
be forgiven in the present life, nor in the 
next, the Millennial Age; it indicates 
more than Adamic depravity, and must 
have stripes. 

(i) "The Spirit said unto Philip, Go 
near and join thyself to this chariot." 
Acts 8:29. We fail to see in this anything 
demanding another God. We think 
the influence or spirit of God could indicate 
this to Philip in a variety of ways. 
In what way he was influenced is not 
stated and is immaterial to us. 

(j) "The Spirit said unto him, Behold, 
three men seek thee." Acts 10:19. We 
would make the same criticism of this, as 
of the former objection. It is immaterial 
how the power or spirit of God addressed 
to Peter this information; possibly it 
came as an inspired thought into his mind, 
or possibly he was guided by the three 
men's voices and the three visions, and 
accepted these as evidences of the mind or 
will of God as to his going. 

(k) "The Holy Ghost said, separate 
me Barnabas and Saul, for the work 
whereunto I have called them." (Acts 13:2.) 
We are not told in what manner 
the holy Spirit said or indicated the setting 
apart specially of these two. It is 
very probable, however, that they were 
"called," and "set apart" by the holy 
Spirit in much the same manner that all 
true ministers of God are now called and 
set apart. All the fully consecrated— begotten 
—children of God, are called to 
preach, each according to his ability. 
The Spirit says to us all, "Why stand ye 
idle. ..go, ye, also into the vineyard." 



But, where special ability to teach or expound 

God's Word is possessed by any of 

the consecrated that special ability is recognized 

as a special call to the more public 

work of the ministry— the talents possessed 

emphasizing the general call of the 

holy Spirit. 

In speaking of his call to the ministry, 
(Gal. 1:1,) Paul mentions his authority 
as from the Father and Son, but ignores 
the holy Spirit entirely; which would be 
inexcusable if the holy Spirit were a person, 
and in fact, the person actually appointing 
him. But it is consistent enough 
when we regard the holy Spirit as the 
holy influence from the Father or the 
Son, or from both conjointly, as their 
purposes are one. Gal. 1:1 reads, "Paul, 
an apostle, not of men, neither by man, 
but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father, 
who raised him from the dead." 

(1) "For it seemed good to the Holy 
Ghost and to us," etc. Acts 15:28. The 
decisions reached in the matter under 
consideration, seemed to be the judgment 
of the church, and in harmony 
with God's will and plan. 

James, the chief speaker at the council, 
gives the clue to how God's will or mind 
was ascertained then; and we find it the 
same method which we use to-day. He 
argues from Peter's statement of God's 
leadings in the matter of Cornelius, 
and from an unfulfilled prophecy which 
he quotes. The conclusion drawn from 
these, he and all the church accepted as 
the holy Spirit's teaching. Read carefully 
Acts 15:13 to 18. 

(m) "And were forbidden of the Holy 
Ghost to preach the Word in Asia." 
Acts 16:6. Like the others, this text in 
no way indicates that the holy Spirit is a 
person. As to how God's power or influence 
was exercised to direct their course 
away from Asia, we know not, but possibly 
by unfavorable circumstances, or a 
vision. No matter how, the lesson is 
that God was guiding the apostles. An 
illustration of one of the Spirit's ways of 
leading them, is given in the context, vs. 9. 
"A vision appeared to Paul in the 
night. There stood a man of Macedonia, 
and prayed him, saying, "Come over 
into Macedonia, and help us"; and after 
he had seen the vision, "immediately they 
endeavored to go into Macedonia, assuredly 



gathering that the Lord had called 
them for to preach the gospel unto them." 
All these various dealings teach us that 
the methods by which God taught and led 
in those days were not so different from 
those now in use, as some seem to think. 

(n) "Save that the Holy Ghost witnesseth 
in every city, saying, that bonds 
and afflictions abide me." Acts 20:23. 
Nothing here indicates personality. As 
an illustration of the agencies by which 
the holy power of God informed Paul of 
the bonds awaiting him at Jerusalem, 
see Acts 21:11-14. 

(o) "The flock over which the Holy 
Ghost hath made you overseers to feed 
the church of God." Acts 20:28. Paul, 
addressing the church, not the world, 
says, "The manifestation of the Spirit is 

R988 : page 5 

given to every man [in Christ] to profit 
withal"— "GOD hath set some in the 
church, first apostles, secondarily prophets, 
thirdly teachers," etc.— "and there 
are diversities of operations, but it is the 
same GOD which worketh all, in all." 
(1 Cor. 12:6,7,28.) This explains how 
God through his holy Spirit sets men 
apart to various offices which he deems 
needful to the church. It contradicts the 
thought of the holy Spirit being another 
person, and shows that God did the work 
by his spirit. These elders of the church 
had consecrated themselves to the Lord's 
service, and were chosen because of special 
fitness and talents, by their brethren, 
in whom also was the holy Spirit, the 
will of God reigning, to be overseers of 
the flock. And though called to office 
through human instrumentality, they accepted 
the service as of God's direction 
and appointment. 

(p) "God hath revealed them unto us 
by his Spirit, for the Spirit searcheth all 
things, yea, the deep things of God." 
"Which things also we speak, not in the 
words which man's wisdom teacheth, but 
which the Holy Ghost teacheth." (1 Cor. 2:10-13. 
Read the context.) This as 
we have already shown proves that the 
holy Spirit or mind of God in us as his 
children, enables us to comprehend his 
plans, etc., even the deep things of God, 
by coming into full harmony with him 



through his Word. We have also noticed 
the context (vs. 12) where Paul, in explaining 
the subject, tries to make it plain 
by comparing "the SPIRIT, which is of 
[from] God," in us, with "the SPIRIT of 
the world," which influences "the natural 
man." It is clear that the spirit of the 
world is not a person, but a worldly mind. 
The spirit or mind of God in his children, 
is no more a person than is the spirit of 
the world with which it is here contrasted. 

(q) "But the natural man receiveth 
not the things of the Spirit of God; for 
they are foolishness unto him; neither can 
he know them, for they are spiritually discerned. 
Vs. 14. This is a forcible 
statement of what we have already seen. 
A man who is filled with the worldly 
spirit is unprepared to see the "deep" and 
glorious things of God— the things which 
God hath prepared for them that love 
him. This is a close test if applied. Have 
you the Spirit of God? Have you been 
taught by it [through the Word] any 
"deep things" which the natural, worldly 
man cannot appreciate? 

Alas ! how often have we felt the force 
of this distinction between natural and 
spiritual as we have talked with some of 
the professed teachers of to-day, many 
of whom are blind leaders of the blind, 
when they confessed and sometimes boasted 
of their ignorance of "the things which 
God hath prepared for them that love 
him." Thereby they proclaim that they 
have not the mind of God, do not know 
his plans, and cannot have much of his 
Spirit, the spirit of the truth, when they 
have not much of the truth from which 
that spirit flows. The test here given of 
our possession of the Spirit is our ability 
to discern and appreciate the deep things 
of God which are hidden from the worldly 
—"God hath revealed them unto us by 
his Spirit." 

INEXPRESSIBLE GROANINGS. 

(r) "The Spirit itself maketh intercession 
for us with groanings which cannot 
be uttered, and he that searcheth the 
hearts, knoweth the mind of the Spirit." 
-Rom. 8:26,27. 

How much this expression of our Father's 
loving care has been misunderstood 
by his children! Who that has been 



taught that the holy Spirit is a person, 
and as the catechisms state it, "equal in 
power" with the Father, has not wondered 
why it could not utter groanings. 
Many a Christian brother has endeavored 
to make up for this supposed weakness or 
inability of the holy Spirit to express 
itself, by redoubling his own groanings. 
But it would be equally strange if it be 
understood to mean that the holy Spirit, 
as the influence or power of the Almighty 
Jehovah, is unable to express itself. We 
know that in past ages, this influence 
found abundant expression by words and 
deeds of prophets. We know that in 
this age, the apostles all attest of its power 
over them. What can it mean, then 
—"The Spirit itself maketh intercession 
for us with groanings which cannot be 
uttered"? The mistake is, in supposing 
that it is God's Spirit which supplicates. It 
is the spirit of the saints which supplicates 
and often cannot express itself. 

Let us look at the text with its connections, 
and the ground for our conclusion 
will be evident. Paul had just been 
speaking of sin-burdened humanity groaning 
in its fetters. He assures us that they 
shall be given liberty from this bondage 
when the church is selected from the 
world, and when as sons of God the 
great deliverer whom Jehovah raises up 
to bless all the families of the earth is 
manifested in power. (Vs. 19-21.) He 
then passes from the groanings of the 
world to the present condition of the 
church, in which we groan: "Ourselves 
also, which have the first fruits of the 
Spirit, even we groan within ourselves, 
waiting for the adoption."— Vs. 23. 

Our renewed, transformed mind or 
spirit, once worldly, is now holy and 
spiritual, but our bodies are still human, 
and have the Adamic imperfections. 
Hence, we as new creatures, are burdened 
by the flesh, and groan for the 
promised deliverance into Christ's likeness. 
Paul explains how we may, by faith, 
reckon the earthly body dead, and think 
of ourselves as new creatures perfected, 
and thus realize ourselves saved now 
—"Saved by hope" (Vs. 24). Then having 
seen how we may view ourselves, he 
tells us how the matter is viewed from 
God's standpoint— God reckons us "new" 
and "holy"— "spiritual" beings— and he 



recognizes only those deeds of the flesh 
as ours, to which our minds consent. 
God knows when your holy spirit (new 
mind) is willing and your flesh weak. 

As the receiving of the new mind 
brought us into a new relationship to 
God, and into new hopes, so "likewise 
the spirit (our new holy mind) also helpeth 
[maketh up for] our [bodily] infirmities. 
For we know not [even] what we 
should pray for as we ought; [much less 
are we able to do as we would like always] 
but the spirit itself [our holy mind] 
maketh intercession [for us— omitted in 
old MSS.] with groanings which cannot 
be uttered. And he that searcheth the 
hearts [God], knoweth what is the mind 
[Gr. phronema— inclination] of the [our] 
spirit; because he [it] maketh intercession 
for the saints according to the will of 
God." It is God's will that the heart-desires 
of his children be accepted, both 
in prayer and service, and not the imperfections 
of their earthen vessels. 

O, how comforting is this thought! 
How often you have experienced it. You 
were perhaps overtaken in a fault, entrapped 
by some weakness of the human 
nature, and almost disheartened, you went 
to your Father in prayer. You had no 
words for utterance, but you groaned in 
spirit to God— "being burdened." God 
heard you and blessed you, answering 
your unuttered prayer and giving strength. 
Paul's conclusion is ours; we have every 
cause for rejoicing. What shall we say 
then? God is for us evidently; and disposed 
to accept our heart-intentions rather 
than our imperfect prayers and deeds. "If 
God be for us, who can be against us?" 
—Verse 31. 

(s) "The Spirit itself beareth witness 
with our spirit that we are the children of 
God."-Rom. 8:16. 

Nothing in this text teaches that the 
holy Spirit is a person, but the contrary; 
it indicates that as each man has a spirit 
or mind, so God has a spirit. Read this 
text in the light of 1 Cor. 2:11,12, and 
it will be seen that it does not teach of a 
personal holy Spirit. 

THE WITNESS OF THE SPIRIT. 

On few subjects have Christians in general 
felt more disturbed, than on this. 



Not knowing what the witness of the 
spirit is, they know not surely whether 
they have it or not. And some more full 
of assurance than of knowledge, claim 
that they have it, and refer to their own 
changeable feelings as evidence. The 
Calvinist, repudiating the idea of positive 
knowledge of sonship, sings, 
"Tis a point I long to know, 

Oft it causes anxious thought: 
Do I love the Lord or no? 
Am I His, or am I not?" 

This comes from a misapprehension of 
the doctrine of Election. Other Christians, 
equally misunderstanding the subject 
claim that when they feel good, these 
feelings are the witness of sonship. Because 
the Scriptures say, "Thou wilt keep 
him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed 
on thee," they judge of their sonship 
solely by their peace, and often by their 
prosperity. They lose sight of the words 
of Jesus— "In the world ye shall have 
tribulation, but in me ye shall have peace." 

When things move smoothly they feel 
good, and consider this the witness of the 
Spirit. But when they look at the heathen 
and at the worldly, and see that many of 
them have peace of mind too, their supposed 
witness proves insufficient. Then 
the dark hour comes, and they say, How 
easy a matter to be deceived, and they 
sing- 

"Where is the peace I once enjoyed, 
When first I found the Lord?" 

They are in torment lest they have 
grieved the Spirit— for "fear hath torment." 
This is all because of the unscriptural 
view taken of the Spirit and its 
dealings and witnessings. Let us take 
the Bible view of the witness of the Spirit 
(mind) of God, with our spirit (mind), 
and the song of God's children shall be— 

"How firm a foundation, ye saints of the Lord, 
Is laid for your faith in His excellent Word." 

As we would know of a man's mind 
or spirit, by his words and dealings, so 
we are to know of God's mind or spirit 
by his words and dealings. God's word 
is, that whosoever cometh unto God by 
Jesus [consecrates himself] is accepted. 
(Heb. 7:25.) Then, the first question to 
ask yourself is, Did I ever fully consecrate 
myself to God during the acceptable 
time— my life, my time, talents, influence, 
—all? If you can candidly answer before 



God— Yes, I gave myself wholly to him; 
then be assured on the authority, not of 
your feelings, but of God's Word, which, 
unlike your feelings, is unchangeable, that 
you then and there instantly became a 
child of God— a member, a branch, of 
the true vine. (John 15:1.) This is an 
evidence, or witness that you have joined 
the true church, which is Christ's body: 
it is a witness given to your mind or 
spirit, by the testimony of God's spirit 
through his Word. 

Whether you are abiding in him now, 
depends on whether you have grown as a 
branch, and are bearing fruit: "Every 
branch in me that beareth not fruit, he 
taketh away, and every branch that beareth 
fruit he purgeth [pruneth] it, that it 
may bring forth more fruit." Here is 
stated the rule in our Father's family 
—chastisements, pruning, taking away of 
dross, and a development of fruit-bearing 
qualities. If you lack these indications 
of parental care, and personal growth in 
grace, you lack one evidence or witness 
that you are a child. "Whom the Lord 
loveth, he chasteneth, and scourgeth every 
son whom he receiveth. If ye be without 
chastisement, then are ye bastards and 
not sons." (Heb. 12:8.) Afflictions 
and troubles come upon the world as well 
as upon the Lord's saints, but are not 
marks of sonship except to those who have 
fully consecrated to his service. Nor is 
the pruning and chastising in the divine 
family always the same. As with earthly 
children, so with God's children: to some, 
a look of disapproval, to others a word of 
rebuke is an all-sufficient reproof, while 
others must be scourged repeatedly. An 
earthly parent rejoices most in the child 
so obedient and submissive that a look or 
word is sufficient to prune off evil; and 
so does our Father in heaven. Such are 
those who judge themselves, and therefore 
need less of the chastising of the 
Lord. (1 Cor. 11:31.) To be of this 
class, requires a full consecration; and 
these are the overcomers deemed worthy 
of being joint-heirs with Jesus Christ 
their Lord, whose footsteps they thus follow. 
To this obedient, watchful class, 
the Lord says, "I will guide thee with 
mine eye." Those who can only be 
guided by the scourge are not the overcoming 
class, destined to be the Lord's 



bride. 

The chastening however is not always 
suffering for our faults, but with the saints 
it is often the suffering which strict adherence 
to their covenant of sacrifice involves. 
Even so our Lord was chastened 
for our transgressions, not his own, because 
he bore the sins of many. And so we 
must suffer as joint sacrifices with him. 

Here is one testimony of the Spirit 
then— that every true child or branch 
needs, and will have continual pruning. 
Are you being pruned? If so, that is an 
evidence of your being a branch; in this 
pruning the Spirit of truth bears witness 
with your spirit that you are a child. 

Again the Spirit witnesseth that "whosoever 
is born [begotten] of God sinneth 
not." (1 John 5:18.) Such may be 
overtaken in a fault, may err in judgment, 
be overpowered by the old nature 
not yet under control, but will never sin 
willfully— will never willfully transgress 
God's will. Now can your mind answer 
that you delight to do God's will and 
would not willingly violate or in any way 
desire to oppose it, but would rather have 
his will done, his plan carried out, even 
though it should dash your former hopes 
and break every tender tie? If so, the 
witness of your spirit, or mind, agrees 
with the spirit of truth, indicating that 
you are a child of God, acceptable to him. 

The witness of the Spirit is, that the 
true branches of the vine, like the vine 
Christ Jesus, are not of the world— "If 
ye were of the world, the world would love 
his own, but because ye are not of the 
world, therefore the world hateth you." 
"Yea and all that will live Godly in Christ 
Jesus shall suffer persecution." (2 Tim. 3:12.) 
Does your mind testify that it 
is thus in your experience? If so, then 

R988 : page 6 

the Spirit of God again witnesseth with 

your spirit that you are his child. Remember 

that the world spoken of by Jesus, 

included all worldly-minded ones, all in 

whom the spirit of the world has a footing. 

In Jesus' day, this was true of 

the nominal Jewish Church. In fact 

all of his persecution came from professors 

of religion. Marvel not if you 

should have a similar experience. It was 



the chief religionists of his day, that called 
Jesus Beelzebub, a prince of devils; and 
he tells us, "If they have called the master 
of the house Beelzebub how much more 
shall they call them of his household." 
(Matt. 10:25.) If Jesus had joined hands 
in their Phariseeism he would not have had 
"hatred" and "persecution." Even had 
he kept quiet and let their hypocrisies, 
shams, long prayers and false teachings 
alone, he would have been let alone and 
would not have suffered. So it is with us, 
it is from a similar class that the truth 
and those that have the spirit of the truth, 
and who let their light shine, now incur 
"hatred" and "persecution." If we have 
this witness it is another witness of the 
Spirit, that we are overcoming the spirit 
of the world— therefore the worldly 
spirited hate you. 

The Spirit witnesseth that whosoever is 
ashamed of Jesus and his words, of him 
shall he be ashamed. (Mark 8:38.) Does 
your spirit witness that you are one whom 
he here promises to confess? If so, rejoice; 
this is another good witness of the Spirit 
that your present standing is that of a 
child and heir. 

The Spirit witnesseth that "Whosoever 
is born [begotten] of God overcometh the 
world: and this is the victory that overcometh 
the world, even our faith." (1 John 5:4.) 
Is this your experience? 
To overcome indicates that you are not 
in harmony with the world, its spirit, and 
its methods. Have you this witness that 
you are overcoming the world? Wait a 
moment— you are not to overcome the 
world by flattery, nor by joining in its 
follies, nor are you to overcome the world 
by teaching a Sunday class, or joining a 
sectarian church— no; but by your faith. 
If an overcomer, you must walk by faith, 
not by sight. Looking not at the things 
that are seen— popularity, worldly show, 
numbers, denominational greatness, etc.; 
but looking at the things which are not 
seen— the crown, the throne, the church 
whose names are written in heaven— the 
eternal things.— 2 Cor. 4:18. 

Again, the Spirit witnesseth that if 
you are a child of God, you will not be 
ignorant of his Word, and will not only 
be in the light as to present truth, but 
that you should know something about 
"things to come." The maturing child 



will grow in grace, knowledge, and love, 
adding daily the graces of the Spirit 
—faith, virtue, knowledge, charity, etc. 
And surely "if these things be in you 
and abound, they make you that ye shall 
neither be barren nor unfruitful in the 
knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. But 
he that lacketh these things is blind and 
cannot see afar off, etc.... For if ye do 
these things ye shall never fall, for so an 
entrance shall be ministered unto you 
abundantly, into the everlasting kingdom 
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ." 
(2 Pet. 1:5-11; compare John 16:12-15.) 
Ask yourself whether you have 
this witness of growth, and the sort of 
fruit mentioned. Remember too, that 
you cannot grow in love faster than you 
grow in knowledge; and you cannot grow 
in favor, except by complying with God's 
instructions. This instruction, this knowledge, 
is found in his Word. Hence, we 
are exhorted to "search the Scriptures," 
that we may be thoroughly furnished unto 
every good work.— 2 Tim. 3:17. 

These are the witnesses of the Spirit by 
which we may know perfectly just how 
we stand. You may be a young sprout 
in the vine; then, of course, God does 
not expect much fruit instantly; but there 
should be the budding at once, and soon 
the fruits. And if you are a developed 
and advanced Christian, every testimony 
of the Spirit above cited should witness 
with your spirit. If in any of these testimonies 
of the Spirit, you find yourself 
lacking, give diligence, give earnest heed, 
that you may possess every experience described. 
Then you will no longer sing— 

"Tis a point I long to know," etc., 
but will know, and be rooted and 
grounded, built up and established in 
the faith. In this divinely arranged way, 
we escape from fear and from what Bunyan 
called "Doubting Castle," for our 
trust rests securely on God's promises. 

"When darkness seems to vail his face, 
You'll rest in His unchanging grace; 

His oath, His covenant, and His blood, 
Supporting 'neath the whelming flood." 

JUSTIFIED AND SANCTIFIED BY THE 
SPIRIT. 

"But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, 
but ye are justified, in the name of 



our Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our 
God."-l Cor. 6:11. 

Sanctification means a setting apart 
or separating. Those who are sanctified, 
set apart, fully consecrated to God, must 
first be justified or cleansed from Adamic 
sin by accepting in faith the testimony of 
God, that "Christ died for our sins according 
to the Scriptures." Being then 
justified by faith, we have peace with 
God, and can approach him and begin to 
do works acceptable to God by Jesus 
Christ. The evidence which we have of our 
justification and sanctification, is the testimony 
of the spirit of truth in the Word, 
and the "seal" and "witness" in ourselves 
—our transformed mind. 

The power which enables us to live up 
to our consecration vows, is the Spirit or 
mind of our God of which we receive. 
The Spirit of truth received by the study 
and obedience of our Father's words, gives 
the needed strength for the overcoming 
of the human nature, and the spirit of 
the world. 

To this agree other Scriptures. Paul 
prayed: "The very God of peace sanctify 
you wholly." Peter says, Ye are "elect, 
[chosen] through sanctification [setting 
apart] of the Spirit, unto obedience." 
Again, that the sanctifying power, or spirit 
in us is the spirit of truth, is shown by 
Paul's statement, that Christ sanctifies and 
cleanses the church by the Word. Eph. 5:26. 
Our Lord Jesus prayed: "Sanctify 
them through thy truth; thy Word 
is truth." (John 17:17.) So then, these 
Scriptures taken together, teach as the 
foregoing, that our sanctification is accomplished 
by the spirit of truth, freely imparted 
to the consecrated followers of the 
Redeemer, through the Word of God 
which he has provided for this purpose. 

All thus sanctified are reckoned new 
creatures in Christ, and are addressed as 
"them that are sanctified in Christ." (1 Cor. 1:2.) 
That it is by reason of our 
sanctification of spirit that we are one 
with Christ, is shown by the statement: 
"Both he that sanctifieth and they who 
are sanctified are all of one; for which 
cause he is not ashamed to call them 
brethren." (Heb. 2:11.) Thus it is 
that we are "washed— sanctified— justified 
in the name of our Lord Jesus, and 



by the Spirit of our God,"— the spirit of 
the truth, communicated to us through his 
Word. 

THE SPIRIT WILL REPROVE THE WORLD. 

"When he ['the Spirit of truth 1 ] is 
come he will reprove the world of sin, 
and of righteousness, and of judgement." 
John 16:8-11. 

Many have the wrong idea, and suppose 
that the holy Spirit operates in sinners 
for their reformation. This is not 
the right view. The spirit of God is not in 
the children of this world. Theirs is "the 
spirit of the world." The "spirit of the 
world," or "the carnal mind, is enmity 
against God." The Spirit or mind of God 
is in believers only. Hence wherever we 
find it, it is a seal, or mark of sonship— "By 
whom also ye were sealed after that ye 
had believed the gospel of your salvation." 
(Eph. 1:13.) "If any man have 
not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of 
his." The Spirit of God by means of 
its fruits, and its witness through the 
Word, is the evidence of our begetting 
to the family of God; it is "the spirit of 
adoption whereby we cry, Abba, Father." 
(Rom. 8:15.) It must be evident to all 
then, that the Spirit in us, is not the 
spirit which is in the worldly, and that 
the Spirit of God is in no sense in the 
worldly. 

The question arises then, in what sense 
does the Spirit of God— the Spirit of 
truth— the Spirit of Christ— in us, reprove 
the world, in whom it is not? We 
reply that being in us, it constitutes us 
(all the true church) the light of the world. 
It is the light which shines from the true 
Christian, which reproves or condemns 
and opposes the darkness of this world. 
Jesus when anointed of the Spirit of God 
declared, "I am the light of the world." 
And again, "As long as I am in the 
world, I am the light of the world." 
(John 8:12 and 9:5.) Addressing his 
church of this age, sanctified by the same 
holy spirit, he says, "Ye are the light of 
the world"— let your light shine before 
men. (Matt. 5:14-16.) Paul addressing 
the same body of Christ, says, Ye 
were at one time "darkness but now are 
ye light in the Lord; walk as children of 
light." (Eph. 5:8 and 1 Thes. 5:5.) 



"For God... [the spirit of God, the 
spirit of truth] hath shined in our hearts 
to give the light of the knowledge of the 
glory of God." (2 Cor. 4:6.) Thus 
we see that it is the light of God's truth, 
his spirit or mind shining in our hearts, 
which shines out upon the world; and we 
are to "do all things without murmurings 
and disputings, that ye may be blameless 
and harmless, the sons of God without 
rebuke in the midst of a crooked and 
perverse nation, among whom ye shine as 
lights in the world; holding forth the 
word of life."-Phil. 2:15. 

It is, thus, not directly but by a reflex 
light— through those who possess it, that 
the Spirit operates upon (but not in) the 
world; for the natural man receiveth not 
the things of the Spirit of God neither 
can he know them. (1 Cor. 2: 14.) The 
Apostle thus explains the reproving of the 
world by the Spirit in the saints, saying, 
"Walk as children of light.. .and have 
no fellowship with the unfruitful works of 
darkness, but rather reprove them. ...All 
things that are reproved are made manifest 
[shown to be wrong] by the light." 
(Eph. 5:8-13.) The light of God's 
truth, which is the expression of his mind 
or spirit, as it shines through a saint's 
sanctified life, is the holy Spirit reproving 
the darkness of the world, showing 
those who see it, what is sin, and what is 
righteousness, from which they will reason 
of a coming judgment, when righteousness 
will receive some reward and sin 
some punishment. Thus a godly life is 
always a reproof to an ungodly one, even 
where no word of reproof may be possible, 
or proper. The spirit in you reproves 
them; for if sanctified ye are 
"living epistles known and read of all 
men." 

But "if the light that is in thee be 
[become] darkness, how great is that 
darkness?" This is the condition of the 
nominal church systems— "Babylon." 
Because they have taken the creeds and 
traditions of men, they have the "spirit 
of fear" and of "bondage." Because 
they have neglected the word of the 
Lord, the word of truth, they have lost 
the "spirit of truth" and received the 
"spirit of error." Because they have lost 
the spirit of truth, they have lost its sanctifying 
power, and have become imbued 



with the "spirit of the world" and the 

spirit of error: hence the light to reprove 

the world no longer shines out from them. 

As a natural result, the worldly feel themselves 

very slightly reproved by the nominal 

church and superior to a large majority 

of nominal Christians. 

The true church always has been a 
light in the world; but as with its Head, 
the light has shined in the darkness; and 
though the darkness recognizes the reproof 
of its presence, it comprehends it 
not. Therefore they have always persecuted 
the light-bringers, because they 
knew not our Father, nor our Lord, nor 
his body (John 16:3.) It has always 
been a part of the church's mission to let 
the truth shine through it to reprove 
evil. And this reproof has always been 
chiefly to nominal systems and nominal 
professors, as were our Lord's reproofs. 

BAPTISM OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 

A common error among God's children 
to-day, arising also from an improper 
conception of the holy Spirit, is the supposed 
necessity for frequent baptisms of 
the Spirit. We are told, "Be ye filled 
with the Spirit"; and we would urge the 
necessity of constantly receiving supplies 
of grace to help our infirmities. We all 
need constantly to go to the fountain to 
replenish, because our "earthen vessels" 
are very defective, and the spirit of Christ 
easily slips out, being under constant 
pressure from the spirit of the world. 
But to be filled with the Spirit is something 
totally different from the baptism 
of the Spirit. 

So far as we are informed, there have 
been but three baptisms of the Spirit in 
all: First, Jesus was so baptised; second, 
the disciples at Pentecost were similarly 
baptized; third, Cornelius and his family 
were so baptized. These three baptisms 
were in reality but one, as already shown 
from the Levitical type. The holy anointing 
oil was poured upon the head 
and ran down over the body of the typical 
priest, and so the spirit of anointing 
given to our Head— Jesus— descended on 
the church at Pentecost, and has since 
been running down over and anointing 
all that are members of his body. In the 
three cases mentioned above then, it was 



an outward manifestation which witnessed 
specially that God recognized the baptized 
as his. To convince the natural 
man, this acceptance was accompanied 
by various "gifts." (1 Cor. 14:22.) To 
them these gifts were the evidences of 
the possession of the Spirit and of acceptance 
with God. 

The Spirit, or mind, of God is now 
received without the gifts, and without 
outward manifestation, those manifestations 
and gifts being now recorded in 
the Word of God, and not (or with few 
exceptions) in the persons and deeds of 
his children. Paul testified that he might 

R988 : page 7 

have gifts, or be acted upon by the Spirit, 

and yet be almost destitute of the Spirit 

of love and sacrifice itself— and thus be 

but a "tinkling cymbal" (1 Cor. 13:1.) 

Thus we see that the gifts were not a 

mark of special favor toward those exercised 

by them. What we may have of 

the "witness" of the Spirit, is a far better 

criterion of our spiritual condition, 

than if possessed of the mountain-moving, 

tongue-speaking, and miracle-working 

power, without the internal witness of harmony 

with God's Word. 

Since Cornelius, there have been no 
such baptisms or outward manifestations 
of God's favor; but instead, the inward 
unseen witness of the Spirit of truth with 
our spirit, that we are children and heirs 
of God. 

Nor should we wonder at this: the 
church was like two rooms, hitherto unopened 
—locked up. The one room represents 
the Jewish believers in Jesus; the 
other the Gentile believers. Both were 
to be henceforth thrown open and used. 
There must be an opening and demonstration, 
after which, the doors standing 
open, needed no further re-opening. Peter 
unlocked or opened both of these doors. 
At Pentecost he did the opening work to 
the Jews who had believed. (Acts 2:14-41.) 
And when about three and one-half 
years after, it became God's due 
time to receive Gentile believers into the 
same privileges of sonship, Peter was 
again used to open that door— being sent 
to Cornelius, the first Gentile convert. 
(Acts 10.) Thus he used the "keys of 



the kingdom of heaven" (church), and 
opened the way, as Jesus had foretold. 
(Matt. 16:19.) Keys represent power 
and authority. He needed more than 
one, because hitherto Jews and Gentiles 
had been recognized as totally distinct, and 
the Gentiles were not fellow heirs, and of 
the same body. 

If the acceptance of Jewish born believers 
was indicated once for all at Pentecost, 
why should God repeat it to others 
now? If the acceptance of Gentile born 
believers was clearly shown in Cornelius' 
case, why should a repetition be asked? 
There is nothing in Scripture to indicate 
that these baptisms were ever repeated. 

Some now meet and agonizingly pray 
for a Pentecostal baptism of the holy 
Spirit. They look back to that with 
special longings, thinking that it was something 
not now possessed by the saints, 
whereas the things not now possessed are 
merely the gifts of the Spirit. This is 
wrong— it is looking from the standpoint 
of the natural mind. It is looking at the 
things that are seen and not at the things 
unseen and eternal for a basis of faith. 
When just coming out of the fleshly into 
the spiritual dispensation, it was very 
necessary to have something which the 
natural man might recognize to mark the 
new era. The gifts were in the church 
not to convince the saints of their acceptance 
with God, but to convince the natural 
man. (See, 1 Cor. 14:22.) The 
witness of the Spirit was for the saints. 

The church in general had the gifts, 
but they did not all receive those gifts at 
Pentecost, nor by a baptism of the Spirit. 
The eleven apostles, with Paul, the Lord's 
choice for the place of Judas, possessed 
the special power of communicating those 
gifts by laying on of hands, (Compare 
Acts 8:13,14,17-19); but those who received 
the gifts from their hands could not 
re-communicate them to others. 

Though entirely out of harmony with 
God's Word to pray for another baptism 
of the holy Spirit, it is right to pray to 
be kept filled with the holy Spirit. The 
Father in heaven is more willing to give 
the Spirit to those that ask him, than 
earthly parents are to give good gifts to 
their children. (Luke 11:13.) When 
we ask for anything, it implies that we 
want it, and if wholly consecrated, we 



should want to receive the holy Spirit in 
the way God wishes to give it. We pray 
for daily food, and properly, but we must 
do more than pray. God puts within 
our reach the needful means of procuring 
the food and thus the food comes from 
him from whom cometh every good gift. 
When we pray for the Spirit, and desire 
to "be filled with the Spirit," it is well. 
God has already provided all the means 
necessary to the fulfillment of our request. 
The "Spirit of truth" will give the very 
filling we desire, but we must partake of, 
must eat the feast, or we will not be filled. 
He who will not eat of a full table will 
be empty and starve, as truly as though 
there were no food. The asking of a 
blessing on food will not fill you; you 
must eat it; so the possession of a Bible 
and a petition for spiritual food will not 
do, we must eat the Word of God if we 
would derive his spirit from it. 

The Spirit of truth speaks to us through 
the Word, and by obedience to the Word 
we shall be filled with the Spirit. Our 
Lord said "The words that I speak unto 
you, they are spirit and they are life." 
(John 6:63.) And of those who are filled 
with the Spirit it is true as spoken by the 
prophet, "Thy words were found and I 
did eat them." (Jer. 15:16.) It is useless 
then, for us to pray, Lord, Lord, give 
us the Spirit, if we neglect the Word of 
truth from whence that Spirit is supplied. 
It is for this reason that many who meet 
often and pray much for the holy Spirit, 
are still but "babes in Christ," and many 
seek the outward signs as proof of relationship, 
instead of the inward witness 
with the Word of truth. 

It is because, as we have just seen, we 
have something to do if we would be 
filled with the Spirit, as surely as we have 
something to do if we would have natural 
food, that the Apostle addresses us— "Be 
ye filled with the Spirit" (Eph. 5:18.) 
—indicating that it rests entirely with us, 
since the doors were opened wide at Pentecost 
and at Cornelius' house. 

"He shall baptize you with the Holy 
Ghost and with fire." Matt. 3:10-12. 
These words were spoken to the Jews as 
a nation, and Jesus was the one who 
would do the baptizing. So many of that 
nation as received Jesus were baptised of 
the holy Spirit at Pentecost, and the remainder 



were afterward baptised with 
fire— trouble. The time of trouble which 
finally, in A.D. 70, destroyed their 
national existence was the fiery baptism 
foretold by the Prophets, and now repeated 
by John. The three verses here 
connected (10-12) refer to the same fire. 
The unfruitful tree cast into the fire, and 
the chaff burned, represent those of that 
nation who "knew not the time of their 
visitation." 

I WILL POUR OUT MY SPIRIT UPON ALL 
FLESH. 

There is a remarkable prophecy in Joel (2:28-32,) 
which clearly distinguishes between 
the present age in which the possession 
of God's spirit is by the few, the 
little flock, and the Millennial age in 
which the truth will be generally diffused 
among men, and its spirit generally accepted 
by men. The prophecy is stated 
in a manner likely to be misunderstood, 
in that the blessing upon the many is 
mentioned first, and the blessing upon 
the little flock which comes first, is mentioned 
last. Even so, many of God's 
testimonies are arranged and so stated as 
not to be clearly seen until fully due— as 
meat in due season to the household of 
faith. 

Joel says [transposing his words to the 
order of their fulfillment]: "In those 
days I will pour out my spirit upon my 
servants and upon my handmaids: And 
it shall come to pass after those days, 
that I will pour out my spirit upon all 
flesh." (Joel 2:29,28.) Peter at Pentecost 
referred to this prophecy (Acts 2:16-21,) 
saying "This [outpouring of the spirit of 
God which you see— upon his servants 
and handmaids], is that which was spoken 
by the prophet Joel." All that Joel had 
prophesied was not fulfilled before their 
eyes, but what they saw was all foretold 
by Joel in that prophecy, and more too. 
Joel foretold the blessing of Pentecost 
upon the servants and handmaids, and 
also the blessing of all flesh in the "great 
day of the Lord," the Millennial day; 
and he also foretold the day of trouble 
preceding that Millennial day of blessing, 
referring to it under the symbolic statement 
of "wonders in the heavens above 
and signs in the earth beneath, blood, 



and fire, and vapor of smoke," etc. 

The coming of the spirit upon all flesh 
(i.e. in general upon all mankind) in the 
next age, will be in much the same manner 
that it comes now to the special servants 
of God. Then, as now, it will be 
the spirit of truth and cannot be received 
without the recipients first coming to a 
knowledge of at least the first principles 
of THE TRUTH, and being consecrated to 
God's service. 

Of difference between the Spirit received 
by the church in this Gospel age, 
and by the human family in general in 
the next age there will be none— it is the 
same spirit; and as we have just seen, it 
will be received in the same way, from the 
same source (God), and through the same 
channel— His Word of truth. So then 
when we claim and teach that the sealing 
and witnessing of the Spirit of God then 
to the converted world, will be very different 
from the sealing and witness which it 
now gives to the "little flock," many 
will at first be surprised, not at once seeing 
how the same spirit, could in the same 
way, testify, witness and seal differently 
in one age than in another. But we trust 
we shall be able to make this abundantly 
clear. 

Note clearly the dissimilarity of the 
two ages. In the Gospel age evil predominates, 
Satan rules, gross darkness 
covers the people, and the god of this 
world takes advantage in thousands of 
ways of the weakness of fallen men, misrepresents 
the truth and clothes error in 
the garb of truth. In the Millennial age 
evil will be restrained, Christ will rule and 
bless and the light of truth shall penetrate 
every dark corner. Mankind will 
be helped out of the weakness of the fall, 
and right and truth on every subject shall 
triumph. 

All this, God saw beforehand; and he 
saw that the trial or testing of any who possess 
and would be led by his Spirit, would 
be seven fold as severe in this Gospel age, 
as in the Millennial age. Yet he designed 
to have it so, in order that thus he might 
elect or select the "little flock" of peculiarly 
zealous ones for the work of blessing 
others, as well as for illustrations of 
the exceeding riches of his favor toward 
those willing to serve him at the cost of 
self-sacrifice. 



God knew beforehand that whosoever 
would live Godly in this present world 
[age]— whoever would receive the Spirit 
of the truth and be led of it, would suffer 
persecution and present loss; that whoever 
would have and obey the leadings of 
his holy Spirit, among those having the 
opposing "spirit of the world" would do 
it only at the cost of self-sacrificing. And 
God had a perfect right to promise such 
sacrificers, of whom our Lord Jesus is 
the head and exemplar, a special "prize," 
a "high calling," exceeding great and 
precious, and a change from the human to 
the divine nature if he chose: and he did 
choose to do this very thing. This is 
the promise which he hath promised us. 
The promises to be like Christ our Lord, 
and to live with him, and to reign with 
him, and to be his joint-heirs, are not 
made to all who shall receive the holy 
Spirit of the truth, but to those who suffer 
for righteousness sake, who hazard and 
lay down their lives for the truth, who 
suffer with Christ, and become dead with 
him, filling up that which is behind of 
the afflictions of Christ, in the earnest 
desire to serve his body, which is the 
church. 

Just so surely as the "sufferings of 
Christ" are completely filled up and end 
with this age, and the glories to follow 
enter with the next age, just so surely it 
will be impossible for those who in the 
next age have the Spirit of truth, to suffer 
for obeying it— impossible that they should 
be sacrificers. Consequently they could 
never have the witness of the Spirit that 
they are joint-heirs with Christ, nor that 
they shall be made new creatures, partakers 
of the divine nature. 

The Spirit's testimony is that they 
for whom those exceeding great things 
were prepared of the Father, were sacrificers, 
who through much opposition, tribulation 
and gainsaying should be recognized 
as "overcomers," members of "the 
body of Christ." 

But those who receive the Spirit of the 
truth in the Millennial age will have in it a 
witness also. It will witness to them their 
acceptance with God through faith in 
Christ their Redeemer. And it will witness 
then, almost the reverse of what it 
now witnesses, so far as tribulation is concerned. 
He who then suffers tribulation 



will have it as a witness of wrong doing 
and of the King's displeasure; while he 
who flourishes well in his affairs, will have 
that as a witness of his well doing and of 
the King's good pleasure toward him, 
according as it is written: "In his day 
[the Millennial Day] the righteous shall 
flourish," and the evil doers shall be cut 
off; and again "He shall visit tribulation 
and anguish upon every soul of man that 
doeth evil, to the Jew first and also to 
the Gentile." (Psa. 72:7, Rom. 2:9.) 
And under that blessing the well doers 
shall progress toward human perfection. 
Be it remembered, MAN is an earthly image 
of God, and hence the spirit mind of 
a perfect man would be in harmony with 
God's spirit or mind— especially will 
this be the case with restored man, 
who during the fall and rising again, will 
have well learned to rely upon and obey 
implicitly the divine Spirit's leadings, 
and thus be led by the Spirit of the truth. 

The opening work for the world may 
furnish some marked evidence of divine 
acceptance, as at Pentecost a special manifestation 
of divine acceptance was given, 
but not necessarily so. The Word of 
truth and its witness may be all, and if so, 
quite sufficient evidence for faith. 

The Spirit of truth would be to such a 
spirit of begetting also, begetting again 
as human sons of God; for such was 
Adam before he sinned, since which all 
are counted as cut off, dead, except as 

R988 : page 8 

brought back to perfection through redemption 
and restitution. And though 
begotten by the Spirit of truth, such must 
prove themselves worthy of being restored 
to full sonship (born), until the end of 
that age, when being made complete 
through Christ, they can be presented to 
the Father as sons.— 1 Cor. 15:24. 

As we thus bring the light of one scripture 
to bear upon another we see how 
God brushes away the mist of traditional 
error, revealing his own glorious character, 
and making us better acquainted 
with himself and with his dear Son through 
whom he accomplished our redemption. 
With a clear understanding of the distinct 
personality of each, comes a clearer understanding 
of much more truth. We are 



able to more intelligently appreciate what 
both our heavenly Father and our Lord 
Jesus have done for us, and to give to 
each the honor due. And as we observe 
the beautiful harmony of parental and 
filial affection, and study it in all its workings 
as revealed in the great plan of God, 
we have a theme for our praise and imitation 
as long as eternity shall endure. 

"Hear O Israel! Jehovah our God is 
one— Jehovah. And thou shall love the 
Lord thy God with all thine heart, and 
with all thy soul, and with all thy might;" 
for he is worthy. Study his character, 
behold his glory— of wisdom, love and 
power, and when you fully apprehend him, 
and recognize him as the fountain of every 
virtue and of every blessing, no creature 
in heaven or in earth will be able to take 
his first and rightful place in your heart's 
affections. 

Even our blessed Lord Jesus is no rival 
with Jehovah for that first, chief place. 
He himself said, "My Father is greater 
than I," and his highest ambition was to 
honor him at any cost to himself; at the 
cost of abasement and humiliation even 
unto death. And yet the Father hath so 
highly honored him as to place him at 
his own right hand of power and glory, 
and bid all his creatures to honor the 
Son, even as they honor the Father. And 
being in character and glory the express 
image of the Father, and so intimately 
associated with all his plans, the love of 
our hearts that goes out toward one, naturally 
falls upon both, and the only distinction 
we can see, or feel in our love 
toward them, is that the one is the eternal 
fountain and the other the perennial 
stream of unalloyed goodness and glory 
and blessing. 



R988 : page 8 

THE EPISCOPALIAN VIEW. 

The convention of the St. Andrew's 
Brotherhood, which was held in this city 
last week, was its second annual session. 
The report of the council shows that the 
Brotherhood has grown in a year from 36 
to 144 chapters, with an estimated membership 
of 2,361 young men. These figures 



demonstrate that the Church needs 
such a society, an order of laymen who 
will do Church work on Church lines. We 
wish to emphasize this remark— Church 
work on Church lines— because we believe 
it needs to be impressed upon the 
leaders of this movement. We were 
pained to note in the debates of the session 
a disposition to adopt the cant that 
young men must be brought to Christ, not 
the Church, that Christ, not the Church, 
must be preached, etc. In other words 
that there is a disposition to "run" the 
Brotherhood on Y.M.C.A. lines. This 
is a mistake, and if it is persisted in, will 
be a fatal mistake. Christ and His Church 
cannot be divorced. To bring men to 
Christ we must bring them into His Body. 
It is because the Y.M.C.A. ignore this 
principle that the Church has not adopted 
it, and the Church will not adopt it even 
if it calls itself by the name of St. Andrew. 
—From The Living Church, Oct. 
22, '87— Prot. Episcopal organ, Chicago. 

The above is sent us by a brother who 
was once a staunch Episcopalian, but who 
is now rejoicing in a membership enrollment 
in the real Church— "The Church 
of the first born whose names are written 
in heaven." Our Brother's brief comment 
accompanying the above was: "A 
strong argument for our side." 

Yes, it is a strong argument for our side. 
The claim made by the Episcopal organ 
that: "Christ and his church cannot be 
divorced; To bring men to Christ we 
must bring them into HIS BODY," is true 
only of the true Church as we recognize 
it; the Church of whom it is written 
"The Lord knoweth them that are His." 
Truly it is impossible to divorce or separate 
the saints, the Bride, from their Lord, 
the Bridegroom. Truly to bring men to 
Christ is to bring them into this state of 
membership with Him as their head— into 
membership in the Church which is HIS 
BODY. 

But this is not true of any of the nominal 
bodies of Christ which are mere 
earthly organizations composed for most 
part of tares; containing (as Bishop Foster, 
of the M.E. church, has declared) 
"all the ring-streaked and speckled [characters] 
of Christendom." No earthly 
organization whose membership is admitted 
by fallible men who cannot read the 



hearts of those they admit, can decently 
and candidly claim to be the Church, 
the Body of Christ. 

Yet this absurd claim made by Episcopalians 
in the past, when all "dissenters" 
such as Presbyterians, Methodists, Baptists, 
etc., were regarded as heretics who 
had neither part nor lot in the Church 
of Christ— is still the measure of the 
heart and intellect of the editor of The 
Living Church, and we fear also of many 
who regard his writings with favor. 

And yet all the various churches or 
sects are involved in the same confusion, 
for none will dispute that there is but one 
body of the one Lord, and hence but one 
"Church, which is his body." It is the 
height of absurdity then, to speak of the 
various human organizations as churches. 
There can be but one true church, one 
true body of Christ: all others must be 
spurious counterfeits. 

The true Church which is his body 
must contain all "the sanctified in Christ 
Jesus," from the Head, down to the last 
member of his body. The true living 
Church in any city, state or town 
Must contain all "the sanctified 
in Christ Jesus" who are alive. The true 
living church in any city, state or town 
must contain all "the sanctified in Christ 
Jesus" in such city, state or town; as for 
instance, the true Church in London includes 
all "the sanctified in Christ 
Jesus," who are in London, and the true 
Church in Ohio, includes all "the sanctified 
in Christ Jesus" in Ohio. 

Can it be claimed that any earthly organization 
contains all "The sanctified in 

R989 : page 8 

Christ" in London or in Ohio, and none 

besides? We are confident that no sectarian, 

be he even as fossilized as the Editor 

of The Living Church, will have the effrontery 

to make such a claim for his sect. 

Why then call all these sects or counterfeits 

Churches, when there is but one genuine 

true Church, and none of these claim 

to be it? It is wrong as well as absurd. 

Our brother well says of the above 
words: "a strong argument for OUR side." 
They are indeed, they agree and fit only 
to the Church of the first born [ones] 
whose names are written in heaven. All 



these are our brethren; all these are joint-heirs, 

whether known to us or unknown. 

The Lord knoweth them that are His. 

And though he has long permitted these 

to grow up side by side, wheat and tares 

together, he now in the "harvest" commands 

the reapers with the sickles of 

truth, to separate, and he sends his message 

to all these sheep— Come out of her, 

my people! He that hath an ear to hear 

let him hear! All his sheep will hear 

[obey] the Master's voice. 



R990 : page 1 

VOL. IX. ALLEGHENY, PA., DECEMBER, 1887. NO. 4. 



R996 : page 1 



NEW POSTAL RULINGS require that our 
lists shall be composed of bona fide [actual] 
subscribers. We are obliged to be 
more strict than formerly, and all who 
wish to continue receiving the TOWER 
must send at least a request for it. All 
too poor to pay 50 cts. will be paid for 
out of the Tract Fund, supplied by those 
more able. 



R996 : page 1 

OUT OF BABYLON. 



Charles H. Spurgeon, the notable Baptist 
minister of London, has left Babylon; 
he has withdrawn from the Baptist Association 
and now stands a free man, untrammeled 
by human organizations, free 
to believe and to teach whatever he may 
find in God's Word, without either permission 
or hindrance from others. 

We know not what has led Brother 
Spurgeon into this liberty wherewith 
Christ hath made us free. We know not 
how much truth he has imbibed, but feel 
sure that this indicates some increase of 
the knowledge of the truth; for it is written 
"Ye shall know the truth, and the 
truth shall make you free." Soon we 
doubt not the knowledge or truth which 
led Mr. Spurgeon to this step, will manifest 
itself in his preaching. May he, now 
that he is free, make rapid strides from 
grace to grace and from knowledge to 
knowledge. 

This, which seems to us a grand step, of 
course seems correspondingly bad to 
others, and evil motives are attributed by 
those who worship sectarian organization 
rather than the great Head of the Church, 
and who obey men rather than God, and 
sectarian conferences, creeds, etc., rather 
than the Word of God. All sectarianism 
should fall, and each consecrated follower 
of Christ should be free to grow in grace, 



knowledge and love, and to co-operate 
with each other, not to bind one another's 
conscience but to assist each other in the 
study of the one guide and rule of faith 
and practice— the Bible. 

To-day, then, Mr. Spurgeon stands with 
us, in and of no sect, responsible to no 
man nor set of men, but to God and his 
Word only. We welcome Brother Spurgeon 
to the ranks of the free. He now 
stands with us on the only proper platform 
for Christian union— Christ only and the 
liberty which he grants to each. 

A MISSIONARY FREE. 

A Brother who for years has been a 
missionary, a minister in the M.E. 
Church in Africa, writes that the truth 
has made him free, and ten of his congregation 
also. They are all subscribers 
to the TOWER. He has resigned the ministry 
of Methodism and is now preaching 
under the higher commission of Christ 
and the apostles, in the Bible. We sent 
on Thanksgiving day a box of fifty more 
Dawns, besides Concordance, Diaglott, 
etc. May his labors be greatly blessed 
of the Lord. 

A BROTHER IN CHRIST HEARD FROM. 

You will all be glad to know of the 
firmness and promptness of the Brother 
whose questions were answered in the 
October TOWER. The courage and success 
of one soldier of the cross, should and 
does encourage others. His brief letter, 
[which reminds us of Caesar's famous 
short letter, "veni vidi, vici," I came, I 
saw, I conquered] is as follows:— 

Just a moment to say that I have written to my 
Rector at Janesville announcing the severing of my 
connection with the Church. It was a hard and 
painful step, and it seems as though everything 
opposes me in it— old relations and pleasant ones, 
my family and even my business seem to unite to 
keep me in Babylon. But the step has been taken, 
the letter is gone. Hastily, but very truly yours, 
WM. M. WRIGHT. 

A SISTER FREE WRITES: 

DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST: 

I write to thank you for your published letter in 
answer to Mr. Wm. Wright's on "Coming out of 



Babylon." (I only commenced receiving the 
TOWER in July.) You will understand my interest 
when I tell you, that on the 26th day of September 
last, I asked that my name be taken from the 
Baptist Church list, because I realized that its 
teachings were not in harmony with the inspired 
Word, which I was led to study after afflictions 
came upon me and I was led to see that I could 
not in all good conscience stand before my Saviour 
and the church at the same time. It cost me something 
for in its fold were some of my dearest 
earthly friends and it might mean a sacrifice of 
them; but I decided like Mary to choose the better 
part. I have seen so much that was ungodly passed 
by with a wink, that I came to feel like just Lot 
in Sodom, and I do rejoice that the Lord has led 
me out. I feel happy and contented with my name 
among the "little flock." I desire to use and be 
used for the honor and glory of the Master, and 
believe there is a work for me somewhere, in some 
humble way, and that I shall be and am now being 
fitted for it. Will you and Mrs. Russell pray specially 
for me? A humble servant, 

JULIETTE CHURCHILL. 



R990 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

ANARCHISM. 

November witnessed at Chicago the execution 
of four avowed and defiant anarchists. 
There were found at their funeral 
thousands who considered them heroes 
and martyrs, who denounced their execution 
as "legalized but atrocious murder," 
and their conviction by all the courts as 
tyranny, as a victory of the ruling class 
over the laboring class, and swore over 
the graves of their adored comrades that 
they would yet "avenge this foul murder." 

Even a lawyer, a man whom we might 
expect would appreciate law and order, 
was present at that funeral, and comforted 
the Godless company [for avowed anarchists 
are almost always avowed atheists] 
as follows, as reported in the Press 
dispatches:— 

He told his hearers that they had come 
to do honor to the soldiers and martyrs to 
truth. They had lost their lives in her 
service and they were numbered with 
those that in all history had died for the 



same cause. They were kind hearted and 
tender, manly, noble men. They loved 
humanity. They worshiped God by striving 
their utmost to benefit their fellow 
men, and it was in this strife that they 
offered up their lives. They were not 
standing there by the bodies of felons. 
There was nothing disgraceful about their 
death. They died for liberty, for the 
sacred right of untrammeled speech, for 
humanity, and his hearers should be proud 
that they had been their friends.— Times, 
Nov. 14, 1887. 

And other thousands actuated some by 
fear of the results of the already made 
threats of anarchists, and some by a conscientious 
timidity, begotten of a false 
idea of God's provisions for these men, 
—fearful of putting them into God's hands, 
fearful lest He would not give them "a 
just recompense" for their evil deeds, 
fearful that He would plunge them into 
everlasting torment,— signed lengthy petitions 
to the Governor of Illinois for the 
commutation of the death penalty. 

Since this matter has excited such general 
attention, particularly since other similar 
cases will come forward again, and 
because the church should as far as possible 
hold correct ideas on this as well as 
other subjects, we rehearse the matter as 
it appears to our View in the TOWER. 

The riot at the Chicago hay-market 
meeting May 4th, 1886, was precipitated 
by the throwing of a death-dealing bomb 
among the police, present upon the occasion 
to preserve peace and order. The 
murderers of those properly appointed representatives 
of the majority of Chicago's 
citizens, were sought, and though it could 
not be ascertained positively whose hands 
had lighted and thrown the bomb or by 
whom it and other similar bombs found 
were made, it was proved that it was 
thrown from the wagon in which the leaders 
of the meeting stood, and that the 
men convicted and hanged were those 
leaders, who for months previous, at meetings, 
and through circulars and papers, 
and at this very hay-market meeting, had 
urged their followers to acts of riot, violence 
and murder, had advocated the use 
of just such bombs, and had given in detail 
particulars as to how such could be 
made, and what would make them most 
deadly. 



A brave court and jury impartially selected 
from among their neighbors (with 
great difficulty because of natural timidity 
inspired by loud threats, secretly uttered, 
that any man brave enough to stand 
up for the law and order and bring in a 
true verdict in accordance with the law 
and the facts, would be assassinated), after 
hearing all the evidence and all the arguments 
which the able counsel for the anarchists 
could present in their favor, 
brought in its sworn verdict, that according 
to their honest conviction, the law 
and evidence proved these men guilty of 
murder— of premeditated murder— and 
that the death penalty provided in the 
law, should be inflicted. Appeals to the 
Supreme Courts of the state, and of the 
United States, confirmed the truthfulness 
and righteousness of that verdict. 

It is a credit to Chicago that her citizens 
refrained from lynching those enemies 
of her laws and liberties: that cool 
deliberation and true manliness prevailed, 
and that the condemned had every possible 
opportunity to be legally cleared. It 
is no less a credit to them that, after 
making the best laws they knew how to 
make for the government of such cases, 
and for the protection of the people 
against the devilish piracy of a comparatively 
small number of lawless, godless, 
heaven and earth defying enemies of all 
order, all peace and all righteousness, 
they had men of sufficient moral courage 
to execute those laws. 

But we must say a word on behalf of 
members of the trades unions which took 
part in the funeral parade, and thereby 
gave their assent to the principles of anarchy 
and to the terrible lawless deeds for 
which those men suffered. They are duped 
by blatant leaders, whose specious arguments 
are as follows:— 

These men are, say they, martyrs in a 
grand cause, the cause of liberty, free 
speech, and elevation of the laboring 
classes; it was not proved that any one of 
them threw the bomb; hence instead of 
regarding them as felons, convicts, murderers, 
every working man should recognize 
in them the champions of his rights, 
of which FREE SPEECH is chief. 

They appeal to prejudice and seek to 
awaken spite and hatred of government 
by such words as the following, used by 



anarchists at the cemetery:" 
"Ruling class over the laboring class." 
There is a specious deception about all 
this, which some do not quickly detect. 
Take the last sentence. Which is the 
ruling class in this land of freedom, where 
the majority rules and the ballot-box determines 
who shall represent that majority 
in the execution of its own laws? Just so 
surely as the majority of the people in this 
land are laborers— some laboring with the 

R990 : page 2 

plow, some with the pick, some with machinery, 
and some with their pens, just 
so surely the working class is the ruling 
class, and the windy orator should have 
expressed himself rather that it was a victory 
of the practical working class over 
work-talkers who labor not at all, but seek 
to cover themselves with glory and pose 
as ultra freemen when in reality they are 
a small minority, who, conscious that they 
can never convince a majority of the people 
that anarchy [lawlessness and destruction] 
is better than thrift and true liberty 
(liberty to do right and to permit each 
other to do the same), seek to overturn 
the freedom of the land which welcomed 
them to enjoy the blessing of her blood-bought 
liberties, when they fled as convicts 
and outlaws from the lands that gave 
them birth. 

As to freedom, can it not be carried 
too far? Did not these "martyrs for freedom" (?) 
carry it too far— farther than 
the working class, the ruling class, is prepared 
to permit? Freedom to murder 
whom you please, or to burn whose house 
you please, is too much freedom to grant 
to any one until we are sure that the 
grace of God has so thoroughly refined 
the heart that this freedom would never be 
used. 

Freedom of speech should be permitted; 
it is one of the strong bulwarks of liberty, 
which every true man should love and 
appreciate. There should be full freedom 
to criticize public officers and laws, to 
show their injustice or inefficiency if it 
can be shown, and thus to move the majority, 
the ruling and working class, to 
effect any change which can be shown to 
be for the benefit of the majority. But 
no well balanced mind, properly informed 



of the institutions of this land, could 
possibly urge that it is a proper use of the 
word FREEDOM which would permit men 
in the name of the liberty, guaranteed to 
all under the Constitution, to set at nought 
the will of the majority and the laws they 
have made, and publicly threaten the 
life and property of the masses, and of 
their servants and representatives appointed 
to enforce those laws. The true 
meaning of freedom is untrammeled liberty 
to do anything that is right. Does any 
one claim that murder is right? Yes, 
anarchists claim that. They claim that by 
any means, and at any cost of life and 
happiness to others, their theories should 
be carried out. They know that they 
constitute a hopeless minority. They have 
no hope of ever convincing a majority 
that their theory is desirable: hence they 
argue We must use force— We must force 
the majority to obey the minority. And 
strangely enough they call that a battle 
for LIBERTY. Despotism, we should call 
it, the bondage of the majority, of nine-tenths 
of society, of the working class, to 
the vicious class, who could not if they 
would, rule as well as the better educated 
despotic classes of the old world. 

As to the sentence of death executed 
upon these men, we believe that society 
(i.e. the majority) did perfectly right in 
putting out of their midst those misguided 
and injurious members, who even if they 
did not throw the bomb, were the real 
perpetrators of the crime, having undoubtedly 
incited others to do that which perhaps 
they themselves were too cowardly 
to do. If it could be shown conclusively 
that another threw the fatal bomb, we 
could not excuse them on any ground 
but cowardice. No pity for the fearless 
men who represented the people, nor pity 
for their wives and babes, hindered those 
anarchists from each throwing bombs by 

R991 : page 2 

the dozen; their words over and over 
again prove this; only their cowardice 
prevented. Nothing else hindered that we 
can think of. So then, if a poor ignorant 
deluded wretch could to-day be found 
whose ignorant mind and courage they 
had talked up to the point of action, we, 
and we believe the people (the ruling working 



class) would say, More guilty far and 
more worthy of death were the cowardly 
talkers than the duped one who obeyed 
them— their tool. 

But, is society (the people) justified in 
taking the life of such enemies of its life 
and peace? We answer, yes; far more so 
than they generally think. In taking 
away the life of such as these, it merely 
hastens (for the good of the whole) the 
death penalty under which the whole 
world rests. [Only believers have even 
reckonedly escaped that condemnation 
which came upon all through Adam's disobedience.] 
Society does not do more 
than this; it has no right to torture him. 
Neither can it go beyond the present life 
to interfere in any degree with that future 
resurrection life, which our Lord's ransom 
has made secure to every man. These 
men who have so misused the present 
brief spark of life, were no doubt deluded 
egotists who vainly supposed they knew 
far better than the people what is advantageous 
and beneficial for all, and in the 
next age (the Millenium) when they get 
their share of the ransom which our Lord 
gave for all, they will be enabled to see 
clearly, under the Great Teacher's instructions, 
the ways of righteousness, wisdom 
and peace, and some of them we 
may hope will be converted by that knowledge 
into servants of God and supporters of 
divine law and order. 

The Law of God given to Israel directed 
and commanded them to visit capital punishment 
in such serious cases. Some, however, 
will perhaps remark— The TOWER's 
teaching is that the Law was for the Jewish 
nation, and that we are under the law 
of love during the Gospel age. Very true, 
we answer, and in our reference to "society", 
"the people", "the masses", etc., 
we had no reference to the little minority, 
the virgin of Christ, the church, the sanctified 
in Christ Jesus. These are "not 
of the world." In our consideration of 
the world, the people, and what they are 
justified in doing, viz., making laws, electing 
executors of those laws, prosecuting 
wars in defence of liberties etc., trying 
and executing anarchists, and all such 
business, we exempt and except the church 
(real) entirely and always, as the Lord and 
the apostles did. As consecrated new creatures, 
representatives of Christ our Lord 



in the world, we have nothing to do with 
such things, but are to leave those things 
to the world, while we follow the Master 
and exemplify his teachings, which are 
totally unsuited to the world under the 
evil conditions of the present. And not 
the least embarrassing feature of our case 
is that we must be misunderstood by many 
of our neighbors, who know us not, even 
as they knew not our Master and his 
course.— 1 John 3:1. 



R991 : page 2 

THE REAL DANGER. 



"Pride goeth before destruction, and a haughty 
spirit before a fall."— Prov. 16:18. 

The real danger to society at present is 
not from an uprising of a small handful 
of anarchists to overthrow law and order, 
but to the surprise of many let us say, 
the real danger now, is from friends of 
the law and order. The success of the 
law and its servants in properly and deliberately 
putting down these enemies of 
the law, will tend toward haughty austerity 
on the part of many, who feeling, that a 
large majority favor the law, will be less 
conciliatory in their dealing, less cautious 
and considerate of the feelings and equitable 
rights of others, and more disposed 
to invoke the arm of the law to their aid 
whenever possible. 

It will be conceded that all the wealthy 
and all those mechanics and artisans in 
"comfortable circumstances," are on the 
side of law and order, and with them are 
the masses of meagerly educated peace-loving 
laborers, whose well balanced 
minds grasp the fact that the educated 
and skilled artisan and capitalistic energy 
are necessities, without which they would 
sink back from present comfort, and advantages, 
and opportunities of advancement, 
into the comfortless barbarism of 
our ancestors. The present victory at 
Chicago, is the victory of all these over 
their common enemy, anarchism. But so 
surely as the feeling of strength shall 
harden the hearts of the capitalists or employing 
element of this class, and make 
them less considerate of the other members 



of the same class— employees— so 
surely will the majority of these laborers 
be gradually driven into opposition, not 
only to their employers, but also to all 
laws which do not favor their own selfish 
interests. 

In order that laws shall be respected by 
the majority, they must be based, not on 
selfishness, but on justice. And as from 
time to time, under changing circumstances 
and increasing knowledge, laws are 
found to be unjust toward any, all should 
submit to justice, and such laws should be 
changed. But as already pointed out in 
chapter XV. of Millennial Dawn, selfishness 
will rule on both sides, and will divide 
the at present law abiding masses of 
the people and result in the very anarchy 
now seemingly throttled. 

While admitting that labor strikes are 
generally evils, which oftenest bring loss 
rather than gain to those who engage in 
them, and to others dependent upon them, 
and while admitting that selfishness and 
injustice often lie at the bottom of trades-unions, 
we are ready to admit that sometimes 
they may be necessary, to obtain justice.* 

The employing class, blinded partially 
by selfishness so that they are unable to 
see the necessity and justice of self-protection 
by organization, on the part of 
the employed class, associates in mind 
and in private conversation (though not 
often publicly) all trades-unionists with 
anarchists; and they think of the victory 
over anarchism at Chicago, as a victory 
over trades-unionists in general. They 
think they see in the very general failure 
of strikes during this year, and finally the 
hanging of the anarchists, evidence of 
the power of capital over all opposition, 
and many now claim that the 
"heroic treatment" of crushing out opposition, 
strikes, etc., is the only sure, and 
the best plan, and that the holding of conferences, 
attempts to arbitrate or conciliate 
etc., only stimulate the employed to 
ask more and unreasonable things. (And 
this last point is too true.) 

The splitting of labor organizations into 
factions, and contentions between these 
now imminent, threatens two dangerous 
results: First, the effect will be to 
strengthen the hand of capitalists, permitting 
selfishness to have the greater control 
of their consciences and conduct, 



making them sometimes haughty and inconsiderate 

of the interests and rights of 

others: Secondly, the effect upon laborers, 

artisans, etc., will be to discourage them 

from present hopes of legally, at the ballot-box, 

by united effort, obtaining such 

changes of laws as changing circumstances, 

conditions, inventions, etc., may dictate 

to be just. The result of this despair 

will be bad. It will change many of these, 

at present law-upholding people, into law-opposers 

—anarchists. Thus we see the 

danger of the present moment, from an 

opposite quarter to that from which it is 

generally looked for. 

In proof of what we here predict, we 
cite a few instances which have come under 
our own observation here in Pittsburg, 
which surely we are justified in considering 
as samples of the general sentiment of 
the land. 

(1) On the day of the execution of the 
anarchists a prominent banker remarked 
to the writer, that he was glad to see law 
and order vindicated. To this we assented, 
but when he proceeded to class as part 
and parcel of the same victory the political 
defeat at the polls of the "United 

Labor Party" in New York, we had to 
differ. So positive were the gentleman's 
expressions that discussion on that subject 
seemed to be useless, and only calculated 
to make him regard any who might differ 
with him as anarchists also. 

(2) The Sunday following the execution 
of the anarchists at Chicago, witnessed 

a conflict between various political 
and labor societies, and the police and 
military authorities in the city of London, 
England, occasioned by the prohibition 
of a public meeting, which according to 
custom the labor societies attempted to 
hold, and which they evidently thought 
they had a right to hold under the existing 
English laws. Without discussing the 
merits of this case we wish merely to note 
that in referring to it some of the journals 
of this city gave evidence that their views 
on the subject of labor organizations and 
anarchism are warped in the manner indicated 
above. They declared that Chicago 
had given London a practical lesson 
in how to deal with anarchists, and that 
the firmness of the police and military at 
London showed that they were equal to 
any emergency. And we doubt not these 



journals voiced the sentiments of their 
owners and of a very large class of readers. 
Others would read in the telegraphic 
column, that many of those who attempted 
to hold the London meetings were there 
as labor organizations, who carried banners 
claiming that they were almost starving, 
and wanted not charity, but work, 
whereby to honestly provide for their families; 



*To protect each other's interests under existing 
conditions it seems as proper for men to combine 
their talents in a trade union as to co-operate 
in a joint stock company for trade or manufacture; 
but for either a trade union or a joint-stock company 
to attempt selfishly to serve its own interest 
by forcing others out of trade, or out of employment 
is contrary to both human and divine laws, 
and is grossly unjust. For this reason conscientious, 
righteousness-loving children of God must 
there draw the line and have no part in intimidating 
or injuring others, however necessary or expedient 
for their own interests such a course might 
appear. 

R992 : page 2 

and urging upon the government to 
enact some laws or start some public 
works, whereby they might be kept from 
starvation, without being compelled by 
necessity to violate law and order, by 
confiscating a part of the surplusage of 
the luxurious aristocracy, to obtain life's 
necessities for those in need.* As the 



*We are convinced that this is not a fancy sketch 
as some here might be inclined to think, for a letter 
written a few days before this conflict by a WATCH 
TOWER reader living in England who himself has 
been out of work for some time and is selling 
"Dawn" wherever he can, to spread the truth and 
help sustain his family until he can get paying work, 
says that the destitution is very great among the 
poor, many of whom he says can get no work 
and have no idea where the next meals victuals 
will come from. He can sell but a few copies a 
week, and the rich will not purchase nor even receive 
him. 

[Continued on 8th page.] 



R992 : page 8 
[From Second Page.] 



THE REAL DANGER. 

comfortable American mechanic and laborer 

reads this, and the editorial comment 

on it which speaks of artisans as 

anarchists, he against his will is forced to 

conclude that in the opinion of his fellow 

citizens, as voiced by the Press, all wage-workers 

are counted as anarchists. This 

is what the executed anarchists tried to 

instill into them, viz.: that all physical 

laborers are of one brotherhood, and all 

mental laborers of another; and that the 

former should all be anarchists and oppose 

the latter. They resisted the imputations 

and doctrines of anarchy only 

to find that many of their law-abiding 

fellow citizens more comfortably fixed in 

life, are in array against them, and name 

and treat them as anarchists. They are 

not slow to feel an angry resentment rising 

within them against those who would perforce 

classify and name them with anarchists, 

and they quickly draw the inference, 

that should business here become depressed 

as it is in England, and should they desire 

to use lawfully their right of free 

speech, to make known their necessities, 

they too would be dispersed by force, publicly 

branded "anarchists," and ultimately 

forced— by necessity perhaps— to 

aid the anarchy of which at first they 

were unjustly accused. 

(3) Another illustration of the haughtiness 
which the triumph of law over the 
anarchists has called forth, is reported in 
the secular journals of this city from the 
pulpit. It but illustrates the spirit which 
has always been at the bottom of intolerance 
and persecution— that "might makes 
right." It was under this same spirit 
that thousands of lives were sacrificed in 
the past, and illustrates how willingly the 
speaker would, if he could, not only be 
a pope to decide what men must think, 
but how he would forcibly silence, excommunicate, 
and anathematize, all who 
would not harmonize with his ideas. Rev. 
N. Woodside, of the First Reformed Presbyterian 
church, of Pittsburg, was the 



speaker, and his subject was "Protection 
from Ecclesiastical Anarchists." 

He said, as reported in The Times:— 

"Ecclesiastical anarchists should not 
be allowed to come in and change the existing 
order and laws of the Church. They 
have undertaken to authoritatively preach 
the Gospel without being ordained. In 
this they are impeaching the wisdom of 
Jesus Christ. They administer the sacrament 
in direct opposition to divine law. 
The speaker did not care who these expressions 
hit." 

"These ecclesiastical anarchists must 
be suppressed, for, there is an effort being 
made on the part of some to destroy the 
good order that has existed in Christ's 
Church." 

"I want you to stand out against all 
this anarchy. We must publish the names 
of these Church anarchists through the 
newspapers so that all the world may 
know them— these men who go about 
from church to church ingratiating themselves 
into the good graces of leading 
members and destroying the good order 
of the Church." 

We know not to whom this gentleman 
referred, nor does it matter; it is the 
principle that we are discussing. Seeing 
the arm of the law successful against the 
anarchists, he greatly desires to use the 
same, or any other power against those 
who dare to think for themselves, or to 
read the Bible without his glasses or his 
permission. To begin this persecution, 
and lay a foundation for some further 
steps, when action may be more possible, 
he brands those he hopes yet to destroy 
or silence for ever, as anarchists. 

We are not personally acquainted with 
the gentleman, but from his use of the 
word we doubt if he appreciates the meaning 
of the word anarchists, or understands 
upon what grounds the political anarchists 
were condemned and executed. The 
anarchists were executed, not because 
they held different views on political economy, 
from the majority— that is not a 
crime in this age— nor because they expressed 
their views,— which all have a perfect 
right to do in this age and land— but 
they were executed because they went beyond 
these rights, and threatened and took 
the lives of others. So, if the lives of 
members of Mr. Woodside's church have 



been threatened or taken, or if their property 
has been destroyed or menaced, let 
the guilty persons be treated as felons and 
anarchists, and let them upon similar conviction, 
be dealt with according to law. 

But this is not the trouble; no, we understand 
the gentleman perfectly. Thank 
God we have not met many with such 
sentiments, but we read of them in 
history. The gentleman has merely adopted 
a new name for his enemies, those 
whom he regards as heretics, stigmatizing 
them as "ecclesiastical anarchists," that 
thereby he may draw upon them some of 
the deserved reproach which attaches to 
that name in the estimation of all order-loving 
people, and thus to awaken an uncharitable, 
unchristian, persecuting spirit. 

The same heart and tongue if in the 
place of influence a few centuries ago, 
instead of saying "These ecclesiastical 
anarchists must be suppressed," would 
have worded it, "Burn the heretics!" 
—"Establish an Inquisition!" 

Using the gentleman's newly applied 
name "ecclesiastical anarchist," as the 
synonym for "heretic," let us remind him 
of a little scrap of church history, which, 
if he ever knew, he has evidently forgotten, 
viz:— that when his forerunners 
started to think for themselves and left 
the "Covenanters," calling themselves 
"Reformed Presbyterians," they were 
counted "ecclesiastical anarchists" (heretics); 
and were also accused of "destroying 
the good order of the church." To go 
back still further, we find that the "Covenanters" 
also began, by a few men 
thinking and teaching contrary to the 
teachings of the Episcopal Church from 
which it broke off, and these too were 
counted "ecclesiastical anarchists" (heretics) 
by those whom they left. Going 
further still into the past (and that not 
three and a-half centuries ago), the Episcopal 
Church, or Church of England, 
broke off from the Roman Catholic 
Church, and all its members were cursed 
as (heretics) "ecclesiastical anarchists." 

Each of these in turn, has been told by 
those they left, that they were "in direct 
opposition to the divine law," and that 
they were "destroying the good order of 
the church" etc. And the Episcopal and 
Roman Catholic churches from which 
they came out, to this day declare that no 



one can "authoritatively preach the gospel 

without being ordained" by them. Thus 

we see that Mr. Woodside is an "ecclesiastical 

anarchist" of the very sort his 

words condemn. Scraps of history are very 

useful as antidotes for pulpit-rabies. 

Thus we have shown evidence from 
the Press, the Pulpit and the Bank, 
that the danger is not from present real 
anarchists, but rather that over-confidence, 
pride and tyranny on the part of some will 
ultimately force the issue and compel anarchism. 
As for the ecclesiastical intolerance 
we have long ago pointed out the 
probability of an offensive and defensive 
combination of all the large denominations 
of Christendom for the suppression 
of "growth in grace and knowledge" beyond 
their lines— somewhat on the order 
of the present "Evangelical Alliance." 
Our study of the Scriptures which are 
"able to make us wise," prepares us for 
the time and events Mr. Woodside longs 
for, when, by an ecclesiastical combination, 
all small companies of independent 
thinkers will be "suppressed." In the 
Scriptures we read the fact that the great 
ones in politics, finances and ecclesiastical 
affairs, will consolidate their power for 
a time, but the haughty, proud and unjust 
shall fall, and terrible will be the fall. 

The events of our day show that these 
things are drawing nigh, and though we 
pen these words of warning, we have no 
hope of altering the course which God 
has foretold, but will be satisfied, if we 
shall help the few, the little flock scattered 
abroad, to discern the times and be on the 
Lord's side, the side of right; and prepare 
them to endure hardness as good 
soldiers of our Master, who indeed peaceable 
as a lamb, was also considered an 
"ecclesiastical anarchist" by the Chief 
Priests and "orthodox" religionists of his 
day. He too whom God had anointed 
with his spirit also, to preach the gospel, 
was demanded of the Pharisees, "Who 
gave thee this authority?" (Matt. 21:23.) 
The Apostles' authority also was questioned 
by the same class, and they were 
cast into prison for daring to preach without 
permission of the Chief Priests.— 
Acts 5:17,18,26-28,41,42. Should the 
time of persecution ever again come, let 
all continue to preach as did the early 
church, asking no other authority than the 



command of the Lord. Acts 11:19. All 
the spirit anointed are members of the 
"Royal Priesthood." "Ye should show 
forth the praises of him who called you out 
of darkness into his marvelous light" 
(1 Pet. 1:9) and "ought to be teachers." 
-Heb. 5:12. 

But it is not needful here, to go to the 
Scriptures to prove that all who have the 
Spirit of Christ, are not only authorized and 
commanded by him, the true head of the 
Church, to preach, but having the spirit 
of the gospel within them, they cannot 
refrain from declaring the gracious goodness 
of God and his glorious plan of 
salvation. 



R993 : page 3 

THE FAITHFUL SERVANT'S PRAYER. 

Lord, speak to me, that I may speak 
In living echoes of Thy tone; 

As Thou hast sought, so let me seek 
Thy erring children, lost and lone. 

O lead me, Lord, that I may lead 

The wandering and the wavering feet; 

O feed me, Lord, that I may feed 

Thy hungering ones with manna sweet. 

strengthen me, that while I stand 
Firm on the Rock, and strong in Thee, 

1 may stretch out a loving hand 

To wrestlers in the troubled sea. 

O teach me, Lord, that I may teach 

The precious things Thou dost impart; 

And wing my words, that they may reach 
The hidden depths of many a heart. 

O give thine own sweet rest to me, 

That I may speak with soothing power 

A word in season, as from Thee, 
To weary ones in needful hour. 

O fill me with Thy fullness, Lord, 

Until my very heart o'erflow 
In kindling thought and glowing word, 

Thy love to tell, Thy praise to show. 

O use me, Lord, use even me, 

Just as Thou wilt, and when, and where; 
Until Thy blessed face I see, 



Thy rest, Thy joy, Thy glory share. 
— Havergal. 



R993 : page 3 

SONS OF GOD AND DAUGHTERS OF MEN. 

"The sons of God saw the daughters 
of men that they were fair, and they took 
them wives of all, which they chose.... 
And they bear children to them, the 
same became mighty men, which were of 
old, men of renown."— Gen. 6:2,4. 

The Scriptures not only point us to the 
future age and call the spiritual government 
of Christ which shall then exist a 
"new heavens," and earthly society and 
institutions under it a "new earth;" but 
the present spiritual rulership [under Satan, 
"the prince of this world"] and 
earthly institutions under it are termed 
"The present evil world," dispensation 
or epoch. Moreover, we are informed 
that the present dominion of evil has not 
lasted forever, but that it was preceded 
by a still different dispensation or epoch 
spoken of as "the world that was before 
the flood," which also had a heavens or 
spiritual ruling power, and an earth, or 
condition of men subject to that spiritual 
dominion. 

The three worlds mentioned by Peter 
(2 Pet. 3:6,7,13) designate these three 
great epochs of time, in each of which, 
God's plan with reference to men has a 
distinct and separate outline, yet each is 
but a part of the one great plan which, 
when complete, will exhibit the divine 
wisdom, though considered separately 
these parts would fail to show their deep 
design. 

Since that first "world" (heavens and 
earth," or that order of things,) passed 
away at the time of the flood, it follows 
that it must have been a different order 
from the present, and hence the prince of 
this present evil world was not the prince 
of that which preceded this— of the 
world or dispensation before the flood. 

Several scriptures seem to throw light 
on God's dealings during that first dispensation, 
and we think give a further 
and clearer insight into his plan and purpose 



as a whole. The thought suggested 
by these is, that the first world (the dispensation 
before the flood) was under the 
supervision and special ministration of 
the angels; that these were man's governors 
and overseers commissioned to 
communicate God's will and to rule over 
the fallen and degenerating race, which, 
because of sin, needed this government. 

That angels were the rulers of that 
epoch is not only indicated by all references 
to that period, but may be reasonably 
inferred from the Apostle's remark 
when contrasting the present dispensation 
with the past and the future. He endeavors 
to show both the righteousness and 
the enduring character of the future rulership 
of the world, saying, "The world to 
come hath He not put in subjection to 
the angels." No, it is put under the control 
of Jesus and his joint-heirs, and 
hence it shall not only be more righteous 
than the present rule of Satan, but it shall 
be more successful than was the previous 
rule by the angels.— See Heb. 2:2,5. 

In their original estate all the angels 
seemed to possess the ability to appear in 
earthly forms— Satan appeared to Eve as 
a serpent; other angels frequently appeared 
as men, thus performing their ministry, 
appearing or disappearing, as the 
work demanded. 

It was at this time it seems, that the 
fall of some of the angels occurred. It 
is a common supposition, though we 
think without foundation, that the fall 
of Satan's angels occurred before man's 
creation. We are told that Satan was 
a murderer [man killer] from the beginning. 
(Jno. 8:44.) Certainly not 
the beginning of his own existence, for 
every creation coming from God's hand 
is perfect, nor can we think any other 
beginning referred to than man's beginning, 
in Eden. But so far as we are informed 
he was alone then and had no followers 
or angels. 

The ambition of Satan to become a 
ruler seems to have developed as he beheld 
the first human pair with their procreative 
powers. He probably reasoned that 
if he could obtain the control of this man 
he should have the dominion over all his 
offspring, and be in power and influence 
above others, a rival of Jehovah; and his 
growing ambition said, "I will be like the 



Most High. "--Isa. 14:14. 

Measurably successful, Satan gained a 
great influence over the race, but not 
complete, for in competition with him 
was the great company of angels, who, as 
guardians, instructed and ruled mankind 
for a time in harmony with the will of 
God. But presently came a great degeneracy 
among those rulers of men. Man's 
corruption was contagious, and some of 
the angels left their own habitation, or 
condition as spiritual beings, keeping not 
their first or original estate. They misused 
the powers which they possessed of 
assuming a human form, and became of 
a reprobate and licentious mind, copying 
after degenerate man, and started a new 
race of men in the world, as the above 
text (Gen. 6:2,4,) affirms. 

Some have endeavored to apply this 
scripture to two classes of men— one class 
more righteous than the other, called 
"sons of God," but such a position is 
untenable, for it is not a sin for one man 
to take for a wife, another man's daughter. 
Marriage among men is never condemned 
as sinful in the Scriptures. Again, if it 
were merely a union of two classes of the 
same race, why should the offspring be 
"GIANTS," and specially "MEN OF RENOWN?" 
If the righteous and the wicked 
marry to-day, are their children therefore 
giants or more renowned men? 

Through the deterioration of several 
hundred years, mankind had lost much of 
its original vigor and perfection of mind 
and body, but with the angels it was 
different. Their powers were still perfect 
and unimpaired, hence it is clear that 
their children would partake of that vitality 
and much more resemble the first perfect 
man than those around them, among 
whom they would be giants both in physical 
and mental strength. 

Those angels which kept not their first 
condition, but sought the level of sinful 
men, and left their own habitation, or 
spiritual condition, God placed in age-lasting 
chains. That is, God restrained 
or limited their powers, taking from them 
the power and privilege of appearing in 
an earthly form, human or other. Hence, 
though we know that they thus did appear 
before the flood, there is not one 
instance recorded in which they have been 
able to free themselves from this restraint 



or chain since. On the contrary, the 

angels who left not their first estate are 

not so restrained, and have appeared frequently 

as men, as a flame of fire and as 

a pillar of cloud, etc., as recorded in both 

the Old and New Testament Scriptures. 

Having become depraved in their tastes 
and being given over to a reprobate mind, 
and being debarred from all association 
with God and his works and his plans, 
these fallen angels have no longer any 
pleasure in things on the spiritual plane, 
but crave association with depraved mankind 
and a participation with him in sin. 
How wise and kind the Almighty hand 
which has restrained their power and influence 
over men, by preventing their personal 
intercourse. Now, they may indeed 
enter and act through any who invite their 
companionship, but no more can they do. 
Thus far shalt thou go, saith the Almighty, 
but no farther. 

Some of this class, possessed by devils, 
Jesus and his disciples met in their ministry. 
Out of one he cast a legion of devils, 
(Mark 5:1-15). Anxious in some manner 
to become associated with humanity, 
yet unable to assume human form because 
restrained, when they found a man willing 
to have such company, a legion crowded 
into him, thereby making him a maniac. 
Even when they perceived that Jesus 
would release the man from their possession, 
they in despair requested as a favor 
that they might be permitted to inhabit 
and use the bodies of a herd of swine 
near by. But the swine were crazed 
thereby, and madly rushed into the sea. 

Jude (vs. 6,7,) gives conclusive evidence 
on the subject, and clearly shows 
the nature of the sin for which the fallen 
angels were condemned and restrained, 
when, after mentioning the angels who 
sinned, he says, "Even as Sodom and 
Gomorrah. ..IN LIKE MANNER giving 
themselves over to fornication and going 
after strange flesh." 

That God deprecates any mixture or 
blending of human and spiritual natures, 
and designs that each should keep its own 
original or first estate, we need scarcely 
remark is clearly taught here. (See also, 
Lev. 18:23, and 20:15,16.) And that 
our race as it exists to-day, coming 
through Noah, is purely Adamic stock, 
and contains no mixture, is shown by the 



expression— "These are the generations 
of Noah: Noah was a just man and perfect 
in his generation,"— i.e., not contaminated 
in the manner before described. 
-Gen. 6:9. 

Glancing back, then, we see the first 
epoch under angelic control, and the result, 
man's continued degradation, and 
degrading influence upon some of the 
angels. The angels were utterly unable 
to accomplish the great work of man's 
recovery. Doubtless they were anxious 
to do it, for they sang and shouted for 
joy at his creation. And God let them 
try it, and it was doubtless part of their 
trial and discipline, but sadly they failed. 
Some joined the ranks of evil and the 
rest stood by and witnessed the terrible 
course of sin. Later we find them still 
interested and desiring to look into the 
plan which God has since been working 
out, and ever ready to do his bidding 
in our service. (1 Peter 1:12.) Thus 
was proven both to men and angels the 
futility of angelic power to save men, 
though they thus showed interest. 

In the beginning of "this present evil 
world," notwithstanding Noah's endeavor 
to serve God and to teach his posterity 
to follow his example, and the exhibition 
of God's anger at the deluge, the tendency 
was still downward, and soon the 
wickedness of Sodom brought its destruction. 
Mankind was bent on an evil course, 
and God permitted them to take it. Then 
the ministration of angels, except to the 
few of God's children, was withdrawn. 

In this second dispensation God permits 
the world to select and obey the prince 
of its own choosing, to feel his galling 
yoke and to realize the real character of 
evil, while He is selecting from among 
them a little flock, whose desire to do the 
will of God has led them to sacrifice the 
human interests and present things, to 
share as joint-heirs with Christ the glories 
and honors of the new ruling power (new 
heavens). And when the prince of this 
world is cast out, and he whose right it is 
shall take his power and reign, then 
in him shall all the families of the earth 
be blessed. 

God has now demonstrated to all his 
creatures that his plan is the only one 
which could accomplish the great work; 
and his plan has, ever since the fall, been 



gradually and quietly developing, and in 
due time will bear abundant fruit unto 
eternal life. It selects and tests first of all 
the "little flock," the Royal Priesthood 
and then reaches out to lift up and restore 
all who will accept the favor upon God's 
conditions. 

THE SPIRITS IN PRISON. 

"Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just 
for the unjust, that he might bring US to God, being 
put to death in the flesh but quickened [in] spirit. 
By which also, [in addition to this work done for 
us] he preached to the spirits in prison; which 
sometime [before] were disobedient, when once 
the long-suffering of God waited in the days of 
Noah."-l Pet. 3:18-20. See Diaglott, footnote. 

A satisfactory interpretation of this 
Scripture has long been sought, and but 
few have found a solution perfectly consistent 
and satisfying even to themselves. 
But in view of the truth gleaned from the 
suggestions of the preceding article, the 
above statements of the apostle Peter become 
luminous. 

The two views of this passage commonly 
held we state first, and then give our present 
view of it. 

The most common view is, that during 
the time that Jesus was entombed he was 
off on a missionary tour preaching to the 
antediluvian sinners who were suffering 
torture in a place called hell. 

If its advocates would consider it, they 
would find that their interpretation favors 
a view of future probation for the antediluvians, 
a thing which they strenuously 
oppose. For if Christ preached to them 
it must have been for some purpose, and 
surely it was not to merely mock and deride 
them; and consequently he must 
have preached a message of hope— a part 
of his blessed "good tidings of great joy." 
And if there is a future probation for the 
antediluvians, why not accept our position 
as correct— that in Christ "all the families 
of the earth shall be blessed?" 

This is the objection which consistency 
would urge against this view, from the 
standpoint of those who hold it. But if 
we view it from the Scriptural standpoint, 
and with the correct idea of death, we 
must reason that if Jesus was really dead 
during those three days, as the Apostles 



declare, then he could do no preaching; 

for "the dead know not anything," (Eccl. 9:5), 

and "there is no work, nor device, 

R993 : page 4 

nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave." 

(Eccl. 9:10.) Secondly, If Jesus had 

been an exception to the rule, and could 

have preached, the antediluvians could 

not have heard, for certainly they have no 

wisdom, nor knowledge, in the grave. 

Hence this view is found generally unsatisfactory 

and out of harmony with the 

Scriptures. 

The second view, and the one which 
seemed most reasonable to us until the 
considerations of the preceding article 
threw light upon this scripture also, is to 
refer the preaching to that which Noah 
did under the direction of the Spirit of 
God to the antediluvians, who at this time 
were imprisoned in death. The objection 
to this view is, that the preaching was 
not to men, nor to the spirits of men, but 
to spirits, spirit beings; and the preaching 
was not done by Noah, nor by the Spirit 
of God, but by the death and resurrection 
of Jesus. 

It seems very clear therefore, that the 
spirits are those spirit beings who were 
disobedient during the days of Noah, 
and whom God therefore imprisoned or 
restrained in some of their former liberties 
and privileges, even "those angels 
who kept not their own principality, but 
left their own habitation [or normal condition] 
he has kept in perpetual chains, 
[restraints,] under thick darkness, for the 
judgment of the great day." Jude 6. 
-Diaglott. 

This interpretation seems to meet all 
the circumstances of the case thus far. 
Now we inquire, In what way could Jesus 
preach to these during the time he was 
dead? We answer that it is not so stated. 
It was by the facts that he preached, as 
we sometimes say that "actions speak 
louder than words." It was by his sufferings, 
death and resurrection that the 
preaching was done. Thus, as Jesus went 
from step to step in his work, his course 
was preaching a good sermon to those 
angels who once had been placed in control 
of man, and had themselves fallen 
instead of lifting up mankind. In Jesus 



they saw exemplified obedience even unto 
death, and its reward— resurrection— to 
spiritual being of the divine nature. Such 
was the great text, and the lesson from it 
is stated by the Apostle in verse 22, viz., 
that Jesus was now highly exalted and 
given a name [title] above every name, 
that he was "gone into heaven, and is at 
the right hand of God [the position of 
highest favor]; ANGELS and authorities 
and powers being made subject to him." 
They knew Jesus before he left the glory 
of the heavenly condition and became 
a man. They knew the object of his 
self-sacrifice as a man. They saw him 
obedient even unto death, and then that 
his high exaltation came as a reward 
(Phil. 2:9). They must have felt keenly 
their loss through disobedience, being cut 
off from communion with God, restrained 
as unworthy of former liberty and communion 
with the purer minded of mankind, 
and their own future an unsolved 
mystery. We can but imagine that sorrow 
and chagrin filled their hearts as they 
contrasted their course of disobedience 
and its results, with Jesus' obedient course 
and its grand results. We can fancy them 
saying, Would that we had realized before, 
as fully as we now do, the wide contrast 
between the results of obedience and 
disobedience. Would that we might have 
another trial: with our increased knowledge, 
our course would be very different. 

A clear distinction should be borne in 
mind, as between Satan and these angels. 
Satan evidently sinned against great light, 
so that infinite wisdom finds no place to 
do more for him. His was not a temptation 
to sin from bad example in others, 
as was the case with the "angels who sinned" 
in the days of Noah, being led in to 
evil by their contact with fallen man; 
for Satan is the father of lies and was a 
sinner prior to man's fall, and was man's 
tempter. With reference to Satan nothing 
is stated in Scripture to indicate a 
future trial; but, to the contrary, it is 
expressly stated that he is to be "destroyed." 
Heb. 2:14; Rom. 16:20; 
Rev. 20:10. 

Here we start the inquiry: Is it possible 
that there may be probation for these 
spirits in prison who were formerly disobedient 
in the day of Noah, being led 
into sin through man's bad example? We 



answer that God's loving care over and 
for man, while we were yet sinners, and 
his impartiality, would lead us to hope 
that he might as well have some provision 
for the spirits imprisoned alive, as for 
mankind imprisoned in death. Though 
because of the different penalties upon 
the two classes the means of recovery may 
not necessarily be the same in all particulars: 
for instance, these angels not 
being condemned to death, need not be 
redeemed from death. 

If those angels which sinned are to have 
a future trial— during the day or age of 
judgment [or trial], which is expressly 
stated, it follows that there is hope for 
them. If then, under the able instruction 
and assistance of the glorified church, 
they forsake sin and lay hold upon righteousness, 
they shall be accounted worthy 
of everlasting life and happiness. 

Since we find no Scripture statement 
contradictory of this, no statement telling 
of their destruction, we have reasonable 
ground of hope for them, and may 
search further for Scripture statements favoring 
that hope? 

We find but two statements apparently 
contradictory; The first reads: "Art thou 
come to destroy us?" (Mark 1:24; Luke 4:34; 
Matt. 8:29). This shows that 
these imprisoned spirits had in mind destruction 
as their final doom, but it no 
more proves that their suppositions were 
correct, than the fact that the so-called 
"Orthodox" believe that nine-tenths of 
humanity will be everlastingly tormented, 
proves that to be so. The fact is we find 
Satan, who taught men to thus blaspheme 
God's character through misrepresentations 
of his plans, was the master and 
chief over these cast-down spirits; and 
evidently he had misrepresented Jehovah's 
plans to the imprisoned spirits as he has 
to men. He is the father of lies. 

The second text (Matt. 25:41), mentions 
"everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and 
his angels." This cannot be used as an argument 
against a hope for a probation for 
the imprisoned spirits, for though by force 
of circumstances and restraint from any 
other service, they are now Satan's angels 
—messengers or servants— yet they may 
not always be such, if an opportunity 
were granted for them to return to God's 
service and be angels of God. This passage 



relates to the "lake of fire," or destruction, 
into which, at the close of the 
Millennial age, all are to be cast, who are 
out of harmony with God. Satan will be 
of those cast into that everlasting destruction, 
and with him all who do unrighteousness 
or have pleasure therein— all 
of whom, spirits or men, are reckoned to 
be on his side, his angels or messengers 
—evil doers, shall be cut off from life. 
To cut off such and such only, was God's 
plan from the beginning. The wilfully 
wicked and not the merely ignorant, misled, 
blinded or deceived are meant when 
it is said, "All the wicked will God 
destroy." 

THE PROBATION OF ANGELS. 

The above considerations naturally suggest 
the inquiry, Will those "spirits in 
prison," "those angels which kept not 
their first estate," and who received such 
a powerful lesson from the ministry, death 
and resurrection of Jesus, ever have an 
opportunity to profit by those lessons? will 
they ever have a chance to repent of their 
sin, to leave Satan's service, and return 
to loyalty to God? 

If at first we thought the Scriptures 
were silent on the subject, we have found 
that to be a mistake, and when God speaks 
we may reasonably conclude there is something 
profitable for us to learn. Hence 
let us give ear that we may learn whatever 
our Father deems expedient to communicate. 

Jude (verse 6) informs us that those 
angels which committed fornication and 
went after strange flesh "also" "in like 
manner" to the Sodomites (verse 7), God 
is keeping under restraint, (their penalty 
or punishment) "unto the judgment of 
the great day." The "great day" is the 
Millennial Day, and mankind is also waiting 
for this judgment [krisis— trial]. 
Peter's testimony is in harmony (2 Pet. 2:4). 
And Paul settles the matter that these 
fallen and now imprisoned spirit beings 
will have a trial as well as mankind, under 
the reign of Christ— the Church, the 
kingdom of God in exalted power. Speaking 
of the propriety of our deciding 
earthly difficulties, he says, "Do you not 
know that the saints shall judge the 
world?. ..Know ye not that we shall 
judge angels?" (1 Cor. 6:1-4). The 



Greek word here rendered judge, is krino, 
of the same root as krisis, rendered judgment 
in Jude 7, and signifies, to govern, 
to test, as to mete out to each individual 
blessings or stripes, according to the 
merit of their course when brought fully 
into the light of truth, and under all the 
blessings of the reign of Christ. Thus it 
is seen that it will be part of the work of 
the Christ to rule over and direct both 
human and angelic sinners— "to judge 
the world" of fallen men, now restrained 
in death, from which they have been redeemed 
—and also fallen spirits, restrained 
alive until this judgment or trial of the 
Great Millennial Day, when the saints 
under the headship of Jesus shall try their 
cause also, giving everlasting life and favor 
to those who shall then prove themselves 
worthy of it, and everlasting destruction 
to those unworthy. 

Besides, we find frequent references to 
a work Christ is to do in subjecting 
heavenly or spiritual, as well as human 
powers, when the church which is his body 
has been selected and the work of judging 
and blessing commences. For instance, 
we read (Eph. 1:10), "In the dispensation 
of the fullness of times, to re-establish 
[under God's dominion and law] all 
things in Christ [the disordered things] 
that are in heaven [spiritual] and on earth 
[human], in him."— Douay translation. 
Again, "In him it hath well pleased the 
Father that all fullness should dwell, and 
through him to reconcile all things unto 
himself, making peace by the blood of 
his cross, both as to the things on earth, 
and the things in heaven"— earthly and 
spiritual transgressors— Col. 1:20 Douay. 

In Eph. 3:8-10, it is shown that the 
length and breadth of God's redemptive 
plan, has been hidden by God until the 
Gospel Age, when the Apostles were commissioned 
to declare to men, the conditions 
upon which they might become 
sharers with Jesus in the execution of 
God's loving plans, and the intent is, ultimately 
to have all the heavenly or spiritual 
beings know, through the instrumentality 
of the Church, the boundless wealth 
that is in God's great gift— His Son— and 
the different methods and steps his wisdom 
marked out for all his creatures. We 
quote the passage from the Diaglott 
translation:— 



"To me, the very lowest of the saints, 
was this favor given— To announce among 
nations the glad tidings-the BOUNDLESS 
WEALTH of the Anointed One: even to 
enlighten all as to what is the [method 
of] administration [or operation] of that 
secret [plan] which has been concealed 
from the ages, by that God who created 
all things; in order that now [henceforth] 
may be made known to the governments 
and the authorities in the heavenlies, 
through [the instrumentality of] the congregation 
[church] the much diversified 
wisdom of God, according to the plan of 
the ages," "which he purposed in Christ 
Jesus our Lord." 

It would appear, then, that God's bountiful 
plan and diversified wisdom contains 
something of interest to the angels, and 
if of interest to any, of special interest 
to those confined or restrained, and awaiting 
a trial in the judgment of the great 
day. They see the saints and seek to 
look into things revealed by the spirit 
and Word to these, but in no other way 
can they learn of their future, or of what 
provision has been made for them in the 
boundless wealth and diversified wisdom 
of God, because it is to be "made known," 
"through the church." 

These condemned angels have been 
learning much since the first text and sermon 
—the lesson of Jesus' obedience and 
exaltation (1 Pet. 3:18-20 and 1 Tim. 3:16); 
for we read that "we are made a 
spectacle to both angels and to men." 
(1 Cor. 4:9— Diaglott.) The spectacle 
and lesson is both to men and angels for 
the reason that both men and angels will 
shortly be judged by the church, and 
blessed by it, if found obedient and worthy 
of life. When the testimony in due 
time is given, all things, both in heaven 
(the spiritual condition) and on earth (the 
human) shall bow to Jehovah's Anointed 
and confess him their Lord and Ruler; 
and those who refuse his righteous authority, 
shall be cut off as unworthy of life. 
-Isa. 45:23. Rom. 14:11. Matt. 25. 
Acts 3:33. 

The angels that sinned in the days of 
Noah, have had a bitter experience since, 
no doubt death would have been preferable 
in many respects. Cut off from association 
with good angels and placed in 
the companionship of each other and Satan, 



without God and having no hope, 

they must have had a terrible experience, 

with sin's demoralizing effects, while their 

observation of mankind dying on account 

of sin, would lead them to surmise that 

such might ultimately be their portion. 

Surely, many of them will be prepared for 

a return to their former estate and its privileges 

and blessings, on whatever terms a 

just God may prescribe. 

We cannot forget, too, their respectful 
conduct toward our Lord and his apostles, 
and the message they delivered; far 
more respectful indeed than that of the 
strictest sect of the Jewish church. While 
the latter scoffed and said, "Is not this 
Jesus the son of Joseph?" (John 6:42) 
the former exclaimed "Thou art the Son 
of God," (Mark 3:11.) While the former 
said, "Thou hast a devil and art mad," 
the latter said, "I know thee who thou 
art, the HOLY ONE of God. "--Mark 1:24. 

While they respected the true, they opposed 
the false, saying to some who pretended 
to exercise power— "Jesus I know, 
and Paul I know, but who are ye? And 

R993 : page 5 

the man in whom the evil spirit was, 
leaped on them and overcame them." 
-Acts 19:15. 

The Jews and Gentiles beat and stoned 
the messengers of God when they came 
among them with the glad tidings of salvation, 
but some of these fallen angels 
seemed desirous of spreading the glad 
tidings. One followed the Apostles, saying: 
"These men are the servants of the 
most high God which show unto us the 
way of salvation."— Acts 16:17. 

THE BASIS OF THEIR HOPE. 

But an important question now arises. 
The Scriptures show us that our hope centres 
in the fact that a ransom price was 
given for our sins, but what is the basis of 
hope for these fallen angels? On what 
ground can they have a trial and hope of 
future everlasting life? Did our Lord die 
for them? 

We are not so informed: The ransom-sacrifice 
was human, a ransom for men. 
"Verily," says Paul, "he took not on him 
the nature of angels," etc. (Heb. 2:16.) 



Furthermore, they were not under condemnation 

of death, and hence have 

never lost their life in any measure, and 

would need no ransom from death, when 

they were not in, nor condemned to it. 

It was because the sentence of DEATH had 

passed upon men that a ransom was necessary 

in order that we might regain life. 

Those angels which kept not their first 

estate, were condemned, not to death, but 

to restraint and confinement, until a day 

of trial, when God will judge both men 

and angels in righteousness by that man 

whom he hath ordained. (Acts 17:31.) 

They are therefore undergoing their penalty 

as truly as man is suffering his, though 

they be very different in kind— "according 

to the much diversified wisdom of 

God." 

And yet they had a great interest in 
our Lord's sacrifice; for though they were 
not being redeemed, bought by the precious 
blood, as was man, and did not need 
to be, not being under condemnation to 
death, yet their hope centered in the power 
which he should gain through his exaltation 
to the divine nature, in consequence 
of his obedience even unto death, to judge 
and restore them in due time. 

Again, if we have a correct view of the 
matter, that these angels had been tempted 
and seduced by evil in men, which had 
become very great (Gen. 6:5) then we 
see how the reconciliation accomplished 
by the blood of the cross for man would 
apply to and cancel both direct and indirect 
guilt, which resulted from the one 
man's disobedience. So that now, in the 
words of the Apostle, "It pleased the 
Father... having made peace [propitiation 
—satisfaction] by the blood of his 
cross, by him to reconcile all things unto 
himself, by him, whether things [out of 
harmony] in earth, or things in heaven." 
-Col. 1:20. 

GOD'S COMPREHENSIVE LAW. 

God's wisdom, love, and justice decide 
on what is best, and that decision is his 
will or law. But strictly speaking, only 
so much of God's will as he expresses to 
his creatures is law to them. Hence while 
his laws never conflict, they may be more 
or less fully expressed on one occasion 
than on another. 



All of God's intelligent creatures are 
under instruction, being taught those laws 
which his infinite love, wisdom and justice 
have enacted for the well-being of all. 
Though created perfect, each in his plane 
of being, yet they all lack that scope of 
knowledge and wisdom which belongs in 
full measure only to the divine nature. 
They all lack experience: hence in giving 
them instruction in the wisdom and propriety 
of his laws, it has pleased Jehovah 
to make an illustration which would manifest 
and practically exemplify his own 
character and prove to his creatures the 
wisdom and righteousness of his laws. 

It is evident, that the spirit of his law is 
not to take advantage of some transgressive 
slip, occasioned by lack of experience 
on the part of his creatures, but that he 
intends it to apply to the thoughts and 
intents of the hearts. That this is the 
real intent of God, we shall see illustrated 
by his dealings with those who have from 
lack of knowledge become sinners. 

His law in full, as we now see it in the 
light of His Word, is, "The soul that 
sinneth, it shall die;" that no being shall 
be permitted to live, who, when fully informed 
of God's righteous will, and enabled 
to obey it, shall not conform thereto; 
that all such shall be cut off from 
life. But this is as it may be seen NOW. 
Once it was not so clearly expressed, nor 
so clearly seen. 

To exemplify this law fully, God caused 
man to be used as an illustration before 
this extreme penalty was placed upon the 
angels. So, God placed on man the full extreme 
penalty of his law— death, knowing 
that through inexperience he would violate 
that law and come under its penalty. 
But God proposed to make an illustration 
to all his creatures of the exceeding sinfulness 
of sin and its sure consequences, 
while at the same time his love and wisdom 
so marked out the plan, that mankind, 
the illustration, might not suffer 
loss, but be fully recovered from the penalty, 
and be blessed by being everlastingly 
guarded against sin, by the lessons 
learned. 

Nor should we forget that God's dealing 
with man was perfectly just. He had a 
perfect right to demand perfect obedience 
from a perfect creature; and the fact that 
he has not required it at first of the angels, 



was a favor toward them, permitting them 

to acquire by observation of mankind, a 

knowledge of sin and its dire results, before 

being placed liable to its extreme 

penalty; even as toward man he has displayed 

his favor also, though in a different 

manner— through a ransom, and Savior, 

and restitution, and future trial for life, 

more favorable than the first, because of 

the knowledge of sin and its effects, meanwhile 

acquired by experience. This was 

a masterly stroke of wise economy on 

God's part; for had the death penalty 

been pronounced on the angels who sinned, 

a redeemer of their own kind would 

have been necessary for their recovery; 

and not only one, but many; for they 

were not representatively, but individually 

on trial. By the method chosen the grand 

result is accomplished through the instrumentality 

of the one sacrifice and the benefits 

which flow therefrom. Let us briefly 

VIEW THE EXHIBITION 

of God's character as displayed in his 
dealing toward mankind whom he made 
a spectacle to angels. (1 Cor. 4:9.) In 
so doing, let us guard against the common 
error which judges of God's actions 
exactly as of our own. Let us remember 
that justice, love, wisdom, and power, as 
commonly displayed by the fallen race, 
in dealing with each other, and by human 
parents with their children, are far from 
being perfect, as at first— the image of 
those qualities in Jehovah. In consequence 
of the fall these qualities are constantly 
at war with each other, in our experience. 
Sometimes love has a victory over justice, 
and sometimes justice has a victory over 
love. 

But with Jehovah there can be no conflict; 
and neither ever gains a victory or 
ascendancy over the other. Both are perfect, 
and work only in perfect harmony. 

Before man was created, the justice, 
wisdom, love, and power of God held 
conference on the subject, and devised the 
plan which has since been developing. 
The plan was suggested by wisdom and 
concurred in by the other attributes, the 
arrangement and execution of it being 
left in Wisdom's hands. 

Wisdom designed to have the largest 
returns of experience and benefit to man, 



and the most valuable illustration of God's 
character to all his creatures, on every 
plane of being. Accordingly Wisdom 
said, Let the man come under the control 
of Justice, Love, and Power, separately, 
that the force and operation of each 
may be the more forcibly illustrated. Let 
Justice first have complete control, let the 
man be dealt with by the strict law, "Thou 
shaltnot"— . "In the day that thou 
dost.. .dying thou shaltdie." And 
so it was. 

Man, inexperienced and unused to self 
control and liberty, violated the law, and 
experienced the full weight of Justice, as 
Wisdom had foreseen and prepared for. 

The lesson under Justice has been long 
and severe, but the lesson must be thorough, 
so that it shall never need repeating. 
Men and angels must learn that Justice is 
relentless, irrevocable and unalterable. 
Then, too, before it could be realized that 
the remedy for man lay only in Jehovah and 
nowhere else, an opportunity was offered 
for the trial of other methods for his recovery. 
First, the angels were given rulership, 
(during the age before the flood), 
and made a miserable failure; for while 
man became more and more corrupt himself, 
his evil influence led to the fall of 
some of those who attempted his assistance 
—"those angels which kept not their 
first estate." 

With the Deluge that order of affairs 
passed away. Then, under the law, given 
to one selected nation, another and a 
different opportunity was offered, to prove 
to man that even if God should cancel all 
enmity, or resentment, and receive the 
world into covenant relations, yet they 
would require a Restorer so that they could 
continue in harmony with God, even after 
being brought back. Hence sacrifices and 
offerings for sin were instituted, and God 
treated that nation as though original sin 
and guilt had been removed, and then 
placed them under law to prove to them, 
to us and to all, their inability (as degenerate 
creatures) to keep his law without 
a restitution to perfection— to his 
likeness. 

Meanwhile Love stood ready to manifest 
itself at the moment Wisdom should 
give the word. Love would have done so 
at once, but for two reasons: First, it 
could not oppose or interfere with the 



action of Justice in condemning man and 

delivering him over for the execution of 

the prescribed penalty. Secondly; Though 

Love might have acknowledged Justice 

and approved its action by promptly providing 

a ransom (an equivalent price), 

Wisdom objected and did not permit 

this course at that time, because it saw best 

to make the lesson complete and thorough. 

Hence for over four thousand years 
Love was not permitted to manifest itself, 
and might only speak in shadowy sacrifices 
and ceremonies, and more or less obscure 
promises. But finally, when the right time 
had come, "in due time," "in the fullness 
of time," Wisdom gave the word, 
and Love began to manifest itself for 
man's relief. The first act was to produce 
a perfect and sinless man to be a 
suitable "ransom for all," and it must be 
one not under the Adamic curse, who 
would lay down his life for the race, and 
whose sacrifice would meet all the requirements 
of justice, and therefore be acceptable 
as a ransom and propitiation for our 
sins. And Love's great exhibition was 
seen in the gift of the grandest, and greatest, 
and first of all God's creation, who 
became a man to redeem men: and "they 
called his name Jesus" when he became a 
man. 

Ah! says one who judges by his own 
habits and feelings, Now comes Love's 
victory over Justice. We shall see that 
God is more loving than severe. But not 
so; God is not more loving than severely 
just: he is perfect in both respects. It 
will be indeed a victory for Love, but not 
over Justice. It will be much grander 
than that. It will prove a victory for 
both Justice and Love; for it will be 
gained by Love's paying the price demanded 
by Justice— a RANSOM, "an equivalent 
price." 

Thus did the love of God magnify the 
justice and law of God, and "make it 
honorable," by acknowledging its claims 
in the payment of the very penalty demanded 
—man's death.— Rom. 5:19. 

We need scarcely say, that the love of 
God so long veiled from sight, was manifested 
in the gift of his Son to be our 
Redeemer and Saviour. The record is: 
"Herein is love, not that we loved God, 
but that he loved us and sent his Son to 
be the propitiation [satisfaction or appeasement] 



for our sins." "In this was 

manifested the love of God toward us, because 

that God sent his only begotten Son 

into the world, that we might LIVE through 

him."-l Jno. 4:9,10. 

When Love had RANSOMED man, and 
was ready to reveal itself by restoring mankind 
to perfection and harmony with 
God, Wisdom postponed it on the ground 
that a further development of the plan 
would ultimately enhance Love's glory, 
and perfect the work: that an interlude 
[the Gospel age] must occur in which 
should be selected some from among the 
redeemed; some sharers in Christ's sufferings 
and reproach, who should be counted 
worthy to share his glory, and to be his 
associates in the execution of Love's triumph 
in "the restitution of all things 
spoken by the mouth of all the holy 
prophets." 

Long and faithfully has Love labored, 
yet all her labor will yet be lost, unless in 
due time Wisdom shall commission Power 
to do its special part in the great plan. 

Power thus far has stood in the background, 
doing nothing directly in man's 
relief, save in the resurrection of our 
Lord and in the miracles, which shadowed 
forth its coming work. 

Now, we are living in the day when 
Power begins to act, not in opposition to 
Justice, but in harmony with Wisdom, 
Justice, and Love, in crushing out sin and 
evil, and in legally removing the penalty 
of sin and the dominion of evil, cancelled 
through the ransom, paid by Jesus. 
Oh, blessed day! The Lamb that was 
slain and who redeemed us by his blood 
is now invested with Power to restore and 
bless all whom he bought, and he is now 
about taking unto himself his great power, 
and shall reign until he hath put all enemies 
in subjection.— Rev. 20:6; and 
1 Cor. 15:25. 

Thus, God has chosen the plan which 
most fully and grandly exemplifies his 
unalterable justice, and exhibits the exceeding 
riches of his grace— his love; and 
in the restoration of man from destruction 
from death, to life and perfection, will 
God's power be illustrated far more forcibly 
than even in man's creation. And as 

R993 : page 6 



men and angels come to recognize the full 
fruition of God's plan in the ages to come, 
will they not with one consent exclaim 
with our brother Paul, as he caught a 
glimpse of it: "O the depths of the riches 
both of the wisdom and knowledge of 
God! how unsearchable are his judgments 
and his ways past finding out! For who 
hath known the mind [plan] of the Lord? 
or who hath been his counsellor?. ..Because 
out of him, and through him, and 
for him are all things. To him be the 
glory for ever."— Rom. 11:34-36. 

THE DIVERSIFIED WISDOM OF GOD. 

"The much-diversified wisdom of God" 
(Eph. 3:10. Diaglott) pursued one course 
with reference to men, and another with 
reference to the angels, not delivering them 
over to justice under the extreme penalty 
of the law, but pronouncing a lesser penalty 
until they should learn of evil and 
its consequences from the "spectacle" furnished 
them in mankind. 

But the result of wisdom's course in 
either case is the same. The angels being 
perfect, and having had an example of the 
extreme penalty of the law, will be able 
and doubtless glad to conform to God's 
law when again offered the opportunity. 
Man, who experienced the extreme penalty 
of the law, when restored, will be able to 
appreciate forever good and evil, and to 
rightly choose that which is good. While 
both will then be liable to the extreme 
penalty— death— neither need come under 
it, because of perfection and knowledge. 
They will then, as God does, love righteousness 
because it is good and hate unrighteousness 
because it is wrong. 

Though the experience of angels might 
at first appear less severe than man's, yet 
when it is remembered that man's dying 
experience was limited to an average of 
three-score years and ten, while the angels 
who sinned experienced over four thousand 
years of living restraint under Satan's 
rule, it will generally be conceded that 
their experience was not less severe than 
man's. 

In view of the great work to be accomplished, 
how necessary is the elevation of 
the Christ (head and body) to the DIVINE 
nature, since his mission is to govern, 
direct, and bring to perfection "whosoever 



will," both of spiritual and human 
beings. And does not the selection of 
this class, made different both from angels 
and men— of the divine nature— illustrate 
yet further the much diversified wisdom 
of God, whereby he is able to work all 
things according to the counsel of his own 
will? 



R994 : page 6 
ROMANISM SPOTTED. 



Roman Catholicism seems to adapt 
itself to every circumstance. It is black 
in one place, and white in another, and 
grey in another, just as the civilization of 
the people will permit. In thoroughly 
ignorant Catholic countries, as Cuba, 
Spain and Mexico, it openly sells indulgences 
for sin covering almost every crime 
conceivable, and in many instances these 
are printed and for sale at regularly 
graded prices. These are some of the 
black spots, and the shaded influence of 
priest-craft has kept those nations over 
which it has obtained control, far behind 
other nations in progress and civilization, 
though at one time they had superior 
advantages. In civilized lands 
where it comes in conflict and comparison 
with liberty and general intelligence, 
Romanism wears a garment of light (2 Cor. 11:13-15); 
and repudiating indulgences 
by that name, she has a more 
refined way of collecting the same revenue. 
Here she demands more priestly 
prayers and masses for some sins than 
others, and can thus run up the bill of 
charges for forgiveness as well as in the 
case of the printed indulgences of other 
lands. 

ROMANISM AND THE PUBLIC SCHOOLS. 

Long has Rome realized that intelligence 
is her foe; and hence in priest-ridden 
countries such as we have named, 
the population is ignorant in the extreme; 
as for illustration, the Catholic districts 
of Ireland, and in Spain, Portugal, Italy, 
etc. In none of these countries where 
Romanism has had a strong foothold for 
centuries, has she shown any disposition 



or energy to educate the masses of the 
people. But in civilized lands where 
Protestants predominate, the Church of 
Rome is full of zeal for the education of 
the masses. She conceals the real cause of 
her animosity to the public school system 
of this country, which thus far she has 
failed to overthrow, by establishing parochial 
schools for the children of Roman 
Catholics, claiming that a secular education 
from which religious instruction is 
excluded, is a serious evil, and that therefore 
they cannot send their children to the 
public schools. 

By religious instruction they evidently do 
not mean, such as comes from the good 
example of moral teachers; for such most 
of the public schools have. Nor do they 
mean the simple lesson of reverence for 
God; for they objected to the reading of 
a chapter from the Bible, though the 
Bibles used by Catholics and Protestants 
are practically alike. And they object 
too, to the repetition of the Lord's Prayer 
by the school: hence we must conclude 
that when they say that the children 
should have a religious training, they 
mean by that, a course of instruction in 
Catholic doctrines, and histories specially 
prepared to deceive relative to the past 
and present attitude of the Church of 
Rome. They do not wish to have the 
rising generations instructed in the plain 
facts of reliable history, which reveals 
the true character of the Church of Rome, 
the dawn of the Reformation, etc. These 
facts, if they must be alluded to, must 
first receive the gloss of Catholic writers. 

We mention these matters that it may 
be seen as a very peculiar change of front, 
that recently in one of the public school 
wards of Pittsburg, a Roman Catholic 
Priest, of St. Malachi's Church, was 
elected and installed as Principal. What 
a strange procedure! How well the symbol 
"leopard", applied to that system in 
holy writ, illustrates its spotted or varied 
character.— Rev. 13:2. 

It was not strange that a ward in which 
Roman Catholics predominate should prefer 
a Catholic to a Protestant for Principal, 
all other conditions, education, etc., 
being equal, but it was strange, that a 
man should be thought capable as a school 
Principal whose time may well be supposed 
to be urgently needed in pastoral 



services over a large flock of deluded and 
ignorant sheep and goats, for whose ignorance 
and that of their parents for centuries 
past, the Church of Rome is directly 
chargeable. 

But the most strange fact of all is, that 
this gentleman would accept the position; 
and that the church he represents, should 
permit his course, after so long and so 
bitterly crying out against these very 
schools as her enemies, and as institutions 
of the devil. This priest is too well educated 
to be ignorant of the objections all 
along urged by his church against the public 
schools. He must also have been aware, 
before accepting the office of Principal, 
that he would have no power either to 
introduce Roman Catholic instruction, or 
even to change the text-books and routine 
of studies. So then, these "wicked" 
"infidel" public schools which Roman 
Catholics have so often cursed, are really 
unchanged by the election of a priest for 
Principal, yet as soon as the priest was 
installed, Catholic children were ordered 
to attend them. This was merely another 
evidence of the "leopard," or scheming 
[spotted] policy of Roman Catholicism. 
The next stealthy step, designed no doubt, 
was to get the entire control of each 
school into the hands of local boards, 
and then change text-books, exercises, 
studies, etc., to suit themselves. 

But the scheme miscarried for the present, 
by reason of the failure of the nuns 
selected by this Principal to be the new 
teachers under him, to pass the rigid examination 
to which public school teachers 
are subjected here. Rather than carry on 
the schools without the nuns as teachers, 
the priest resigned the Principalship and 
started the Catholic schools as before. 
The plan is not considered dead, but 
merely sleeping until a more convenient 
season, when preparations will be more complete. 
We might as well add that we favor 
purely secular schools, from which all religious 
teaching and worship would be excluded. 
Less than thirty hours each week, 
and that for but a few years, is spent in 
the school room, and surely priests, nuns 
and others, have plenty of time to pour 
into childhood's ears their confusing mixtures 
of truths and errors, without intruding 
upon these few precious hours, or upon 
each other's sectarian prejudices. 



The Church of Rome is assiduously endeavoring 
to make herself popular and 
to commend herself to liberty lovers, 
trusting that they will forget the past and 
present of her despotic rule of ignorance 
and superstition in other lands. It is 
for this reason that she now appears to 
favor free schools, whereas the fifteen 
centuries of the past emphasize the fact 
that she is the bitterest enemy of everything 
which even looks toward liberty of 
conscience. She lays her clammy hand 
caressingly and patronizingly upon America's 
free institutions, that at an unsuspected 
moment she may throttle them 
and use them to her own unchanged purposes 
and schemes. She therefore for the 
moment changes her policy to suit the 
circumstances and seeks to pose before the 
public as the champion of true Christian 
liberty, even going so far as to put the 
Bible (which once she condemned and 
prohibited, except for the "clergy") into 
the hands of the people. This she did 
at the last Plenary Council in Baltimore, 
in Oct. '86. Could we see in these changes 
real reform, we would rejoice, but since 
it is ever Rome's boast that she is infallible 
and never changes, we are forced to 
believe that she is really the same as ever, 
and that merely her policy is now changing 
for purposes of expediency. 

Hear again the real sentiments of the 
unchangeable Church of Rome, not from 
the remote past, but within comparatively 
recent years:— 

"We declare, affirm, define, and pronounce it 
necessary to salvation, for every human creature to 
be subject to the Roman Pontiff."— Cardinal 
Manning. 

"Accursed be those very crafty and deceitful societies, 
called Bible Societies, which thrust the 
Bible into the hands of the inexperienced youth." 
-Pope Pius IX. 

"What Father Walker says (i.e., that he would 
as soon administer the sacraments to a dog as to 
Catholics who send their children to the public 
schools) is only what has been said over and over 
again by the bishops in their pastorals all over the 
world, and we heartily indorse it."— N.Y. Tablet. 

"No Bible shall be held or read except by priests. 
No Bible shall be sold without a license, except 
upon the pains and penalties of that mortal sin 
that is neither to be forgiven in this world nor in the 
next."— Council of Trent. 

"Moreover we confirm and renew the decrees 



delivered in former times by apostolic authority, 
against the publication, distribution, reading and 
possession of books of the Holy Scriptures translated 
into the vulgar tongue."— Pope Gregory XVI. 

The following is from the bishop's oath.— "Heretics 
(Protestants), schismatics and rebels to the 
Pope or his successors, I will, to the utmost of my 
power, persecute and wage war with." 

Rome has no new love for the Bible, 
which she has learned to fear, as the "Sword 
of the Spirit," from whose wound in the 
hands of the early Protestants, she has 
not yet fully recovered. (Rev. 13:3.) 
But she has learned that that sword is 
comparatively harmless when there are so 
few brave defenders of "the faith once 
delivered to the saints," to wield it. She 
has learned that even the "two-edged 
sword" of God's Word, when sheathed 
in the scabbard of human tradition, is not 
to be feared even in the hands of the 
masses. She has seen the children of 
those early Protestors— Lutherans, Methodists, 
Presbyterians, etc., sheath this 
Sword of the Spirit to smite with merely 
the scabbards of human tradition, and 
though they bear it continually, that thus 
they appear more like soldiers of the cross, 
though in fact they are not. And this appearance 
is another element of power 
Rome desires, and therefore she adds this 
to her policy. She thinks that in the 
same way, she can handle the Bible as 
safely as do the Protestants. 

If all the Protestant sects can with a 
show of liberty put the Bible into the 
hands of their followers, and yet make 

R995 : page 6 

void the Scriptures through their traditions, 
cannot she as safely as Protestants 
use the Bible and appear to study it, without 
permitting its truths to destroy her 
false system, traditions, and doctrinal errors? 
This is the reason why Papacy 
has finally concluded to appear as liberal 
as Protestantism. And so, the Bible may 
now be read by Catholics, and the Church 
of Rome thus quietly makes another move 
representing herself as the friend of the 
Bible and of freedom. This is necessary 
for her hold upon her subjects here, who 
are used to the air of freedom, and could 
not be trampled upon as in Roman Catholic 
countries, for instance Spain, where 



recently an American citizen was assaulted 

by a priest in the streets of Madrid, because 

he would not remove his hat and 

salute one of the numerous Catholic processions. 

It is the same in Mexico, and 

in the Central and South American countries, 

where all who will not manifest reverence 

for those processions are obliged 

to dodge into by-streets, to avoid being 

mobbed for their exercise of that slightest 

of liberties. 

The Church of Rome is seeking to favorably 
impress the worldly irreligious 
classes— which includes most of the 
wealthy, that in the troublous times already 
begun, she may pose before them as the 
only Church capable of controlling the 
people. She desires thus to turn present 
and coming labor troubles to her own 
advantage. Already she requests donations 
from large manufacturing firms, and 
gets them, as we have learned from their 
own lips, on the ground that she has more 
influence with the ignorant classes than 
any other power and can best conserve 
the interests of the wealthy. 

By and by, as Romanism rises in apparent 
love of liberty and progress, under 
the growing feeling that so many sects 
of so-called Christians is a weakness, and 
under the pressure of the growing desire 
of religionists, and the apparent necessity 
in the minds of capitalists and kings for 
a STRONG RELIGIOUS POWER to hold the 

R994 : page 7 

people down to the old laws and customs 
of the past, favorable to those now in 
power financially and socially, the aspirations 
of the Church of Rome will again 
begin to be realized; and she will begin to 
gather to her fold the wealthy and the 
conservative, convincing them that her 
influence is necessary to the preservation 
of their interests, financial and political, 
just as she long ago conquered Italy and 
then all Europe, on the same terms. 

And this is sound logic; it certainly 
appeals to business men as such. No other 
power on earth can and will, so successfully 
and so long, resist the spirit and rule 
of the new incoming dispensation of justice, 
equal rights, fullest liberty of conscience, 
and the general diffusion of truth 
and righteousness as the Church of Rome. 



Whether she will seek to stand entirely 

alone or whether she will affiliate to 

some extent with leading Protestant systems, 

is at present difficult to determine. 

It seems however from the views given in 

Revelation that she will stand separate, 

and yet be allied in interest with Protestants. 

Already we see tokens of the growing 
popularity of Romanism, and a desire for 
one strong church, among men of influence. 
At the recent celebration of the Constitutional 
Centennial in Philadelphia, the 
"cradle of liberty," a representative of this 
old and implacable foe of liberty took the 
most prominent religious part: Cardinal 
Gibbon, who, as previously announced, 
offered prayer and pronounced a benediction 
in his official robes, was the FIRST 
dignitary called upon by the President of 
the United States, upon his arrival; and 
they were afterward as representatives of 
the CHURCH and the NATION publicly introduced 
upon the platform, "amid the 
deafening applause of the immense throng 
present, which lasted unusually long." 

Let us not be misunderstood. We do 
not claim that the President had not the 
right to visit the Cardinal; for though 
his office gives him no privileges not enjoyed 
by all citizens, neither does it rob 
him of any liberties possessed by others. 
He had a right to visit whom and when 
he pleased, but we merely note this as one 
of the straws which indicate the tendencies 
of our times. Mr. Cleveland's courtesy 
to the Cardinal does not indicate 
that Mr. Cleveland is at heart a Romanist, 
but merely that he was shrewd enough 
to remember the political influence of the 
large class of voters represented by the 
Cardinal. 

Nor should we be understood as believing 
that choice should have been made 
of a minister from some other sect, or 
without official robes, instead of Cardinal 
Gibbon, to offer the Centennial prayer. 
On the contrary, we hold that the mixing 
of religion and politics is wholly wrong. 
The church and its sacred services should 
be kept entirely separate from the world 
and its political trickery, and misrule. 
The Master said: Ye are not of the world. 
If ye were of the world the world would 
love his own; but I have chosen you out 
of [to be separate from] the world; therefore 
the world hateth you. (John 15:19.) 



The world does not love God, nor his 
faithful children; for their ways and teachings 
reprove the world.— John 15:22. 

The idea of opening political Conventions 
with prayer, and appointing Chaplains 
to offer regular prayers in Congress, 
and before Legislative Assemblies, is farcical 
and hypocritical in the extreme. The 
politicians, "children of this age," do 
not want God's will done, and do not 
really consult God's will. No one will 
gainsay the statement, that if there be any 
really consecrated children of God, any 
real saints in politics, they are surely but 
few. The majority are unbelievers, though 
profiting by Mr. Ingersol's experience, in 
losing office, they do not parade their 
unbelief. 

Under the instructions first given by 
Papacy, and never fully escaped from by 
Protestants, the world has been taught to 
hypocritically ape Christianity— Kings, 
Queens, Emperors, etc., each claims to 
reign by Divine appointment, because 
Papacy authorized such rulers, under 
the claim that she represented God, and 
that her appointment or recognition of a 
ruler, was a divine recognition. If the 
kingdoms of this world call themselves 
Christian Kingdoms (Kingdoms authorized 
and governed by Christ), it is but 
natural that they should carry out that 
deception— that they should formally 
acknowledge God in their official acts, 
especially if thereby they can strengthen 
their governments, and the more firmly 
hold the people under them. Hence no 
matter how wicked and selfish the wars 
in which they engage, no matter whose 
rights and liberties they seek to subvert, 
chaplains are always sent along to pray 
with the men who go forth to murder 
others, and to steal from them their God-given 
rights, to give to the soldiers and 
sailors the idea that they are engaged in a 
Christian warfare, waged for righteousness' 
sake by a Christian nation. 

Politicians generally abominate such 
hypocritical shams, and continue them, 
not for their influence upon God, but for 
their influence upon the people. It is 
time that true Christians should know that 
such Pharisaical worship with lips while 
the heart is far from him, is an abomination 
to the Lord. 

Calling earthly and often sensual and 



devilish people and governments by the 
name Christian, has already worked great 
mischief, and made that holy name Christian, 
almost a synonym for hypocrisy and 
double-dealing. However, the poor world 
does not see the delusion under which it 
labors, and the Church of Rome, with a 
master policy, stands ready now to take 
advantage of the situation and to hold up 
before politicians and financiers her strong, 
powerful system, as the one best suited to 
the present and prospective emergency. 

Statesmen and financiers are looking 
with anxiety "after those things coming 
upon the earth" [society] as they see that 
a great shaking, a great storm is brewing 
in the heavens [among the ruling powers, 
civil and ecclesiastical]; "for the powers 
of the heavens shall be [and are being] 
shaken." Statesmen fear the result of the 
breaking up of the ecclesiastical control: 
they see what the masses do not see— that 
with the removal of religious bigotry and 
superstition, will come a reaction which 
will lead to an excess of freedom for a 
time— to lawlessness and anarchy. It is 
this "fear," as she sees this tendency, 
that is leading Protestant Prussia (so 
called) to strengthen her relations with 
the Church of Rome— the strongest power 
in the ecclesiastical heavens, and the 
one which will withstand the shaking 
longest. The same influence is at work 
in Italy and in every nation, tending to 
strengthen the hands of Papacy for the 
moment, as the power most able and most 
willing to assist in any scheme which 
seems to forward her own influence, and 
increase her own power. 

Protestants generally, having dropped 
the original ground of protest— the right 
of individual private judgment in the 
understanding of the Scriptures— and having 
adopted church governments copied 
largely after that of Papacy, are not far 
from even being good Catholics now. 
Since Papacy now advocates the use of 
the Bible in the same manner that Protestants 
do— granting liberty to read but 
not to believe it, except where it agrees 
with the Confession of Faith handed with 
it— what is now to prevent harmony 
if not union, between Catholics and (so 
called) Protestants? Nothing but the 
pictures and images, and the worship of 
the Virgin Mary, and doubtless these can 



be explained out of the way to many ere 
long. 

Recall now a fact to which we have 
heretofore directed attention— that not 
long since many Episcopalians were moving 
for a change of name, preferring the 
name Catholic, and that they entertained 
a motion looking to the offer of what is 
termed the right of Apostolic benediction 
and succession, to other Protestants. Remember 
also the trend of thought among 
Presbyterian and Methodist ministers as 
represented by the words of Bishop Foster, 
of the M.E. Church, and Rev. E. 

R996 : page 7 

R. Donehoo, Presbyterian, of this city, 
which we here repeat. Mr. Donehoo said 
in a discourse before his congregation: 
"Wince as you will, you must admit that 
this [the Catholic Church] is the Mother 
Church. She possesses an unbroken history 
extending back to the times of the 
Apostles. For every fragment of religious 
truth which we prize, we are indebted to 
her as the depository. If she has no claims 
to being the true church, then are we 
bastards and not sons.... Talk about missionaries 
to labor amongst Romanists! 
I would as soon think of sending missionaries 
amongst Methodists and Episcopalians 
and United Presbyterians and Lutherans, 
for the purpose of converting 
them into Presbyterians." 

And Bishop Foster before the M.E. 
Conference, Nov. '86, addressing twelve 
bishops and forty lay delegates together 
with a large audience, said, and that without 
creating a ripple of opposition, "The 
popular idea is that the Church of Rome 
is antichrist. I don't agree with the popular 
belief. I regard that wonderful institution 
as a GREAT CHRISTIAN CAMP." 

We do not expect a complete union 
between Catholics and Protestants, but a 
fraternization by which the majority of 
Protestants (measurably consolidated) will 
stand shoulder to shoulder in aim and profession 
with the Church of Rome, embracing 
generally the capitalists, kings and great 
ones of earth, while the true liberty lovers 
and saints will be shaken out. But great 
Babylon shall never recover her former 
power and prestige. Only for a little moment 
shall she seem to succeed and be able 



to say— I sit a queen and shall see no sorrow; 
for "Strong is the Lord God who 
judgeth her." (Rev. 18:8.) The true 
Christ and his Kingdom shall supplant 
anti-christ and the Kingdoms of this world, 
falsely called Christendom. 

The Lord shall smite the nations and 
slay anti-christ with the truth— the sword 
which proceedeth out of his mouth. It 
is TRUTH, on various subjects, which is now 
stirring up the masses of the people to 
demand their natural rights and liberties. 
[Often, too, they ignorantly make unreasonable 
demands.] And many who mentally 
recognize their rights, through fear 
and selfishness will not acknowledge them, 
but often oppose them. Nevertheless, in 
this battle, truth and right shall come off 
victorious, though at great cost to all engaged. 
God will judge the hypocritical 
Christian Kingdoms of the earth by 
their professions, and with what measure 
they have measured out justice and 
consideration to the people, with that 
same measure shall their judgment be 
measured to them in this day of the judgment 
of the nations. They all shall fall, as 
tried in the balances they are found wanting; 
but with some the fall will be intensified 
to a dashing to pieces. 

While the gathering of Babylon as tares 
for the burning is progressing thus, the 
true wheat must also be gathering— and 
they are being gathered, not into a sect, 
nor into one place, but into harmony and 
oneness with the Lord, and with one another 
as members of his body. And so 
the Prophet was caused to write concerning 
the peculiar people, the royal priesthood, 
the holy nation," saying:— 

"Gather yourselves together, yea gather 
together, O nation not desired [despised 
by the world because of your faithfulness 
to God and the truth]. Before the decree 
bring forth [its results] for the day will 
pass [quickly, as when] chaff [burneth]; 
before the fierce anger of the Lord come 
upon you, before the day of the Lord's 
anger come upon you, Seek ye the Lord, 
all ye meek of the earth, which have 
obeyed his commands; seek righteousness 
[the right, the truth,] seek meekness; 
it may be ye shall be hid in the day of 
the Lord's anger.... Wait ye upon 
me, saith the Lord, until I rise up to the 
prey: for my determination is to gather 



the nations, that I may assemble the kingdoms, 
to pour upon them mine indignation, 
even all my fierce anger; for all the 
earth shall be devoured with the fire of 
my jealousy. For then will I turn to the 
people a pure language [unmixed with 
falsity and error as now] and they shall 
all call upon the name of the Lord to 
serve him with one consent." (Zeph. 2:1-3 
and 3:8,9.) Thus we have the two 
gatherings, the one for favor and blessing, 
the other for national destruction. To 
what standard and with what class am I 
being gathered? each should ask himself. 
See the right and seek it meekly— the 
time is short. 

R993 : page 7 

A VATICAN COUNCIL FOR PROTESTANTS. 

To illustrate the growing sentiment unfavorable 
to growth in knowledge of the 
truth, and the desire to have some pope 
or something like a Vatican Council to 
positively pronounce the doctrines held by 
various large sects, as all truth, and the 
whole truth— neither to be added to nor 
diminished, (just what Papacy claims to 
be able to decide,) we quote some of 
the remarks made at a meeting of the 
"American Board of Foreign Missions" at 
Springfield, Mass., Oct. 5, 1887, as reported 
in the daily Press. 

"During the debate a returned missionary 
from Turkey said, 'The effect on the 
missionary field would be terrible, if men 
were sent there with loose ideas of Bible 
interpretation'. Dr. Eddy, of Detroit, 
said: 'Don't send out any more creeds, 
for the Lord's sake! We could wish there 
were a Vatican Council in Boston to SETTLE 
all difficult questions.'" "It was decided 
not to call Councils to deal with 
difficult cases," and "the present" was 
characterized as "a period of THEOLOGICAL 
UPHEAVAL." 

How significant are these wishes, so 
publicly expressed, in such prominent official 
bodies of Protestantism, and by their 
leading men, for a strong statement of 
doctrines and defining of heresies which 
would authorize and appear to justify the 
silencing of all independent thought in 
the study of God's word, as thoroughly 
as Papacy ever did, even though a higher 



civilization might not permit the terrible 
tortures and vile indignities of the Inquisition, 
once heaped upon those whom the 
truth makes free by the "Mother." The 
desire is for the power and authority to 
bind upon men in the name of God and 
the Bible, doctrines of devils; such as 
the doctrine of the everlasting torture of 

R993 : page 8 

the great majority of God's creatures— of 
all who are not believing saints. Many 
do not and cannot believe the "good 
tidings of great joy" because it has been 
covered and made to appear bad tidings of 
great misery to all people, by the preaching 
of human traditions, largely obtained 
by Protestants from what Luther termed 
"the dunghill of Roman decretals." 

Protestants see that divisions are contrary 
to the Bible, but they do not see 
where the fault lies. They vainly suppose 
that the fault is a lack of organization 
—that they should have a stronger organization 
with a more rigidly fixed creed, 
like Rome has. This is their great mistake; 
in this they are ignorantly striving 
against God. Instead of having too 
little organization and an insufficient 
creed, they already are too much organized 
and have creeds a hundred fold too 
strong already; especially since they lack 
the support of the Bible or reason. 

The various degrees of growth in knowledge, 
cause men to have various stages of 
belief; and God intended that the organization 
should be very loose, and so arranged 
for the early church through the 
Apostles, so that in the Church of believers 
all might be able to stand, who believe 
in our Lord's ransom-sacrifice for their 
sins, and who are consecrated to his service. 
This simple creed would keep out 
none who have a right to be among the 
redeemed sheep, but would afford room 
for growth in grace and knowledge built 
upon this foundation, to all grades of mental 
endowment, so that while there might 
be wide differences as to attainments in 
the lengths and breadths, the heights and 
depths of knowledge, each would still 
recognize the other as a member of the 
one Church which Christ purchased with 
his own precious blood. This Church 
which is the only, the ONE CHURCH recognized 



by God, includes all the truly consecrated 
believers in Christ as our Redeemer, 
wherever they may be. Alas! many 
of them, starved and lean, are in Babylon's 
narrow streets (sects) instead of being 
outside in the liberty of the green pastures 
of God's Word. He is now calling 
to such saying, "Come out of her, my 
people, that ye be not partakers of her sins 
and that ye receive not of her plagues." 
He is now gathering together such in 
heart-union with himself and each other. 
He is sealing them in their foreheads, giving 
them an intellectual appreciation of 
himself and his plan. The Master saith 
"My sheep hear [obey] my voice and follow 
me," and by this we may be able to 
recognize them. 



R989 : page 8 

ARP SLIPS FOR W.VA. AND MD. 

Brother Weber, who lives near the border 
between Md. and W.Va., thinks the 
plan started by the Penna. sister last 
month a good one to follow, and sends 
in forty dollars to pay for Arp slips for 
free distribution in these two small states. 
See plan in last TOWER, and let brethren 
and sisters in these states send in plenty 
of orders. We have printed and on the 
press, over one hundred thousand already, 
and are ready to make it a million, with 
your co-operation. Brethren here are 
preaching thus to the various churches 
every Sunday. 



page 8 

NO MORE SOILED DAWNS. 

Our supply of 200 was ordered several 
times over. We have none but clean now, 
but plenty of them, paper bound 25 cts. 
Those who wish them for loaning or giving 
away, are welcome to the ten cents each, 
allowed by the tract fund to colporteurs 
as "expense money," if they will ask for it. 



