VOL. XIV. JUNE 1, 1893. NO. 11. 

THE RELATIVE CLAIMS OF LOVE AND JUSTICE. 



THERE is nothing more necessary to the peace 

and prosperity of the Church of God than 

that its members should have a clear understanding 

and appreciation of moral principles, with 

a full determination to be controlled by them. 

Even among Christians there are often differences 

of opinion, with reference to principles 

of action, which greatly interfere with spiritual 

growth and prosperity. Such difficulties most 

frequently arise through a failure to rightly 

distinguish between the relative claims of love 

and justice. Therefore we deem it profitable 

to briefly consider these principles and their 

operation among the children of God. 

Justice is sometimes represented by a pair of 
evenly poised balances, and sometimes by the 
square and compass, both of which are fitting 
emblems of its character. Justice knows no 
compromise and no deviation from its fixed 
rule of action. It is mathematically precise. 
It gives nothing over for "good weight" or 
"good measure:" there is no grace in it, no 
heart, no love, no sympathy, no favor of any 
kind. It is the cold, calculating, exact measure 
of truth and righteousness. When justice is 
done, there is no thanks due to the one who 
metes it out: such a one has only done a duty, 
the neglect of which would have been culpable, 
and the doing of which merits no favor or 
praise. And yet, cold, firm and relentless as 
this principle is, it is declared to be the very 
foundation of God's throne. It is the principle 



which underlies all his dealings with all his 
creatures: it is his unchangeable business principle. 
And how firmly he adheres to it is manifest 
to every one acquainted with the plan of 
salvation, the first step of which was to satisfy 
the claims of justice against our race. Though 
it cost the life of his only begotten and well 
beloved Son to do this, so important was this 
principle that he freely gave him up for us all— 
to satisfy its legal claims against us. 

The principle of love, unlike that of justice, 
overflows with tenderness and longs to bless. 
It is full of grace, and delights in the bestowment 
of favor. It is manifest, however, that 
no action can be regarded as a favor or a manifestation 
of love, which has not underneath it 
the substantial foundation of justice. Thus, 
for instance, if one comes to you with a gift, 
and at the same time disregards a just debt to 
you, the gift falls far short of appreciation as 
an expression of love; and you say, We should 
be just before we attempt to be generous. 

And this is right: if justice is the foundation 
principle in all of God's dealings, it should be 
in ours also; and none the less so among 
brethren in Christ than among those of the 
world. As brethren in Christ, we have no right 
to presume upon the favor of one another. All 
that we have a right to claim from one another 
is simple justice— justice in the payment of our 
honest debts to each other, justice in our judgment 
one of another (which must make due 
allowance for frailties, etc., because we realize 

R1535 : page 163 

in ourselves some measure of similar imperfection), 
and justice in fair and friendly treatment 
one of another. This is all we have any right 

R1535 : page 164 

to claim; and we must also bear in mind that 
while we have a right to claim this for ourselves 
from others, we are just as fully obligated to 
render the same to them. 

But while we may claim justice— though there 
is no obligation to demand it for ourselves, and 
we may if we choose even suffer injustice uncomplainingly 
—we must, if we are Christ's, 
render it. In other words, we are not responsible 
for the actions of others in these respects, 
but we are responsible for our own. And therefore 
we must see to it that all our actions are 
squared by the exact rule of justice, before we 
ever present a single act as an expression of love. 



The principle of love is not an exact principle 
to be measured and weighed like that of 
justice. It is three-fold in its character, being 
pitiful, sympathetic or reverential, according 
to the object upon which it is centered. The 
love of pity is the lowest form of love: it takes 
cognizance of even the vile and degraded, and 
is active in measures of relief. The love of 
sympathy rises higher, and proffers fellowship. 
But the love of reverence rises above all these, 
and delights in the contemplation of the good, 
the pure and the beautiful. In this latter sense 
we may indeed love God supremely, as the personification 
of all that is truly worthy of admiration 
and reverence, and our fellow men in 
proportion as they bear his likeness. 

Although we owe to every man the duty of 
love in some one of these senses, we may not 
demand it one of another, as we may the principle 
of justice; for love is the overflow of justice. 
Justice fills the measure full, but love 
shakes it, presses it down, heaps it up and overflows 
justice. It is therefore something not to 
be demanded, nor its lack to be complained of, 
but to be gratefully appreciated as a favor and 
to be generously reciprocated. Every one who 
craves it at all should crave it in its highest 
sense— the sense of admiration and reverence. 
But this sort of love is the most costly, and the 
only way to secure it is to manifest that nobility 
of character which calls it forth from others 
who are truly noble. 

The love of sympathy and fellowship is also 
very precious; but, if it come merely in response 
to a demand, it comes robbed of its choicest 
aroma: therefore never demand it, but rather 
by manifestation of it toward others court its 
reciprocation. 

The love of pity is not called out by the 
nobility of the subject, but rather by the nobility 
of the bestower, who is so full of the principle 
of love that it overflows in its generous 
impulses toward even the unworthy. All of 
the objects of pity are not, however, unworthy 
of love in the higher senses; and some such 
often draw upon our love in all the senses. 

To demand love's overflow of blessing— 
which is beyond the claims of justice— is only 
an exhibition of covetousness. We may act 
on this principle of love ourselves, but we may 
not claim it from others. The reverse of this 
exhibits a manifest lack of love and a considerable 
measure of selfishness. 

Thus, for instance, two of the Lord's children 
were once rooming together and, through a 
failure to rightly consider the relative claim 



of love and justice, one presumed upon the 
brotherly love of the other to the extent of expecting 
him to pay the entire rent; and when 
the other urged the claims of justice, he pushed 
the claim of brotherly love, and the former 
reluctantly yielded to it, not knowing how to 
refute the claim, yet feeling that somehow some 
Christians had less principle than many worldly 
people. How strange that any of God's children 
should take so narrow and one-sided a 
view. Cannot all see that love and justice 
should work both ways and that it is the business 
of each not to oversee others in these respects, 
but to look well to his own course, and 
if he would teach others, let it be rather by example 
than by precept. 

Let us beware of a disposition to covetousness, 
and let each remember that he is steward 
over his own goods, and not over his neighbor's, 
and that each is accountable to the 
Lord, and not to his brother, for the right use 
of that which the Master entrusted to him. 
There is nothing much more unlovely and unbecoming 
to the children of God than a disposition 
to petty criticism of the individual affairs 
of one another. It is a business too small for 
the saints, and manifests a sad lack of that 
brotherly love which should be specially manifest 

R1535 : page 165 

in broad and generous consideration, which 
would rather cover a multitude of sins than 
magnify one. 

May love and justice find their proper and 
relative places in the hearts of all of God's 
people, that so the enemy may have no occasion 
to glory. The Psalmist says, "Oh, how 
love I thy law [the law of love, whose foundation 
is justice]: it is my meditation all the 
day." (Psa. 119:97.) Surely, if it were the 
constant meditation of all, there would be fewer 
and less glaring mistakes than we often see. 
Let us watch and be sober, that the enemy may 
not gain an advantage over us. 



R1535 :page 165 
THE LORD'S SHEEP. 



THE Lord, in calling his people his sheep, 
chose a very significant emblem of the 



character he would have manifested in them. 

The most noticeable characteristics of the sheep 

are meekness, docility and obedience to the 

shepherd to whose care they fully entrust themselves. 

They are very true to the shepherd: 

they study his voice, watch for the indications 

of his will, and trustfully obey him. When 

they hear his voice, quickly, and without the 

slightest hesitation or faltering, they run to 

obey it. But the voice of a stranger they will 

not follow, for they know not the voice of 

strangers. 

What a lesson is here for the Lord's "little 
flock," over whom he is the good Shepherd. 
The weakest lamb in the flock knows his voice 
and hears him say, "This is the way: walk 
ye in it." And while there are thousands of 
voices calling, now in this direction and now 
in that, the Lord's sheep, acquainted with his 
Spirit and his Word, turn away from all save 
the well known voice of the Shepherd. In 
various ways our Shepherd speaks to his flock 
of sheep and lambs. His written words treasured 
up in the heart mark the way of truth continually; 
his special providences further shape 
the peculiar course of each individual; and 
the abiding presence of his holy Spirit makes 
manifest every intrusion of any other spirit 
which seeks to beguile and to lead astray. 
The true sheep will carefully listen for the 
faintest accents of the voice of the Shepherd— 
i.e., he will treasure up his words in his heart; 
he will study his providences; and he will cultivate 
that communion and personal fellowship 
with the Lord which are his privilege. Those 
who thus abide in him can never go astray. 
"They can never, never lose their way." 

They may not have much learning, and, humanly 
speaking, would not be able to grapple 
with all the sophistries of error. But, being 
so well acquainted with the Master's voice, 
they quickly perceive that such voices are the 
voices of strangers, and they will not follow 
them; for they are loyal and obedient to the 
Shepherd only. 

In such an attitude of mind and heart is our 
only safety in the midst of all the difficulties 
and confusion of this evil day. And all such 
may confidently sing with the Psalmist— 

"The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want. 
He maketh me to lie down [to rest— the rest 
of faith] in green pastures [with abundance of 
satisfying food]; he leadeth me beside the still 
waters [deep, refreshing truths]. He restoreth 
my soul [reclaims it from death]; he leadeth 
me in the paths of righteousness for his name's 



sake [because I am his child and bear his honored 
name]. Yea, though I walk through the 
valley of the shadow of death [The entire 
journey of life since the fall has been through 
a vale of tears, upon which rests the shadow of 
death.], I will fear no evil; for thou art with 
me; thy rod and thy staff, they comfort me." 
Thy word and providences discipline and guide 
me in the way. Our Shepherd's providence 
not only disciplines the true sheep, but protects 
them from the "wolves" and other foes. 

With the Prophet, we also can say, "Thou 
preparest a table before me in the presence of 
mine enemies [for even while beset by Satan 
and Sin, we are sustained by the Lord's abundant 
provision for every necessity]; thou 
anointest my head with [the] oil [of joy], my 
cup [pleasure] runneth over [even while, as a 

R1535 : page 166 

pilgrim, I am beset with life's difficulties]." And, 

in view of the Lord's present and past leading, 

all, who continue to be truly his sheep, can certainly 

trust that— "Surely goodness and mercy 

shall follow me, all the days of my life; and I 

will dwell in the house of the Lord [will be recognized 

as a member of his household, as his 

child] forever." 

Let us seek to cultivate more and more the 
meek, docile and loyal character of the sheep, 
that so we may be abundantly blessed by the 
care of the good Shepherd. Such a disposition 
does not commend itself to the world— the 
wayward goat, the bold lion, or the stealthy 
bear, the subtle serpent and vicious vampires 
are more fitting emblems of their ideals, and 
are usually the emblems selected for their escutcheons. 
But let the world love its own, 
while we remember that we are not of the world, 
but are sent forth as sheep in the midst of 
wolves, and that our safety and spiritual prosperity 
depend, not upon our own wisdom and 
sagacity, but depend entirely upon our diligent 
hearkening to, and patient following of, the 
voice of the good Shepherd, who will very 
soon highly exalt his little flock and crown 
them with an exceeding and eternal weight of 
glory. 



R1535 :page 166 

BE YE WISE AS SERPENTS-HARMLESS AS DOVES. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I appeal to you 
for some assistance. I have had within the 
last four months quite an experience; and, being 
only a "babe" in the truth, I need help. My 
query is respecting MILLENNIAL DAWN. The 
Lord has used it graciously in bringing me 
into his family,— and into great joy and peace. 
I was not until lately a Christian; because nothing 
in Christianity drew me; but, rather, the 
contradictory doctrines of the various denominations 
repelled me, and caused me to doubt 
the Book (the Bible) from which so many conflicting 
views could be drawn. About a year 
ago I became a "Salvationist," but now I am 
simply a Christian. 

But when I had read the DAWN series (and 
I shall always feel grateful to the dear friend 
and Brother, who brought it to my attention), 
I found what my soul had long unwittingly 
hungered and thirsted after;— I found 
the divine plan of the ages;— I found harmony 
in God's Word;— I found the plan of God 
therein revealed in fullest accord with my 
highest and noblest reasoning faculties and 
sympathies; I found it full of love, full of justice 
and full of wisdom. 

Joyfully I exclaimed,— These DAWN volumes 
are the Bible keys which God himself has sent 
to his people; that now, at last, after centuries 
of darkness and perplexity, we may "see light 
in his light," and praise and glorify his name, 
and get fully free from the bondage of error, 
and enjoy the true liberty of the sons of God! 

As you know, I entered the colporteur work; 
—I gave myself zealously to that work (selling 
over a thousand DAWNS in eleven weeks), because 
I believed that thus I was preaching the 
gospel more successfully and more acceptably 
to God than in any other way. But now I 
have stopped; because doubts have been aroused 
in my mind (and these by a brother colporteur) 
as to whether or not the DAWNS are what 
I hoped,— God-given "Bible Keys." 

The cause of my loss of confidence lay in the 
fact that the brother-colporteur referred to, 
while quite earnest in the sale of DAWN, gave 
me to understand that he differed with its 
teachings on several points, and in some meetings, 
which we attended, he seemed to ignore 
the DAWN entirely. When one older than I in 
"this way" manifested such lack of confidence 
in the DAWNS, it shook my confidence, 
and I said to him, "Were not the DAWNS and 
WATCH TOWER the channels through which 



God brought the knowledge of his plan of the 
ages to your attention? And, if so, why are 
you ashamed to confess the agency which God 
thus honored and used to bless you? And if 
you know more truth than the DAWN and the 
TOWER present, and in conflict with their 
teachings, why do you circulate them?" The 
answer was that I would make of you a pope; 
and that even some parts of the Bible are errors. 
But I was honest and in earnest, and concluded 
to sell no more DAWNS until I felt sure 
that they present the truth;— more of it than 
any other book I could circulate, and more 
than I myself could teach in any other manner. 
It was about this time that the Adversary 
brought me in contact with the so-called 
Spirit of the Word which for a few days 
threatened to ensnare me. But I soon discovered 
that not the spirit of God's Word but 
the spirit of error forwarded its teachings. It 

R1535 : page 167 

is altogether off the foundation,— the ransom. 
It teaches, too, that God is the only real sinner, 
and man his innocent dupe. Its hope is that, 
after 6000 years of mischief and sin and trouble 
making, God will, during the Millennial age, 
change; and in his efforts to undo the wrongs 
of the past and present he will save everybody 
everlastingly,— even the devil. I learned that 
Mr. Adams had first gotten the truth from you 
(and I could see traces of the plan of the ages 
throughout his writings), and that he had as he 
supposed improved upon your writings: but to 
me his improvements had spoiled everything 
they mixed with. 

I turned again to the DAWNS and TOWERS, 
and again the peace and joy and confidence 
began to come. Brother Adamson's article in 
the March 15th TOWER helped me, and then 
the May 1st TOWER on "The Twelve Apostles," 
seemed just the food my soul needed. 

R1536 : page 167 

It, with the second chapter of DAWN, Vol. I., 

refreshed my confidence in the Bible as indeed 

the Word of God— specially given and specially 

presented for our comfort and strength in 

this day of doubts and skepticism and many 

"uncertain sounds." And this gave me increased 

confidence in the DAWNS and TOWERS; 

and I said to myself: The same God who sent 

by his spirit his message by the prophets and 

his expositions by the apostles surely had something 



to do with the preparation of the MILLENNIAL 
DAWN and WATCH TOWER teachings; for 
they, and they alone of all the books of earth, 
fully harmonize the teachings of the Bible 
and make clear "the mystery" which God declared 
he would make clear in the close of the 
Gospel age. (Rev. 10:7) As evidence that there 
is an intelligent Creator, I am reminded of the 
old proof, sometimes given to Atheists, viz., the 
finding of a watch. The perfect adaptation of 
its wheels to each other and to the hands and 
dial proves that the watch had a designer, just 
as the perfect adaptation of Nature's various 
parts proves that there is an intelligent Creator. 
This same illustration, it seems to me, fits 
the DAWN: the fact that no other view harmonizes 
the entire Bible and rejects none of it, 
and the fact that the DAWN does this, would 
seem to my mind to prove that the DAWN had, 
either directly or indirectly, God's direction 
and providential leading in its preparation. 

I note, Brother Russell, how carefully and 
modestly you disclaim any special revelations, 
any special inspirations, etc., in connection 
with these writings: how, on the contrary, you 
claim that all such revelations, etc., ended with 
the twelve apostles, and that all subsequent 
light comes through their writings; and that the 
fact that the much fuller light now shining 
upon the divine plan is simply because God's 
due time has come for solving "the mystery;" 
that some channel must be used; and that if 
you had not been faithful to the opportunity 
some one else would have been used to hand 
forth the "meat in due season" to the household 
of faith. 

Now, excuse the question, please,— Does the 
Brother I mention know more about the plan 
of God than you do? Or do you know anything 
wrong with the DAWNS, that you could 
correct if writing them to-day? As I said at 
first, I am but a "babe" in Christ and in the 
truth, but I desire the truth— the clearest truth 
to be obtained, and want to spend myself entirely 
in its service. Help me, I pray, to get 
settled again on a sure, firm foundation; for I 
have no desire to deceive myself or others. 

Your brother in love, fellowship and His 
service, . 

IN REPLY. 



[This dear Brother has since gotten quite 
rid of his perplexities, and is again hard at work 



in the harvest-field selling DAWN. We publish 
the above, and our answer, for the sake of 
others; advising all the dear reapers to be cautious 
lest the "babes" be even unintentionally 
choked.-EDITOR.] 

DEAR BROTHER :-I am much pleased 

with your earnest spirit; and I fully agree with 
your sentiment that, in consecrating our time, 
influence and all to the Lord and his truth, it 
is our duty to use every reasonable means to 
know just what is Truth. You did perfectly 
right in stopping your sale of DAWN when in 
doubt about its truthful representation of God's 
great plan. Honesty toward God and toward 
fellow men demanded this of you, as of all in 
this harvest work, or in any work in which the 
laborer becomes ostensibly God's instrument. 
For this reason we seek to have, among the 
DAWN and TOWER colporteurs, only such as 
are in the work for the Truth's sake only. 

But, dear Brother, God would have you learn 
that, while the sympathy and companionship 
of fellow-servants are pleasant and desirable, it 
is needful for each of his servants to have on a 
personal armor that he may be able always to 
give an answer concerning his own hope (regardless 
of the hopes and doubts of others) with 
meekness. (1 Pet. 3:15.) Being only a "babe" 
in the truth and in the Lord, it is not surprising 
that you lacked the full vigor and full 
armor of a "man in Christ," well instructed 
unto every good work, and fully able to rightly 
divide the Word of truth. Indeed, this may 
yet be quite a lesson for you to learn,— that 

R1536 :page 168 

you do not know much; that you are not yet a 
graduate, but merely a pupil in the school of 
Christ. Even the Apostle confessed that now 
we see as through an obscured glass,— now we 
know only in part. (1 Cor. 13:12.) And the 
more we all grow in the grace of the Lord, 
the humbler and more teachable we surely will 
become. It will be less and less a question of 
what channel the Lord may use, so long as we 
are sure that what we receive is his message 
from his Word. 

But you are quite right in looking for more 
refreshment through the former channel of 
blessings;— until you are convinced either 
that the entire matter was a delusion and a deception, 
blessings and all, or else that the 
channel has become corrupted at a certain 
point, beyond which it is unfit for refreshment. 
And in the latter case it would be your duty to 



point out the corrupting error of life or doctrine 
—to the teacher, first; and then, if still seen to 
be error, you should boldly but lovingly declare, 
with your proofs, what you find to all whom 
you may esteem to be in danger. But if great 
humility is essential to acceptance with the 
Lord as teacher, remember that it will require 
the same spirit of meekness and humility to be 
properly and acceptably a teacher of teachers. 
Such a course is indicated in our Lord's Word, 
and is sure to bring good results to all the 
meek sheep concerned. 

Now, dear Brother, begin again; and, taking 
your BIBLE and the DAWNS, study the Plan 
of the Ages in the light of God's Word, and 
become rooted and grounded and built up in 
the present truth. (Col. 2:7.) When thus convinced 
of God's Word, the doubts and fears 
of others, on subjects thus proved and fully 
tested for yourself by the only standard, will 
not affect your faith, but strengthen you. But 
let not your strength rest in yourself,— in your 
own wisdom and knowledge which would merely 
puff you up and speedily make you unfit for 
present usefulness, as well as unworthy of the 
future Kingdom glories, promised to the faithful 
meek. Neither must you lean upon the DAWN 
and the TOWER as infallible teachers. If it was 
proper for the early Christians to prove what 
they received from the apostles, who were and 
who claimed to be inspired, how much more 
important it is that you fully satisfy yourself 
that these teachings keep closely within their 
outline instructions and those of our Lord;— 
since their author claims no inspiration, but 
merely the guidance of the Lord, as one used 
of him in feeding his flock. 

I trust, dear Brother, that, as you examine 
these publications, that may seem to you to be 
true of the author which the Apostle Paul said 
of himself: "We preach not ourselves, but 
Christ,— the power of God and the wisdom of 
God. Whether successful or not, others must 
judge, and especially the Lord; but I ever seek 
to hold forth the Word of Life. (Phil. 2: 16.) 
True, it has been held forth in my hands 
(powers), but never as my Word. Hence in 
no sense have I, as a pope, taken the place of 
Christ before his Church. 

Indeed, time and again I have seen that the 
teachings of those who make utterances of their 
own, but in the name of Christ, by claimed inspiration, 
or special revelations, or boasted 
wisdom (which is the real spirit of popery), and 
without proof from the Scripture, are received 
by many. And I am confident that the DAWN 



and TOWER would have many more friends 
and believers if they followed this (popery's) 
course;— for as some one has said, "People 
prefer to be humbugged." But such a course 
I dare not follow; I must be true to the Lord 
and declare his Word, and let him take charge 
of the consequences. 

The world will be deceived, and merely so-called 
Christians also; because error will come 
in the way that will appeal to their expectations 
—boastfully: but God is now seeking a 
special "little flock" which always hearkens 
to the voice of the Chief Shepherd, and flees 
from all undershepherds who do not echo his 
words and have his spirit of meekness and 
simplicity. -Phil. 3:16-18. 

And now about brother-colporteurs: I know 
from your previous letters that you owe very 
much to some of them for kindly Christian assistance 
in the truth and in colporteur methods. I 
feel sure that to some extent you have misapprehended 
their no doubt well-meant remarks; but 
I regret that any of them should be so unwise 
in their utterances, even though their hearts 
were entirely right in the matter. I have too 
much confidence in them all to suppose that any 
would remain in this harvest work if he had 
lost confidence in the tools with which the 
work is being prosecuted;— the DAWN and 
TOWER through which they learned of "the 
harvest" and found an entrance into it. When 
you become better acquainted with them, you 
will, I believe, fully concur with me that they 
are a very noble, self-sacrificing and humble 
band of the Lord's disciples; and will love 
them every one, as I do. 

The only explanation I can offer of the language 
you quote is that possibly he thought 
you were in danger of loving the servant who 
showed you the truth more than the Lord who 
gave it to you through the servant. And let 
us hope it was zeal for the Lord that led him 
to the other extreme. 

R1536 : page 169 

The remark, that "all of the Bible is not 
true," may merely have meant that some very 
ancient manuscripts of the Bible, found within 
the last fifty years, show that a few verses here 
and there in our common English Bible are 
really no part of the Bible proper, as it came 
from the apostles, but were added by unknown 
parties somewhere between the fifth and 
tenth centuries. (Of these are Mark 16:9-20; 
John 21:25; Matt. 23:14; and parts of 1 John 5:7,8 



and of Rev. 20:5; besides a few of very 

R1537 :page 169 

minor importance, affecting the sense little or 
nothing.) Or he may have been drifting, as 
so many are in these days, into a general 
doubt of the Bible, and of all except their own 
so-called "higher criticism:" If so, we trust 
that the article on "The Twelve Apostles," 
may prove helpful. It was intended to meet 
just such doubts and questionings and has 
already been blessed to many of the "sheep." 
Or he may have meant that the translators 
might at times have used to advantage other 
words than those they did use. But, whichever 
was his thought, his expression was unwise; 
because his meaning was not made clear to you, 
and led you into doubts and fears and questionings, 
instead of establishing you in the Faith. 

The same would be my construction of the 
unwise expression you mention relative to DAWN 
and TOWER. Probably the meaning was that a 
few typographical errors had come to his attention; 
or that, if he were to set himself about it, 
he could clothe the thoughts in other language 
which he would think preferable. But as for 
his holding variant views on any doctrine of 
importance taught in the DAWN and TOWER, I 
think that very improbable; and hence that 
his wiser way would have been to have ignored 
motes and trifles unworthy to be mentioned 
with the blessed truths now shining upon and 
refreshing us all. (And I may here answer one 
of your questions by saying that, if I knew of 
errors in the DAWN, I assuredly would contradict 
and correct them.) 

Besides, let us remember that the colporteurs 
also are fallible, and often subjects of special 
temptations,— as are all public representatives 
of the truth. (Matt. 18:1; Luke 22:24; Num. 16:3-9.) 
If you engage again as a colporteur, 
dear Brother, you may have more temptation 
on this line than thus far, and will be able to 
sympathize more heartily with others and to 
help them. 

While, as you have possibly noticed, the 
DAWN gives only so much prominence to the 
name of the author as seemed necessary,— omitting 
it entirely from the usual places on the 
cover and title page— and while we have never 
offered objections to the many who have 
quoted at length from our writings without 
mentioning them (but on the contrary have rejoiced 
to have the truth proclaimed from any 
motive— Phil. 1:15-18), yet our observation, 



covering several years, is that those who love 
the truth, but are ashamed of the channel 
through which God sends it, never prosper in 
it, but finally lose it as well as its spirit. 
"He that humbleth himself shall be exalted, 
and he that exalteth himself shall be abased," 
is God's rule; and God's blessing will come 
to us along that line or not at all. 

Should the temptation ever come to you, to 
seek to show your wisdom by magnifying a 
minor difference between yourself and another 
of the Lord's servants, reject the thought as a 
temptation from the devil, and do the very reverse; 
—minimize differences, and endeavor to 
mind the same things and to be of one mind 
and one spirit with all who love the Lord.— 
ICor. 1:10. 

Let ambition of the flesh die in you, dear 
Brother, and take instead that "fervency of 
spirit, serving the Lord," which the Apostle 
enjoins;— an ambition to be and to do, simply 
and solely, to please and to serve our great 
Redeemer, and through him the Father. To 
do this, "Keep yourself in the love of God," 
and "let it dwell in you richly and abound." 

Your servant in the Lord and his truth, 
C. T. RUSSELL. 



R1537 :page 169 

THE REMEDY CO-EXTENSIVE WITH THE CURSE. 

-ROM. 5:12-21.- 



IN READING this scripture, some who are unable 
to follow the Apostle's argument have become 
somewhat confused and therefore request 
assistance. 

The difficulty with such probably arises from 
the fact that they have failed to notice that 
verses 13-17 are parenthetic, and that the main 
line of the Apostle's argument passes from 
verse 12 to verse 18, irrespective of the parenthesis, 
which is merely incidental, being introduced to 
offset a misapprehension on the part of the Jews 
to the effect that their law covenant conflicted 
with the new covenant in Christ, of which 
Paul was a minister. It was difficult for the 

R1537 :page 170 

Jews to accept the fact that under the new 



covenant there was no difference made between 
Jew and Gentile, but that "the same 
Lord over all is rich unto all that call upon 
him. "--Rom. 10:12. 

In verses 12,18-21, the Apostle is showing 
that by one man sin entered into the world, 
and death as the penalty for sin; and that this 
sentence of death passed upon all men because 
all had sinned— not all individually, but as 
represented in Adam, in whose loins we all 
were. "Therefore," he adds, verse 18, "as by 
the offence of one [Adam] sentence came upon 
all men to condemnation; even so [by the same 
law of heredity] by the righteousness of one 
[of the one who gave his life a ransom] the 
free gift came upon all men unto justification 
of life; for as by one man's disobedience 
many were made sinners, so by the obedience 
of one shall many [all of the race who will 
accept it] be made righteous." In other 
words, Adam, the head or progenitor of the 
entire human race, could only bequeath to his 
posterity the remainder of the ever declining 
inheritance which he himself possessed— 
viz., a spark of life under condemnation to 
death; but our Lord Jesus, by the payment 
of the penalty upon Adam, thereby gained the 
legal right to restore him to life, and in so doing 
gained the right also to restore all his posterity. 
And when the "appointed time" for thus 
restoring life to all the race has come, he, instead 
of Adam, will be the father, life-giver, or 
head of the new race, as it is written, "He shall 
be called the everlasting Father." (Isa. 9:6.) 
And the birthright of the race under this head, 
Christ, unlike that under the first head, Adam, 
will be life instead of death. And that birthright 
can never be taken away unless forfeited 
by individual wilful transgression against the 
known righteous law of God with full ability 
to keep it. 

Thus we see that the gist of the Apostle's 
argument is to prove that by the law of legal 
heredity the race which, by the working of this 
law, inherited death from its first head, Adam, 
will, by the same law inherit life from its second 
head or re-generator, Christ, and that the 
remedy is co-extensive with the curse. This 
being the substance of his argument, it is, of 
course, presumable that his parenthetic remarks 
are not in opposition to, but in harmony with 
it. Thus we read- 
Verse 13— "For until [previous to] the law 
[of Moses and the law covenant with Israel] 
sin was in the world; but sin is not imputed 
when there is no law." Consequently there 



must have been a law, and a covenant based 
upon that law, previous to the law of Moses. 
What law was that? It was the law of God 
originally inscribed, not upon tables of stone, 
but upon the heart of the first perfect man, and 
which was gradually more or less effaced in his 
posterity, because they did not like to retain 
a knowledge of it. (Rom. 1:28.) That law, 
whether ignored or recognized, has always been 
in the world, and sin against that law has 
always been imputed to men. 

Verse 14. "Nevertheless [although the Mosaic 
law had not yet come, to revive in the 
Jews the knowledge of God], death reigned 
from Adam to Moses [just the same], even 
over them that had not sinned after the similitude 
of Adam's transgression [i.e., wilfully; 
for it reigned over infants as well as over those 
capable of personal sin], who is the figure 
[type] of him that was to come [of Christ, the 
second head of the race]." Thus it is manifest 
that all mankind were born under the original 
law, the authority of which was never disannulled, 
and under which all were condemned 
representatively in Adam, the first head of the 
race, but who, thank God, in this office of 
headship was a type of a second head, through 
which our deliverance should come. 

Verse 15. "But not as the offence, so also 
is the free gift. [The results of the offence and 
the free gift are entirely different.] For if 
through the offence of one [Adam, the] many 
be dead [under the condemnation to death], 
much more the grace [favor] of God, and the 
gift [of life] by grace [by the divine favor], 
hath abounded unto many." From the one 
head we inherit death: from the other, the re-generator, 
we shall inherit life. 

Verse 16. "And not as it was by one that 
sinned, so is the gift: for the sentence was by 
one [offence] to condemnation, but the free 

R1537 :page 171 

gift is [the forgiveness] of many offences unto 
justification." Note the contrast of the one and 
the many here, the object of which is to increase 
our estimation of the value of the free gift. 

Verse 17. "For if by one man's offence death 
reigned by [that] one [Adam], much more 
they which receive abundance of grace [of divine 
favor] and of the gift of [imputed] righteousness 
[the righteousness of Christ imputed 
to us by faith] shall reign in life by one, Jesus 
Christ [who has not only purchased us and 
covered us with the robe of his own imputed 



righteousness, but who will also completely eliminate 
sin from our nature so that men shall have 
an actual righteousness of their own, entitling 
them to reign in life as kings of the earthly 
dominion which God at first gave to Adam]." 

Thus by these parenthetic remarks, which are 
seen to be in perfect harmony with the main 
argument, the Jews were shown that their law 
covenant did not in the least interfere with the 
original sentence to death of the entire race (all 
in Adam), nor with the consequent gracious 
provision of life for all mankind, through Christ, 
and not for the Jews alone. 

Verse 20. After clearly announcing that the 
remedy for sin was co-extensive with the penalty 
(verses 18,19), the apostle— reading the 
inquiry in the Jewish mind as to the object of 
the Mosaic law, if it were not intended to give 
life— further adds, "Moreover the law [the 
Mosaic law] entered that the offence might 
abound. [It brought with it a clearer knowledge 
of the will of God, and therefore an increased 
sense of sin, and an increased responsibility 
which made transgressions even more blameworthy. 
But what of it? Did God mean 
only to afflict Israel more heavily than the rest 
of the world? By no means.] But where sin 
abounded [where the clearer knowledge of the 
law of God was given, which enabled them also 
the more fully to see their short-comings and 
brought upon them the greater responsibility], 
grace did much more abound [Israel had many 
special favors, as well as chastisements, from 
God]: that as sin hath reigned unto death 
[both in Israel and in the world], even so [both 
in Israel and in the world] might grace reign 
through righteousness unto eternal life, by Jesus 
Christ our Lord. 



FACE TO FACE WITH TROUBLE. 

You are face to face with trouble, 

And the skies are murk and gray; 
You hardly know which way to turn, 

You are almost dazed, you say. 
And at night you wake to wonder 

What the next day's news will bring; 
Your pillow is brushed by phantom care 

With a grim and ghastly wing. 

You are face to face with trouble; 

A child has gone astray; 
A ship is wrecked on the bitter sea; 

There's a note you cannot pay; 



Your brave right hand is feeble; 

Your sight is growing blind; 
Perhaps a friend is cold and stern, 

Who was ever warm and kind. 

You are face to face with trouble; 

No wonder you cannot sleep; 
But stay, and think of the promise, 

The Lord will safely keep, 
And lead you out of the thicket, 

And into the pasture land. 
You have only to walk straight onward, 

Holding the dear Lord's hand. 

You are face to face with trouble; 

And did you forget to look, 
As the good old father taught you, 

For help to the dear old Book? 
You have heard the tempter whisper, 

And you've had no heart to pray, 
And God has dropped from your scheme of life, 

Oh ! for many a weary day ! 

Then face to face with trouble: 

It is thus He calls you back 
From the land of dearth and famine 

To the land that has no lack. 
You would not hear in the sunshine; 

You hear in the midnight gloom. 
Behold, His tapers kindle 

Like stars in the quiet room. 

Oh! face to face with trouble, 

Friend, I have often stood; 
To learn that pain has sweetness, 

To know that God is good. 
Arise and meet the daylight; 

Be strong and do your best! 
With an honest heart, and a childlike faith 

That God will do the rest. —Selected. 



page 172 

STUDIES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF 

OUR READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1537 : page 172 
MESSIAH'S KINGDOM. 



II. QUAR., LESSON XII., JUNE 18, MAL. 3:1-12. 

Golden Text— "They shall be mine, saith the Lord 
of hosts, in that day when I make up my jewels"— 
Mai. 3:17. 

This prophecy is addressed to Israel. It 
is a reproof for their wayward and evil 
course and a warning of the just retribution 
that must surely follow, if they do not 
repent and turn to God. Malachi was the 
last of the Hebrew prophets: his name signifies, 
The Messenger of Jehovah. He was 
the last messenger to Israel previous to John 
the baptist the immediate forerunner of 
Christ, the great Messenger of Jehovah's 
covenant (verse 1); and well would it have 
been for Israel had they heeded the warning 
and prepared their hearts to receive the 
Lord's Anointed. But this they, with the 
exception of a small remnant, failed to do. 
The promised messenger, John the baptist, 
came to prepare the way of the Lord, 
preaching repentance and remission of sins, 
and announcing the advent of the great 
"Messenger of the Covenant" made with 
Abraham, that in his seed should all the 
families of the earth be blessed.— Gen. 22:18. 

But when the Lord suddenly came to his 
temple (the Jewish temple), they were unprepared 
to receive him. They were unprepared 
to recognize the king in his beauty, 
or to stand the tests of character there applied 
to prove their worthiness of the blessings 
promised in the Abrahamic covenant. 
But a few, a small remnant, were found 
ready. In meekness and humility they inclined 
their hearts to the testimony of the 
prophets, of John the baptist, of the teachings 
and work of Jesus of Nazareth, and of 
the voice from heaven which declared, "This 
is my beloved Son, in whom I am well 
pleased." Such became inheritors of the 
Abrahamic covenant; but the nation as a 
whole, to whom, as the seed of Abraham, 
pertained the promises, lost the blessing, 
and received instead the fiery baptism of 
trouble (Mai. 4:1), which in A.D. 70 utterly 
destroyed their national existence, overthrew 



their holy city, destroyed their temple, and 
scattered them as fugitives among the nations, 
where they have been hated and persecuted, 
even to this day. 

While it is clear that the prophecy thus 
addressed to Israel applied to them primarily, 
it is also manifest, as shown by the 
Lord and the apostles, that it had a much 
wider application; and that in a yet fuller 
sense it was addressed to spiritual Israel, 

R1538 :page 172 

of which fleshly Israel was a type; and that 
it applies to the second advent of the great 
"Messenger of the covenant," whose work 
will fully accomplish all these predictions. 

In the largest and fullest sense, therefore, 
we recognize this prophecy by Malachi 
as addressed to "both the houses of Israel;" 
—to all Israel after the flesh, toward the 
close of the Jewish dispensation, and subsequently 
to all of nominal spiritual Israel, toward 
the close of the Gospel dispensation. 
To the latter, as well as to the former, therefore, 
belong all the expostulations and warnings 
of this prophecy; and well would it be 
for them if they would heed the warnings. 
But, like their prototype, they will not do 
so. Only a remnant of nominal spiritual 
Israel heed the Word of the Lord, and to 
them, therefore, belong the blessings of his 
special favor.-Mal. 3:16,17; 4:2,3. 

CHAPTER 3:1. The messenger who was 
to prepare the way of the Lord at his second 
advent, the antitype of Elias and of 
John the baptist, was the Church militant, 
the Church on earth, whose mission has been 
to preach among all nations the gospel of the 
kingdom and the second coming of Christ, 
the King, in power and great glory. But this 
testimony of the Church, like that of John 
the baptist, has failed to bring peace and 
good will among men, and consequently the 
predicted curse (chap. 4:5,6)— the great 
"time of trouble such as was not since there 
was a nation" (Dan. 12:1)— is about to follow. 

This true Church in the flesh, in the spirit 
and power of Elias, has been the forerunner 
of Christ at his second advent. And 
even now we have the privilege of realizing 
that this glorious Messenger of the covenant, 
in whom we delight, has come to his temple 
—the elect Church. By the sure word of 
prophecy we recognize his presence. See 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. II., Chaps, v., vi. 



R1538 :page 173 

VERSES 2-5. "But who may abide the 
day of his coming?" etc. His coming is to 
judgment; for he is now the Judge of all 
the earth; all judgment is committed unto 
him. Blessed, indeed, are all those whose 
hearts are fully consecrated to God and 
faithful, and who are therefore approved of 
him. Yet even these shall be tried as gold 
in the fire until all their dross is eliminated 
and the refiner can see reflected in them 
his own glorious image. Then, indeed, are 
the sacrifices of such "pleasant unto the 
Lord." 

VERSE 5 declares, "I will come near to you 
[to the great systems which compose nominal 
spiritual Israel— all Christendom, so-called] 
to judgment. [And who cannot see 
in the doctrinal conflicts and in the severe 
handling and criticism of the creeds of Christendom 
to-day that the judgment has already 
begun?] And I will be a swift witness 
against the sorcerers [against those who 
obey and teach doctrines of devils in the 
name of Christianity, and thereby plunge 
men deeper and deeper into sin and degradation]; 
and against the adulterers [those who, 
while claiming to be the virgin of Christ, 
are living in unholy alliance with the world, 
whether it be as individuals or as religious 
systems professedly Christians, yet joined to 
and dependent upon the civil powers]; and 
against false swearers [those who have made 
a covenant with the Lord of entire consecration 
to him, and yet have been unfaithful]; 
and against those that oppose the hireling 
in his wages," etc. The judgment will 
indeed be a close one; for every work is to 
be brought into judgment, with every secret 
thing. (Eccl. 12:14.) And it is even now 
begun: this is the significance of the present 
overturning and re-examination of every 
hoary dogma— civil and religious, and no 
power on earth can end the investigation 
until it has probed and exposed in all their 
details every evil thing. 

VERSE 6. Were it not for the enduring 
mercy of the Lord the workers of iniquity 
would surely be consumed. 

VERSE 7. Prompt repentance even at this 
critical juncture would save the "Christian 
world" (?), "Christendom," from the great 
impending scourge. But they do not realize 
their condition, and are not willing to 



admit that they have robbed God of that 
which is rightly his. They have robbed him 
of his honor by affirming the doctrine of eternal 
torment, thus ascribing to God a character 
blacker even than Satan's. And, while 
they claim to be the Lord's children and his 
representatives in the world, their vows are 
not paid unto the Lord. Their words are 
stout against him, and they count it a vain 
thing to serve him in truth and sincerity. 
But the few (among the masses of the 
unfaithful), who do reverence the Lord and 
walk in his ways, are his jewels, and shall 
be spared in the evil day that is coming upon 
the whole world. And not only will 
they be spared, but they will be the Lord's 
peculiar treasure— "They shall be mine, 
saith the Lord of hosts, in that day when I 
make up my jewels." (Verse 17.) To this 
faithful class, now gathered out of the 
great masses of nominal spiritual Israel, as 
well as to a similar class gathered out of 
nominal fleshly Israel in the harvest of the 
Jewish age, belong the precious promises 
of this prophecy. The elect remnant of 
fleshly Israel, including the apostles and all 
the faithful of the early Church, and the 
elect remnant of nominal spiritual Israel, 
the consecrated and faithful, will together 
constitute the body of Christ, and, with their 
Head, will soon be kings and priests unto 
God— the seed of Abraham in whom all the 
families of the earth shall be blessed during 
the Millennial reign. "If ye be Christ's, 
then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according 
to the promise."— Gal. 3:29; 
Gen. 12:1-4. 

R1538 : page 173 

REVIEW. 



LESSON XIII. , JUNE 25. 

Golden Text— "In all thy ways acknowledge him, 
and he shall direct thy paths."— Prov. 3:6. 

The preceding verse should be a part of 
this golden text, as it forms part of the 
condition of the promised blessing. It reads, 
"Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and 
lean not to thine own understanding." 

This is the blessed privilege of all the 
sons of God; and years of experience of many 



precious saints testify that the Lord is always 
faithful to those who put their trust 
in him, look for his leading and gratefully 
acknowledge his faithfulness. Let those 
who would prove his faithfulness trust him 
more and more, and cease to lean to their 
own understanding, and they will be brought 
to an increasing realization of their heavenly 
Father's love and care and providence, 
and into yet closer bonds of sympathy and 
fellowship with him. 



page 174 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:- 

I want to thank you for the opening article, 

"From Glory to Glory," in March 1st 

TOWER. I cannot see in myself such advancement 

in Christ-likeness as it seems 

there ought to be in one to whom he has 

entrusted a knowledge of the truth. I have, 

perhaps, thought too much of that knowledge, 

and been too satisfied with the wish 

to give it to others, and not had care enough 

in regard to gaining a personal likeness to 

Christ. But, God helping me, I will more 

earnestly strive in that direction. Pray for 

me, dear brother and sister, that I may 

more than ever fully submit myself to the 

moulding of God, and that "mallet and 

chisel and polishing sand" may be used upon 

me until every particle of the deformity 

of self has disappeared, and the image of 

our glorious King is perfectly reflected. 

Oh! nothing can be too much to suffer if 

that may be accomplished in me. 

I remain, your sister, desiring and striving 
to overcome and to be "like Him," 
MRS. M.R. PECK. 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I enclose clippings 
from the Times that I think will interest 
you. If the Times is right, in stating 
that so large an additional number of Jews 
is to be driven out of Russia, it looks as if 
they would be compelled to go to Palestine 
in large numbers, as no other country will 
want to receive them while the cholera is 



threatening. 

I was much pleased with the last TOWER'S 
article on the twelve apostles. 

Yours, J. C. BELL, JR. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I pen you 

these lines in grateful remembrance that I 
was brought out into the light of God's 
Word, as it continues to shine unto the perfect 
day. I have given much time to the 
investigation of the DAWNS, comparing them 
with the Bible, and I find a beautiful harmony, 
leading me to consecrate all my ransomed 
powers to his blessed will. I have 
been running for the prize for a number of 
years, feeling my way as the Lord gave me 
light. I have been giving truth to the hungry 
ones with whom I have associated, but 
had to stay out of the church to which I 
once belonged. In all sects I met the same 
opposition, and finally saw clearly that I must 
come out of all organized bodies. I find 
one here and one there that welcomes the 
truth, and have had to go through trials and 
to suffer the loss of my friends; but I am 
praising the Lord. Jesus was never more 
precious than now; and I rejoice to be able, 
through God's blessing, to send you my 
subscription for the TOWER for '93. Hope 
to do more as the Lord prospers me. 
Your brother in Christian love and 
fellowship, S. A. STAPLES. 



DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL: 

As you are interested to know how each 
one of the harvesters is using the sickle 
placed in his hand, I will report. I took 
orders for 90 volumes of DAWN in M 



a village of about six hundred inhabitants. 

I have taken orders in this village for 80 
volumes; and expect to canvass another village 
this week, and to deliver in both places 
next week. On account of nervous and 
other troubles, I am obliged to go slowly; 
and as I have been finding some "ripe 
wheat," who earnestly request me to converse 
with them, I occasionally embrace the 
opportunity to rest. 

Oh, how thankful I am that I did finally decide 
to enter the colporteur work; for I now 
feel that I cannot afford to give it up. As 
I told some interested ones to-day, if I were 



offered work that would pay three times as 
well, in dollars and cents, I would not be 
content to drop the Lord's work. 

Pray for me, that I may be able to overcome 
every obstacle and, if need be, to bear 
up patiently under affliction; that I, with 
you and all the Lord's dear ones, may stand 
the sifting; and, having done all, to stand. 

Your brother in the Lord, 

J. A. EDMONDS. 



R1538 :page 174 

DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER IN CHRIST: 

I have so enjoyed the good things in the 
last April number of TOWER, also the first 
number of this month, that I must write. 

"The Calling of the Twelve Apostles, their 
Office and Authority," have always been 
to me of more than ordinary importance. 
It is a subject I love to study, and you have 
presented it just as I have wished for it 
many time. I never had a desire to know 
just how the Savior broiled the fish upon 
the coals, or how much bread he had, or 
how long it took to eat that divinely prepared 

R1538 :page 175 

meal; but I have always wished to 

know, as nearly as possible, the work he gave 

the apostles to do, and how they did it. 

May "Daniel's God" reveal to you both 
things yet to come, and cause you to be 
abundant reapers in the "harvest time." 

Your sister in Christ, 

MARY L. JOHNSON. 



page 175 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I enclose the 
name of one new subscriber to TOWER. 
I am now selling about 25 DAWNS daily. 

In haste and love, J. B. ADAMSON. 



DEAR BRETHREN: --Please find enclosed 
a money order for three dollars to cover the 
accompanying order. 

The DAWNS, TOWERS and TRACTS came 
duly to hand. Yesterday I feasted on the 
good tidings contained in the TOWER— on 
the letters from Brothers and Sisters scattered 



abroad, and especially on the articles 
"Have not I Chosen You Twelve" and 
"The Oneness of the Divine Family." 
How beautiful, simple and touching is the 
pure gospel— the gospel of love. The prayer 
of my heart is, "May we all with open 
face, beholding as in a glass the glory of the 
Lord, be changed into the same image from 
glory to glory, even as by the spirit of the 
Lord." Yours in Him, W. C. BROWN. 



DEAR FRIENDSr-Although we are having 
rainy weather, the Lord is enabling me 
to take some orders for DAWN. 

Yesterday, at a small village near by, I 
sold twelve sets and four single volumes, in 
paper covers, and to-day I found two that 
want the cloth sets. 

I hesitated long, before starting into the 
work, because I had no confidence in myself; 
but now I am glad to realize that the 
Lord is using me; and it affords me inexpressible 
fulness of joy to be accounted worthy 
of his service as well as of all the precious 
promises of the high calling. Oh! that I 
might overcome! I can, and I will— 
"through favor of our God." 

In our dear Redeemer, 

ISAAC A. LEHMAN. 



R1538 :page 175 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I write to 
say that, through sickness and other causes, 
I have not been able for a long time to send 
any "Good Hopes" to the office; but I hope 
very soon to be able to contribute a mite 
for the spread of God's blessed truths. 

The first number of this month's TOWER 
came to me on Thursday evening; and if 
ever a thirsty pilgrim through the desert 
was refreshed with pure spring water, so 
was I comforted and refreshed with its 
strengthening truths on the subject of inspiration. 
It came to me just at the right 
time, making my heart glad, and my spirit 
rejoice, and my lips praise him who gave 
himself a ransom for all. 

The God of our fathers bless you and your 
dear companion, and all those associated 
with you in your work of faith and labor of 
love, with all them that love his appearing 



and kingdom, is my daily prayer. 
Pray for me. HAYDEN SAMSON. 



MY DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-It is with profound 
gratitude that I thus address you the 
joyful intelligence that I have withdrawn 
from the nominal church, and am now free. 
I praise the Lord for insight into his glorious 
plan of the ages, and I shall, by his grace, 
go on to be one of the overcoming class, 
which will be qualified to be partakers of 
the divine nature and made joint-heirs with 
our dear Lord and Savior. 

I would like you to send me some tracts, 
for, since my withdrawal, three sermons 
have been preached on the second coming 
of Christ; and the people seem to be stirred 
up by them, and also by my statement that 
Christ has made his second advent and they 
must not expect to see him with their natural 
eyes. 

R1539 : page 175 

Remember your far-away brother at the 
throne of grace. M. STRICKLER. 

[We rejoice with you in present freedom. 
Praise God, from whom all blessings flow! 

Have sent some tracts; but next time 
please suggest how many you think you can 
use judiciously. We do not wish to send 
too few— nor yet to waste the tracts by 
sending too many. 

While the knowledge of our Lord's presence 
is very precious to "them that believe," 
it is rather "strong meat" for "babes in 
Christ." Let me suggest that to whatever 
extent we may have opportunities for speaking 
his truth, in our Master's name, we will 
do well to remember his words— "Be ye 
wise as serpents and harmless as doves." 
"Milk is for babes," says the apostle; therefore 
give to such the sincere milk of the word, 
that they may grow thereby." (1 Pet. 2:2.) 
Begin with "a ransom for ALL;" proceed 
gradually "to be testified in due time;" 

R1539 :page 176 

then show the blessed object of Christ's 
second coming and Kingdom; next the manner; 
and, finally, to the few who have interestedly 
and intelligently followed you 
thus far, point out the fact of the Lord's 



presence, as foretold by the prophets, and as 
confirmed by the wonderful events of "the 
harvest" and "the day of the Lord," now 
in progress. The Lord bless and use you in 
his service!— EDITOR.] 



BRO. RUSSELL:-I wish to thank you, as 
the means in God's hands, for delivering 
me out of long ignorance and bondage. If 
it will not tire you, I would like to give you 
a little of my experience. 

In the first place, Food for Thinking 
Christians [now out of print] came into 
my hands, in answer to prayer for light. 
Then you sent me the TOWER, which I accepted 
as food for the hungry. I saw some 
light at that time, but it was all so new; 
and, though I came out of the Presbyterian 
church and was immersed, I soon succumbed 
to the opposition of my friends. They called 
me a fool, and said that if I did not let religion 
alone I would soon be in the insane 
asylum. I replied that true religion never 
made people crazy, though the lack of it 
often did. However, my health was poor, 
and I became tired of so much opposition. 
I stopped talking and thinking about the 
truth, and discontinued the TOWER. I 
thought that in this way I would have peace; 
but I was not happy. When I went to 
church, I was not satisfied; for there I received 
nothing to feed a hungry soul. Often something 
would say to me, 'Take the TOWER 
again;' but I would silence it by saying, I 
do not want to renew opposition.' 

I wonder now that the Lord did not let 
me go; but he did not; for, though I was 
drifting, not rowing as I ought, my faith 
stood fast. At last I awoke to a sense of my 
condition; but Satan stepped in, and suggested 
that I join the Baptist church, as that 
was nearly right, and that, if I went regularly 
to its meetings, I would be kept from again 
going to sleep. But I soon saw my mistake, 
renewed my subscription to the TOWER, 
and purchased the DAWNS. I felt uneasy 
and guilty, remaining in the church; could 
compare myself only to the children of Israel, 
when they said, "Give us the flesh pots of 
Egypt again;" but, thank God, I withdrew 
from it some time since, and am now free. 
I am free with the liberty wherewith Christ 
has made me free, and with his help, I will 
never again be entangled with the yoke of 



bondage. I can truly say that the Lord is 
long suffering and kind: I know he did not 
entirely cast me off; for, had he done so, 
I would not now be progressing in the 
Light. 

Brother Russell, I have obeyed the command 
in 1 John 4:1, and I find that you do 
teach the truth. It is plain and gloriously 
grand. It makes God a God with a purpose, 
not a haphazard being, outwitted by Satan. 

I have placed DAWN in the hands of quite 
a number; and I will copy a portion of a 
letter written to a friend by a young man 
who has read it. 

"Dear Brother:— I guess you think I have 
taken your book and appropriated it to myself. 
I have been reading it, and thanking 
God that you brought it to my notice. It 
is indeed a revelation, and has sent a glow 
of more intelligent faith into my life. I 
have purchased one, and so return yours 
with many thanks for your kindness. I shall 
read the book again and study it carefully; 
for I am convinced that it contains germs 
of truth which are almost unknown to the 
larger part of the world. It has wonderfully 
deepened my knowledge of God's great 
plan toward men." 

Now I wish to send him the TOWER for 
one year. I feel I must be like Andrew: I 
do not amount to much, still I may be the 
means, in God's hands, of calling a Peter 
to the Lord's work; so I will still try to 
scatter the truth, hoping to bring some to 
the light. I also enclose $5.00 to use as you 
see fit, knowing that you will use it to the 
best purpose for the Lord. 

With kind greetings to Sister Russell, 
and asking an interest in your prayers, I remain, 
Yours in the faith, 

MRS. C. CUNNINGHAM. 



page 176 



DEAR BRETHREN:--! send greeting to you 
all, and ask you to remember us, here, who 
are trying to proclaim the truth. We are 
persecuted on every hand, though I think 
we are gaining some ground. I am very 
thankful that my eyes have been opened to 
the light. The article, "The Twelve Chosen 
Apostles," in the last issue of TOWER gave 
me great comfort. I am glad to understand 
that they were set apart for a special purpose 



and that we may have full confidence in 
their writings. May the Lord bless you all. 
J. L. WALDRUP. 



page 178 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION, FOR ONE YEAR, 
TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY" (TRACTS), QUARTERLY, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



In our issue of May 1st we defended the inspiration 
of the apostolic writings and teachings; 
in the S.S. Lesson of this issue we treat a supposed 
objection to Paul's course with Barnabas; 
and in our next we expect to show that 
the Apostle Paul's teachings relative to woman 
and her relationship to man, and to God's plan, 
are in perfect accord with sanctified reason,— 
and give no ground for objection to the Apostle's 
inspiration. 

R1539 :page 178 

THE GOSPEL OF THE KINGDOM IN GREAT 



BRITAIN. 

Ever since our return from Europe we have 
had an earnest desire to see the truth scattered 
with liberal hand in Great Britain and Ireland. 
The people there seemed to us particularly 
ready for the truth; because, while freedom 
seemed to prevail, there it had not run into 
infidelity as so often appeared elsewhere. 

But although an agency for DAWN was established 
(in London), and although a number of 
friends there are very zealous in circulating the 
truth, the colporteur-work, the chief agency for 
preaching these Kingdom truths, never seemed 
to prosper. The fault we believe lies in the 
friends' not knowing how to do it; and we have 
arranged with Brother S.D. Rogers (who has 
been extremely successful here, both as a Colporteur 
and as an instructor of Colporteurs) to 
go to England, meet those who earnestly long 
to be in the work, if they can but make expenses, 
and give them practical lessons. 

And thus under the Lord's blessing we trust 
a great work will be started in England, Scotland 
and Ireland. And here we might remark 
that Brother Boehmer, who recently went to 
Germany, writes us that he is getting started 
and has hopes that he will be able to meet his 
expenses there; but that if not he will gladly 
join in the crusade in Great Britain. 

Now, we want to hear at once from all the 
Brethren and Sisters in Great Britain and Ireland, 
who are free from family encumbrances, 
and anxious to spend their lives in preaching 
the Gospel of the Kingdom, by the sale of 
DAWNS;— the way which the Lord seems to 
have specially prepared and to be specially 
blessing, in the present harvest work. We cannot 
promise earthly wealth as the reward of 
earnest toil in this service for the Lord; but 
we can, from experience here, assure the unencumbered 
the "things needful" and joy and 
peace and spiritual blessing in this present 
time; and to all the faithful and persevering, in 
every department of his service, the Lord promises 
"treasure in heaven"— glory, honor and 
immortality. 

After writing to us of your desire to enter the 
work, with particulars respecting your age, size, 
previous occupation, etc., begin to shape your 
affairs and your prayers to the proposed course. 
Brother Rogers may be expected in England 
in September; and those who write may expect 
to be fully notified of arrangements. 

page 178 



COLPORTEURS, TAKE NOTICE! 

Colporteurs need not hereafter send in to us 
all the addresses to which they deliver DAWNS, 
but merely keep note of those found to be specially 
interested, who do not subscribe for the 
TOWER. Send in such with each Semi-monthly 
Report— on separate card or letter sheet. 

The Semi-monthly Reports, for which blank 
have been furnished, are expected from all colporteurs, 
and are requested to be mailed on the 
1st and 16th of each month. These should be 
kept separate from orders for which other 
blanks are provided. 

Routes given to Colporteurs are expected to 
be followed strictly. This is necessary to the 
proper conduct of the work and to prevent confusion, 
as the number of "harvest" laborers 
is increasing. 

The Swedish and Dano-Norwegian translations 
of Millennial Dawn, Vol. I. are in the 
hands of the type-setters. We hope to have 
them ready about September next. 



R1539 :page 179 
