From Our Readers
Disfellowshipping  I appreciated the article “The Bible’s Viewpoint: Why Disfellowshipping Is a Loving Arrangement.” (September 8, 1996) I myself was disfellowshipped in 1987 and reinstated in 1988, after learning my lesson. This loving arrangement helped me make adjustments in my life-style and associates. How blessed we are to have an organization that recognizes Bible standards!
R. R., United States
I too was disfellowshipped from the congregation. I felt at the time that it was harsh and that it was the meanest thing that could be done to a person. I was wrong! Before the disfellowshipping, the congregation elders worked so hard to help me seek repentance. I just did not appreciate the help at that time. Being disfellowshipped humbled me a great deal. It moved me to see how serious our relationship with Jehovah is.
B. T., United States
Native Americans  Thank you for the series “American Indians—What Does Their Future Hold?” (September 8, 1996) I have always been interested in the history of Native Americans. Once again, I was struck by the frankness, objectivity, and historical accuracy of your magazines.
A. M., Italy
You never see a Native American teacher or lawyer on the front page of a magazine. Primitive images, comparable to the front page of your issue, are consistently promoted. The perpetuation of these images hinders our efforts against stereotypes.
K. M. T., United States
Certainly it was not our intention to perpetuate any harmful stereotype. The cover art was designed to present Native Americans in a positive and dignified way. Traditional garb was used because it was appropriate to the subject and could easily be identified by our global readership. Interestingly, many Native American readers expressed appreciation for both the articles and the artwork. Some are desirous of keeping some of the ancient ways alive and will still don traditional dress on certain occasions.—ED.
Since I work for a museum as an ethnologist specializing in North America, I am very interested in this topic. Would it be possible to send me ten copies of this issue, which I would distribute to others who are interested in American Indians?
P. B., Germany
We were happy to comply with this request.—ED.
What little I knew about Indians came from the movies. I can see from these articles that Hollywood did not show the real truth. My view of Indians has changed.
T. M., United States
My ancestry is part Native American, so I was excited to read this issue. However, contrary to popular opinion, Sitting Bull was not a leader at the Little Bighorn battle.
P. H., United States
It seems that whether or not Sitting Bull personally participated in the battle is a matter of some controversy among historians. The viewpoint that seems to prevail among most scholars is found in the respected magazine “Natural History,” which states: “According to Indian accounts, Sitting Bull, sometimes thought of as Custer’s adversary in battle, did not participate in the fighting but occupied himself with making medicine to strengthen the Indian warriors.” Whether further clarifying information will come to light remains to be seen.—ED.

