Osteoporosis—The ‘Brittle Bone’ Disease
“Osteoporosis is a condition in which the amount of bone tissue is so low that the bones easily fracture in response to minimal force. A person with osteoporosis can fracture a wrist or hip from a fall on the ice or receive a broken rib from an affectionate hug. . . . In fact, the amount of bone tissue may be so low that a person fractures the spine simply by carrying the weight of the body.”—“Osteoporosis—A Guide to Prevention & Treatment,” by John F. Aloia, M.D.
DO YOU suffer from osteoporosis? This bone thinning disorder is common among postmenopausal women. Yet, it can develop in younger women as well as in men. According to the U.S. National Institutes of Health, osteoporosis affects “as many as 15-20 million individuals in the United States.” Each year in the United States, osteoporosis is blamed for about 1.3 million fractures in people aged 45 and older. This costs $3.8 billion annually.
Health Tips, a publication of the California Medical Education and Research Foundation, explains: “Although the symptoms of osteoporosis are most visible in the later years, the process that weakens bones actually begins 30-40 years before the first fracture occurs. After age 35 both men and women begin to lose bone mass. As the bones become lighter and thinner, fractures can occur more easily and may heal slowly because the body is not able to form new bone as easily as it once was. The precise cause of osteoporosis is not known, but inadequate calcium and vitamin D in the diet, reduced estrogen levels in women and insufficient exercise may all contribute to its development.”
The book Understanding Your Body—Every Woman’s Guide to a Lifetime of Health notes that one of the common symptoms associated with menopause is bone strength loss. It states: “Osteoporosis, literally porous bones, is a common and important health problem for women after menopause.”
Research suggests that osteoporosis may be both preventable and treatable. A preventive measure is to see that the body has the proper amount of calcium along with vitamin D, which is essential for calcium absorption. Another preventive measure is regular weight-bearing exercise, such as walking or jogging.
Dr. Carol E. Goodman said in Geriatrics: “Postural correction and strengthening exercises should be prescribed—and we must be as particular about these prescriptions as we are about those for drugs. An ideal exercise program for an older osteoporotic patient can be easy to understand, simple to carry out, and safe.”
Although osteoporosis cannot be cured, new medications for it are becoming available. Furthermore, it may be prevented by proper nutrition, adequate exercise, and for some, hormone replacement therapy. To be most effective, these measures must be undertaken before bone loss begins and must be continued for life.
[Box on page 17]
Protection Against Osteoporosis
1. Calcium
2. Vitamin D
3. Sunshine
4. Good posture
5. Back-care precautions
6. Exercise
7. Nonsmoking
[Box on page 17]
Calcium in Common Foods
Food Calcium (milligrams)
Nonfat milk, 1 cup [2.4 dl] 300
Cheddar cheese, 1-inch [2.5] cube 130
Yogurt, 1 cup [2.4 dl] 300
Beef, chicken, fish, 6 ounces [170 g] 30-80
Canned salmon, 3 ounces [85 g] 170
Bread, grains, rice, 1 cup [2.4 dl] 20-50
Tofu (soybean curd), 4 ounces [100 g] 150
Almonds, 1/2 cup [1.2 dl] 160
Walnuts, 1/2 cup [1.2 dl] 50
Broccoli, 1 stalk 150
Spinach, 1 cup [2.4 dl] 200
Turnip greens, 1 cup [2.4 dl] 250
Most other vegetables, 1 cup [2.4 dl] 40-80
Apricots, dried, 1 cup [2.4 dl] 100
Dates, pitted, 1 cup [2.4 dl] 100
Rhubarb, 1 cup [2.4 dl] 200
Most other fruits, 1 cup [2.4 dl] 20-70
From Understanding Your Body, by Felicia Stewart, Gary Stewart, Felicia Guest, and Robert Hatcher, page 596.
[Box on page 17]
Some Osteoporosis Risk Factors
Hereditary Factors
Female
Nonblack
Northern-European ancestry
Fair complexion
Slender
Small (five feet two inches [157 cm] or less)
Life-Style Factors
Outdoor sunlight, less than three hours a week
Low calcium intake
High caffeine and/or phosphate intake
Medications
Antacids containing aluminum
Thyroid or levothyroxine
Steroid (cortisone)
Dilantin (prolonged treatment)
Furosemide (diuretic)
Medical Problems
Early or premature menopause
Amenorrhea (absence of menses)
Anorexia nervosa
Hyperthyroidism (excessive thyroid)
Kidney disease or stones
Diabetes
Lactase deficiency (milk intolerance)
Bowel disease (colitis, ileitis)
Alcoholism
Bed rest or immobilization longer than three weeks
Rheumatoid arthritis

