VOL. XVII. DECEMBER 15, 1896. No. 24. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 298 

View from the Tower 299 

Poem: "Covet Earnestly the Best" 300 

Tract Society's Report for 1896 301 

Worship the Lord in the Beauty 

of Holiness. No. 2 304 

Who shall Abide in Thy Tabernacle? 306 

Birth of the "Man Christ Jesus" 308 

Christ's Ascension 310 

page 298 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, NY. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



ABOUT TEACHERS' BIBLES. 



Some inquire, Are the 97 cent Bibles mentioned in the TOWER first 
class books? We answer, No! They are not strictly first class, but 
they are elegant, nevertheless. 

A brother who ordered one of them wrote us on receiving it that 
we had made some mistake; for surely no such Bible as the one received 
could be made for the price, 97 cents plus 25 cents postage. 
We answered him that there was no mistake, and thereupon he took 
his as a sample and among his neighbors got orders for fifty-five copies 
—selling them as a special bargain at $1.60 each. 

Those who want a very superior leather binding, and India paper, 
can be supplied at $3.00 a Bible whose list price is $7.50, and for $4.50 
a Bible whose list price is $10.00, having a still finer leather. 

However, the Bibles mentioned in our last at 97 cents and $1.10 
and $1.48 are good enough for almost anyone. 30 cents extra for 
Patent Index, 25 cents postage. 



R2076 : page 299 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 



THE day set apart for National Thanksgiving is 
past, but we trust that the spirit of thankfulness 
continues in many hearts; and no time is more appropriate 
for the review of our causes for thankfulness as 
children of the Heavenly King, than at Christmastide, 
on the threshold of a new year, while ruminating upon 
the things that were, the things that are and the things 
which we desire and hope shall be. Whether partial 
failure or moderate success has, during the year closing, 
marked our efforts along lines of moral, physical, 
financial or spiritual attainment, let thankfulness fill 
our hearts, as well as good resolves and holy ambitions 
for the coming year. Indeed, we esteem that thankfulness 
must be an abiding grace in all true Christians 
who have reached a reasonable degree of development 
in the higher life. 

This highly favored land has much to be thankful 
for in the way of bountiful harvests; and although the 
farmer has not gotten high prices, this is a cause of 
thankfulness to other lands whose harvests are scant. 
As it is, wheat is nearly $1.80 per bushel (silver) in 
India where the crop has been short for the past five 
harvests and gives little promise for the next, and 
where at present ninety millions are seriously affected 
and over one million on the verge of starvation, requiring 
military intervention repeatedly to quell bread-riots. 



If the people of India cannot give thanks for rain 
and plenty, they can at least give thanks that the wholesale 
starvations of the past are now measurably prevented 
by the intervention of civilization and its accessories 
of wiser government and commerce. If the lot 
of any here seem hard, let him compare it with that of 
others; remembering that in India, in years of average 
bounty, millions of people never get a chance to eat 
three meals a day to satisfaction, even of the plainest 
food. Yes, the "curse," the penalty of sin, rests heavily 
upon the earth. The convict, man, is being made to 
feel its weight. Conditions are not what they would 
have been, had he remained obedient to his Creator 
in Eden. 

But "thanks be unto God for his unspeakable 
gift,"— his Son, our Lord; and for the "ransom for 
all;" and for the reconciliation by it made possible; 
and for the promise of his Kingdom soon to come; and 
for our call to a share in it with our Lord; and for the 
glorious prospect of coming "times of restitution of all 
things spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets." 
-Acts 3:19-21. 

Thank God, this will mean the lifting of the "curse" 
from the ground, and from so many of the death-sentenced 
convict-race as will accept the grace of God in 
Christ. Ah! blessed thought; this will mean an end 
of famines, an end of pestilences, an end of storms 
and floods and droughts, and ultimately "there shall 
be no more death, neither sorrow nor crying, neither 
shall there be any more pain: because the former things 
[shall have] passed away." (Rev. 21:4.) Already a 
blessing has followed in the wake of the gospel of 
Christ— since the "Great Light" was "lifted up" on 
Calvary. Wherever any have been made free indeed 
by the Son, a light has shone out and has brought with 
it blessings; although, alas! this intelligence and its 
accompanying blessings have been sadly perverted by 
selfishness— especially in the large class of Christian 
counterfeits, called in the Scriptures "tares." 

But if others have cause for thanksgiving, how 
much more cause have those into whose hearts the 
light of the knowledge of God, shining in the face of 

R2076 : page 300 

Jesus Christ our Lord, has shined. (2 Cor. 4:4.) Those 

thus favored can rejoice and give thanks under all circumstances 

and conditions;— in sickness, in death, in 

poverty's vale or in comfort and health. Surely, thankfulness 

is a necessary ingredient to Christian living. It 

must be mixed with our songs of praise, and with our 

prayers; it must fill our hearts to enable us to render 

faithful and efficient service to our Lord, in any direction. 

It was this gratitude, thankfulness, which enabled 

Brothers Paul and Silas to serve our Master so 

faithfully that they could sing praise and offer thanks for 



the privilege of suffering for Christ in the jail at Phillipi, 
while their backs were smarting from the cruel 
lashes received as the cost of their discipleship.— 
Acts 16:25,33. 

Moreover, the thankfulness of the true Christian 
must continue— daily, hourly; its loss even for a moment 
should be deplored as an evidence of spiritual 
sickness, and the afflicted should go to the leaves of 
healing in the divine Word, that he may be refreshed 
in strength of love and zeal and realize afresh that "the 
love of Christ constraineth us; because we thus judge, 
that if one died for all, then were all dead: and that 
he died for all that they which live [now reckoned 
alive in Christ] should not henceforth live unto themselves, 
but [in thankfulness] unto him which died for 
them and rose again."— 2 Cor. 5:14,15. 

"Let the peace of God rule in your hearts,... 
and be ye thankful."— Col. 3:15. 



The New York Observer, a high class "orthodox" 
religious journal has been studying the question of 
Israel's restoration to "the land of promise." After 
viewing the subject in various lights it gives its conclusions, 
as follows:— 

"A 'restoration,' then, through the efforts of the 
Jews themselves, must be the only hope. And that it 
will be brought about by the voluntary efforts of others 
is exceedingly improbable. Under any notion of the 
fitness of things, Palestine ought, when the Turk is 
driven across the Euphrates and the Ottoman Empire 
is partitioned, to revert to the Jews. But all the plans 
which have thus far been suggested to restore it to 
Christian control have been negatived at the outset by 
the jealousy of the Russians for the safety of the Holy 
Places. It was that safety which formed the popular 
Russian pretext for the Crimean war. With passionate 
reverence for the Holy Places an unchanging tradition 
of the Russian peasantry, there is no reason to believe 
that the Czar will permit the transfer of Palestine to 
any save a great power, and that power Russia. Probably 
if before the Ottoman break-up the Jews desired 
to buy the Holy Land, and Europe consented, he might 
acquiesce on condition of a European guaranty. But 
there is little present reason to believe that he would 
consent to such a reversion as a part of the final partition 
of Turkey. It would seem, then, that the hoped-for 
'restoration' may never come, and that although Palestine 
will again become cultivated and prosperous, to the 
Jews it may always be a land of promise." 

The italics are ours and point out the hopelessness 
of Israel's cause from the human standpoint. We admit 
that the Observer's views and reasonings are clear and 
logical; but it has omitted the most important factor in 
question; namely the will and plan of God. That will 



and plan, as revealed in God's Word, teaches us to expect 
that within eighteen years the "times of the Gentiles" 
will expire, and that with their expiration Jerusalem 
will cease to be trodden down by the Gentile 
kingdoms;— that the set time to favor "Jacob" with 
Millennial blessings as the first-fruits of the nations 
will then have come, and that it will include their saving 
or recovery from the blindness which came upon 
them nationally, at their rejection of Messiah. Who 
can question this interpretation of the prophets in the 
light of the Apostle's testimony in Romans 1 1:25-33? 



Protestant federation has been little discussed of 
late, but is evidently progressing slowly as indicated 
by the following from the Literary Digest:— 

"The committee of the Presbyterian Church in 
Canada on Union with other churches reported to the 
recent Canadian General Assembly upon its proceedings 
with reference to the proposition of the General 
Conference of the Methodist Church of Canada for the 
establishment of a federal court composed of representatives 
of the negotiating churches, whose function it 
should be to promote cooperation and economy in respect 
to mission work and 'dependent churches,' but 
which should not have power to deal with matters of 
creed or discipline, or with any question vitally affecting 
the independence of the negotiating churches. The 
proposition was generally accepted." 

The expectancy of the Episcopal Church Rome-ward 
has doubtless hindered progress toward Protestant 
Federation or union; but this is now out of the 
way, as Rome has closed that door. The new policy 
of Romanism will surely revive Protestant desires for 
a consolidated and sizable Protestant system as an offset 
in influence with the governments and with the people. 

R2078 : page 300 

"COVET EARNESTLY THE BEST." 



God has his best things for the few 
Whose love shall stand the test; 

God has his second choice for those 
Who do not crave his best. 

It is not always open sin 

That risks the promised rest; 

A good more often is the foe 
That keeps us from the best. 

R2079 : page 301 



There's scarcely one but vaguely wants 

In some way to be blest; 
'Tis not a blessing, Lord, I seek, 

I want thy very best! 

Yet others make the highest choice, 

But when by trials pressed 
They shrink, they yield, they shun the cross, 

And so they lose the best. 

I want in this short life of mine, 

As much as can be pressed 
Of service true for God and man; 

God help me do my best! 

I want to stand when Christ appears 

In spotless raiment dressed; 
Numbered among his chosen ones, 

His holiest, his best. 

I want among the victor throng 

To have my name confessed; 
And hear my Master say at last, 

"Well done! You did your best." 

Give me, O Lord, thy highest choice; 

Let others choose the rest; 
Their good things lose their charm for me, 

Since I have found thy best. —Selected. 



R2077 : page 301 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY. 



REPORT FOR FISCAL YEAR ENDING DEC. 1, 1896. 



ALTHOUGH the above has been the recognized 

name of our Society for some four years, it 

was not until this year that the Board of Directors took 

the proper steps to have the name legally changed from 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER TRACT SOCIETY to that above. 

The new name seems to be in every way preferable. 

Although disinclined to make frequent reference 
to the work centering in the TOWER office, lest it might 
be misunderstood to be boasting, we are nevertheless 
glad to avail ourselves of the opportunities offered us in 
connection with this our annual report, to lay before 
our interested and sympathizing Brethren and Sisters, 
for their encouragement, a brief summary of the work 
itself, as well as of the moneys expended in the propaganda. 



If the following statement even seem to a few 

to savor of boasting and show, nevertheless, it is our 

duty to those who have contributed the means which 

have permitted the work: and they represent in the 

aggregate a large proportion of our paying subscribers;— 

and the letters from those who receive the WATCH 

TOWER free as "the Lord's poor" indicate that many 

of them are equally deeply interested in the work, in 

its every feature. Many of these, although hindered 

by poverty from sharing in this work financially, have efficiently 

cooperated in the work as tract-distributers, etc. 

The work divides itself into the following 
departments. 

(1) The WATCH TOWER Editorial Department, to 
which three proof-readers lend efficient aid. Each 
reader must judge for himself respecting the Lord's 
blessing upon this department. We trust that the 
study of the TOWER by its readers gives them even 

half the blessing enjoyed in its preparation. The withdrawal 

of our "Associate Editor" has been noted by 

some, so we explain now to all that this was granted 

at her own urgent request. She prefers to appear as a correspondent 

over her own signature, MRS. M. F. RUSSELL. 

The growth of the TOWER list is one of the best evidences 
of the progress of Present Truth for which it 
stands as a defender and servant. Our friends will be 
glad to know that notwithstanding the money pressure 
of the past year the TOWER lists show an increase of 
the interest— although of course some "fall away" as 
we are forewarned to expect. 

(2) The Correspondence Department,— with which 

is associated the keeping of accounts, attention to your 
orders for DAWNS, O.T. TRACTS, WATCH TOWERS, 
Bibles, etc. This department handled during the past 
year about twenty thousand of your letters and sent out 
thirteen thousand two hundred and ninety-one replies. 
This is a very important feature of the work, very 
helpful to many in perplexity, and, blessed by modern 
progress, enables us to be in touch with such as the 
Lord may please to direct to us from all parts of the 
world. 

(3) The Publishing Department.— To this belongs 

the type setting of the TOWERS, DAWNS and OLD THEOLOGY 

TRACTS, contracting for paper, press-work, 

binding, etc. (for we save both time and money by hiring 

our printing and binding done). This department 

also includes packing and shipping of DAWNS, tracts 

and TOWERS by freight, express and mail. The writing 

of wrappers for the sending out of sample tracts 

and TOWERS belongs also to this department; but efficient 

aid in this matter has been rendered by friends 

at a distance, who have our hearty thanks. 

(4) The Colporteur Department— This is conducted 
by dear Brethren and Sisters who give, some a 

part, and some all, of their time in visiting house after 
house, and city after city, with a view to interesting 



fellow Christians in "present truth," respecting the 
Plan of the Ages, in which the divine wisdom, love, 
justice and power are made manifest; in showing, too, 
that we are now in the Millennial dawn onto which 
laps the forty year "harvest" in which ends the Gospel 
age in a great time of trouble— social, financial and 

R2077 : page 302 

religious. The past year has been a very trying one 
upon these dear faithful "reapers," obliging several of 
them to temporarily seek other employment. And 
many who continued got so deeply into our debt that 
it was very trying to them as well as to us. Many of 
them will be made glad and encouraged to fresh energy 
by one item of this report yet to be mentioned. Already 
the prospect of "better times" is leading to new inquiries 
for fields of service, etc. This branch of the 
service continues to yield most favorable results which 
are, however, ably supplemented along the other lines. 

Any who may have the idea that the colporteurs 
are in the service merely as a business, are greatly mistaken. 
We never knowingly encourage such, and if, 
by chance, they do slip into the harness, they soon become 
discouraged. As an illustration of the spirit which 
prompts the colporteurs, we will here give an extract 
from a letter written by one of them to a friend, with 
no expectation that it would ever reach your eyes or 
ours. The Brother is not yet nineteen years old, but 
since getting the Truth has caught its spirit, and with 
his sister is seeking to spread it. His letter says:— 

"We had very poor success in selling DAWNS that 
day. Yet it was no more than I had expected (having 
been in the business before), but I think my sister was 
a little disappointed, as it was her first attempt, and she 
became pretty tired by evening. But I do not see that 
we should be discouraged, but rather encouraged, since 
we are following in the footsteps of our dear Master, 
and we remember how he also many times became 
weary, and how he sat down by the well to rest. We 
should be encouraged when we look at the course of 
Jesus and the apostles, how they went from door to 
door, sacrificing all earthly things, and when we remember 
the life of the great Apostle Paul and the sufferings 
he endured for Jesus' sake, working his own 
way as he preached. 

"Now I know that the Lord is abundantly able to 
prosper us in this work and make it an honorable service 
before the world; but on the other hand I see also 
his plan in not permitting it thus. Our work of preaching 
is made to be dishonorable and a reproach before 
the world and the nominal church, that we may thus 
prove our love and loyalty to God and his truth, and 
show ourselves worthy to be of that "little flock" who, 
through much tribulation, shall enter the Kingdom of 
God. Unless we suffer with him, we cannot reign 



with him. 

"All my brothers and sisters (ten children in our 
family) are studying the DAWNS and TOWERS with the 
Bible in hand and learning the truth as fast as they 
can. The death of our dear mother has also been a 
chastisement to father and is leading him closer to Jesus 
and farther from the world and its spirit." 

(5) The Evangel Department.— This branch looks 
after the holding of meetings, to water the good seed 
sown by the colporteur brethren, and to refresh and 

assist little groups of the Lord's people, wherever accessible, 

and to assist them to the most profitable methods 

for private and social study of the Lord's Word. 

Of the good results of this service, as now carried on, 

we have constant evidence through your letters; and 

still we are endeavoring to make it more efficient. 

To the Lord of the "harvest" be all the glory, and to 

his people, the true "wheat," more and more blessing. 

The expenditure for this branch of the service is noted 

in the Financial Report in another column: it has been, 

we believe, wisely and economically used for legitimate 

expenses only; and, so far as we have been able to 

judge, has cooperated with such only as have considerable 

knowledge of present truth and some talent as 

speakers. It has been expended for meetings held in 

224 places, from one day to a week at each place and 

from one to three meetings per day in the following 

States:— Pennsylvania, New York, Virginia, West Virginia, 

Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Kansas, Missouri, 

Kentucky. 

(6) The Tract Distribution Department.— Every 
TOWER reader is desired to be an active participant in this 
branch of the service. Some have more and others less 
opportunity for engaging in this service. The report 
given in another column shows that this department 
lagged a little this year as compared to last; probably 
because of the general distraction incident to the recent 
political campaign. However, many may now be all the 
better prepared to see that "Neither their silver nor 

their gold shall be able to deliver them" from the impending 
trouble, and to look for the only hope of the 
groaning creation. 

(7) The Financial Department.— The work of 
course must have means or stop, as we have no power 
to work miracles. But it may surprise you all, as it 
does us at the Office, how, almost miraculously, the 
Lord keeps opening the way more and more from year 
to year. The report for this year will doubtless 
amaze you. It shows that notwithstanding the extreme 
financial depression, your increasing zeal has been 
blessed and used of the Lord to such an extent that we 
open the new year with a small balance on hand 

for the use of which contracts are already let. It will 
soon be out on its mission in the form of O.T. TRACTS 
and TOWERS, to be used of the Lord in reaching others 
of his children who are now more or less blinded by the 



falsities propagated by the god of this world,— to help 
them "out of darkness" into God's "marvelous light." 

It is a rare matter for us to mention the names of 
the Tract Fund contributors— nor would we have space 

R2078 : page 302 

for them all, for our list of contributors is nearly or quite 
five thousand; and their donations range from half 
a cent per week upward. Neither do we intend now 
to change our rule, believing that it is best that the 
left hand know not what the right hand does for the 
Lord's cause, until the King shall make known his 

R2078 : page 303 

judgment, based upon the purposes and intents of our 
hearts. And indeed the Brother, whose name and very 
generous gift we will mention wrote— "I prefer you 
do not mention my name, unless you think that some 
special good would be secured. It is quite sufficient to 
credit it to 'A deeply interested Brother.'" 
But we are not satisfied to do this for two reasons; 

(1) because many might say, That is Brother Russell's 
own gift to the work, and thus make a mistake; and 

(2) because we believe it does us all good to know something 
of the noble sacrifices of others. We therefore 

conclude that it will be to the Lord's glory and our 
readers' good for us to give you some particulars including 
the name, as follows. 

Some time ago Brother W. Hope Hay fell heir to 
a fortune in Great Britain. On securing the money he 
invested most of it in mortgages; and being anxious to 
do something in the Lord's cause, he built and donated 
a neat little Episcopal church for the town in which he 
resided. About that time the Lord counted him worthy 
and sent him MILLENNIAL DAWN, which, as the Lord's 
messenger, guided our Brother to a better and more 
consistent understanding of the divine Word. With 
a heart full of thankfulness to God for "his marvelous 
light," Brother Hay visited us at Allegheny, 
looked into the work and said, Brother Russell I want 
to have a share in this work. By simple living I can 
spare $10,000, and I want you to put it into active 
service in spreading the "harvest" message of divine 
love and wisdom to others who are yet in the darkness 
from which God has so graciously delivered me. Not 
only do I believe that this is Truth, but more, I believe 
it to be the very message ordained of God "to gather 
together his elect" unto himself preparatory to their 
glorification with him. 

It required some time and sacrifice to get the 
money out of the mortgages, but it finally came. 
Brother Hay's idea and our own originally was to invest 
this money and use the interest to help defray the 
additional expense of making ZION'S WATCH TOWER 



a twelve page weekly, without increasing the subscription 

price. (In harmony with this thought we made quite 

a number of this year's issues sixteen pages instead of 

twelve.) But the pressure upon our time, the greater 

necessity for getting out additional volumes of MILLENNIAL 

DAWN, and the growing burden of Colporteur 

debts has hindered. And now we have received 

from Brother Hay a letter directing the sale of the investments 

and the direct application of the money to 

the uses of the Tract Society; part of the sum to be 

applied to the cancelling of portions of the accounts of 

burdened Colporteurs in arrears— for their reencouragement, 

and for the Tract Society's relief from the burden 

of debt, interest, etc. He remarked incidentally that 

he feared anyway that if the TOWER were made a weekly 

its important subjects would be merely read and not 

studied, Bible in hand, as they should be. 

We in no wise wish to intimate that Bro. Hay's 
gift is greater in God's sight than the much smaller 
donations of many others less able; but we are sure 
that all who are in harmony with the work which God 
has been pleased to assign to the Watch Tower Bible 
and Tract Society will rejoice with us, and with the 
Colporteurs, and with Brother Hay, in view of the 
great blessing which, as a servant of divine providence, 
he has been permitted and enabled to render to the 
Lord's cause. And besides, while Brother Hay did 
not give out "of his penury" nor "all his living," like 
the poor widow (Mark 12:42-44), nevertheless, neither 
did he give this out of a vast superabundance; for in this 
gift he laid upon the Lord's altar (we believe) more than 
half of all his earthly possessions. And indeed he 
would have given more, had we not counseled otherwise; 
urging that he keep enough to maintain himself 
and family, so that he could give his time in the service 
of the truth. And now he is so engaged,— holding 
meetings on Sundays, and during the week engaged 
in DAWN and tract work, seeking and feeding 
the Lord's sheep. 

DISTRIBUTING ACCOUNT. 

During the year from December 1, 1895, to December 
1, 1896, there have been circulated, at the expense 
of the Tract Fund. 
Copies of the OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS 1,134,952 

" " ZION'S WATCH TOWER 183,187 

In view of the fact that tracts vary greatly as to 
the number of pages, it is customary to state their circulation 
by pages. The foregoing, so stated, represent 
a total of tract pages, 23,978,780 

The total number of copies of MILLENNIAL DAWN 
circulated by the cooperation of this Fund, but not at 
its expense, was 74,013 

FINANCIAL ACCOUNT. 



EXPENDITURES: 

For Tracts and for TOWERS sent out free, $8,213.48 

Labor, for mailing same, 485.00 

Postage, freight, wrappers, etc., 747.78 

Interest paid on Colporteur accounts overdue, 555.23 
Cash paid out on account of foreign 

translations, etc., 1,264.42 

Expenses of traveling Evangelists, etc., 925.04 

Colporteurs' hopeless indebtedness paid off 

by W. Hope Hay's donation 8,847.66 



Total, $21,038.61 

Cash balance on hand, now being invested, 
1897 account, 104.49 



$21,143.10 

RECEIPTS: 

From "Good Hopes," $ 6,502.80 

" other sources, 4,850.20 

W. Hope Hay's contribution for the 

general uses of the Society, and specially 

to clear off part of the Tract 

Society's liabilities, 10,000.00 



Total, $21,143.10 



R2078 : page 304 

Respecting the helpers connected with the above 
work we must say a word. Our office force consists of 
eight Brethren and Sisters and two lads, besides Sister 
Russell and the Editor. The amount of work turned 
out must be your guide as to the zeal and efficiency of 
these dear co-laborers. There are no "drones" among 
them: each labors "as unto the Lord," and seems to 
wish that there were more hours to each day that he 
might accomplish more. Indeed, strange as it may 
seem, we have been obliged to hinder some from overtaxing 
their strength in willing, joyful service to our 
King and to you our fellow-servants. 

It will be noticed that no items of rent, fuel, gas, 
salaries, etc., appear in the above. This omission is 
not by oversight: we have no such expenses, but share 
the office comforts of the TOWER PUBLISHING CO., 
free of charge. Thus we are enabled to accomplish 
much more proportionately than other tract societies, 
much of whose receipts goes for rent and salaries. 

Another matter. Not one cent of the above fund 
was begged or even asked for,— directly or indirectly. 
It was all voluntary. Those who have been truly 
blessed by present truth love to serve it out to others, 
and need no urging. They want to do what they can, 
and we merely show them what is being done, and 



consider that they and we are highly favored in being permitted 
to join in it. The rewards for present sacrifices and 
services cannot be expected now, but they will come 
later,— from the King of Glory himself! 

The usual "Good Hope" blank goes with this 
issue; do not understand it as a request, but as a 
notice of opportunity to join in this service. Knowing 
in advance what the friends wish and hope to do enables 
us the better to regulate the work economically 
and efficiently. 

We congratulate all of the friends of present truth 
upon the result of our united efforts for the year past; 
and trust that as our King shall pass judgment upon 
it he may be able to say to us each and all,— Well done, 
good, faithful servants, enter ye into the joys of your Lord. 

Let us now unite our hearts in fervent prayer for 
divine wisdom and blessing for the new year, remembering 
each part of the work and all co-laborers in any 
manner associated with it. 



R2079 : page 304 

"WORSHIP THE LORD IN THE BEAUTY OF HOLINESS." NO. 2. 



"The hour cometh, and now is, when the true 
worshipers shall worship the Father in spirit and 
in truth; for the Father seeketh 
such to worship him."— John 4:23. 

AT the first advent our Lord said of some of the unbelieving 

professors of religion of the scribes 

and Pharisees: "In vain do they worship me, teaching 

for doctrines the commandments of men." The majority 

of those addressed, it seems, were outwardly very pious, 

and fasted and prayed much, and for a pretense made 

long prayers in the streets; but theirs was not true and 

acceptable worship; and therefore, they were not prepared 

to be introduced at Pentecost to the begetting 

of the spirit and thus to become worshipers in spirit 

and in truth. And our Lord in the above words shows 

one important hindrance to their proper attitude of 

heart, and hence to their acceptance as worshipers; 

namely, false doctrines— human tradition and commandments 

as instead of the pure teachings of God's 

Word. And it is but reasonable to suppose that similarly 

all down through this Gospel age many, very 

many, have been hindered from proper development 

as true worshipers of God, worshipers in spirit, worshipers 

in every act and word and deed of life, by the 

same baneful influences; namely, false doctrines, human 

creeds and traditions accepted and held to as instead 

of the Word of God, the true bread which comes 



down from heaven. 

Many think lightly of faith, and hold that it matters 
little what a man may believe; that his life and 
conduct are the only things of importance in the divine 
sight. But in our Lord's testimony here considered 
(and it is corroborated by Christian experience) a 
man's faith concerning God and his plan is very important 
indeed, and has a wonderful influence upon his 
life, conduct and character. The Christian who under 
the delusions of the great adversary has accepted the 
human traditions (presented by nearly all the theological 
schools of "Christendom"), that God is a tyrant, 
who uses his omnipotent power in the creation of angels 
and men with the foreknowledge that the great 
mass of them (all except a little flock) will be by his 
providence preserved in indescribable torments and anguish 
throughout all eternity;— such Christians, thus 
blindfolded by false doctrines, attempt in vain to worship 
such a God with their whole heart; for their fears 
hinder perfect love and full devotion. They would 
find every element of their moral nature in antagonism 
to such a plan of damnation; and although they might 
bow the knee in fear and submission, they would find it 
impossible to bow down their hearts in full acquiescence, 
unless their hearts were grossly depraved as to 
justice and love and mercy. 

It may be safely said, however, that all who become 
children of God and whose hearts are honest are 
delivered to some extent from bondage to this false 

R2079 : page 305 

doctrine, and are enabled through truths received to 

counteract the baneful effect of this error to such an 

extent as to permit them through certain great truths 

to see God's love and in a general way at least to hope 

and trust that God will commit no injustice upon any 

of his creatures, and that somehow, somewhere and at 

sometime all men will have a full chance to be reconciled 

to God through Christ. Thus with many of God's 

saints, we believe, the spirit of error hindering worship 

is overcome by the spirit of truth in general and true 

worship made possible. Yet many never fully escape 

the fear "taught by the precepts of men" (Isa. 29: 13), 

and to the very last are hindered thereby from the attainment 

of "perfect love" and from the rendering of 

the highest degree of worship in spirit and in truth. 

And what is true of this false doctrine is true to 
some extent of all false doctrines. Every error hides 
some truth; every misunderstanding of the character 
of God or of the fundamental features of his plan of 
salvation is so much to hinder men from becoming to the 
fullest extent possible worshipers of God in spirit and 
in truth. It is to this end that God's people are exhorted 
to search the Scriptures to "know the truth," 
to "know God," because, as our Lord declares, the object 



of the giving of the truth is to produce sanctification 
of heart and life, and hence whatever beclouds or 
hinders the truth hinders sanctification of heart. No 
one can possess the spirit of the truth without having 
considerable of the letter of the truth upon fundamental 
principles. 

WORSHIPING FELLOW MESSENGERS. 



God's people are to love and esteem each other, 
and that in proportion as they recognize in each other 
the spirit of God, the spirit of Christ, the spirit of holiness 
and devotion to truth and righteousness; as the 
Apostle says, the faithful should be esteemed "very 
highly for their work's sake" (1 Thess. 5:13); but 
while there may be danger that some will fail to render 
"honor to whom honor is due" (Rom. 13:7), there is 
undoubtedly danger also that some might render too 
much honor to human instruments, whom God is pleased 
to use in connection with the service of the truth. It 
is proper therefore that we call attention here, as we 
have done heretofore, to the danger of man-worship. 
This matter is very forcibly brought to our attention 
in Revelation 22:9. John the Revelator, who, representing 
the living saints all down through the Gospel 
age, is caused to see unfolding the various features of 
the divine plan, in conclusion falls down to worship the 
angel who showed him those things. So there has been 
and is a tendency on the part of many to give more 
than love, respect and honor to the servants of God 
who from time to time have been used as special servants 
of God in bringing to the attention of the Church 
things new and old, or to the particular brother or sister 
who was the means of conversion or other spiritual 
benefit. There was this disposition in the early Church, 
some exalting one Apostle and some another as their 
chief and master, and naming themselves as his disciples, 
saying, "I am of Paul;" or "I am of Apollos;" 
or "I am of Peter," etc. The Apostle Paul assures 
them that this disposition indicates a measure of carnality, 
and he inquires, who then are Paul, Apollos and 
Peter, but merely the servants or channels through 
whom God has been pleased to send you the blessings of 
the truth. "Neither is he that planteth anything, 
neither he that watereth, but God that giveth the increase." 
He indicates thus that they should recognize, 
not the channels through whom the blessings came, but 
the Lord, the Author of their blessings, and loyally 
bear no other name than his who died for and redeemed 
them. 

Likewise, when the Church began to get rid of the 
gross darkness of the dark ages under the help and instruction 
of the reformers, Luther, Calvin, Zwingli and 
others, they naturally and properly had great respect 



for those whom God had honored as the instruments in 
the work of reformation. But again the tendency to 
"worship" the messengers, the human agents, instead 
of the divine Author was manifested, and to-day there 
are hundreds of thousands who call themselves by the 
name of Luther, Calvin, Wesley, Campbell and others, 
and who give more respect to their teachings and writings 
than to the Word of God, and this with corresponding 
injury to themselves. 

Likewise, to-day, in the light of present truth, 
shining more clearly than ever before, no doubt there 
is need to be on guard against this carnal tendency 
which has had so deleterious an influence in the past. 

When John fell down to worship the angel who 
had shown him the wonders of the divine plan, the angel's 
refusal to accept homage should be a lesson to all 
ministers (servants— messengers) of God. He said, 

R2080 : page 305 

"See thou do it not; for I am thy fellow-servant [not 
thy Lord and Master], and [fellow-servant] of thy 
brethren the prophets, and [fellow-servant] of [all] 
them which keep the sayings of this book. Worship 
God [the source from which come all these blessings 
and all this light]." All servants of God are fellow-servants 
regardless of the time or extent of their service. 

The Apostle calls attention to this man-worshiping 
tendency in his epistle to the Colossians (2:18,19), 
saying, "Let no man beguile you of your reward, in a 
voluntary humility and worshiping of angels [messengers]." 
The intimation is that this temptation will 
come insidiously, craftily, and not by brazen demands 
for reverence. Such is the reverence accorded in general 

R2080 : page 306 

to the ministry of the nominal churches. Many 

ministers who seem very meek, and who would not 

think of demanding reverence or worship, nevertheless 

accept of their flocks the voluntary title, Reverend, and 

encourage it, and feel offended if reverence or worship 

of this sort is not rendered. The effect has been and 

still is to injure the household of faith, to give an over-confidence 

in the judgment and word of the minister in 

spiritual things, so that many neglect to prove their 

faith by God's Word, and to trust implicitly to its 

authority. 

And there is danger amongst those who do not use 
the title, Reverend. It should always be remembered 
(as pointed out in our issue of Nov. 15, '95) that control 
resides in the congregation and not in self-appointed 
leaders, whether they seek to serve a dozen or thousands. 
The churches of Christ should recognize the 
leading of their Head, and know their leaders to be of his 
choice (See Heb. 13:7,17,24, Diaglott), but they 



should beware of any disposed to usurp the rights of the 

congregation or to ignore those rights by taking the 

place of leaders without the specific request of the congregation; 

beguiling the company into supposing that the 

leader alone is competent to judge and decide for the 

congregation as to the Lord's choice, and thus failing 

to hold the Head (Christ) as the only real teacher, 

who is able and willing to guide all the meek in judgment, 

because they are his Church— "his body." 

Nor is this beguiling of the attention of the flock, 
away from the only Shepherd, to a fellow sheep always 
the fault of the "leaders:" there seems to be a 
general tendency on the part of all who have the true, 
humble, sheep nature to follow one another. It is a 
lesson, therefore, for all to learn,— that each sheep recognize 
as leaders only such as are found in full accord 
with the voice and spirit of the Chief Shepherd (Christ), 
and the under-shepherds (the Apostles), and that each 
sheep see to it that he eats only "clean provender" and 
drinks only "pure water" as directed by the Shepherd. 
(See Ezek. 34:17-19.) This implies the exercise of the 
individual conscience of each member of Christ's flock 
on matters of doctrine and practice, and tends to keep 
each one in sympathy and fellowship with the Shepherd, 
who knoweth each sheep and "calleth his own 
sheep by name." The same intimate relationship of 
the individual Christian with the Lord is illustrated in 
the figure of Christ the Head and the Church as members 
of his body.-l Cor. 12:12-27; Eph. 4:15,16. 

As we have been to some extent, by the grace of 
God, used in the ministry of the gospel, it may not be 
out of place to say here what we have frequently said 
in private, and previously in these columns,— namely, 
that while we appreciate the love, sympathy, confidence 
and fellowship of fellow-servants and of the entire 
household of faith, we want no homage, no reverence, 
for ourselves or our writings; nor do we wish to be 
called Reverend or Rabbi. Nor do we wish that any 
should be called by our name. The name of him who 
died for all— the name Christian— is quite sufficient to 
designate the spiritual sons of God, the true brethren 
of Christ; and whatsoever is more than this cometh of 
evil, of carnality, and tends toward more of 
the same. 

Nor would we have our writings reverenced or regarded 
as infallible, or on a par with the holy Scriptures. 
The most we claim or have ever claimed for our 
teachings is, that they are what we believe to be harmonious 
interpretations of the divine Word, in harmony 
with the spirit of the truth. And we still urge, as in 
the past, that each reader study the subjects we present 
in the light of the Scriptures, proving all things 
by the Scriptures, accepting what they see to be thus 
approved, and rejecting all else. It is to this end, to 
enable the student to trace the subject in the divinely 
inspired Record, that we so freely intersperse both quotations 



and citations of the Scriptures upon which to build. 



R2080 : page 306 

WHO SHALL ABIDE IN THY TABERNACLE? 



"Lord, who shall abide in thy tabernacle? 
who shall dwell in thy holy hill?"— Psa. 15:1. 

THE tabernacle of God is his dwelling place in the 
midst of his people. As the typical tabernacle 
in the midst of the typical Israel indicated that the divine 
presence was with them, so the antitypical spiritual 
Israel is similarly, yet even more highly, favored, 
as the antitype is higher than the type. "God is in the 
midst of her; she shall not be moved." And "he that 
dwelleth in the secret place of the Most High [in the 
holy place— the place or condition of full and faithful 
consecration to God] shall abide under the shadow of 
the Almighty." They abide in his love, under his 
protection and care, and in communion and fellowship 
with him. 

Every "saint" has realized something of the blessedness 
of abiding in this secret holy place of the divine 
tabernacle, and with the Psalmist can say, "How 
amiable are thy tabernacles, O Lord of hosts!" Wherever 
God is, there is his Tabernacle: wherever there is 
a loyal consecrated heart, there is a dwelling place of 
God; and wherever two or three or more such are met 
together in his name, God is in the midst, and there is 
his dwelling place. How amiable indeed are thy tabernacles; 

R2080 : page 307 

how blessed to sit together in the heavenly 

places in Christ Jesus, how sweet the songs of praise, 

how fervent the prayers, how blessed the communion! 

But only those who abide in the secret place know 
how to appreciate these things. With them there is a 
longing after more and more of the manifestations of 
divine favor. The language of their hearts is, "My soul 
longeth, yea, even fainteth for the courts of the Lord; 
my heart and my flesh crieth out for the living God; 
[elsewhere]. I had rather be a doorkeeper in the 
house of my God, than to dwell in the tents of wickedness." 
-Psa. 84:1,2,10. 

Yes, "Blessed are they that dwell in thy house;" 
blessed are they that dwell in God, and in whom God 
dwells. They find in him a shadow from the heat, 
where the heart may rest its burdens and find refreshment, 
and a refuge from the storms of life (Isa. 4:5,6), 
and that the Lord God is a sun and shield, giving 



grace and glory, and withholding no good thing from 
them that walk uprightly. 

These are some of the blessings of those who abide 
in the tabernacle of the Lord now, while it is pitched 
in the wilderness of this present life. But what pen 
can portray the blessedness of abiding in that glorious 
tabernacle, that temple of God, which shall be the 
dwelling place of the overcoming saints to all eternity, 
after we have passed through this wilderness and beyond 
the Jordan of death? There we shall see the Lord 
in his glory, and be like him; there we shall see our 
Father's face, and worship and adore; there we shall 
delight in the society of all his holy angels; there we 
shall be endowed with power to execute the gracious 
designs of our God toward all his creatures; and life 
and everlasting joy shall fill his temple, and thence 
shall flow streams of blessing to all creatures in heaven 
and in earth. 

This is the glorious hope of our high calling to live 
and reign with Christ: and this will be the joy of abiding 
forever in the tabernacle of the Lord and dwelling 
in his holy hill (his holy Kingdom). With such a hope 
before us, and with the conditions of its attainment 
yet to be fulfilled, how solicitous should be the inquiry 
of every sincere child of God, "Lord, who shall abide 
in thy tabernacle? who shall dwell in thy holy hill? 

The answer is plain, that those so honored must be 
lovers of righteousness and haters of iniquity; they 
must be persons of uncompromising integrity, having 
no fellowship with the workers of iniquity; and 
those who, having made a covenant, do not ignore its 
solemn obligations,— "He that sweareth to his own 
hurt and changeth not." "He that doeth these things 
shall never be moved." 

These considerations call very forcibly to mind the 
great importance which the Scriptures attach to the— 

COVENANT OBLIGATIONS OF GOD'S PEOPLE. 



The man that sweareth to his own hurt, or, in 
other words, who makes a solemn covenant to present 
himself a living sacrifice to God, is thenceforth bound 
by that covenant. He cannot, by subsequently changing 
his mind, be released from the obligations thus incurred; 
and to endeavor to ignore them is to be caught 
in a most deceitful snare of the adversary.— "It is a 

R2081 : page 307 

snare to man to sanctify things hastily, and to make inquiry 

only after having made vows;" i.e., to make inquiry 

in the sense of reconsidering the cost and whether 

or not, in view of the cost, we shall keep it, when already 

its solemn obligations are upon us and cannot 



be either repudiated or ignored with impunity. 
(Prov. 20:25— Leeser.) Again we read, "When 
thou vowest a vow unto God [when thou makest 
a covenant or promise], defer not to pay it; for he 
hath no pleasure in fools: pay that which thou hast 
vowed. Better is it that thou shouldest not vow, 
than that thou shouldest vow and not pay. Suffer 
not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin."— Eccl. 5:4-6. 

Again the obligation was expressed to typical 
fleshly Israel— and if it was applicable to them, the 
typical people, it applies with at least equal force to 
the still more highly favored and enlightened antitypes 
of the Gospel age— thus: "When thou shalt vow a vow 
unto the Lord thy God, thou shalt not slack to pay it; 
for the Lord thy God will surely require it of thee, and it 
would be sin in thee. That which is gone out of thy 
lips thou shalt keep and perform, even a free-will offering, 
according as thou hast vowed unto the Lord thy 
God, which thou hast promised with thy mouth."— 
Deut. 23:21-23. 

It is those who thus respect their covenant obligations, 
and fulfil them, that shall forever abide in the 
tabernacle of the Lord and dwell in his holy Kingdom. 
It is in view of these solemn obligations that the Lord 
counsels those who would come to him to "first count 
the cost" and make sure that they are ready to assume 
them (Luke 14:28-32), and that on another occasion 
he said, "No man, having put his hand to the plow, 
and looking back, is fit for the Kingdom of God." 
(Luke 9:62.) Again we read, "If any man draw back, 
my soul shall have no pleasure in him." And the 
Apostle Paul shows that some at least will draw back 
unto perdition— destruction.— Heb. 10:38,39. 

Thus viewed, how imperative are the obligations 
of our covenants with God. But, on the other side of 
this great responsibility, are the bountiful encouragements 
and assurances of divine grace:— "My grace is 
sufficient for thee;" "My strength is made perfect in 
[your] weakness;" "I will teach thee and guide thee 

R2081 : page 308 

in the way which thou shalt go." Yes, the blessed 
promises stand out on every page of the sacred Word; 
and the spirit of God is ever ready to seal them upon 
the hearts of his consecrated children who continue to 
look to him for the supplies of grace, and who make 
diligent use of them. 

Thus the Lord is able to carry on to completion 
the good work which he has begun in us; and he will 
do it in all who continue loyal and true to their covenant 
and zealous for the cause of truth and righteousness. 
"He that doeth these things shall never be moved." 
MRS. M. F. RUSSELL. 



R2081 : page 308 

BIRTH OF "THE MAN CHRIST JESUS." 

-DEC. 20.-MATT. 2:1-12.- 

"And the angel said unto them, Fear not: for, behold, I bring you 
good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people."— Luke 2:10. 

OUR subject does not take us back to the beginning 

of God's creation when Christ as a spirit 

being became "the first born of every creature;"— the 

Word that was with God in the beginning of creation, 

and by whom all things were made, and without whom 

not one thing was made. (John 1:1-3,10.) Our Master 

at that time was "the beginning and the ending, the 

first and the last," of Jehovah's direct creation: all subsequent 

creations being by and through him as Jehovah's 

honored agent. (Rev. 1:11; 3:14; Col. 1:15; 

John 1:1-3.) We come to the time when he who was 

rich for our sakes became poor (2 Cor. 8:9) and left 

the glory which he had with the Father "before the 

world was." (John 17:5.) Then, without dying, our 

Master underwent a change of nature and "humbled 

himself," "was made flesh" (Phil. 2:8; John 1:14), 

"took upon himself the form of a servant" and was 

"found in fashion a man;" "a little lower than the 

angels;" and then still further he humbled himself even 

unto death, and yet more even unto the shameful death 

of the cross— as a culprit, as a sinner. (Heb. 2:9,16; 

Phil. 2:6-9.) This lesson, appropriate to the season, 

calls our attention to the birth of "the man Christ Jesus." 

In the divine predictions of a coming Savior attention 
is largely called to the fact that he is to be a King, 
a Deliverer, a Savior. This point is made prominent 
because God appealed to mankind along the line of 
their necessities and hopes. The sacrificial feature of 
our Lord's ministry was made less prominent than his 
power and majesty and glory, because the sacrifice related 
specially to God and was to meet the demands of 
the divine law against the sinner-race. The question 
of how God would settle the matter consistently with 
his own sentence of death, resting upon the race, would 
to the average human mind be much less important than 
the statement of the resulting glories, restitution and 
blessings. Hence, we find the references to the sacrificial 
features of our Lord's ministry largely presented 
under types and symbols intended to be comprehended 
only by those who, as sons of God, would be guided 
into the truth by the spirit of God. 

It is not surprising that the angels who announced 
our Lord's birth mentioned only the glories to follow 
and not his sufferings which would intervene. It is 
not surprising that they did not weep for the sufferings 
and humiliation, but sang "Glory to God in the 



highest, on earth peace, good will toward men;" grasping 
merely the culmination of the great divine plan 
which had its beginning in the birth of Jesus. 

(1,2) Whether or not the "wise men" of the 
East were Hebrews we are not informed; but since divine 
favor was for the time confined to Israel, and since 
that favor did not depart until they had rejected the 
Messiah, we consider it highly probable that these wise 
men from the East were part of "the twelve tribes 
scattered abroad," who, "instantly serving God," were 
hoping for and "waiting for the consolation of Israel" 
through the long promised Messiah. (Acts 26:7; Luke 2:25.) 
We do know that hundreds of thousands if not 
several millions of Israelites were carried captive to 
this very East country— Babylon, Medo-Persia; and 
we know also that less than 55,000 availed themselves 
of the decree of Cyrus permitting their return to Palestine. 
The great bulk of the people Israel, therefore, 
at that time (as now) resided in foreign lands. 
And it would appear that their foreign captivity was 
helpful to their religious interests, and that the Israelites 
in general had more faith in the Lord and more 
strong interest in prophecies respecting Messiah after 
the captivity in Babylon than for several hundred years 
previous, when they were continually beset with 
idolatry. 

The promise of God to Abraham of a great "seed," 
a great king and ruler who should bless the world with 
a righteous reign, it would appear, was carried by the 
Israelites into all the then civilized world; leading some 
to expect a Jewish Messiah, it led others through a 
feeling of pride to declare that they were as able as the 
Jews to produce the desirable government and ruler 
for the world. Hence, we find that the idea of universal 
dominion began to prevail. It is claimed by 
some that Zoroaster, the great Persian religious teacher, 
was a disciple of the Prophet Jeremiah, and the 
memoir of Mrs. Grant, missionary to Persia, says:— 

"Zoroaster taught the Persians concerning Christ. 
He declared that in the latter days a pure virgin should 

R2081 : page 309 

conceive, and that as soon as the child was born a star 
would appear, even at noonday, with undiminished 
luster. 'You, my son,' exclaimed the venerable seer, 
'will perceive its rising before any other nation. As 
soon as you see the star follow it wherever it leads you 
and adore the mysterious child, offering your gifts to 
him with the profoundest humility. He is the almighty 
Word which created the heavens.'" 

Although this is only a legend, it is interesting to 
know that there was such a legend amongst the people 
of the East. And respecting Zoroaster it may be said 
that his teachings were of a higher character than 
those of other heathen teachers. 



(3-6) Expecting a king, the wise men naturally 
came to the palace of Herod, who, although called the 
King of the Jews, was the representative of their conquerors, 
the Romans. Herod was the founder of the 
House of Herod and naturally had great expectations, 
not only with reference to the duration of his own dominion, 
but also with a view to the establishment of 
his posterity in the power and office which he enjoyed. 
No wonder, then, that he was "troubled." The prospect 
of a rival either in the power or in the esteem of 
the people was not to his liking. "And all Jerusalem 
[was troubled] with him." Political influence takes 
in a wide circle. There were connected with Herod's 
government or benefited by it, directly or indirectly, 
many whose plans, hopes, etc., might be very much 
disarranged by any change of the government. Herod 
evidently knew of the Jewish tradition respecting Messiah, 
for he at once sent for those who were learned in 
the Scriptures to demand of them where the prophets 
indicated that Messiah should be born. The scribes 
and Pharisees were evidently quite familiar with the 
subject, had looked it up, and apparently without 
hesitation gave the name of Messiah's birthplace as 
Bethlehem, and quoted from the prophet in support 
of it. 

(7-12) The cunning art of Herod, by which he 
hoped to learn who was this divinely designated Prince 
and heir to his throne, is only appreciated when we 
remember the sequel to this narrative: how, when 
he found that the wise men did not return to give him 
the information and permit the destruction of the child 
Jesus, he determined to kill all the children of the city 
of Bethlehem of two years old and under; thus he 
might be sure, he thought, that he had outwitted the 
divine plan and protected his own power. 

The star which seemingly had led these wise men 
toward Jerusalem, and which then apparently had vanished, 
and left the searchers to arouse the curiosity and 
interest of the people of Jerusalem, again became their 
guide as they left the city, and led them to Bethlehem, 
which is only a short distance, and the star appears 
to have indicated even the very house in which they 
found the new-born King. According to the custom 
of the time they presented costly treasures as well as 
their homage. 

Although the King came, his own received him 
not; and like the "young nobleman" of his own parable 
he went "into a far country," even heaven itself, 
there to be invested with power by the King of kings, 
and to postpone the establishment of his kingdom until 
his Church, his bride, his joint-heirs, should be selected 
and prepared to share the Kingdom with him. 

Meantime, the world still needs a King as much 
as ever. All nations are learning more and more their 
need of a wise, a just, a powerful, a loving, a merciful 
ruler. They need this very one, and are gradually 



learning that none of the fallen race can be trusted 
with much power, honor and glory; that all are weak 
through the fall, and that a superior king and a superior 
government are essential to their highest blessing. The 
masses are beginning to feel this need more keenly; 
and it is remarkable to what extent various advocates 
of Socialism recognize and quote the teachings of this 
very King with commendation;— even though it may 
be said that they wish others to be governed by the 
Golden Rule, while they themselves fail to walk by it. 

The world is beginning to realize that the King is 
at the door: the Herods of to-day and with them all 
those of influence and power, political and financial, 
are "troubled" at a prospect of a change of government, 
which their own "wise men" announce as imminent. 
We need not expect that the princes of the world will 
welcome him: rather they will fear a disruption of 
present institutions;— fear that under his government 
they would not have so favorable opportunities for 
prosperity; and that in the general levelling, which 
the prophets declare will accompany his reign, some 
that are high shall be abased, and some that are low 
shall be exalted. As a consequence, Messiah's Kingdom, 
although a kingdom of peace and righteousness, 
must be introduced by "a time of trouble, such as was 
not since there was a nation." Yet we rejoice in the 
promise that "when the judgments of the Lord are 
abroad in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will 
learn righteousness," and that eventually his kingdom 
shall come to be the "desire of all nations." 

Thus far the gospel of the kingdom has been received 
by only a few; and the special blessings have 
been with the few who have acknowledged the King, 
and who are being prepared to be joint-heirs in his 
kingdom. But let us not forget the gracious results 
that are to follow the establishment of that kingdom, 
when, as declared in the Golden Text,— the good tidings 
and the great joy "shall be to all people." 



page 309 
DEC. 27.— REVIEW of the lessons respecting Solomon. 



R2081 : page 310 

CHRIST'S ASCENSION. 

-JAN. 3.-ACTS 1:1-14.— 

"While he blessed them, he was parted from them, 
and carried up into heaven."— Luke 24:51. 



THE writer, Luke the evangelist, here introduces 
the Book of Acts and associates it with the 
Gospel of Luke. 

(2,3) These two verses cover briefly the forty 
days of our Lord's presence with the disciples after his 
resurrection, prior to his ascension. An important part 
of our Lord's mission during those forty days was to 
give the disciples instruction respecting the spiritual 
character of the kingdom to be established, and the necessity 
for his sufferings as a prelude to the glory to 
follow. His words of explanation, as for instance to 
the disciples on the way to Emmaus, constituted only 
a part of this instruction; another and, we may judge, 
a still more important instruction was conveyed to them 
through observation of his conduct. He would prove 
to them two things: (1) that he whom they had seen 
crucified and buried had come to life, had arisen from 
the dead; (2) that, although alive and the same person, 
with the same individuality, yet now his conditions 
were entirely altered;— that he was no longer "the man 
Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom," but that, 
having finished that work for the performance of which 
he took the form and nature of a servant, he was made 
alive again on the higher, the spiritual plane, which he 
left more than thirty-three years previously in order to 
redeem mankind. 

Since the apostles were still natural men, not having 
as yet received the gift of the holy spirit, they 
were still unable to appreciate spiritual things (John 3:12); 
and hence it was necessary to give the proofs 
of a spiritual matter (namely, that Christ had risen 
from the dead a spirit being) along lines which the 
unilluminated could appreciate. It would not have 
availed the accomplishment of his purpose, it would 
not have given the disciples satisfactory evidence of 
his resurrection, had he appeared to them as he did 
subsequently to Saul of Tarsus in the glory of a spirit 
being "above the brightness of the sun at noonday." 
That was a valuable lesson to the Apostle Paul and to 
all the apostles; but it needed the connecting links associating 
the risen and glorified Jesus with the man 
Jesus, and these links of association were provided during 
the forty days before the ascension. It was to this 
end that our Lord appeared to the disciples in bodies 
of flesh, and on two occasions in bodies resembling the 
one which they had seen crucified, bearing also the 
nail and spear marks. He thus associated in their 
minds the crucified man-Jesus and the risen spirit- Jesus. 

The second step in the lesson was in the fact that 
these appearances were infrequent: in all the forty 
days the records would not indicate that he appeared 
to them at the very outside more than ten times, and 
his interviews with them would appear to have been 
very brief, so that we are certainly safe in concluding 
that out of the forty days he was not visibly manifest 
to the disciples more than four hours— quite probably 



not more than one-half hour at each of the five to ten 
interviews recorded. Where was he the remainder of 
the time? would naturally come to them as a question. 
Why not with them continually as before his crucifixion? 
they probably asked. And this was part of the 
lesson— to induce reasoning and reflection on their part, 
and to cause them to understand that a great "change" 
had taken place in the interim between his crucifixion 
and his first appearance to them on the morning of his 
resurrection. We can fancy their study of the subject 
during those forty days, and discussions pro and 
con, their wonders when the next appearance would 
take place, and what would be the outcome of the whole 
matter. 

The third feature of their lesson in observation 
was in respect to the manner and variety of his appearances; 
once as the gardener to Mary, who saw no nail 
prints in his hands or feet, although she embraced his 
feet; again as a sojourner and guest at Emmaus in 
another form, so that the disciples did not know him 
and did not remark anything peculiar about his hands 
or his feet, although he was with them at the table. 
It was in his asking of a blessing upon the food that 
they recognized him. Again at the seashore where he 
evidently appeared in still another form to Peter, James 
and John who recognized him by the miracle, and concerning 
whom the evangelist says, None of them durst 
ask him who he was, knowing that it was the Lord- 
not by the marks of the crown of thorns, not by the nail 
prints, but by his manner and the miraculous draught 
of great fishes following their unprofitable night of toil. 
And on two occasions he appeared in a body of flesh 
like to that crucified, with nail prints and spear marks; 
once when doubting Thomas was absent, and once when 
he was present. These various appearances under 
various conditions in various places, wholly unlike his 
previous conduct with them, were calculated to teach 
them the lesson that he was "changed"— that he was 
no longer a flesh being, "the man Christ Jesus," "made 
flesh" and limited to fleshly conditions in locomotion 
and visibility, etc.; but that now he was alive, though 
so changed that he could appear or disappear, assume 
one kind of body or another kind, assume one kind of 
clothing or another kind at pleasure. 

The fourth lesson along the lines of observation 
was taught by the fact that he appeared and disappeared 
miraculously, suddenly, unaccountably. Coming 
from they knew not whither, the Lord had joined the 
two going to Emmaus; and then, after he had given them 
as much of a lesson as they could digest, he "vanished 
out of their sight." The same evening in another 
city he suddenly appeared to the ten, the doors being 
shut for fear of the Jews, and, we may suppose, securely 
barred: he needed not to undo the bolts nor to open 
the door as the "man Christ Jesus" would have needed 
to do; the spirit-born Jesus could do and did do just 



what he had previously explained to Nicodemus in the 
hearing of the disciples as recorded by the Apostle 

R2082: page 310 

John (3:5). He came and went like the wind; they 
could not tell whence he came; and when he went he 
vanished out of their sight again, and they could not 
tell whither he went: So is every one that is born of 
the spirit. No wonder the disciples were astonished 
and affrighted at the first, and needed that our Lord 

R2082: page 311 

should convince them that they were not looking at a 
spirit but at plain, ordinary flesh and bones, of which 
they need have no fear. Of this he assured them 
saying, you do not see a spirit, "a spirit hath not flesh 
and bones as ye see me have." Similarly he appeared 
in a body of flesh and bones to Father Abraham and 
ate and drank with him (Gen. 18:1,2); and similarly 
angels in the past upon certain missions have appeared 
to men. We are to draw a great distinction between the 
power of a spirit being to appear in a body of flesh and 
the great humiliation which our Lord accomplished on 
our behalf, when he entirely left his glory and exchanged 
his nature as a spirit being for human nature and was 
"made flesh." In the one case the spirit nature was 
maintained with unrestricted power and merely used a 
human form as a means of communication, creating the 
human body as well as the human clothing in an instant, 
and as quickly dissolving both. This was evidently 
what our Lord did, when he appeared in the room, the 
doors being shut, and when he vanished, the doors still 
being shut. The power thus manifested is so far beyond 
human power as to be incomprehensible to us, as 
the turning of water into wine or as the resurrection 
itself. It can only be received by faith based upon the 
evidences of reliable witnesses and supported on every 
hand by our knowledge of the divine power. 

That the apostles got this thought is evident from 
the peculiar manner in which they refer to the Lord's 
manifestations after his resurrection. They say, "he 
appeared," "he showed himself." These are not ordinary 
expressions nor do they mark ordinary circumstances. 
Ordinarily, people are seen if present without 
any necessity of showing themselves or appearing. 
The disciples learned and noted also the fact that these 
showings and appearings were only to the believers and 
never to the world; which agrees with our Lord's testimony 
before his death,— "Yet a little while and the 
world seeth me no more." Nor will the world ever 
see the man Christ Jesus. While he still bears the 
title of Son of Man as a mark of his great obedience to 
the Father, and the purchase of the human race, and 
his title to the glories of the divine nature which he 



now possesses as a reward of his obedience even unto 
death, even the death of the cross, God has now highly 
exalted him and given him a name which is above every 
name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should 
bow and every tongue confess. 

Many confuse themselves greatly by failing to 
clearly distinguish between spirit-beings and human-beings 
and their distinct powers. Very many suppose 
that a spirit body must be made out of a human body, 
and must still contain certain human elements. They 
overlook the fact that the resurrection body is not the 
body buried, as the Apostle so forcibly proves (1 Cor. 15:37,38); 
nor will those have "flesh and blood" 
bodies who shall inherit the Kingdom. (1 Cor. 15:50; 
John 3:3,5,8.) Some, in an effort to harmonize a 
false theory with the Scriptures, claim that a spirit-body 
is one in which the blood gives place to spirit. 
(Do they mean wind?) They fail to see that this 
would not harmonize with the conditions noted foregoing. 
A body of flesh and bones with wind in the veins 
instead of blood could no more come into a room when 
the doors were shut than could a body of flesh and 
bones and blood: nor could it vanish from sight— nor 
could its clothing come in and then vanish out of a 
closed room. The only solution is that which recognizes 
the truth of our Lord's words,— "A spirit hath 
not flesh and bones;" although spirit beings in harmony 
with God have in the past been permitted to assume 
flesh and bones and clothing for approved purposes. 

(4,5) Here our attention is called again to the 
fact that the gift of the holy spirit to the gospel Church 
is something unique— wholly different from any previous 
gift of the holy spirit except upon our Lord Jesus 
himself. They were to wait for it, and did wait ten 
days from the time of our Lord's ascension, until the 
spirit power came upon them. They waited while he 
as the great High Priest went into heaven itself and 
there appeared in the presence of God and presented 
to God on our behalf the merits of his sacrifice at Calvary. 

(6-8) They were perplexed with the new order of 
things since Christ's resurrection. Their previous ideas, 
common to the Jews, had been of an earthly kingdom, 
and Christ and themselves, the apostles, associated 
in a human or fleshly glory and kingdom power. Now 
however they perceived their Master wonderfully 
changed, and he spoke to them again of going away 
and said nothing about the kingdom for which they in 
common with all recognized as the twelve tribes of Israel 
waited. (Acts 26:7.) So they asked him concerning 
the time for its establishment. In his answer he 
does not deny that there will be a kingdom, but the 
reverse, merely telling them that it is not for them to 
know the time. When they asked him a similar question 
before his crucifixion he answered that he did not 
know. (Mark 13:32.) But he does not so answer on 
this occasion. We must suppose, on the contrary, that he 



did know, because he was now born of the spirit, and 
he himself testified "All power in heaven and in earth is 
given unto me." This must therefore have included 
the power of knowledge; but he withheld the knowledge 
from the disciples in their interest and instead 
told them of the coming power of the spirit, and of the 
intermediate mission appointed for them and all his 
Church, of witnessing to the world before the establishment 
of his Kingdom. 

(9-1 1) The account of the ascension is very simply 
given and yet, strange to say, many stumble over 
the statement of the angels "this same Jesus" "shall 
so come in like manner as ye have seen him go." Many 
think of this as though it read that same Jesus, "the 
man Christ Jesus," shall come again. But it was this 
Jesus, the resurrected Jesus, the Jesus whom none of 
the world saw; the Jesus who was seen by the disciples 
only a few times during that forty days; the Jesus who 
was seen by them only when "he appeared" or 
"showed himself;" the Jesus who could come into their 
midst, the doors being shut, and who could and did 
"vanish out of their sight;" "this same Jesus" is the 
one who will "come again." 

Again, many get a wrong impression from the 
word "manner." They think of manner as meaning 
flesh; but manner means manner. He ascended in a quiet 
manner, without display or commotion or noise, in 
a secret manner, so far as the world was concerned, in 
a manner known only to the disciples. Hence, when 
he comes again in like manner, it will be likewise unknown 
and invisibly to the world, without noise or 
demonstration, and recognized only by believers. 


