Benefit From the 1999 Theocratic Ministry School Program
1 Jesus was the Master Teacher. People were “astounded at his way of teaching.” (Mark 1:22) Although none of us can speak and teach as well as Jesus did, we can endeavor to imitate him. (Acts 4:13) To that end, our participation in the Theocratic Ministry School program will help us to keep on improving our speaking and teaching skills.
2 In 1999, Assignment No. 1 will be based mainly on articles from the 1997 Watchtower and Awake! magazines. Our understanding of spiritual matters will be greatly enhanced if we read this information in advance and then hear it on the school program. Those assigned to give these instruction talks should make practical application of the material, presenting it in an interesting and lively manner. Assignment No. 3 will be based on the Family Happiness book, and Assignment No. 4, on a Bible character, although the source material may alternate for these assignments. The school overseer should give careful consideration to the material before assigning the parts. All students assigned to deliver material from the Family Happiness book should be exemplary in their own family life.
3 Apply Counsel, and Prepare Well: Everyone can make further improvement in the art of speaking and teaching. (1 Tim. 4:13) Hence, we should seek counsel and never view it as something to be avoided. (Prov. 12:15; 19:20) Presenting the truth effectively at the meetings and in the field ministry requires more than just relating facts or reading scriptures in a perfunctory way. We need to reach hearts and motivate those who listen to us. We can do this by speaking the truth convincingly from our heart. (Compare Acts 2:37.) The counsel we receive in the school will help us to accomplish this.
4 As soon as you receive an assignment, think about the speech qualities that you are to work on as explained in the School Guidebook. Consider what you need to do to apply previous counsel that you received. Meditate on your theme, the setting you will use if one is called for, and how you will apply the scriptures found in your assigned material. Ponder over how best to use the information to teach and to motivate.​—1 Tim. 4:15, 16.
5 If you are apprehensive about enrolling in the school, pray about it and then discuss your feelings with the school overseer. Everyone can benefit by taking full advantage of the program that will be presented in the Theocratic Ministry School in 1999.

