Offering the New World Translation
1 “The New World [Translation] is well worth acquiring. It is lively and lifelike, and makes the reader think and study. It is not the work of Higher Critics, but of scholars who honour God and His Word.” So stated a noted Hebrew and Greek commentator. We agree. How can we help others to have the same appreciation for the New World Translation when we offer it along with the Knowledge book in December?
2 Some people may respond, “I already have a Bible. I don’t need another one.” Our challenge is to help them see that the New World Translation is not just another Bible. It is a literal translation in today’s language that accurately captures the sense of the original text. One aspect of its superiority can be demonstrated by comparing the renderings of such words as “shambles” (King James Version) with “meat market” (New World Translation) at 1 Corinthians 10:25.
3 However, few people read the Bible, much less understand its principles for everyday life. They need to know that God’s Word can influence their lives for good and that following its counsel on honesty, morality, and family life can help them to cope with today’s problems. How might this be accomplished?
4 A Suggested Presentation: “Would you agree that with today’s moral values changing so rapidly and with the uncertainty that exists about our future, we need a reliable guide in life? [Allow for response.] Although it is the oldest of books, the Bible gives practical counsel for modern living and happy family life.” Then turn to chapter 2 in the Knowledge book, and read paragraph 10 and the first sentence of paragraph 11, including 2 Timothy 3:16, 17. If interest is shown, place the Knowledge book, explain our free home Bible study program, and offer the New World Translation. If you feel that it would be better to start the study in the Require brochure, you may do so. You will find additional suitable introductions on pages 9-15 in the Reasoning book.
5 Let us reflect our appreciation for the superb New World Translation. We can do this by zealously offering it in December.

