Overseers Taking the Lead​—The Watchtower Study Conductor
1 The Watchtower Announcing Jehovah’s Kingdom is the primary provision of “the faithful and discreet slave” for dispensing spiritual food to us “at the proper time.” (Matt. 24:45) The elder who conducts the Watchtower Study has a vital responsibility as a capable teacher who sets a fine example in Christian living.​—Rom. 12:7; Jas. 3:1.
2 To teach effectively, the Watchtower Study conductor must put real effort into preparing each week. He does so prayerfully and carefully. His keen interest in the congregation is reflected in a genuine endeavor to reach our hearts with the material being studied. He concentrates on the main points of the lesson and helps us to see how they relate to the theme of the article.
3 Thorough preparation on his part involves looking up the scriptures in advance so as to know how they apply. He keeps God’s Word to the fore by encouraging the congregation to make good use of the Bible during the study. When an important point is not covered in comments from the congregation or when the application of a key scripture is overlooked, he asks a specific additional question to draw out the information. In this way, he helps us to arrive at correct conclusions and to know how to apply what we learn in our lives.
4 The Watchtower Study conductor progressively strives to improve his own teaching ability. He does not comment excessively but encourages us to comment​—in our own words, briefly, and to the point. He may occasionally remind us that the first one to comment on a paragraph should give a brief, direct answer to the printed question. Additional comments from the audience may draw attention to scripture application, supporting arguments, or practical application of the material. By promoting personal and family preparation, the Watchtower Study conductor works to stimulate everyone’s desire to participate.
5 As “persons taught by Jehovah,” we appreciate “gifts in men,” such as Watchtower Study conductors, who “work hard in . . . teaching.”​—Isa. 54:13; Eph. 4:8, 11; 1 Tim. 5:17.

