We Must Call Again and Again
1 Did you respond favorably the first time that someone talked to you about the good news? If not, you must be grateful that Jehovah’s Witnesses called again and again until you finally accepted the offer of a Bible study. It is good to think of that when you repeatedly work your assigned territory.
2 People’s lives are constantly changing. They face new problems or situations, hear of disturbing events in the community or the world, suffer economic reverses, or experience illness or death in the family. Such things may cause them to want to learn the reason for these distresses. We must discern the factors that weigh on people’s minds and then respond with a comforting message.
3 This Is a Rescue Work: Think of rescue workers at a disaster scene. Even though some may be searching in an area where few survivors are being found, they do not slack off and quit because their fellow workers are finding more survivors elsewhere. Our rescue operation has not been called off yet. Each year, hundreds of thousands who want to survive “the great tribulation” are being found.​—Rev. 7:9, 14.
4 “Everyone who calls on the name of Jehovah will be saved.” (Rom. 10:13-15) These words should impress on each of us the need to persist in preaching. Since our territory first began to be covered, children have grown up and are now old enough to think seriously for themselves about their future and the purpose of life. We have no way of knowing who will ultimately listen. (Eccl. 11:6) Many former opposers have accepted the truth. Our job is, not to judge people, but to keep giving them an opportunity to hear and to be rescued from this old world. As Jesus’ early disciples did, we must “go continually” to the people and try to stir up their interest in the Kingdom message.​—Matt. 10:6, 7.
5 The fact that the way is still open for us to preach is an expression of Jehovah’s mercy. (2 Pet. 3:9) As we allow others to hear the message again and again, we highlight God’s love, and in this way we praise him.

