VOL. XXXIV JUNE 15 No. 12 
A. D. 1913-A. M. 6041 



CONTENTS 

"Your Redemption Draweth Nigh" 179 

The "Secret Place" of His Saints 179 

Retribution for Wilful Sin 180 

A Word to the Watchers 181 

Evidences of the New Day 181 

Watchmen for A Purpose 182 

The Messengers of God in "The Last Days" 182 

Christ's Presence A Stumbling-Stone 183 

Hope (Poem) 183 

Spiritual Vision Proportionate to Heart 
Purity 184 

Individual Claims for Retribution 185 

General and Special Rights Under Law 185 

Our Share In the Cup of Suffering 186 

Making the Wilderness Bloom 186 

"With What Judgment Ye Judge" 187 

Moses Called to Service 188 



The Refiner's Fire (Poem) 189 

Men of Destiny 190 

Some Interesting Questions 191 

page 178 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



R5264 : page 178 

VOLUNTEER EXTENSION WORK 

The Volunteers this year are doing nobly and we have 
splendid ammunition. No doubt the results will be great. 
However, we must not hope to know the details until we reach 
the Kingdom. Meantime it is ours to do faithfully what our 
hands find to do— what our Lord privileges us to do. We are 
His ambassadors, His witnesses. 

We suggest that Class Extension work find parallel in 
Volunteer Extension work. After you have served your place 
of residence, seek the Lord's blessing in an endeavor to extend 
the distribution of free literature to other towns and cities 
within a reasonable radius. The Society is pleased to 
supply the ammunition free of all charges. It merely wishes, 
with the order, the names of the places to be served and the 
assurance that the work undertaken will (D.V.) be promptly 
done— that the literature will not be permitted to lie by unused. 
Remember that census population includes infants and that a 
proper estimate of one paper to the family would be one to 



five of the population. That is to say, a town of 5,000 would 
require 1,000 copies of the Volunteer matter. In cases where 
the population is found to be foreign, remember we have free 
literature in nearly all languages. 

"He that reapeth receiveth wages and gathereth fruit unto 
eternal life," is the message of our Master to us, one and all. 



R5255 : page 179 

"YOUR REDEMPTION DRAWETH NIGH" 

Come, My people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy 
doors about thee; hide thyself as it were for a little moment, 
until the indignation be overpast. For, behold, the Lord 
cometh out of His place to punish the inhabitants of the 
earth for their iniquity; the earth also shall disclose her 
blood, and shall no more cover her slain."— Isaiah 26:20,21. 

THERE is an affectionate tenderness about 

these words of our Heavenly Father which 

helps us to realize His great love for His 

people, and His special care over them. 

But while appreciating very gratefully this 

special love and care in the comfort, encouragement 

and protection afforded us by 

our Heavenly Father in the world's great 

tribulation, we would come far short of having 

His Spirit if we should regard the matter 

with self-complacency, forgetful of His great love for 

the world also. This love, veiled behind the clouds of 

His righteous indignation against their sins, in wisdom 

strikes the heavenly blow which will shatter all their idols 

and humble their pride in the dust, that so the sore 

wounds of His wrath may prepare them for their everlasting 

healing. 

If God so loved the world as to give His Only Begotten 
Son, "that whosoever believeth in Him should not perish 
[eternally], but have everlasting life," He loves them 
still, and it is His love that wields the rod for their correction. 
He also would have His people so regard His 
judgments, and while they rejoice in the sunshine of His 
favor, because by faith they have come into an attitude 
which can receive it, He would have them share His spirit 
toward the world; and while the blows of His righteous 
indignation fall heavily upon the world, He would have 
us point them to the cause of their calamities and to the 
only remedy— "In returning [to God] and rest [in Him 
alone] shall ye be saved; in quietness and in confidence 
shall be your strength." "Be still," saith the Lord, "and 
know that I am God; I will be exalted among the nations, 
I will be exalted in the earth."— Isa. 30:15; 
Psa. 46:10. 

But who are those whom the Lord is pleased to designate 
by the endearing name, "My people"? Does this 



class include every one upon whom His name is named? 
No; for that would include a great number of false professors. 
As the Psalmist expresses it, it includes all those 
who have made a covenant with God by sacrifice (Psa. 50:5.) 
—all the consecrated and faithful children of God, 
however young or weak they may be, whose hearts are 
fixed firmly and resolutely to be truly loyal and obedient 
children by His assisting grace. 

To be numbered among the children of God is a great 
privilege; but it means much more than many seem to 
understand— much more both on their part and on God's 
part. On their part, it signifies, not merely a name to 
live in some great organization which bears the Christian 
name, but that they have become sons and heirs of God 
through Christ; that they have fully consecrated themselves 
to God to follow in the footsteps of His dear Son; 
that they have renounced the vain pomp and glory of the 
world and have solemnly covenanted to live apart from 
its spirit, ambitions, hopes and aims; and not only so, but 
that in pursuance of that covenant, they are striving daily 
to be faithful, and meekly to take up their cross and follow 
their Leader and Head, Christ Jesus. 

On God's part it signifies the fulfilment of all His 
gracious promises to such through Christ, both for the 
life that now is, and for that which is to come. It signifies 
that in the present life we have His Fatherly Love, 
care, discipline, counsel, teaching, protection and encouragement, 
to the end; and that afterwards we shall be 
received into His glorious presence, and into everlasting 
rest, joy and peace. Oh, how blessed to be the people of 
God! even in the present life the reward of His favor is 
beyond computation. 

THE "SECRET PLACE" OF HIS SAINTS 

The place of hiding is "the secret place of the Most 
High," "under the shadow of the Almighty." (Psa. 91:1-9.) 
This secret place of the Most High, Beloved, is 
the place of intimate communion and fellowship with God, 
through the blessed privilege of prayer and through faith 
in His precious Word and His promised providential care. 

"When all around our souls gives way, 
He then is all our hope and stay." 

Oh, how precious is this hiding place! What rest and 
refreshment we find in the midst of the commotion that is 
even now bestirring the whole world, but especially the 
nations of Christendom— rest from the pride and folly 
of men in their abortive efforts to readjust the present 
unsatisfactory social order; and rest from the strife of 
tongues in their equally vain attempt to evolve the clear 
principles of truth and righteousness from the present 
confusion of human traditions. (Psa. 31:20.) Here we 
find rest, peace, light and joy, which the world can neither 
give nor take away. 



Few indeed are those who can understand our motives 
in thus withdrawing from the world and from the various 

R5255 : page 180 

organizations of the nominal Christian Church, to walk 

alone with God; and many are the reproaches which such 

must endure for His name's sake. But fear not; "shut 

thy doors [of faith] about thee," and heed not the reproaches; 

turn a deaf ear to them, and "Sanctify the Lord 

of Hosts Himself, and let Him be your fear, and let Him 

be your dread," (Isa. 8:13.); and, "Above all, take [for 

the conflict before you] the shield of faith, wherewith ye 

shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked." 

(Eph. 6: 16.) "And this is the victory that overcometh the 

world, even our faith."— I Jno. 5:4. 

It is to inspire such a faith as this that the Lord has 
offered us, in addition to all His precious promises, so 
many encouragements to simple, childlike trust in Him, 
and that He has bidden us to turn a deaf ear to the reproaches 
of man, saying, "Hearken unto Me, ye that know 
righteousness, the people in whose heart is My Law; fear 
ye not the reproach of men, neither be afraid of their 
revilings....I, even I, am He that comforteth 
you; who art thou, that thou shouldest be afraid of a man 
that shall die, and of the son of a man that shall be made 
as grass; and forgettest the Lord thy Maker, that has 
stretched forth the Heavens, and laid the foundations of 
the earth; and hast feared continually every day because 
of the fury of the oppressor, as if he were ready to destroy? 
...I have put My Words in thy mouth, and 
I have covered thee in the shadow of Mine hand, that I 
may plant the Heavens [establish the new Heavens], and 
lay the foundations of the earth [the new earth], and 
say unto Zion [the people tried and proved by these afflictions 
to be the worthy heirs of the new Kingdom— the 
new Heavens and earth], Thou art MY PEOPLE."— 
Isa. 51:7,12,13,16. 

While the storm of trouble which is to engulf the 
whole world will affect all men, both individually and collectively, 
the Lord's people, who seek only to draw yet 
closer to Him, entering more fully into the secret place 
of communion and fellowship and rest in Him, and shutting 
the doors of faith about them, will there be safely 
hidden from the alarm and fear and trembling that will 
take hold upon all other classes. And while they patiently 
endure its effects upon their temporal interests, they will 
rejoice not only in the knowledge of God's overruling 
Providence, in the whirlwind and in the storm as well as 
in the calms of life, but also in His blessed assurance that 
His wrath will be thus revealed only "for a little moment," 
and then will His righteous Kingdom be manifested 
in power and great glory, and they "shall shine 
forth as the sun. "-Matt. 13:43. 

Speaking of the trouble at the end of the Gospel Age, 
our Lord said, "Watch ye, therefore, and pray always, 



that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these things 
that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of 
Man." (Luke 21:36.) Again (vs. 28) He said, "When 
these things begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift 
up your heads; for your redemption draweth nigh." "My 
people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy doors." 

How much trouble there will be in our passing into the 
secret "chambers," in passing unto the Lord, we do not 
know. Yet when this trouble comes, there will be such a 
blessing from the Lord that those who go through it will 
be able to rejoice in tribulation. Whatever their experiences 
will be, these will be joyful in that they will have 
the thought of being forever with the Lord. We can rejoice 
even as did St. Stephen. 

RETRIBUTION FOR WILFUL SIN 

Verse 21 seems to refer to the operation of the principle 
of justice in God's judgments upon the world. The 
Heavenly Father stands for Justice, and He has appointed 
that all of His Mercy shall be exercised through the Lord 
Jesus Christ. Our Lord will be specially identified with 
the trouble upon the nations, but it will not be so much 
His work as the Father's. The Day of Trouble is called 
the Day of Jehovah. We read that "In that Day His feet 
shall stand upon the Mount of Olives," and that there 
shall be a great earthquake.— Zech. 14:4. 

While God has done nothing for mankind during the 
past six thousand years, but has rested so far as any work 
of Restitution is concerned, yet in some instances He 
has interfered to prevent the spread of evil, as in the 
case of the Amalekites and of the Sodomites. The Scriptures 
seem to indicate that in the end of this Age He will 
intervene in the affairs of mankind, and execute justice in 
the time of trouble. 

In the Scriptures, Justice is represented as calling for 
retribution. The blood of the murderers' victims is said 
to cry for vengeance. Whether the sin has been literal 
murder, or has been some injustice which has led to 
crime or suicide, Justice will require of humanity this 
much of retribution on this score. Justice demands that 
the children of Adam shall suffer. The Church of Christ 
is a separate class, taken out from the world and having 
their sins forgiven. They are upholders of Truth and 
righteousness. 

But this time of trouble coming upon the world will be 
the time when Justice will get its dues, so to speak. Justice 
will take its "pound of flesh." It will require for the 
more or less wilful sins of humanity. The class that has 

R5256 : page 180 

reaped the benefit of the spoliation of the poor in the past, 
will have to pay some of the toll to Justice in squaring the 
accounts. The Apostle James says, "Go to now, ye rich 
men, weep and howl for the miseries that shall come 



upon you." We are not to think, however, that in this 
present time God is dealing with the rich. None are on 
trial now except the Church of Christ. The others are 
merely the world of mankind, one part of which God 
will permit to wreak a measure of vengeance on the other 
part. But man's extremity will be God's opportunity. 
His appointed time for the establishment of His Kingdom 
will have come, and He will cause this wrath of man to 
work out good for humanity. 

Those who are causing this trouble to come on are not 
aware of what they are doing. But when satisfaction 
shall have been made to Justice, Messiah's Kingdom will 
interpose. We read that "except those days should be 
shortened, there should no flesh be saved." This exacting 
of a penalty for such sins as we have enumerated is not 
at all in conflict with the Bible teaching that Christ died 
for sin. Jesus pays the sin-debt of the world. 

The sin-debt of the world was a death penalty. Unless 
the Lord Jesus had met that penalty, the world would 
never be released. That death penalty would have remained 
upon the world, without any injustice in any way. 
The selfishness which has led to murder is, however, 
much more than the meeting of Adam's sin penalty by 
our Lord. Whoever has, through injustice, been responsible 
for murderous conditions is held responsible for 
those conditions. 

We read that in the end of the Jewish Age our Lord 
said that God would require from that generation a reckoning 
for all the righteous blood shed from the time of 
Abel down. (Matt. 23:35.) And the trouble which came 
upon the Jewish nation in the end of their Age fully 
settled that account. They had light and knowledge, and 
thus were held responsible. They were obliged to suffer 
because of the injuries that were not only perpetrated 
by some, but endorsed or winked at by others. 

R5256 :page 181 

LIGHT AND RESPONSIBILITY 

In the close of this Age, it would seem, the judgment 
of the Lord will be upon Christendom, which has had 
much light, although at times only a refracted light. But 
a measure of responsibility has come with it, and apparently 
the Lord's edict is that they shall not escape the 
penalty. From this generation He will require all the 
righteous blood shed during this Age, upon it, even as He 
did from the Jews in the end of their Age. This will 
cause the great time of trouble here, as it did there. So 
far as the world is concerned, they might not perceive the 
relationship between this time and the past. We know 
only from the Scriptures. God gives us this understanding, 
that we may have the greater poise and comfort of 
mind. 

In thinking of the nature of the tribulation at the end 
of this Age, we are first of all to remember that it is a 



tribulation coming upon the world and the hypocrites. 
The Lord tells us that if we are faithful, we shall not 
come into the condemnation coming upon the world. The 
intimation is that those who are not faithful enough to 
get into the Little Flock will come into this condemnation 
with the world. So the Lord tells us of some who 
will get their portion with the hypocrites.— Matt. 24:51. 

Only the wheat class constitute the Church of Christ. 
Only they will be gathered into the barn. (Matt. 13:30.) 
The tare class will undergo this time of trouble 
coming upon the world. The hypocrite class will include 
the rich of this world. These are addressed by St. James, 5:1-6. 
In these verses, the Apostle is turning aside from 
his line of thought. Then he addresses the Church again. 
The trouble will be especially hard on the rich, who are 
represented as weeping and howling for misery. 

The Great Company class is typically represented by 
the scapegoat of Israel's Atonement Day ceremonies. 
The bullock typifies our Lord Jesus, and the Lord's goat 
His faithful followers. (Heb. 13:11-13.) After the 
faithful ones have finished their course, then something 
will be done with the scapegoat— the Great Company. 
The account in Leviticus is very specific that the high 
priest will then lay upon the head of the scapegoat all 
the iniquities of all Israel. (Lev. 16:21.) All the sins 
of all the people were laid upon the head of the scapegoat, 
that it might bear them away— make full satisfaction. 
As has been suggested, God has made provision for 
the cancellation of original sin through Christ, and has 
made arrangements for the satisfaction of Justice, so far 
as all the other sins of the world are concerned, through 
the Great Company class. 

There is a correspondency between the end of the 
Jewish Age and the end of this Gospel Age in this way: 
As expiation for the taking of the life of Jesus was required 
of the Jewish nation, so at the end of the Gospel 
Age, the sacrificed life of the Church will in a measure 
be required of nominal Spiritual Israel. 

The Lord seems to give this suggestion, when He 
says that "the blood of all the prophets, which was shed 
from the foundation of the world, may be required of 
this generation; from the blood of Abel unto the blood 
of Zacharias, which perished between the altar and the 
temple: verily I say unto you, it shall be required of this 
generation." (Luke 11:50,51.) And St. Paul writes 
that all things written in the prophecies shall be fulfilled. 
So in the end of this Age there are certain things charged 
up against Christendom for their evil deeds. This will 
include all the persecutions of this Gospel Age, including 
also, presumably, all the persecutions against the Jews. 
Therefore the Scriptures indicate that a great time of 
trouble similar to that which came upon the Jewish nation 
will now come upon all Christendom. The experiences 
of Israel in the year 70 will be paralleled in the 
experiences of the year 1915. 



R5256 :page 181 

A WORD TO THE WATCHERS 

"Let us watch and be sober."— 1 Thess. 5:6. 

THE APOSTLE PAUL is addressing the 
Church, himself included, when he says, "Let 
us watch and be sober." He indicates in the 
context that we are to watch for the Day, 
for Messiah's Kingdom, which will produce 
that Day. We know to expect the rising of 
the Sun of Righteousness. The Church is to 
be delivered from sin and death early in the 
morning of that wonderful Day. Their part 
is to be in the First Resurrection, to glory, 
honor and immortality with their Lord. 

St. Paul tells us that God has so arranged His Program 
that the Day will come as a thief in the night— 
stealthily: and that those who are asleep will not be aware 
that the Day has come, and might therefore not be expected 
to be in a waiting attitude. Our Master's words 
are, "Take heed to yourselves, lest... that Day 
come upon you unawares. ...Watch ye therefore." 
(Luke 21:34,36.) We believe that He leaves the matter 
in obscurity, because it will be better for us as a 
whole not to know the exact time. For instance, in the 
long period of the Dark Ages it was better that Christians 
did not know just when the time of Christ's return would 
come. There were wonderful events transpiring in their 
day, and have been, in fact, in every day, but so much the 
more, we read, as the Day approaches. 

While the Adversary is ever active in his efforts to do 
harm to the Lord's cause, he will be still more seductive in 
his evil influences during the last days. We must therefore, 
as the Day draws near, be more and more alert in 
guarding every point of attack. The Lord allows us to do 
this watching, and He will reward the faithful ones, for 
He takes pleasure in the watchers. These will not be careless. 
Any who are careless will not be of the Kingdom 
class, for they are not of the kind that He wishes to 
glorify. 

God wishes those who are awake to be learning more 
and more of His Plan. These will grow in grace and in 
knowledge as they watch. They will not be like the world. 
The world will be in a stupor— they will be unworthy of 
the Day. Darkness covers the whole earth at the present 
time. But God's people are granted a special light. They 
love the light. "Thy Word is a lamp unto my feet, and a 
light unto my path." (Psa. 119:105.) It is not a light like 
that of the moon, which reaches far out, but merely a little 
light at the feet of those who are watching for it. 
Those who are going to sleep will find their light going 
out. 



EVIDENCES OF THE NEW DAY 

The way that the Lord has been marking out for His 
people all down through the Age has been a narrow way— 
a very narrow way. His light is given only to those who 
are seeking— those who are waiting— those who are watching. 
These will discern the dawning of the morning. 

Others will not see. They have not watched to catch 
the foregleams of the New Day. While things transpire 
that are evidences of the New Day, they are quite unconscious. 
For instance, the wonderful blessings of our 

R5257 :page 182 

day are manifestations of the New Dispensation. The 
dawn is here. We are astonished that the people do not 
see. But they attribute these wonderful things to different 
causes. They think that these are merely the results of 
man's taking another step forward in progress from the 
monkey-stage. He has become more intelligent, goes to 
concerts, churches, etc. He is getting farther away from 
the monkey! The power to use steam and electricity 
proves to these that we are entering the Brain Age! They 
forget that the few are talented inventors, etc. 

We can see that all these great blessings belong to the 
New Dispensation. God is bringing it about. We can see 
that it is not the educated people, but those less educated, 
who have discovered the wonderful inventions most useful 
to man. The inventions which have proved the greatest 
blessings the world has ever known have been discovered 
by unlearned men. These things are not due to 
the "brain age," as they tell us. Perhaps none of the 
present generation will compare with Shakespeare; perhaps 
none will compare with St. Paul; none perhaps will 
compare with Solomon, or David, or Moses. 

WATCHMEN FOR A PURPOSE 

The Apostle says, "Let us watch and be sober." We 
cannot say that he here refers to abstinence from the use 
of liquors, tobacco and other things which have a stupefying 
effect on the nerves. The thought is that we should 
be watchful and sober in mind. We find a great many 
people who are excitable— carried about by every wind of 
doctrine. They cannot give the reason for what they accept. 
They do not know that the Truth is intended for 
only the one class of people— for those who are watching. 

How carefully we should watch all the increasing signs 
of the New Day! But the watchman who stands at the 
post of duty, and sees things going on, but keeps his 
mouth shut, is of no use at all. We want a watchman for 
a purpose! Those who are on the alert should call the 
attention of others to these wonderful things. They 
should seek to arouse the Household of Faith. 

There are people who are as fully consecrated as ourselves, 



perhaps, only they are not awake. We should 

give them a kindly shake to arouse them to see the wonderful 

things. And since we are to be called away soon 

to the marriage, we are to remember that a part of our 

watching should be to keep our garments white. We are 

to watch to some purpose. If we realized how near the 

Bridegroom is, how careful we would be of our robes! 

Others do not know, but the Bride-elect knows how near 

the Bridegroom is. She will watch and be sober. 

In one sense of the word, there might be many things 
to lead to excitability. We might merely jump up and 
down as we see the wonderful things, and clap our hands, 
etc. But not so! We are to be sober. Yet we are not to 
be stupid— stolid. We should remember that the Lord is 
giving us this knowledge to be used, and we should use 
it more and more. As we more clearly see our imperfections, 
we should watch and be sober, and we shall accordingly 
be circumspect, we shall be helpful to others, 
and will put on more and more the fruits and graces of 
the Holy Spirit— patience, meekness, gentleness, brotherly-kindness, 
love. And as we watch, we shall be putting 
off anger, malice, hatred, envy, strife. Thus we shall be 
pleasing and acceptable to the Bridegroom, and we shall 
thus be making ourselves ready to enter in with Him into 
the joys and blessings that are now so near— at the door. 



R5257 : page 182 

THE MESSENGERS OF GOD IN "THE LAST DAYS" 

"He shall give His angels [messengers] a charge concerning 
thee, to guard thee in all thy ways."— Psalm 91:11. 

IN THE MIDST of the "perilous times" of this 
"evil day," and of the warning voices of the 
Holy Prophets and Apostles pointing out 
snares and pestilences and subtle dangers on 
every hand— and in the midst, too, of a realizing 
sense of the actual existence of such 
evil besetments and perils— how precious to 
the saints are the assurances of Divine protection 
and care and personal love! 

Evidently the person referred to in our 
text as giving a charge, or message, is Jehovah, the 
Heavenly Father. The Prophet David is prophesying in 
respect to some person, then future. That person was 
primarily, we believe, the Lord Jesus Christ; and secondarily, 
all those whom He has accepted as members of His 
Body throughout this Gospel Age— the Messiah class, 
Head and members. The words imply a special care of 
God over this class. All through the Scriptures they are referred 
to as those whom God specially loves and specially 
cares for. Our Lord Jesus is the Only Begotten, the Well-beloved 
Son, and all those who are His members are peculiarly 



loved. Jesus said to some of His faithful disciples, 
"The Father Himself loveth you." 

The charge given to the angels we would understand 
to have a very broad application. The Apostle Paul assures 
us that the angels of God are ministering spirits sent 
forth to minister unto and to serve those who shall be heirs 
of salvation, the saved ones of this Gospel Age. Yes, all 
of these, because believers in Christ, because at heart faithful, 
because fully consecrated to the Lord and begotten of 
His Spirit, are the special and happy objects of His grace, 
ministered to and served by the invisible messengers. Our 
Lord Jesus sets forth practically the same thought in His 
declaration, "Their angels do always behold [have access 
to] the face of My Father." The Master's words seem to 
imply that one or more of these angels have charge over 
the consecrated ones, the Very Elect. 

Our Lord uses a different figure of speech from that of 
the Apostle, as though He would assure us that these 
messengers would not be delayed in caring for our interests. 
They would not be hindered by more important 
Heavenly business, but would at once have direct access 
to the Divine presence and attention, so that our interests 
would have all needed consideration. Our Lord would 
have us realize that we are of the House of Sons, under 
Himself the chief Son, hence no time is lost in bringing 
our interests to the Father. Our interests have first 
place, our angels have always access to the Father. Before 
we speak, He knows our minds. Before we realize 
our own necessities, He has made provision for them. A 
wonderful watch-care has been arranged. It is hard for 
us to understand how the Almighty God can give such 
particular care and attention to our needs. Instead of being 
puffed up that God has manifested such loving consideration 
towards us, it should make us feel how little we are, 
how unworthy of such blessings. 

Although the Father makes such use of Heavenly 
messengers, this by no means invalidates the thought that 
the Lord's earthly children are frequently used of Him 
as ministers, servants, the one of another. Indeed, we 
may be assured that the invisible messengers are required 
generally to act through human instrumentalities. Of 
this we have illustrations in the Harvest work, supervised 
by our present Lord and His Heavenly hosts, yet in the 
main carried on by members of His Body in the flesh. 

The Apostle Paul has stated that the Lord makes His 

R5257 : page 183 

ministers, or servants, a flaming fire, and intimates to us 
that any and every agency and power that Divine providence 
uses is a part of that care over His people. (Heb. 1:7.) 
In other words, every agency used of God— whether 
it be fire or electricity or man, or whatever— would be a 
messenger of God. And whatever would not be to His 
praise and work out what He chooses, He is able to restrain 
—as He tells us.— Psalm 76:10. 



OVERCOMERS DEVELOPED BY TRIAL 

These angels are to "keep thee in all thy ways"— not 
only in all the affairs of the Church, both individually and 
collectively, but also in all times; it was kept during the 
Dark Ages as well as at other times. But this care will 
not keep us from temptation. None can be of this elect 
Church unless they have trials. In order to have the 
overcoming qualities of heart they must have the tests. 
But the Lord's promised grace is to be with them for their 
assistance— not to overcome for them, but to sustain them. 
His grace is sufficient for us. He does not make up for a 
poor will; but He does make up for imperfect bodies. If 
the will is poor, He does not want such in His elect 
Church. He wants His people to be strong in will- 
nothing doubting— overcomers. 

The next verse of the Psalm from which our text is 
taken proceeds to say that these messengers which have a 
charge over the affairs of the Church, Head and Body, 
will keep the feet from stumbling. In a general way we 
might apply the term feet to some members of the Body 
all down, in all times of the Age; as we might say, for 
instance, one member is a hand, and one a foot, etc. The 
Church, resting on those feet members all the way down, 
throughout the Gospel Age, will be guided aright; they 
will not be allowed to stumble; for, "Thy Word is a lamp 
unto my feet and a light unto my pathway." Thus they 
would be enabled to surmount the difficulties in their path. 

So all down through the Gospel Age the messengers of 
the Lord have helped His people over all of their trials. 
But this reference to the feet seems especially applicable 
to the last members of the Body of Christ. "How beautiful 
upon the mountains are the feet of him that bringeth 
good tidings, that publisheth peace. ..that saith 
unto Zion, Thy God reigneth!" (Isa. 52:7.) This would 
seem to apply to the last members of the Church. This 
could not have been said all the way down the Age. It is 
only for us who are living at the present time to say. 

These various manifestations of progress that we see, 
are just beginning. The new regime is only opening. 

R5258 :page 183 

After our Lord shall have delivered and glorified the 
Church, then He will begin the work with the world. 
None had the right to say, "Thy God reigneth," in the 
past; but since 1878, we are making this proclamation. 

CHRIST'S PRESENCE A STUMBLING-STONE 

The text seems to imply that the feet members at this 
time would be in a position of special trial, and be as a 
stumbling-stone. And this calls to our remembrance that 
the Lord foretold this, saying, "He shall be. ..for 
a stone of stumbling and for a rock of offense to both the 



houses of Israel." (Isa. 8:14.) This stone was stumbled 
over in the end of the Jewish Age. (I Peter 2:8.) The 
Scriptures set forth that Jesus is the Way. The Lord 
is a Stumbling-Stone in the pathway of many. These 
passages do not refer to the world. It was not the Gentile 
nations that stumbled over Jesus at His First Advent, 
but it was some of the true Israelites who were there 
stumbled. And the text implies the stumbling of some 
true Spiritual Israelites because of the coming of the 
Lord in a way totally different from what they had 
imagined. So we believe that there are very many good 
Christian people today who are stumbling over Christ's 
Presence. They thought so and so; they imagined so and 
so. And all is so different from what they had imagined 
and expected that it is just as it was in the end of the 
Jewish Age, when the rabbis stumbled. 

The question is, why should not the angels have charge 
over all good people, so that they would not stumble? Is 
not this the promise? We answer that the promise is made 
to all who are of the elect class. But in order to remain 
members of this Body, they must all stand the trial. It 
will be a test. Are they willing to have the assistance of 
the angels— messengers? Are they willing to surmount 
these difficulties and to remain in the way? 

One class will be in a condition to receive the trials in 
the proper manner; another class will be so self-confident, 
so overcharged with the cares of this life, and so lacking 
in spiritual development, that they will not be ready to 
avail themselves of the services of the angels. This is 
because God uses as His messengers some whom the world 
will not be ready to receive. 

PARALLELISM BETWEEN JEWISH AND GOSPEL AGES 

In the Jewish Age the Lord used some whom the 
scribes, the doctors of the Law and the chief priests could 
not accept at all. If He wanted to use agents, or channels, 
or messengers, to teach the people, why did He not 
choose the learned scribes or the pompous Pharisees of 
that day? Why did the Lord use as His messengers men 
who had been fishermen, tax-gatherers— persons whom 
the learned would think entirely unfit as instructors, or 
teachers? We recall that in the end of the Jewish Age 
it was written of two of them (and perhaps of them all) 
that the people perceived that they were unlearned and 
ignorant men. (Acts 4:13.) How could it be that God 
would pass by some of the most learned of that day? 
"Thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, 
and hast revealed them unto babes. Even so, Father: for 
so it seemed good in Thy sight."— Matt. 1 1:25,26. 

So today the Lord is using channels, agencies, messengers, 
that are not acceptable to many whom they approach. 
And while these are making up their minds to believe, 
slow in this because overcharged with the cares of this 
life, the elect company will be made up. Then the others 
will say, "Lord, Lord, open unto us." But the Lord will 



declare that He cannot recognize them as members of His 
Body, the Elect. They will not have shown the spirit of 
meekness, gentleness, patience, love, necessary to give 
them a place in this Body. So it will be only the Body 
members who will be lifted up by the messengers and carried 
safely through the trials and difficulties which will be 
permitted to test the love, loyalty and obedience to the will 
of God, of all who have made with Him a Covenant of 
Sacrifice— even unto death. 



HOPE 



"O Father, just to see Thee face to face, 

E'er endless death 
Should claim me for its own- 
To hear Thy voice, behold Thy Throne! 

And for one moment 
Hear Thee call me Thine, and Thine alone! 

Ah ! that were worth 
Long years of suffering and pain. 

"But what, O God, must be the joy of this— 

To see Thy face, 
To feel Thy touch, and folded to Thy breast 
To hear Thee say, "We ne'er shall part!" 

Break not, O heart! 
Though thou hast naught of worth, 

Be this thy plea 
God's own Almighty love, and Christ's sufficiency. 
—A Friend. 



R5258 : page 184 

SPIRITUAL VISION PROPORTIONATE TO HEART PURITY 

"Be ye clean, that bear the 
vessels of the Lord."— Isa. 52:11. 

THE VESSELS of the Lord in the Tabernacle, 
and also in the Temple, were those vessels 
which were connected with the holy services 
—in the Court, in the Holy and the Most 
Holy. They consisted of hooks, censer, pans 
snuffers, cups, bowls— a variety of precious 
vessels. Those used in the Holy and the 
Most Holy were of gold, and those used in 
the Court were of copper. 

The only ones who were allowed to handle 
these vessels at all were the consecrated class. The 
priests handled these in the Holy and the Most Holy in 
certain parts of the service, and in less important services 
they were covered up and borne in the hands of the 



Levites. So the vessels were handled only by the priests 
and the Levites. They required a cleansing before being 
used, and so were washed. Every bearer of these was required 
to be cleansed, typically washed free from sin. 

In the antitype, our Lord is the great High Priest. 
The most faithful of His followers are those who are 
counted as the Priesthood in God's sight, on trial now to 
see whether they will constitute the Priests in glory. But 
all who have made consecration have the Robe of Christ's 
Righteousness. Whoever is not thus clothed upon by the 
righteousness of Christ, whoever is not thus justified in 
God's sight, can have neither part nor lot in handling the 
holy things— the precious truths. 

The antitypical significance of the Prophet's exhortation 
in our text is that as in the type God required that 
everything should be clean, so we must be clean, pure 
of heart. "Blessed are the pure in heart." We have not 
perfection of flesh at the present time. When we have 
come into Christ, this imperfection of the flesh is said to 
be covered by a clean, white robe, representing the righteousness, 
the merit, of Christ. We must abide in Him. 
So long as we are in the flesh, we must have the Robe of 
Christ's Righteousness, in order to be clean. 

Moreover, as it was required of the priests that they 
keep their robes clean, so we are exhorted to put away 
all filthiness of the flesh and to keep our robes clean. We 
are told that the Church will be without spot, and clean. 
(Eph. 5:26,27.) And if we marvel how this could be, the 
Scriptures show us how it is. We were cleansed from 
sins of the past when the robe was given us, and this 
means also a provision on God's part for the continued 
cleansing of all the sins that are ours through weakness, 
through temptation, through unavoidable failures. But 
nothing in this provision indicates a cleansing from wilful 
sin. 

PURITY OF HEART ESSENTIAL 

We as New Creatures could not have wilful sin and 
still remain New Creatures; for the New Creature represents 
the mind of Christ, which is holy. Whatever weaknesses 
and imperfections there may be are attached to the 
flesh; and all these are covered by the Robe of Christ's 
Righteousness. We approach the Throne of Heavenly 
Grace and find grace to help in every time of need. 

The context seems to make the text applicable in the 
present time. It was applicable in our Lord's day. He 
was holy, harmless, undefiled. It was applicable in the 
Apostles' day. All these must be clean. One, who was 
unclean, Judas, went to his own destruction. We believe 
that he went into the Second Death because he failed to 
use the opportunities that had been given to him. 

As it was possible for Judas to fail, it is also possible 
for us to fail— to a greater or a less extent. As he was 
put out of the Divine service because of impurity of 
heart, love of money, etc., so we may be sure that all not 



pure in heart will be put out of this service. Just as none 
would be placed in this service if not pure in heart, so if 
any become impure they will be put out of it. 

This is illustrated by the case of Ananias and Sapphira, 
who were put out of their affiliation with the Priesthood 
because of their love of money and their attempt to deceive. 

R5259 :page 184 

We remember this also in the case of Simon 
Magus and others mentioned in the New Testament. 
There might be some defiled of heart and other people 
not know of it. As the Scriptures intimate, there might 
be some highly esteemed among men, and not highly 
esteemed in God's sight. And there might be some not 
much esteemed among men, but highly esteemed of God. 
"The world knoweth us not, even as it knew Him not."— 
I John 3:1. 

PRESENT-DAY OPPONENTS OF RIGHTEOUSNESS 

No doubt there are those occupying pulpits who may 
esteem themselves as really the ministers of God, and be 
thus esteemed of others, who do not honor His Word. 
We are told that some of the ministers of Satan are 
thought to be ministers of God. (2 Cor. 11:13-15; Rev. 2:2; 
3:9.) Some of them confess that they have no faith, 
no God at all. Some of them say that God is simply the 
god of nature. And others, again, say that they believe 
in God, but do not believe in the Scriptures. 

We cannot suppose that these are bearing the vessels 
of the Lord's House in any sense of the word. Probably 
they never did bear these vessels. Or possibly they might 
have done so, and then gone into error, gone out of the 
Court condition altogether, become enemies of the cross of 
Christ. (Philippians 3:18.) The Apostle speaks of some 
such who hold down (Greek katecho) the Truth in unrighteousness. 
In this text the word hold is used, not in 
the sense of retaining the Truth, but of oppressing it.— 
Romans 1:18. 

In another Epistle the Apostle speaks of some who 
preach Christ with contention (Phil. 1:15,16.); but he is 
not in any way here referring to those bearing the vessels 
of the Lord's House. He seems to refer to those 
who have not known Christ, but who nevertheless were 
drawing attention to the fact that there is a Christ; that 
they had heard that there was such a claim put forth— that 
there is a Christ— just as there are some today who are 
more or less calling attention to certain features of the 
Truth. We would not think that these in any sense of the 
word are bearing the vessels of the Lord's House, but 
rather that they are opponents. 

The passage from which our text is taken seems to indicate 
that those who bear the vessels of the Lord's 
House would have a special force and influence at the 
present time. This is shown in the statement, "How beautiful 



upon the mountains are the feet of Him who bringeth 
good tidings, that publisheth peace; that bringeth good 
tidings of good, that publisheth salvation; that saith unto 
Zion, Thy God reigneth!" (Isaiah 52:7.) This seems to 
be applicable now in a sense that it never was previously; 
for the time for the Kingdom reign is practically here, the 
time for this Message of God is at hand. We believe 
that the Kingdom of God is in process of erection, and 
the gathering of the saints now in process of completion. 
With the completion of this class will come the inauguration 
of the Kingdom. 

The context also shows that the time is near when the 
Message shall be preached to every creature. We believe 
that this is even now being fulfilled. Many are seeing the 
Restitution of all things and the glorious outcome of the 
Divine Plan. All who would be thus engaged in proclaiming 
the Message are exhorted to be clean. 

R5259 : page 185 

THE PURE IN HEART THE TARGET OF THE ENEMY 

The intimation of the Scriptures everywhere is that 
there are adverse influences at work in the world, tending 
to defile the people of God. They all have, of course, 
through the weaknesses of their own flesh, a sufficiency of 
temptation, we might say, to overcome. But the Scriptures 
say that this is not all they have to contend against. 
There are fallen angels that operate through occult influences 
and that are intent upon defiling especially the 
saintly class. But they are intent upon defiling all. 

The purer the person, the more surely will he be the 
target. You notice that the speckled birds are more a 
mark for the huntsman than are the others. Thus all 
who are bearing the vessels of the Lord's House are special 
targets for the fiery darts of the Wicked One. So we 
must contend against the world, the flesh and the Adversary. 
Those who are in the right condition of heart, the 
pure in heart, earnest as the Lord's children, watch to keep 
their garments clean. Unless they watch, they will surely 
get their garments defiled. Satan is specially endeavoring 
to touch them; and we know that wherever he would touch 
there is defilement. Whoever the Wicked One touches 
receives a measure of injury. And there is a measure of 
culpability in the individual before he is touched. 

The suggestion is that to whatever extent one becomes 
defiled, unclean, in that proportion he would not be fit to 
be entrusted with the vessels of the Lord's House. Perhaps 
all of God's people can say from experience that they 
know something of what this means. Doubtless it is the 
experience of all of the Lord's children that in proportion 
as their hearts are clean their spiritual vision is clear. 
And in proportion as they depart from this purity, in that 
proportion they would have less and less opportunity for 
service— for bearing the vessels of the Truth. 



R5259 : page 185 

INDIVIDUAL CLAIMS FOR RETRIBUTION 

"Lay not this sin to their charge."— Acts 7:60. 

THE words of St. Stephen on the occasion of 
his martyrdom, "Lord, lay not this sin to 
their charge," must not be understood to 
mean that he was in any way dictating to 
the Almighty how to deal with those who 
were taking his life. Nor are we to think 
that he was praying for the forgiveness of 
all the sins of these people. We are to narrow 
the matter down to the words used— 
"Lay not this sin to their charge." 

So far as St. Stephen was concerned, he had no special 
claim to make upon Justice for retribution. The question 
then arises, has any one such a claim? The answer is 
that it would seem that any one who suffers injustice has 
a claim for retribution. In our common courts, there are 
some crimes and acts of injustice which are taken up for 
consideration, though there are others which would never 
be touched, unless the individual concerned took up a 
charge. 

In St. Stephen's case, we understand that the wrongs 
done him are charged up against the wrong-doers. They 
were already tainted with original sin, as members of the 
human family; they were already under condemnation to 
death. The Lord Jesus had already begun the work of 
making satisfaction for their sins and for the sins of the 
whole world. In His own time and way, God will judge 
these sinners. Hence they shall have a just recompense, 
in proportion as they were guilty of wrong-doing. 

Jesus intimates that crimes against any of the members 
of His Body will have to be expiated. The doing of injury 
to one of the Lord's people is especially evil in God's 
sight, and especially punishable; for these are in special 
covenant relationship with Him, while the world is outside 
of this protection of Divine Justice, except in a general 
way. 

The words attributed to our Lord, "Father, forgive 
them, for they know not what they do," given in our 
Common Version Bible, are not found in the oldest Greek 
MSS. It would be rather more difficult for Jesus to offer 
such a prayer than for us to do so; for the Scriptures declare 
that He knew what was in man. We do not know. 
Any prayer that we might offer respecting man would be 
very different from what Jesus would offer. Therefore, 
we must leave these words out of consideration when 
thinking of St. Stephen's words. 

GENERAL AND SPECIAL RIGHTS UNDER THE LAW 



We ask ourselves, to what extent was St. Stephen right 
and within his privileges in offering such a prayer? If 
he were one of the Apostles, we should be bound not to 
make inquiry, but to suppose that he was right. The 
fact that the words are recorded in Scripture does not 
prove anything more than if they were from one of us. 

In our Common Law, there seems to be this principle- 
each individual seems to have certain rights in addition 
to the general rights under the Law. These special rights 
he may or may not press, if occasion should arise. In St. 
Stephen's case, we understand that he had a right to waive 
the claims of Justice, and did so. It is as though he had 
said, "I put in no protest, and ask for no vengeance on my 
account." 

The question then arises, did he have a right to wish 
for vengeance on them? We think not. Our Lord's instructions 
are, "Be ye therefore merciful, as your Father 
also is merciful." (Luke 6:36.) But so far as the general 
principles of righteousness are concerned, we must not 
interfere. St. Stephen very properly limits his prayer in 
this sense, as if he were saying (paraphrasing), "Heavenly 
Father, I am not asking for vengeance on them, but that 
they may not be held especially responsible for this sin 
against me." 

DEFENSE OF THE INTERESTS OF THE TRUTH A DUTY 

We are admonished by our Lord to love our enemies, 
and to do good to them who hate us, and to pray for them 
who despitefully use us and persecute us. The question 
then comes in, Would it ever be right for us to appeal to 
Justice? Should we always say, "Father, forgive them; I 
forgive them"? Should we wish that the courts should do 

R5260 : page 185 

nothing against them? No! Where the interests of the 
Lord's Cause are involved, it is our duty to say something 
in defense of the Truth; but not in a personal matter. 

Of course, the world will not understand our motive, 
for the world does not act except for personal reasons. 
Consequently, they would suppose that we acted for our 
own sakes. But we have given up all our earthly rights, 
in consecration; that is, we covenanted to give up every 
claim to our just rights in the world. This is the substance 
of our consecration. 

Where the interests of the Lord's Cause are involved, 
however, it is our duty to act for the good of the Truth, 
for the reason that certain impressions inimical to the 
Truth may be stopped. We see illustrations of this principle 
in the case of the Apostle Paul at court; also when he 
said to Elymas the sorcerer, "O thou child of the Devil, 
...wilt thou not cease to pervert the right ways of 
the Lord?. ..thou shalt be blind, not seeing the sun 
for a season." (Acts 13:10,11.) In these cases, and also 



R5260 : page 186 

in that of Alexander the coppersmith, we may be sure that 
the Apostle was not seeking personal revenge. 

This attitude should also be ours in all the affairs of 
life. If anything is done in opposition to those who oppose 
themselves, it should be done in the same spirit that 
the Apostle showed in the course which he took. We all 
find that as we grow in grace and in knowledge we develop 
a spirit of charity— forgiveness. This is as it should 
be. Greater knowledge of God, greater development in 
character-likeness of Christ, should make us the more 
generous, forgiving. 

IGNORANCE THE REAL CAUSE OF MUCH INJUSTICE 

The Lord blesses us in giving us a clearer knowledge 
of the Truth. When we come to the knowledge of the 
Truth, it gives us a sympathetic feeling for the world. 
We are all fallen. But the Apostle says, "Ye are washed, 
ye are sanctified, ye are justified in the name of the Lord 
Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God." (I Cor. 6:11.) 
Others, who are not cleansed, not sanctified, not justified, 
are in the gall of bitterness, so to speak. 

When we consider all the evil deeds done in the world, 
and when we look back through the pages of history, we 
can see that the majority of those who perpetrated evil 
did so because they did not appreciate the principles involved 
in the matter. St. Peter, speaking by inspiration, 
says that in ignorance Israel killed the Prince of Life. 
(Acts 3:15,17.) St. Paul, who gave the authority of the 
Sanhedrin for the stoning of St. Stephen, tells us that he 
did these things in ignorance, in blindness; and that he 
verily thought that he was doing God service. 

If this was true of all these cases in the past, may we 
not think that quite certainly the same principle is operating 
now— individually, personally? The Lord is able to 
stop these things, and will do so in due time. He will lift 
the veil and let the light shine out in due time. But it is 
not the due time as yet. The Church has not yet completed 
the sufferings of Christ. 

OUR SHARE OF THE CUP OF SUFFERING 

We should rejoice in having a share in the sufferings 
of Christ, and should receive our share in meekness and 
uncomplaining obedience, realizing that the Father hath 
poured the cup which we are to drink. If we love our 
enemies and do not wish to do them harm, but on the 
contrary wish to open the eyes of their understanding and 
to do them good, then we have the right spirit. Any desire 
to do them injury would prove that we are lacking in the 
Lord's Spirit. Whoever finds that he has a spirit of 
viciousness will find that he has much to learn. But whoever 
finds in himself evidence of the Spirit of the Lord in 
this matter, may rejoice. 



By and by, these very ones who are persecuting, slandering, 
doing evil towards us, will see clearly, and they will 
be ashamed. As the Scriptures say, "Your brethren that 
hated you and cast you out for My Name's sake, said, Let 
the Lord be glorified; but He shall appear to your joy, and 
they shall be ashamed." (Isa. 66:5.) The time when 
they shall be ashamed is the time when Christ shall appear 
and they shall see. "And when He shall appear, we shall 
be like Him." So, then, our opportunity for revenge will 
be future, and our revenge will be to do our enemies good. 
We will do them so much good that they will be thoroughly 
ashamed of what they are now doing against us. 



R5262 : page 186 

MAKING THE WILDERNESS BLOOM 

BIBLE STUDENTS are more and more having 

proofs set before them of the fulfilment of 

the Scriptures. The promise has stood in 

the Bible for centuries, that God would ultimately 

turn away the curse from the earth 

and that, instead of thorns and thistles, it 

would yield blessings to mankind. This 

great change was to come at the close of the 

six great Days of a thousand years each— 

the period of the reign of sin and death. 

The great Seventh Day, the Day of Christ— a thousand 

years— is to witness a wonderful transformation from 

darkness to light, from evil to good, from the curse to the 

blessing. 

That thousand years of blessing is in the Bible styled 
"The Times [or years] of Restitution of all things which 
God hath spoken by the mouth of all the Holy Prophets 
since the world began." (Acts 3:19-21.) Bible Students 
are calling the attention of each other and of the world to 
the fact that the six thousand years of the reign of sin 
and death are past, and that we are living in the dawn of 
Messiah's Day— the Millennium. 

Blessings are coming to mankind from every quarter. 
But they are not coming as miraculously as many had expected. 
God's blessing is coming through human enlightenment. 
He is lifting the veil, and men of ordinary capacity 
are seeing things which their equally bright forefathers 
never dreamed of. Artesian wells are serving to irrigate 
certain sections and to make them very fruitful. The diverting 
of streams for irrigation purposes is rapidly making 
arid lands blossom as the rose. 

Advancement along the lines of horticulture is improving 
our plants and flowers greatly. It is difficult to 
imagine how more beautiful bloom could ever have 
been seen in Eden of old, or how anything more nearly 
perfect and beautiful could ever be hoped for in the 
Paradise which by and by will be world-wide. Horticulture 



is receiving enlightenment and blessing from 

Heaven. Ideal apples, pears, plums, grapes, etc., are coming 

to us in the place of the poor stunted fruits of the 

past. We may well wonder how there could be much further 

improvement made in some directions. Yet the matter 

of improvement is about in its infancy. 

We quote below an interesting item respecting a valuable 
work now being conducted by Mr. Burbank, of California, 
a man who has already given us some new varieties 
of fruit and done much to educate the world along horticultural 
lines. We quote: 

"While the recognition of the value of Burbank's work 
by the Carnegie Institution and the appropriation of funds 
was helpful at a time most needed, it is not as important 
from a utilitarian standpoint as was the bill passed by 
Congress last August giving Mr. Burbank grants of lands 
for conducting his experiments regarding the spineless 
cacti. The bill provides for the placing of twelve sections 
of desert land at his disposal in locations to be selected by 
him in California, Nevada, Arizona and New Mexico, each 
section containing 640 acres of land. 

"While the stories of the spineless cactus and its possibilities 
as an addition to the food and industrial resources 
of the country were ridiculed at the beginning, the 
demonstrations already given by Mr. Burbank are convincing 
proof of its practicability. About ten years ago he began 
to study the cactus with a view of making it useful 
to the human race, instead of the enemy it always has been 
regarded. He recognized its good qualities, namely, that 
it was hardy and would grow where nothing else would, in 
the blistering heat of the desert, and that it had much 
nutrition stored in its thick leaves and golden or crimson 
fruit. 

R5262 : page 187 

"His first two objects were the removal of the sharp 
thorns covering the branches, leaves and fruit, and the 
removal of the woody, fibrous skeleton of the leaves, 
which made them indigestible. The cactus selected by 
Burbank for his experiments was the Opuntia species, 
native to Mexico and South America. Hundreds of thousands 
of seeds were planted and extensive crossings were 
made between the pollens of the flowers. In making the 
thornless cactus, Mr. Burbank recognized the fact that it 
took much of the vital force of the cacti to develop the 
powerful thorns and supply the leaves with fibers. In 
breeding these away he gave nature a chance to devote her 
energy to improving the fruit. He has accomplished this 
in a manner that seems absolutely marvelous. 

"The fruit of the cactus is like a fat cucumber in appearance, 
slightly flattened at the ends. It is delicious for 
jelly and jams, and one variety has a pineapple flavor. 
The juice has been found invaluable for mixing paint, and 

R5263 : page 187 



the coloring of the red fruit is permanent and of great 
brilliance. Cactus fruit already is on sale in the Western 
States, and a large commercial company has been formed 
in California for its exploitation. 

"At present Mr. Burbank is devoting his time chiefly 
to the selection of the sites of his experiment fields in the 
desert lands supplied him by the Government. If, as is 
generally believed, his claims can be demonstrated upon 
this large scale, he will add many millions of dollars to 
the resources of the world. There are billions of acres of 
desert ground in different parts of the world, and if these 
are all made productive, the benefit to all is apparent. 

"It is claimed that an acre of cactus plants will produce 
200 tons of food value. A corn production of a ton and 
a half is considered good, and a five-ton yield of alfalfa is 
exceptional. The leaves of the cactus may be used as 
forage as acceptably as alfalfa. If the produce is utilized 
for the manufacture of wood alcohol, the yield is estimated 
as amounting to $1,200 value per acre as against $35 for 
Indian corn. It must be considered that this cactus is to 
be produced entirely upon desert lands, which never before 
have been productive of anything of commercial value." 



R5260 : page 187 

"WITH WHAT JUDGMENT YE JUDGE" 

RECENTLY we received a copy of a letter sent 

to Rev. Moorehead. We have not learned 

if it received a reply. The spirit of the letter 

is kind and moderate, hence we publish it. 

It is in marked contrast with the various 

slanderous attacks made upon the Editor of 

THE WATCH TOWER. A number of religious 

papers of various denominations attack 

Brother Russell with slander and abuse, 

and such a manifestation of alarm and 

viciousness as to suggest that they are terrified and fearful 

that all their honor of men and titles and scholarship 

and musty creeds will be scattered as the chaff of the 

summer's threshing floor. 

We trust that Brother Russell's friends, as well as his 
enemies, recognize how different is his attitude. He does 
indeed attack false doctrines unsparingly, but he never, in 
his sermons or any of his writings, descends to personalities. 
It is because the clashing creeds cannot be sustained 
by their devotees that the latter manifest their displeasure 
by attacking Pastor Russell. 

The letter follows: 

REV. WILLIAM G. MOOREHEAD, D.D. 
DEAR DR. MOOREHEAD: 

I read some time ago your article in the seventh volume 



of Fundamentals on "MILLENNIAL DAWN," the teaching of Mr. 
C. T. Russell. I felt like writing you at that time but did not. 
Recently I read the summary of your article in one of my 
religious papers and have had an increasing impression to 
write you. I hesitate to do so because of the high regard 
I have always had for you as one of my teachers of twenty 
years ago, and also because of the high esteem in which you 
are held in the company of Biblical expositors and Christian 
workers in general. Yet I feel also that in the interest of 
truth and fairness your article should have some attention. 

I feel that this article from your pen is unworthy of a 
man like you. I cannot understand why such a careful student 
as yourself should make statements such as you make in this 
article, when they are so manifestly and greatly in error. 

In addition to reading five of the six volumes of "MILLENNIAL 
DAWN" carefully, and the sixth volume in part, I have also 
read many other pamphlets, magazine articles and sermons 
of Pastor Russell's, and also every criticism I have found 
or heard of in opposition to his teachings. I was one of 
his critics for about fifteen years, and I based my criticisms 
upon reading about half of one chapter of one of his books. 
A few years ago it occurred to me that I might not understand 
his full thought, so I took time to inform myself on 
the subject I had been criticising, and when I obtained more 
information I became an admirer of his work, though I do 
not agree with him in all his conclusions. I have reached 
the conclusion concerning the authors of the criticisms that 
I have read, that they do not know any more about Pastor 
Russell's teachings than I did in the days when I was so 
liberal with my condemnation. They all remind me of the 
testimony of the two witnesses who offered testimony before 
the Jewish council when Jesus was on trial. They said, 
"We heard him say: 'I will destroy this temple that is made 
with hands, and within three days I will build another made 
without hands.'" Now Jesus had said something like that— 
though essentially different. These critics seem to have read 
Pastor Russell's works with the same methods and motives 
that Thomas Paine, Robert Ingersoll and others of their class 
read the Scriptures and criticized them. This seems very 
unfortunate since it has been done by men who have been 
eminent for Christian character and leaders of Christian 
thought. 

Coming now to your article: I cannot take up all the mistakes 
you have made in this, but will confine myself to those 
lying on the surface. In the opening sentence you assure us 
that in the MILLENNIAL DAWN series there are "six rather 
bulky volumes, comprising in all some two thousand pages." 
On page 123, you speak of "a careful reading of these 
volumes," so we conclude that you have read them all carefully. 
(This is what you should have done before putting 
yourself on record in criticism of them.) I note that in your 
references to and quotations from these books you confine 
yourself to the first three volumes, and chiefly to the first 
two. I note also that you quote a single sentence, or part 
of a paragraph, giving only a partial presentation of the 
author's thought, and then proceed to criticize it. This is a 



most unfair method. It reminds me of an article I read a 
few years ago in which the writer was opposing the doctrine 
of the total depravity of man, and as a proof text he quoted 
John 9:3, "Neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents," 
and said that Jesus here taught that here were at least three 
persons who had never sinned. Your method with Pastor 
Russell is identical. 

Under the heading, "Ninth Error," in your article, you say: 
"One of these, the ninth error, essential and fundamental in 
Christianity, is the person and work of the Holy Spirit. There 
is a strange and ominous silence regarding this most important 

R5261 :page 187 

subject very apparent in the writings of Pastor Russell. 
A careful reading of those volumes, comprising more 
than one thousand pages, has discovered but one solitary 
reference to the Spirit; it is a casual mention of the Spirit 
in connection with the Day of Pentecost. The statement is 
simply made as a historic fact, or rather as an event which 
marks a stage in the development of the Christian Church. 
Not one word of teaching has the writer found in MILLENNIAL 
DAWN as to the distinct personality of the Spirit, or as to 
His supreme agency in the salvation of sinners." 

Now I must say frankly, though courteously, that I cannot 
understand how, or why, a man with your record for 
accuracy could be so careless or dishonest as to make such 
a statement. In your opening statement you say, "There are 
six volumes of two thousand pages;" and here you say that 
you have given these volumes a careful reading, and count 
but ONE thousand pages, and then you make a bold and 
erroneous statement— that the author ignores the Holy Spirit. 

R5261 :page 188 

A judge would not think of rendering a verdict with only 
half the evidence in, but you speak boldly in condemnation 
of Pastor Russell when you are only half way through his 
books. Now, if you have gotten these volumes a "careful 
reading," I do not see how you missed in the fifth volume, 
pages 163 to 300, where the author gives ONE HUNDRED AND 
THIRTY-SEVEN PAGES to a full presentation of the person and 
work of the Holy Spirit, in connection with the redemption of 
the race of man. How can you explain this? 

It is true that Pastor Russell may teach some things concerning 
the Holy Spirit that you will not agree with, but he 
does not ignore the Spirit, as you say he does. It is evident 
that in making this criticism you were very careless, to say 
the least, and this should make those who are seeking the 
Truth very cautious about accepting your statements without 
full verification. 

Another mistake which lies on the surface in your article 
is found on page 125, where in reference to Pastor Russell's 
lecture on the subject of "To Hell and Back Again," you say: 
"Crowds have listened with no little satisfaction to his assertions 
that there is no hell, no eternal punishment, no hopelessness 



after death." Now I have not heard Pastor Russell speak 
at any time, nor have I read this particular lecture, but if 
he in this lecture teaches that there is no hell, and no punishment 
for the finally impenitent, then he in this lecture flatly 
contradicts what is very clear in all his writings. I have never 
read an expositor who speaks with more clearness and earnestness 
of the eternal punishment to be meted out to the finally 
impenitent. It is true that he does not believe in a literal 
lake of fire of burning brimstone, and that men are eternally 
tortured in this, but in this he is not out of harmony with 
thousands of other good, orthodox teachers. 

I hope you will not think me impertinent if I, as one of 
your former students, ask you a question here, as we used to 
have the privilege of doing in the class-room. In this article 
of yours, in Fundamentals, on page 126, you say: "We read 
in Revelation 19:20; 20:10, that after a thousand years in the 
lake of fire the Beast and the False Prophet are still there 
undestroyed." Now, I have looked up the several translations 
that I have in my library and I do not find that word "undestroyed" 
in any of them. In what translation will I find it, 
and what is the authority for putting it into that passage? I 
am a seeker after the full Truth, and if that has any authority 
for being in that passage I would like to know it, for it is 
important. 

Now, in closing, I want to say that you need have no concern 
about one of your pupils following Pastor Russell. I 
have his books in my library and consult them freely, as I 
do every other good expositor I can find, and afford to buy. 
I have gotten beyond the early stage of the disciples who 
wanted to forbid some to teach or cast out devils because 
they "follow not US." I have gotten unlimited aid from you, 
and also from Pastor Russell. I do not feel like saying with 
you that he is "being used of the evil one to subvert the truth 
of God." My church officials still regard me as sufficiently 
orthodox that they can go to sleep and allow me to continue 
preaching to the congregation. 

With kindest regards for you and highest appreciation of 
the help I have received from you, I am 

Yours in His service, T. S. THOMPSON.--N. Dak. 



R5261 :page 188 

MOSES CALLED TO SERVICE 

--JULY 20.-EXODUS 3:1-14.- 

"Blessed are the pure in heart: for 
they shall see God."— Matthew 5:8. 

MOSES was forty years old when he fled from 
Pharaoh, discouraged. He was eighty years 
old when God called him to be the leader of 
Israel. The first forty years of his life were 
an ordinary schooling, the last forty a 



special schooling in meekness. He was now 

ready for service at exactly the time when 

God wished to use him. So thoroughly discouraged 

had he become that he who was 

ready to lead the hosts of Israel without a 

special Divine commission and authorization was now so 

distrustful of himself that even when called of the Lord 

he apologized, pleading his unfitness, etc. He did not 

realize that he had only then become fit. 

So it is with some of God's children today. They 
little realize the importance of the lesson of meekness- 
submission— teachableness. He who learns this lesson is 
getting the most important preparation for Divine service. 
"The Lord resisteth the proud, but showeth grace to the 
humble"— the meek, the teachable, the submissive. The 
Apostle, on the strength of this principle, urges the 
Church, saying, "Humble yourselves, therefore, under the 
mighty hand of God"— submit yourselves to whatever 
God's providence shall bring to you in life's experiences 
—"that He may exalt you in due time"— after He shall 
have made you ready for the exaltation and for the service 
He wishes you to perform.— I Peter 5:6. 

Moses was tending Jethro's flocks, and perhaps considering 
how wise it was that forty years before he had 
been unsuccessful in arousing his brethren to flee out of 
Egypt. He could see now, in the light of maturer years, 
what a herculean task he would have had as their leader. 
He could see with maturer years the dangers and the 
difficulties of the wilderness journey. He could better 
understand the difficulties that would have attended his 
people in attempting to take possession of the land of 
Canaan— how they would have been resisted by the inhabitants 
of the land, more experienced than they in 
warfare, etc. Quite possibly he philosophized upon the 
folly of human ambitions, and concluded that the people 
unready to be delivered had been as wise or wiser than 
himself in remaining rather in bondage. 

THE BURNING BUSH CONSUMED NOT 

Thus meditating, while his flocks pastured on the 
mountainside, Moses caught sight of something most unusual. 
A bush was afire, yet it was not consumed. The 
longer he gazed, the more curious he became, until he resolved 
to investigate. He approached the bush. From 
it came a voice, declaring the phenomenon to be a manifestation 
of God's presence and power. Moses obeyed 
the command that he should take off his sandals, because 
it was holy ground, by reason of the presence of the Angel 
of the Lord. Moses covered his face in reverence, while 
he hearkened to the Divine message. 

God's message portrayed to Moses' mind the foundation 
for his hopes and those of the Israelites. The statement, 
"I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac and 
the God of Jacob," brought to this instructed man of God 
a clear understanding of what was signified by this experience. 



By it God reminded him of the special Covenant 
which He had made with Abraham, and had renewed with 
Isaac, and confirmed to Jacob for an everlasting covenant. 
Thus Moses was assured that God had not forgotten the 
good things which He had promised. Thus his faith and 
hope must have been re-established. He learned that 
God's time had come for the deliverance of the Israelites 
and for their attaining the Land of Promise— Canaan, the 
land flowing with milk and honey— i.e., very rich, very 
productive. 

If during those forty years, and perhaps before, Moses 
had time and again wondered whether God really cared 
for the Israelites and why He permitted them to be oppressed 
by the Egyptians, he now had God's own assurance 
that He did know it and that He did care, with the 
intimation that for some good reason He had all these 
years waited, and had withheld help which He at any time 
had been able to give, and that He had a purpose in so 

R5262 : page 189 

withholding. The Lord's explanation of the matter closed 
with an invitation to Moses to now be His servant, and 
messenger and mouthpiece to Pharaoh, calling upon him 
to liberate the captive Israelites. 

"CERTAINLY I WILL BE WITH THEE" 

Then Moses, who forty years before was full of confidence 
and courage, and ready to lead the Israelites, but 
who now was lacking in self-confidence, replied to the 
Lord: "Who am I, that I should go unto Pharaoh, and 
that I should bring forth the children of Israel out of 
Egypt?" This meant, Lord, surely you know that I am 
a failure; with all the educational advantages that I had, 
I am fit for nothing better than to be a sheep-tender; Lord, 
surely there must be some one much more competent than 
I for the leadership of Israel, else I fear that my people 
will never get out of Egypt. 

God's reply was: "Surely I will be with thee." I shall 
not expect you to do this of yourself. I realize that it 
is a great task, a mighty work, but "I will be with thee." 
By way of making the matter forceful, the Lord declared 
not only that Moses should lead forth the people, but that 
they should come to that very mountain, "the mount of 
God"— and worship Him there. 

Moses, remembering his previous failure, was cautious. 
He inquired what response he should make to the 
Israelites if he should tell them that God sent him this 
time and they should inquire, Who? Which God? What 
is His name? The Divine answer was that God's name 
is, "I AM THAT I AM "-the self-existing One. But 
Moses had become so distrustful of himself that he still 
could not think of undertaking this great work. He urged 
that the Egyptians would not let the people go. He felt 
more and more convinced that their intention was to keep 



the Israelites as their slaves. Another objection was that 
the Israelites themselves would not believe that God had 
really appeared to Moses. 

Answering these objections, the Lord gave Moses certain 
signs, convincing him that he was talking to the 
Omnipotent One, and assured him that these same signs 
would be convincing to the Israelites and the Egyptians. 

SLOW OF SPEECH AND INCOMPETENT 

So meek was Moses that although he fully believed the 
Lord and trusted His power, he could not realize that even 
with Divine help he would be successful. It must be God's 
thought that some one else would be found for so important 
a work. Moses declared, "I am not eloquent, but am 
slow of speech and of a slow tongue." Moreover, he was 
inexperienced as a servant or prophet of the Lord. Surely 
it must be that the Lord was merely trying him to see 
whether he would be rash enough to undertake such a 
matter, but really intending to use some one else. But 
no! The Lord's answer was, "I will be with thy mouth 
and teach thee what thou shalt say."— Exod. 4:10,12. 

So today the Lord's true people of the Gospel Age 
are all spirit-begotten, and are all thereby authorized and 
qualified to be ambassadors for God, to speak the Truth 
in love, in the name of God, and as servants of the Lord 
Jesus Christ. But to some of us at times it seems impossible 
to realize how great the honor God has conferred 
upon us in inviting us to be His agents and mouthpieces 
in speaking His Message to the world or to the brethren 
in the Church. And then when convinced that the Lord 
will be with us, some are in danger of being too rash and 
wilful in connection with the matter. While such need 
no encouragement, doubtless those who, like Moses, need 
to be encouraged, are in less danger of being injured by 
the great honor that attaches to the service of God in any 
capacity. 

To the humble ones now, as to Moses of old, God 
declares: "I will be with thee; I will be with thy mouth 
and teach thee what thou shalt say." As one lesson is to 
have no confidence in ourselves or in our own judgment 
or strength, another important lesson is that we should 
have every confidence, absolute confidence, in God. Not 
until this lesson is learned will any be really fit to be 
God's mouthpieces. In the case of Moses, humility, lack 
of self-confidence, meekness, had become so pronounced 
in him during his forty years of training along that line 
that he prayed the Lord that, even if he should be used, 
some one else might be the spokesman. God heard his 
request and granted that he should have his brother Aaron 
for a companion and mouthpiece, when he would go before 
Pharaoh to make demands in the name of the Lord. 

Nevertheless, Aaron was not the one competent for 
the great work. He did not have the same schooling that 
Moses enjoyed. Therefore God appointed that Moses 
should be as a god, or ruler, to his brother Aaron and 



that the latter should be as his servant, or mouthpiece, 
speaking only as authorized by the meek and lowly Moses 
in whom, because of his meekness, God was reposing the 
responsibility. 

Everything in the Scriptures points us to the fact that 
humility is a quality most essential to all of the Lord's 
people who would be used of the Lord in any important 
or special work for Him. If the followers of the Lord 
could continually keep this in memory, and would persistently 
shape their course accordingly, how much they 
would be used, we may be sure. Any service for the Lord 
is an honor; but the more we are permitted to serve, the 
more will be our blessing in the present life and the 
greater also will be our reward in the life to come. Let 
us, therefore, as the Apostle says, humble ourselves under 
God's mighty hand, that He may exalt us in due time. 



R5264 : page 189 

THE REFINER'S FIRE 

He sat by a fire of seven-fold heat 

As He watched the precious ore, 
And closer He bent with a searching gaze, 

As He heated it more and more. 

He knew He had ore that could stand the test, 

And He wanted the finest gold, 
To mould as a crown for the King to wear, 

Set with gems of a price untold. 

So He laid our gold on the burning fire, 

Tho' we fain would have said Him, "Nay"; 

And He watched the dross that we had not seen 
As it melted and passed away. 

And the gold grew brighter, and yet more bright, 
But our eyes were so dim with tears, 

We saw but the fire— not the Master's hand— 
And questioned with anxious fears. 

Yet our gold shone out with a richer glow 

As it mirrored a Form above, 
That bent o'er the fire, unseen by us, 

With a look of ineffable love. 

Can we think that it pleases His loving heart 

To cause us a moment's pain? 
Ah, no! but He saw thro' the present cross 

The bliss of eternal gain. 

So He waited there with a watchful eye, 

With a love that is strong and sure, 
And His gold did not suffer a whit more heat 



Than was needed to make it pure! —Unknown. 



R5263 : page 190 

MEN OF DESTINY 

-JULY 27.-EXODUS 5:1-14.- 

"Blessed are they that mourn: for they 
shall be comforted."— Matthew 5:4. 

NAPOLEON was styled a man of destiny, and 

surely many things connected with his experiences 

look as though the Lord's providence 

had something to do with him. This 

does not signify that he was a servant of 

God— far from it! But it does signify that 

Divine Wisdom has at all times been able to 

overrule the wrath of man to serve Him, 

and the remainder to restrain, thus to cause 

all things to work out the Divine purpose. 

Just what were the Divine purposes in Napoleon's day 

was far from clear, to even the saints of God then living. 

Indeed, we may say that that purpose is only partially 

understood by the Lord's people yet, although Bible 

Students can see with the eye of faith many ways in which 

the campaigns of Napoleon worked changes which undoubtedly 

have had much to do with the world's progress 

during the past century. To the ear of faith God declares, 

All my purposes shall be accomplished. "The word that 

is gone forth out of My mouth shall not return unto Me 

void; it shall accomplish that which I please, saith the 

Lord." -Isaiah 55:11. 

The Pharaoh who reigned in Egypt at the time that 
God delivered the Israelites was also a man of destiny. 
We may be even more sure of this than in respect to 
Napoleon, because we have Divine assurance of the fact. 
"And in very deed for this cause have I raised thee up, 
for to show in thee My power; and that My name may be 
declared throughout all the earth." (Exodus 9:16.) "St. 
Paul declared that God hardened this Pharaoh's heart that 
he should not let the people of Israel go free. He quotes 
the Divine Word: "For the Scripture saith unto Pharaoh, 
Even for this same purpose have I raised thee up, that 
I might show My power in thee, and that My name might 
be declared throughout all the earth."— Romans 9:17. 

But God's people very seriously misunderstood the 
purport of these words when in the past they interpreted 
them to mean that God had created Pharaoh a wicked, hard-hearted 
man, and that subsequently, He still further hardened 
his heart. Not so ! The Scriptures declare that all 
God's work is perfect. He never made an imperfect man. 
Adam was created in His Maker's likeness, His moral 
image. It is sin that has wrought the havoc, that has 



made man selfish and hard-hearted. 

VIEWING THE OTHER SIDE 

This degeneracy has been passed down from parent to 
child along the lines of heredity, so that Pharaoh was by 
nature what his forefathers had made him, plus the action 
of his own volition. St. James declares, "God tempteth 
no man." (James 1:13.) There is nothing surer than 
that God has never directly used His mighty power to 
harden the heart of any human being. On the contrary, 
the Lord's providences, blessings, instructions and mercies 
are all intended to soften the heart, to take away its 
stoniness. 

Bible Students now realize that the Apostle meant to 
tell us that from amongst the princes of Egypt God 
raised up to the throne of that kingdom a stubborn ruler, 
upon whose heart the mercies of God, in lifting one 
plague after another, would have only a hardening effect. 
And God raised this prince to the throne, so as to teach 
a great lesson respecting Divine tenderness, gentleness 
and forgiveness, and to illustrate the principle that God's 
greatest blessing to mankind— a free will— may be perverted 
by Satan to work his greatest injury. 

Not all men of destiny are in opposition to God, however. 
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, David, Solomon 
and the Prophets, as well as Jesus and His Apostles and 
all His followers, are men of destiny— foreknown, "called 
of God." With these men of destiny the Lord equally 
operates, and similarly. Upon these His mercies, tenderness 
and gracious promises have a softening effect, making 
them tender-hearted, forgiving, loving, more and more 
tending toward the development of the graces of the Holy 
Spirit— "meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering, 
brotherly-kindness, love." 

The destiny of these men is only partly worked out in 
the present life. They are permitted to pay a goodly 
price for the maintenance of their fellowship with God 
and inheritance of His promises. This costs them the 
friendship of the world, and oftentimes the loss of things 
highly esteemed amongst men, but it brings them the 
"Peace of God which passeth all understanding." And 
this peace and joy and comfort amidst tribulation are 
merely the foretaste of the riches of Divine grace which 
God has in reservation for these— in Messiah's Kingdom. 

Such of these saints as lived before the Redeemer 
offered His sacrifice for sins are to have a better resurrection 
to earthly nature than the remainder of mankind 
will have, and to be "princes in all the earth" as the 
human representatives of the Messianic Kingdom for a 
thousand years. The men of destiny, from the time of the 
First Advent of our Lord down, are to have a still higher 
reward— a change of nature. The Captain of their Salvation, 
the Redeemer, has already reached His destiny of 
high exaltation, "far above angels, principalities and 
powers"— "at the right hand of God."— Philippians 2:9; 



Ephesians 1:20,21. 

The loyal band following in His footsteps in the Narrow 
Way, seeking, according to the Divine promise, glory, 
honor, immortality and join t-heirship in Messiah's Kingdom, 
are also men of destiny. But their destiny has not 
yet been attained. It is for them to wait until the full 
number of the elect Church shall have been called, chosen 
and proved faithful. Then their destiny will be reached 
by the glorious change of the First Resurrection; for 
"flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God." 
By their change they will be perfected in the Divine 
nature like their Master. (2 Peter 1:4.) O glorious 
destiny! United, or married, to their Lord on the 
Heavenly plane, they will be His joint-heirs, a Royal 
Priesthood, to reign with Him a thousand years for the 
very purpose of blessing the world of mankind, for whose 
recovery Christ died.— Revelation 20:6. 

Eventually, the destinies of those faithful before the 
Cross and those faithful since the Cross will be united 
in the Kingdom, as St. Paul declares. The Ancient 
Worthies, although proved, cannot be made perfect until 
the Church, of still higher destiny, shall have reached her 
glory. -Hebrews 11:38-40. 

"I KNOW NOT THE LORD" 

In due course Moses, accompanied by Aaron, who 
acted as his mouthpiece, presented himself before Pharaoh 
and delivered the Divine message respecting the liberation 
of the Israelites. He was met with derision, Pharaoh declaring, 
"I know not Jehovah, neither will I let Israel go." 
For a time it seemed as though the whole work would be 
a failure. It was a time of testing to the faith of not only 
Moses and Aaron, but all the Israelites. Pharaoh with 
great hardness of heart sent forth the edict that the tasks 
of the Israelites should be increased. The Israelites were 
doing forced labor, making bricks for public buildings. 

R5263 :page 191 

Apparently the bricks were made of unburned clay, and 
straw was provided for use as a binder. By the new 
rule, the Israelites must produce the same number of 
bricks per day, but must additionally scour the fields and 
hedges to gather some kind of stubble that would serve 
them as binders. Thus their tasks were practically 
doubled; and if not performed, they were beaten. Can 
we wonder that the Israelites of less faith murmured 
against Moses and Aaron and blamed them with the increase 
of their tasks ! Nevertheless, by these very bitter 
experiences the people were all the more prepared to welcome 
the liberty subsequently offered them in God's 
providence. 

And is this not true in respect to some of our spiritual 
liberties also? To some extent, at first, our efforts to 
please and obey God bring greater trials of the flesh, 



greater oppositions from the Adversary. The Lord would 
strengthen our faith, and cause us to appreciate the 
privilege of being set free from the power of sin and 

R5264:page 191 

death, and of being inducted into His family. 

Confirmations of this very account of the tribulations 
of the Israelites were discovered by the French savant, 
M. E. Naville, in 1884. He found the city of Pithom, 
which the Israelites built. (Exodus 1:11.) In the British 
Museum in London and also in the Metropolitan 
Museum, New York, there are on exhibition some of these 
very bricks. In size they are about four inches to eight 
inches square and about two inches thick— unbaked, but 
very hard. Another traveler, describing the walls of 
Pithom, says: "The lower courses of these walls, and for 
some distance up, are made of well-made bricks, with 
chopped straw in them; but, higher up, the courses of 
brick are not so good. The straw is long and scanty, and 
the last courses have no straw at all, but have sedges, 
rushes, and water plants, which had been mingled with 
the mud in their making." 

PREPARATIONS FOR CANAAN 

The statement of Exodus 1: 14 is generally understood 
to imply that the Israelites were compelled to learn all 
the trades and occupations of their masters. They had 
been from Abraham's time a pastoral people, and by this 
very operation they were forced, as it were, into an industrial 
school in the foremost civilization of that day. 
It was a severe training, but a very useful one and undoubtedly 
a grand preparation for the necessities that lay 
before them. Shall we say that all this was of chance? 
Shall we not rather say that the Lord in His providence 
was dealing with them— humbling them, as well as qualifying 
them for the larger opportunities He intended to 
present? 

Whoever can discern the Lord's leadings in connection 
with typical Israel of old should be fully prepared to note 
and appreciate Divine providences in his own case as a 
Spiritual Israelite. Nevertheless, few lessons are harder 
to learn than this one— that God supervises the affairs of 
all who are truly His. Nevertheless, it is well to remember 
that only those who have entered into covenant relationship 
with God, and who are maintaining that relationship, 
can apply to themselves the comforting words of St. 
Paul, "We know that all things work together for good to 
them that love God, to them who are the called according 
to His purpose."— Romans 8:28. Our present experiences 
of disappointment, trials, vexations, oppositions, etc., are 
designed to work in us the peaceable fruits of righteousness, 
and to thus "work out for us a far more exceeding 
and eternal weight of glory." 



R5264:page 191 

SOME INTERESTING QUESTIONS 
ADAMIC OR SACRIFICIAL DEATH? 

Question.— Suppose that one of God's consecrated 
saints should die by some convulsion of nature— flood, 
fire, etc.— would such a death be sacrificial, or would it be 
Adamic? 

Answer.— A consecrated child of God could not die 
the Adamic death. His death would either be the sacrificial 
death or the Second Death. If when he died he 
were a consecrated child of God, his death would be merely 
a completion of the consecration which he had previously 
made. Our lives are made holy and acceptable by 
the great High Priest, in whatever form death may come. 
But if in the meantime this consecrated child of God 
should turn away from Him, then it would be the Second 
Death. If he sin wilfully, deliberately, he commits the 
"sin unto death."— I John 5:16. 



OUR LORD'S BAPTISM 

Question.— Was our Lord baptized in water before He 
was baptized of the Holy Spirit? 

Answer.— The Scriptural account of our Lord's baptism 
at Jordan seems to imply that God made the manifestation 
of the descent of the Holy Spirit on Jesus after His 
baptism in water. He was baptized into death before He 
went into the water, in the sense that He had given up 
His own will; in the sense that the Apostle quotes from 
the Old Testament— "Lo, I come: in the volume of the 
Book it is written of Me; I delight to do Thy will, O My 
God." (Psa. 40:7,8; Heb. 10:7.) Our Lord came to do 
everything written in the Book concerning Him. 

Our Lord was already dead to His own will; otherwise 
He could not have gone to John at Jordan. But God's 
manifestation of His acceptance of Jesus' sacrifice of 
Himself, apparently waited until after Jesus had performed 
the symbol. So we read that after He had come 
up out of the water, the Holy Spirit descended like a dove. 
God gave that outward sign, not for all, but for John, who 
"saw and bare record," as the Scriptures declare.— 
John 1:32-34. 



CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT 

Question.— How near to the character-likeness of our 
Lord Jesus Christ must one attain on this side the veil in 



order to have good hope of being one of the Elect on the 
other side of the veil? 

Answer.— Jehovah God will not accept anything that is 
imperfect. Even our human nature presented to Him sacrificially 
by the High Priest needed first to be covered by 
the merit of the Priest Himself and to be thus perfected 
before being Divinely accepted. In thinking of ourselves, 
however, we are to remember that we have the New 
Creature in an earthen vessel. It is the New Creature 
that must have the likeness of Christ. 

In the flesh we are beset by the world, the flesh and the 
Devil. All these things conspire to hinder the New Creature 
from working perfectly in the old body. The will 
must be nothing less than perfect. As Jesus said, "Blessed 
are the pure in heart." (Matt. 5:8.) Purity of heart must 
be absolute. 

The pure of heart are those whose intentions are pure, 
whose motives are pure, who desire the best— long for 
the best. These may have strong consolation, may have 
full confidence toward God respecting the glorious things 
He has promised; for they could do no more than the 
best they are able to do in the mortal body— and thus show 
their devotion. 



page 193 
