A Meeting to Fortify Us Spiritually
1 Paul said that “solid food belongs to mature people, to those who through use have their perceptive powers trained to distinguish both right and wrong.” (Heb. 5:14) The congregation meetings supply solid spiritual food needed to fortify the mind and heart. Thus, the Scriptural command to ‘not forsake the gathering of ourselves together’ should not be minimized. There is good reason for us to obey this inspired direction.—Heb. 10:23-25.
2 While you regularly attend all other congregation meetings and participate in them, enjoying and benefiting from these, never underestimate the value of the weekly Congregation Book Study. The fact that this is an organized meeting of a smaller group contributes to its spiritual value. It allows for greater individual participation. There is often more time for scriptures to be looked up, read and discussed. Newer ones and children find it easier to participate and they progress quickly as they gain confidence in expressing their faith. Comments made by mature publishers on the more weighty material help to strengthen and fortify all in attendance. The interchange of encouragement at the book study invigorates all who support it, and a closer bond of union results.—Prov. 27:17; Rom. 1:11, 12.
3 Beginning the week of December 5 we will be studying portions of the book Man’s Salvation out of World Distress at Hand! at our Congregation Book Studies. By all means attend regularly and be prepared to participate.
PREPARATION
4 Regular preparation for the book study and participation in it strengthens us spiritually. (1 Cor. 16:13) Meetings become more interesting and encouraging when we have a part in them. The result is greater joy, satisfaction and spiritual growth. Our participation also serves to encourage and fortify our brothers.
5 To prepare for the book study, each family can best make their own arrangements according to the needs and circumstances. In some families each member individually prepares for the study. Some study a few paragraphs each day as they travel to and from work. To help their children, parents remind and encourage them to prepare for the study. Some families find it beneficial to set aside time to prepare the entire lesson together.
CONDUCTOR AND READER
6 So that all in attendance may receive the greatest benefits from the book study the conductor must be well prepared. (1 Tim. 4:15, 16) Also, since approximately half of the study hour is devoted to reading the paragraphs, a good reader should be assigned beforehand. He should understand the material well and read with appropriate emphasis and clarity. (See Our Kingdom Service, June 1980, page 4, Question Box.)
7 In the September issue of Our Kingdom Ministry, we received direction as to proper dress when attending the book study. It said: “When attending the book study, it would be appropriate to dress as when attending the regular meetings at the Kingdom Hall.”
FIELD SERVICE
8 Wholehearted participation in the ministry is a safeguard for us and strengthens us spiritually. (Rom. 12:11) Our study and participation in meetings produce a desire and zeal to share what we have learned with others. Hence, the location for the book study is usually used as a meeting place for field service.
9 Keep fortified by regularly preparing for and attending ALL congregation meetings. Your participation will strengthen you.

