Announcements
● Literature offer for November: Subscription for The Watchtower or Awake! or for both magazines. Cost is $3.50 per year for semimonthly magazines, $2.00 for six-month subscriptions and $2.00 per year for monthly magazines. (There is no six-month subscription for monthly magazines.) December: The New World Translation and any 192-page book for $3.75. January and February: You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth, for $2.50.
● 1983 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses: Publishers and pioneers please order your Yearbooks through your congregation. Congregations should begin accepting orders for these Yearbooks now. Then on the dates here listed, or as soon as possible thereafter, send this order to the Society using the regular Literature Order form (S-14). November 15, 1982: English; December 15, 1982: French, Greek, Italian, Spanish; February 15, 1983: Dutch, Finnish, German, Japanese, Korean, Portuguese. Congregations should order only the number of Yearbooks for which there are requests. Payment should not accompany the congregation order. The Yearbooks will be charged to the literature account at $1.00 each, which is the rate for publishers and the public. Regular and special pioneers on the list before July 1, 1982, may receive a free copy for which the congregation may request credit on the Remittance and Credit Request (S-20). Pioneers may obtain additional copies at 25c each. (Note to secretary: Please have announced to the congregation when the Yearbooks are received so that all who ordered can obtain their copies.)
● In addition to the languages announced in Our Kingdom Ministry for August 1982, the 1983 calendars will also be available in Danish, Dutch, Finnish, and Swedish. These can be ordered by the congregation using the Literature Order form (S-14).
● The Society has a stock of Yearbooks for 1975, 1977 and 1979. Congregations may order these according to local needs.
● You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth is now available in grade-two English Braille. This four-volume publication may be purchased or obtained on a loan basis and returned in six months. A remittance of $5.00 should accompany all orders if purchased. Also, the name and address of the individual that will receive the publication should be included. All orders for Braille items should be sent to the Society’s BRAILLE DESK, and not included along with Literature Orders for printed publications. Braille material should not be stocked by the congregation.
● New Publications Available:
“Let Your Kingdom Come”—Finnish, Gujarati, Malayalam
Good News—To Make You Happy—Sinhalese
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth—Afrikaans
Watch Tower Publications Index for 1981—English
The Path of Divine Truth Leading to Liberation—Bengali, Gujarati, Hindi, Malayalam, Marathi, Punjabi, Tamil
Bible Topics for Discussion—Gujarati
Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!—Finnish, Italian

