Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 31
Song 27
 7 min: Local announcements. Comment on subscription offer for November, encourage all to prepare well and to have a full share in the subscription campaign.
23 min: “Sowing and Cultivating Seeds of Truth.”
(15 min.) Question-and-answer consideration of article.
(8 min.) Demonstration following consideration of paragraph 6. Start demonstration with statement “May I show you how I found these scriptures in the Bible? It has been helpful to me and I believe it may be helpful to you too.” Consider one or two paragraphs from publication, such as new Live Forever book or from magazines offered. Read the paragraphs and the scriptures as outlined in paragraph 5.
10 min: Experiences starting studies. Call on brothers and sisters who conduct studies and do well in starting them. (Arrange with them ahead of time.) Ask them: Do you believe the Live Forever book will be effective and why? Do you find it best to ask the householder directly if he would like to have a Bible study or to introduce the study in an indirect manner? Do you have additional suggestions that you believe will be helpful to publishers who are endeavoring to start studies?
 5 min: Encourage all to share in the field service on first Sunday of the month. Announce field service arrangements.
Song 58 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 7
Song 36
 5 min: Local announcements and accounts report.
10 min: Talk by elder on what should be kept in mind in determining which congregation we will associate with. Review Question Box in March 1976 Our Kingdom Service. Point out advantages of attending meetings of congregation holding territory where one lives; why generally best to do so. Varying circumstances of individuals to be considered, and final decision responsibility of family head. He may get advice from elders before making decision, thus consider advantages and disadvantages. Elders encourage family head to ensure best spiritual interests of family. No reason to be critical of decision when made.
20 min: “A Meeting to Fortify Us Spiritually.” (15 min.) Question-and-answer coverage of article. As time permits read paragraphs and look up scriptures.
(5 min.) Call on two or three for comments on (1) how they prepare for the book study as individuals, (2) how they prepare as a family, (3) the advantages of preparing as they do.
10 min: Encourage all to share in magazine work on the second Saturday of month; announce field service arrangements. Draw attention to the November 15 issue of The Watchtower and particularly the articles “The Churches—Are They Nearing Their End?” and “Flee While There Is Yet Time!” Arrange for three brief and well-rehearsed magazine presentations featuring an article in the November 8 issue of Awake! or the November 15 issue of The Watchtower: One by a youngster in house-to-house work, one by an adult approaching a person on the street and one in a business establishment. Encourage all who show interest to subscribe to the magazines.
Song 63 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 14
Song 66
14 min: Local announcements and selected points from Announcements. Review article “Special Talks Starting in January”; draw attention particularly to suggestion in paragraph 5 on inviting interested persons.
15 min: Encouraging talk on subject “Those Weaknesses Can Be Overcome” from October 15, 1982, Watchtower, pages 8-11.
16 min: “Presenting the Good News—In Business Territory.” Questions and answers. As time permits have publishers relate their experiences while working business territory. Announce field service arrangements for the weekend and encourage full support.
Song Song 67 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 21
Song 1
 7 min: Local announcements.
15 min: Use time for local needs or have an elder give a talk on the article “The Spirit of the Christian Ministry,” encouraging wholehearted field service activity. (See the November 15, 1982, Watchtower.) Or, if appropriate in your congregation, give a talk on “What’s Happening in the Schools?” putting emphasis primarily on the need for fine conduct on the part of Christian students and what the parents can do. (See the May 8, 1982, Awake!)
10 min: Getting to Know Our Brothers. Interview parent, preferably one who has teenage children. When do you study with your children? Why then? How long do you study? Why? What do you study? Why? How do you prepare for field service with your children? Other comments on what parent has found helpful in aiding youngsters spiritually and rewards to parents for such efforts. Interview one or two youngsters, teenagers if possible. Ask how they have benefited from family study. Ask about a situation in school that turned out well. How was it that they knew how to handle it as they did? Was it something they learned from their parents? at the meetings? in an article they read? Ask them to relate the best field service experience they have had in the past year. Commend parents and children for their part in making advancement manifest.—2 Tim. 3:14-17; 1 Tim. 4:15, 16.
13 min: Encourage support of fourth Saturday magazine activity; announce field service arrangements. Draw attention to November 22 Awake! particularly the article “Young People Ask . . . What Future Is There for Any of Us?” Two brief demonstrations (one by adult; one by youth) featuring an article in the November 22 Awake! or December 1 Watchtower.
Song 64 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 28
Song 51
10 min: Local announcements. Review literature offer and Topic for Conversation, including scriptures, for month of December. Brief, well-prepared presentation of literature offer. Publisher should refer to last scripture in Topic for Conversation and then make offer, showing householder the value of the New World Translation and book being presented.
13 min: Positive and encouraging talk by elder on article “Beware of Self-Pity” from September 1977 Watchtower, pages 547, 548. Highlight need to show interest in others. (May also use appropriate experiences from June 22, 1977, Awake! pages 4, 5.)
15 min: “Doing Good to Those With Special Needs.” Question-and-answer coverage of article. Read paragraphs and look up scriptures as time permits.
 7 min: Encourage full support of first Sunday by sharing in house-to-house activity. Announce arrangements for weekend field service.
Song 9 and prayer.

