Presenting the Good News—In Business Territory
1 It is reported that the business territory of many congregations is worked infrequently. In some cases business territory has not been worked for years. Is this the situation in your congregation? What can be done?
2 Many congregations have business establishments throughout their territory. Some are included as a part of the regular house-to-house territories. Hence, publishers may need to be reminded that they are to call also on the business establishments when they work the territory. If some business places are not open or you observe that they are too busy when the territory is first worked, note it down so that calls can be made later at a suitable time.
3 Where there are large business sections, it would be well to have separate business territories for such areas. These can be worked by qualified publishers on a regular basis, just as residential areas are covered.
4 If large sections of business territory cannot be cared for by the congregation, elders should discuss this with the circuit overseer. He can coordinate the efforts of other congregations in the city to get the territory worked by qualified publishers and pioneers.
5 When have you found it best to call on local business establishments? Some have found an early hour on Saturday morning to be a good time, whereas others find it advantageous to call later in the day when they are not so busy or on a weekday when owners are not so occupied.
6 Those working in business territories should be neatly attired. It is best to keep presentations brief. Some explain that they are calling because businessmen are not usually at home when we call. Use magazines, the current literature offer or tracts. The offer or approach may be varied according to the circumstances.
7 Could your congregation do more to work its business territory? Qualified publishers might be trained to share in this activity. Elders! Can you organize this work so that the good news is presented regularly in all business territory?

