Sowing and Cultivating Seeds of Truth
1 When we witness to people, offer literature, leave tracts and handbills, we are sowing seeds of Kingdom truth. Jesus described our work as similar to that of a farmer sowing seed. (Luke 8:5-8) It is our desire to sow seeds in the hearts of as many as possible. Is that not the way you feel about it?
2 During the month of November we will continue to feature subscriptions to The Watchtower or Awake! magazine or to both. All will want to make good use of these publications as we zealously share in sowing seeds of truth.
3 Most of us spend a large portion of our service time in the house-to-house work and this is appropriate. We would like to speak with at least someone in each home. However, it is often necessary to call a second or third time to find someone at home. We may witness to others at their places of business or employment. Many publishers regularly engage in street work in an effort to contact still others. Our Kingdom Ministry has encouraged us to approach people working in their gardens or yards as well as to speak to deliverymen and repairmen. Ecclesiastes 11:6 encourage us to ‘sow our seed’ conscientiously because we can never tell where it will take root.
RETURN VISITS
4 The apostle Paul mentioned both planting and watering seeds of truth. (1 Cor. 3:6) This corresponds with Jesus’ command that we teach and make disciples of people. (Matt. 28:19, 20) So, we have a responsibility to call back on receptive individuals and endeavor to water and cultivate the seeds of truth. How can this be done?
5 To honest-hearted ones the Kingdom message is good news. The Kingdom will remedy their problems and provide for all of mankind’s needs. So when you call back, show them from the Bible what the Kingdom will accomplish. At the same time endeavor to become acquainted with their concerns and interests. It will help you to determine which of the Kingdom blessings may particularly appeal to them.—Matt. 10:7, 12, 13; 9:36.
SHARE REGULARLY
6 Usually it is best to schedule time regularly for making return visits and endeavoring to start studies. Many are making it a practice to share regularly in the house-to-house work on Sunday. Most have found it best to make their return visits soon after the initial contact. Have you ever made a return visit within a few days, while the interest is still strong? This can be very effective.

