Showing that We Care
1 When Jesus was upon the earth, he was interested in people and he felt tender affection for them. He cared about what was happening to them. That is why he toured the cities and villages and preached the good news of the Kingdom among them. He saw that they were knocked about like sheep without a shepherd. Not only did he help the people personally, but he arranged to send out more workers into the harvest, namely, his twelve disciples, as mentioned in Matthew chapters nine and ten.—See Matthew 9:35-38.
2 Being interested in people and showing that they care for them are Christian characteristics demonstrated by the footstep followers of Jesus Christ. While false religion’s leaders may not care for the people and do not take care of their spiritual needs, God is not to blame for that, and we do not want to see anyone accuse God of being responsible for the suffering that has come upon the human family. Therefore, the distribution of Kingdom News No. 23 in November (from 5 to 14) presents us with a wonderful opportunity. This tract has a message that brings honor to Jehovah. People need to know why there is so much suffering on the earth and who is responsible for it, and the majority should be very much interested in the question, “Why So Much Suffering—If God Cares?”, which is the title of the new tract. There is every reason for us to be enthusiastic in presenting this message.
3 The last time we distributed a tract here in the United States, about 10,500 requests for free booklets were received at the office in Brooklyn. So a great amount of good was accomplished. This time there will be another offer of a free booklet and we hope the response will be even better. Perhaps you can cover territory that was not covered with Kingdom News No. 22. But, whatever territory you work, start out in the work early in the campaign. In the cities many publishers may be able to distribute their tracts during the first three days of the campaign. If that be the case, then the regular offer can be used in the field for the remaining period.
4 Although we want to put out all our tracts in good time, this does not mean that we should ignore interest that is shown. It is suggested that we carry along a copy of the Youth book. This can be offered to any who show unusual interest. Where circumstances permit, take time to talk to interested people, be friendly. Carry along equipment so you can make written note of special interest and make it a point to call back sometime during the month of November to see how the persons enjoyed the message. If we take time to talk to the interested people as we meet them, it can be very beneficial to them. We cannot be sure that we will meet the individual again, so it is good to give the witness while we have the opportunity. Leaving a Scriptural thought with someone will only result in good.
5 Those who are conducting home Bible studies with interested persons may wish to present a copy of the tract and explain that all over the world this message is being given out to as many people as possible. Ask each of these interested persons whether they would like to have a few copies, say five or ten, to give to some friends or acquaintances. When they see the message in the tract, those who study may be very enthusiastic about the opportunity to pass on such good information.
6 We are confident that the campaign with Kingdom News No. 23 will prove to be a great blessing, because all of us, as Christians, care for people. May Jehovah bless the Kingdom News campaign.

