We Have What We Need!
1 Today’s teen-agers are growing up in an unsettled, topsy-turvy world. Many teen-agers are searching for answers to what life is really all about. Living conditions are far different from those of twenty or more years ago when their parents were growing up. Problems of youth today are also different. So in recent years a need has developed for a publication that would be of interest and help to the teen-age group. And now we have what we need—the new book Your Youth—Getting the Best out of It.
2 This new book should be an excellent help to young people. But they need to get it in their hands and read it to benefit from it. It is our privilege to put it there. The Youth book tells them, on page 5: “Youth is a time of challenge. . . . The road of life today has plenty of rough spots. It takes courage to face them. But if you learn early how to overcome the rough spots, then the rest of the road becomes far smoother for you.” This book directs young folks to God’s Word and shows how problems of life can be handled in the right way, making life more satisfying, as well as enabling persons to be pleasing to Jehovah.
3 Today there are many young people in Jehovah’s organization, and many thousands are coming in. In fact, quite a few teen-agers accept the truth despite parental opposition. They recognize the ring of truth when they hear the good news preached to them. They accept it and show their desire to serve Jehovah by entering into a dedicated relationship with Him, doing so while still youthful. (Eccl. 12:1) The new Youth book will certainly help these young publishers to get Jehovah’s mind on matters and to make their minds over to Jehovah’s way of thinking.—Rom. 12:1, 2.
WHO ALSO NEED IT?
4 Who besides the young publishers need the Youth book? Certainly parents and grandparents will find it very helpful in their families. They should encourage their children and grandchildren to read it personally. They can also read the book along with them so the entire family will benefit together. We believe that the Youth book will help many parents to become more familiar with the problems facing children and teen-agers today and it should assist these parents in communicating with their children. Thus they will be in a better position to aid their children and grandchildren spiritually and in other matters of living.
WHERE CAN WE PLACE IT?
5 Consider people whom you know and who could benefit from this new publication. You may have neighbors or relatives with teen-age children who would greatly appreciate it. Also, youth counselors, school authorities and even policemen may find it useful in their work. Young publishers or parents may wish to show this book to teachers and encourage them to read it. Some publishers may find it productive to do street witnessing near high schools, colleges or universities, offering the Youth book to young people they meet. You may know some older persons who would like to use it as a gift for young relatives, friends, children or prospective parents.
6 We all rejoice to have this fine new publication for our personal use and now for use in the field service. We have what we need! Let us help many to benefit from the Youth book.

