





COVER SUBJECT | LIES THAT MAKE GOD SEEM UNLOVABLE
The Truth Can Set You Free




One day, in Jerusalem, Jesus was talking about his Father, Jehovah, and exposing the false religious leaders of his day. (John 8:12-30) What he stated on that occasion teaches us how to examine popular beliefs about God today. Jesus said: “If you remain in my word, you are really my disciples, and you will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.”—John 8:31, 32.
“Remain in my word.” Here Jesus sets the standard for evaluating whether religious teachings are “the truth.” When you hear a statement about God, ask yourself, ‘Does this harmonize with Jesus’ words and the rest of the Holy Scriptures?’ Imitate those who heard the apostle Paul speak and who were “carefully examining the Scriptures daily as to whether these things [the things they were learning] were so.”—Acts 17:11.
Marco, Rosa, and Raymonde, all quoted in the first article of this series, carefully examined their beliefs by studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses. What did they learn?
Marco: “Our Bible teacher used the Scriptures to answer every question my wife and I had. Our love for Jehovah started to grow, and we also grew closer as husband and wife!”

Rosa: “At first, I thought that the Bible was nothing more than a book of philosophy that attempts to explain God using human reasoning. Gradually, however, I found the Bible’s answers to my questions. Now, Jehovah is real to me. He is Someone whom I can trust.”

Raymonde: “I prayed to God for help to learn about him. Soon thereafter, my husband and I started to study the Bible. Finally, we learned the truth about Jehovah! We were overjoyed to discover the kind of God he is.”

The Bible does far more than simply expose lies about God; it reveals the truth about his appealing qualities. It is his inspired Word, and it helps us to “know the things that have been kindly given us by God.” (1 Corinthians 2:12) Why not see for yourself how the Bible can answer common yet fundamental questions about God, his purpose, and our future? Read the answers to some of these questions under “Bible Teachings > Bible Questions Answered” at www.jw.org. You can also request a Bible study on that Web site or from one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. We are confident that if you do, you will find God easier to love than you ever thought possible.



