Is Do-It-Yourself for You?
ARE you a do-it-yourself enthusiast? More and more people are. So popular has the do-it-yourself trend become that recent attempts in Britain to enforce a ban on Sunday trading met with stiff resistance from the owners of the proliferating supermarkets stocked with supplies for the home enthusiasts.
Is do-it-yourself for you? What will help you reach a wise decision?
Count the Cost
Before ever starting a job, how wise it is to figure out its cost. You will find that a comparison of the charges of a skilled professional with the cost of materials for what you would need to do it yourself will be revealing. But do not forget the hidden extras. What are they?
Many professionals guarantee that their work will meet a certain standard at a specified time. If they fail, you can often seek some type of compensation. In the long run, to pay a little more and benefit from the services of a professional may be to your advantage.
Another factor to reckon with is the cost of your time. Does your do-it-yourself project leave you so drained physically that you resume your regular work tired out? Does your do-it-yourself work rob you of time needed to maintain and strengthen the family bond? If you are married, what does your mate think of your projects and the time you spend on them? And your children, do they derive happiness from what you do? Being “married” to do-it-yourself work can sow seeds of discord with family and friends.
It is possible, nevertheless, to maintain good family relationships and still work on do-it-yourself projects. How? By enlisting the help of your family. Your marriage mate can join you, either in planning or in actually doing the work, perhaps even taking care of some of your other duties while you concentrate on the work to be done. Surely, your family and friends deserve consideration.
You may work things out well, planning the project and enlisting the cooperation of your family, but do you have the right tools?
The Value of Tools
Are you inspired by glossy brochures that show successful projects? But do you know what tools were used, and how much they cost? Is purchase of such tools within your family’s budget? On occasion, you may find renting some of the larger power tools a viable option if their purchase price is too great but the need vital. You can manage many a do-it-yourself project with very basic tools. However, for these to be of lasting value, care for them well.
Where will you keep your tools? When deciding on a storage area, make sure the tools are protected and treated properly so they remain in good condition. Throwing tools together in a drawer can damage them. Arrange a designated place for each tool. You will find that tracing the outline of the tool onto a flat board is helpful. Fasten this board on the wall of your workshop or tool cupboard. Then clasp and hang the tools there. You can thus easily see whether the tool is in its place or not.
Some tools that are used under tension, such as fretsaws, may require release before storage. Most tools will require cleaning and oiling to maintain their value. Make tool maintenance a part of whatever do-it-yourself project you undertake.
You have figured out the cost and opted to do it yourself. You have all the tools ready and in good condition. ‘But there is something missing,’ you say. ‘I am not experienced.’ Does this mean that do-it-yourself work is ruled out?
Success Without Experience?
Success on a first-time job does not come automatically. A helpful guide, though, is to apply the maxim: Follow the instructions carefully. But whose instructions?
“In the multitude of counselors there is accomplishment,” states an ancient proverb. (Proverbs 15:22) Consequently, before you start to do it yourself, consult the experts. You can draw on the accumulated wisdom of the experts by reading their suggestions in many do-it-yourself manuals. Or if one of your friends has already successfully done a similar job, ask him how he managed it and what tips he can offer.
Safety Essential
Remember the need for safety. Use the tools only in the way they are intended to be used. If your children help you, teach them respect and proper care for tools, especially for those that are sharp and dangerous.
The variety of projects that you can undertake for yourself is great. But to avoid being unbalanced in such jobs, take into account other people’s advice. Then adapt the suggestions to your own circumstances. Whatever the proposed project, study it carefully before you decide to do it yourself.
[Box/​Picture on page 18]
HOW TO CARE FOR YOUR TOOLS
□ Use them properly
□ Clean them thoroughly
□ Store them correctly

