VOL. XXVII JUNE 15, 1906 No. 12 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 179 

Church Union— Next, Federation 179 

The United Church of Canada 179 

Federation in Great Britain 180 

Education Makes "Fools" 180 

We Are Counted As Fools 181 

Man and Woman Under the Curse 181 

Hell Fire and Saintliness Denounced by Two 

M.E. Bishops 182 

All Things Work For Good (Poem) 182 

A Vision of the Kingdom 182 

"Never Man Spake Like This Man" 185 

Greatest in the Kingdom 186 

Some Interesting Letters 190 

page 178 



LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ASBURY PARK, N.J., CONVENTION, JULY 22-29 



(For information respecting meetings, see last page, this issue.) 

RAILROAD RATES 

We have secured fare-and-one-third rates on all lines of railroad 
east of and including Chicago and St. Louis, on "Certificate 
Plan." Ask for ticket for "Watch Tower Convention, 
Asbury Park, N.J.," for which you pay one way full fare and 
receive a Certificate in addition to your ticket. The Certificate, 
after endorsement by proper officers at the Convention and 
payment of 25 cents, entitles you to one-third fare on return 
trip. From some points cheaper rates than these may be obtainable, 
via Atlantic City or other ocean points. Enquire of your 
railroad agent. 

ACCOMMODATIONS 

Board and lodging can be procured for $1, $1.25, $1.50, $2, 
and upward to $5 per day. 
Write at once if you wish us to procure accommodations, 



stating briefly and pointedly what kind, number of persons, 
sex and color, and if married couples wish to room together. Do 
not expect any alteration of your party's location after writing. 
If others join it later they will be accommodated in the order 
of notification. Address all letters to "Convention Dept," 
WATCH TOWER B. & T. SOCIETY, Allegheny, Pa. 



R3791 :page 179 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
CHURCH UNION-NEXT, FEDERATION 



THE Presbyterian and Cumberland Presbyterian 
bodies have reunited, as per the following telegram 
in the public press columns: 

Des Moines, la., May 24. -Dr. Hunter Corbett, 
the Moderator of the Presbyterian General Assembly, 
declared the union of the Presbyterian Church of the 
United States and the Cumberland Presbyterian Church 
completed at 10.21 o'clock this morning as follows: 

"I do solemnly declare and hereby publicly announce 
that the basis of union and reunion is now in 
full force and effect, and that the Cumberland Presbyterian 
Church is now reunited with the Presbyterian 
Church in the United States of America as one Church." 

The big ecclesiastical assemblage burst into a 
storm of rejoicing. Handc lapping, cheering and waving 
of handkerchiefs gave expression of unalloyed 
pleasure. 



The spirit of union and federation prevails everywhere. 
Our readers well know that from prophecy we 
have for twenty-five years been expecting not only that 
the Federation would come soon, but that the vitality 
of it would come from the Episcopal Church. The insurmountable 
barrier thus far seems to be in the claim 
of this denomination to "Apostolic Succession," which 
asserts that none are qualified ministers except as 
"ordained" in the line of such succession. 

Now we find a movement amongst Episcopalians 
to concede something: to claim merely the Historic 
Episcopate and to drop the claim of Apostolic Succession, 
so as to promote the union of all Protestants. 
This view is set forth in a recently published book by 
Rev. E. McCrady (Episcopalian), entitled, 

"APOSTOLIC SUCCESSION AND THE PROBLEM OF UNITY" 



We quote one paragraph:— 

"When we ourselves are broad enough, catholic 
enough, to admit that the theory of the divine right of 
Episcopacy is a theory only— when we are willing to 
own, as we must, that while fitting in very well with 
historical facts, it can never be absolutely demonstrated 
—when we further are willing to recognize the fact that 
the Reformers did not believe in such a theory themselves, 
and that the Church, in spite of all the influences 
brought to bear upon her, has carefully refrained 
from officially promulgating such a doctrine— when, in 
other words, we cease to unchurch our Protestant 
brethren by insisting upon a principle logically indefensible 
and never officially set forth— we will then be 
in a position to expect some concessions on their part, 
and— we venture the further prediction— we shall then 
begin to hear some solid discussion, and see some valid 
signs of the approaching union of Christendom." 



The Bible clearly sets forth that such a federation 
of Protestants will be effected before the great final 
catastrophe which will usher in the Kingdom of God's 
dear Son and the glorification of the Church of the 
Firstborn; hence our interest in every item pointing 
to its realization. 

"THE UNITED CHURCH OF CANADA" 



"The negotiations for the union of three churches 
in Canada have attracted world-wide attention. Nearly 
all of the religious journals and many of the secular 
ones devote much space to special comment upon this 
theme. These comments are almost entirely congratulatory. 
The Toronto Globe has rendered important 
service by printing the expressions of opinion by men 
of light and leading in the three churches in various 
parts of the country. It is a surprise to find how generally 
these are favorable expressions. Of course there 
are a few doubting Thomases, a few who magnify the differences 
and overlook the great harmonies, who advise 
us to be careful and go slow; but the overwhelming concensus 
is in favor, not of federation, but of organic 
union. We have received correspondence from various 
parts of the United States, from the Atlantic to the 
Pacific, with reference to an account we wrote in The 

R3791 :page 180 

Christian Herald of this great movement, and all of 
these are of devout thanksgiving for the leading of divine 
providence. We quote from the Literary Digest 
some of the press comments on this subject: 



'"An extraordinary movement, in some respects, 
not paralleled in several centuries,' is the phrase by 
which the New York Christian Advocate (Methodist) 
characterizes the movement toward union between the 
Presbyterian, Methodist and Congregationalist churches 
in Canada. The report of the joint committee of these 
three denominations, just published, is described by 
the Toronto Globe as 'the most remarkable ecclesiastical 
document issued in Protestant Christendom since 
the Reformation.' All the indications seem to point to 
the ultimate consummation of this union, and the name 
tentatively chosen for the new Church is, 'The United 
Church of Canada.' The Interior (Presbyterian, Chicago) 
writes of the union planned as 'the most radical 
and remarkable coalition of churches that has been 
proposed since the Reformation brought in the era of 
denominational divisions,' Zion's Herald (Methodist, 
Boston), reminds us that Canada in the past has led 
the way in effecting denominational unions. 

"The Christian Advocate remarks editorially: 'This 
experiment in each of its stages should receive the concentrated 
attention of the Protestantism of the world. 
If it succeed it will make feasible the only reasonable 
plan for the diminution of the number of distinct 
communions.' 

"The Presbyterian (Toronto, Canada) thinks that 
the prospects are bright for a consummation of the 
proposed union. It says: 'There will be no unseemly 
haste; in the nature of things there cannot be. It will 
take some little time to prepare the basis and have it 
pronounced upon ultimately by the body of the people. 
Agreement as to the things that may be given up and 
the things that shall remain, will not come in a moment, 
but it will come. There is an organizing power of its 
own in a great, structural, co-ordinating movement 
like this.' 

"The Presbyterian Banner (Pittsburgh, Pa.) comments 
as follows: 'We would hardly think a union of 
these three churches possible in this country, but it 
appears to be possible only a few miles north of us, 
and it is the Lord's doing and marvellous in our eyes. 
The Spirit of the Lord, however, is not restricted by 
geographical boundaries and red and blue lines on the 
map, and what the Spirit can do there he may do here.' 

"The Methodists in Canada number 916,659, the 
Presbyterians 842,016, and the Congregationalists 28,000. 
Thus, as the Church Standard (Protestant Episcopal, 
Philadelphia) points out, the new Church will 
enter upon its work with a membership of 1,786,676, 
'nearly one-third of the population of the whole of Canada.'" 
—Onward (Methodist, Toronto). 

FEDERATION IN GREAT BRITAIN 



The London Daily Chronicle recently published a 
lengthy appeal for special prayers for the reunion of 
Christendom. It was signed by the President of the 
United Methodist Free Churches; the President of the 
Methodist New Connection Church; the President of 
the Wesleyan Methodist Conference; the Moderator-elect 
of the English Presbyterian Church; the President of 
the Baptist Union; the Moderator of the General Assembly 
of the Church of Scotland; the Moderator of 
the General Assembly of the United Free Church of 
Scotland; the Primus of the Scottish Church, and the 
Chairman of the Congregational Union of England and 
Wales. Evidently a few more years of stress will accomplish 
what they pray for,— a union of sects, a federation 
on the basis of ignoring one another's errors. 
But this will not be the heart union for which our Lord 
prayed— one in the Father and the Son and in heart 

R3792 : page 180 

fellowship with each other, because "sanctified by the 
Truth." 

EDUCATION MAKES "FOOLS" 



"The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God."— 
Psalm 14:1. 

COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY CLASS 65 PER CENT. FOOLS 



The faculty of Columbia University put the following 
questions to a class of 45 students in elementary 
psychology: 

(1) "Do you conceive of God as a personal or an 
impersonal being?" 

(2) "What difference do you make between a personal 
and an impersonal being?" 

(3) "Under what image or images do you think of 
God?" 

(4) "What difference would the non-existence of 
God make in your daily life?" 

Papers bearing these questions were distributed to 
the class, with the request that they be returned with 
their answers within a few days. Only three replies 
were received. 

The Professor then made the questions a part of 
the regular class lesson, and an entire lecture period 
was granted for the preparation of the answers. It was 
further granted that none need sign his name to his 
replies, in hope that this would bring out full responses. 

Three refused to express themselves, returning the 
question papers blank. Twenty-two said their conception 



of God was impersonal. Four expressed doubt as 

to God's personality. Sixteen only (35 per cent.) expressed 

belief in a personal God. Thirteen of the 

young men said that it would not make the least bit 

of difference in their daily lives if they had not heard 

of the existence of God. The rest said that there 

would be some difference, but no two agreed exactly 

as to the same condition of life. 

These things are hard to believe, but the facts are 
vouched for by the St. Louis Globe-Democrat. They 
remind us of the Apostle's words, "The world by wisdom 
knows not God"; and again, that "The god of this 
world hath blinded the minds of them that believe not." 

How glad we are that these blinded young men will 
yet be brought under the influence of him who died for 

R3792:page 181 

them at Calvary, to the extent that their blindness 
shall be turned away and the "knowledge of the glory 
of the Lord" shall shine into their hearts. How strange 
it seems that their Christian friends and relatives (1) 
so combat the thought of God's mercy enduring beyond 
the tomb, that these and "all the families of the 
earth may be blessed" by the Messiah (Head and body), 
the elect of this age. (2) How strange that they think 
of such young men, who say in their hearts, "There is 
no God," as being of the "elect," believers, footstep 
followers of Christ— to whom alone in this age the 
"great salvation" is promised. 

"WE ARE COUNTED AS FOOLS" 



The above words by St. Paul are still true of those 
faithful to the Word of God. Below we reprint an item 
from the Digest, re the changing meaning of the word 
heresy. The Rev. Crapsey, D.D., of the Episcopal 
Church, has recently been telling his doubts and disbeliefs, 
yet contends that he is still an orthodox Episcopalian 
and should be permitted to teach his unbeliefs 
under the prestige of "the Church," wearing its livery, 
holding its honors and receiving its pay. Some one 
not well posted on such matters thought this was 
wrong and brought the matter up in a heresy trial, 
Dr. Crapsey disbelieves the Bible, rejects its being of 
divine inspiration, thinks Jesus was born as every 
other child, that he had no prehuman existence, that 
Joseph or some man was his father. So far as 
we may be able to judge, Robert Ingersoll and Rev. 
Crapsey, D.D., would have agreed perfectly except as 
to methods of teaching the unbelief. In our opinion 
Mr. Ingersoll took the more honorable position in not 
pretending to be a minister and servant and teacher of 
the One whose words he denied. 



Dr. Crapsey, in his unbelief, has so much company 
now among ministers that his conviction was a general 
surprise. Others would doubtless feel that if they condemned 
him they would be at the same time condemning 
themselves, because the majority, apparently, are 
now "higher critics." Dr. Crapsey is surprised and 
desires a new trial. 

"THE WAY WHICH THEY CALL HERESY" 

The Apostle says, "After the way which they call 
heresy so worship I the God of my fathers." (Acts 24:14.) 
Likewise, today, if anyone will arise in any of the 
churches of Christendom and fearlessly preach the Bible's 
presentations as set forth in the MILLENNIAL DAWN 
volumes, it would not take long to decide him a heretic. 
In other words, times have so changed that those who deny 
the Bible's testimony are recognized as orthodox, while 
those who teach and expound the Bible faithfully and 
consistently are recognized at once as heretics, just as 
in Paul's day. The article follows:— 

CHANGING DEFINITIONS OF HERESY 

'"In the eighteenth century it required a radical 
philosopher like Hume to advance such arguments 
against the credibility of Christian miracles as today 
may be put forth by an Episcopal rector, with a fair 
chance of baffling the heresy-hunters at the last,' remarks 
a writer in the Evening Post, apropos of the recent 
trial of Rev. Algernon Crapsey. The churches, 
the writer asserts, are looking for a definition of heresy 
that can be generally accepted, 'for it is annoying, to 
say the least, to convene investigating bodies every 
year to define the offense anew.' Dr. Crapsey's trial, 
he points out, will leave the Episcopal Church practically 
where it was before in the matter, 'except that in 
Bishop Walker's jurisdiction it will be decided either 
that the miracles of the Bible must be accepted or that 
they may be rejected.' However, he adds, it will serve 
to show that what was heresy yesterday is not necessarily 
heresy today. We read further: 

'"As compared with the published utterances of Heber 
Newton, Dr. Crapsey's statements do not seem to be 
extreme, though they mark a distinct advance in frankness 
from the day that Bishop Gray "deposed" Bishop 
Colenso for attempting to question the Pentateuch. 
The words are much more specific, too, than those uttered 
by Dr. Charles A. Briggs in 1891, when he became 
professor of Biblical theology at the Union Theological 
Seminary, and which led to his withdrawal from the 
Presbyterian ministry. But Dr. Briggs found refuge 
with the Episcopalians, that Church called by Phillips 
Brooks "the roomiest Church in America." Whether 
the denomination that refused to consider charges 
against Heber Newton and welcomed Dr. Briggs will 



decide to retain Dr. Crapsey must depend upon the 
court's reading of history.' 

"Some years ago, when Dr. Heber Newton gave up 
his rectorship of All Souls' Church to go to Leland 
Stanford University, the New York Sun commented in 
part as follows: 

'"The religious views expressed so boldly by Dr. 
Newton which aroused so loud a protest ten or fifteen 
years ago have no longer the novelty they then had. 
The conclusions of the "higher criticism" of the Bible, 
which in general may be said to have furnished the basis 
for them, have since affected very profoundly the teachings 
of Protestant churches very extensively, and they are 
accepted if not actually propagated by professors in practically 
all their leading theological schools. Thus the religious 
public has become accustomed to views which 
provoked astonishment and resentment when they began 
to be proclaimed so frankly by Dr. Newton.'" 

MAN AND WOMAN UNDER THE CURSE 



Sin and death have long reigned. Selfishness instead 
of Love has had control of the world for centuries. 
Now God is lifting the vail of ignorance, and all 
who have been getting the worst of the bargain become 
violent for their rights. The masses of Russia have 
long been happy in ignorance and superstition. Their 
ignorance was their bliss. Now there is a general awakening; 
everybody is dissatisfied; all are clamoring 
for their rights. The nation is in revolution, and undoubtedly 
will become more unhappy yearly as the 
awakening comes, until the great catastrophe of anarchy, 
which will be the divine opportunity for rectifying 
all wrongs and establishing the social order on Love 
instead of Selfishness. It is necessary that all should 

R3792 : page 182 

be awakened, that all may see the effect of selfishness 
and learn to deprecate it. 

The men of Russia have been degraded and brutal 
because of their share of the curse; because their 
mothers knew nothing but selfishness to teach them. 
Now these mothers and sisters are awakening and crying 
out against the very conditions they assisted in creating. 
They have our sympathy; the more so because their discontent 
will for the time make them and their homes the 
more unhappy until they learn their lesson. And of 
course only a few will ever learn in this day "The 
Christian's secret of a happy life"— the peace of God, 
built on the exceeding great and precious promises of 
the Scriptures. 

HELL FIRE AND SAINTLINESS DENOUNCED BY TWO 



M.E. BISHOPS 



We clip the following from the Toledo Times, May 
24, report of the Rocky Mountain Missionary Society: 

Denver, Colo.— Hell fire, such as is preached from 
many pulpits, does not exist, declared Bishop Oldham 
of the Methodist Episcopal Diocese of Southern Asia 
yesterday before the convention of the Rocky Mountain 
Missionary Society. 

R3793 : page 182 

"Just tell me of anybody who believes we will be 
burned alive in a place filled with brimstone and fire. 
I'd hate to die if I thought I'd get a scorch for every 
sin," said the Bishop. 

"I wouldn't be a saint for anything," exhorted Bishop 
J. C. Hartzell of Africa, in taking up the discussion, 
"but at the same time I go to Church regularly, even if I 
don't do the talking. There are two extremes: the man 
who, in spite of all the help God, man or the Bible 
gives him, goes to the bad, and the man who is so tremendously 
greedy good that he is dubbed saint. I'd 
rather be a man, for a man has all the possibilities of 
right and wrong, and a saint hasn't any choice." 



CRAZED BY DR. TORREY'S SERMON ON HELL 

The Chicago Tribune, May 24, tells of a Mr. J. W. 
Griffin of Atlanta, Ga., crazed by hearing Dr. Torrey's 
sermon on hell and taken in charge by the police. 



ALL THINGS WORK FOR GOOD. 

-ROMANS 8:28.- 

If our Father's gracious promise 
Was more clearly understood, 
That his daily dealing with us 
Works together for our good; 

How the burdens that are pressing 
Hard upon us would grow light, 
And each trial prove a blessing 
Were our trust in him complete. 

If our hearts were always lightsome, 
And we knew no anxious care, 
We might overlook the sorrow 
That surrounds us everywhere. 



If our stores were overflowing, 
Then, perhaps, we never would 
Learn to sympathize with others 
Who are lacking daily food. 

Knowing he is always "for us" 
We, as children of his grace, 
Can afford to bear with patience 
"Trusting where we cannot trace." 

He will surely guard the issue 
Of each test, though it may seem 
Hard to bear; its object always 
Is to draw us close to him. 

So whatever may befall us 

We who love him always should 

Know the Lord is overruling 

All that happens us, for good. —John LaDow. 



R3793 : page 182 

A VISION OF THE KINGDOM. 

-LUKE 9:28-36. -JUNE 17.- 

Golden Text:— "This is my beloved Son. Hear him." 

THE SCENE on the Mount of Transfiguration, to be appreciated, 

must be viewed from the standpoint of our 

Lord's words. Eight days before, our Lord had 

promised his followers that some of them would not taste 

of death until they should see the Kingdom of God. He 

did not explain to them whether they would see the Kingdom 

in reality established in eight days or whether they 

would see a vision of the Kingdom. He left their minds full 

of wonder and expectancy, and then at the appropriate time 

took with him Peter, James and John, the three most prominent 

of the twelve apostles, who went up into the mountain, 

presumably Mount Hermon. 

From a comparison of the accounts some have surmised 
that possibly the Lord and the apostles remained in the 
mountain all night, as Jesus sometimes did, away from the 
multitude, in quiet, in prayer. In one of the accounts we 
are told that the apostles were heavy with sleep, and the 
inference seems to be that they were awakened at the proper 
time to see the vision; that its glorious grandeur was too 
great for them; that they fell upon their faces in fear, which 
was increased as a very dense, black cloud enveloped them, 
and when they heard a voice in the cloud saying, "This is 
my beloved Son: Hear him." One account shows that it 
was necessary for the Lord to touch the apostles, saying, 
"Arise, and be not afraid." 



JESUS SAID IT WAS A VISION 

So far as the apostles were concerned everything that 
they saw was so actual, so real, that they supposed the 
whole matter actual, just as John in the visions of Revelation 
saw, heard, spoke, etc., and just as Paul explains that 

R3793 : page 183 

in one of his visions matters were so real that he could not 
have told whether he was in the body or out of the body— 
whether he was still on earth having a vision or whether he 
had actually been taken away for a time and shown realities. 
Thus it is with all visions: their every detail is as 
actual and as perfect as though it were a fact. Our assurance 
that this transfiguration was a vision is in our Lord's 
words: "And as they were coming down from the mountain 
Jesus commanded them, saying, Tell the vision to no man 
until the Son of man be risen from the dead." When we 
have our Lord's direct statement that it was a vision it would 
be folly for us to perplex ourselves to explain it upon any 
other theory or hypothesis, such, for instance, as wondering 
how Moses and Elias could be there without a resurrection, 
especially when it is remembered that Jesus was the first to 
rise from the dead, "the firstborn from the dead."— Rom. 8:29; 
Col. 1:18. 

THE MEANING OF THE VISION 

Our Lord's words of eight days previous show clearly 
that the vision was intended to be a foreshowing of the glories 
and honors of the Kingdom in some sense of the word. 
It represented then the Son of man coming into his Kingdom 
—into his dominion. Peter, one of those who saw the vision, 
informs us that he got this lesson from it— that he was 
persuaded respecting the majesty of Jesus, of his dignity as 
the Messianic King, and the fact that all there pictured in 
vision would eventually be fulfilled. He says, "We have 
not followed cunningly devised fables when we declared unto 
you the power and coming of Jesus, but were eye-witnesses 
of his majesty [his kingly glory] when we were with 
him in the holy mount."— 2 Pet. 1:16,18. 

The central figure, therefore, of that vision was Jesus 
himself. Moses and Elias were merely accessories to fill out 
the picture. It was the Son of man who was to be honored, 
whose kingly dominion was to be represented, so that the 
disciples, who were to be so severely tried in their faith respecting 
him very shortly, might have a firm conviction respecting 
the authenticity of his claims as Messiah— that they 
might be able to witness a good confession of him to others, 
and be prepared through faith to accomplish the work of 
God to which they had been chosen as apostles of the Lamb 
—that the three who were with the Lord were representatives 
of the twelve, in whom the latter would all have 
confidence. 



"HE WAS TRANSFIGURED BEFORE THEM" 

The account is very explicit; his countenance was 
changed, his raiment became white and glistening, the heavenly 
glory fairly shining in his entire person. He was not 
changed actually. That change from human to divine, beginning 
at his baptism, when he received the anointing of 
the holy Spirit, the begetting of the holy Spirit to the divine 
nature, did indeed develop, change him from glory to glory, 
shining out in all the conduct of life; but his actual change 
did not occur until three days after Calvary, when he was 
raised from the dead by the glory of the Father. Then that 
which was sown in weakness was raised in power, that 
which was sown in dishonor of men was raised in glory, 
that which was sown in the fleshly body which knew no 
sin, but was holy, harmless, separate from sinners, was raised 
a spiritual body, filled with all the fulness of the divine 
nature. 

What the disciples saw, therefore, was not this change 
from human to divine, but a vision of it— a picture of it. 
Somewhat similar was the vision granted to Saul of Tarsus 

R3794 : page 183 

on his way to Damascus, when smitten down by the light 

above the brightness of the sun at noonday. He declares 

that the Lord appeared to him at noonday, a light shining 

above the brightness of the sun. Something of this brightness, 

this light, this transcendent grandeur was pictured 

before the three apostles in the holy mount, and no wonder 

that they fell upon their faces with fear— they were in 

trepidation in the presence of such glorious grandeur. Respecting 

the divine glory we read that Christ, "whom no man 

hath seen or can see,"— since his resurrection— "dwelleth in 

a light which no man can approach unto." 

Whenever even a vision is granted to mortals of this 
heavenly grandeur they must be specially protected of the 
Lord that the glorious brightness does not injure the mortal 
eye. In the case of Saul of Tarsus, we know that, lacking 
this protection, his sight was destroyed and he was blind for 
certain days, until by a miracle his sight was partially restored, 
though even then the defect remained a thorn in the 
flesh to his last moments— a reminder of how once he had 
been a persecutor of the just, an injurious person as respects 
the Lord's cause— reminding him also of the propriety of 
humility, and assisting in keeping him very humble, so that 
he describes himself as being one of the least of all saints. 

Indeed we may safely conclude that those of the Lord's 
people who have seen with any kind of vision the glories of 
the Lord or have had a glimpse through the eyes of their 
understanding or otherwise of the glorious character and person 
of our Lord and God, have had the opportunity of realizing 
more than ever their own littleness and insufficiency. As it 
was the three most advanced ones of the Lord's followers who 
were granted that vision of the Kingdom, so since then it is 



the most advanced of the Lord's followers, the most humble, 
the most zealous, the most faithful, who are granted the 
clearest visions, the clearest perceptions of the glories of the 
Kingdom, and these are permitted to reveal to others of the 
elect little flock more and more of the grandeurs of the divine 
arrangement as each may be able to hear and to appreciate 
and to understand the same. 

What wonderful privileges are ours at this day! Abiding 
in the Lord's love and favor, with loyalty of heart 
toward him, it is now our privilege of going up into the 
Mount of God and seeing wonderful things. Our visions 
are of a different kind. Before us are opened the glorious 
things of all the past— the divine revelations to Abraham 
and the prophets and through Jesus and the apostles— all of 
these things now are opened before us, radiant with harmonious 
beauty. Ours is a vision of Moses and the Lamb, and 
ours is a picture of Moses and the Lamb in the very highest 
and grandest sense. 

"MOSES AND ELIAS APPEARED" 

No intimation is given to us of why Moses and Elias 
were introduced into the vision. We must draw an inference. 
Since it was a vision, and as Christ was shown 
in the vision as a King, these two faithful ones of the 

R3794 : page 184 

past must be viewed in their relationship to Jesus and the 
Kingdom. These two, as will be remembered, like Jesus, 
had fasted each forty days: thus representatively they were 
one with the Lord in a remarkable devotion to the heavenly 
Father— in the practice of self-denial from a desire to be 
acceptable to the Lord and to fully acquaint themselves 
with the divine purposes. 

Moses evidently represented the Mosaic dispensation. 
He stood as a representative of Israel after the flesh, and 
possibly as a representative also of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, 
Enoch and all the faithful of the past, as we read, "Moses 
was faithful as a servant over all his house." Are they to have a 
place in the Kingdom? We answer, Yes. The divine promise 
is that when Messiah shall be glorified, the ancient worthies 
—whom Moses evidently represented in this vision- 
will be made princes in all the earth, agents or representatives 
of the heavenly Kingdom, its ministers of righteousness 
amongst men. (Psa. 45:16.) Nevertheless those ancient 
worthies, as we have previously seen, are separate and distinct 
as a class from the Church. John the Baptist, the last 
of the prophets, than whom the Lord declares no prophet 
was greater, belonged to that fleshly house of faithful servants 
of God, who instead of being the fathers shall shortly 
be the children of Christ and serve the cause they love as the 
princes of Messiah. But they without us shall not be made 
perfect: God having reserved some better thing for us.— 
Heb. 11:40. 



ELIJAH, THE CHURCH'S REPRESENTATIVE 

Elijah in the vision evidently represented the Gospel 
Church. We have already pointed out that Elijah's work 
was an attempted reformation, such as the Church has been 
commissioned to attempt throughout this Gospel age. We 
have already pointed out (see MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. II., chap. 
8) that Elijah typified the Gospel Church in all of his 
course; that the 1260 days of the drouth and famine while 
Elijah was in the wilderness prefigured the 1260 years of 
drouth and famine while the Church was in the wilderness 
during the "dark ages"; that the persecutor of Elijah was 
Jezebel, while the persecutor of the Church is symbolically 
called Jezebel. (Rev. 2:20.) We have seen that the emergence 
of Elijah from the wilderness and the measure of reformation 
that took place prefigured the Reformation movement 
of the sixteenth century and onward, and that his 
subsequent fleeing from Jezebel represented later persecutions, 
and that Elijah's eventual taking away in a whirlwind, in a 
chariot of fire, illustrates the ultimate gathering of the last 
members of the Gospel Church in connection with the time 
of trouble. 

Now look at the vision, the picture, and note its significance 
—Jesus glorified, transfigured, radiant like the sun as 
in Revelation (1:14-16), and with him in the Kingdom glory 
and brightness, represented by Elijah, the Elijah class, the 
Gospel Church, the little flock, his joint-heirs in the Kingdom, 
and also associated with him the ancient worthies portrayed 
by Moses. A conversation is represented as taking 
place respecting our Lord's crucifixion. And so it is that 
not only the ancient ones trusted in a sacrifice to come, 
but the Gospel Church trusts in the sacrifice already accomplished 
for her, and there is a full communion or fellowship 
between the two. Furthermore, when the Kingdom shall be 
established, assuredly all of the Lord's faithful ones will 
look to Calvary and its great sacrifice for sins as being the 
very center of the divine program or arrangement on which 
hangs all the blessings both for the Church and for the 
world through the Kingdom of God's dear Son. 

"THIS IS MY BELOVED SON: HEAR HIM" 

The essence of the entire vision was to impress upon 
the minds of the apostles the fact that Jesus was the Messiah, 
that he was worthy of being heard, that he was the 
mouthpiece of God, that he that honored him honored the 
Father also. This voice was heard from the cloud, which 
represented the darkness and trouble which would be permitted 
to come upon the Lord's followers in the midst of all 
the trials of the dark days that were coming upon them in 
connection with Jesus' rejection by the Jews, his scourging, 
dishonor, crucifixion, death, burial. In all this they were to 
remember the voice of the Father, "This is my beloved Son," 
and were not to be discouraged nor allow their faith to grow 
faint. Similarly throughout this Gospel age the Lord has 
frequently permitted the same dark cloud to come over his 



faithful ones, that they might be the better prepared also to 
listen to his Word, his message, "This is my beloved Son," 
and this vision of the Holy Mount is an assurance respecting 
the glorious Kingdom which he will establish, which 
will be the end of darkness and trouble. 

As the apostles were overpowered by the brilliancy of 
the vision and feared when they entered the cloud and heard 
the voice, so we in our weak and imperfect conditions sometimes 
find it difficult to grasp the glorious things which God 
hath set before us. The picture of the things unseen as yet 
is so wonderful as to amaze us. The fact that we have been 
invited to be heirs of God and associates with Jesus Christ 
our Lord in his Kingdom is too wonderful for us to grasp. 
We begin to fear lest we should fail in so great an undertaking. 
It is well for us to realize our own littleness and 
unworthiness, and to see that the whole matter is of the divine 
arrangement. It is well for us under the circumstances 
that the dark cloud of trouble and opposition is permitted to 
keep us very humble, that we may indeed fall on our faces 
in the dust. It is well that we should listen to the voice 
from heaven, saying, "This is my beloved Son: hear him." 
It is well that we should hear the Son assuring us that all 
things shall work together for good to those who love God. 
It is well that we should exercise faith in him that speaketh 
from heaven, lest we should become weary and faint in our 
minds. It is well that the Master teach us as he taught his 
disciples, and that looking up we should see Jesus only, 
that we should realize that in him alone is our help, that 
God hath laid help upon one who is mighty to deliver, and 
that so realizing that all of our help is in Christ Jesus we 
should hold fast to the relationship which we have already 
secured through faith in his blood and through consecration 
to him. 

MAKING THREE TABERNACLES 

The impulsive Peter cried out, "Lord, it is good for us 
to be here: let us now make three tabernacles— one for 
thee, one for Moses and one for Elias": not knowing what 
he said. How many there are who, Peter-like, want to be 

R3795 : page 185 

doing something, want to be rearing earthly tabernacles. 

How few at first catch the real spirit of the vision and realize 

that it represents things that are yet to be attained and 

not things of the present time of temporary tabernacles. All 

about us we see the disposition to rear costly temples of an 

earthly kind to the Lord, and a neglect of the vision in its 

real meaning, sentiment, teaching— that it points to the future, 

to the enduring perfect Temple condition, when everything 

imperfect and temporal shall have passed away and 

the Kingdom of God's dear Son shall have been fully established. 

Let us remember that Jesus did not accept Peter's 

proposition for earthly temporary tabernacles, but directed 

the minds of his followers to the eternal things of the Kingdom, 



which are to be brought to pass in God's due time. 

May the Master's touch ever keep us more and more awake 

to the privileges of our position, to the glorious opportunities 

that are granted to us of participating with him in his 

Kingdom. 



R3795 : page 185 

"NEVER MAN SPAKE LIKE THIS MAN. 
-JOHN 7:46.-JUNE 24.- 



AT THE END of the quarter a review is in order. We 

begin at the Mount of Beatitudes and close with 

the Mount of Transfiguration, and on the way in 

the Master's words and conduct find illustrations of the wonderful 

teachings of the Sermon on the Mount and how faithful 

obedience to the instructions there given will mean to us 

eventually a place in the Kingdom, pictured in the Transfiguration 

scene. The blessings of the meek, the merciful, 

the persecuted for righteousness' sake, etc., etc., all will find 

their fulfilment when, by the grace of God, we shall eventually 

be changed, transfigured, by the power of the First Resurrection, 

and made like to our great Redeemer and Lord— 

"Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the 

Kingdom of their Father. "-Matt. 13:43. 

How wonderful are the Lord's dealings with us and yet 
how reasonable. His appeal is, "Come let us reason together: 
though your sins be as scarlet they shall be white 
as snow; though they be red like crimson they shall be as 
wool." (Isa. 1:18.) He shows us how he has prepared 
for this: that he himself was provided, the sacrifice for sins; 
that our Lord has already died the Just for the unjust that 
he might bring us to God, and that God can be just when he 
receives us, just in his dealings with us, because the justice 
element of his Law has been fully met on our behalf. He 
gives us a glimpse of the blessings he proposes to bring to 
the world of mankind, points us to the Lamb of God, whose 
sacrifice takes away the sin of the world, and invites all 
those who have love and sympathy and appreciation to come 
now and accept not only life eternal but favor upon favor— 
joint-heirship with his Son in the glorious Kingdom which is 
to bless the world in the great uplift of "restitution, which 
God hath spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets 
since the world began."— Acts 3:19-23. 

This message comes to us through the Son of God, of 
whom our Golden Text declares, "Never man spake like this 
man." No wonder the apostles said to him when some were 
forsaking him, "Lord, to whom should we go? Thou hast 
the words [the message] of eternal life." Others may indeed 
think that they have eternal life in themselves— they 
may persuade themselves that by some inherent, immortal 
principle they will live forever, and that when they die it 
will merely be the appearance of dying, and actually they 



will become in that moment more alive than ever. At best 
that is a very difficult thought, and few are able to so hypnotize 
their own judgments as to believe it. We on the contrary, 
hearkening to the voice that spoke as never man 
spoke, hear his declaration that our hope is in him as the 
"resurrection and the life." (John 1 1:25.) We hear him 
telling us that the hour is coming in the which all that are 
in their graves shall hear his voice and shall come forth. 
(John 5:28,29.) It is reasonable. 

We can reason together with God when we take the 
voice of his Son and reject the voices of the "dark ages." 
From this standpoint— that a resurrection has been provided 
through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus— the whole 
matter of death and eternal life is clarified before our mental 
view. We see the condemnation through Adam, and 
how death is justly reigning throughout the whole world of 
mankind ever since. We see the death of Christ, the Just 
for the unjust; that he has bought us with his precious 
blood, that he has paid our ransom price, and that as a result, 
in God's due time, all shall come forth from the power 
of the tomb. We see the keys of death and of the grave in 
the hands of the one who has purchased all; we rejoice in 
the proclamation of the coming blessing to all the families 
of the earth, through a release from this power of sin and 
Satan and death. 

We hearken still more intently to the voice of him that 
speaketh as never man spake, and hear him assure us that 
there are two resurrections— one a life resurrection, the other 
a judgment resurrection. We hear him tell us that only 
those who through faith and obedience attain a standing 
with God under the cover of the precious sacrifice will be 
counted the good, the justified, and only they will share in 
the life resurrection, because only they will have passed 
their trial and be counted worthy of life. All others will 
come forth to the judgment resurrection to be disciplined 
under the Kingdom, to receive stripes in proportion to the 
wilfulness in which they have cooperated in their own downfall 
into mental, moral and physical degradation, but to be 
helped by the stripes, to be corrected in righteousness, if 
they will, and to be brought step by step out of the sin-and-death 
conditions, up, up, up, by resurrection power of 
Jesus, to the full perfection, to all that was lost in Adam. 

Well may we rejoice in this one who spake as never 
man spake, in him who has the words of eternal life. Respecting 
those words the Apostle Peter says, "Whereby are 
given unto us exceeding great and precious promises, that 
by these we might become partakers of the divine nature." 
(2 Pet. 1:4.) Ah, yes! wonderful words of life, tell them 

R3795 : page 186 

over again, think them over again, rejoice in them more and 
more— let them fill our hearts and be in our mouths a new 
song of the loving-kindness of our God, whose tender mercies 
are over all his works. 
Of these words, which the Master spake as never man 



spake, the Apostle further declares that he spake of our salvation. 

He says, "Which salvation began to be spoken by 

our Lord and was confirmed unto us by them that heard 

him." Not only was there no eternal life in our race, and 

no hope for attaining any except through Jesus, but all of 

the promises of the past would have been powerless without 

his work of atonement, and not until he came was it known 

how our redemption was to be accomplished. True, the 

Lord had provided various types and shadows in the numerous 

sacrifices of the past which illustrated the fact that 

without the shedding of blood there can be no remission of 

sin; but they could not be understood until the antitype 

had come. Then he brought life to light and immortality 

to light— life for the world, eternal life to be conferred during 

the Millennial age— immortality for his Church, his 

Bride, his little flock, his joint-heirs. These were never 

brought to light before; they were faintly seen and vaguely 

described, but it remained for the great teacher to set forth 

before us the salvation which God had proffered through 

him. Thank God that our hearts have made our lips more 

and more tell forth the praises of him who has called us out 

of darkness into his marvellous light. Through faith in him 

we are already reckoned risen to walk in newness of life, 

and through him by and by the Father will raise us up by 

his own power, that we shall be like him and share his 

glory, honor and immortality. 



R3795 : page 186 

GREATEST IN THE KINGDOM. 

-MATTHEW 18: 1-14. -JULY 1- 

"It is not the will of your Father which is in 
heaven that one of these little ones should perish." 

AFTER the vision in the Holy Mount representing the 
coming glories of Christ there followed temptation. 
And this has not been an unusual course 
of events with the Lord's people ever since. Our highest 
and most glorious views of the heavenly things which the 
Lord has in reservation for his people are quickly followed 
by earthly trials and difficulties, which serve to test and to 
prove us whether or not we be of the Kingdom class— 
whether or not we will be submissive to the heavenly moulding 
and fashioning, that we shall be made meet, fit, for the 
Kingdom— whether or not, by full submission to the divine 
instructions in the school of Christ, we shall make our calling 
and our election sure to a place in the Kingdom to which 
he has called us. 
The disciples had the same thought that all Jews entertained 

R3796 : page 186 



respecting the Messianic Kingdom, that it would be 
established by a great Messiah, a great King, who would 
bear rule over all the earth; that God's favored people Israel 
would be his special charge and nearest to him in association 
in his Kingdom, and that through this Kingdom all 
nations, all peoples, all kindreds, would be blessed even as 
God had promised and sworn to Abraham. These sentiments 
had been quickened in the minds of the people by 
the appearance of Jesus, his wonderful words of life and his 
wonderful works witnessing that "never man spake like this 
man," and that Messiah could do no greater works than Jesus 
did. Israelites in general were in perplexity because their 
chief priests and teachers and rulers in the synagogues, etc., 
all rejected Jesus and were his opponents. The disciples, 
however, believed on him, followed him and hung upon his 
words that they and all of his followers should yet be associated 
with him in his Kingdom glory. 

Probably the disciples who were not with the Lord on 
the Mount of Transfiguration felt a little envy of those who 
had seen the vision and who subsequently told them. Could 
this mean that Peter, James and John, who were with the 
Lord on the Mount, would be more highly favored than the 
remainder of the discipleship when the Kingdom should be 
established? As they journeyed, following Jesus at a little 
distance, the dispute grew quite warm with arguments on 
the one side and on the other respecting which should be 
the greatest in the coming Kingdom. Our Lord doubtless 
knew at the time their arguments in the dispute, but instead 
of administering a personal rebuke to those most at fault, he 
chose rather to make of the matter a general lesson, profitable, 
helpful, strengthening to them all. And is not his example 
valuable to all of his followers? Is it not wise on 
our part so far as possible to avoid personalities and the 
holding up of any individual to special criticism? All mankind 
have faults and blemishes, some in one particular and 
some in another, and it is very rarely wise to single out an 
individual in the body of Christ for a special reprimand; it 
is generally better to do as our Master did in this instance 
—to give a general lesson on the subject which will be helpful 
to all, not only to those who are taking the wrong course, 
but also to those who are more nearly right in their views 
and conclusions. 

"AS A LITTLE CHILD" 

Our Lord inquired of the disciples what topic was so 
greatly absorbing their attention and leading to such warm 
discussion. It is to the credit of the apostles that they were 
ashamed to acknowledge that they had been disputing concerning 
which should be chief or greatest in the Kingdom. 
The whole matter was to be a favor to them anyway; they 
realized that they had done nothing to merit so great an 
honor, that the call to a place in the Kingdom was of grace, 
of favor. Why should they quarrel with each other respecting 
the Master's distribution of his royal favors? They felt 
abashed, and Jesus did not press the question. Knowing 



of the matter he allowed them to see that he had a knowledge, 
not only of their words, but also of their very hearts 
and intentions. Most skilfully, most gently, did he administer 
a rebuke; not in coarse, harsh terms did he berate those 

R3796 :page 187 

who were inclined to be self-seeking; he did not threaten 
them. 

A child was near— he took it and set it in their midst. 
Afterwards, says Luke, he took it in his arms. Their attention 
riveted by this peculiar proceeding, they were prepared 
for the lesson— which many today misunderstand when they 
suppose that our Lord meant that the Kingdom of heaven 
would be composed mainly of little children. No such 
words were uttered by our Lord and no such thoughts were 
communicated to his disciples. On the contrary, Jesus never 
called little children to be his disciples; he himself did not 
begin his ministry as a child, but when he was thirty years 
of age. Nothing in this, however, signifies that our Lord 
had not a deep sympathy with children, as is illustrated by 
his taking some of them into his arms and blessing them 
and saying, "Suffer the little children to come unto me and 
forbid them not, for of such [like] is the Kingdom of heaven." 
Our Lord loved the innocency and simplicity of a little 
child, and was quite willing to show his own humility in 
acceding to the wishes of the mothers that he notice their 
children and give them his blessing. Indeed we can rest 
assured that no good man or woman could be without love 
for the innocency and simplicity of childhood. 

"GREATEST IN THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN." 

Neither should we understand that because Jesus' ministry 
began at thirty, and because those whom he called to 
be his disciples were of mature years, that this would limit 
the age of any who might become the followers of Christ 
during this Gospel age. Quite to the contrary, we believe 
that some of very tender years have reached a sufficiency of 
information respecting our Lord and his work of redemption 
and his invitation to followers to intelligently take their 
stand with Jesus' disciples by full consecration of heart and 
life and every interest, with apparently quite a clear conception 
of what they were doing. Indeed, we feel like encouraging 
those of the young who are disposed to make a full 
consecration of their lives to the Lord to believe that in so 
doing they are not only acceptable, but that additionally 
they the sooner enter into the rest of faith, and are spared 
many of the unfavorable experiences which come to those 
who first seek the world and the pleasures thereof. 

In this lesson, however, we should distinctly note that 
the Lord is neither addressing little children nor discussing 
them, except as an example or illustration of simplicity, docility 
and teachableness, and freedom from pride and ambition. 
This was impressed upon the disciples as they looked 
at the little child sitting there unconscious of the great honor 



thrust upon it, unconscious of being used by the glorious 

King of kings to illustrate a lesson. The thought of our 

Lord is clearly given in the fourth verse, which says, "Whosoever 

therefore shall humble himself as this little child, 

the same is greatest in the kingdom of heaven." 

Let us not lose sight of the fact that it is the Kingdom 
of heaven that the Lord is discussing and not the world. 
This was the same thought the apostles had, not which of 
them would get into the Kingdom of heaven and which 
would not get into the Kingdom, but— supposing that 
all were going to be in the Kingdom— which would be the 
greatest? The Lord's reply to this question is along this 
line, namely, that the one of them who would be the most 
childlike, most humble, most unpretentious, most willing to 
be taught and guided, would be the one who would be greatest. 
This thought applies to the Church both in its present 
and in its future conditions. At the present time, the 
Church, the Kingdom, is in an embryo condition, not glorified, 
not recognized even by the world, but recognized by 
each other and by the Lord. Humility and childlikeness 
amongst the brethren now should be esteemed as a mark of 
true greatness from the Lord's standpoint. Such as are of 
this childlike class we may know assuredly will be proportionately 
highly honored in the future, when the Kingdom 
shall be established in power and great glory as God's 
agency for the blessing of all the families of the earth. 

In harmony with this thought that the humble, the 
teachable, the simple, the unpretentious should be esteemed 
the greatest, we should expect to find in all the ecclesias, in 
all the companies of the Lord's people, that those chosen to 
the place of eldership and prominence in the Church would 
be amongst the most humble of mind and of conduct in the 
whole company. Any other condition than this would imply 
that the congregation had not rightly understood and appreciated 
and obeyed our Lord's sentiments expressed in connection 
with the incidents of our lesson. 

This does not mean, however, that the brother possessing 
five talents should be entirely unconscious and neglect 
to use them. It does not mean that he should be blind to 
the fact that some others of the brethren have fewer talents, 
but it does mean that he should have such love, such humility, 
that his only desire in connection with his talents would 
be to use them for the good of the Lord's cause— that he 
would be so humble minded, so zealous for the Lord, that 
he would not for a moment think of using his talents to 
serve personal ambitions, to vaunt himself or to in any measure 
or degree seek to suppress the talents, opportunities 
and privileges of others that his own talents might alone be 
recognized. It does mean that if he have five talents, and 
if of the right, childlike, humble spirit, he will have such 
interest in the dear brethren that he will do all reasonably 
within his power for the good of the whole cause, for the 
exercise of the various talents of the different brothers and 
sisters in such manner as will be to their upbuilding, 
strengthening and mutual edification, that the whole body 
of Christ may thus minister to its wants and necessities and 



comforts in faith and hope and love. 

"EXCEPT YE BE CONVERTED" 

The word converted signifies to turn about, to experience 
a change, but many fail to recognize this broad meaning 
of the word, and instead think of it as signifying the 
leaving of a relationship to the world and the devil and 
coming into relationship with God. The Lord did not mean 
to say to his apostles that they were not converted in this 
latter sense— that they were aliens, strangers and foreigners 
from God. He already knew them to be Israelites indeed. 
In his prayer he declares, "Thine they were and thou gavest 
them to me, and I have kept them." What he did mean was 
that they must be turned from their present attitude of mind 
in respect to ambition for place and honor in the Kingdom, 
else they would never enter into it. Already they were 

R3797 : page 188 

in his embryo Kingdom, and hence his meaning was that unless 

in the embryo Kingdom his followers should develop 

a childlike, humble spirit and turn from the selfish and ambitious 

spirit, they would utterly fail of getting into the 

Kingdom of glory, the Millennial Kingdom. 

What a lesson there is here for the Lord's followers— 
his "little ones." He shows us that while he has invited us 
to the greatest and grandest of all honors and privileges, 
nevertheless the attainment of this high calling, the making 
of this calling and election sure, will depend upon the way 
in which we receive the honors, privileges, blessings, the 
call. If it stirs up in us selfish ambition for greatness and 
power and honor amongst men, it is having the wrong, the 
undesigned effect. The effect which God designs is that we 
should realize our own insignificance and unworthiness of 
such great honors; that we should feel ourselves very little 
indeed in the sight of God, and wonder that he would so 
condescend as to take from the fallen race a little company to 
constitute the Bride, the Lamb's wife in glory, joint-heirs in 
his Kingdom. As in the school of Christ they grow in grace 
and grow in knowledge, this humility, this childlikeness, 
must not depart, but rather it must increase more and more. 
They must realize their own unfitness and unworthiness of 
such great honor, they must receive all of God's favors as of 
his bounty, his grace. 

The moving power with the proper disciples of Christ, 
who would maintain the love and favor of their Lord and 
ultimately make sure their calling and election in his Kingdom, 
must not be selfishness, love of position and power, 
name and fame. What, then, must it be? We reply, the 
moving power must be love— love for God, love for the 
brethren, and at least sympathetic love for the whole world 
of mankind, even including our enemies, many of whom are 
doubtless such because of blindness. The Apostle expresses 
this ruling, propelling power in the true followers of Jesus, 
saying, "The love of Christ constraineth us; because we 



thus judge that if one died for all then were all dead: and 
that he died for all that they which live should henceforth 
not live unto themselves but unto him which died for them 
and rose again."— 2 Cor. 5:14,15. 

"HE THAT RECEIVETH YOU RECEIVETH ME" 

Our Lord's discourse continues on the same lines when he 
says, "Whosoever receiveth one such little child in my name 
receiveth me." He is not referring to the receiving of infants 
in his name but the receiving of disciples in his name 
—the receiving of such disciples as have this child-like 
character and thus have the mark of being the true followers 
of Jesus. Whoever receives one of these humble, faithful, 
unpretentious ones, not because of worldly name or fame, 
not because of boasts of being some great one, but because 
they are the Lord's, because they give evidence that they 
have his Spirit— whoever receives such, the Lord says, 
should be considered and rewarded as though they had received 
the Master himself. 

Reversely, the Lord says that whoever will do injury to 
one of these little ones— these that are little or humble 
minded, these that are meek and loyal of heart— it were 
better that a millstone were hanged about his neck and that 
he be drowned in the depths of the sea. The word here 
rendered "offended," and in the revised version "stumbled," 
is derived from the Greek word "skandalon," and is closely 
related to our word scandal, which originally meant, "the 
stick in a trap on which the bait is placed, and which 
springs up and shuts the trap at the touch of the animal." 
Hence our Lord does not mean whosoever will anger or ill-use 
one of these little ones of my discipleship, but whosoever 
will entrap, injure, hurt one of these spiritually, etc. 

If a person were drowned in the sea it could do him no 
further harm and be no barrier in any sense of the word to 
his future life in the resurrection time; but should he entrap, 
scandalize, injure one of the Lord's little ones, to the 
spiritual damage of the latter, he will thereby subject himself 
to certain losses beyond the present life— he will suffer 
loss or injury in the resurrection life provided for all mankind 
through the great redemptive sacrifice. Our Lord does 
not state what will be the character of the loss or punishment 
or stripes that such an one will have, but does intimate 
that its bearing upon his future and eternal interests 
will be so great that it would have been far better for him 
to have had his earthly life shortened instead; and we all 
know how all mankind clings to every year of earthly life 
permitted. 

WOE UNTO THE WORLD FROM SNARES 

After telling us in verse 6 how serious a matter it will 
be for anyone to injure one of the Lord's little ones, one of 
his specially consecrated disciples, the Great Teacher in 
verse 7 applies his lesson to the world, and declares that a 
large part of the world's difficulty and woe comes to it along 



similar lines— "skandalon." These snares or traps or injurious 
misrepresentations, etc., cause a large part of the world's 
present discomfort, but they must needs be, they are a necessary 
part of the general trouble through sin, which are to 
cause mankind to ultimately hate sin and to long for the 
rule, the reign of righteousness, the Kingdom. But our Lord 
adds, while these offences or stumblings will cause special 
woes to many throughout the world, they will be specially 
injurious to the ones who started them, "To that man by 
whom the stumbling cometh." 

For this reason all who are the Lord's people are to be 
specially on guard that, whatever others may do in the way 
of injuring, scandalizing, wounding, stumbling, causing trouble 
now, they must refrain from this, and remember that 
they are the followers of the meek and lowly One who did 
harm to none, but on the contrary laid down his life in the 
interests of others. The Lord suggests as an illustration 
that the tendency to wrong doing which would prove "skandalon" 
or stumbling, an injury to others, might be a quality 
of character that would seem as close and precious to us as 
a right hand or a foot or an eye— it might be one form of 
wrong doing or injury or another form; but in every case 
those who would be followers of the Prince of Peace and 
ultimately be his joint-heirs in the Kingdom must, as good 
soldiers of righteousness, fight against all such sinful, selfish, 
injurious tendencies of the flesh. These must be mortally 
combatted, to the extent that the New Creature would be 
willing, yea anxious to utterly destroy that element of his 

R3797 : page 189 

fallen disposition which is contrary to the Master's pleasement, 
even though it be at a sacrifice that would be illustrated 
by the loss of an eye, a hand or a foot. 

We are to put away such practices, that we may be 
truly our Lord's footstep followers and be counted worthy 
to enter into and share his Kingdom. If we will not so 
do we cannot enter the Kingdom. If we will hold on to 
these tendencies of the fallen nature they will mean ultimately 
our destruction in the Second Death, for every person 
who has and who maintains an injurious character, a tendency 
to scandalize or injure others, will be esteemed of 
the Lord wholly unfit for any part in his Kingdom— yea 
unfit for eternal life at all. Hence the Lord's declaration 
that such would go into the fire or destruction eternal— the 
Second Death. No wonder, then, that our great Teacher 
urged all who would be his disciples to put away from them, 
to mortify, the deeds of the body, the selfish instincts of the 
fallen nature, at any cost, no matter how dear, that they 
might enter into life with him as participants in the Kingdom, 
as members of the Bride. 

Our Lord urges that such a loss of an eye or a hand or 
a foot, as representing earthly advantages and privileges of 
the present time, would be far better than, possessing these 
privileges, to be ultimately destroyed in Gehenna fire. Gehenna 
fire here and elsewhere, as we have pointed out, referred 



primarily to the valley outside the city of Jerusalem, 
where all the offal was destroyed (not preserved or tortured), 
and this, as we have seen, symbolized or prefigured the 
general destruction of the Second Death associated with the 
New Jerusalem government of the Millennial age— in which 
all the unworthy, all the offal, all the unfit, will be utterly 
destroyed in the Second Death, that the Lord may have a clean 
universe in which every creature would praise and honor 
him and exemplify his law and character and government 
of love. 

"DESPISE NOT THESE LITTLE ONES" 

Continuing to discuss his followers as "little ones," our 
Lord intimates that some who might not seek to entrap, ensnare 
and to "skandalon" them might nevertheless despise 
them, and so he gives a warning against this also. Amongst 
the Lord's "little ones" are not many great, not many wise, 
not many learned, and they are chiefly the poor of this 
world, rich in faith; and hence many might be disposed to 
despise them, to slight them, to evil entreat them, etc., because 
their despisers know them not, because they realize 
not that they are united to their hidden Lord— they know 
not us as they knew not him, the Forerunner and Captain.— 
1 Cor. 1:26-28; James 2:5; 1 John 3:1. 

When our Lord would intimate why his humblest followers 
should not be despised, the illustration he uses implies 
that they are the special objects of the heavenly Father's 
care and love, and that to despise them or to do anything 
demeaning toward them would surely bring some kind 
of retribution either in the present life or in a future one. 
The matter is put as though the Lord would say, You cannot 

R3798 : page 189 

even despise one of my "little ones" without the Father knowing 
it very quickly. He says, "In heaven their angels do 
always behold the face of my Father." These angels have 
no difficulty in bringing to his attention the difficulties, 
trials or persecutions of his faithful ones. Some, from this 
statement, have presumed the Lord to mean that every 
human being has a guardian angel looking after his interest, 
and that as now the world numbers 1,600,000,000, it would 
imply that there is a similar number of angelic beings 
looking after the interests of these. 

This is wholly erroneous; the Lord does not anywhere 
intimate any special guardianship of the interests of the 
world. He does tell us that he has arranged for the 
redemption and restitution of mankind in due time; but any 
special supervision intimated in the Scriptures is only over 
those who belong to the Lord in the sense that is mentioned in 
this Scripture, namely, as his "little ones." It is respecting 
these "little ones" that we read, "The angel of the Lord 
encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivereth 
them." (Psa. 34:7.) And again, "The angels are ministering 
spirits sent forth to minister [serve] to the heirs of 



salvation." (Heb. 1:14.) It would not at all surprise us 
if there were a guardian angel for each member of the 
Lord's little flock, the Lord's consecrated, his "little ones." 
However, we are to remember that the word angel is one of 
wide significance, and might include all the powers of God 
both animate and inanimate, by which he could take knowledge 
of and render assistance to those who are his. 

In any event, however, the thought of the picture the 
Lord here shows is that his "little ones" are never forgotten, 
and that all their trials and difficulties are speedily brought 
to the Father's attention through the angels or agencies of 
divine arrangement. What a comfort this is to those who 
are seeking to walk in the footsteps of Jesus and who find 
themselves frequently misunderstood or slandered or despised 
or neglected! Any good done to this class will never 
be forgotten by the Lord; any injury done to them will also 
be known and will not go unpunished, and the punishment 
will be in proportion to the degree of intelligence and wilfulness 
of the wrongdoer. "Vengeance is mine, I will 
repay, saith the Lord." Therefore, brethren, avenge not 
yourselves; leave all in the hands of the Lord as you suffer 
injury patiently and learn advantageous lessons therefrom; 
but at all times be careful, vigilant, that you yourself shall 
stumble, injure, none. 

THESE "LITTLE ONES" NOT TO PERISH 

Verse 1 1 is omitted from the revised version because it 
is not found in the oldest manuscripts, and this is good 
authority for omitting it. The same words do occur in Luke 19:10, 
and they represent an eternal truth. They were probably 
introduced here by some one who thought that Matthew 
had overlooked the words and that this would be an 
appropriate place for recording them. However, there are 
various diversions between this account of a hundred sheep 
and the other account of Luke 15:3-7. The one was apparently 
made to the Scribes and Pharisees; this narrative 
on the contrary was made to the disciples. We have elsewhere 
discussed the parable addressed to the Pharisees, 
showing that the hundred sheep properly represented the 
entire family of God, and that the one sheep that went 
astray represented properly enough humanity, which fell 

R3798 : page 190 

from divine likeness and favor through Adam's 
disobedience. 

The parable shows the Lord's love and mercy in pursuing 
after the lost sheep, humanity, and intimates its 
recovery in the end— not that all will be universally and 
everlastingly saved, but that all will be brought to conditions 
of salvation, to a clear knowledge of the truth and to 
a full opportunity for accepting the same, so that the rejection 
will be a just cause for their sharing the Second 
Death. 

This statement respecting the hundred sheep is applied 



in a totally different manner, as the context shows. Here it 
refers to all of the Lord's "little ones," all who become his 
followers, his sheep. Should one of them be stumbled, 
should one of them stray, the Lord in his providence will 
not abandon him, but will purify him if possibly he may be 
recovered. And all who are in harmony with the Lord 
should have this same thought and interest in one another, 
that they would be willing to spend and be spent in the 
recovery of a brother from the snare of the adversary. Verse 14 
sets the matter forth very clearly, saying, "Even so it is not 
the will of your Father which is in heaven that one of these little 
ones should perish." Hence, as the Apostle explains, he that 
recovereth a sinner from the error of his ways, saves a soul 
from death and hides a multitude of sins. (Jas. 5:20.) 
This is not referring to the souls of the world in general, 
which are still under the sentence of death, but it is referring 
to the souls of believers, who through faith have been 
justified and consecrated to the Lord. If they shall fall 
away, shall stumble by any means, all the faithful are to be 
energetic in their endeavors to recover such, to bring them 
back into full accord with the Lord. 

Its assurance further is that it is not the will of the 
Father that they should perish, and hence we may rely 
upon it that any and every reasonable and proper thing in 
their interests will be done rather than that they should be 
abandoned. This same spirit at work in the household of 
faith amongst the "little ones" would lead them, not to 
strive as to which of them would be greatest, but rather lead 
them to mutual helpfulness, that each and all might gain 
the prize of the high calling. It is in accordance with this 
thought that the Lord does not wish these to perish that he 
provides that those of his consecrated ones who do not follow 
voluntarily in the work of sacrifice shall not be abandoned, 
but shall be put through trying experiences, as 
represented in the "great company," who will wash their 
robes and make them white in the blood of the Lamb. It 
would, of course, have been better had they been so loving 
and loyal and zealous as to joyfully sacrifice earthly interests 
to gain the heavenly; but even though they do not thus 
do all in their power to fulfil their Covenant the Lord is 
merciful toward them and unwilling that any should perish. 
He will see to it that they are brought through such 
experiences as will eventually test and prove them, and, 
if they are faithful under the test, bring them off 
conquerors. 



R3798 : page 190 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

On pages 263-4 of Volume VI., MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
you express these thoughts: "Honesty to the Truth is 
a prime essential to progress in it; to oppose what one 



believes to be true and to even temporarily uphold what 
one believes to be error, for. ..any reason, will surely 
be offensive to the Lord," etc., and, "Next to the 
Lord, the Truth is the most precious thing in the world; 
it is not to be trifled with, not to be played with; and 
whoever is negligent along this line will himself sustain 
injury." 

You can imagine, dear Pastor, better than I can 
describe how happy I am, therefore, in the fact that 
God guided me not to oppose what, from the time of 
your debate with Dr. Eaton (which was my initiation 
into the study of Present Truth), appealed to me as 
the Truth. Every influence of my past religious experience 
(a happy one, because I then knew none better) 
held me to my old associations, where my pastor 
assured me I might hold your views and yet remain in 
Methodism, which opinion I for a while rejoiced in as 
correct. 

But oh, how I have since rejoiced, and continue to rejoice, 
that God led me to come out of error simply for love 
of the Truth as God's Word teaches it, and as I came to 
see plainly through your teaching. So far from there being 
anything in the past to attract, I find the love 
of the Truth increasing daily. It has taken a little 
over one year to read the full course of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN— counting "Tabernacle Shadows," TOWER, tracts 
and sermons as part of the course, and a most delightful, 
as well as inestimably profitable, course it has 
been, I acknowledge with inexpressible gratitude to 
the Father and to you. 

Your sister in Christ, 

ELIZABETH M. GILLETT,-Pa. 



MY DEAR SIR AND BROTHER:- 

Can you bear with me if I tell you a little experience 
of how the DAWNS came to my attention? 

I was visiting a relative in B , and in looking over 

their book case I saw the "Divine Plan of the Ages" and 
I took it up to see what it was. After noting some of 
the headings of chapters, I just sat down to devour as 
much of it as was possible before I had to leave. I inquired 
of the lady who bought it, "What book is this, 
and where did you get it?" She explained that she 
bought it of an agent for 35c, but had not read it and 
did not really know what it was. I only had time to 
read two or three chapters and I tried to explain to her 
what it was. 

I went from there to D , to visit an aunt, and I 

told her of the book I had seen and that I was going to 
have one as soon as possible. My description of the 
appearance of the book led her to think that she had 
bought one like it some time before, but as she could 
not understand it she had taken it to her sister. The 
latter was a good Baptist, and after a brief examination 



she pronounced it an Advent book and would not read 
it. I secured that copy and read it through, and was so 

R3799 :page 191 

taken up with it that I just had to talk about it to nearly 
everyone, and lent it to my father-in-law, who is a 
great Bible reader. He read it two or three times, but 
can hardly "fall in" with "future probation," although 
he admits it to be the most reasonable and sensible 
theory he has ever read. 

Next I brought up the subject to a brother member 
of the M.E. Church. When I was trying to explain 
the chart in the front of the book, he remembered that 
he also had purchased a book like it, but had only read 
a little of it as he could not understand it— and it was 
an Advent book anyway. I could not see how he could 
start to read it and not go on. However, he is not a 
very devout member of the Church. 

As for myself I was always in the Sunday School, 
but for 10 or 12 years I have been a railway mail clerk, 
and must confess I have hardly kept the dust off my 
Bible covers in all that time. Since reading the "Divine 
Plan" I have had the Bible in hand at every brief opportunity. 
I find a difference between reading the Bible 
and searching the Scriptures. I have read Vols. I., III., 
am reading Vol. IV. and am sending for Vol. II. 

Oh, it seems such a revelation to me, and it seems 
also very plain. I would like to see you and grasp 
your hand. There are lots of questions I would like to 
ask you, but I don't feel that I should impose upon 
your time. 

Tonight I am in M . I have attended the preaching 

service in Wesley M.E. Church this evening. 
The preacher read the book of Jude and in commenting 
on the 9th verse said that what was meant by it was a 
mystery. It never had and never would be explained 
by man. His principal theme was in verse 23, applying 
it to the Church's duty to snatch sinners out of the 
fire of hell. It all seemed so weak and childish to me. 

My Vol. I. is now in the hands of a fellow-clerk on 
the road. He is a Universalist and I am waiting patiently 
for his verdict. I assure you that I will keep 
my books in the hands of some who will read them and 
that no time will be lost. The messages which you 
wrote ten or fifteen years ago are being most remarkably 
emphasized in the last two years. 

Wishing you the fulness of the joy of his elect, I 
am, yours sincerely, 

CHARLES J. DAVIS.-N.Y. 



page 191 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 



Greetings in the Lord! I received some time ago, 
through our Brother Hemery, a little token of your love, 
together with a letter containing your greetings and 
words of encouragement. These, my dear brother, 
are very highly appreciated indeed, and be assured 
they are reciprocated by me. 

I feel, dear Brother Russell, that I owe you a real 
debt of gratitude for help and blessing which, under 
our heavenly Father's providence, by your instrumentality, 
I have received and am still receiving. The 
Truth, my beloved brother, is more precious to me today 
than ever it has been. I love it and hold it as 
priceless, and I am determined that my boast shall 
ever be in Him who is the Truth. 

I am glad of the privilege of being a Colporteur, 
even though, on account of home affairs, I cannot get 
going as far afield as I would sometimes like. However, 
the work is the Lord's, and how and by whom it 
has to be accomplished is his business, and his will be 
done. I could tell you a lot in my affairs to the praise 
of my Redeemer, of his wonderful care, of his patience, 
his mercy and his loving forbearance. Oh, when I 
think of his goodness I feel ashamed of myself, of my 
waywardness and of the very poor service I have rendered 
him. Oh, for grace to serve him better, and to 
bring every thought, word and action into subjection 
to his perfect mind and will. 

I frequently remember you, my dear brother, at the 
throne of heavenly grace, as I know your trials must 
be many. It has always been so with the prominent 
teachers of the Lord's flock; the Adversary seems to 
have a special eye to their downfall, and your case cannot 
be an exception, but he who is for you and whose 
cause you serve is greater than all that can be against 
you. 

With much love in Christ, yours in the hope of our 
calling, GEO. H. TAUBMAN,-Scotland. 



R3799 :page 191 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Your very kind letter 
expressing Christian love and greetings was received. 
Thanks for all your kind remembrance of me, not only 
in this letter but during the more than four years of 
Pilgrim service in which the Father permitted me to 
engage and for which I shall ever be grateful to him. 
While these years have been full of toil and travel, and 
sometimes the flesh has grown weary, and while the 
enemy has sometimes greatly vexed the soul, yet as I 
look back over more than three score years of life, these 
four years are the best, brightest, sweetest, happiest 
years of them all, and it is with regret that I must for a 
time— I do not know how long— drop out of the regular 
work to look after some other duties that present themselves. 



While I would have greatly preferred to continue 
in the work, yet I bow obediently to what seems 
to be the Father's will, knowing that he knows best and 
that he always gives to his children what is best for 
them. I wish to say to you, dear brother, that while I 
may not be in the regular work, I will endeavor at all 
times to do what I can in a local service for the spread 
of the Truth. It is not my purpose that there shall be 
any break in the service; having closed my last Pilgrim 
service last Sunday evening, I am engaged to speak 
for the Boston Church again next Sunday p.m. I expect 

to spend the next Sunday with friends in B , and 

other places have spoken for services, so that I see no 
cause for me to be found in idleness. 

With Christian love, very sincerely yours in the 
faith, JOHN HARRISON. 



DEAR BROTHER:— I have noticed in several cases 
recently, when consecrated brethren have died, not one 
of them has seemingly expressed a wish as to burial 
according to our service, with enough force to have it 
used; (this of course applies to places where there is 
no class and elders to serve). I therefore decided to 
copy my service [see Vol. VI., p. 328] and file it away, 
as my last request, and I feel sure it will be recognized 
by my family. In copying it I see how remarkably 
clear it is, and feel as though our dear people miss a 
great opportunity for service in accomplishing our mission 
as the feet members of the body of Christ if they 
neglect it, for, as you remark, "hearts are then tender," 
and the fact that the hands lying cold before them copied 
the service while still in the earthly tabernacle 
would add force to the message. 

Your servant in the Lord, I. D. B.,— Ark. 



page 193 



SEMI-MONTHLY. 