From Our Readers
Information Anxiety  I am writing to thank you for the series “Information Anxiety—How Does It Affect You?” (January 8, 1998) I love reading, but only now have I realized that I was becoming anxious in my desire to know all there is to know about everything. These articles helped me to have a balanced point of view.
M. E., Italy
I would like to congratulate you on such in-depth articles. I would be very grateful to be granted permission to reproduce the introductory article in a newsletter for our educational and media technology association. The so-called information superhighway is jam-packed, and it is through such articles that one can be honestly informed and able to cope with the information age.
G. D., Ghana
Permission was granted to reproduce the article.—ED.
Fearing God?  I feel compelled to express my delight over the article “The Bible’s Viewpoint: How Can You Fear a God of Love?” (January 8, 1998) For some time I had been pondering that very question. I understood that fearing God meant having a healthy fear of displeasing him. Still, I felt a need to understand this subject more fully. Then I read that article. At last, a very satisfying discussion of what it means to fear God!
M. J. T., United States
Injustice Rectified  Thanks for the article “A European Court Rights a Wrong.” (January 8, 1998) Hearing about our brothers going to court so as not to be forced into military service reminded me of how our brothers won the right to preach from door to door on Sundays. Such accounts help me never to take this privilege for granted.
S. V., United States
Incas  After reading the article “How the Incas Lost Their Golden Empire” (January 8, 1998), I must express my profound appreciation for such a beautifully illustrated, heartrending story. The efforts of you Witnesses to bring your comforting message to descendants of the Incas will no doubt bring them much consolation. Thank you, Awake!, for speaking the truth.
S. B., Nigeria
I am ten years old, and I want to say thank you for the article. I was amazed at how many miles of road the Incas made. I also liked how they sent messages.
F. C., United States
Children Leaving Home  I am grateful for the series “When Children Leave Home.” (January 22, 1998) Letting go of my own precious children has been painful and slow. You are right, though. Living in the empty nest does get better with time and understanding. We parents can renew the marital bonds with our spouses.
A. E., Canada
The articles were an answer to my prayers. Children leaving home can be a source of bitterness and conflict. But with the good advice in this article, peace and love can triumph.
P. N., France
I felt the articles were written especially for me. I recently left home to serve in an area where there is a need for full-time evangelizers. These articles helped me to understand how my parents feel and to overcome my own guilt feelings for leaving them. Furthermore, I will follow the advice in the section “A Word to Grown Children—Help Parents to Let Go.” Even though I am far away, I will be able to feel close to my parents. Thank you for articles like these that always arrive at the right time.
G. U., Italy

