Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting February 14
Song 113
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
15 min: “Preach the Word . . . Urgently.” Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion. Include comments on Our Ministry book, page 170. Offer some practical suggestions on how to increase preaching activity during the rest of the winter.
20 min: “How to Develop Reasoning Ability.” Talk and demonstration. Explain why the ability to reason is so important in the ministry and how to acquire it. Have two capable publishers discuss how to prepare for the ministry by following the steps outlined in paragraph 3 of the article and then demonstrate their presentation.
Song 182 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting February 21
Song 17
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report.
15 min: “Women Who Are Working Hard in the Lord.” Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion. Include comments on September 15, 1996, Watchtower, pages 14-15, paragraphs 18-19. Warmly commend sisters for their willing support, the beneficial services they perform for others, and their zealous preaching activity.
20 min: “What Can Help Us to Stand Firm in the Faith?” Talk by an elder. We live in critical times, and all of us need assistance in some way. Review what elders and ministerial servants can do to strengthen those beset by discouraging problems. (See the subheading “Shepherding That Is Upbuilding” in the September 15, 1993, Watchtower, pages 21-3.) Explain how we can encourage one another in ways that will stabilize us spiritually.​—Rom. 1:11, 12.
Song 82 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting February 28
Song 46
10 min: Local announcements. Remind all to turn in field service reports for February. Briefly review the “Four Easy Steps” for using tracts to start conversations that were outlined on page 4 of last month’s Our Kingdom Ministry. Demonstrate how the Peaceful New World tract can be used to introduce the Knowledge book. After posing the questions from the opening paragraph of the tract, read the first paragraph on page 3, including Psalm 37:29. If interest is shown, open the Knowledge book to page 5, read the box, and offer a study. This month, all should make a special effort to start new home Bible studies.
 5 min: Question Box. Talk by an elder.
12 min: Appreciating the Work of Regional Building Committees. Talk by an elder, based on the August 1995 Our Kingdom Ministry insert. The 77 Regional Building Committees now operating in the United States branch territory have aided in constructing, renovating, and maintaining 2,289 Kingdom Halls, benefiting 3,484 congregations. There is still much work to be done. Consider the work of regional committees, and build enthusiasm for Kingdom Hall construction. Explain who can qualify as volunteer workers, and stimulate more to volunteer. (See November 1992 Our Kingdom Ministry insert, paragraphs 18-20.) Interview some who have shared in a Kingdom Hall construction project, and include their comments on the joy they have experienced.​—See June 1, 1999, Watchtower, pages 18-19, paragraphs 15-16.
18 min: “Preaching the Good News With Strong Conviction.” Have a two- or three-minute heartfelt introduction based on material as well as cited and quoted scriptures in paragraphs 1 and 2. Then cover paragraphs 3-12 by question-and-answer discussion.
Song 61 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 6
Song 116
 5 min: Local announcements.
10 min: Local needs.
10 min: “Pay Attention to How You Listen.” A family head discusses with his wife and children what they can do to benefit more fully from congregation meetings, assemblies, and conventions. He feels that all in the family could concentrate better. They review the suggestions listed and consider how to apply each one, including the need to have more discussions about the things learned. They consider how to live up to their resolve not to miss any meetings or any session of a convention or assembly if at all possible.
20 min: “Preaching the Good News With Strong Conviction.” After a brief review of last week’s discussion of first 12 paragraphs of insert, conduct question-and-answer discussion of paragraphs 13-24. Make good use of quoted and cited scriptures.
Song 186 and concluding prayer.

