What Can Help Us to Stand Firm in the Faith?
1 Ever since we began associating with Jehovah’s organization, our spiritual progress has proved to be a source of joy for us! Yet, to remain ‘rooted, built up, and stabilized in the faith,’ continued spiritual growth is necessary. (Col. 2:6, 7) While most have prospered spiritually, some have drifted away because of failing to “stand firm in the faith.” (1 Cor. 16:13) We can prevent this from happening to us. How?
2 Constant Spiritual Activity: Establish a good spiritual routine within Jehovah’s organization. Here our spiritual needs are cared for abundantly. Congregation meetings, assemblies, and conventions spur us on to greater spiritual growth and stability, provided we are in constant attendance to reap the benefits. (Heb. 10:24, 25) A regular routine of reading the Bible, the Watchtower and Awake! magazines, and the books that discuss the meat of God’s Word will cause our spiritual roots to grow deep and strong. (Heb. 5:14) Setting personal spiritual goals and diligently working toward them will also bring lasting benefits.​—Phil. 3:16.
3 Assistance From Mature Ones: Seek to widen out in association with spiritually mature ones in the congregation. Get to know the elders, as they are primarily the ones who can strengthen us. (1 Thess. 2:11, 12) Welcome any counsel or suggestions they might offer. (Eph. 4:11-16) Ministerial servants are also interested in helping others to be made firm in the faith, so look to these brothers for encouragement.
4 Do you need assistance in the ministry? Speak to the elders, and request help. Perhaps you can be included in the Pioneers Assist Others program. Are you newly baptized? Studying the Our Ministry book and applying what it contains will stimulate progress toward spiritual maturity. Are you a parent? Continually strengthen the spirituality of your children.​—Eph. 6:4.
5 By being rooted and stabilized in the faith, we enjoy a close relationship with Jehovah and warm association with our brothers. This enables us to withstand Satan’s attacks, and strengthens our hope of an everlasting future.​—1 Pet. 5:9, 10.

