“Preach the Word . . . Urgently”
1 If you receive something marked “URGENT,” how do you view it? The word “urgent” means “calling for immediate attention.” With good reason, the apostle Paul instructed Christians to “preach the word . . . urgently.” (2 Tim. 4:2) Do you respond by giving this work your immediate attention?
2 It may have been reported to Paul that some of his brothers were displaying a tendency to ‘loiter at their business’ as Christians. (Rom. 12:11) This limited the results of their labors as well as the joy that they otherwise could have derived from helping others.
3 Jesus’ View of the Ministry: What delight Jesus found in carrying out his ministry! He said: “My food is for me to do the will of him that sent me and to finish his work.” Jesus’ example motivated his disciples, whom he encouraged by telling them that ‘the fields are white for harvesting.’ (John 4:34, 35) The sense of urgency that he displayed throughout his ministry was evident when he told his disciples to “beg the Master of the harvest to send out workers into his harvest.” (Matt. 9:38) Jesus appreciated that his commission was to preach, and he was determined not to let anything prevent him from doing so.
4 What About Us? Today, there is greater urgency than ever before to move ahead with the preaching work. In many parts of the world, the fields are ripe for harvesting. Even in lands where a thorough witness has seemingly been given, thousands are being baptized each year. With the end of this system of things rapidly approaching, there is “plenty to do in the work of the Lord.” (1 Cor. 15:58) More than at any other time, it is vital that we exert ourselves vigorously in sharing the Kingdom message with others.
5 Let us be absorbed in reaching others with the good news, both from house to house and wherever else people can be found in the territory. By sharing as fully as possible in the preaching work, we clearly demonstrate that we have put the Kingdom first in our lives. (Matt. 6:33) Our faithfulness in preaching the word urgently will bring us much joy.

