





LANDS AND PEOPLES
A Visit to Cambodia









FLOATING VILLAGES, bustling markets, streets jammed with motorbikes transporting everything from live chickens to refrigerators—these are just some of the sights and sounds in parts of Cambodia.
The people of Cambodia are known for being warm, friendly, and close-knit. In informal settings, they may refer to one another using titles for brother, sister, aunt, uncle, grandmother, or grandfather—even if they are meeting for the first time!





Some Cambodians live in houseboats, while others live in houses raised on long stilts or built on floating platforms. There are even floating schools, clinics, markets, and petrol stations










Dragon fruit is popular in Cambodia





Rice is a prominent part of Cambodian cuisine. A typical meal will have three or four dishes, often including soup. Fish is a favorite food. It is common for sweet, sour, and salty dishes to be served in the same meal.
About two millenniums ago, Indian merchants and pilgrims on their way to China began frequenting Cambodia’s coastline and exchanging silk and metals for spices, aromatic wood, ivory, and gold. In time, the people of Cambodia absorbed the influence of India and China, and thus Hinduism and Buddhism flourished. Today, over 90 percent of the inhabitants are Buddhist.
Jehovah’s Witnesses share a message of hope from the Bible in Cambodia. They have helped many people by means of the book What Does the Bible Really Teach? It is available in about 250 languages, including Cambodian.
FAST FACTS
Population: Approximately 14 million

Capital: Phnom Penh

Climate: Warm to hot, with wet and dry seasons

Exports: Clothing, timber, rubber, rice












More than 1,500 people in Cambodia are studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses and finding the answers to such questions as, “Where are the dead?” and “What is God’s purpose for the earth?”










The book What Does the Bible Really Teach?, published by Jehovah’s Witnesses, is available in Cambodian (shown here).

