





HELP FOR THE FAMILY | YOUNG PEOPLE
How to Accept Correction



THE CHALLENGE

“When someone gives you correction, that person is basically telling you that you’re doing something wrong. And I don’t know anyone who says, ‘I just love to be told that I’m doing something wrong!’”—Amy, 17.a






A person who dismisses correction is like a pilot who ignores direction from the control tower. The result can be disastrous.





Do you find it hard to accept correction from your parents, teachers, and other adults? If so, this article will help you.



WHAT YOU SHOULD KNOW

Everyone needs correction.
“We all stumble many times.”—James 3:2.
“There’s nothing shameful about needing to be corrected when you do something wrong.”—Jessica.

Being corrected does not mean you are a failure.
“Those whom Jehovahb loves he reproves, just as a father does a son in whom he delights.”—Proverbs 3:12.
“When people give me correction, I try to focus on how difficult it must be for them to do it and how loving it is for them to give me advice.”—Tamara.

Correction can help you become a better person.
“Listen to discipline and become wise.”—Proverbs 8:33.
“Correction is essential for growth. It gives you insight into how you are perceived by others and helps you to curb negative traits that you may not even know you have developed.”—Deanne.




WHAT YOU CAN DO

Look at the matter objectively. You might be inclined to take offense at the correction. But try to put your feelings aside. To help you do that, take yourself out of the situation for a moment and imagine that you are giving the same correction to someone else—perhaps a younger sibling. Can you now see at least some merit in the counsel? Now put yourself back into the situation and try to view the matter the same way.—Bible principle: Ecclesiastes 7:9.
“Sometimes you can get so upset over the criticism that you forget that this person was trying to help you become a better person, not trying to hurt your feelings.”—Theresa.

Stay humble. Do not let pride cause you to reject the correction. On the other hand, do not allow yourself to become overwhelmed with discouragement just because you have something to work on. Humility will help you to avoid either extreme. Remember: The correction that hurts the most may be the correction that you need the most. If, for whatever reason, you reject it, you miss out on a valuable opportunity to grow.—Bible principle: Proverbs 16:18.
The correction that hurts the most may be the correction that you need the most

“Accepting correction is an important part of becoming a mature adult. If we don’t learn to take it and grow from it, we hurt ourselves in the long run.”—Lena.

Be thankful. Even if you find the correction difficult to accept, why not express your gratitude to the person who gave it? Undoubtedly, that person has your best interests at heart and truly wants you to succeed.—Bible principle: Psalm 141:5.
“You can never go wrong with saying ‘Thanks,’ especially if you needed the counsel. Even if you didn’t, you can be gracious and express thanks for the effort the person took to approach you.”—Carla.




Some names in this article have been changed.
Jehovah is God’s name as revealed in the Bible.

KEY SCRIPTURES
“Do not be quick to take offense.”—Ecclesiastes 7:9.

“Pride is before a crash.”—Proverbs 16:18.

“Should the righteous one strike me [with reproof], it would be an act of loyal love.”—Psalm 141:5.









“Criticism can hurt, but I try to remember that the person who gives it wants me to be the best that I can be. I try to view him as a friend helping me to succeed.”—JUSTIN






“I know that I’ll make mistakes, so I appreciate it when people tell me when I’m wrong. That way I know what I need to work on.”—CHARLETTE



