VOL. XXI. JANUARY 15, 1900. No. 2. 



CONTENTS. 



New York's One Day 

Convention, Jan. 21st 18 

Views from the Watch Tower 19 

Churches as Social Clubs 19 

Christianity in Japan 20 

Poem: A Little While 21 

Preaching of John the Baptizer 21 

Consecration Followed by 

Temptations 26 

Temptation to Use Spiritual Favors 

for Personal Profit 29 

Tempting God by Unauthorized 

Efforts 30 

Temptation to Obtain Desired Good 

Results by Compromise 31 

Interesting Letters 32 

Higher Prices for Cheap Bibles 18 

page 18 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



NEW YORK'S ONE-DAY CONVENTION, JAN. 2 1ST. 

Friends of the truth have recently started a meeting at Willard 
Hall, Grand Opera House Block, 23rd Street and 8th Avenue, 
New York City, of which we hear good reports. It is said to be 
quite convenient to Jersey City by ferry and generally accessible. 

These friends have sent an urgent request that the editor 
of this journal shall be with them on Jan. 21st, and he has accepted. 
Meetings are regularly held at above hall every Sunday 
afternoon, but for this occasion (Jan. 21st) there will be preaching 
service at 10:30 A.M., and another at 2:30 P.M. Rather, we 
might say, there will be an all-day meeting with noon intermission 
for luncheon at nearby restaurants. 

Friends in general are invited, and many residing within a 
radius of fifteen miles from New York City are expected. All 
such will be warmly welcomed; and each is requested to introduce 
himself to the editor. 



Morning topic— "Blessed are the people who know the joyful 
sound." Afternoon topic— The Necessity of Justification as 
Precedent to Sanctification and Begetting of the Spirit. 



HIGHER PRICES FOR CHEAP BIBLES. 



The rise in price of paper, leather, etc., has caused an advance 
of prices in many Bibles quoted in the Dec. 1st, '99, WATCH 
TOWER, as follows:- 
To Bibles quoted under 45 cents add 5 cents each. 

at 50 cents to 95 cents add 10 cents each. 

" " " at $1.00 and $2.00 add 15 cents each. 

The higher priced Bibles are less affected;— no change 
as yet. 



R2561 :page 19 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
CHURCHES AS SOCIAL CLUBS. 



REV. JOHN WATSON, widely known in 
"orthodox" circles (as "Ian Maclaren," his 
literary nom de plume), wrote for publication recently, 
that in his judgment the churches of various denominations 
are rapidly becoming social clubs— ceasing to 
appreciate or use the place hitherto considered the true 
position of the church. The text for his criticism was 
found on a printed postal card sent out by an American 
Y.M.C.A., which read word for word as follows: 

"DO NOT FORGET 

"The next Social. 

"The next Candy-pull. 

"The next Entertainment. 

"The next Song Service. 

"The next Gospel Meeting. 

"The next Meeting of the Debating Club. 

"The next Chicken-pie Dinner. 

"The next date when you ought to make the 

secretary happy with your cash." 

Commenting upon this card, he says:— 
"This remarkable list of operations, combining 
evangelistic zeal, creature comforts, and business 
shrewdness, requires no commentary; the items give 
us a convincing illustration of an up-to-date religious 
institution— a veritable hustler of a Y.M.C.A. 



"The Christian church and a Y.M.C.A. are of 
course very different institutions, and the latter is free 
from any traditions of austere dignity, but one is not 
surprised to find that the church has also been touched 
with the social spirit and is also doing her best to make 
religion entertaining. One enters what is called a 
place of worship and imagines that he is in a drawing-room. 
The floor has a thick carpet, there are rows of 
theater-chairs, a huge organ fills the eye, a large bouquet 
of flowers marks the ministers place; people come 
in with a jaunty air and salute one another cheerily; 
hardly one bends his head in prayer; there is a hum of 
gossip through the building. 

"A man disentangles himself from a conversation 
and bustles up to the platform without clerical garb of 
any kind, as likely as not in layman's dress. A quartet 
advances, and, facing the audience, sings an anthem 
to the congregation, which does not rise, and later 
they sing another anthem, also to the congregation. 
There is one prayer, and one reading from Holy Scripture, 
and a sermon which is brief and bright. Among 
other intimations the minister urges attendance at the 
oyster supper, when, as is mentioned in a paper in the 
pews, there will be oysters and meat— turkey, I think 
—and ice-cream. This meal is to be served in the 
'church parlor.' 

"No sooner has the benediction been pronounced, 
which has some original feature introduced, than the 
congregation hurries to the door, but altho no one can 
explain how it is managed, the minister is already 
there shaking hands, introducing people, 'getting off 
good things,' and generally making things 'hum.' 
One person congratulates him on his 'talk'— new name 
for a sermon— and another says it was 'fine.' 

"Efforts have been made in England also to make 
church life really popular, and, in one town known to 
the writer, with some success of its own kind. One 
church secured a new set of communion plates by the 
popular device of a dance; various congregations gave 
private theatricals, and in one case had stage property 
of their own. Bible classes celebrated the conclusions 
of their sessions by a supper; on Good Friday there 
were excursions into the country accompanied by a 
military band, and a considerable portion of the congregational 
income was derived from social treats of 
various kinds. This particular town is only an illustration 
of the genial spirit spreading throughout the 
church in England. One minister uses a magic lantern 
to give force to his sermon; another has added a tavern 
to his church equipment; a third takes up the latest 
murder or scandal; a fourth has a service of song; a 
fifth depends on a gypsy or an ex-pugilist. 

"If this goes on, the church will soon embrace a 
theater and other attractions which will draw young 
people, and prevent old people from wearying in the 
worship of God. 



[Contrasting these modern and irreverent and unscriptural 

R2561 : page 20 

methods with those of the past, Dr. Watson 
continues:—] 

"Perhaps it may be the perversity of human nature 
which is apt to cavil at new things and hanker 
after the good old times— which were not always good, 
by any means— but one is not much enamoured with 
the new departure, nor at all convinced that what may 
be called for brief the 'candy-pull' system is any improvement 
on the past. After a slight experience of 
smart preachers, and church parlors, and ice-cream 
suppers, and picnics, one remembers with new respect 
and keen appreciation the minister of former days, 
with his seemly dress, his dignified manner, his sense 
of responsibility, who came from the secret place of 
divine fellowship, and spoke as one carrying the message 
of the Eternal. He may not have been so fussy 
in the aisles as his successor, nor so clever at games, nor 
able to make so fetching a speech on 'Love, Courtship, 
and Marriage.' 

"There are no doubt many points in which the 
congregation of the present has advanced on the congregation 
of the past, but it has not been all gain, for 
the chief note in the worship of the former generation 
was reverence— people met in the presence of the Eternal, 
before whom every man is less than nothing. And 
the chief note of their children, who meet to listen to 
a choir and a clever platform speaker, is self-complacency." 
—The Ladies' Home Journal. 



We have frequently pointed out these same tendencies, 
but we are glad to be able to quote the words 
of another— of one who stands so high in Churchianity. 
But Dr. Watson will ere long find that he must 
not criticize "Babylon;" and that if he persists he will 
lose caste with the lords thereof. So conservative a 
journal as The Advance has already intimated that 
"Candy-Pulls" and other modern methods of making 
Christianity attractive must not be interfered with by 
"old fogies." 

And so say we! Let the innovations proceed— 
they are essential to the very existence of "Babylon." 
And besides, the sooner the social Churchianity clubs 
act out their real sentiments all along the line, the 
better it will be for true Christianity, whose separation 
from Churchianity is now due to be accomplished in 
this harvest time— "wheat" from "tares." The more 
it becomes apparent that, with the vast majority, religion 
is merely "a form of godliness," the more will those 
who have the power of it as well realize the width of 
the gulf which really separates the two classes in divine 



estimation. The louder grows the revelry and 
irreverence and the scoffing at God's Word by "higher 
critics" and the boasts of Evolution, the louder in the 
ears of the Lord's true saints will sound the Master's 
command: "Babylon is fallen, is fallen! Come out of 
her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, 
and that ye receive not of her plagues."— Rev. 18:2,4. 



The Editor of the Washington City Times gives 
his opinion of some of the methods of Churchianity, 
thus:— 

"A sensational Brooklyn preacher lately discoursed 
on subjects like these: 'Would Christ Belong to a Labor 
Union?' 'Would Christ Go to a Brooklyn Theater?' 
and so on. It is rather difficult to conceive the 
moral status of people who actually approve of sermons 
of this sort. Undoubtedly a large part of the audiences 
which they attract come from mere curiosity, as they 
might come to any other sort of show; and they might 
as well be at the theater for all the good that it is 
likely to do them. One of the most deplorable features 
of modern American life is the tendency toward sensationalism 
in the pulpit. It is bad from every point 
of view. It excites emotions which are in no way religious, 
and are all the worse for passing under that 
name. It is in execrable taste, it misleads people to 
a sort of contempt for religion, and it makes the 
churches which indulge in it odious. 

"It has grown out of another bad feature of our 
modern life— the plutocratic ideal. Any sensible person 
may easily understand that when the attraction of 
a church for its members depends on this sort of thing, 
and on the ability of the people of the church to dress 
well and pay for a handsome building and a showy 
choir, there is no more real religion in the whole business 
than there is in a circus.... 

"It would be much more to the point for the sensational 
preacher above quoted to ask himself, in private, 
whether his church is the kind which Christ 
would be likely to approve, or if it is full of money-changers 
and the sellers of doves. 

"It is time that sensible and thoughtful religious 
people in this country understood what a church is 
really intended to be. It should not be a bad imitation 
of fashionable society, with all the meannesses, caste 
distinctions, pettiness, and jealousy of that society, 
veneered over with a coating of formal religion...." 

CHRISTIANITY IN JAPAN. 



Not long since Japan was considered the brightest 
example of progress in Christian missions, and with 



good reason. Everything coming from Europe or the 
United States was looked upon with favor— the Christian 
religion included. In a few years the number of 
converts to various shades of nominal "Christianity" 
ran up to 40,578 in 1878. However, a great change 
has occurred there: and within the past two years the 
total converts claimed by all denominations is only 403. 

The beginning of this change of sentiment seems to 
have dated from the time that the different denominations 
began more or less to compete. It would seem that 
at first denominational and creed differences were considerably 
hidden from the Japanese, and they seem to 
have embraced Christianity in something of its simplicity 
of spirit if not of doctrine. However, when they 
began to send some of their young men to American 
and English colleges, the fact of the great varieties 
of contradictory doctrines, all claiming to represent 

R2562 : page 21 

Christ's teachings, became known, and was naturally 
followed by denominational reapings, chiefly, we believe, 
Presbyterian. 

The Japanese are a practical people, and concluded 
that, if Christians of the West were so confused and 
divided respecting the teachings of the Bible, the Japanese 
could properly exercise their own judgments on 
the subjects also. In doing so they are rapidly tending 
toward agnosticism, doubt, uncertainty, unbelief, just as 
thinking people everywhere are doing, except as they 
get the truth and with it the spirit of a sound mind. How 
we would like to put into the hands of these Japanese 
and all truth-seekers the light of present truth showing 
forth the divine plan of the ages. We are on the 
lookout for the Lord to bring forward to the light 
some earnest, fully consecrated Japanese capable of 
presenting the plan by translating DAWN, VOL. I., presenting 
it to his Christian countrymen. We thought 
we had found the one two years ago, but it proved 
otherwise;— Christianity was unpopular, but the truth 
much more so— too unpopular for him. 

Rev. Dr. Christlieb, for years the representative 
of the "Evangelical Protestant Mission Society" of 
Germany, discussed the set-back in Japan in a volume 
just published, entitled, "The Tendencies of Japanese 
Civilization and Christianity," in which he explains:— 

"The opposition now generally entertained by the 
Japanese against the Christian church is due to the 
changed attitude which they have in recent years developed 
in so marked a degree to all influences from 
abroad— a conservative reaction of a pronounced type. 
This return to nativism is largely due to the easy success 
in the war with the Chinese. This reaction from 
the former enthusiasm for innovation has assumed a 
particularly determined character. The Japanese have 
reached the conclusion that they had been too hasty 



in discarding the old in favor of the new, and this 
spirit has found its way even into the Christian elements 
of Japan, which aspired to the establishment of a 
church independent of the churches in countries that 
have been Christian for centuries. Altho the Japanese 
have known Christianity only for thirty years and there 
is scarcely a single adult native who has been a Christian 
since his childhood, yet they began to regard 
themselves more capable to develop a Christian culture 
and life than those who brought them the new faith. 

"These ideas and ambitions are largely due to the 
fact that attempts were made to build up a Christianity 
wholly divorced from the national character of the 
people. The reaction is, to a certain extent, the result 
also of the radical anti-Japanese type of life that representatives 
of Western Christianity aimed to develop, 
completely ignoring the many excellent traits that 
make up the national character of the people. 

"Still another element that has entered into this 
reaction is the fact that the Japanese, who is naturally 
not too deep intellectually and who is but half civilized, 
has been made acquainted with Western agnosticism 
and atheism as found in the writings of Schopenhauer 
and Herbert Spencer. Through these a certain dangerous 
contempt for the supernatural has been developed, 
especially among the younger generation. All 
these factors and others have united to produce the 
modern opposition to Christianity in the Japanese 
empire." 

R2568 : page 21 

A LITTLE WHILE. 



A little while with weary feet to tread the narrow way, 

A little while, the time will not be long, 
A little while the sinless One to follow day by day, 

A little while to suffer and be strong. 

A little while with faltering tongue to testify for God, 

A little while to suffer scorn and shame, 
A little while with voice and pen to spread the truth abroad, 

A little while to glorify his name. 

A little while with humble faith to wage the goodly fight, 
A little while, grasp firm the two-edged sword, 

A little while, Satanic hosts shall all be put to flight, 
A little while, then, trust thou in the Lord. 

A little while, a little while, Oh, let this be our song, 

A little while, lay not the armor down; 
A little while, a little while, the strife will not be long, 

A little while, and we shall wear the crown! 

-GERTRUDE W. SEIBERT. 



R2562 : page 21 

PREACHING OF JOHN THE BAPTIZER. 

--JANUARY 21. -LUKE 3:1-17.- 

"Prepare ye the way of the Lord." 

DOUBTLESS many commenters on this lesson 

will claim that John the Baptizer's ministry 

began with the year A.D. 26, and by positiveness of assertion 

seek to make up for their lack of evidence on 

this subject. Let all therefore bear in mind that such 

a dating of John's ministry will be purely arbitrary, 

to make it conform to the erroneous view which prevails 

among scholars in respect to the date of our Lord's 

birth. It should not be forgotten, however, that, altho 

it is well established from the Scriptures that our Lord 

was six months younger than his second-cousin, John, 

there is no other Scriptural date which so closely and 

definitely connects the history of our Lord and of John 

the Baptizer with general history, as does the statement 

of this very lesson, that John began his ministry (when 

he was thirty years of age) in the fifteenth year of the 

reign of Tiberius Caesar. Those who claim that Jesus 

began his ministry A.D. 27, instead of A.D. 29, claim 

that John's ministry began in A.D. 26; and in order to 

make this fit with the statement of the first verse of 

R2562 : page 22 

this lesson, they are obliged to count the reign of Tiberius 
Caesar two years before its admitted date. For a 
particular discussion of this subject, however, we must 
refer our readers to MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., p.54. 

Of John it is written that he was filled with the 
holy spirit from his birth. But we must not misunderstand 
this to mean that he was begotten of the holy 
spirit, in the sense that Christians are begotten of it, 
for he lived before the time of spirit-begetting— in the 
Jewish age, not in the Gospel or Christian age. Thus 
our Lord said of him that, altho there had not arisen a 
greater Prophet than John, nevertheless, the least in 
the Kingdom of God is greater than he— the least one 
in the house of sons is on a higher plane than the greatest 
one in the house of servants. (Matt. 11:11; Heb. 3:5,6.) 
The Apostle again explains that "the holy spirit 
was not yet given, because Jesus was not yet glorified." 
-John 7:39. 

In harmony with this we must understand that 
John was filled with the holy spirit, holy power or influence 
from God from his birth, after the same manner 
that the other prophets throughout the Jewish age had 



been under that holy spirit. The expression would lead 

us to understand that, altho John was not borne immaculate, 

as was Jesus, he nevertheless was well born, 

under holy influences, which tended to develop in him 

natural characteristics suitable to the mission he was intended 

of God to fulfil. This does not involve the thought 

of divine interference with the free will of the individual, 

for Paul tells us that he also was chosen of God 

from his birth to be a special servant to do a special 

work. (Gal. 1:15.) Nevertheless, the Lord did not interfere 

with his exercising his own free will, even permitting 

him to go so far into blind error as to become 

the persecutor of the Church. And even when the Lord 

rebuked him in the way to Damascus, that was not an 

interference with his will or nature, but merely a removal 

of his blindness, his ignorance, permitting his 

true will to come into exercise. And so no doubt others 

of the Lord's people from time to time have been from 

earliest childhood special subjects of divine Providence 

which has guided and shaped their experiences without 

interfering with their wills, so as to make of them special 

instruments for the accomplishment of divine 

purposes. 

Of John's life from infancy to manhood we know 
nothing except the bare record, "The child grew and 
waxed strong in spirit, and was in the desert until the 
day of his showing unto Israel" (Luke 1:80)— not in 
the sandy deserts, but more properly in the wilds, the 
uncultivated regions, perhaps in the "hill country," 
where his parents resided at the time of his birth. Possibly 
a part of the Lord's providence in respect to John's 
training for his work consisted in the ordering of the 
affairs of his parents, so that possibly they were forced 
by circumstances to reside in such a wilderness-home, 
where they would have comparatively little intercourse 
with others, and where John, probably as a forester, 
would have the experiences which the Lord saw would 
best fit him for the work intended. All Christians 
should learn to trust to the Heavenly Father's guidance, 
remembering his special promise, which is applicable 
to each one who is in Christ, viz., that "all things shall 
work together for good to them that love God," and 
remembering this they should be content with the lot 
which Providence seems to mark out for them— not indolent, 
but content, when they have done all that their 
hands find to do,— not restless, peevish, dissatisfied, 
complainers against God and his providence. "Trust 
in the Lord and do good." It may be that the Lord is 
fitting and preparing us individually for some special 
service, and that the permitted experiences alone will 
prepare us for that service. Indeed, we know from the 
Word that God designs his "elect" for joint-heirship 
with our dear Redeemer in the glorious Millennial Kingdom; 
and we can well realize that because of our imperfection 
we need much moulding and fashioning, chiseling 
and polishing to make us "meet for the inheritance 



of the saints in light." We are to remember also that 
we are incompetent to judge of our own imperfections, 
and hence incompetent to judge of the experiences 
which would be most helpful to us. It is difficult for 
us sometimes even to see ourselves as others see us; 
much more difficult, undoubtedly, it would be to see 
ourselves from the divine standpoint. Here faith in 
God comes to the front— "This is the victory which 
overcometh the world, even your faith." 

The time of John's "showing" or presentation to 
Israel was undoubtedly the time when he reached the 

R2563 : page 22 

legally required thirty years of age; and then it was 
that the word of the Lord came unto him, causing him 
to begin his mission. We are not to think of this expression 
as having to John the same signification as it 
has to us who are of this Gospel age. The word of God 
came to John as a prophet, for our Lord declared,— 
"There hath not arisen a greater prophet than John the 
Baptist." The Lord made clear to John that the time 
had come for the beginning of his ministry, not merely 
by an impression or surmise, but with positiveness, as 
in the case of all the prophets. In harmony with his 
commission he went to the thickly settled regions in 
the vicinity of the River Jordan, preaching repentance 
—that the people should reform— and baptizing in the 
Jordan those who professed a reformation. For this 
reason John sought the pools or deep places of the 
river;— for instance, he went to Enon, near to Salem, 
"because there was much water there"— a pool sufficiently 
deep for the purposes of immersion. 

R2563 : page 23 

We are not to fall into the too common error of 
supposing from the record that John preached to the 
people that repentance and baptism would work for them 
a remission of their sins. To so interpret these words would 
put them in direct conflict with the entire testimony of 
the Scriptures, which is to the effect that without the 
shedding of blood there is no remission of sins. The 
usual representation of this subject is therefore clearly 
in error. To the contrary, we are to understand this 
verse to mean that John preached a baptism signifying 
repentance unto, or preparation for, a remission of sins. 
The time had not yet come for the blotting out of the 
sins, and John neither had nor could have obtained 
authority to declare sins remitted because of repentance 
and baptism. Had it been possible for him to have 
made such a proclamation, truthfully, it would have 
proven that there was no necessity for the coming of 
our Lord Jesus to give himself a ransom for Israel and 
for all the families of the earth. If repentance and 
immersion in water would bring the forgiveness of sins, 



the "Savior and a great one" whom God had promised 

to Israel for so long would have been wholly unnecessary. 

But when we view John's work and preaching 

as merely a preliminary one, to make ready a repentant 

people, desiring to have their sins forgiven, desiring full 

at-one-ment with God, and expecting a Savior to accomplish 

all this,— then all is harmony. 

And this thought, that the remission of sins was a 
work future from John's day, a work to be accomplished 
by Christ, is fully borne out by the succeeding context, 
a quotation from Isaiah the Prophet, which has not even 
yet been fulfilled, but includes the entire work of the 
Millennial age. That age will be one for remission of 
sins and blotting out of sins, and the full reconciliation of 
so many as will accept God's grace in Christ under the 
New Covenant. (Compare Acts 3:19-21.) In that time, 
under those favorable conditions, and not before, will 
the statement be fulfilled, "All flesh shall see the salvation 
of God." 

We are to bear in mind that John's work as a messenger 
was exclusively to Israel, and had nothing whatever 
to do with any of the Gentiles. To Israel he acted 
as the Elijah or Forerunner of Messiah in the flesh, seeking 
to induce that nation, in its "harvest" time, to accept 
the formal offer of God's Kingdom by accepting 
Jesus as the King. But John's mission was not successful 
to his nation, and profited only a few of the 
people; those few who believed John's testimony, and 
received it into good and honest and repentant hearts, 
were prepared to receive Jesus and to appreciate and receive 
the remission of sins offered by God through him. 
The remainder of that nation, rejecting John's teaching, 
and being in an unrepentant condition of heart, were 
not properly exercised, were not ready for Jesus, and 
did not appreciate the offer of remission of sins through 
his blood as a consequence, and as a nation were rejected 
of God and wholly overthrown. 

While John thus acted as the Elijah in introducing 
Jesus in the flesh to fleshly Israel, and gathered out a 
certain class who were ready to receive Jesus, and who 
were blessed by him, so we see that in God's plan there 
is a greater antitype of Elijah than was John, as there 
is a greater Christ than was our Lord Jesus. The greater 
Christ is the spiritual one, "The Lord from heaven"— 
"Now the Lord is that Spirit." And this glorified spirit 
Lord is the Head of "the Church which is his body," 
and this body of many members will, in "the first resurrection," 
be made like him and to share his glory, and 
with him and under him constitute the great Messiah, 
who shall take unto himself his great power and reign, 
establishing God's Kingdom amongst men, and causing 
his will to be done "on earth as it is done in heaven." 
(Matt. 6:10.) The coming into power of this great 
Christ, the spiritual Christ (head and body) constitutes 
the Second Advent to mankind— "the manifestation of 
the sons of God" for the deliverance of the groaning 



creation. (Rom. 8:17-19.) Thus the Second Advent of 
Christ the Head (with the Church his body) will be 
seen to be on a very much higher plane than was the 
first advent of our Lord in the flesh, altho the first advent 
was all-important in that without it and its sacrifice 
for sins there could have been no Second Advent of 
Jesus, the Head, in the glory of Kingdom power, and 
there could have been no glorified members of his body 
to be associated with him. 

After thus noting the relationship of the two events, 
it is proper for us to note also that as the blessings of the 
first advent were offered to nominal fleshly Israel so the 
presentation of the blessings of the Second Advent will 
be to nominal Spiritual Israel ("Christendom"), and as 
a Forerunner or herald was appropriately sent to fleshly 
Israel, to prepare them for the first advent, likewise 
it would be appropriate that a proportionately greater 
Forerunner should precede the Second Advent, and seek 
to make ready therefor all nominal Spiritual Israelites. 
As we have already shown,* this greater Elijah, who 
heralds the spiritual Christ, is composed of many members; 
Jesus in the flesh was himself the Head of this 
Elijah class, and all of his true followers, who will be, 
when glorified with him, members of the glorious 
Christ, will have previously been in their earthly lives 
members with him of the Elijah class, whose mission 
it is to show forth the principles of righteousness and 
true holiness, and to exhort both by word and conduct 
all men to repentance and to preparation for the Second 
Advent— the glorious appearing, the setting up of the 
Messianic Kingdom, the actual blotting out of sins, the 



*MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., Chap. 8. 

R2563 : page 24 

straightening of every crooked way, the leveling up of 
deep crevices of character, the leveling down of the 
hills of pride to the proper level of humility; and in 
every sense of the word seeking to prepare all flesh to see 
the salvation of God. 

Nevertheless, we are to remember that the Scriptures 
distinctly indicate that the testimony of this greater 
Elijah will be equally unsuccessful with that of the lesser 
antitype of Elijah, John the Baptizer. The Church 
in the flesh has not succeeded in making straight the 
paths of the Lord for a triumphal entry to his Kingdom 
upon the earth. A few have heard, but the message 
has utterly failed as respects the vast majority, even 
those who profess respect for and to be waiting for the 
Kingdom. Nevertheless, all God's good purposes will 
be ultimately accomplished, tho necessarily introduced 
by troubles, calamities, distress upon "Christendom," 
in the end of this age or "harvest" time, similar 



to those troubles which came upon fleshly Israelites who 
were unready for the Savior, and "knew not the time 
of their visitation," at his first advent. All this unreadiness, 
however, shall not hinder the work of the 
Messiah. As at his first advent he gathered all Israelites 
indeed to the new dispensation, so now he will 
gather his elect "little flock" to himself; his Kingdom 
will be established; it shall rule over all; it will accomplish 
the straightening of every crooked path; it will 
level up the path of righteousness and holiness, and 
make of it "a highway" freed from stumbling blocks 
of error and from Satan's deception. (Isa. 35:8,9.) All 
mankind then brought to a knowledge of the truth will 
have the privilege of progressing through the times of 
restitution up this grand highway of obedience to the 
grand perfection lost for himself and his race by father 
Adam's transgression, but redeemed for Adam and his 
race by the precious blood of Christ. All flesh indeed 
shall see the salvation of our God, and so many as will 
may share therein, for this is the blessing which God 
has provided for all the families of the earth, through 
the true spiritual Seed of Abraham— Christ and his 
elect Church. -Gal. 3:16,29. 

It would seem that John's ministry at first was 
somewhat popular, notwithstanding his probably uncouth 
"backwoods" appearance and great plainness of 
speech; so that great multitudes came to him: amongst 
these were some who seemed to John to be so vile that 
he could not properly accept them until they had given 
some proofs of reform. These he denominates "children 
of vipers"— very harsh language, we would be inclined 
to say. We are not to understand that such 
language is proper to be copied by the Lord's people of 
to-day. We are rather to suppose that there were special 
conditions at that time which made this language 
appropriate, and that John, as a prophet, was divinely 
guided into giving this sharp reproof. The Lord's people 
of the Gospel age are instructed on the contrary to 
speak with meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering, 
etc.,— "in meekness instructing those that oppose 
themselves"— "reproving with all long-suffering." 
The Lord's people of today are under general instructions 
of God's Word, as regards all their conduct, and 
are not to depart therefrom unless it would be under 
special divine direction, as were the prophets of old— 

R2564 : page 24 

such as is not given to any at the present time so far as 
we are aware. 

When John speaks of his hearers "fleeing from the 
wrath to come," we are not to get the thought that he 
preached, or that the people believed in, the doctrine of 
eternal torment, and that the words referred to this. 
Quite to the contrary, there is no such teaching in the 
Scriptures. The "wrath to come" referred to by John 



prophetically was the trouble that was about to come 
upon that nation unless they would receive Messiah, 
who had not yet been offered to them, but who would 
shortly appear, and for whose appearance they were to 
make ready by true repentance and baptism. The 
"wrath to come" did come upon the nation because of 
its rejection of Messiah, as our Lord and the Apostle 
Paul specially testify. (See Luke 21:23; Rom. 9:22; 
1 Thes. 2:16.) It burned fiercely against them in the 
great time of trouble which led to the collapse of their 
national polity in A.D. 69-70, and they have been under 
that wrath and unable to reestablish themselves as a 
nation from that day to the present time. We shall 
find confirmation of this interpretation of the "wrath 
to come" further down in this lesson. 

In John's preaching he found one difficulty, and 
that was that his hearers were imbued with the 
thought that they were God's specially chosen, "elect" 
people, whose glorification had been foretold in the 
prophets, and that since there were no better people in 
the world it was unreasonable to suppose that God 
would pass by the very best. They reasoned that he 
must take some, in order to fulfil his promises; and that 
they were not only the most obedient to his Law outwardly, 
but also were the natural seed of Abraham, to 
whom the promises were made. Likewise the principal 
opposition to the teaching of holiness, entire consecration 
to the Lord, today throughout "Christendom," is 
the same error. A false theory has gotten into the minds 
of Christian people, which leads them to reason that 
holiness cannot be essential to the Lord's favor. Their 
process of reasoning is this: Out of the sixteen hundred 
millions of the world's population there are only about 
three hundred millions that make the slightest profession 
of Christianity, and this includes all the Greek 
Catholics, Roman Catholics, and what Bishop Foster 
(M.E.) designated the "ring-straked and speckled" of 

R2564 : page 25 

Protestantism— infants and all. Now, say they, God 
must certainly intend to have some, and if he takes all 
kinds of Christians he will have only comparatively 
few, and if merely an ambition to be ahead of the devil 
were to move him, he could scarcely reject any who claim 
to be Christians, and who are even half-way decent. 
Consequently they reason that holiness to the Lord, 
sanctification of thought and word and deed, cannot be 
essential to divine favor, and is therefore rather carrying 
matters to an extreme. The declaration that only 
"the pure in heart shall see God," and that "without 
holiness no man shall see the Lord," are, to them, extreme 
statements, and must be passed by, or else the 
word "holiness" must be considered as used in olden 
times in a very restricted sense, as meaning not openly 
or violently wicked. 



Thus we see that the antitypical Elijah to the Jews 
encountered the same difficulties that are encountered 
now by the antitypical Elijah ministering to nominal 
spiritual Israel. But note John's answer; he laid down 
the conditions very strictly: Do not permit yourselves 
to be deceived into thinking that God is under compulsion 
to accept such as you, and that otherwise his word 
would become void; do not think that he could not get 
children of Abraham that would be purer than you, 
and therefore that he must take you; God is unlimited 
in power and unlimited in resource, and, if necessary, 
he could raise up children to Abraham out of these 
stones— out of some that you consider as far from the 
possibilities of being Abraham's children as tho they 
were these stones at your feet. And similarly we answer 
"Christendom" today, that God utterly rejects 
hypocritical Christianity, as represented by the vast 
majority of its professors, still blinded by the god of 
this world, and ignorant of the true character of God 
and of Jesus Christ whom he has sent; because not pure 
in heart, not consecrated fully to the Lord. Would that 
we had a trumpet voice that we might tell the millions 
of nominal Christendom the true state of the case, and 
would that they had circumcised ears to hear and reform, 
and be prepared for the glorious events now due 
to be ushered in,— without being obliged to pass through 
the great trouble time. All we can assure them is that 
God will find the full number of his elect, and that the 
full number is nearly complete now, and that in all it 
is but a "little flock" to whom it is the Father's good 
pleasure to give the Kingdom; and that soon these will 
all be glorified with their glorious Head and Lord, and 
that then the Kingdom established will be revealed to 
bless all the families of the earth. Nevertheless, we 
deeply sympathize with them in the fact that their condition 
necessitates that the introduction of the Kingdom 
shall be with a time of trouble such as was not since 
there was a nation, and, thank God, shall never again 
be.-Dan. 12:1; Matt. 24:21. 

John, proceeding with his discourse, points out to 
his Jewish hearers that the time of judgment had come 
upon their nation. The axe was laid at the root of the 
trees; every Israelite who was not an Israelite indeed 
was to be overthrown, and to be cast into the "fire" of 
trouble with which that age and national polity terminated. 
The three and a half years of our Lord's ministry 
to the Jewish nation, and their final rejection by 
him, are represented by the barren fig tree parable, in 
harmony with the statement of John foregoing.— See 
Luke 13:6-9. 

John evidently struck the chord of fear to some 
extent, but he struck it properly. There is a proper 
presentation of the truth, and a proper fear of God and 
his retribution, which may properly be kept before the 
mind of the transgressor; but this is wholly different 
from the terrorizing fear of eternal torment, which plays 



so important a part in all the theological teaching, directly 

and indirectly, today, and which has driven some 

to insanity, some to skepticism and infidelity, and has 

hindered the great majority even of saints from appreciating 

the true character and plan of our God. Let us 

present the wrath to come, truthfully, not misrepresenting 

the character of our God; for assuredly God will not 

hold them guiltless who blaspheme his holy name. 

Under John's preaching the people began to inquire 
what course they should pursue, and summing the matter 
up John's instruction was that they should practice 
justice, mercy, love, generosity; they should avoid violence, 
extortion, etc.; and should seek to be content 
with such things as they had. This was excellent advice, 
and undoubtedly those who followed it would be 
in just the right condition of heart and mind to welcome 
the Lord Jesus, and his good tidings of remission of sins 
through his blood and thus to become reconciled with the 
Father. And similarly if any now inquire respecting 
the coming trouble, the wrath that is to come in the 
end of this age upon "Christendom,"— What must we 
do? We answer them,— Practice righteousness, truth, 
godliness, kindness, benevolence, justice, trust in the 
Lord, seek to walk in his ways. Or we may quote them 
the words of the prophet, specially bearing upon this 
time, viz., "Seek meekness, seek righteousness; it may 
be that ye shall be hid in the day of the Lord's anger." 
(Zeph. 2:3.) And furthermore, we may rely upon it 
that those who thus seek righteousness, etc., will be the 
ones most ready to welcome our King, and his Kingdom, 
and we may be sure that when in this harvest 
time some fail to make their calling and election sure, 
and prove themselves unworthy of the crowns apportioned 
to them, the Lord will be pleased to select from 
among such penitent seekers of righteousness some as 
substitutes to complete his elect Church. 

So powerful was John's presentation of the truth, 

R2564 : page 26 

that the people began to wonder whether or not he 
might be the Coming One, the Messiah, but he set the 
thought at rest speedily, assuring him that he was so 
inferior to the Messiah that he would be unworthy the 
honor of doing toward him the most menial service of 
removing his sandals. Then, having given them a little 
glimpse of the character of Messiah, he proceeded to tell 
them respecting his work, that it would be higher than 
his own, and that those who received him would receive 
a higher baptism also: "He shall baptize you with the 
holy spirit and with fire"— some of them (the few) with 
holy spirit, the remainder (the mass) with the fire,— 
judgments, the great time of trouble which destroyed 
their national life and many individual lives. 

He gave them an illustration of the matter, showing 
them that they had reached the harvest-time of their 



age, and that now a separating was to be expected— the 

separating of the true wheat from the chaff; and he represented 

our Lord's work with Israel as being that of a 

reaper winnowing the "wheat," freeing it from the 

"chaff" element. How forceful was the figure! how 

true the facts ! Our Lord indeed gathered from that 

nation all the true "wheat," we may be sure that not 

a solitary grain was lost. All that wheat was gathered 

into his barn, into a place of safety, into a higher dispensation, 

—they constituted the beginning or first 

members of the Gospel Church. It was upon this wheat 

class that the holy spirit came at Pentecost, and it has 

abode with this true Church since. After the separating 

(winnowing) of the "wheat," and the gathering 

into the barn, and its baptism of the holy spirit, in due 

time, the "chaff" of that nation was burned up with 

unquenchable fire— a time of trouble which nothing could 

stop or hinder. It will be remembered that various 

steps were taken to hinder the destruction of the nation 

of Israel, but all failed: even the Roman Emperor was 

desirous of preserving the nation, and of establishing 

R2565 : page 26 

order there, and the Roman army went not to destroy 
them but to establish peace in their midst; but the Lord 
had declared that the fire of trouble which he enkindled 
should not be quenched by any power, that it should 
do its work to the full; and it did. 

Likewise it will be with the great "fire" of trouble 
with which this Gospel age shall end, and into which 
the "tare" class of Christendom will be cast; it will not 
be an utter destruction of life (altho many lives will 
perish in the great trouble of this Day of Wrath), but 
it will completely consume earthly governments and 
Churchianity in a fire of anarchy. Nothing shall quench 
that fire, or hinder that utter destruction of present 
systems. But praise God that when this fire shall have 
consumed the stubble and the falsities and deceptions 
of present institutions, it will have but prepared the 
way for the great blessing which he has designed and 
provided for in his coming Kingdom. This "fire," 
and the blessing to follow it, are particularly referred 
toinZeph. 3:8,9. 



R2565 : page 26 

CONSECRATION FOLLOWED BY TEMPTATIONS. 
-JAN. 28.-MATT. 3:13-4:11.— 

"This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased." 
AFTER JOHN had been preaching and baptizing 



for about six months, about September, A.D. 
29, Jesus, who had been residing in Galilee and was 
nearing his thirtieth birthday, set out to find John and 
to be baptized of him and to begin his public ministry 
at the earliest possible moment. He was to be a Priest 
as well as a King for his people, "a Priest forever after 
the order of Melchisedec," and the Law required of a 
priest that he be at least thirty years of age. Hence 
Jesus' ministry was hindered from beginning until this 
age was attained, but he was free to begin it at the earliest 
possible moment after that time. 

He was of course acquainted with his second-cousin, 
John the Baptizer, who evidently well knew of his upright 
life and unimpeachable character, and who was 
astounded to have him apply for baptism, whereas the 
class John was seeking was the renegade and sinful. 
According to the original reading, John "would have 
hindered him, saying, I have need to be baptized of 
thee, and comest thou to me?" Realizing that Jesus 
had no sins to wash away, it seemed to John inappropriate 
that this ceremony should be performed upon 
Jesus, for we are to remember that John's baptism was 
merely a baptism unto repentance— reformation— and 
not Christian baptism.— See Acts 19:4,5. 

Our Lord did not attempt to explain to John that 
he was introducing a new baptism, not for sinners 
but exclusively for holy ones, and not, therefore, in any 
sense of the word symbolic of the cleansing from sin, 
but symbolic of a sacrificial death for the sins of others. 
It was not then due time to explain Christian baptism, 
and to have done so would merely have confused John 
and those who might have heard, without profiting him 
any, because the new baptism belonged to the new dispensation 
which did not begin until Pentecost, except 
in the person of our Lord Jesus himself. And in any 
case the force and meaning of the symbol is merely 
what is understood by the baptized one. It is perhaps 
well that we call special attention to this point, in view 
of the fact that a large and influential body of Christian 
people* are even today practicing John's baptism, "for 
the remission of sins," wholly failing to realize the import 
of the new baptism— Christian baptism— first symbolized 
by our Lord Jesus himself. 

Our "Disciple" friends will not dispute the Scriptural 
statement that our Lord Jesus was holy, harmless, 
undefiled, separate from sinners, and hence that he had no 
sins to wash away, and consequently that for him John's 
baptism of reformation would have been worse than meaningless; 



*The Christian denomination, otherwise termed "Disciples. 
R2565 : page 27 
it would have been a contradiction of fact and 



contrary to faith; and "whatsoever is not of faith is sin." 
Hence it would have been wrong for our Lord Jesus to 
have been baptized for the remission of sins— John's only 
understanding of baptism. We may be sure, therefore, 
that since "in him was no sin," his act of baptism 
was the first of a new order of baptism— practiced by 
his followers after Pentecost. (Acts 19:4,5.) We here 
note the fact that Christian baptism is only for believers 
in Christ— not for unbelievers, not for sinners. Faith in 
Christ is the justifying power; we are justified through 
faith in his blood. When justified we are ready for 
Christian baptism, and not before, but when justified 
we have no sins to wash away, being "justified freely 
from all things." To the Christian believer, baptism 
symbolizes precisely the same thing that it did to his 
Lord, viz., consecration— the full surrender of his will, 
his life, his all, to the Heavenly Father's will. By such 
a surrender of his will he becomes dead to the world, to 
earthly hopes and aims, and becomes alive toward God, 
to walk in newness of life, and by and by to have that 
newness of life actually, as a sharer with Jesus, his Lord, 
his Redeemer, in the "first Resurrection." All this is 
symbolized in the proper Christian baptism. 

Our Lord, being free from sin, required no justification 
by another, and when he had reached manhood's 
estate presented himself wholly, unreservedly, to do 
the Father's will. At the moment of consecration his 
earthly life was yielded up as a sacrifice for the sins of 
the whole world,— and this was symbolized by his immersion 
in water. The remaining three and a half years 
of his life were already on the altar, and he merely 
waited for his sacrifice to be consumed, crying with his 
last breath, "It is finished!" Likewise he has invited 
all of his faithful, elect Church to become joint-sacrificers 
with him, and ultimately to become also his joint-heirs 
in the Kingdom to be given to the Royal Priesthood. 
As Jesus' baptism, therefore, signified his death 
sacrificially for sins, so the baptism of Christians symbolizes 
their participation with the Lord in his sacrifice 
(after they have first been justified by faith freely from 
all things by the merit of his blood). In our Lord's 
case the consecration was quickly followed by the symbol, 
and with his followers the consecration should be 
followed by the symbol as quickly as they recognize the 
meaning of the symbol,— which for centuries has been beclouded 
and obscured. 

Quickly following our Lord's consecration and its 
symbolization came the evidence that his sacrifice was 
accepted of God: the heavens were opened unto him. 
This probably signifies that he was granted a vision of 
heaven, confirming to him his relationship to the Father, 
and connecting up the interim of his experience as a 
man with his prehuman experiences: and there came a 
voice declaring him to be God's well-beloved Son, and 
he as well as John (John 1:34) witnessed a manifestation 
of the divine blessing descending upon him like a 



dove. We are not informed that the people saw the 
heavens opened, heard the voice and saw the dove; on 
the contrary, the records seem to indicate that only 
Jesus and John saw and heard, and that the latter was 
granted the privilege to the intent that he might bear 
witness to the fact. 

A dove was a favorite figure with the Jews as an 
emblem of peace and salvation. Indeed, Noah's dove, 
with its olive branch, seems to have become a symbol 
to all civilized peoples. It was most appropriate, therefore, 
that since some figure was to be used as an outward 
evidence of divine blessing, the dove should be 
that figure. Yet we are not to suppose that the holy 
spirit is a dove, nor that it has bodily shape like a dove, 
but as instructed in all the Scriptures, that it is a divine 
power or influence. The dove represented fittingly the 
meek and quiet spirit which is one of the striking ornaments 
of all those who possess the spirit of holiness 
unto the Lord. Such experiences as these which our 
Lord enjoyed are not granted to his followers nor to be 
expected today,— neither the voice nor the opened 
heavens, nor the dove. The coming of the holy spirit 
to the Church at Pentecost was signalized by an outward 
demonstration, which serves the entire Church throughout 
the age. Such outward demonstrations were essential 
at the beginning, as assurances to us that we are not 
following some vain imaginations of our own or other 
men's minds in respect to the holy spirit, and now we 
merely have the realities, which at first were symbolized 
or represented in tangible form. All who, after believing 
unto repentance, are justified from their sins, and 
subsequently present themselves to the Lord to be baptized 
into his death (Rom. 6:3), receive an opening of 
the heavens before them in the sense of an opening of 
their minds to see heavenly things, to appreciate spiritual 
matters; as the Apostle declares, "God reveals them 
unto us by his spirit; for the spirit searcheth all things, 
yea, the deep things of God,"— things which "eye hath 
not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath entered into the 
heart of [the natural] man." (1 Cor. 2:10.) They also 
by faith hear the voice of the Father, speaking unto 
them, saying that, having thus come unto him through 
Jesus, and having thus consecrated their lives to him, 
they are now beloved sons, accepted in the well-beloved 
One. They also receive the blessing of the holy spirit, 
in the shedding abroad in their hearts of the peace-giving, 
meek and gentle spirit of holiness, and this becomes 
more and more a reality with them as they become more 
and more "filled with the spirit." 

Jesus was led of the spirit— his own spirit, illuminated 
by the spirit-baptism which he had just received 

R2566 : page 28 

—to go apart from John and the concourse of people 

into quiet solitude, and for this purpose he chose a wilderness 



place. Mark says he was impelled or "driven" 
of the spirit into the wilderness. The thought we get 
is that there was a great pressure upon our Lord's mind 
at this time. In a previous lesson we noted his study 
at Jerusalem at an early age respecting the "Father's 
business," and how he should go about it. We found 
the Law instructing him that it would not be proper for 
him to engage in the Father's business until he was 
thirty years of age, and that in consideration of this 
fact he desisted and served his parents. The momentous 
time for which he had been waiting for eighteen 
years had come. He hastened to present himself at 
the earliest moment, that his service should not be delayed; 
but now, under the enlightenment of the holy 
spirit, instead of beginning his ministry precipitately, 
he felt that he must know definitely the proper course 
to pursue: he must not make a mistake at the very out-start 
of his service; he must know the Father's will, 
that he might render his service in harmony therewith. 
Such motives impelled him to seek solitude for thought 
and prayer, and for reviewing the various Scriptures 
which hitherto he had studied and but imperfectly comprehended, 
but which now began to be luminous under 
the influence of the holy spirit which he had received. 
How proper it would be that all of the Lord's people, 
when they have made a consecration of themselves 
to the divine service, should be impelled by the new 
mind, the new spirit, to go apart first and to commune 
with the Father, and to study his Word respecting how 
they should render their lives most acceptable in his 
service! Were this course pursued how many lives 
would be totally different from what they are; how many 
failures and changes and turnings, hither and thither, 
would be avoided! Our Lord expressed the matter in 
one of his parables, when he said that anyone taking 
up his cross to follow him should sit down first and 
count the cost— learn what the Father's will would be, 
as well as the results to be sought. And if any of God's 
dear children have neglected thus to seek the right path 
at the beginning of their consecration, we refer them to 
the example of our dear Master, who was wise in this 
as in all things, having not only the spirit of a sound 
mind, but a sound mind itself, through which that spirit 
operated perfectly. However, our study of the divine 
will need not be so completely alone as was our Master's 
—we have "brethren," he had none, being himself the 
forerunner. We may profitably take counsel of such 
as give evidence of faith in and consecration to God, 
that we may learn the more quickly and the more thoroughly 
the Father's will concerning us: especially may 
we have the aid of the words and example of our elder 
Brother, Jesus. We must never forget, however, that 
our consecration is to the Father's business, and that 
brethren can only be really helpful to us as they assist 
us in understanding the Father's plan and our part 
therein: otherwise they might become hindrances by 



substituting their own or sectarian plans and seeking 
our consecration thereto. 

Our Lord's temptations may be said to have begun 
at this point— those temptations in which "he was 
tempted like as we are, yet without sin." It was not 
the boy Jesus, nor the youth Jesus, that was tempted 
"as we are." And our Lord's temptations after his 
consecration were not like the temptations which beset 
the world, but like the Church's temptations. In other 
words, our Lord was reckoned a new creature from the 
time of his consecration at Jordan, as we are counted 
new creatures in him from the time of our consecration; 
and it was the consecrated Jesus who was tempted and 
tried like as his consecrated followers are tempted and 
tried. We shall see further evidences of this as we proceed 
to notice the character of our Lord's temptations, 
and to compare them with the temptations which come 
to his consecrated "brethren." Many have wondered 
why their temptations seemed to commence after their 
consecration to the Lord, rather than before: seemingly 
they expected that after consecration the Adversary 
would flee from them, and they should have little or no 
temptation— totally misunderstanding the divine arrangement. 
Such temptations or tests of character as 

come to the consecrated are not appropriate to the unconsecrated: 
the present is not the judgment day of the 
world, but the testing time for the Church. 

It would appear that our Lord's temptations progressed 
throughout the entire forty days, but that the 
three temptations specifically described were the culmination 
of that period of testing. We may imagine our 
Lord in the wilderness solitude, intently thinking over 
the various prophetic references to himself, and linking 
these together, as an architect would first draw the outline 
of a building and subsequently fill out feature after 
feature of its internal arrangements. The outline before 
our Lord's mind from the Scriptures, beyond any peradventure, 
was the Kingdom. He was to be the King, 
the Seed of Abraham, under whose gracious government 
and wise instruction all the families of the earth were 
to be blessed. This, the profile, was already clearly 
delineated in his mind, but other features needed to be 
properly adjusted. How was he to fulfil the type of 
the Law which represented the priest as giving up his 
life for the sins of the people? Where would come in 
the type of the everlasting priesthood? Where would 
come in the class of Israelites represented by Rebecca, 
as he himself was represented by Isaac, and the Father 
by Abraham, in the type? And if Israel would receive 
him, and become the Rebecca, where would come in 

R2566 : page 29 

the sacrifice, and how? And then other prophecies no 
doubt pressed his mind for a place in the plan, viz., the 
declaration that altho Israel were as the sand of the 



sea only a remnant should be acceptable, and how then 
would the predestinated number of the "elect" be found, 
to complete the glorious royal priesthood; and by what 
process would the blessing come to all the families of 
the earth, if himself, as the High Priest, and his true 
followers, as the royal priests, were all to suffer and to 
die for righteousness' sake, as sacrifices? 

We may well suppose that adjustment and readjustment, 
fitting and refitting, with much reflection and 
prayer, occupied many of the forty days, and there 
may have been temptations intermingled with these all; 
as for instance, questionings respecting the necessity of 
those features represented in the types and specified in 
the prophecies of the sufferings of Christ which must 
take precedence to the glories that would follow. There 
may have been temptations, too, to deal dishonestly 
with the records, to "wrest the Scriptures," and thus 
self-deceived, to choose a way not in fullest conformity 
to the divine outline; but we may safely suppose that 
as soon as such suggestions, one after another, presented 
themselves, they were promptly rejected,— our Lord 
being fully determined that he would be absolutely obedient 
to the Father's will and accomplish the work 
which he had sent him to do in exactly the manner 
prescribed. 

So intent had been his study, and so earnest his 
desire for quiet fellowship with the Father and his Law, 
that forty days were spent under such conditions, and 
apparently so deeply absorbed was our Lord that he 
did not even think of food. Nor does this appear so 
strange to us, when we remember that he was perfect, 
while we are imperfect, physically as well as otherwise. 
"He afterward hungered." 

It was at the close of this period of Bible study 
and prayer, when our Lord was weak from fasting, that 
the Adversary assaulted him with three temptations 
particularized in our lesson. 

The word here translated "devil" is diabolos, and 
is used with the definite article— the devil. The arch-deceiver 
is thus Scripturally distinguished from the fallen 
angels, who throughout the Scriptures are spoken of in 
the plural, designated by another word signifying demons. 
Here, then, is one place in the Scriptures where 
the personality of the prince of devils is definitely affirmed, 
and his person and power acknowledged by our 
Lord himself. It is not necessary for us, however, to 
assume that Satan appeared to our Lord in a human 
form; he may or may not thus have been personally 
manifest. If personally manifest, we may rest well assured 
that he presented himself in his very best appearance, 
as an angel of light. Indeed, we may well remember 
that our Lord, in his prehuman condition, had, 
as the Father's agent, been the Creator of Satan, and 
we remember that Satan was an angel of very high 
order, whose sin consisted in an attempt to usurp 
authority and to become the potentate of earth, by 



stealing the sympathy, affection and obedience of humanity, 
and that on this account he fell under divine 
reprobation. We can imagine that a visit from him to 
Jesus would not be at all inappropriate, as he undoubtedly 
knew the facts of our Lord's consecration, and to 
some extent knew of the work which the Father had 
given him to do in the redemption of the fallen race of 
men. We can imagine him even presenting himself in 
a friendly manner, and assuring our Lord Jesus that he 
felt a great interest in him and in his work; that he 
himself had been painfully surprised to note the penalty 
of sin upon mankind, and the dreadful degradation 
which had resulted; and that now he would be glad indeed 
to have something done by which poor humanity 
might be delivered from its groaning, travailing, dying 
conditions. As a friend, thoroughly versed in the situation 
all around, and interested in its success, and thoroughly 
conversant with the mental moods and foibles 
of humanity, he was in a place where he felt qualified 
to offer some suggestions respecting the very work which 
our Lord Jesus wished to perform, the plan for which 
he was now considering. 

R2567 : page 29 

TEMPTATION TO USE SPIRITUAL FAVORS FOR 
PERSONAL PROFIT. 

First, he manifests his personal interest in our 
Savior by suggesting his weakness from lack of food 
and the necessity for taking proper care of his physical 
health if he would do the great and noble work he had 
undertaken. He reminded him also of his present 
power— that he had just been imbued with divine power, 
and that he had now full ability to supply his wants, 
and need only to speak the word and have the stones 
turned into food. Thus also, he suggested, he would 
be demonstrating to himself the verity of the new power 
which he witnessed coming upon him, and had subsequently 
felt. What more cunning temptation could be 
devised than this? Compliance with it evidently meant, 
not only the relief of his hunger and the strengthening 
of his physical frame, but additionally it apparently 
meant the conversion of Satan, who now seemingly was 
in a repentant attitude, and desirous of cooperating with 
him in the undoing of the evil work of the long ago. 
It was a strong temptation. 

Such temptations come also to all the consecrated; 
not in exactly the same form, nor in the same language, 
but somewhat similarly— suggestions that the new relationship 
with God, and the strength which it brings, 
may be used to some extent at least in creature comforts 

R2567 : page 30 

—may be utilized for our temporal advancement; 



may be made to make us shine before men as very honorable 
and favored of God; may be used to command 
large salaries, or at least as a means for seeking them, 
even if never found. We may then all note carefully 
how our Lord resisted his would-be friend and his 
worldly-wise suggestions. He flatly refused the suggestion 
of using his spiritual power to serve his temporal 
wants. The spiritual gift could no more be used to 
procure temporal comforts than it could be sold for 
money to Simon (Acts 8:18-24); but without going into 
details, and without boasting that he was too holy to 
think of such a sacrilegious use of the power entrusted 
to him, Jesus simply answered the Adversary in Scriptural 
language, that a man's life was not wholly dependant 
upon what he should eat, but that obedience 
to the Word of God would be a surer guarantee of life. 
And after this manner each of the Lord's followers 
should answer every question which in any manner proposes 
the acquirement of earthly blessings and comforts 
at the sacrifice of the spiritual. To quite a number of 
the Lord's "brethren" the Adversary has presented this 
same temptation in this form: If you follow too closely 
to the truth, and permit the holy spirit of the truth to 
make you very zealous in its service, you will soon have 
no bread, no food, for the world's people with whom 
you must deal do not appreciate such things. They 
will discharge you from their employ, or they will cease 
to deal at your store, or they will dismiss you from being 
their pastor, or they will withdraw from you their 
fellowship, their society, etc., and you will starve for 
all the good things of this present life. The proper 
answer is that God is able to take care of all those who 
respect his spiritual blessings too much to sell them for 
a mess of pottage, as did Esau in the type; and that 
we are convinced that whoever lives according to the 
Word of God, tho he may lose some of the comforts of 
the present time, will eventually gain the far better, the 
life eternal with exceeding glory. 

Our Lord's positiveness of reply shut off the temptation 
quickly, and discouraged the Adversary from 
further proceeding along that line; and so it is with us, 
his followers: if we are positive in our rejection of temptation 
it increases our strength of character, not only 
for that time, but also for subsequent temptations; and 
it disconcerts to some extent our Adversary, who, noting 
our positiveness, knows well that it is useless to 
discuss the matter with persons of strong convictions 
and positive characters; whereas, if the question were 
parleyed over, the result would surely be the advancing 
of further reasons and arguments on the Adversary's 
part, and a danger on our part that we would be over-matched 
in argument, for, as the Apostle declares, the 
Devil is a wily adversary, and "we are not ignorant of 
his devices." Prompt and positive obedience to the 
word and spirit of the Lord is the only safe course for 
any of the "brethren." 



TEMPTING GOD BY UNAUTHORIZED EFFORTS. 



Disappointed in his first effort, the Adversary quickly 
turned the subject, not even dissenting from our 
Lord's judgment in the matter. The second temptation 
he presented is like all others that came to our Lord and 
that come to his consecrated followers, viz., not a temptation 
to gross wickedness— to steal, to kill, etc.— but a 
temptation to do the Lord's work in another way than 
that which the Lord had planned— the misuse of the 
divine powers given him by endeavoring to accomplish 
good results in an improper manner. 

Satan took our Lord Jesus to Jerusalem and up to 
the flat roof of one of the wings of the Temple— not 
physically, but mentally, just as mentally we can go to 
various places and do certain things without change of 
physical location. The suggestion now made was this: 
I (Satan) can give you a good suggestion respecting a 
way to bring yourself quickly into prominence before 
the people of Israel, and you will be pleased with it, 
because it is a Scriptural way; indeed I have found that 
it is foretold in the prophecy that Messiah at his coming 
will do this: and the people will readily recognize it as 
a fulfilment of the words of the Prophet David, and 
thus they will embrace your cause quickly, you will 
become the leader of the people, and your work will go 
on most grandly: and as I said before, I will rejoice in 
seeing the prosperity of the work, for I am heartily 
sick of the degradation which I have witnessed for now 
four thousand years. My suggestion is that you go to 
the roof of the southern wing of the Temple which on 
its rear part overlooks the Valley of Hinnom, towering 
above it six hundred feet, and which also overlooks the 
court of the Temple, in which there are hundreds of 
devout Jews: then leap from this eminence, and arise 
unhurt by the fall. This will demonstrate more quickly 
than anything else you could do or say that the power 
of the Highest is upon you, and that you are the Messiah. 
This, I say, is referred to in the Scripture which 
says,— "He shall give his angels charge concerning thee: 
and in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any 
time thou dash thy foot against a stone."— Matt. 4:6. 

Similar are the temptations which Satan presents 
to the consecrated followers of Jesus:— Make a great 
show before the world and the nominal church; attract 
their attention by any means, and not simply by the 
preaching of the cross of Christ; use the spiritual powers 
and blessings that you have received for doing some 
great and striking work, which will appeal to the natural 
man, and thus secure quick and great success; do 
this instead of doing the quiet and less conspicuous 

R2567 : page 31 



work of presenting spiritual things to the spiritual class, 
which work the vast majority can in no wise appreciate, 
but will only shun you, consider you peculiar, and 
which not only will lose you the sympathy of the mass, 
but will bring you specially the hatred of some of the 
principal professors of Christendom. 

Again our Lord answered promptly and correctly: 
"It is written again, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy 
God." Satan would like to have us walk by sight, not 
by faith; he would like to have us continually tempting 
God, and demanding some ocular demonstrations of his 
favor and protection, instead of accepting the testimony 
of his Word, and relying thereon implicitly in faith. 
In the light of the unfolding of the Scriptures we see 
that Satan, probably unwittingly, quoted a passage of 
Scripture wholly out of its proper meaning and interpretation, 
a passage which referred, not to the literal 
feet of Jesus, and to literal stones, and to literal angels, 
but to the symbolic feet-members of the body of Christ 
today, and to the stones of stumbling, doctrinal and 
otherwise, which are now permitted in the pathway of 
the faithful, and to the angels or ministers of divine 
truth who in the present harvest-time would be commissioned 
to bear up the feet members with such counsels, 
admonitions and expositions of Scripture as would 
be necessary for them.— Psa. 91:11,12. 

TEMPTATION TO OBTAIN DESIRED GOOD RESULTS 
BY COMPROMISE. 

Satan's third temptation we may presume was presented 
likewise in a friendly and sympathetic manner, 
indicative of a desire for cooperation in our Lord's great 
work. He took him to a high mountain— not literally, 
but mentally. Indeed, there is no literal high mountain 
near Jerusalem, nor anywhere in the world, from which 
all the kingdoms of the world and their glory could be 
seen. Satan took our Lord mentally to a very high 
symbolic mountain (kingdom). He pictured before 
him the immensity of his (Satan's) own power throughout 
the world, his control of all the nations and peoples 
to a large extent, and this our Lord subsequently acknowledged 
when he referred to Satan as "the prince 
[ruler] of this world." This panoramic presentation 
of Satan's power and influence throughout the world 
was designed to impress upon the mind of our Redeemer 
the thought that Satan's friendship and assistance would 
be most valuable— nay, almost of vital importance to 
the success of his mission, and hence that it was very 
fortunate indeed that at this juncture Satan had 
called upon him in so friendly a mood, and that he apparently 
so sincerely welcomed his efforts and was ready 
to cooperate therewith. 

Satan possibly pointed out to our Lord that Messiah 
was specially referred to as the King of Israel, and 



to bless Israel, and he may have admitted that a light 
of influence would extend to all nations through him, 
but the center of his argument would seem to be that he 
proposed to Jesus a still larger kingdom than Israel. 

R2568 : page 31 

He proposed to him a kingdom embracing all the nations 

of the earth, and that he should have the control 

of all these, and be able to bring in the blessed reforms 

which were designed of God, only one condition being 

insisted upon, viz., that whatever kingdom or rule or 

authority might be established must recognize Satan. 

The Adversary thus seemed to see what he thought a 

favorable opportunity for consummating his original 

plans, for we cannot suppose that his original intention 

was to gain control of a dying and depraved race, but 

that he much rather would be the lord or ruler of a highly 

enlightened and well-endowed people. He was willing, 

therefore, to see carried into effect all the gracious 

work which God had designed, and willing to reform 

himself and to become the leader of reform, provided 

only that he should be recognized as having the chief 

place of influence in connection with mankind. It was 

after this manner that he wished our Lord to do worship 

or reverence to him— to recognize his influence and cooperation 

in the work, and not for a moment can we 

suppose that he expected him to kneel before him and 

to worship him as God. 

Our Lord's reply to this last temptation shows that 
it fully awakened him to a realization of the fact that 
there was no real reformation at work in Satan's heart; 
that he was still ambitious, self-seeking, as at the beginning 
of his downward course; and he realized that 
to even discuss the matter further with one who had thus 
avowed his real sentiments would be disloyalty to the 
Father, and hence his words, "Get thee hence, Satan" 
—leave me; you cannot cooperate with me at all; my 
work is in full accord with the absolute standard of the 
divine will; I can be a party to no program contrary to 
this, however alluring some of its features might be in 
promising a speedy conquest of the world, and a speedy 
establishment of a reign of righteousness and blessing 
and an avoidance of personal suffering; I cannot serve 
two masters; I can only recognize the one supreme Jehovah, 
as Lord of heaven and of earth, and therefore could 
not recognize you in any position of authority except as 
the great Jehovah would appoint you to it, which I 
know he would never do, so long as you are of the present 
ambitious spirit. I am operating along the line of 
the declaration, "Thou shalt worship [reverence] the 
Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve." 

We may readily discern that this temptation of our 
Lord was but a sample illustration of such as beset his 
followers all along the narrow way, from the same source, 
directly or through agencies. Satan, through his various 



mouthpieces, is continually saying to the saints, 
Here is a more successful way of accomplishing your 
object than that which you are pursuing, a more successful 
way than the Lord's way. Bend a little; make compromise 
with the worldly spirit; do not hew too close to 
the line of the word of God and the example of the Lord 
Jesus and the apostles; you must be more like the 
world, in order to exert an influence— mix a little into 
politics, and a good deal into secret societies; keep in 
touch with the fads and foibles of the day, and above all 
things keep any light of present truth under a bushel, 
—thus alone can you have influence and accomplish 
your good desires toward men. But our dear Master 
assures us that we are to be faithful to the Lord and to 
his plan, and let things work out as best they may along 
that line; and that we may rest assured that in the end 
the Father's plan not only is the best but really the 
only plan for accomplishing his great designs, and that 
if we would be associated therein with him as colaborers, 
it must be by recognizing him as our only Master, and 
with an eye single to his approval. 
Our Lord's utter refusal of every other way of 

R2568 : page 32 

carrying out his mission than the one which the Father 

had marked out, the way of self-sacrifice, the narrow 

way, was indeed a great victory. The Adversary left 

him, finding nothing in him that he could take hold of 

or work upon, so thoroughly loyal was he to the very 

word and the spirit of Jehovah. And then, the trial 

being ended, we read that holy angels came and ministered 

to our Lord— doubtless supplying him with refreshment 

such as he had refused to exercise the divine 

power to obtain for himself. And such we may recognize 

as being the experience of our Lord's followers: 

with victory comes a blessing from the Lord, fellowship 

of spirit, refreshment of heart, a realization of divine 

favor that makes stronger for the next trial. 

Another lesson here is that temptation does not 
imply sin. As our Lord was tempted "without sin" 
so may his brethren be if they follow his example and 
with purity of heart, purity of intention, seek only the 
Father's will. Sin could only come through yielding to 
the temptation. But let us not forget that hesitancy 
after the wrong is seen increases the power of the temptation. 
And we may note here that while Satan is a 
tempter, endeavoring to ensnare us into wrong paths 
and wrong conduct, God is not so; "he tempteth no 
man" (Jas. 1:13), and even tho he permit the Adversary 
and his agents to beset his people, it is not with 
the object of ensnaring them, but with the opposite object, 
that they may by such trials and testings be made 
the stronger, developing character through exercise in 
resisting evil. Let us remember too for our strengthening, 
the Scriptural assurance that God will not suffer us to be 



tempted above that we are able to resist and overcome 
but will with the temptation provide also a way of escape. 

To avail ourselves of this provision requires merely 
faith, and the more we exercise our faith in such matters 
the more of it we will have, becoming stronger in 
the Lord and in the power of his might; and thus by 
divine grace and under the Master's assistance we may 
come off overcomers— conquerors, and more than conquerors, 
through him who loved us and bought us with 
his own precious blood.— 2 Cor. 12:9; 1 Cor. 10:13; 
Eph. 6:10; Rom. 8:37-39. 



page 32 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I wish to thank you 
for Vol. V. of M. DAWN, for it has been a great help 
to me in clearing up many dark points; it has been to 
me indeed "meat in due season," and it is just what 
I wish to place in the hands of my friends and neighbors. 
There are now quite a number here who have 
read M.D. who are more or less interested, but so far 
I could not find any one who has come fully into the 
truth, and I have been thinking that perhaps if you 
could send a "Pilgrim" brother here for a few days some 
time this winter to present the truth orally to such as 
are interested much good could be done. I have the 
Mission hall promised me for this purpose, as I have 
succeeded in interesting the man who keeps this Mission 
at his own expense, and all he wants is two or three 
weeks' notice as to when I want the hall. He is a very 
liberal minded Christian who, I believe, will be open 
to the truth if only he could be brought to investigate 
it, but his time is so completely taken up by Prohibition, 
the "salvation of souls" and social reform movements 
that he finds no time. Now if you find it expedient 
to send a brother I will gladly receive him into 
my home and make all necessary arrangements about 
meetings and invite all interested ones to attend; we 
could hold at least one public evening -meeting a day 
and one in the afternoon for such as are interested. 

I would also like to have some extra copies of the 
TOWER for distribution among such of the friends as 
are interested in the truth, who have read M. DAWN, 
to see if I cannot get some of them to subscribe for it, 
because I know from my own experience how very 
helpful it is. I would not be without it for ten times 
its subscription price. The publication of your discourse, 
"Which is the True Gospel?" has given me 
much pleasure, as it was impossible for me to attend 
either the Indianapolis or St. Louis Conventions, which 
was a great disappointment to me. 

Your discourse is very logical, a clear statement 



of facts, and would, I believe, make an excellent 
tract. I thank the Lord for giving me a small share 
in his harvest work; I would like to devote all my time 
and means to that glorious work, but as my family has 
a prior claim I will do what I can, knowing that the 
Lord sees my intention and willingness and accepts it. 
It is now a year since I gave myself fully to the Lord 
who bought me with his precious blood, and looking 
back over the year I can see his tender mercy in his 
leadings, and how he has kept me and revealed to me 
the hidden depths of my heart. His grace is sufficient 
at all times, and I have full confidence in him that he 
will continue and finish the good work which he has 
so graciously begun in me. I realize more than ever 
my own unworthiness and inability to do anything 
good in my own strength. May he also continue to 
bless and preserve you is my prayer. 
Your brother in Christ, C. L. BAUER,-Indiana. 



DEAR MR. RUSSELL:-I have just received enclosed 
card (saying that my subscription is in arrears) 
and deeply regret I am not able to send my subscription 
for the TOWER this month, but I think it is very probable 
I can remit before the end of next month. 

As I read the remark of the card that I "cannot 
afford to miss the TOWER teachings if interested," 
I thought how little do the TOWER friends know of 
what these teachings are to me, or they would never 
have put it so mildly. 

To me they are a part of my very life, inasmuch 
as they have opened up the Scriptures to me in a marvelously 
new light; to me they have revealed God as 
my Father, Jesus as my Redeemer, and the Holy Spirit 
as an ever present Guide in a manner hitherto undreamed 
of; for me they have shined with dazzling 
brightness upon the very darkest moments of my life; 
for me they are meat and drink, an all engrossing 
theme, and will be until the everlasting blessedness is 
mine, "partaker of the Divine Nature." I cannot explain 
it but the very thought of such a transformation 
while it humbles one to the very dust, exalts as if on 
angels' wings. Oh no! I cannot afford to do without 
the TOWER teachings, for through them "I have seen 
his face, and souls that once have looked upon their 
Lord, must die or look again." Just now I am feasting 
on "Our Lord's Return." What can be more convincing, 
more sublime, or more elevating than "The 
Parousia!" May His wealth of glorious goodness, love, 
wisdom and power be showered upon you and yours! 

Yours, ever gratefully, ELEANOR MILLER. 



page 33 