R63 : page 1 

VOL. I. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., JANUARY, 1880. 

NO. 7. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



REGULAR CONTRIBUTORS. 

J. H PATON, .... ALMONT, MICH. 
W. I. MANN, .... SWISSVALE, PA. 
B. W. KEITH, . . . DANSVILLE, N.Y. 
H. B. RICE, . . . W. OAKLAND, CAL. 
A. D. JONES, . . . PITTSBURGH, PA. 



In no case will the Editor be responsible for all sentiments 
expressed by correspondents, nor is he to be understood as 
indorsing every expression in articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS, 50 CENTS PER YEAR, In Advance-includes 
postage. 



All communications should be addressed to "ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER," as above, and drafts, money orders, etc., made 
payable to the Editor. 



R63 : page 1 



DIALOGUE. Rev. 13. 

B. I am here again Bro. A., anxious as ever to enjoy whatever 
light may be due the church; I know that you believe the word of 
God to be a lamp, whose oil is the spirit, which sheds its light 
upon the path of the just as fast as the light is due, in order that 
at each step we may not be in darkness. Have you seen anything 
fresh or new lately? 

A. God's word is "new every morning and fresh every evening." 
In this respect it differs from all other books and, undoubtedly it 
is a fountain of living waters (truths) from the fact that it 
contains special dispensational truths, as well as general truth. 
Thus it is a great storehouse from which the Lord's servants are 
to bring forth "things new and old," that the household of faith 
may have meat in due season. " I seem to see in a clearer light 
than ever before, the present condition of the nominal church 
and its future. We talked some of this subject at a previous 
interview, when we considered the text- "Babylon is fallen." 
The subject in general and the Bible teaching concerning it, 
seems daily to open up more clearly. I think too, that it is— the 
meat due here. Many saints in "Babylon" are ignorant of the 
fact, and therefore do not obey the call- "Come out from her my 
people, so that you may have no fellowship with her sins and 
that you receive not of her plagues." Would this subject be 
agreeable to you this evening? 

B. It would, and profitable too I hope. I was much interested in 
our last conversation on The Antichrist and its picture in Rev. 
12. 

A. Then we will consider the "Two horned beast" of the next 
chapter now. It seems to follow connectedly, our last topic. 

B. Suppose you use the Emphatic Diaglott; it is so much clearer. 
Then I can have the advantage of both translations. 

A. The first ten verses of this chapter describe the Papal-Roman 
dominion. It is the Leopard; its spots showing mixture, or 
church and empire combined. It receives its power &c, from the 
"Dragon" (Pagan Rome.) Let me here explain that in symbol, 
"Heavens," signify the higher or ruling powers, "Earth," 
represents the people obedient to those ruling powers. When the 
Dragon gave its place to Papacy, it (Papacy) became "the 
heavens" and those who were obedient to it (the church) were 
"the earth." "The sea" represents the general masses of the 
world, without religious restraints. 

The "Leopard" arose from the sea— from among the masses of 
the people-received its power and dominion etc. "And the 
whole earth wondered after the beast. " And they did homage to 
the Dragon (Paganism) because he gave the authority to the 
Beast. And they worshiped the Beast saying: Who is like to the 
Beast? Thus we see that the people honored both the empire and 



the ecclesiastical or church power, finally concluding that the 
Beast (ecclesiastical power) was the stronger, and saying— "Who 
is able to make war (to contend) with the Beast. The 
"blasphemies and the great swelling words" of this power, we 
talked of at our last interview. Its time for speaking is not 
limited; it still speaks, but not so its time for acting. It had 
"power to act forty and two months." This is the same period 
referred to in chap. 12 as "twelve hundred and sixty days," and 
three and a half times (3-1/2 years) extending from A.D. 538 to 
1798, when its "power to act" or put to death seems to have 
ceased. 

THE TWO HORNED BEAST 

Vs. 11. "And I saw another wild beast, ascending from the 
earth. " If the previous beast was an ecclesiastical power, this 
beast called another would also be an ecclesiastical, or church 
power. As the first beast had ten horns, or powers, which gave to 
it their support, strength and protection, so this beast has "two 
horns." The first beast received a deadly wound from the sword. 
(Vs. 14.) The sword is the word of God and Papacy received 
such a wound during the reformation. The preaching of the word 
of God by Luther, Zwingle and others, showing it to be the 
"mystery of iniquity," "The man of Sin," "The Antichrist," &c, 
took away much of its power and almost took its life. 

B. I see then that the second beast with two horns, you regard as 
another ecclesiastical power arising since the reformation. Can it 
be possible that it refers to or symbolizes Protestantism? 

A. I think it does. As Papacy became a beast by the union of 
church and empire, so with Protestantism. It is not called a beast 
until it unites with the empires represented by the two horns- 
two powers, England and Germany. Notice that this beast does 
not come out of the Sea (the irreligious masses) but from the 
"Earth" (the people who had been obedient to Papacy). It has not 
the fierce, aggressive character of the "Leopard," but "two horns 
like a lamb." It used its horns only as a means of defense and 
protection. 

B. The next statement that it "spake as a dragon" does not seem 
to fit Protestantism. It would seem to imply that the second beast 
taught the same things as the dragon, i.e. Paganism &c. 

A. By no means, the two beasts are being contrasted. We have 
already been told what were the claims of the Leopard or Papal 
ecclesiasticism, how it spake great swelling words and 
blasphemies, how it claimed the right to "rule all nations with a 
rod of iron" by virtue of its other claim that it was "The kingdom 
of God. " Protestantism, though it associated itself with earthly 
empire and became a beast made no such boast. It spake no such 
swelling words and made no such pretentious claims. It does not 



speak as the dragon, as a dragon-Its claims are the same as any 
civil or dragon power. 

B. O I see! I thought that its speaking as a dragon, would 
indicate that it was worse than Papacy but I see that it really 
marks it as being better and is the distinguishing feature between 
it and "The man of Sin. " It does seem that the Spirit clothed the 
matter in such symbols as would be difficult or impossible to 
understand until it should become meat due to the church. 

A. Notice further that although the two-horned beast claimed 
less, its greater humility did not operate against it, for "All the 
authority of the first beast he executes in his presence. " 

B. That is the Protestant Beast [the state churches of England 
and Germany.] was able to exert as much influence and power 
as Papacy could by its greater claims. But what is meant by "in 
his presence?" 

A. This is thrown in to show us that the rise of the second, did 
not destroy the first one. They continue to exist 
contemporaneous ly . 

"And he makes The Earth and those who dwell in it to worship 
the first beast whose mortal wound was healed. " Papacy's 
wound began 

R64 : page 1 

to heal from the time the Reformation Church united to worldly 
empires, for how could the Reformers any longer use the Sword 
of the Spirit against Papacy as a church- state organization 
when they themselves were the same. 

And not only did this cause them to cease to wound and injure 
Papacy, but when they justified their own church and empire 
organization and demanded for it the respect and reverence of 
the people, they virtually caused all, both papists and protestants 
to worship, respect and honor the Papal Church. To such an 
extent is this true, that to-day the Papal Church is recognized 
among Christians as one of the churches of Christ, instead of, in 
its true character as the "Antichrist," that the Lord recognizes as 
"The Abomination of the Earth. " The utterance of early 
reformers against this church, if made to-day would be 
denounced by both Christians and the world. 

Vs. 13. "And he does great signs 

R64 : page 2 

so that fire he makes to come down from heaven to the earth in 
the presence of men. " Remember that both beasts are now, in 
"heaven, " or in authority. The second beast displays its power 
over "the earth," or those who are under its authority by 
occasionally sending down fire [symbol of judgment and 
punishments] upon them— declaring certain judgments and 



punishments upon those who oppose it— heretics. Such fire was 
sent down upon the Dissenters- Baptists, Puritans and others. 

Vs. 14. "And he deceives those who dwell on the earth by the 
signs which it was given him to do in the presence of the beast. " 
Those who dwell on the earth (not "the earth" itself-i.e. the 
people who acknowledge and obey these two beasts) probably 
refers to independent Christians not allied to worldly 
organizations. These were deceived by the pretentious claims of 
divine right and appointment etc. 

They claim as the Papal church did and does that they are the 
only church of Christ and that none but their ministers and 
bishops have right to preach since they and the Roman Catholic 
clergy alone are rightly "ordained of God." They claim that the 
right to ordain (set apart and install in office) was originally 
possessed only by the Apostles, who through "laying on of 
hands," conferred the gifts of the Spirit. This last we know is 
true, but they also claim that those so ordained, could, in 
ordaining others, confer the same spiritual gifts and powers. 
This was probably first promulgated to give power and seeming 
authority to the clergy, and to create between them and the 
balance of the church, a gulf of awe so wide that few would dare 
leap over. Thus priest-craft obtained a mighty hold upon the 
minds of the people. It is the carrying out of this same principle 
that sanctions the teaching, that none are qualified to understand 
the Bible aright except those consecrated by the imposition of 
holy orders by the Apostolic succession. This claim of both 
beasts we deny, and assert that the laying on of hands by all the 
Bishops and Popes, could not add to the spiritual gifts of any, 
saint or sinner. We challenge both churches to produce a single 
case in which "the gifts of the Spirit" (as they are explained in 1 
Cor.) ever followed the ordination of their ministers. 

It was in this way that the second beast deceived or led into error 
(bondage) the various independent companies of protestant 
Christians, telling them ("those who dwell on the earth") to 
make an image to the (first) beast, who has the wound of the 
sword and lives." 

B. We understand then that these two churches, the church of 
England and the church of Germany by their claims and 
organizations similar to Papacy, said to smaller companies of 
Independent Protestant Christians by example etc. : You will also 
find it necessary to have an ecclesiastical fence to separate your 
clergy from the common people of the church, that their 
utterances, by seeming authority may have the greater weight, 
even as the word of God with the people— thus preventing the 
exercise of individual thought and study. 

A. Yes, they demonstrated to them that they required an 
organized government &c, of the clergy over the common 
people like to Papacy in form, in fact an "Image of that beast. " 



This each denomination, Presbyterian, Methodist, Baptist and 
legion besides, did, as they gained power, i.e. While they 
denounced priest-craft and advocated individual study of the 
Bible, yet, they claimed the authority of their clergy to interpret 
the scriptures. And while they freely placed the Bible in the 
hands of the people, they handed them along with it, the 
catechism and creed of the church. They concede the right of the 
individual to be a member of the church and to study the word if 
they will agree to believe neither more nor less than the clergy 
who formed the creed. Strange liberty! Thus each denomination 
did make an image; but there is a sense in which they have all 
united to make one grand image, the one referred to in this 
fourteenth verse. 

B. I notice that the Sinaitic MSS. adds the word also in this 
verse— "That they also should make an image. " —Would not this 
seem to indicate that Protestantism as represented in this beast, 
is an image of the first beast also? 

A. Yes, the thought is there even without the word also, since 
they are both beasts, but also, does add to the force. Well, they 
took the advice of example and did organize such an image. In 
London, Aug. 19th, 1846, there assembled representatives of all 
the leading Protestant denominations of Europe and America, 
who there organized under the name— "Evangelical Alliance." 
That was a church organization in many respects similar in form 
("an image") to Papacy. Its design is to increase the power and 
authority of Protestantism, just as the formation of the Leopard 
beast was the result of a desire to increase the power and 
authority of Papacy. 

B. Surely you do not mean to say that the "Evangelical 
Alliance," which seemingly has been for the cementing of all 
Protestant Christians into one organization is an evil thing. 

A. The union of believers is one of the things for which we long 
and pray, but it is brought about, not by the organization of 
societies, but by the Holy Spirit. It is a union of hearts bound 
together by the golden chord of truth; not a union of church 
societies bound by creeds. 

If the Evangelical Alliance were the coming together of 
Christians, saying-We realize that there is "One Lord, one faith, 
one baptism," and that all truth is in harmony, and therefore, as 
we who profess to be God's children differ widely on various 
subjects and our various creeds in many particulars contradict 
each other, we desire to lay aside all written creeds and we unite 
in this manner as Christians, with no rule nor creed but the 
Bible. We will henceforth strive to be taught of God and seek to 
come to harmony in the understanding of His word. 

I say if this were the object, I could rejoice at such an 
organization. But it is not; no, each denomination stands as 
firmly as ever by its creed. And this Alliance is designed only as 



a protection to those creeds. The Alliance has a creed of nine 
articles, and none can be considered as within the pale of 
Orthodoxy, except by subscribing to this creed. It is, I repeat, an 
organization in form and purpose, similar to Papacy and is here 
properly termed the "Image of the beast." 

Vs. 15. "And it was given him to give breath to the image of the 
beast, that the image of the beast should both speak, and cause 
that as many as would not worship the image of the beast, 
should be killed."- That is, the Protestant beast gave vital power 
and authority to the image (The united sects— Evangelical 
Alliance). It has done this by joining with them in the 
organization. The church of England and the church of Germany 
were both represented at several of the late meetings of the 
Alliance. This is contrary to the Spirit of their creeds, as all 
know who are conversant with them. The English and German 
churches each claim, as the Papal has always done, that theirs is 
THE CHURCH founded by the Apostles and that their ministers 
and bishops have the special unction for teaching by the "laying 
on of hands," or what is known as ordination and Apostolic 
succession. These claim that the Papacy was an apostacy from 
their church, and that the various other denominations are 
schisms from their church and heretical, in that they hold 
doctrines differing from theirs. 

They have departed from the real ground of their creed when 
they take part with other denominations in forming, and 
recognizing (giving life to) "the image. " 

And even the Papal Church went so far as to acknowledge the 
Image, for during the session (in Europe) two months since, she 
sent her GREETINGS to the "Evangelical Alliance." The 
recognition by these beasts gives force and power to the image, 
so that it can command the reverence of all; and woe be to the 
one who dares refuse to worship "Orthodoxy." He is 
symbolically "killed" -cut off, as a heretic, and is no longer 
recognized as a Christian. 

Vs. 16. "And he causes all, the little and great, and the rich and 
the poor, and the freemen and the bondmen, that they should 
give themselves a mark on the right hand or in their forehead;" 
i.e., the Image causes all who would be its followers and 
worshipers to commit themselves either by a public profession 
(mark in forehead), or by giving able support with their might, 
power and means (mark in right hand). A mark is a seal or sign 
of allegiance. 

B. How do the various denominational churches constituting the 
Image follow Papacy? 

A. In many ways. For instance: Papacy established the clerical 
hierarchy, who lord it over God's heritage instead of serving 
their brethren as Jesus explained- "One is your Master and all ye 
are brethren," and as Paul said- "We are to speak the 



R65 : page 2 

truth in love and grow up into Him in all things who is the head, 
even Christ; from whom the whole body fitly joined together 
(not by creeds of men, but by love begotten by the one Spirit of 
truth) and compacted by that which every joint supplieth (every 
joint is every member, not the clergy only) making increase of 
the body unto the edifying of itself in love. " Thus coming "to the 
unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God. " 
Eph. 4. 

As Papacy established the priesthood over the church, so 
Protestantism has established almost the same, and there is no 
opportunity for the body to edify itself, every joint taking part. 
True, there is a seeming show of liberty at prayer meetings, &c, 
but it is only upon the surface, for the ordained pastor is to 
watch zealously lest anything contrary to the teachings of his 
church should be expressed, and if so to silence the audacious 
member at once, for the church creed is the rule, not the Word of 
God. If this is not sufficient, they must have a sort of church trial 
and excommunicate him ["kill him"]. The trial, by the way, 
gives evidence of another likeness to the beast, namely, the 
exaltation of the teachings of the organization above the Word 
of God, for all such are tried according to "the authorities" of 
their church. 

Another mark is the ordination or apostolic succession. This is 
claimed by Methodists and others, who go through the same 
form of consecrating their ministers as do the Episcopal and 
Roman Catholic churches, and without scriptural authority. 

B. Do you not think it right that fellow servants should pray over 
and in the name of God set apart a fellow member for the Lord's 
service? 

A. O yes ! What I object to is the idea held, that some 
supernatural power and wisdom is conveyed, and that it is 
particular that the blessing come in a direct descent from the 
first Apostles. Another prominent mark of the beast copied 



[Continued on seventh page.] 

R65 : page 7 

[Continued from second page.] 



by the image is the honoring of the special class, the clergy, with 
special honors and titles. They are known as Revs., Divines, 
etc., but Jesus, the divine, said: "Ye call me Lord and Master, 
and ye say well, for so I am." "Be not ye called Rabbi, neither be 
ye called Masters, for one is your Master, even Christ, and all ye 
are brethren (Matt. 23:8). These titles are assumptions fashioned 
after those of Papacy. 



When the various denominations began their existence, more 
full of the spirit of Christ, they claimed no such high-sounding 

titles. The Reformers were not known as Rev. , 

D.D., &c, but as John Knox, Martin Luther, John Wesley, &c. 
Unpretentious, like Jesus and the Apostles, they were intent 
upon serving God and therefore became the servants (ministers) 
of the church. These had marks of God's approval, and as a 
result, their ministry was wonderfully blest. But now the clergy 
are far from being servants, they are Lords. They have itching 
ears, loving the approval of men. As pride and worldliness have 
come in, vital godliness and power have gradually departed. 

For the very same reason they are losing all power to expound 
the Word of God-the gift of teaching -because "God abhoreth 
the proud but giveth grace (favor) to the humble. " The early 
reformers were humble, and God led them into much knowledge 
of His Word, and although we are much farther along "the path 
of the just," and the servants should have more light and bring 
things new as well as old from the Word, yet we find ministers 
of all denominations ready to confess their ignorance of the 
Word. They appeal for their information back to the early 
reformers, and thus confess that they have less light than they. 
Pride always has hindered growth in grace and does now. " 
"How can ye believe who receive honor one of another, and 
seek not the honor which cometh from God, only?" That their 
light should grow dim and their spiritual life become dwarfed is 
the natural result of their joining the image and subscribing to 
creeds made in the fifteenth century, which, like the iron shoe of 
China, will not admit of any growth. It is a shoe a little larger 
than Papacy put upon its followers but of the same sort. 

Another mark received by nearly all is 

SPRINKLING INSTEAD OF BAPTISM. 

This has been handed down through the Church of Rome to the 
Churches of England and Germany, and through the influence of 
these to the allied Evangelical churches. 

The word baptize is not a translated word, but a transferred 
Greek word, and means to dip, immerse, wash, as is abundantly 
proven by its use in hundreds of instances in profane Greek 
literature. Its use in scripture seems also to teach the same thing, 
as well as the admitted fact that all Christians for nearly three 
centuries practiced immersion. The Church of Rome (the only 
one which has a history) admits that the word signifies, to 
immerse, and that it was so practiced by early Christians, but 
claims that SHE changed it. She claims that she, through her 
head, the Pope, (the vicar of Christ), had authority to change any 
ordinance. This is in harmony with the spirit of Papacy as 
illustrated in the quotation at our last meeting from Pope Martin: 
"Wherefore no marvel if it be in my power to change time and 
times, to alter and abrogate laws, to dispense with all things, 



yea, with the precepts of Christ." Can you wonder that I should 
feel aggrieved to see fellow Christians ignore the precepts of 
Christ and exalt instead the teachings of men, claiming that it 
makes no difference? 

B. Certainly if these are marks of the beast, it is time that all 
Christians should realize it. Also, that all who are worshiping 
any church organization should be warned. "See thou do it not." 
These are thy fellow servants. "Worship God." Rev. 22:9. 

A. The image worship is hindering hundreds from seeing the 
beauties of the Word of God. They may perhaps glance at it and 
for a moment think for themselves, but that is all. The church 
discipline is so strict and they reverence it so much that a look or 
frown is sufficient to warn them that independent thought is a 
dangerous thing and must not be indulged in, lest they be 
regarded as infidels. Would that all could see that these local 
organizations called churches are not THE CHURCH, but that 
the Church of God includes all Christians, all whose names are 
written in Heaven, and that when these local organizations 
attempt to come between them as children, and God their Father, 
or to put their creed instead of the Word of God, their assumed 
authority is not to be recognized, nor tolerated; and that it is our 
duty to rebuke it as sinful. 

Vs. 17. "So that no one may be able to buy or sell unless he who 
has the mark, the name of the beast, or the number of his name. " 
The buying and selling here are doubtless symbolic, and refer to 
trading, or exchanging of spiritual things- truths. None are 
recognized as having a right to teach or preach unless they have 
these marks; i.e., he must have a theological examination to see 
whether he bears all the marks and reverences the authority of 
the image. He must either be a part of the beast itself, or of the 
number of his name— many denominations. 

B. Our meeting has been profitable to me, I hope. I will watch 
the closer that I do not worship men nor men's opinions and 
creeds. Man worship in some form seems to be a failing of very 
many. 

A. If you feel interested enough in these topics, and will call 
again, we may take up some of the subsequent chapters of this 
interesting but in times past sealed book. Farewell. 



R65 : page 3 



"As Unknown and Yet Well Known." 

Strangers here- 
Not a link with earth unbroken, 
Not a farewell to be spoken; 
Waiting for their Lord to take them 
To Himself, and like Him make them. 

Strangers here- 
with their hearts upon a treasure 
That has dimmed for them earth's pleasure, 
Lamps well trimmed, and brightly burning, 
Eyes forever upward turning. 

Strangers here- 
Earthly rank and riches losing. 
Worldly ties and claims refusing. 
On to Christ in glory passing. 
All things there in Him possessing. 

Strangers here- 

But in Him their hearts are resting, 
Faith looks up in days of testing, 
Follows Him with true allegiance, 
Loves to walk in His obedience. 

Well know there - 
Oh, what joy for Christ to take them 
To the Father, who will make them 
Welcome in His mansions yonder, 
Strangers here-to be no longer. 



R66 : page 3 



-Selected. 



The Old and New. 



The natural and the spiritual, both, are elements of God's plan. 
Some make too much of the one and some too much of the 
other. If we would keep balanced we should carefully avoid 
extremes. First the natural and afterward the spiritual, is God's 
law of development, both of dispensations and persons; and the 
natural is first also in the sense that the spiritual grows out of it- 
not developed by the power of the natural itself, but by the 
power of the spiritual, with which the natural is impregnated. In 
God's order there can be no spiritual without first the natural, 
hence the spiritual is in one sense dependent on the natural. This 
gives us a clear application of the principles: "The elder shall 
serve the younger," spoken concerning Esau (the elder) and 
Jacob (the younger). Gen. 25:23. They were twins; and thus 
intimately related, clearly represent the relation between the 



natural and the spiritual, Esau, as the natural, first, and afterward 
Jacob. 

The Jewish and Gospel dispensations stand so related to each 
other. As Esau for pottage sold Jacob his birthright and Jacob 
received the blessing of the firstborn, so natural Israel by 
desiring only the things adapted to an earthly condition, lost the 
kingdom, and it is given to another nation— the Gospel church- 
the true Israel of God. But the Gospel church grew out of the 
Jewish; the remnant saved being the nucleus around which the 
Gospel church was gathered. Christ, his apostles and all the 
remnant were Jews, they received the Holy Spirit and became 
the light beams to the Gentiles: "Salvation is of the Jews." John 
4:22. The natural is the elder, but the elder serves the younger. 

The natural and the spiritual are related thus to each other in the 
person of our Lord Jesus Christ, reckoning from the beginning 
of his earthly life. As one born of the flesh (the natural) he was 
natural, but when he was born from the dead by the Spirit he 
was spiritual, and he is our Leader in the order of development. 
This order, in Christ is the key to the whole plan, and is the basis 
of Paul's statement concerning our resurrection. "It is sown a 
natural body; it is raised a spiritual body." 1 Cor. 15:44,46. The 
natural could not of itself become spiritual, neither could there 
be the spiritual, in God's order without "First the natural. " The 
natural or "vile body" changed becomes the glorious body; 
changed by the power of the Spirit indwelling. Rom. 8:11 and 
Phil. 3:21. 

The relation of the grub and the butterfly is a good illustration of 
the Christian in his two stages of existence. It is first the grub 
and afterward the butterfly, the grub changing into a butterfly on 
account of the butterfly nature which the grub possesses. So 
when a man has the Divine or spiritual nature, in due time he 
will "bear the image of the heavenly," a glorious form, (1 Cor. 
15:49). But a mere natural man has no germ of the spiritual, and 
hence he needs a Savior-he needs the life giving power of the 
Second Adam. 

Adam was a mere natural man and in harmony with this fact 
was on trial only for natural life, which the typical tree could 
prolong. There is no intimation in the Bible that spirituality or 
immortality was placed before him as of possible attainment. If 
it be said, "God's plan cannot change, and therefore God 
intended from the first that man should develop from the natural 
to the spiritual." I answer by admitting the premises, and urging 
in consequence that God intended that man should receive 
spiritual life by the Second Adam. As man had only natural life 
when created, a redeemed or ransomed life can only be natural; 
and as a naturally dead man can not develop into spiritual life, 
man needs a Redeemer, and must either be actually redeemed if 
dead, or counted redeemed if under sentence, in order to receive 
the spiritual life. We may thus be able to see great light and 



beauty in the fact that in Christ are combined both the natural 
and the spiritual, for man needs a Redeemer from the curse 
"Dying thou shalt die, " and also a spiritual Life-giver. We are 
compelled to believe that Christ is man's Redeemer from natural 
death, because He gave his natural life (Gr. psuchee) a ransom 
for the many; and natural life could not redeem spiritual life nor 
spiritual redeem the natural, as the law requires "An eye for an 
eye and a tooth for a tooth. " But we are asked was it not God's 
plan to raise man from natural death? We answer, yes; but it was 
as much his plan to raise them by a Redeemer, as to raise them 
at all, or as it was his plan to give men spiritual life by the 
Second Adam. It is evidently a part of the plan to save or deliver 
man from the natural death, and so far at least God saves the old 
man. It seems to us a misapprehension of the relation between 
the natural and the spiritual, that leads to the idea that there is no 
provisions for the salvation of the old man. If God raises the 
dead "distinct from Christ," or without a Redeemer, he saves 
them without a provision; but even with this view, the recovery 
of the natural man from natural death in order to give him 
spiritual life is as much a necessity as in our view, that God 
saves men by a Redeemer. It seems strange that any one should 
say that God has made no provision to save the natural man. 
Pray tell us who needs saving if not poor lost, sinful mortal man. 
The spiritual man needs no Savior; he is the saved man. To 
restore is to save from death; in this sense he saves all mankind. 
To give spiritual life is to save by preventing the second death. 
"On such the second death hath no power." "Neither can they 
die any more." Rev. 20:6 and Luke 20:36. 

This is the great, the special salvation and is to believers only; 
and the principle involved is, THE OLD MADE NEW. If God 
does not save the old man he saves nobody. And if the new 
creation does not consist in making the old man new, by the 
power of the spirit, then our glorified Savior is not the man 
Christ Jesus who went about doing good; who learned to 
sympathize with his brethren, because "he was tried in all points 
like as we are;" and who gave himself a ransom for all, by his 
obedience unto death; and was therefore highly exalted. Phil. 
2:8,9. If he does not save the old man by making him new, then 
there is neither resurrection nor change-the putting on of 
immortality. The butterfly may or may not remember his grub 
life, but as he flutters in the air with his beautiful form and 
gaudy dress, he is the very same creature that once wallowed in 
the soil of earth. 

Our change will indeed be great, well may it be called a "New 
Creation;" (to form anew or give a new form.) "It doth not yet 
appear what we shall be; but we know that when he shall appear, 
we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is." 1 John 3:2. 
We would doubtless be greatly surprised could we in vision see 
ourselves in glory: these vile bodies changed, and fashioned like 
unto his glorious body; but no one need be afraid of losing his 



identity. When we look back, and realize what God hath 
wrought in redeeming out of every kindred, and in making us 
Kings and Priests, well may we then exclaim: "Oh death where 
is thy sting, Oh grave where is thy victory. Thanks be unto God 
that giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. " And as 
Jesus by the memory of his suffering can sympathize with the 
sorrowing and the tempted, so will we by the trials which we 
have overcome, be prepared with him to share in the 
administration of power, to succor and bless the nations of Earth 
in the millennial day. 

All hail, to our mighty Redeemer and Friend; 
Who saves the redeemed to a life without end. 
In thy kingdom of glory, may we share with the few 
In bringing mankind from the old to the new. 



J. H. P. 



R66 : page 3 



Into All Truth. 



"Howbeit when he, the spirit of truth is come, he will guide 
you into all truth." -John 16:13. 

To whom was that promise made by the Savior, to the 
Apostles, or to the church? And if to the church, does it belong 
to each individual of the church? We believe there is a sense in 
which it was designed for the Apostles, and was fulfilled in 
them. Revelation has two phases, one of which is fulfilled in the 
word being spoken or written, the other in its being understood. 
This is especially true of prophecy, which though spoken or 
written by men inspired by the spirit, was not understood, nor 
intended to be understood by them, (1 Pet. 1:11,12.) but was for 
the church. Prophecy can only be fully understood when 
fulfilled, and a truth is not fully revealed until it is understood. 
To reveal is to make known, and in a very important sense the 
promise of the Spirit was fulfilled when the inspired writings 
were complete and given to the church. We do not believe that 
new truths, not contained in the Bible, have been given to men, 
and when men come to us claiming to have new revelations, we 
beware. But we have no doubt that in the application and 
understanding of the word, the Spirit's help is as necessary as in 
writing it. The prophets and apostles had inspiration to write and 
the church have the same Spirit's help to understand. 

The Apostles are as the twelve foundation stones of the church, 
(when complete and glorified the New Jerusalem. -Rev. 21:14,) 
and as such, represent the whole church, and for this reason, the 
terms "ye" and "you" addressed to them, refer to the whole 
church. In this way we believe the promise of the Spirit 



R67 : page 3 

belongs to the whole church. "Go ye into all the world," is our 
commission, to preach the gospel, as well as their's, though 
addressed to them. "Lo I am with you alway even unto the end 
of the world," is a precious promise to us and could refer to 
them only in the sense that they were a part of the one family 
addressed, and in their time, received by the Spirit all needed 
help. The church is one body, Christ being its head, and the 
Apostles important members of it, but the body would be 
incomplete without the toes, and the same Spirit animates the 
toes that animates the Head. "There is one body and one Spirit, 
even as ye 

R67 : page 4 

are called in one hope of your calling." Eph 4:4. 

The living generation of believers in Christ represents the 
church now as at any time in the past, but it requires the whole 
number, dead and living, to constitute the church, that body 
which when complete and filled with glory, will shine as the sun 
in the Father's kingdom. Now, we do not and cannot believe that 
Christ, in any sense, intended the promise of which we are 
speaking, for any one individual, now, or at any time in the past; 
hence we do not believe that any one person ever had, or ever 
will have the truth concerning Christ and his plans this side of 
the kingdom or immortal state. "Now we see through a glass, 
darkly, but then face to face. Now I know in part, but then shall I 
know even as also I am known." 1 Cor. 13:12. Whoever expects 
all the truth while in a mortal state will, doubtless, be 
disappointed, but this need not stand in the way of any ones 
applying himself faithfully, with the assurance that his work 
shall be richly rewarded. He who searches will find. There can 
be no doubt, that, in consequence of the promise of the leading 
of the Spirit, the living generation of Christians has, at all times, 
had all the truth due at that time, and therefore that the church 
now living has all the truth due in our day; and because of the 
progress of truth in the "path that shines more and more even 
unto the perfect day," we may reasonably claim that the present 
generation of Christians know more of prophecy and God's plan 
than any generation preceding. We have the advantage of the 
aggregate progress of the past, besides the fulfillment of the 
prophecies which clearly indicate our position on the verge of 
the glory of the kingdom. But it is just as true now as it ever 
was, that there is variety of power and intellect in the church. 
There are babes, young men and fathers, now as at all times in 
the past, and yet, it is as much a fact that the babe with its 
undeveloped capacity for knowledge or work, belongs to the 
family as that the father belongs to the family. The existence of 
life by the Divine Spirit is what constitutes any individual a 
member of the body, and the degree of strength or knowledge 
the members possess depends upon circumstances. The growth 



in grace and knowledge is of members in the family and does 
not constitute them members, and however young, ignorant or 
feeble a member is, he is certain of a place in the kingdom, 
unless for some reason he is disinherited and cut off. If the 
branch bear no fruit it is cut off and withers, but every branch 
that beareth fruit, be it ever so little, he purgeth it that it may 
bring forth more fruit. John 15:2. If each individual now, on the 
strength of the promise, may claim perfect knowledge, so might 
each individual at any other time, and we know that even in the 
apostle's day, no one had all the help the Spirit gave, but God 
divided to each man severally according to his own will.— 1 Cor. 
12:1 1. If a knowledge of all the truth is necessary in order to fit 
a man for the kingdom, then admitting that the last generation 
could get it all, only these could be the heirs and all the dead are 
shut out. True, they were not expected to know as much as 
Christians now, neither was each one expected to know all that 
they all knew, but they were expected to bring forth fruit unto 
holiness, and that they each could do. It is no more reasonable to 
expect each one to know now, all that all know than it would 
have been at any time in the past. The bride is evidently chosen 
with reference to her union with Christ by his spirit and her 
loyalty to him rather than her degree of knowledge. She is called 
out under circumstances peculiarly dark in some respects, and it 
is not until after the bride is complete and Zion is brought back 
that even the "Watchman shall see eye to eye."— Isa. 52:8. 
Though we cannot know all until the perfect is come, we can 
grow in grace and in knowledge, and the Spirit will help our 
infirmities. 

J. H. P. 



R68 : page 4 

The Completeness of the Body. 

"The Church is the 'one body' of Christ, and all Christians are 
individual members of that body. No one liveth to himself, no 
one dieth to himself; when one member suffers all members 
suffer with it. It is one of the sins of a self-sufficient age to deny 
the unity and completeness of Christ's body, and to set up tests 
of unity other than those which he has appointed. In the natural 
body each member united with the head has vital union with 
every other member connected with the same head. The basis of 
true Christian unity is union with Jesus Christ who is the head of 
the body. Men lay down as the basis of their unity, union with 
some human leaders through the doctrines which he has 
proclaimed or the forms which he has instituted. They are united 
by external observances, by laws, forms, rites and bands. Their 
union is the union of staves in a barrel; Christ's union is the 
union of branches in a vine. Their union is that of bones in a 



skeleton, joined and wired together, but destitute of vital energy; 
the union of Christ and his people is the union of the members 
of a body, joined together by those ligaments which every joint 
supplieth, and pervaded by the energy of a common life. The 
unity which Christ inaugurated embraces the whole family of 
God. It includes every man who has vital connection with the 
great Head of the Church. Men's schemes are too narrow for 
this, and include only those persons who coincide in opinions, 
who agree in forms, who are trimmed according to a certain 
pattern, or shaped in conformity to certain human standards. 
Christ bids us to receive one another as he has received us. The 
fact that we have passed from death unto life, and that we are 
united to Christ the living Head, is proof that we are united to 
his people. If our fellowship is with the Father and with the Son 
Jesus Christ, it is also with one another. Men, however, restrict 
their fellowship; and hence, while Christ's Church is inclusive 
and wide-reaching, their churches are narrow, and shut out more 
Christians than they shut in. The results of this are grievous to 
God's people who are thus excluded from union with saints, but 
still more grievous to those who exclude them. How often we 
see churches crippled and helpless for lack of the labor and 
sympathy of Christian brethren who stand by their side ready 
and willing to be helpers in their toils, but are excluded by some 
party Shibboleth, or by some unscriptural name or form. How 
often we see men shut away from their proper field of Christian 
effort, simply because they cannot accept the unscriptural 
statements and arrangements, which men presume to impose 
before they will receive them to their fellowship. Men toil in 
weariness, and bring themselves to the borders of the grave, that 
they may do work which others would willingly and wisely do, 
who are not permitted to participate in the labor. Thus men 
virtually say to God's children, 'You may be members of Christ's 
body, but we have no need of you or your services.' 

The apostle has taught us that no member of the body can be 
spared from its place and its proper work, without serious injury. 
No man can separate himself from the body of Christ without 
harm; nor can any portion of Christians separate themselves 
from others who love the Lord, or exclude other Christians from 
their fellowship, without doing themselves great injury. 

The union of true Christians springs from a higher than human 
source; and their adaptation to each other for mutual helpfulness 
is so complete and perfect that any separation must work harm 
both to those who cause it and to those who endure it. The feet 
may say, We are strong, we have no need of the eyes, we carry 
the body, and the eyes are mere useless gazers, but when the 
eyes are gone, and the feet are groping and floundering in the 
ditch, the folly of this decision is most manifest. So whenever 
any of the Lord's children in their inexperience and self- 
sufficiency think themselves able to dispense with the presence, 
the service, and the loving fellowship of others of the children of 



the Lord, they may find sooner or later, by their weakness, 
inefficiency, and a thousand calamities and troubles that may 
come upon them, they have over-estimated their own powers, 
and have put away from them those members which God hath 
set in the body, that they might abide together in the unity of 
love and in mutual helpfulness. All down through the ages 
comes our Savior's parting prayer for his disciples, that "they all 
may be one," and the hearts of the truly regenerate yearn and 
long for this unity. Deeper than the names and forms and creeds 
of men, throbs that inward, divine and universal life which 
Christ imparted, and which makes his children one.— The 
Armory. 



R67 : page 4 

Type and Antitype. 

In searching for the true relation between the natural and the 
spiritual, we are called to look again at the types and allegories. 
It has been seen and is a familiar fact to most of our readers, that 
the Lord uses natural things to represent spiritual things. This 
method of teaching is doubtless more common in the Bible than 
is generally supposed. We have long been convinced that the 
writings of Moses are largely allegorical; but we would guard 
against extremes. Some deny the literal meaning, because of the 
allegorical and typical, but our view is that in addition to the 
literal they have a superior value, on account of their 
representing the great plan of salvation. They mean all they say, 
but they mean much more than they say. 

What they say is the letter, but the deeper meaning is the Spirit. 
To the Jew and to many Christians, the letter is as the veil which 
hides or obscures the real and deeper truth. Paul treats of this 
subject in 2 Cor. 3, and we might truly say still, as he said of the 
Jew: "Even unto this day, when Moses is read, the veil is upon 
their heart."-(Ver. 15.) The tendency of seeing only the letter is 
killing, but the Spirit, appreciated, tends to liberty and life. "The 
letter killeth, but the Spirit giveth life." -(Ver. 6.) "Now the 
Lord is that Spirit; and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is 
liberty. "-(Ver. 17.) Combining the teachings of Paul and the 
Savior himself (John 5:45-47,) we draw the conclusion that the 
writings of Moses contain the gospel of the Son of God, as a 
shell contains a kernel; that both are real and each is valuable in 
its own place and for the purpose designed; but the kernel is 
more valuable than the shell. We regard the whole Bible as none 
too large, and all teaching directly or indirectly the gospel of 
Christ. The Lord is the Golden Thread of revelation, as he is the 
soul of the plan of salvation. From all who can see the fullness 
and harmony of the writings of the Old Testament with the 
gospel of Christ, 



R67 : page 5 

the spirit of doubt as to the Divine inspiration of the Bible will 
flee away. The fact that the truth has been hidden for ages and 
yet there, under cover of the mere history, is, to us, a strong 
evidence that no human mind laid the plan of the book or the 
great salvation brought to light by it. 

When men begin to see the flood of light from this source, there 
may be a liability to lose balance or to be carried too far in the 
application. An extreme spiritualism should be avoided as well 
as an extreme materialism. We do not believe that every portion 
of the Bible has double meaning as do some. Some portions 
relate wholly to the natural and some wholly to the spiritual, and 
the natural represents the spiritual, so that the relation of the two 
in the plan is preserved. For instance, there are two Jerusalems- 
the old and the new, the natural and the spiritual— and the old is 
doubtless a type of the new, but sometimes the Lord speaks of 
the one and sometimes of the other and we should be careful not 
to confound them. 

We would call special attention to the fact that antitypes are not 
always wholly spiritual. This has been overlooked by some in 
the treatment of this subject, and confusion instead of light has 
been the result. Adam is a type of Christ, but in Christ is 
combined both the natural and the spiritual, in the order of 
development. So this antitype is not wholly spiritual. The spirit 
of a type is what it means. Many types foreshadow the great 
plan of salvation, but the plan has the two elements: First the 
natural and afterward the spiritual; and therefore the type 
represents both. 

Christ's life is the key to the plan; two births and two lives are 
brought to view, and at his death and resurrection is the turning 
point between them. He was born of the flesh first, and 
afterward of the spirit. He was "put to death in the flesh, and 
made alive by the spirit." 1 Pet. 3:18. The life he lived before his 
death was natural, and the life by resurrection was spiritual, and 
Adam as a type represented both. In the natural life Christ was 
alone, (he had no church, then) and "Except a corn of wheat fall 
into the ground and die, it abideth alone." John 12:24. He died to 
bring forth fruit. So Adam was alone for a time, and the Lord 
said "it is not good for a man to be alone, and the Lord caused a 
deep sleep to come upon him;" and so his wife was developed 
from his side. 

That part of Adam's life which was before he fell asleep, 
represented Christ's natural life, and Adam's falling asleep, 
represented Christ's natural death. So we see that Christ's flesh 
life and his natural death are a part of the antitype, and an 
important part of the plan; let no man dare to belittle them; on 
the other hand let no one confound the natural with the after and 
spiritual life of Christ. Adam's life, after awaking from sleep, 



represented Christ's life after his resurrection. His marriage 
represented the marriage of the Lamb, the generation of the race 
the regeneration of the race, and the dominion over all given to 
Adam and his wife, represents the united reign of Christ and his 
wife-the church— over the Earth and the nations in the world to 
come. "Come hither, and I will show thee the bride, the Lamb's 
wife, and he showed me... that great 

R68 : page 5 

city, the holy Jerusalem." "And the nations shall walk in the 
light of it." Rev. 21:9,10,24. 

The bride in both type and antitype becomes a mother, and 
therefore imparts her own nature to her offspring. No one can 
see this great fact, without being impressed with the magnitude 
of the plan, and the fullness of the love of God. Isaac, the son of 
faithful Abraham, is a type of the Son of God, the Father of the 
faithful in the highest sense. Isaac was offered a sacrifice, being 
three days subject to death, and was received from the dead, all 
in figure, and Jesus the Son of God died, and rose again the third 
day, in fact. The calling of the wife, the marriage and the 
development of the family, in both type and antitype, follow the 
resurrection in proper order. Isaac's life, before he was offered, 
represents Christ's life, before he was offered— the natural life, 
the sacrifice of Isaac in figure represented the sacrifice of 
Christ's natural life; for Christ gave his natural life (psuchee) a 
ransom for many; and the after life of Isaac represented the 
spiritual life of Christ. Here again it is clear that the antitype is 
both natural and spiritual. Joseph went into the pit and came out 
again, and was exalted to the right hand of power in Egypt, and 
became the Bread keeper and Life preserver for both Egypt and 
Israel. Joseph had a life before he went into the pit, as well as 
after he came out, and so had Christ the antitype. 

Moses came twice to his own people —natural Israel, and was 
rejected at the first, but delivered them at the second coming. So 
of Christ, He comes twice to the same people, is rejected at the 
first and at the second delivers them. The coming in flesh, and 
the coming in glory are both represented, in that type, and yet 
both are to the natural seed. In each of these types, Adam, Isaac, 
Joseph and Moses, the death of Christ is foreshadowed, though 
none actually died. Adam fell asleep; Isaac was offered in spirit; 
Joseph went into the pit; and Moses had to flee for his life. The 
death of Christ is shown, in this and many other ways to be an 
important part of the plan. It is the turning point between the 
natural and the spiritual; and to say that the natural life, the flesh 
and blood life of Christ profiteth nothing, is to say that God's 
plan is all spiritual, instead of "first the natural and afterward the 
spiritual." This would be a strange perversion of Christ's words, 
"The flesh profiteth nothing;" for Christ was speaking 
figuratively, when he said, "Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of 
man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. " Eating literal 



flesh, and drinking literal blood, of course would profit nothing, 
in giving spiritual life, and therefore Christ wanted them to 
understand that he was not talking of the literal. But that does 
not destroy the fact, that Christ had literal flesh and blood, that 
he took it for a purpose, (Heb. 2:9,14,15.) and that he actually 
died. 

The spirit could not take the place of the flesh, any more than 
the flesh could take the place of the spirit: both would be equally 
unprofitable, out of their order. Observe the order and all is 
clear, harmonious and beautiful. Christ gave his natural life 
(psuchee) to redeem man, and gives us the spiritual to live by, 
and we must eat it (i.e. receive the truth) in order to sustain life, 
(spiritual.) The value of the cross (death) of our Lord Jesus, is 
beautifully enforced by the two cherubim. The centre is the 
meeting place, the point of reconciliation between God and man, 
and so Paul says we are reconciled to God by the death of his 
Son. Rom. 5:10. The one cherub represents the Jewish church 
looking forward, and the second the Gospel church looking 
back. The first therefore represents the natural and the second 
the spiritual, and the antitype is again proved to contain both. 
From these facts we may see another. Because Elijah was a type 
of the Gospel church, and Elijah healed the sick and raised the 
dead (physically) it does not follow that the antitypical Elijah 
can only deal with spiritual life. Just as surely as to restore is to 
give back what was lost, so surely Christ and the church, will 
restore natural life to the world; It has not been proved yet, 
though often assumed and asserted, that man lost spiritual life by 
Adam's sin. But because restoration is the work of Christ and the 
church, let no one conclude that they will do nothing more. 
Elijah represents Christ as Restorer, and Adam represents Christ 
as Head of an immortal race. 

We do not presume to have exhausted this subject; no doubt 
there is much more to be learned. Each new truth learned must 
be retained if we would grow, and we are quite sure that any 
idea advanced, that ignores either the natural or the spiritual in 
the plan, is darkness instead of light, and if taken as the key to 
other ideas, will lead to greater darkness. It is doubtless true that 
many stumble because they fail to discern the spiritual; and as a 
means of safety we suggest the necessity of keeping in mind the 
relation between the natural and the spiritual. 

J. H. P. 



R69 : page 5 



Sanctification. 

"For this is the will of God, even your sanctification. "— 1 Thes. 
4:3. 

And thou shalt make holy garments for Aaron thy brother for 
glory and for beauty. And for Aaron's sons thou shalt make 
coats, and thou shalt make for them girdles, for glory and for 
beauty. And thou shalt put them upon Aaron thy brother, and his 
sons with him; and thou shalt anoint them, and shalt consecrate 
them, and sanctify them, that they may minister unto me in the 
priest's office. Ex. 28. 

Sanctify unto me all the first-born; they are mine. 

The church of first-born (Heb. 12) the body of Christ, is 
sanctified -called out or separated from the world-through the 
truth, the word of God, and for a purpose. 

Christ, praying to the Father, for the church, says: "They are not 
of the world, even as I am not of the world. Sanctify them 
through thy truth; thy word is truth." John 17:16,17. And Paul, 
in his letter to the Eph., 5 chapter; "Husbands, love your wives, 
even as Christ also loved the church, and gave himself for it; 
that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water, 
by the word that he might present it to himself a glorious church, 
not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should 
be holy and without blemish." 1 Thess. 5:23 reads: "And the 
very God of peace sanctify you wholly; and I pray God your 
whole spirit, and soul-life— and body be preserved blameless in 
the (parousia) presence of our Lord Jesus Christ. " 

Again in 2 Thess. 2:13, we read: "God hath from the beginning 
chosen you to salvation through sanctification of the spirit and 
belief of the truth, whereunto he called you by our gospel, to the 
obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. " 

A sanctified church is composed of sanctified individuals, who 
are not called for their own sakes alone, but for a glorious 
purpose in God's plan; and sanctified, not because of their own 
merit (Gal. 2:6,) but because of their relationship to Christ. 

Unto the church of God which is at Corinth, to them that are 
sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be saints... I thank my God 
always on your behalf, for the grace of God which is given you 
by Jesus Christ; that in everything ye are enriched by him, in all 
utterance, and in all knowledge; even as the testimony of Christ 
was confirmed in you; so that ye come behind in no gift; waiting 
for the coming-revelation-of our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall 
also confirm you unto the end, that ye may be blameless in the 
day of our Lord Jesus Christ. For ye see your calling, brethren, 
how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, 
not many noble are called; but God hath chosen the foolish 
things of the world, to confound 



R69 : page 6 

the wise; and God hath chosen the weak things of the world to 
confound the things which are mighty, and base things of the 
world, and things which are despised, hath God chosen, yea and 
things which are not, to bring to naught things that are; that no 
flesh should glory in his presence. "But of him are ye in Christ 
Jesus, who of God is made unto you wisdom, and righteousness, 
and sanctification, and redemption; that, according as it is 
written, he that glorieth, let him glory in the Lord. 1 Cor. 1. 

This complete sanctification in Christ; constitutes the perfection 
and unity of the church. 

"For it became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are 
all things, in bringing many sons unto glory, to make the captain 
of their salvation perfect through sufferings. For both he that 
sanctifieth and they who are sanctified are all of one; for which 
cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren." Heb. 2:10,1 1. 

"For by one offering he hath perfected forever them that are 
sanctified; whereof the Holy Ghost is also a witness to us." Heb. 
10:14,15. And again; God is faithful, by whom ye were called 
unto the fellowship of his Son, Jesus Christ our Lord. "Now I 
beseech you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions 
among you; but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same 
mind and in the same judgment-sentiment. " 1 Cor. 1:9,10. 

This entire sanctification, like all other spiritual blessings, is 
based upon a knowledge of truth, which can only be obtained by 
earnest, continual, and prayerful searching; and being led by the 
spirit into all truth. Thus it can be called a sanctification of the 
spirit, and belief of the truth. 2 Thess. 2:13. No one can believe 
the truth, unless he knows the truth. 

As it is a fact that the scriptures develop or unfold gradually, and 
thus give light on the whole of the path of the just; and the spirit 
guides into all truth, then it is necessary to understand present 
truth. Faith comes by hearing; and hearing by the word of God, 
(Rom. 10:17) so faith is based upon the word of God. Paul says: 
"And now brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of 
his grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an 
inheritance among all them which are sanctified." Acts 20:32. 

When we learn what is revealed of the glorious position to 
which the sanctified will be elevated in the future, we can not 
wonder at the strict requirements given in the scriptures, for 
those who would attain to that position. They are to be elevated 
to a higher plane; changed from the image of the earthly-first 
man; into the image of the heavenly, or second man, the image 
of God, adopted into the family of God, and become, in the full 
sense "sons of God." 



We who have the first fruits of the Spirit, even we ourselves, 
groan within ourselves, waiting for the adoption -sonship-to 
wit, "the redemption of our body-the body of Christ. " Rom. 
8:23. 

"As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of 
God." Rom. 8:14. "Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it 
doth not yet appear what we shall be, but we know that when he 
shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is. 
And every man that hath this hope in him, purifieth himself, 
even as he is pure." 1 John 3:2,3. Jesus Christ was sanctified, 
and sent into the world (John 10:36.) for the good of the human 
race; and his body or bride are for the same purpose. 

If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of 
love, if any fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels and mercies; 
fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like minded, having the same love, 
being of one accord, of one mind. Let nothing be done through 
strife— party spirit-or vain glory, but in lowliness of mind let 
each esteem others better than themselves. Look not every man 
on his own things, or interests; but every man also on the 
interests of others. Let this same mind be in you, which was also 
in Christ Jesus; who, being in the form of God, thought it not 
robbery to be equal with God; but made himself of no 
reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was 
made in the likeness of men. And being found in fashion as a 
man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even 
the death of the cross. Wherefore God also hath highly exalted 
him, and given him a name, which is above every name; that at 
the name of Jesus every knee should bow; of those in heaven, 
and those in earth, and those underneath the earth- underground 
ones— and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is 
Lord, to the glory of God the Father. Phil. 2:1,10. 

And if we are the children of God, we are heirs; heirs of God, 
and joint heirs with Christ; if so be that we suffer with him, that 
we may be glorified together. No wonder that Paul could say: 
What shall we say to these things? If God be for us, who can be 
against us? He that spared not his own son, but delivered him up 
for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all 
things? 

B. W. K. 



R69 : page 6 

Farewell. 

We have now sent seven numbers of the ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER, to quite a number of persons from whom we have 
never heard. We have offered it FREE to all unable to pay if 
they wanted it enough to ask for it. Those who want it and can 



afford to pay for it, need no invitation to subscribe. So we 
conclude that all from whom we have not heard at all are not 
interested, and shall discontinue sending it. To all such we say 
God bless you— Farewell. 



R69 : page 6 



Extracts from a Letter. 



We make a few extracts from the letter of a friend. They are 
suggestive, and we hope that others may be profited by them as 
we have been. 

J. H. P. 

1 . "If a man wished to bestow a title of honor and entail an 
inheritance on a slave, would he not first make him free? How 
could a single soul be converted, if not first counted alive in 
God's sight? 'Awake thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, 
and Christ shall give thee light.' Our freedom, so that we may 
choose eternal life, is based on Christ's death. " 

2. "He that hath the bride is the bridegroom. " "If Christ could in 
any sense be called a Bridegroom, without any bride, before the 
gospel 

R70 : page 6 

had even commenced, why can he not bear that title now, when 
he has come as Reaper? Why did the Jewish age belong in a 
special way to God? Although not 'called the Son until the 
incarnation' yet Christ as the 'word' created all things.' He is the 
Beginning as well as the End, the Author as well as the Finisher. 
Having created all things He sustains and possesses them. 'He 
came to His own and His own received Him not.' He came in the 
flesh to a fleshly typical bride. The marriage feast was prepared 
but those who were invited were unworthy. " Matt. 22. 

3. "I do not think any truth is vital, nor any error fatal which 
when believed and obeyed does not affect character. Those who 
understand the plans of God are called His friends, but the 
understanding does not make them so, it only proves their 
friendship. We permit others to become acquainted with our 
very life, not to make them our friends but because they are our 
friends. Christ says: 'Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I 
command you.' It seems strange that any can believe that 
righteousness is other than right doing. ['Little children let no 
man deceive you; he that doeth righteousness is righteous.']" 

4. "It is a relief to turn from the crooked and tangled reasonings 
of men, to the simple clear word of God. Its statements are full 
of heaven born power to those who receive them. I believe with 
all my heart that 'a little scripture is worth a good deal of 
reasoning,' and I am so glad man's reasoning can not alter God's 



word. I do not believe God ever put these latter day truths into 
one man's hands to dispense to the church. It would be too great 
an honor for the flesh to endure. Whoever makes such a claim, 
is in danger of becoming bigoted. But can we not afford to be 
calm, patient and charitable? 

Heaven help you, my brother, not to falter or grow weary. The 
work God does through us now will stand when controversies 
shall be forgotten. 

"Truth with diamond point shall be written on the hearts of a 
redeemed race. " 



page 6 

Thank You. 

Our request, of last issue met with a generous response for 
which we extend you our thanks. Very many of the papers 
returned were liberally underscored etc., and gave evidence of 
interest and careful and prayerful reading which was very 
interesting and pleasant for the editor to notice. Although not 
laboring for the "praise of men" nor "seeking praise one of 
another;" yet every such indication of your interest in the work 
we have so deeply at heart, gives us fresh strength and joy. 

The kind words received from many of you during the past six 
months have been duly appreciated also. Although we have not 
been able to answer you, they have afforded your editor pleasure 
and comfort, and that was doubtless your object. We seldom 
publish letters, of correspondents, because firstly, we have no 
room to spare, and secondly, they generally contain personal 
allusion to the writers too complimentary to admit of 
publication. We subjoin just two, which contain no personal 
allusions and which represent many received. 

Springfield, Mass. Dear Brother: I send you the paper you 
requested, but fear it will not be fit to send to your subscribers 
(The paper received was marked etc. , from first to last, I kept it 
as a memento.) I read them over and over, lend them, but never 
give them away for they are as choice to me as gold dust. As I 
read I mark and comment for my own benefit, so you see it is 
pretty well worn out and defaced. I cannot pay you until warm 
weather as my coal takes up all my spare money. But if you can, 
please continue it to me and may the Lord reward you. Your 
sister in Christ. 

V. N. J. 

Yes sister you will get your paper, as freely without as with the 
money. It is published expressly for such as you. 

A new reader writing from Vermont says: "A lady friend sent 
me two copies of ZION'S WATCH TOWER, which came from 
an unknown source. I then wrote to you and got more, also the 



little hymn book. I cannot express my gratitude to you for 
sending them to me. They are just what I wanted. It is meat and 
drink to read them. I want to introduce these papers into our 
village if I can. I think they are just what is needed all over the 
earth. As I am 83 years old and unable to canvas I have secured 
the services of a young lady to do so for me. Very truly yours." 

M. D. W. 

So it is, here and there, everywhere, some can say with the 
prophet "Thy word was found and I did eat it. " It is sweet unto 
my taste. 



R70 : page 6 

THE article entitled "The Holy Bible," crowded out of the 
December number, and referred to in the "Questions of 
Correspondents" last month, will be found in this number. 



R70 : page 7 

WILL THE CHURCH BE A MOTHER? 

We are in the habit of thinking and speaking of the church in 
this way. We have taught so because we supposed, felt sure that 
the Scripture was our authority for so doing. But upon 
investigation, we find that it has no Scriptural foundation. Let us 
look at the matter carefully and make sure what is truth, then 
cast away any ideas which we may have built upon this 
supposition. 

We had supposed it to be taught by the type of Eve and Rebecca 
and positively asserted by Paul in Gal. 4:26, "But Jerusalem 
which is above is free which is the mother of us all." Let us 
examine the positive statements first and afterwards the types. 
Casting your eye over the preceding verses and the third chapter, 
you will notice that in the Apostle's argument throughout, he 
endeavors to show clearly the difference between the law age 
just closed and the Gospel age just commenced. In 3:17, he 
contrasts the two agreements of God— the two covenants. He 
claims that God's first covenant- the Gospel-which was 
preached before (before the law,) to Abraham (Gal. 3:8,) and 
confirmed in Christ, could not be disannulled by the second 
covenant (the law) made with the fleshly seed. Then he argues 
[vs. 29,] that if we be Christ's, we are Abraham's seed and heirs 
according to the promise or first covenant and being children of 
this better covenant with the better promises, it is quite 
unnecessary to prove that we are related as children to the 
second covenant— the law— either by obedience to that law or by 
tracing of fleshly descent. In 4:21-31, he carries out this same 
line of reasoning, viz: That fleshly Israelites were children of 



God by the second covenant, while we become, by believing 
into Christ, children of the first covenant, and if we are children 
of that covenant, surely IT IS OUR MOTHER- "the mother of 
us all." 

Yes, Jesus our head, comes as the Son of this covenant and we 
in Him. 

Paul declares that God gave a type of these two Israels and two 
covenants. Abraham represents God. Hagar, the bond woman, 
represents the covenant of bondage- "the law." Sarah represents 
the first covenant, and as Isaac was the promised offspring of 
this wife, or free woman, so "we brethren, as Isaac was, are the 
children of this promise" or covenant. The fleshly children dwelt 
in the earthly city Jerusalem, still in bondage; but we who 
realize "the liberty of the sons of God," have "our citizenship in 
heaven" and in our new nature, "We are risen with him (Jesus) 
and seated together in heavenly places." They are the bond- 
servants of the law and of earth; we God's free heavenly 
children begotten of grace; they the children of the earthly 
kingdom, represented by Jerusalem; we of the heavenly 
kingdom, the "Jerusalem above. " 

We are sure then that Gal. 4:26 does not teach that the church 
will be a mother; are we not? 

Next examine with me the type of Eve: It is nowhere said that 
Eve is a type, but we think there are good reasons for 
considering her such, but we should remember that types have a 
time for ending as well as for beginning. Upon examination we 
feel assured that the type ceased where Eve was accepted by 
Adam as his wife. Paul tells us that Adam was a figure of him 
who was to come— Jesus— and we have seen how the death of 
Jesus was typified by the deep sleep which came upon Adam; 
how Jesus' pierced side, the price of our development as his 
bride, was typified by the open side of Adam from whence came 
Eve; how Adam, recognizing his wife as of his nature, bone of 
his bone, represents the fact that we shall be recognized by our 
Lord as of his nature-the spiritual. "He that is joined to the Lord 
is one spirit." But here the type ceases. We should not suppose 
because Eve became a mother that Christ's bride will become a 
mother, any more than that Eve sinned and caused Adam's fall, 
so the bride of Christ must sin and cause the fall of her Lord. 
Moreover, we are sure that the having of children by Eve was 
after she had ceased to be a type of the bride of Christ, because 
her children were born in sin and under the penalty of death. 
Should we force these children as a type it could only prove that 
the bride of Christ would become the mother of dead-born 
children. No, we see no reasonable ground for considering Eve 
as a type beyond the time of Union with Adam, representing our 
union or marriage with our Lord. In fact this seems to be as far 
into the future as God ever revealed either by word or type. 



But does some one say: "God said, be fruitful and multiply." 
Yes, we answer, this (Gen. 1:28.) was said to Adam as a natural 
man, not as a type of Christ. The description of the typical 
features occurs in another connection, Gen. 2:21. Read, compare 
and notice that there is no reference to offspring in the typical 
account. 

Again we have seen that Isaac was a type of Christ; that 
Abraham's sending the servant to get a bride for Isaac, typified 
our Father's sending the Holy Spirit to take out of the gentiles a 
people, or bride for his (Christ's) name. And 

R70 : page 8 

as the servant brought Rebecca from her father's house to Isaac 
and to Abraham's home, so we as the antitypical Rebecca leave 
our father's home [the world,] and go forth under the guidance 
of the spirit, to meet our Lord and to dwell in our Father's home. 
We, too, expect soon to meet our Isaac on the way that he 
himself may bring us into our new home. But here the type 
ceases. We had somehow come to imagine that Abraham 
blessed her and said: Be thou the mother of thousands of 
millions, but no, upon examination we find that this was the 
utterance of Rebecca's mother and brother, and was doubtless 
the customary greeting of their day. On the contrary, Rebecca 
was barren while a type. It was not until twenty years after this 
type had ended that she bore Jacob and Esau and this is quite 
another distinct type. Gen. 25:20,21,26. 

We conclude then that neither directly nor by type does God tell 
us that the church will after her union with Christ, beget children 
of her own nature. 



R71 : page 8 



Brother Geo. Storrs. 



Our brother, so long the editor of "The Bible Examiner" is 
known to most of our readers; also that he has been obliged by 
severe illness to discontinue his paper. While he no doubt feels, 
as we do, that he should like to continue the proclamation of the 
love of God for all His creatures, yet he has much reason to 
thank God for being privileged to spend so long a life and one so 
consecrated to the Master. 

Feeling that many of you, as well as I, would be glad to hear 
from our brother occasionally we offered him the use of a part 
of our space. The following from his daughter, will be of interest 
to you. 

BROOKLYN, Dec. 14th 1879. 

Bro. Russell: Your letter of the 9th, was duly received and read 
to father as he lay on his sick bed, exhausted and worn. He 



appreciates your Christian sympathy and kind suggestions, but 
as for his writing or inditing anything, he has not strength either 
of body or mind. He does not suffer so constantly, as he has 
done but he is much emaciated and helpless as a child and is so 
heavy, that we find it necessary to have a man to lift him. 

We should like a statement of his condition in ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER- Your offer is the first we have received, from any 
paper, and we thank you for it. He is very patient and 
uncomplaining, though, at times his sufferings are so great, that 
he longs for rest. Yesterday was his 83rd birthday, as I suppose 
you know. He sends much Christian love. Yours respectfully, 

H W. STORRS. 

We (without solicitation) suggest to any of our readers to 
whom the Lord has given bountifully as His stewards: that this 
is one opportunity (among many) of "ministering to the 
necessities of the saints." 



page 8 

Preaching. 

BRO. PATON purposes visiting several places in Indiana, 
Illinois and Iowa during January and February. Any living in 
that direction who desire meetings should address him at once. 
J. H. Paton, Almont, Michigan. 



R70 : page 8 

Our Living Savior. 

Though we have known Christ after the flesh and the memory 
of that "man of sorrows," "who bought us with his own precious 
blood" is sweet and sacred; yet: now we know him as our living 
Redeemer whom (because of obedience "unto death even the 
death of the cross.") "God hath highly exalted and given him a 
name that is above every name. "He is Lord of all. " Our living 
Savior. 



R71 : page 8 

Bible Class Department. 



The Holy Bible. 

The Bible commands our reverence and respect because of its 
author— God. We accept its teachings as authority and law on 
this account. How important it is then that we have the Word of 



God as pure and free as possible from human teaching. The 
channels through which it has come have not all been pure. Are 
we certain then, that the Bible as we now have it, is all inspired 
and holy? Let us glance at the New Testament. Perhaps all are 
aware that the New Testament was written originally by various 
apostles at different places and times. After their death, their 
letters, &c, came to be highly prized by the church as 
authorities on various subjects, and we have reason to believe 
that this was the design of the Spirit in causing the writings at 
first,-not merely to bless and instruct the portion of the church 
to whom directly addressed, but to have it contain elements of 
truth valuable, and intended for the whole church in all ages. It 
was not long before each church had a copy of all the sacred 
writings. These copies were all made with the pen for about 
fourteen hundred years (until printing was invented) and the 
process of copying and recopying gave rise to many small errors 
and omissions, as for instance the addition or omission of an 
and, or the, or but. Another source of trouble is the interpolation, 
or adding to the word of various words and sentences. A few of 
these, about four, bear marks of design and seem to have been 
added about the ninth century, probably to give a basis or 
support to some papal dogma, while the great majority seem to 
have arisen from accident. For instance, one copyist while 
writing the text of the word might add as a sort of parenthesis 
some thought which he might have as to its meaning, not 
designed to be understood as a part of the sacred writing, but 
merely to refresh his own mind when reading the same scripture 
again, much as we are in the habit of doing on the margin of our 
Bible. Yet another copyist using this MSS. as a guide would be 
apt to copy the previous writer's note into the body of the text, 
and so that uninspired clause would be handed down to future 
generations as inspired, and these have given much trouble. 

Seeing then the liability to error, it is only just to ourselves that 
we be careful that what we accept as our basis of faith and hope 
is the word of God and not the errors of men, since it is "all 
scripture given by inspiration of God, " that is "profitable for 
instruction in righteousness, etc." Our regular authorized version 
called "King James' Bible," was published A.D. 1511. It was not 
a translation from the original. It was not a direct translation 
from the original Greek, but a revision of several versions then 
in use as will appear from the following instructions given by 
King James to the forty-seven learned persons whom he 
appointed to revise translations then in use (1604)— "The 
Bishop's Bible (A.D. 1568) to be followed and altered as little as 
the original will permit. And these translations to be used when 
they agree better with the text than the Bishop's Bible-namely: 
"Tyndale's, (first Bible published 1526.) Coverdales, (1535) 
Matthews (1537) Whitchurch's and Geneva (1560.) These being 
all translations from the Vulgate Latin and not from the original 
Greek text, (only compared with it) it follows that our "King 



James' Bible" is only a revision of the Vulgate Latin. Says an 
able writer: "This translation was perhaps, the best that could be 
made at the time, but if it had not been published by kingly 
authority, it would not now be venerated by English and 
American Protestants as though it had come direct from God. " 
At the time of the revision of "King James' Bible," the 
translators had the advantage of some eight Greek MSS. and 
none of these were of earlier date than the tenth century. Who 
will say how many errors large and small crept into the text 
during that thousand years? It is claimed that the errors may be 
numbered by thousands, mostly small and insignificant, but 
some of importance and weight. 

Few perhaps are aware of the great advantages possessed by 
translators of the present day. Between 600 and 700 Greek MSS. 
are now known, some of which are quite ancient. Two of them, 
the "Sinaitic" and "Vatican No. 1209," dating about the year 
A.D. 350. What an advantage in our favor above every other 
age, for obtaining the pure word of God. Truly the word of God 
is being fulfilled, "In the time of the end ...knowledge shall be 
increased. Not merely scientific and mechanical knowledge has 
increased but also knowledge and understanding of what is the 
word of God. The Sinaitic MSS. the most valuable of all was 
only recently found and was published in 1870. 

If not governed by prejudice and preconceived opinions we 
should improve all the opportunities offered to grow in the 
knowledge of the truth, remembering that it is not error but truth 
which sanctifies. Truly 

We are living; we are dwelling, 
In a grand and awful time. 
In an age on ages telling, 
To be living is sublime. " 

WHAT HELPS CAN WE OBTAIN 

which would give us a more clear understanding of what is the 
true and inspired text, you ask. 

I answer: There are three which I can commend, all of which I 
make use of and receive help from, viz: The New Testament 
(regular authorized version) with foot notes of different readings 
by the three oldest MSS. -"Sinaitic," "Vatican No. 1209," and 
"Alexandrine "-the latter written about A.D. 450. (From the 
Vatican MSS. are missing the epistles to Timothy, Titus and 
Philemon and Heb., from 9:14 to close and also the book of 
Revelation.) This work, known as "Tischendorf s New 
Testament," is to me very valuable. 

Second: The "Emphatic Diaglott," a work upon which a great 
deal of time and care have been bestowed by its author Benj. 
Wilson. We value it highly. It contains the Greek text of the 
N.T. according to Dr. Griesbach and interlined with it a literal 



word-for-word translation— The corresponding English being 
placed directly under the Greek word. Together with this it 
contains a new version for general reading based upon the labors 
of many learned critics. In the form of foot notes, it gives the 
different readings of the Vatican MSS. No. 1209, as far as it 
goes, after which Vatican MSS. 1 160 (of the seventh century) 
884 pp. 

Third: "The American Bible Union" translation of the N.T.-a 
revision of the oldest translations compared with ancient MSS. 
It is very useful, giving a good clear rendering which is usually 
in harmony with the others above mentioned, though not so 
critical. It would be of little advantage to any who possess the 
Emphatic Diaglott. 

We have corresponded with the publishers of the above named 
works, and are able to announce that we can furnish them to our 
readers at wholesale prices— postage added, viz: 

Emphatic Diaglott" cloth, (price $4.00) for $2.70 
Emphatic Diaglott finer binding (5.00) 3.35 

"Tischendorf" N.T cloth, (price 1.00) .75 

A Bible Union N.T. (1.00) .65 

pocket edition (1 .00) .75 

If you wish any of these books we shall take pleasure in 
furnishing them to you at these prices. 


