Letting Light Shine in the Heart of Africa
STRADDLING the equator like a giant horseman, the Republic of Zaire covers the heart of Africa. Previously known as the Congo, Zaire’s huge jungle and savanna areas provide a home for lions, gorillas, leopards, monkeys, elephants, okapis and many other wild animals. Rich in mineral resources, it has long been the object of international interest and has often been the site of invasions or civil wars. Far from being warlike, however, most of its 26,000,000 inhabitants are humble, kind-hearted, peace-loving people who, while extremely influenced by ancestral customs, have respect for the Bible.
Religious life in the past was characterized most of all by superstition and belief in spirits of the dead. People lived in fear of the unknown and they sought help by the use of fetishes, such as amulets and talismans. This belief has kept these people in great darkness.
Early Problems
It was in the late 1940’s that the publications of Jehovah’s Witnesses began to circulate in the Congo, but there were no real Witnesses to direct their use. Native groups called themselves “Watchtower” members, but they twisted Bible teachings and mixed such with their superstitious customs and immoral way of life. They often refused to pay taxes and otherwise resisted the government. It is no surprise that the Belgian government outlawed these movements of “Kitawala,” as they were called. But they wrongly identified Jehovah’s Witnesses with these false “Watchtower movement” practicers and refused to admit any genuine missionaries of Jehovah’s Witnesses who could have helped to clear up the matter.
Nevertheless, there was a small group who, though outlawed by the authorities, diligently shared Bible truths with others. Their upright, honest conduct marked them as entirely different from the trouble-making Kitawala.
With the approach of Congolese Independence in 1960, it became somewhat easier for them to make the truth known. Yet, keeping neutral in political affairs required keen insight and strong faith on their part. Independence brought increased tolerance and by the end of 1960 the number of those letting Kingdom light shine rose to almost a thousand.
Progress by Improved Organization
Finally, in 1961, the first missionaries of Jehovah’s Witnesses gained entry into the country. A branch office was set up in the capital, Leopoldville, now named Kinshasa, resulting in better direction. Things started to move ahead rapidly. But there were still many things to overcome, such as problems of language barriers, polygamy, tribalism, and superstition and spiritism. Poor communication made it difficult to contact groups of interested persons around the country. Traveling overseers had to sort out those who were really interested in following Bible truths and those who were false Kitawala movement members. This work was not easy.
Bible Truth Changes Lives
Honest-hearted people made enormous changes in their lives. One man wrote:
“Before learning of the Christian way of life, I was a real sports enthusiast, practicing the traditional wrestling and boxing. For me fighting was a way of life, and hand-to-hand combat was a great pleasure. I loved weight lifting too. In 1963 I won the championship in wrestling for the Congo and that same year I came out first in weight lifting, putting up 85 kg [187 pounds] with one hand and 150 [330 pounds] with two. All the time I looked to my fetish charms for strength and endurance. This was all the more true when they wanted to send me to Japan to represent my country.
“Once again I chased my wife away so as to concentrate on my sports activities. She took up living with a lieutenant. I would still see her from time to time, and one day I found a book entitled ‘From Paradise Lost to Paradise Regained,’ which this lieutenant had bought for her. I was impressed with this book and borrowed it for two weeks. I was particularly struck by the title on page 203, ‘How This World Comes to Its End.’ I read the book carefully and when I thought about it, it made me afraid. I decided to write to the publishers for other books, and at the same time I moved my fetishes out of my room into my father’s. My family was rather astonished at this.
“The same day that I wrote my letter, a knock came on my door. There were two of Jehovah’s Witnesses who wanted to share with me the good news from the Bible. At first I thought they had come to see my father who was an acting pastor. I said my father was not there, but they tactfully showed me that their message was for me too. When I saw another Paradise book in their opened book bag I reached my hand right into the case to grab it. I showed them the Paradise book I had and also the letter I had just written. I was much impressed with the answers these Witnesses gave and, in the end, I took a copy of every book they had in their bag. They told me the address of the little Kingdom Hall where they met.
“In spite of opposition and threats from my father, I continued to receive help from the Witnesses and I did not miss a meeting. I destroyed every last one of my fetishes and on November 8, 1964, I officially married my wife with whom I was again living. Then I dedicated my life to Jehovah and symbolized my dedication by water baptism.”
Now this Witness is a special pioneer (full-time minister) and an elder in a congregation in northern Zaire. He is but one example of thousands who have come out of darkness and who are now letting their spiritual light shine.
Religious Freedom​—Gained and Restricted
By 1966 the number of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Zaire had risen to almost 4,000. On June 9 of that year the organization was officially registered with the government. From then on Jehovah’s Witnesses could preach publicly, meet together freely and organize assemblies for Christian fellowship and instruction. Missionaries could enter the country and give a hand with the work. Bible study aids were translated into the six major languages used in the country.
But this increased liberty was short-lived. On December 31, 1971, a law was passed requiring all but the three largest religious denominations to reintroduce their request for legal status. Any not legally recognized within three months were to be dissolved. Any persons practicing an unauthorized religion could be liable to heavy fines and from five to ten years in prison. Jehovah’s Witnesses reintroduced their request but the deadline date of March 31 came and no reply of recognition was received.
This restriction of religious freedom brought increased difficulties. No more could larger public gatherings be held. No longer could new missionaries freely enter the country. And in some places where the local authorities were misinformed by the religious leaders, the Witnesses suffered much persecution.
Around Moba, Shaba, more than 200 Witnesses were imprisoned in 1973. They were forced to do extremely hard work of clearing fields, planting crops, repairing bridges and building houses, all by hand and while being fed very little food. But Jehovah’s Witnesses went about their Christian way of living quietly, looking to Jehovah for strength and direction, and the light of Bible truth kept shining brighter.
Problems to Be Overcome
The sheer vastness of the territory and the lack of good roads makes the spreading of the “good news” very difficult. One sometimes has to wait for weeks in order to take a boat over one of the numerous waterways throughout the country. Or a person may have to travel for days on the back of a truck heavily loaded with sacks of maize or manioc. And for those who cannot afford the expensive fares, the only recourse is to walk.
One Witness from the Bulungu Congregation learned that a circuit assembly was to be held in Kikwit, 108 km (67 miles) from her home. She had often heard of such assemblies but had never been able to attend one and wanted to learn how they were organized. Having no money to pay the fare, she decided to walk the entire distance along with her 13-year-old child. They spent two days en route, arriving in Kikwit on the third day, tired and hungry. There she told the brothers: “In spite of the distance I walked with my son, it didn’t seem like all that far. Jehovah helped me.”
Traveling overseers particularly have to show great courage and faith in order to visit their brothers with spiritual encouragement. Distances are often long between congregations and there are frequently tsetse-fly-infested areas to cross, forests with wild animals, or raging rivers in flood. It is farther from Kinshasa to the second-largest city, Lubumbashi, than it is from London to Rome.
One circuit overseer recently wrote to the branch the following in apology for his reports arriving late:
“The delay is due to circumstances that I set out below. April 12 was the day the train was to leave Kisangani for Ubundu. The train departs at 8 a.m., but, since seating space is so limited, people have to be there at 3 a.m. in order to get a seat. We were staying on the opposite side of the river and decided it best for my wife and me and our little son, Moza, to cross the river the night before and sleep there.
“It is the middle of the rainy season and the river was at flood stage. At 7:30 p.m. we took a taxi bus to the river with the intention of getting a dugout with a little outboard motor to cross the river. When we got into the boat we quickly saw that there were far too many people. We urged the conductor to have some people get out of the dugout or at least let us get out. But, being money-hungry as he was, he answered back, ‘Likambo te!’​—‘It’s nothing, don’t worry,’ and he started up the little outboard motor. No sooner had we gotten 15 meters [50 feet] or so from the shore than the boat struck a big rock under water, giving it a terrible jolt that almost turned it right over. Into the river went 30 people, yelling, screaming, flailing.
“Imagine, dear brothers, the spectacle in the Zaire River. Into the water went all our baggage, including my files, my forms, the projector and all the slides. I shouted to my wife to keep calm, and to hold tight to the child until I could get to them. Happily my wife and child were the only ones that weren’t knocked out of the dugout, which was now rapidly taking in water and about half submerged. Fortunately, in the end everybody was pulled out of the water safe and sound, except that our baggage was lost, including the projector.”
Good Prospects for the Future
On April 30, 1980, the president of the Republic of Zaire signed into law Decree No. 124 according legal recognition once again to the Association of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Since then the greater freedom of action has resulted in greater increases in the Kingdom work than were experienced in the past.
There was only a handful of Kingdom proclaimers actively letting their light shine in the Congo in the late 1940’s. But the number of active preachers of the good news of God’s kingdom in Zaire reached a peak of 25,753 in 1981. There are well over 2,200 full-time pioneer ministers, including some 450 special pioneers who concentrate on opening up new territories. Each month more than 36,000 individuals and families are studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses. And judging from the 107,766 persons who attended the Memorial of Christ’s death in the 838 congregations throughout Zaire on April 19, 1981, there are yet many more people who would like to benefit from the light of truth now shining in this country. More than 200 tribes speaking some 300 languages or dialects are receiving a witness concerning the Kingdom.
There are still many problems to overcome, such as language barriers, tribalism, polygamy, superstition, spiritism and lack of transport and communications, to name only a few. And the worldwide economic problems with skyrocketing inflation have also affected Zaire. But this is causing many people to search for a solid hope for the future. Jehovah’s Witnesses are offering them that hope​—God’s new order under his kingdom by Christ Jesus!
[Blurb on page 11]
From just a handful of Kingdom proclaimers in the Congo in the late 1940’s, the number of active preachers of the “good news” in Zaire reached a peak of 25,649 in April of 1981
[Map on page 9]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
Zaire

