Endangered Species—How You Are Involved
TIGERS, turtles, rhino, butterflies—why, the list of threatened species seems endless! You will no doubt agree that man must bear much of the blame. But how does this concern you?
In view of the world’s economic plight, is it reasonable to expect people worried about their own welfare to support conservation schemes, however noble they may be? “It’s certainly not easy being green in most of sub-Saharan Africa, where millions of people face political upheaval, tribal warfare, famine and epidemic disease,” comments Time. The same is true elsewhere.
Radical changes are necessary if the problem of endangered species is to be solved. According to The Atlas of Endangered Species, these changes are “of such magnitude that they can only be made by governments.” It then recommends: “Where governments are elected, it is the responsibility of each individual to ensure that by the year 2000 only politicians sensitive to the environment are elected.”
Is this a realistic prospect? Judging by the testimony of history, we must conclude that “man has dominated man to his injury”—and wildlife as well. (Ecclesiastes 8:9) Indeed, many conservationists believe that earth’s flora and fauna serve as environmental indicators. When these are endangered, so are we humans. But this is not the first time in human history that all earth’s life has been threatened with extinction.
The most ancient of history books records the words: “Here I am bringing the deluge of waters upon the earth to bring to ruin all flesh in which the force of life is active from under the heavens. Everything that is in the earth will expire.” (Genesis 6:17) Nevertheless, neither every human nor every other form of life died, for God arranged a means of survival.
An Ark for Survival
Scientists believe that the best solution to the problem of today’s endangered species involves preserving their habitats. Interestingly, New Scientist reports on this and refers to conservationists’ use of “the metaphor of Noah’s Ark.” Noah’s ark was the very means by which humans and animals survived the Deluge of Noah’s day.
God furnished Noah with the design for the ark, an enormous wooden chest, which was to float on the surface of the floodwaters. This preserved the lives of Noah, his wife, their three sons, and the sons’ wives, together with representatives of different kinds of animals, both wild and domestic—indeed, “every sort of flesh in which the force of life was active.” (Genesis 7:15) The multiplicity of life forms that exist today proves how well that ark served its purpose.
Notice, though, that survival did not depend solely on human efforts. Noah and his family had to obey God, who had the power to preserve them alive. It was God who put an end to the wrangling, violence, and greed characteristic of that pre-Flood world.—2 Peter 3:5, 6.
Animals in the New World
Jehovah God has promised that obedience to his laws can change humans from being like wild, voracious predators to resembling meek, gentle animals. (Isaiah 11:6-9; 65:25) Even now, evidence of this abounds. Attend the meetings at the Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses near you, and see for yourself. If Jehovah can accomplish such radical changes among humans, can he not also arrange for the animal kingdom to live together in peace and security, even if this means changing their present-day characteristics? In fact, he promises: “I shall certainly conclude a covenant in that day in connection with the wild beast of the field and with the flying creature of the heavens and the creeping thing of the ground, . . . and I will make them lie down in security.”—Hosea 2:18.
The apostle Peter wrote of a future “day of judgment and of destruction of the ungodly men.” (2 Peter 3:7) God’s controlled intervention will destroy only the ungodly men. God will “bring to ruin those ruining the earth.”—Revelation 11:18.
Imagine what a joy it will be to live in a world where creatures are no longer under threat. How much there will be to learn from the wildlife that will then surround us! Yes, tigers, lions, elephants, will roam undisturbed. Marine life will abound, as will reptiles, insects, and a variety of birds, including macaws—all in proper balance. With obedient mankind restored to human perfection under the Messianic Kingdom, a perfect ecosystem will reign.

