From Our Readers
Rock Concerts  I couldn’t help thinking that the article “Young People Ask . . . Should I Attend Rock Concerts?” (December 22, 1995) was a little biased. I attended a rock concert with my mom. It was an older band, and the crowd was well behaved. But the article didn’t highlight even the possibility of finding a decent concert.
S. A., United States
The article did focus on the potential dangers of rock concerts. However, we did not make a blanket condemnation of attending such events. We told readers: “If you should think of going to a concert, get the facts.” Information was thus given to help youths and their parents make a balanced decision.—ED.
I want to thank you for the article. Just weeks before I received the magazine, a number of us went to a concert. It was wild, and many there were drunk; it was no place for Christians. I definitely learned my lesson and hope the others did too.
M. E., United States
Costa Rica  I would like to make a clarification regarding the article “Costa Rica—Small Country, Abundant Variety.” (July 8, 1995) You stated that “almost 27 percent of the land is protected, the largest proportion of any country in the world.” However, according to the World Almanac, Ecuador has set aside almost 40 percent of its total land area for conservation.
M. E., Ecuador
Thanks for the clarification.—ED.
Mali  I shed tears of joy when I read the article “A First for Mali.” (December 22, 1995) The spirit of cooperation of your members in Mali is faith strengthening. I have contacted Jehovah’s Witnesses to start teaching me the Bible. It is my determination to fellowship with your members in worshiping God.
D. C. A., Nigeria
Tourette Syndrome  I want to express my gratitude for your article “The Challenge of Living With Tourette Syndrome.” (December 22, 1995) My symptoms disappeared at the end of my adolescence. But not all have been so fortunate. This article will be a valuable help for such ones and their families.
Y. L., France
I know a boy who has it, and up till now I have avoided him because I was embarrassed to be in his company. I had never realized that he may feel more embarrassed about it than I do!
P. M., Italy
I have had this disorder since I was five, and it has made me very sad. I have muscular and vocal tics. Neither my parents nor I could understand why these tics happened; they worried that maybe there was something wrong in the way they brought me up. I have prayed to Jehovah to help me understand, and he has answered my prayer through this article. I was very encouraged to read the experiences of others among Jehovah’s Witnesses who have the same disorder.
Y. K., Japan
I have lived with this condition nearly all my life, but it has only been since 1983 that I have known what it was. When I was a child, others would often make fun of me. But the brothers and sisters at the Kingdom Hall were always very loving and accepted it as part of me. Later on, I fell in love with a young Christian man. He was fully aware of my problem. Although my dad thought our marriage wouldn’t last, I am happy to say that 30 years later we are still happily married. My husband always treats me like gold and has never let my problem bother or embarrass him.
F. H., Canada

