The Bible’s Viewpoint
Should You Fear the Dead?
BRING up the subject of the dead, and many people shrink from speaking any further about it. Some, however, are not just uncomfortable with the subject; they are stricken with fear. So it is not unusual to find customs and rites related to fear of the dead in cultures throughout the world. For example, let us look at the customs found in sub-Saharan Africa.
One woman in a West African city vividly remembers what happened after a member of her family died. She relates: “A relative would regularly prepare a plate of food for the deceased and carefully place it in his bedroom. When she was not around, I would go and help myself to the food. When the relative returned, she was so happy! She believed the dead one had received the goodies. This went on for some time until I fell sick. I lost my appetite and could not eat any food. This created a panic in me! Many of my relatives concluded that my illness was caused by our dead relative. He must be angry at someone in the family, they thought.”
In that same city, if a family has twins and one dies, no one may speak of the deceased in the home. If someone asks about the twin who died, the family will customarily reply: “He, or she, went out to buy salt.” They strongly believe that the surviving twin’s life will be taken if the truth is spoken.
Next, picture this scene: A man who had three wives has died. The day after the funeral, special white clothing is made for the wives. At the same time, a special place made of wood and thatch is built near the home, where these women will bathe and dress in the white apparel. No one is to enter that place except them and a woman designated to assist them. Upon emerging from this special washroom, the women’s faces are veiled. The women also wear a sebe, a rope necklace for “protection.” This ceremonial washing is done each Friday and Monday for 100 days. During this period they cannot take anything directly from a male. If a man wants to give them something, he must first place it on the ground or on a table. The woman will then pick it up. No one is allowed to sit on or sleep in the bed of these women. Whenever they leave the home, they each must carry a special stick. They think that possession of this stick will prevent their deceased husband from attacking them. If the above instructions are not followed, they feel that the dead husband could become vexed and harm them.
Such experiences are common in that part of the world. However, these types of customs are not unique to Africa.
Fear of the Dead Widespread
One encyclopedia, Encarta, states the following about the way many peoples view their dead ancestors: “Deceased relatives . . . are believed to have become powerful spiritual beings or, less frequently, to have attained the status of gods. [This concept] is based on the belief that ancestors are active members of society, still interested in the affairs of their living relatives. It has been extensively documented in West African societies . . . , in Polynesia and Melanesia (the Dobu and the Manus), among several Indo-European peoples (the ancient Scandinavians and Germans), and especially in China and Japan. In general, ancestors are believed to wield great authority, having special powers to influence the course of events or to control the well-being of their living relatives. Protection of the family is one of their main concerns. They are considered intermediaries between the supreme god, or the gods, and the people, and can communicate with the living through dreams and by possession. The attitude toward them is one of mixed fear and reverence. If neglected, the ancestors may cause disease and other misfortunes. Propitiation, supplication, prayer, and sacrifice are various ways in which the living can communicate with their ancestors.”
Indeed, a family’s income can be sapped because of fear of the dead. Often, elaborate ceremonies requiring food and drink, live animals for sacrifice, and expensive garb are demanded by those who strongly believe the dead should be feared.
But are dead relatives or ancestors really in a state that demands fear and reverence? What does God’s Word, the Bible, say?
Can the Dead Harm You?
You may be interested to know that the Bible acknowledges such beliefs. In the book of Deuteronomy, practices related to fear of the dead are mentioned. It states: “There should not be found in you anyone who . . . binds others with a spell or anyone who consults a spirit medium or a professional foreteller of events or anyone who inquires of the dead. For everybody doing these things is something detestable to Jehovah.”—Deuteronomy 18:10-12.
Notice that Jehovah God condemned such rites. Why? Because they are based on a lie. The foremost lie concerning the dead is that the soul lives on. For example, the magazine The Straight Path said this about what happens to the dead: “Death is nothing other than the departure of the soul. . . . The grave is a reservoir for the body only, not the soul.”
The Bible does not agree. Read for yourself Ezekiel 18:4: “Behold, all souls are mine; as the soul of the father, so also the soul of the son is mine: the soul that sinneth, it shall die.” (King James Version) Also, the condition of the dead was spelled out clearly in God’s Word at Ecclesiastes 9:5: “The living are conscious that they will die; but as for the dead, they are conscious of nothing at all.” This explains why food left for the dead does not get consumed unless it is eaten by someone living.
The Bible, however, does not leave us without hope for those who are in the grave. They can live again! The Bible speaks of a “resurrection.” (John 5:28, 29; 11:25; Acts 24:15) This will take place at God’s due time. Meanwhile, the dead lie unconscious in the grave, ‘sleeping,’ until God’s time for them to “awaken.”—John 11:11-14; Psalm 13:3.
People generally fear the unknown. Accurate knowledge can set a person free from unfounded superstitions. The Bible gives us the truth about the condition of those in the grave. Put simply, you need not fear the dead!—John 8:32.

