



YURI LASHOV/AFP via Getty Images


KEEP ON THE WATCH!
Christians and War—What Does the Bible Say?




As the conflict in Ukraine has highlighted, many Christian leaders actively promote war. Note how the clergy support both sides of the conflict:
           “Great honors and gratitude to all our warriors defending their native Ukraine from the aggressor . . . Our hearts, sincere prayers, and support are always near you.”—Metropolitan Epiphanius I of Kyiv, as reported in The Jerusalem Post, March 16, 2022.


           “The head of the Russian Orthodox Church held a service for Russian soldiers on Sunday in which he called on them to defend their country ‘as only Russians can’ as Moscow continues its military campaign in Ukraine.”—Reuters, April 3, 2022.



Should Christians take part in war? What does the Bible say?



What the Bible really says

The Bible shows that those who truly follow Jesus Christ do not engage in warfare.
            “Return your sword to its place, for all those who take up the sword will perish by the sword.”—Matthew 26:52.
Is a person who condones war or fights in war really obeying Jesus’ words?

            “I am giving you a new commandment, that you love one another; just as I have loved you, you also love one another. By this all will know that you are my disciples—if you have love among yourselves.”—John 13:34, 35.
Is a person who supports warfare showing the kind of love that Jesus said would identify his disciples, or followers?


For more information, read the article “Is War Compatible With Christianity?”



Christians and war today

Is it realistic for Christians to avoid engaging in warfare today? Yes. The Bible foretold that in our time, a period called “the last days,” there would be people from all nations who would not “learn war anymore,” in harmony with Jesus’ teachings.—Isaiah 2:2, 4, footnote.
            Read The Watchtower article series entitled “How Does God View War?” to find out more.


Soon Jehovah,a “the God of peace,” will use his heavenly government to rescue people “from oppression and from violence.”—Philippians 4:9; Psalm 72:14.
            To see how, watch the video What Is God’s Kingdom?


We warmly invite you to watch our 2022 convention on the theme “Pursue Peace!” This program can help you to find inner peace despite fearful events that cause many to feel overwhelming anxiety. Download or stream the program. No registration required.





a Jehovah is the personal name of God.—Psalm 83:18.

