





Help for Victims of Domestic Abuse




“Violence against women is a global public health problem of epidemic proportion, requiring urgent action,” says the World Health Organization. That organization estimates that almost 30 percent “of all women who have been in a relationship have experienced physical and/or sexual violence” by their partner. And a UN report estimates that in one recent year, 137 women died each day around the world at the hands of their partner or another family member.a
Statistics may reveal the magnitude of the problem of domestic abuse, but they cannot begin to describe the emotional and physical pain that each victim suffers.
Are you a victim of domestic abuse? Or do you know someone who is? If so, consider the following points from the Bible that can help.
Domestic abuse is not your fault
Help is available
You are not alone
Domestic abuse will end
How you can help a victim



Domestic abuse is not your fault

What the Bible says: “Each of us will render an account for himself to God.”—Romans 14:12.
Remember this: Your abuser is responsible for his actions.
If your partner blames you for the abuse he inflicts, he is wrong. Wives deserve to be loved, not abused.—Colossians 3:19.
At times, an abuser’s actions may be influenced by a personality disorder, his family background, or the misuse of alcohol. Even so, he is accountable to God for the way he treats you. And he is responsible to do what it takes to change his actions.



Help is available

What the Bible says: “There is accomplishment through many advisers.”—Proverbs 15:22.
Remember this: If you feel unsafe or do not know what to do, others can help.
Why may you need help from others? Domestic abuse is a complex situation. When deciding how to deal with it, you may struggle to weigh factors that seem to compete with each other, such as:
  Your personal safety

  The well-being of your children

  Your financial situation

  Your love for your partner

  A desire to salvage the relationship if your partner changes his actions


Naturally, you may feel confused and overwhelmed. Who can you turn to for help?
A trusted friend or family member may be able to provide practical and emotional support. Talking to someone who cares for you can make a big difference.
Hotlines for victims of domestic violence may offer immediate support. Those who work these hotlines can help you develop a safety plan. If your partner acknowledges his problem and sincerely wants to change, a hotline may be able to help him with the first steps he needs to take.
Other emergency resources can help you if you are in immediate danger. These resources may include doctors, nurses, or other trained professionals.



You are not alone

What the Bible says: “Jehovahb is close to the brokenhearted; he saves those who are crushed in spirit.”—Psalm 34:18.
Remember this: God promises to help you.
Jehovah cares deeply about you. (1 Peter 5:7) He understands your deepest thoughts and emotions. He can comfort you through His Word, the Bible. And he invites you to pray to him. When you pray, you can ask him to give you the wisdom and strength you need to deal with your situation.—Isaiah 41:10.



Domestic abuse will end

What the Bible says: “They will dwell, each one under his vine and under his fig tree, and no one will make them afraid.”—Micah 4:4, footnote.
Remember this: The Bible promises a time in the near future when the home will be a peaceful place for everyone.
Jehovah God has the only complete and permanent solution to all of our problems. The Bible promises: “He will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore.” (Revelation 21:4) At that time, even bad memories will fade away as they are replaced with good ones. (Isaiah 65:17) This is the peaceful future that the Bible offers you.



a This article refers to the victim as female, but many of the points discussed also apply to male victims.
b Jehovah is God’s name as revealed in the Bible.

How you can help a victim
Do you know someone who is a victim of domestic abuse? Even if you are not a trained professional, you may be able to help her.c
Listen empathetically. (James 1:19) Tell her that you are willing to listen, but do not push her to talk. Reassure her that you believe what she says.​—Proverbs 20:5.
One domestic violence resource says: “It will have taken a lot for her to talk to you. [Victims] are much more likely to cover up or downplay the abuse, rather than to make it up or exaggerate. You might find it hard to imagine someone you know could behave abusively. But the person who is abusive will probably show you a very different side [from] the side the victim sees.”
Speak encouragingly. (1 Thessalonians 5:11) Use your words to build her self-worth. Tell her that you care about her. Remind her of her good qualities. And encourage her to get help.
Offer support. (Proverbs 17:17) Give her practical assistance, such as watching her children for a short time or providing a meal. Verify that she has a safety plan, including a place to go in case of an emergency.
Build up her confidence in her ability to make her own decisions. (Galatians 6:5) Provide her with information, and talk about possible options. But do not tell her what she should do.
c If you are concerned about a victim of the opposite sex, it is best to limit the help you personally provide and encourage her to seek help from a trusted female friend.



