





How to Deal With Isolation




Are you feeling isolated and lonely? If so, you may feel as did the psalmist who said: “I am like a solitary bird on a roof.” (Psalm 102:7) The Bible’s wisdom can help you to deal with problems that are caused by isolation.
Pursue spiritual growth

Read comforting Bible passages

Understand the meaning of world events

Avoid needless anxiety

Cultivate friendships

Stay physically active





Pursue spiritual growth

Even while you are isolated, you can find happiness by being aware of your spiritual need and filling it. (Matthew 5:3, 6) The following free resources can help you get started.
  An online Bible that is accurate and easy to read

  Online Bible Study Lessons that answer some of life’s most important questions

  Short videos about some of the Bible’s essential teachings

  “Bible Questions Answered”—Direct answers to questions often asked

  “Imitate Their Faith”—This series brings to life the accounts of faithful men and women of the Bible

  “Was It Designed?”—This series highlights the beauty and complexity of the natural world





Read comforting Bible passages

These Scriptures have helped many to find comfort. Rather than reading several passages at once, try using your time in isolation as an opportunity to meditate on each passage and to pray.—Mark 1:35.
  Psalm 23:1-6

  Psalm 34:1-22

  Psalm 46:1-11

  Psalm 63:6-8

  Psalm 91:1-6

  Matthew 6:25-34

  2 Corinthians 1:3, 4

  Philippians 4:6, 7

  1 Peter 5:6, 7





Understand the meaning of world events

You can deal better with any troubling situation if you know why bad things happen and how God will undo them.—Isaiah 65:17.
  Why does God allow suffering?

  What does the Bible say about sickness and health?

  What is the sign of the last days?

  Who are the four horsemen of Revelation?

  What will God’s Kingdom accomplish?





Avoid needless anxiety

Articles on the following subjects can help you to deal with stress caused by isolation and to “stop being anxious.”—Matthew 6:25.
  How to deal with stress

  Maintaining a positive attitude

  Anxiety about danger

  Anxiety about money

  Anxiety faced by young people





Cultivate friendships

Friendships benefit your mental and emotional health and are even more important when face-to-face connections are difficult. If you are confined at home, you may be able to use videoconferencing or voice calls to maintain existing friendships and build new ones. The following articles can help you to find and be “a true friend.”—Proverbs 17:17.
  What makes a good friend?

  Should you expand your circle of friends?

  What if you feel that you don’t have any friends?

  Build friendships by being generous

  Build friendships through gratitude





Stay physically active

The Bible acknowledges that “exercise is beneficial.” (1 Timothy 4:8, footnote) It can contribute to mental health, especially when you are dealing with isolation. Even when you are confined to your home, likely there are things you can do to stay active.
  Keep yourself moving

  Build physical and mental resilience





