





Is a Fair Economic System Possible?




In one country after another, people have taken to the streets, protesting what they feel are unfair economic conditions. Those problems were made worse by the COVID-19 pandemic, which fueled unrest, as lockdowns, shortages, and limited access to health care exposed the gulf between rich and poor.
Will we ever see an end to the economic problems that plague the world? Yes. The Bible describes what God will do to solve the problems we are facing.



Economic problems that God will solve

Problem: Humans have not established an economic system that satisfies the needs of all people.
Solution: God will replace human governments with his own, called the Kingdom of God. It will rule from heaven over the entire earth.—Daniel 2:44; Matthew 6:10.
Result: As a global government, God’s Kingdom will administer earth’s affairs perfectly. People will never again be trapped in poverty or suffer economic insecurity. (Psalm 9:7-9, 18) Instead, they will enjoy the results of their labor and experience a productive, satisfying life with their families. The Bible promises: “They will build houses and live in them, and they will plant vineyards and eat their fruitage. They will not build for someone else to inhabit, nor will they plant for others to eat.”—Isaiah 65:21, 22.
Problem: People cannot escape events that bring suffering and want.
Solution: By means of his Kingdom, God will remove all causes of fear and insecurity.
Result: Under God’s care, people will no longer experience events that rob them or their family of life’s necessities. For example, wars, food shortages, and pandemics will be things of the past. (Psalm 46:9; 72:16; Isaiah 33:24) God says: “My people will dwell in a peaceful abiding place, in secure dwellings and in tranquil resting-places.”—Isaiah 32:18.
Problem: People are often exploited by those who are selfish and greedy.
Solution: Subjects of God’s Kingdom will learn to put genuine love for others ahead of self-interest.—Matthew 22:37-39.
Result: Under God’s Kingdom, everyone will display godly love, which “does not look for its own interests.” (1 Corinthians 13:4, 5) The Bible states: “They will not cause any harm or any ruin in all my holy mountain, because the earth will certainly be filled with the knowledge of Jehovaha as the waters cover the sea.”—Isaiah 11:9.
The Bible indicates that we are living in the last days of the current system of things and that soon God will fulfill his promise to bring an end to all economic problems.b (Psalm 12:5) In the meantime, Bible principles can help you cope with the economic problems you face now. For example, see the articles “How to Live on Less” and “A Balanced View of Money.”



Misconceptions about the Bible and economics
Misconception: Poverty will never end, because Jesus said: “You always have the poor with you.”—Matthew 26:11.
Fact: Jesus was simply stating a reality: As long as this unjust world exists, there will be poor people. However, Jesus’ message brought “good news to the poor,” including the promise that God’s Kingdom will end poverty forever.—Luke 4:18, 43.
Misconception: People who want to please God must be poor, for Jesus said: “Go sell your belongings and give to the poor.”—Matthew 19:21.
Fact: Jesus was not establishing a standard for his followers to live by. He was giving specific direction to a young man who was distracted by his riches. Jesus encouraged the man to simplify his life and accept the invitation to become one of Jesus’ followers.
Misconception: God blesses individuals with wealth, for the Bible says: “It is the blessing of Jehovah that makes one rich.”—Proverbs 10:22.
Fact: In the Bible, “the blessing of Jehovah” usually refers to spiritual riches, such as a meaningful life, a good relationship with God, and a bright hope for the future. (Psalm 25:14; John 17:3) While God did bless some of his servants with wealth, most who became Christians were not rich. (Genesis 24:34, 35; James 2:5) Even Jesus Christ possessed few material things.—Matthew 8:20.
Misconception: The Bible teaches a form of communism, as it says about first-century Christians: They “had everything in common, and they were selling their possessions and properties.”—Acts 2:44, 45.
Fact: These verses describe a temporary arrangement made to address the material needs of some who had recently become Christians. These individuals had initially traveled to Jerusalem to attend the Jewish festival of Pentecost. (Acts 2:5) However, when they became Christians, they remained in Jerusalem longer than expected, in order to learn more about their newfound faith. As a result, fellow Christians voluntarily pooled their resources to help provide them with food and accommodations.—Acts 2:41, 42, 46, 47.


a Jehovah is God’s name as revealed in the Bible.—Psalm 83:18.
b To learn why you can trust the Bible, see the article “The Bible—A Reliable Source of Truth.”

