





Is the World Coming to an End? What Is the Apocalypse?




What comes to your mind when you hear the word “apocalypse”? You might think of a global catastrophe, perhaps one that ends all life on earth. Some believe that the world is heading toward such a disaster, especially when they read news reports like the following:
  “Nuclear war—whether started by design, blunder, or simple miscommunication—is a genuine possibility.”—Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists.


  “The past decade has seen an astonishing run of record-breaking storms, forest fires, droughts, coral bleaching, heat waves, and floods around the world.”—National Geographic.


  “Locust swarms in Africa are worst in decades.”—The Associated Press.



Will the earth be destroyed in a global apocalypse? What does the Bible say?



Will planet earth come to an end?

No. God’s Word, the Bible, assures us that the earth will remain forever. (Ecclesiastes 1:4) Rather than destroying the earth that he created, God will “bring to ruin those ruining the earth.”—Revelation 11:18.



Is the world coming to an end?

According to the Bible, the “world” that will come to an end is the world of mankind who disregard God and pursue selfish desires. Just as he did in the days of Noah, God will bring an end to “a world of ungodly people.”—2 Peter 2:5; 3:7.
As 1 John 2:17 states, “the world is passing away and so is its desire.” This verse shows that God will destroy, not the literal planet earth, but the people who persist in their ungodly desires.



When will the end come?

The Bible does not tell us exactly when the end will come. (Matthew 24:36) However, it does indicate that the end is close. The Bible foretells the following:
  Events such as wars, food shortages, epidemics, and powerful earthquakes would occur “in one place after another.”—Matthew 24:3, 7, 14; Luke 21:10, 11; Revelation 6:1-8.

  People in general would display extreme selfishness. For example, they would be “lovers of money,” “unthankful,” and “without self-control.”—2 Timothy 3:1-5.


Many people agree that since the year 1914, world conditions have matched what the Bible foretold and that the end is near. For more information, see the articles “What Does Bible Chronology Indicate About the Year 1914?” and “What Is the Sign of ‘the Last Days,’ or ‘End Times’?”



What is the meaning of “apocalypse” in the Bible?

The original Greek-language word translated “apocalypse” in the Bible basically means “uncovering” or “unveiling.” Often that word describes the revealing of information that had been hidden. The Bible also speaks of “the revelation [or, apocalypse] of the Lord Jesus,” which occurs when Jesus is revealed as the one with the power to rid the earth of all wicked influences and to reward those who worship God.—2 Thessalonians 1:6, 7; 1 Peter 1:7, 13.
The last book of the Bible is named A·po·kaʹly·psis, or Revelation, because it reveals future events. (Revelation 1:1) That book contains good news and a message of hope. (Revelation 1:3) It shows that God will eliminate all injustice and turn the earth into a paradise. At that time, humans will no longer experience pain, suffering, or even death.—Revelation 21:3, 4.
Would you like to learn more about these wonderful Bible promises? Jehovah’s Witnesses offer a free Bible study program that can help you. Why not contact them today?



