





Job Loss—Bible Principles That Can Help You to Cope




Losing your job can take a toll not only on your finances but also on your family life and your emotional and mental well-being. Considering the following suggestions based on timeless principles from the Bible can help you to cope.
  Talk to others about your feelings.
What the Bible says: “A true friend shows love at all times.”—Proverbs 17:17.
After losing your job, you may feel sad, angry, or disoriented, or you may feel that you are a failure. When you share your feelings with family members and close friends, they can provide emotional support. They may also give you practical advice that can help you as you move forward.

  Avoid excessive anxiety.
What the Bible says: “Never be anxious about the next day, for the next day will have its own anxieties.”—Matthew 6:34.
The Bible encourages us to plan ahead. (Proverbs 21:5) However, it also advises us to avoid excessive worry or anxiety about the future. We often end up worrying about things that may never happen. It is better to take one day at a time.
The Bible offers added practical wisdom on how you can cope with the stress you may now feel. Read the article “How to Deal With Stress” to learn more.

  Make necessary changes to your budget.
What the Bible says: “I have learned . . . how to have an abundance and how to do without.”—Philippians 4:12.
Adjust to your current situation. This will include changing your spending habits so that you can live within your means. Be careful not to take on needless debt.—Proverbs 22:7.
For more suggestions on how to adjust to your current financial situation, see the article “How to Live on Less.”

  Use your time wisely.
What the Bible says: “Go on walking in wisdom . . . , making the best use of your time.”—Colossians 4:5.
Even though you no longer have a fixed work schedule, maintain a good routine for how you use your time. Doing so will help you to preserve stability in your life and will bolster your self-worth.

  Be adaptable.
What the Bible says: “There is benefit in every kind of hard work.”—Proverbs 14:23.
Be willing to do work that is different from what you did before. You may need to consider jobs that seem menial or that will pay less than your prior employment did.

  Be persistent.
What the Bible says: “Sow your seed in the morning and do not let your hand rest until the evening; for you do not know which will have success.”—Ecclesiastes 11:6.
Keep looking for work. Spread the word that you are looking for a job. Talk to relatives, acquaintances, former workmates, and neighbors. Check employment agencies, help wanted ads, and job openings on companies’ websites. Be prepared to go on many job interviews and to submit numerous résumés before you find a job.





