
KEEP ON THE WATCH!
Refugee Crisis—Millions Flee Ukraine


Russia began a military invasion of Ukraine on February 24, 2022, creating a severe humanitarian crisis as civilians fled the conflict.a
“There were bombs and explosions. It was so scary that it’s hard to describe in words. When we learned that there were evacuation trains, we decided to leave. You were supposed to put your whole life in one small backpack per person. We could only take documents, medicines, water, and snacks. We left everything else and went to the train station as the bombs fell.”—Nataliia, from Kharkiv, Ukraine.

“Until the last moment, we believed that there would be no war. I heard blasts from some parts of the city, and windows were shaking. I decided to leave, taking only really necessary things. I left home at 8:00 in the morning and took a train to Lviv and then a bus to Poland.”—Nadija, from Kharkiv, Ukraine.

In this article
What are the real causes of this refugee crisis?

Where can refugees turn for hope?

Can the Bible help refugees today?


What are the real causes of this refugee crisis?
The refugee crisis in Ukraine began because of a military invasion by Russia. However, the Bible reveals deeper, underlying causes for all such refugee crises:
  Human governments worldwide have failed the human family. Those in power often use governmental authority as a means of oppression.—Ecclesiastes 4:1; 8:9.

  Satan the Devil, “the ruler of the world,” exerts such an evil influence on mankind that the Bible says: “The whole world is lying in the power of the wicked one.”—John 14:30; 1 John 5:19.

  Besides the problems that have plagued mankind for centuries, we now live in a period of time foretold by the Bible: “In the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here.” (2 Timothy 3:1) What is more, these days would be marked by wars, natural disasters, food shortages, and pestilences—events that cause people to flee.—Luke 21:10, 11.


Where can refugees turn for hope?
The Bible reveals that our Creator, Jehovah,b is a God who has love and compassion for refugees and people displaced from their homes. (Deuteronomy 10:18) He promises to solve the problems of refugees by means of his heavenly government, called God’s Kingdom, which will replace human governments. (Daniel 2:44; Matthew 6:10) Jehovah will use his Kingdom to remove Satan the Devil. (Romans 16:20) That Kingdom will be a global government, eliminating the divisions caused by national borders. All mankind will form a united worldwide family. No one will ever again need to flee his home, for the Bible promises: “They will sit, each one under his vine and under his fig tree, and no one will make them afraid, for the mouth of Jehovah of armies has spoken.”—Micah 4:4.
Only God’s Kingdom can provide a lasting solution to the refugee crises we experience today. Jehovah will use his Kingdom to remove the problems that force people to become refugees. Consider some examples:
  War. “[Jehovah] is bringing an end to wars.” (Psalm 46:9) To find out how God will end conflict, read the article “Peace on Earth—How Will It Come?”

  Oppression and violence. “From oppression and from violence [Jehovah] will rescue them.” (Psalm 72:14) To understand how people can change ingrained attitudes, read the series of articles entitled “Breaking the Cycle of Hatred.”

  Poverty. “[Jehovah] will rescue the poor who cry for help.” (Psalm 72:12) To see how God will address the root causes of poverty, read the article “Is a Fair Economic System Possible?”

  Food shortages. “There will be an abundance of grain on the earth.” (Psalm 72:16) To find out how God will ensure that no one goes hungry, read the article “A World Without Hunger?”


Can the Bible help refugees today?
Yes. Besides giving refugees a sure hope for the future, the Bible can help with the challenges that they face now.

Bible principle: “The naive person believes every word, but the shrewd one ponders each step.”—Proverbs 14:15.
Meaning: Anticipate dangers to which you might be exposed and how you will safeguard yourself. Beware of criminals who target and exploit the insecurities and inexperience of refugees in their new location.


Bible principle: “Having food and clothing, we will be content with these things.”—1 Timothy 6:8.
Meaning: Avoid focusing your mind on material things. When you are satisfied with the basics, you will be happier.


Bible principle: “All things, therefore, that you want men to do to you, you also must do to them.”—Matthew 7:12.
Meaning: Be patient and kind. These qualities will help you gain respect and acceptance within the local community.


Bible principle: “Return evil for evil to no one.”—Romans 12:17.
Meaning: Do not let anger cause you to retaliate when you are mistreated. It will only make things worse.


Bible principle: “For all things I have the strength through the one who gives me power.”—Philippians 4:13.
Meaning: Give God an important place in your life and pray to him. He can strengthen you to cope.

Bible principle: “Do not be anxious over anything, but in everything by prayer and supplication along with thanksgiving, let your petitions be made known to God; and the peace of God that surpasses all understanding will guard your hearts and your mental powers.”—Philippians 4:6, 7.
Meaning: Ask God for peace of mind and heart in whatever circumstance you find yourself. See the article “Philippians 4:6, 7—‘Do Not Be Anxious About Anything.’”

a The day after the invasion, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) assigned the highest emergency level to the crisis. Within just 12 days, more than two million refugees had fled Ukraine to neighboring countries, while another one million people were displaced within the country.
b Jehovah is the personal name of God. (Psalm 83:18) See the article “Who Is Jehovah?”

