





KEEP ON THE WATCH!
School Shootings—What Does the Bible Say?




On May 24, 2022, an unspeakable tragedy befell the small town of Uvalde, Texas, U.S.A. According to The New York Times, “a gunman killed 19 children and two teachers . . . at Robb Elementary School.”
Sadly, such horrific events are all too common. USA Today reported that in the United States alone, “there were 249 shootings on school grounds last year—more than any other year since at least 1970.”
Why do these atrocities occur? How can we cope with such evil acts? Is there any hope that the violence will end? The Bible provides answers.



Why is the world becoming more violent?

  The Bible describes our time period as “the last days” when many people would have “no natural affection” and be “fierce,” engaging in brutal and savage actions. Those displaying such traits would “advance from bad to worse.” (2 Timothy 3:1-5, 13) To learn more, read the article “Did the Bible Predict the Way People Think and Act Today?”


Many people wonder, ‘Why doesn’t God prevent terrible tragedies like school shootings from happening?’ To see the Bible’s answer, read the article “Bad Things Happen to Good People—Why?”



How can we cope with such evil?

  “The things that were written beforehand were written for our instruction, so that . . . through the comfort from the Scriptures we might have hope.”—Romans 15:4.


Bible principles can help you to cope with this violent world. See the Awake! magazine entitled “Will Violence Ever End?” for more information.
For suggestions on how parents can help their children cope with frightening news reports, read the article “Disturbing News Reports and Your Children.”



Will the violence ever end?

  “From oppression and from violence he will rescue them.”—Psalm 72:14.

  “They will beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning shears. Nation will not lift up sword against nation, nor will they learn war anymore.”—Micah 4:3.


God will do what humans are incapable of doing. His heavenly Kingdom government will eliminate all weapons and end all violence. To learn more about what God’s Kingdom will accomplish, read the article “Under God’s Kingdom ‘Peace Will Abound.’”



