





KEEP ON THE WATCH!
Shocking Gun Violence Worldwide—What Does the Bible Say?




During July 2022, shocking acts of gun violence occurred worldwide:
           “The murder of Japan’s best-known politician [former Prime Minister Shinzo Abe] rattled the country and sent shock waves around the world, particularly given the nation’s low levels of violent crime and strict gun laws.”—July 10, 2022, The Japan Times.


           “Denmark in shock as gunman kills three at Copenhagen shopping mall.”—July 4, 2022, Reuters.


            “South Africa: 15 dead after gunmen open fire at bar in Soweto township.”—July 10, 2022, The Guardian.


            “More than 220 shot and killed in U.S. gun violence over July 4 holiday weekend.”—July 5, 2022, CBS News.



Is there any hope that such violence will end? What does the Bible say?



An End to Violence

The Bible describes our time as “the last days,” a time when people would act in fierce, brutal, and savage ways. (2 Timothy 3:1, 3) Such violent acts cause people to live in fear. (Luke 21:11) However, the Bible promises a time when violence will end and “people will dwell in a peaceful abiding place, in secure dwellings and in tranquil resting-places.” (Isaiah 32:18) How will violence end?
God will remove the wicked and destroy all weapons.
            “As for the wicked, they will be cut off from the earth.”—Proverbs 2:22.

            “[God] is bringing an end to wars throughout the earth. He breaks the bow and shatters the spear; he burns the military wagons with fire.”—Psalm 46:9.


God will eliminate the root causes of violent acts by teaching people to live in peace.
            “They will not cause any harm or any ruin in all my holy mountain, because the earth will certainly be filled with the knowledge of Jehovah as the waters cover the sea.”—Isaiah 11:9.

            Even now, God is teaching people worldwide to shun violence and the use of weapons, to “beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning shears.”—Micah 4:3.


To learn more about the Bible’s promise of a world without fear, read the article “Freedom From Fear—Is It Possible?”
To learn more about the permanent solution to violence, read the article “Peace on Earth at Last!”
During July and August of 2022, Jehovah’s Witnesses worldwide are benefiting from the “Pursue Peace”! Regional Convention, which is being held virtually. The Bible principles discussed in the program can help you enjoy peace now and in the future. We invite you to watch the program.





