





KEEP ON THE WATCH!
Soaring Worldwide Inflation—What Does the Bible Say?




“The world economy is again in danger,” warns the president of the World Bank Group in a June 2022 report. “This time it is facing high inflation and slow growth at the same time.”
“Fuel and food prices have increased rapidly, hitting vulnerable populations in low-income countries hardest,” notes the International Monetary Fund.
The Bible helps us to understand why we are facing such challenging economic problems, how we can cope with them, and what hope there is for a permanent solution.



Rising prices during “the last days”

           The Bible calls the time that we are living in “the last days.”—2 Timothy 3:1.

           Jesus said that “fearful sights,” or frightening events, would mark this time period. (Luke 21:11) Soaring inflation causes fear. People worry about their future and whether they will be able to provide for their family.

             The book of Revelation foretold rising food prices during this period of time. “I heard something that sounded like a voice. . . . It said, ‘A quart of wheat or three quarts of barley will cost a full day’s pay.’”—Revelation 6:6, Easy-to-Read Version.


To learn more about “the last days” and the prophecy in the book of Revelation, watch the video The World Has Changed Since 1914 and read the article “The Four Horsemen—Who Are They?”



The solution to all economic problems

            “They will build houses and live in them, and they will plant vineyards and eat their fruitage. They will not build for someone else to inhabit, nor will they plant for others to eat.”—Isaiah 65:21, 22.

            “There will be an abundance of grain on the earth; on the top of the mountains it will overflow.”—Psalm 72:16.

            “‘Because the afflicted are oppressed, because of the sighing of the poor, I will rise up to act,’ says Jehovah.”—Psalm 12:5.a


God will soon bring an end to unfair economic conditions, not just in one country but around the world. To see how, read the article “Is a Fair Economic System Possible?”
But even today, the Bible can help you to deal with rising prices. In what way? It contains practical advice on how to use money wisely. (Proverbs 23:4, 5; Ecclesiastes 7:12) To learn more, read the articles “Protect Your Livelihood” and “How to Live on Less.”



a Jehovah is the personal name of God.—Psalm 83:18.

