





KEEP ON THE WATCH!
Worshipping Images—What Does the Bible Say?




According to the Catholic News Service, during a ceremony at St. Peter’s Basilica held on March 25, 2022, Pope Francis stood before a statue of Mary with his “eyes closed and head bowed in silent prayer.” He “pleaded with Mary” for peace. A Vatican News report added that “the Pope prayed the Act of Consecration of humanity, especially of Russia and Ukraine, to the Immaculate Heart of Mary.”
What do you think? Is it appropriate to pray before images or to use them in worship? Consider the following Bible verses:
  “You must not make for yourself a carved image or a form like anything that is in the heavens above or on the earth below or in the waters under the earth. You must not bow down to them nor be enticed to serve them, for I, Jehovah your God, am a God who requires exclusive devotion.”—Exodus 20:4, 5.a

 “Their idols are silver and gold, the work of human hands.  A mouth they have, but they cannot speak; eyes, but they cannot see; ears they have, but they cannot hear; a nose, but they cannot smell; hands they have, but they cannot feel; feet, but they cannot walk; they make no sound with their throat. The people who make them will become just like them, as will all those who trust in them.”—Psalm 115:4-8.

  “I am Jehovah. That is my name; I do not share my glory with anyone else, nor my praise to graven images.”—Isaiah 42:8, footnote.

  “Flee from idolatry.”—1 Corinthians 10:14.

  “Guard yourselves from idols.”—1 John 5:21.


For more information on what the Bible says about the use of images in worship, read the article “The Bible’s Viewpoint—Images” or watch the video Does God Approve the Use of Images in Worship?
You may also be interested in what the Bible says about these topics:
  “The Virgin Mary—What Does the Bible Say About Her?”

  “Should You Pray to the Virgin Mary?”

  “Miracles and Apparitions—Signs From God?”

  “Peace on Earth—How Will It Come?”


Photo credit: Vincenzo Pinto/AFP via Getty Images



a Jehovah is the personal name of God. (Psalm 83:18) See the article “Who Is Jehovah?”

