Body Building Was a Prime Interest in My Life
STREET fights and household brawls were a regular part of my life, but I always came out the loser. It made me feel like an outcast. I resolved to do something about it. My decision started me on a course in life that eventually made me seek the title “Mr. Universe,” the world’s most perfectly developed man.
Strict diets and weight training became my way of life, and I loved every moment of it. Everything else was subordinated to one purpose: to transform myself to the very essence of masculinity. My body began to be molded and shaped. In time I could rip metal license plates to pieces and perform herculean feats of strength with heavy weights. All this sent my male ego into orbit.
When I entered contests and competitions, it was with only one thought: I would eventually become the most muscular man in the world. Titles and trophies began to accumulate, such as Mr. Algoma​—Most Muscular (1962), and Junior Mr. Canada (1965).
Motorcycle Mania
Parallel with body-building endeavors, I became involved in motorcycle racing. A heady mixture of fame and notoriety resulted from entering races in various parts of the continental United States and Canada.
It was only a short step into membership in motorcycle gangs. Soon my associates came to be a pack of howling, half-inebriated vagabonds. I decked myself out with a German helmet, swastikas, chains and whips. As a gang, we harassed innocent people and created havoc all the way from the Canadian border to the state of Florida. During this period of brutish licentiousness I witnessed drug parties that led the participants into the lowest depths of depravity. Running with this crowd finally gained me a jail sentence.
After my release, nearly out of money, I turned my motorcycle in the direction of home. It was a long journey and afforded me much time to think. A thought that crossed my mind many times during that trip was: If I continue this kind of association I will likely end up dead rather than being a contender for the title of Mr. Universe.
An Awakening
A deep feeling of revulsion came over me. The course in life I had been following was nothing but vanity. Where had it led me? Once again I was almost overwhelmed with that youthful feeling of being an outcast. But now something started to awaken inside me. Questions took shape in my mind. At the time, I thought it was the result of listening to a certain religious radio program. I began to ask myself: Is the Bible really the Word of God? Among all the many and varied religious sects of the world, is there one religion of which God approves?
Even though those questions were given much serious thought at the time, they gradually began to fade out unanswered. Why? Because once again I let physical training become the dominant feature of my life. The 1970 Mr. Canada show was drawing near. I was at a veritable peak of physical strength. To win this coveted award would be a major steppingstone toward attaining the very pinnacle of my life’s ambition​—to be the world’s most perfectly developed man.
Nevertheless, I was restless. There was no real inner satisfaction from my training now. Those questions, although put in the back of my mind, still bothered me. Where could true and satisfying answers be found? Because of disillusionment, I had stopped attending church. Perhaps that religious radio program had the answers. But, no​—their answers did not satisfy my spiritual hunger either.
The Light of Truth Dawns
Sometime previously I met an old acquaintance in a laundry. He spoke briefly about religion, telling me he was one of Jehovah’s witnesses. At the time, although our conversation was interesting, I did not pay much attention. Now, once again I met my Witness friend. This time questions began pouring out of my mouth. In a casual way we began talking about my church just across the street. He pointed out the origin of various symbols such as the cross on the roof and the image of Jesus on the lawn. Because of stimulated interest, it led me to ask about other things that Catholic people generally believe. He showed me that God’s Word gives no support to such teachings as hellfire torment for the wicked, or purgatorial suffering for those who die in venial sin. Other basic doctrines became just as clear.
But was this really the truth? I had to find out. Further investigation in books on different religions proved frustrating, yet accomplished one thing: It brought realization that what my Witness friend had explained from the Bible alone had the ring of truth.
Soon we began to enjoy a regular study of the Bible together. Amazingly, the restlessness and unsettled condition of mind began to give way to an inner peace never experienced before in my life. Never did my instructor force anything on me. He simply reasoned on Bible teachings in a mild-mannered and gentle way. Now I felt drawn, not to a creature, but to the wonderful God of this kindly man who was teaching me.
An Important Decision
Two courses were open before me. Which would I take? The road I was presently following might eventually lead to the summit of human strength and physique along with honor from men. But after reaching that pinnacle of success​—then what? Nothing indicated a truly happy future thereafter. On the other hand, ‘the narrow and cramped road leading off into life,’ according to the Scriptures, would lead to God’s approval and blessing. By pursuing it I could gain unending life in perfection of body and mind, even though now it would bring the disapproval of men. Prayer to Jehovah helped me to make the most important decision of my life.
Meditation on certain scriptures also helped me. One was at 1 Corinthians 1:31: “He that boasts, let him boast in Jehovah.” Would I doing that by going after the title Mr. Universe? No, it would be directly the opposite. Further, the inspired words of the apostle Paul at 1 Timothy 4:7 brought me up short: “Be training yourself with godly devotion as your aim.” Clearly, a change in training was necessary.
At once I went to my manager and trainer and explained that being Mr. Universe was no longer my goal in life and that no longer would I perform in any shows that would bring praise to myself. They exploded into a rage of obscenities, not only toward me, but even cursing the Name of Jehovah. However, I held firmly to my resolve. About that time I was much encouraged when a local newspaper published a story about a famous soccer player in England who turned down a million-dollar contract to follow in the footsteps of Christ Jesus as one of Jehovah’s witnesses.
Next I determined to serve notice of my withdrawal from the Catholic Church. The experience with my trainer and manager had only served to strengthen this decision. So, here I was, face to face with the priest, telling him why I no longer wanted to be a member of his church. His face took on a bewildered look as I explained my desire to become one of Jehovah’s witnesses. Indignantly, he blurted out that I had simply been brainwashed by Jehovah’s witnesses. I replied that what I was learning was the truth and that it was entirely supported by God’s Word, the Holy Bible. This brought forth an angry and unexpected response: “You can’t believe everything the Bible says!” That really shocked me, as I thought back on how many times he had kissed the Bible and treated it with the utmost reverence while standing before the congregation. Now, behind closed doors, he insinuated that the great God of the universe was untrustworthy​—His Word could not be believed in its entirety. This man was showing his true colors.
My mind reflected back to something he had told our family when my father died at the age of sixty-one. “Your father will have to remain in purgatory for sixty-one years for his sins.” It was to be conditional, however, because the more money we gave for High Masses on behalf of father, the less time he would have to be confined to these torments. He never told us what the Bible says​—that “as for the dead, they are conscious of nothing at all.” (Eccl. 9:5) This man had been a party to one of the greatest rackets ever perpetrated on humankind! What a reproach on the Name of the true God! However, he refused to take my name off the church registry or give over my Baptismal Certificate.
It was pointless to talk any further, so I left him and went to the City Hall, where I changed my religious status from Roman Catholic to being one of Jehovah’s witnesses. Quickly after this I telephoned my doctor and told him that if the need ever arose in the future for an operation on myself or one of my family he was to use no blood, because I had learned that the Scriptures say that we are to “abstain . . . from blood.” (Acts 15:20) Next I canceled my membership in the political party to which I had belonged, because I knew that Jesus had refused to get involved in politics, and I wanted to be his disciple. (Matt. 4:8-10; John 6:15; 17:16) Yet, another test was still ahead of me.
An invitation came asking me to meet and talk to another priest. They still wanted to reunite me with the Catholic Church. On this occasion Jehovah truly helped me as I relied on Him for guidance. In our discussion, the involvement of the pope and priests with Hitler came up. In reply to my question: “Are you familiar with James 4:4 in the Bible where it says, ‘Adulteresses, do you not know that the friendship with the world is enmity with God’?” he said, “It has nothing to do with our case.”
However, I reminded him of the pope’s visit to the United Nations when he told that body: “I come as your friend.” “Doesn’t that constitute spiritual adultery?” I asked him. He became visibly nervous. I then referred to the Catholic Church as being a substantial part of Babylon the Great, as shown in the book of Revelation. “At Revelation 17:1-4,” I pointed out, “it says that she sits with scarlet-colored robes as a queen, and commits religious fornication with the kings of the earth.” At that he became infuriated and stormed out of the room. His attitude served to make my faith in Jehovah’s Word and ways stronger than ever, and I thanked Him for giving me the courage to speak the truth boldly.
Since then I have recognized only the Sovereign Lord Jehovah as “my strength.” No more do I look for fame as Mr. Universe. The Bible has changed my outlook on life. The truth has set me free from bondage to vain desires I once had. I now know that, as stated at 1 Timothy 4:8, “bodily training is beneficial for a little; but godly devotion . . . holds promise of the life now and that which is to come.”
Now joy and happiness are my daily lot in life. It is my earnest desire to use my bodily strength and abilities to make glad the heart of the All-Powerful One of the universe, Jehovah.​—Contributed.

