Announcements
◆ Literature offer, January through April: Watchtower subscription, and three booklets, for $1.
◆ During the Watchtower campaign many try to reach the following goals: Publishers, 2 subscriptions; pioneers, 20, and special pioneers, 30. If you wish to arrange for a chart of some sort to show the progress of the congregation during the subscription campaign, this can be done.
◆ The Memorial will be held Sunday, March 22, after 6 p.m., local standard time. Each congregation may make its own arrangements for the Watchtower study, possibly on the book study night at the rendezvous or on Saturday at the Kingdom Hall. All day Sunday can be devoted to field service, followed by the Memorial after 6 p.m. The circuit servant may give the Memorial talk if the congregation he will be visiting requests it.
If the circuit servant is visiting the congregation, adjustments in his program may be made to fit local circumstances. He may give his final talk on Saturday evening. He will not give his public talk.
◆ When ordering Memorial invitations, the overseer should please use a separate handbill order form. The cost is 25c per 1,000.
◆ The special public talk scheduled for all congregations for Sunday, March 29, is “The Road Back to Peace in Paradise.” A manuscript for this will be sent to the congregation in due time. Order handbills now.
◆ Congregation servants may order applications for vacation pioneer service so these will be on hand when needed.
◆ After January 10, 1970, congregations may begin ordering bound volumes of The Watchtower and Awake!, also the Watch Tower Publications Index for 1969. Volumes are $2 each. The Index is 10c. No pioneer rates.
◆ Additional telephone service has been installed for use by the Society in Brooklyn. If you call and find 625-1240 busy, you might try 858-1240.
◆ New publications available:
Is the Bible Really the Word of God?​—Japanese
The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life​—Hiligaynon
“Things in Which It Is Impossible for God to Lie”​—Cinyanja, Ga
Living in Hope of a Righteous New Order​—Vietnamese
T1​—What Do Jehovah’s Witnesses Believe?​—Hausa
T2​—Hellfire—​Bible Truth or Pagan Scare?​—Russian
◆ Available again in U.S.A.:
“This Good News of the Kingdom”​—Arabic, Japanese, Polish, Ukrainian
“Look! I Am Making All Things New”​—Afrikaans, Polish, Russian, Ukrainian
Living in Hope of a Righteous New Order​—Arabic
Sermon Outlines​—Japanese
◆ Out of stock in U.S.A.:
Watch Tower Publications Index for 1967​—English
World Conquest Soon​—by God’s Kingdom—​Spanish
God’s Kingdom Rules​—Is the World’s End Near?​—French

