Offering the Good News Effectively
1 Effectiveness in the house-to-house Christian ministry depends on how closely we imitate the methods of Jesus and the apostles. The Scriptures show that they conversed with people to uncover their beliefs. Knowing these, they then spoke with directness so that the truth penetrated the hearts of individuals.​—Matt. 16:13-16; Acts 17:2-4, 16-18, 22-24.
2 Right from the start, before we open the Bible, it is good to converse with the people, inviting them to express themselves. When Paul was in Athens, he learned by observing with his eyes and by ‘reasoning’ with those he met. (Acts 17:16, 17) This is still the best way. We cannot fully know what a person believes unless he talks. For instance, a householder may be wearing a cross. Is he a Catholic, or a Protestant? Does he agree with things he sees going on in his church? The answers to these questions may really be revealed only by his comments.
3 For this reason, after brief introductory remarks to acquaint the person with the subject you wish to discuss, it might be well to ask the householder right from the start: Why do you feel there is so much religious confusion? You may find it appropriate to word the question differently in your area. Or, you may find it is best to ask a series of questions, such as: ‘You may have read in the news reports about the unrest that is developing in the religious world. Has your church been affected in any way? Why does the religious confusion persist? What do you think about it?’
4 An important thing for us to remember is our attitude, our reason for asking questions. We must be sincere. (2 Cor. 2:17) We sincerely want to know what that person believes. We are interested in him as an individual. Thus, how we ask is as important as what we ask. In a polite, neighborly way, probe, stir up his thinking; encourage him to converse. Make him feel invited to speak out.
5 As he speaks, show respect for his views. We should not feel compelled to prove him wrong on every little misstatement. If he wants the truth, the details will come with study. Rather, at this point, see if there is something on which you can agree with him. It may be only one point, but you can call attention to that and let him know that you feel his point makes sense. Of course, this does not mean we will waste time with people who insist on dominating the discussion and who have no desire to learn the truth.
6 When it comes to reading or citing scriptures and offering the literature, we want to reach the person then, too, if at all possible. This calls for directness. You have learned something about his thinking now, and so are better prepared to present the truth to him. In the same conversational style, point him to the Scriptures. These exert power and can make him think. (Heb. 4:12) More is needed than just reading scriptures, however. Help the householder to see the point of the verse. For instance, 2 Timothy 4:3 and 4 makes the point that some will ‘turn away from the truth.’ And, it is true today that many do not want the truth or to have falsehood identified. That is why there is so much confusion in religion.
7 Similarly, in discussing John 4:23, make clear that the truth is available. There is such a thing as true worship and there are true worshipers, and the Father is looking for such people to worship him.
8 Religion is still a touchy subject with some persons. A growing number of others are disgusted with it, however. If possible, we want to converse with an individual and see where he stands on this subject. The Scriptural thoughts we thereafter emphasize can vary from person to person. But under no circumstances will we be unkind or tactless. Kindness is a fruit of God’s spirit and should always mark our lives and speech. (Gal. 5:22; 2 Cor. 6:3, 4, 6) So, try to get people to talk. Then let the truth be direct enough so that the householder gets the point and is aided to act on it, if he is favorably disposed.​—Acts 13:48.

