Presenting the Good News​—By Letter
1 A crippled sister in Philadelphia finds it necessary to carry on most of her witnessing activity by writing letters. She keeps very busy in her service to Jehovah and she enjoys good success in her work, receiving many replies to her letters. What does she write in her letters? To whom does she write? Where does she get her addresses?
2 To read one of her letters you would think that she was standing at your door talking to you. Often it starts: “Good morning. My name is​——​——. I am ‘writing to share with you some information the Bible provides on ‘finding the true religion.’ I do hope this will brighten your day.” In continuing the letter she usually uses the presentation outlined in the Kingdom Ministry, putting it in her own words. Yes, she writes her letter just as if she were talking to the person in a friendly manner, face to face.
3 Many in the congregation know that this sister has had good success in witnessing by mail. So they give her names and addresses of individuals to whom they would like her to write. She writes to individuals that she and other publishers have met in the hospital. One brother met a businessman who lived in another part of the country. This man showed interest in the truth. So the brother gave his name and address to this sister, who continued to develop the interest by mail. Some names she gets from the obituary column. Or if there is information in the local paper about new mothers, or engaged individuals, she writes them, sharing good news from the Scriptures to encourage them as they embark upon their new responsibilities. The overseer has gone into the lobbies of apartment houses where the publishers cannot get in to witness, and he has copied the names and apartment numbers off the mailboxes so that this sister can contact these individuals by mail. Names and addresses have been obtained from the phone book as well as other sources.
4 This sister is very busy and very happy in the theocratic privileges that are hers. No matter what our situation in life, all of us can have a share in making the good news available to others, too. Those of us who are physically able will want to use our time and energy in the house-to-house work and other regular features of the ministry. It is not intended that able-bodied publishers and pioneers spend much of their time writing letters. But those who are bedridden, or confined to their homes for various reasons, either permanently or temporarily because of illness, bad weather, or for other reasons, may be able to make good use of their time and energy in Jehovah’s service as outlined above. We appreciate the urgency of the times. Our having as full a share as possible in Jehovah’s service is important, as the time left is reduced.
[Blurb on page 8]
“Go on walking in wisdom . . . buying out the opportune time.”

