Show Appreciation for God’s Revelations
1 Through the revelations recorded in his Word, Jehovah has helped us to become better acquainted with him and many of his purposes. What a great aid The Watchtower has been to us in understanding Jehovah’s revelations! In view of what we have learned, we are not anxious about what the future holds, as people of the world are. Rather, with confidence, we look forward to the good things Jehovah has in store for all who will worship him in spirit and in truth, and we want to help others to become acquainted with Jehovah and his purposes too. One of the best ways we can do this is by participating fully in the thirty-second Watchtower campaign. The offer will be a subscription for The Watchtower, and three booklets, for a contribution of $1. Or you may offer a subscription for both The Watchtower and Awake! for $2 if you wish, and give a premium of six booklets.
2 When you saw the theme “Finding the True Religion” suggested in the December Kingdom Ministry for our use in the house-to-house work with the subscriptions, how did it strike you? Have you tried it yet, following the suggestions made in the Kingdom Ministry? We encourage you to do so. See what works best in your territory.
3 Last year it was suggested that we present scriptures on the theme “Religion That God Approves.” Some brothers were hesitant about using this presentation at first. However, many later found that when they asked the opinion of householders concerning things they see going on in the religious organizations, many were not only willing to discuss their views of religious practices but were very open in expressing their disapproval of things they had heard and seen in their own religious organizations. This provided excellent opportunities to give a witness. So we suggest now, too, in beginning your presentation, that you ask the householder what he thinks of the upheaval, disorder and rebellion seen in the religions of Christendom. Let him express himself. Encourage him to do so. It is apparent that the thinking of many people has changed. You will find some very willing to express their views on religion and the clergy. Yet, you will find that many of these people still maintain a faith in God and they need to learn how to worship him in spirit and in truth. The Father is looking for suchlike ones to worship him.​—John 4:23.
4 During the Watchtower campaign each issue of The Watchtower will have articles that appeal strongly to those who love righteousness and who long to know the truth. Kindly but forcefully each of these magazines will show the urgent need for lovers of righteousness to get out of false religion and to associate with Jehovah’s people in doing God’s will now while there is yet time. This is information that people need​—NOW! And during the Watchtower campaign it will be our privilege to present it to them.
5 Our greatest field for obtaining new subscriptions is, of course, from house-to-house. One brother in North Carolina obtained 100 subscriptions during the campaign last year. Asked the secret, he said that it was just spending enough time in the house-to-house ministry. The circuit servant observed that, though this brother is eighty-one years of age, “he doesn’t like to sit in the car too much.” As you arrange your affairs to share regularly in the house-to-house ministry, we pray that Jehovah will bless you with good success and fine experiences.
6 A brother in Missouri obtained 125 subscriptions from friends and relatives. By all means, make the subscriptions available to your friends, relatives and workmates. You may decide to give some gift subscriptions. If you do, you can indicate on the top of the subscription slip that it is a gift subscription and that you are the giver. The Society will be glad to notify the recipient of this.
7 One sister obtained five subscriptions while engaging in street magazine work. When pedestrians asked how much the magazines were, her reply was, “A dollar a year.”
8 Because of the urgency of the times and the message we bear, there is a need for us to show zeal in offering the subscriptions and encouraging others to become acquainted with God by his revelations. In doing so, we show love for our neighbors and we give evidence of our appreciation to Jehovah for his aiding us to get acquainted with him by his revelations.
[Blurb on page 1]
Acquainting ourselves with God by his revelations.

