Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 11
Theme: Showing Appreciation for God’s Revelations. Song 26.
 5 min: Introduction, text and comments.
15 min: Reasons for Vacation Pioneering. Questions and answers on insert “Enjoy the Privilege of Vacation Pioneering.” (Where appropriate one question may cover more than one paragraph. For instance, the question “Why do many vacation pioneer?” may be used to cover several paragraphs, giving opportunity for many comments.) Cover insert from beginning down to the heading “A Fine Time to Vacation Pioneer.” Last paragraph before this heading can be read in conclusion. Congregation servant: Encourage the brothers to read this material before coming to meeting.
15 min: “Show Appreciation for God’s Revelations.” Before beginning discussion of “Kingdom Ministry” article, ask audience where they feel they can obtain new subscriptions. Call on several publishers, to get as many suggestions as possible. Also, ask the publishers what “The Watchtower” has done for them and their family. Entertain several comments. Then suggest that they may want to mention some of these benefits when offering subscriptions to others.
After getting number of comments on the above questions, cover by questions and answers the points in the article “Show Appreciation for God’s Revelations.”
15 min: “A Warning from Ancient Rome.” Audience discussion.
(5 min.) Remind congregation what went on in Rome. For example: From October 22, 1969, “Awake!,” page 9, read first two sentences under heading “Lovers of Money.” Then, ask congregation what parallels we see in the old system of things today.
Read first sentence under heading “Without Self-Control” on page 10. Then ask congregation what parallels we see in this old system of things today. Make reference to fact that the Romans were “A Brutal People.” Ask for parallels today.
(10 min.) Review upbuilding Scriptural counsel. Read Gal. 6:7, 8 and encourage congregation to keep separate from unchristian practices of this system. Ask congregation to refer to scriptures that counsel against love of money and dishonesty. Ask also for comments on the advantages that come to Christians from following this counsel of God’s Word.
Similarly, ask for scriptures that counsel against immorality and brutality. Then, ask the congregation for benefits that come to them from following such counsel. Draw out the congregation. Encourage the brothers to express themselves.
10 min: Concluding comments. Consider “New Peaks in November!”, local congregation report and “Question Box.” Song 82.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 18
Theme: “The Time Left Is Reduced.’’ (1 Cor. 7:29) Song 39.
 8 min: Introduction: Family discusses text. Father quizzes child to see if he remembers high points from Branch Letter. Relate interesting points learned from “1970 Yearbook” encouraging zealous activity.
10 min: Question-and-answer consideration of Presenting the Good News​—“By Letter.”
17 min: “Offering the Good News Effectively.” The topic for discussion during the “Watchtower” campaign is “Finding the True Religion.” To be effective, there will be a need to draw out the householder, encouraging him to comment on his attitude toward what is taking place in the churches. Do this before you get into sermon.
Cover the article quickly with questions and answers. Then demonstrate the entire presentation. Thereafter, ask for comments from the congregation.
15 min: Questions and answers on insert. Cover material under headings “A Fine Time to Vacation Pioneer” and “Recently Baptized Ones Who Can Vacation Pioneer.” In conclusion read last paragraph under heading “Recently Baptized Ones . . .”
10 min: Concluding comments. Consider appropriate items under “Announcements” and “Theocratic News.” Song 55.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 25
Theme: Seek First the Kingdom. (Matt. 6:33) Song 35.
 5 min: Introduction, text and comments.
25 min: The Kingdom. Source material: “Make Sure,” pp. 89 and 91, 167-170, 300-306. “Awake!” of April 22, 1961, pp. 20-22. The chairman should lead with questions and leave the talking to the audience, as much as possible. Appropriate scriptures can be read and discussed.
What does Matthew 24:14 say is going to be done in all the earth? What is “this good news of the kingdom”? How do we explain Luke 17:21? (See “Awake!” of April 22, 1961, p. 20.) Is God’s kingdom real? (Isa. 9:6, 7; Dan. 2:44; 7:14, 18) Will God’s kingdom be established on the earth? (2 Tim. 4:18: Phil. 3:20; 1 Cor. 15:50) Will the Kingdom rule this earth? (Rev. 21:2-4; 5:10) Who are the rulers? How many are rulers in the heavenly kingdom? (Rev. 14:1, 4; Luke 22:28-30) How long has Christ as King been ruling over the Christian congregation? (ms, p. 304, col. 2) How long has the Kingdom in the hands of Christ had authority over the nations of the earth? (Acts 2:34, 35; Heb. 2:8) (See ms, pp. 89-91) How long will God’s kingdom last? (ms, pp. 305, 306) What blessings does God’s kingdom bring to mankind? (ms, pp. 167-170) How can we seek first the Kingdom?
17 min: Conversing with the Householder. Ask congregation: ‘When using current sermon in house-to-house work, how are you drawing the householders out? How are you phrasing your question(s)?’ Call on several to relate what question(s) they pose to draw out householder.
Ask audience to relate replies they have received in house-to-house work and the results they have had from drawing the householder out in this way before presenting the scriptures. (Let the audience do the talking.) Encourage continued use of presentation in this manner. If desired and if time permits, demonstrate the above.
13 min: Concluding comments. Give report on subscriptions to date. Encourage the brothers to offer subscriptions to all individuals on whom they make back-calls and with whom they conduct Bible studies. Encourage good support of special public talk. Use points under “Be Sure to Invite—” as set out in December “Kingdom Ministry” insert. Song 104.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 1
Theme: “Listen Intently to Me, and Eat What Is Good.” (Isa. 55:2) Song 54.
12 min: Introduction, text and comments. Talk on theme for month. See February 1, 1970, issue of “The Watchtower.”
 3 min: Accounts report.
10 min: What is a back-call? Read basic definition outlined in first two sentences under heading “Back-Calls” on page 105 of the “Lamp” book. Then ask audience to describe various return visits that would constitute a back-call. If desired, chairman could also present some examples of certain kinds of calls and ask the audience whether these are back-calls or not.
All examples presented by chairman should be reportable as back-calls, so the presentation is positive and not confusing to the brothers. At least ten different examples are presented in the “Lamp” book.
10 min: Two or three publishers discuss interesting points and experiences from the “Yearbook.” Use these to encourage zealous activity during “Watchtower” campaign in local territory. Encourage all to read “Yearbook.”
15 min: Questions and answers on insert. Cover “Your Family May Help You Vacation Pioneer” to end of insert. One question may cover several paragraphs, allowing for many comments. Read last paragraph.
10 min: Concluding comments. Whet appetite for special public talk.
Last February a 73-year-old regular pioneer sister spent 287 hours in the service, obtaining 6 subscriptions, placing 349 magazines, making 147 back-calls and conducting 11 Bible studies. She covers most of her territory by walking. She told the overseer she always had to work hard in the cotton fields for a payment of little value. She is glad that she can now work hard for Jehovah with everlasting life in view. Encourage all in the congregation to have as full a share in the ministry as possible. Song 91.

