
Chapter Three
Appointment and Deletion of Elders and Ministerial Servants

Closely examine Scriptural qualifications when considering brothers
Be particularly cautious when considering brothers who have had difficulties in the past
When meeting to inform a brother of his appointment, do not be hurried; allow sufficient time
Situations that may raise questions about an appointed man’s qualifications
Follow proper procedure when reviewing an appointed man’s qualifications
When an appointed brother moves into the congregation




Closely Examine Scriptural Qualifications

1. Before meeting to consider recommending brothers as ministerial servants or elders, individual elders should personally review the inspired qualifications found at 1 Timothy 3:1-13; Titus 1:5-9; 1 Peter 5:2; and James 3:17, 18. (w01 1/15 p. 13 par. 10) Helpful comments on the Scriptural qualifications can be found in chapters 5 and 6 of Organized to Do Jehovah’s Will.
2. During the meeting, closely examine the Scriptural qualifications of brothers who may qualify, and make sure that the brother being considered measures up to a reasonable degree. Pray for God’s spirit to guide you. (w01 1/15 p. 14 par. 13) The Governing Body and its representatives rely heavily upon your good judgment and spiritual discernment in making your recommendations.
3. Natural ability does not qualify a brother for appointment. He must be a spiritual man, giving evidence that holy spirit is operating on him. (Gal. 6:1; 2 Tim. 1:14; w01 1/15 p. 14 par. 11) Is he zealous for fine works? (Titus 2:12, 14; 1 Pet. 3:13) Is he a good example in his attendance and participation at congregation meetings? (Heb. 10:24, 25) Does he demonstrate a zeal for the ministry? (Matt. 28:19, 20) Is he a student of the Bible? (1 Tim. 4:15) Does he endeavor to help his family spiritually, regularly studying with his wife and his children living at home? (Eph. 5:29; 6:4) Does he manifest the fruitage of the spirit in his daily life?​—Gal. 5:22, 23.
4. The congregation expects elders and ministerial servants to take the lead in the ministry. (od p. 56 par. 1; w91 1/15 pp. 12-13) What is the brother’s attitude toward preaching? Is he visible in the ministry? Is he doing all he can in view of his age, health, family obligations, and other theocratic responsibilities? To appoint a brother to a position of responsibility who is not exemplary in the ministry will adversely affect the congregation’s zeal for the ministry.
5. Though it is the brother who must measure up to the Scriptural qualifications, you should also consider the spirituality of those in his household. If his wife is baptized, is she a good example? A wife’s conduct often reflects favorably or unfavorably upon her husband. (1 Tim. 3:11) If the wife is spiritually weak, he should be doing all that he can to assist her. For instance, is he making Family Worship a priority? He should also have “believing children that [are] not under a charge of debauchery nor unruly.” (Titus 1:6; see ks10 3:15.) As a general rule, he should have well-behaved minor children who are “believing.” They should either be progressing toward dedication to God or be already baptized as Jehovah’s Witnesses. The Scriptural qualification involves having “children in subjection with all seriousness.” (1 Tim. 3:4) The conduct of adult children still living in the home also reflects upon him.​—w90 9/1 p. 25 par. 7; w88 3/1 p. 24 par. 5.



Cautions Before Recommending Certain Brothers

6. Elders should make sure they have full and complete information regarding the brothers they intend to recommend to the circuit overseer and branch office, especially those in the following circumstances.
7. Brother previously reproved or disfellowshipped: When was he reproved or disfellowshipped? What was the offense? In a case of reproof, did the judicial committee make an announcement? If disfellowshipped, what is the date of reinstatement? When were the last restrictions lifted? Was he reproved or disfellowshipped on any other occasions? What convinces you that he has lived down his  past wrongdoing and that others now view him as a good example? (w90 9/1 p. 24 par. 5) If the wrongdoing took place in another congregation, have you communicated with the elders there to determine how that congregation views him? Recommending him prematurely tends to minimize the seriousness of wrongdoing in his own eyes and in the eyes of others. It is also disturbing to those who still have his bad course fresh in their memories.
8. Guilty of adultery in the past: It will likely take longer for him to live down his wrong and gain a good reputation. Before discussing his recommendation with the circuit overseer, you should know the answers to the following questions: When did the adultery occur? Was he reproved or disfellowshipped? In a case of reproof, did the judicial committee make an announcement? Did the innocent mate reject him? How do you know this? If he divorced, did he remarry? Did he marry the individual with whom he committed adultery? Is there evidence that he schemed to put away his former mate or that he pressured her to accept a divorce? Did the adultery break up the marriage of the other person? How were others affected by his adultery? Is the innocent mate still alive? Did the innocent mate remarry? What convinces you that he has lived down his past wrongdoing and is now viewed with respect? If the wrongdoing took place in another congregation, correspond with the elders there to get their comments on your recommendation.
9. Separated or unscripturally divorced: Who is primarily to blame for the marital problems? What were the circumstances surrounding the separation or divorce? Who is responsible for the separation or pursued the divorce? Did both sign the decree indicating their agreement? How long ago did it occur? What is the brother doing to try to reconcile? Is his mate unwilling to cooperate with his efforts? If so, why? How is his situation viewed by the congregations involved? How do the elders of the mate’s congregation feel about the brother? When separation and divorce are involved, there may be deficiencies on the part of both mates that make it necessary to limit special privileges because neither of them is exemplary.​—w88 11/1 p. 21 par. 7.
10. Brothers who served in an appointed position in the past: A clear understanding of the reasons for the previous deletion or resignation is necessary before making a recommendation. With what congregation did he previously serve, and when was he deleted? What were the reasons why he stopped serving? What makes his circumstances different now? What progress has he made since his deletion? Depending on the length of time since his deletion, if he previously served as an elder and his deletion was not the result of gross wrongdoing, it may not be necessary for him to serve first as a ministerial servant. If the removal took place in another congregation, you will need to correspond with the elders in that congregation for details of the situation and to get their view of his possible reappointment.​—See April 10, 2012, letter to all bodies of elders regarding pornography.



Making Recommendations to the Circuit OverseerBranch Office

11. The body of elders may recommend a brother as an elder or a ministerial servant on the following occasions:
  The circuit overseer visits the congregation. He will submit S-2 forms to the branch office, providing comments on the brother’s qualifications and indicating whether the circuit overseer agrees with the recommendation or not, and why.

  A brother moves into the congregation with a letter of recommendation to reappoint, and the next visit of the circuit overseer is not in the near future. If the body of elders in the new congregation concurs that the brother qualifies, the Congregation Service Committee may send a letter to the branch office recommending his immediate reappointment. The letter from the new congregation should include the brother’s full name, birth date, and baptism date. A copy of the letter of recommendation signed by the service committee from his former congregation must be included. The branch office will not act on the recommendation unless the entire Congregation Service Committee of each congregation signs their respective letter. If the recommendation is approved, an S-52 appointment letter will be sent to the congregation.See July 13, 2014, letter to all bodies of elders regarding the appointment and deletion of elders and ministerial servants.





Appointments Made During the Visit of the Circuit OverseerAfter You Receive the Response From the Branch Office

12. When the body of elders receives notice from the branch office of the appointment of a brother as an elder or a ministerial servant, the coordinator should assign two elders to meet with the brother before announcing the appointment. The atmosphere during the discussion should emphasize the seriousness of the matter; the elders should not rush the discussion or handle it in a casual manner.
13. In every case, the elders must ask the following questions: “Is there anything from your past, even before baptism, or in your personal or family life that disqualifies you or that would prevent you from accepting this appointment? Is there any reason why your appointment should not be announced to the congregation?” If the brother has not previously served as an elder or a ministerial servant, ask the following question: “Have you ever been involved at any time in the past with child sexual molestation?” If he answers yes to any of these questions, do not announce the appointment. Return the S-2 form or S-52 appointment letter to the branch office, and provide a complete explanation as to why the appointment should be annulled. If the brother answers no to these questions and accepts the appointment, the elders might direct his attention to information provided by “the faithful and discreet slave” that will help him fulfill his new privilege of service.​—Matt. 24:45; od chaps. 5-6.See July 13, 2014, letter to all bodies of elders regarding the appointment and deletion of elders and ministerial servants.



Recommendations Not Approved by the Circuit Overseer

14. If the circuit overseerbranch office does not appoint a recommended brother, the elders should endeavor to help him qualify. Two elders may speak with the brother at an appropriate time and discreetly explain what he needs to do to qualify. The elders should notneither inform him that the body of elders recommended him nor read to him from the confidential letter received from the branch office that explains why he was not appointed. On occasion the circuit overseerbranch office will not approve a recommendation so as to allow time for the brother to develop maturity and experience or to live down past conduct. In such cases, there may be no need to discuss matters with the brother.



Situations That May Raise Questions About an Appointed Man’s Qualifications

See April 10, 2012, letter to all bodies of elders regarding pornography. See also March 6, 2012, letter to all bodies of elders for direction on considering the qualifications of appointed men in connection with higher education.
15. Members of the brother’s household are involved in serious wrongdoing: The brother’s qualifications should automatically be reviewed if this occurs. If the brother’s wife or children, including adult children living in his home, have serious problems, the body should seek to determine whether the head of the household was negligent. Was he permissive? Was he alert to provide needed direction, anticipating potential problems? Was he conducting a regular family study? Was he giving his family needed time and attention? When he became aware of serious wrongdoing, did he promptly inform the body of elders so that they could properly investigate the matter? Did he shield his family from discipline or try to manipulate the elders’ handling of the situation? Does he continue to have the respect and confidence of the congregation as an exemplary family head? If one of his children was guilty of serious sin, are the other children doing well spiritually? If the brother has done all that can reasonably be expected and especially if he has had spiritual success with others in his household, rejection of his fine direction by one family member would not necessarily disqualify him if he continues to have the respect of the congregation.​—w88 3/1 p. 24; w78 2/1 pp. 31-32; w72 2/15 p. 126.
16. A disfellowshipped or disassociated family member moves back into the home: This is a decision for the family head, not the body of elders. However, such a decision may cause many problems. If the brother has allowed a disfellowshipped or disassociated family member to move into his home, the body of elders should review his qualifications. Is the disfellowshipped or disassociated individual unable to live on his own, or has he moved back because it is an easier life? Are there valid reasons for allowing him back in the home, or is it primarily so that the Christian family members can resume a measure of association with him? Did the family avoid unnecessary contact with him when he was living outside the home? Is the arrangement temporary or permanent? What is the disfellowshipped or disassociated individual’s conduct? What spiritual effect is he having on others in the household, especially siblings? Is the congregation disturbed by the brother’s decision? Have a number lost respect for him?​—km 8/02 pp. 3-4; w81 9/15 pp. 28-29.
17. Bankruptcy: If an elder or a ministerial servant declares bankruptcy, causing members of the congregation or the community to become upset, the elders should review his qualifications. Did the brother lack self-control in his spending or fail to use reasonable foresight in his business decisions? Does he have a reputation for being honest and responsible? Is he viewed as one who conscientiously tries to pay his debts? Does he feel a moral responsibility to repay canceled debts if former creditors would accept payment? Does he still have the respect of the congregation? Does he continue to have “a fine testimony from people on the outside”?​—1 Tim. 3:7; w94 9/15 pp. 30-31; w68 pp. 223-224.
18. Tacit approval of a marriage between a baptized Christian and a person who is not baptized: An appointed man should be loyal to Jehovah’s standards, including the Scriptural directive to marry “only in the Lord.” (1 Cor. 7:39; 2 Cor. 6:14, 15; Titus 1:8; w04 7/1 p. 31) This directive applies to all Christians, even those who are inactive. Questions about a brother’s qualifications would result if he gave tacit approval to a marriage between a baptized Christian and a person who is not baptized. Participating in, supporting, or assisting in the courtship, wedding, or reception implies approval. Questions would also arise if the brother did not get involved personally but allowed his wife or others in his household to do so. If an elder or a ministerial servant displays poor judgment in these areas to a degree that it raises serious questions in the minds of others, he may be Scripturally disqualified from serving.​—w02 5/1 p. 17 pars. 13-15; w01 5/15 pp. 20-21 pars. 16-17.
19. If it comes to light or an appointed brother confesses that he has committed a disfellowshipping offense years in the past: The body of elders may determine he can continue to serve if the following is true: The immorality or other serious wrongdoing occurred more than a few years ago, and he is genuinely repentant, recognizing that he should have come forward immediately when he sinned. (Perhaps he has even confessed to his sin, seeking help with his guilty conscience.) He has been serving faithfully for many years, has evidence of God’s blessing, and has the respect of the congregation.
20. If the sin occurred before he was appointed as an elder or a ministerial servant, the elders will need to take into consideration the fact that he should have mentioned this possible impediment to his being qualified when elders interviewed him just prior to announcing his appointment. Moreover, the nature of the sin may reflect greatly on his qualifications to serve. For example, the sin may involve past child abuse, and this would likely disqualify him for many years.​—w97 1/1 pp. 26-29; w77 pp. 697-698. See August 1, 2016, letter to all bodies of elders.
21. If the wrongdoing occurred within the past few years while he was serving as an elder or a ministerial servant, he is disqualified from serving as such, not being “free from accusation.” (1 Tim. 3:2, 10; Titus 1:6, 7) Depending on the circumstances, the situation may also need to be handled by a judicial committee.​—See 5:43-44.



Procedure for Reviewing the Qualifications of Appointed Brothers Who Experience Difficulties

22. Do not be quick to recommend deletion unless there is a solid basis for doing so. It may be possible to assist the brother so that he can correct the reasons for disqualification and continue to serve. Has the brother served faithfully for many years? What has he done or failed to do that raises questions? How did he react to counsel? Has he had such difficulties in the past, and how did he then respond to efforts to help? Was his wrongdoing really so serious that it requires restricting his privileges? Possibly he just made a mistake, using poor judgment on an occasion. The congregation in general may still have respect for him and confidence in him as an elder or a ministerial servant. Perhaps the matter is not widely known, if at all. If he realizes his action was unwise, has learned from his mistake, has a good attitude, and wants to improve, it may be that he can continue to serve.
23. If it is necessary to review an elder’s qualifications, the body of elders should consider the matter, with the brother in question present, using the following procedure:
  After seeking Jehovah’s guidance in prayer, make sure all the facts are presented. Maintain a respectful, orderly atmosphere that is conducive to such a discussion.

  Allow the brother adequate time to express his feelings and to answer any questions. Ask him for his view of the matters being discussed regarding his qualifications.

  Ask the brother to leave the room while the other elders continue their discussion and make a decision on what they will recommend.

  Invite the brother back into the room. If the decision is to recommend his deletion, inform him of this and the Scriptural reasons.

  Give the brother the opportunity to comment on the decision. This allows the elders to hear the brother’s defense of himself if he chooses to make a defense. It may be necessary for the brother to leave the room again so that the elders can discuss the matter further before making a final decision.

  If the elders decide to recommend his deletion and the brother disagrees with that recommendation, they should inform him that he may submit a letter stating why he does not agree with the recommendation. His letter should be included with the elders’ letter of explanation to the branch office.


24. If the qualifications of a ministerial servant are being reviewed, the same basic procedure is followed except that rather than having the brother present during the meeting of the body of elders, it would usually be sufficient for two elders to speak with him in advance to hear him out. If the body of elders decides to recommend his deletion, the two elders would meet with him again to inform him of the decision and the Scriptural reasons and to give him the opportunity to express himself. If he disagrees with the elders’ decision, he may submit a letter to the body of elders stating why he does not agree with the recommendation. The elders will consider his letter and determine whether to hold to their decision or not. If the visit of the circuit overseer is close, it would be good to discuss the matter with him.



Recommending Deletions to the Circuit OverseerBranch Office

25. The approval of the circuit overseerbranch office is required when deletions of elders and ministerial servants are recommended in the following circumstances:
  A brother resigns for personal reasons. Two elders should first discuss the matter with him. Why does he wish to resign? Is he Scripturally disqualified? If his personal circumstances hinder him from doing what he would like, can the elders be of any assistance and encouragement? Until his circumstances change, perhaps they can lighten his load for a period of time while he continues to serve. If, after this discussion, he still feels he wants to resign, then the Congregation Service Committee should write the circuit overseerbranch office and give sufficient information so that the reasons for resignation are clear. Full details should be provided as to why he chose to relinquish his privilege of service.

  The elders recommend deletion due to poor judgment not of a judicial nature. In most cases, it is best to consider such matters during the visit of the circuit overseer. However, if serious questions arise concerning a brother’s qualifications and the next visit of the circuit overseer is not in the near future, the elders should make their recommendation to the circuit overseerbranch office. They should supply the following information: What has he done or failed to do that raises questions? What is he doing now, or not doing, that is different from when you recommended him for appointment? Does he agree with the recommendation for his deletion? If he disagrees, he may submit a letter along with the elders’ letter of explanation, stating why he does not accept the recommendation. Meanwhile, he will continue to serve as an elder or a ministerial servant. The body of elders will determine what congregation responsibilities he will have in the interim, according to the circumstances.​—See July 13, 2014, letter to all bodies of elders regarding the appointment and deletion of elders and ministerial servants.


26. An announcement of deletion should be made to the congregation only after receiving from the branch office the returned S-2 form or an S-52 letter indicating that the recommendation has been approved. In such a case, the brother should be informed of his deletion before the announcement is made. The announcement should read as follows: “Brother [Name of person] is no longer serving as an elder (a ministerial servant).”​—See July 13, 2014, letter to all bodies of elders regarding the appointment and deletion of elders and ministerial servants.
27. In addition to the above situations, the branch office should be informed whenever an elder or a ministerial servant is no longer serving for the following reasons:
  Moving or death: The circuit overseer will inform the branch office following his next visit to the congregation. In such cases, an announcement of deletion would not be made to the congregation.

  Disassociation, disfellowshipping, or reproof by a judicial committee: After a judicial charge is clearly established, an announcement of deletion should be made to the congregation at the next Service Meeting without waiting for an acknowledgment from the branch office. The Congregation Service Committee should inform the branch office immediately of the deletion, providing full information about the case. Include the specific judicial offense, the name of any other person involved, any counsel given, and how the wrongdoing became known to the elders. Please also specify the action taken (whether disassociation, disfellowshipping, or judicial reproof, and whether an announcement of reproof was made to the congregation). If one disassociates himself or is disfellowshipped, an announcement to that effect is made to the congregation. If the case is handled just prior to the visit of the circuit overseer, the deletion may be included with his report to the branch office and the details of the case provided in a confidential supplementary letter. See July 13, 2014, letter to all bodies of elders regarding the appointment and deletion of elders and ministerial servants.


28. If the coordinator or secretary is being deleted, fill out and send to the Service Departmentinclude the Coordinator of the Body of Elders/​Secretary Change of Address (S-29) form.
29. Information concerning the deletion of an elder or a ministerial servant should be retained indefinitely in the congregation’s confidential file. This would include S-2 forms and S-52 acknowledgment letters from the branch office and related correspondence. Such background material will be helpful in supplying the branch office with complete details in the event the brother is recommended for reappointment in the future. See July 13, 2014, letter to all bodies of elders regarding the appointment and deletion of elders and ministerial servants.



When an Appointed Brother Moves to Another Congregation

30. The Congregation Service Committee should send a letter of introduction to the elders in the new congregation that plainly states whether the body of elders recommends that he continue to serve. Did he serve in other congregations? What is his total time of serving in an appointed capacity? In what assignments does he have experience? All three members of the Congregation Service Committee should sign the letter of introduction.
31. If any of the elders have serious reservations about the qualifications of an appointed brother who is moving, the body of elders should meet as soon as possible to determine whether they will recommend him for reappointment or not. If they do not recommend him, two or more elders should meet with him before he leaves and clearly explain the reason for the body’s decision. The letter of introduction should clearly explain their concerns and the counsel they gave him.



When an Appointed Brother Moves Into the Congregation

32. Elders and ministerial servants who move to a new congregation with a favorable letter of recommendation and who have a favorable recommendation from the elders of the new congregation but who have not yet been reappointed may be used to handle Bible highlights, parts on the Service Meeting, public talks, and so forth, according to their abilities. They may attend a Kingdom Ministry School. In addition, they can be present with the ministerial servants during the meeting the circuit overseer conducts with the appointed servants in the congregation. If the circuit overseer’s outline includes additional information for elders only, recommended elders who have not yet been reappointed can remain as this information is discussed. However, they should not be present when recommendations and local congregation needs are considered. If the brother is not recommended for reappointment either by the previous body of elders or by the new body of elders, he would not be eligible to attend the spiritual programs mentioned above. Brothers who served as elders in their former congregation do not function in an official capacity as elders (such as by serving on judicial committees or attending meetings of the body of elders) in their new congregation until they are reappointed.
• If an elder or a ministerial servant regularly moves away to live at a second residence, he should not be appointed in both congregations. One congregation should hold the Congregation’s Publisher Record (S-21) card. Each time he leaves, the elders should write a letter to the congregation where he will be temporarily, explaining his circumstances and how he was being used. The elders of the congregation he is visiting can use him to care for duties and responsibilities in the congregation as outlined above. Even if he will be away for more than three months, he should send his field service reports to his home congregation.




