
Chapter Twelve
Clarifications and Guidelines on Handling Certain Matters

Marking disorderly ones
Weddings
Scriptural freedom to remarry
Adulterous marriage
Child abuse
Taking brothers to court
When disasters occur




Marking Disorderly Ones

1. At times it may be necessary to mark those who display a flagrant disregard for theocratic order though not practicing a grave sin that would result in judicial action. (w99 7/15 pp. 29-31) This could include such things as being grossly lazy or critical or being a profitless talker who is a constant ‘meddler with what does not concern him.’ (2 Thess. 3:11) It may involve one who schemes to take material advantage of others, indulges in entertainment that is clearly improper, or dates when not legally or Scripturally free.​—od p. 150-151.
2. If the disorderly conduct is generally unknown to others and poses no threat to their spiritual well-being, usually it is best to handle things through admonition and counsel. The elders should not be hasty in giving a warning talk. However, if the individual does not see the error of his way but continues to be an unwholesome influence, a warning talk may be given to the congregation.​—2 Thess. 3:6, 14, 15; w99 7/15 pp. 29-31; w85 4/15 pp. 30-31.
  Example​—mark for dating an “unbeliever”: The elders should first counsel and try to help a disorderly one. If a person persists in a way that is disturbing and that has the potential for spreading, they may conclude that there would be reason for a warning talk to be given to the congregation.​—2 Cor. 6:14; 2 Thess. 3:11, 14; w99 7/15 p. 31.

  It may be that an individual is dating not an actual ‘unbeliever’ but an unbaptized publisher. In such cases a warning talk may not be needed, depending on the circumstances, on the attitude of the Christian, on the level of disturbance to the congregation, and other factors. Nonetheless, if he is dating with a view to marrying someone who is unbaptized, he is not obeying the Bible’s counsel at 1 Corinthians 7:39 to marry “only in the Lord,” and loving counsel should be given. Elders will use reasonableness and discernment in determining whether a particular situation is sufficiently serious and disturbing to require a warning talk.​—od pp. 150-151; w04 7/1 pp. 30-31.


3. If the disorderly one becomes ashamed of his ways and is moved to change, then as elders of the congregation see the adjustment, they can individually decide to end the limitation they have put on personally socializing with him. This will indicate to the congregation that he is no longer marked.



Weddings

4. Elders may perform a wedding of two Christians or of two unbaptized publishers who are progressing toward baptism. If the couple have a specific elder in mind, they can personally ask him to officiate at their wedding. If the couple have no preference, the body of elders can select one of their number to do this. The elder solemnizing a marriage should make sure that he is legally qualified in the state or locality where the wedding takes place. If the speaker does not legally qualify to administer the vows, another elder who meets such legal requirements could administer the wedding vows after the speaker gives the discourse. The elder who administers the vows would complete the necessary documents. Any elder who is asked to give a wedding talk or administer the vows should conscientiously decide whether he wishes to serve in such capacity. (w97 4/15 p. 24; w84 4/15 pp. 13-14) Elders should not perform the wedding of two persons who are not seriously involved in the activities of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Neither should the elders be involved, directly or indirectly, in the wedding of a baptized individual to an unbaptized, disassociated, or disfellowshipped person. (1 Cor. 5:11; 7:39) It would be improper to participate in a second wedding years after the initial ceremony, as this would imply that the first wedding was not binding.​—w06 10/15 p. 19 par. 8. See October 12, 2010, letter to all bodies of elders regarding wedding procedures and Scriptural freedom to remarry.
5. Before agreeing to officiate, an elder should personally speak with the couple and tactfully but straightforwardly inquire about their conduct during courtship. Make sure that all involved are familiar with and follow the direction in the articles in the November 2008 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 3; the October 15, 2006, Watchtower, pages 18-31; the April 15, 1997, Watchtower, pages 23-26; and the April 15, 1984, Watchtower, pages 11-15. If it is learned that they have engaged in sexual immorality that requires assistance from a judicial committee, the couple cannot use the Kingdom Hall. If neither is disfellowshipped, it will be up to the discretion of the elder as to whether he will officiate at another location. He may also want to inquire about some of the plans for the wedding and reception and give kindly reminders if needed to help them demonstrate reasonableness. However, he should remember that what they choose to do is a personal matter as long as this is not unscriptural. (Phil. 4:5; w84 4/15 pp. 11-12) The elder should also make sure that the bride and groom are legally and Scripturally free to marry. If either was married before, the elder should ask to see a copy of the divorce decree to make sure that the divorce was finalized. He should also be satisfied that the divorce is Scriptural. If the person’s divorce occurred before baptism, the elder should not assume the individual is Scripturally free, as baptism does not dissolve previous marital ties. If either the bride or the groom is from another congregation, the elder should speak or correspond with the elders from that congregation to confirm the person’s standing in the congregation, Scriptural freedom to marry, and so forth.
6. If a couple wishes to use the Kingdom Hall, they should submit a written request well in advance of the wedding date indicating the specific day and time they desire to use the hall. The Congregation Service Committee should promptly consider the request on behalf of the body of elders. Though it is not a requirement that all in the wedding party be baptized, the wedding party should not include any person whose lifestyle grossly conflicts with Bible principles. (km 11/08 p. 3; w84 4/15 p. 15) Any decoration of the Kingdom Hall or rearrangement of the chairs must be approved. Only music selected from Kingdom Melodies or that is found in our songbook may be used. The elders may permit a rehearsal at the Kingdom Hall as long as it does not interfere with other congregation arrangements.
7. The marriage discourse should reflect dignity, honor, and seriousness. (Heb. 13:4) Its purpose is to impress on the minds of the participants, as well as those observing, the God-given responsibilities that married couples must assume and discharge in full harmony with the Scriptures. It is not appropriate to tell humorous stories or read poems simply to entertain or amuse the audience. If the branch office provides an outline in the local language, it should be used.
8. Since much of the direction outlined above has generally been given only to congregation elders, appointed elders should be used to officiate at weddings, if available. (km 11/08 p. 3; w84 4/15 pp. 13-14) Also, elders are certified teachers of God’s Word, so they are the ones most qualified to highlight the important Scriptural principles that apply on this special occasion.​—1 Tim. 3:2.



Scriptural Freedom to Remarry

9. Elders should be very careful when it comes to giving direction on whether an individual is Scripturally free and should consult with the branch office on any questions. This is especially true since the decisions a person makes in such matters will affect not only their relationship with their marriage mate but also their relationship with Jehovah. We therefore as elders shoulder a heavy responsibility in such matters and need to be cautious when offering counsel, especially when the answer may not be readily apparent.​—Luke 12:48; Jas. 3:1. See October 12, 2010, letter to all bodies of elders regarding wedding procedures and Scriptural freedom to remarry.
10. Scriptural freedom to remarry requires three conditions: por·neiʹa; a rejection (refusal to reconcile) by the innocent mate; and a legal, final divorce.​—Matt. 5:31, 32; 19:9; Heb. 13:4.
11. If a dedicated Christian who accuses his believing mate of adultery and wishes to establish freedom to divorce and remarry approaches an elder, the matter should be referred to the body of elders. The accuser is not free unless the evidence establishing wrongdoing is sufficient to warrant the formation of a judicial committee. (Deut. 19:15; John 8:17) If the accused mate is associated with another congregation, the evidence should be presented to the elders of that congregation for review and a determination. The publisher should be advised that he is not to view himself as Scripturally free until the elders have investigated and guilt is established.
12. In some cases adultery is not proved, but it is established by confession or by two or more witnesses that the mate stayed all night in the same house with a person of the opposite sex (or a known homosexual) under improper circumstances. The elders should carefully consider the situation. Were the individuals together all night? Were improper circumstances involved? For example, were the two persons alone? Is there evidence of a romantic relationship? What were the sleeping arrangements? Even if adultery is not established, it may be that the Christian was involved in an immoral sleeping arrangement. Although the elders cannot tell the innocent mate that he is free to marry because adultery was not proved, in view of the circumstances, if the innocent mate is convinced that adultery did occur, the elders may allow him to take responsibility before Jehovah for obtaining a Scriptural divorce; if he remarries, no judicial action will be taken.
13. Even if the accused mate is not one of Jehovah’s Witnesses (disfellowshipped, disassociated, or never baptized), two witnesses are also generally required to establish wrongdoing that would provide a basis for Scriptural freedom. An exception may be made, however, if the unbeliever privately makes an unambiguous confession of adultery to the Christian mate. In such a case, if the innocent Christian mate believes that the confession is true and does not wish to reconcile, he can submit a letter to the elders outlining his situation. The body of elders should then consider the letter. Is there any known reason to conclude other than that the unbelieving mate has been immoral? For example, was the confession worded ambiguously? Did the unbeliever later deny making the confession? If the unbeliever is willing to speak with the elders and matters are unclear, the elders may choose to ask the accused mate directly. If there is no known reason to conclude otherwise, the innocent mate can be allowed to take responsibility before Jehovah for obtaining a Scriptural divorce; if he remarries, no judicial action will be taken.​—w77 pp. 607-608.
14. The following constitutes rejection by the innocent mate:
  The innocent mate initiates a divorce either before or after learning of the adultery.

  The innocent mate signs a divorce decree indicating he does not object to a divorce initiated by the guilty mate, either before or after learning of the adultery. Note: In some lands it is possible for the innocent mate to sign divorce documents that stipulate custody of the children and financial support without indicating he agrees with the divorce; his signing such papers in itself would not indicate a rejection.​—w00 12/15 pp. 28-29.

  Though verbally expressing forgiveness and not seeking a divorce, the innocent mate refuses to resume sexual relations for a very prolonged period of time, a year or even years. Before indicating to the guilty mate that he is free to pursue a Scriptural divorce, the elders should consult with the branch office. Note: The innocent mate is not required to make a quick decision whether to forgive or not.​—w74 pp. 671-672.





Adulterous Marriage

15. If a divorced person remarries and he was not Scripturally free to do so​—in other words, if adultery and rejection by the innocent mate had not occurred—​he has entered into an adulterous marriage. In Jehovah’s eyes, he has married someone while still bound to another. Entering into such a marriage would call for judicial action.
16. If the disfellowshipped one was eventually reinstated, the elders would be very cautious in extending any special privileges. He could share in the cleaning and repair of the local Kingdom Hall. He may eventually give student talks in the Theocratic Ministry School if his doing so would not disturb others. However, he would not be assigned to help with literature, accounts, magazines, attendants, or similar privileges in the congregation as long as the innocent former mate is alive, unmarried, and has not been guilty of por·neiʹa.​—w83 3/15 p. 29.
17. If a Christian did not enter into an adulterous marriage but deliberately committed adultery in a scheming way so as to end his marriage or he pressured the innocent mate to reject him and eventually agree to a divorce, he has dealt treacherously with her. (Mal. 2:14-16) His conduct is similar to entering into an adulterous marriage, and he would not qualify for special privileges for many years.​—See January 6, 2017, letter to all bodies of elders for direction on filing confidential material.



Child Abuse

18. You should immediately call the branch office for direction if you learn of an accusation of child abuse, regardless of the age of the victim now or at the time of the alleged abuse, even if it occurred before the alleged perpetrator’s baptism. The branch office will then give direction based on the circumstances involved in each situation.​—See August 1, 2016, letter to all bodies of elders.
19. Child abuse is a crime. Never suggest to anyone that they should not report an allegation of child abuse to the police or other authorities. If you are asked, make it clear that whether to report the matter to the authorities or not is a personal decision for each individual to make and that there are no congregation sanctions for either decision. Elders will not criticize anyone who reports such an allegation to the authorities. If the victim wishes to make a report, it is his or her absolute right to do so.​—Gal. 6:5.
20. When a known child molester moves to another congregation, the Congregation Service Committee should send a letter of introduction with full and complete information about his background and current situation. Any letter from the branch office concerning the child molester should not be photocopied or sent to the new congregation. However, the new congregation should be clearly informed of any restrictions imposed by the branch office. A copy of the letter of introduction should be sent to the branch office.
21. In a case in which a brother denies an allegation of child abuse and he has been accused by only one witness, the following direction is given if he moves to another congregation. The elders should consult the branch office before sending any information regarding the accusation to the elders in the new congregation. It would be helpful if your letter to the branch office provided a detailed summary of the matter and explained the spiritual condition and personal circumstances of the accused and the accuser. With regard to the accused, the following questions should be answered: (1) What is his interaction with children? (2) Does he admit to any activity with the accuser that could have been misinterpreted by the accuser as sexual abuse, or does he claim to have a poor memory of the accusation? (3) What is his response to why the accuser has made the allegation? (4) Has he had to be counseled for any other matters of a sexual nature, such as inappropriate conduct with adult sisters or pornography? (5) What is the level of his spirituality? (6) Do all the elders on the body believe that he can be trusted with children? The following questions should be answered with regard to the accuser: (1) What is the level of maturity of the child or youth? (2) Is he (or she) describing conduct that one his age would not normally know about? (3) Is the child or his parents known to be serious, mature? (4) Is his memory consistent, or is it intermittent, or does it involve repressed memories? (w95 11/1 pp. 25-26) (5) What is the reputation of the parents? (6) Are they spiritually and emotionally mature? After carefully considering the matter, the branch office will then give you direction as to what information about the allegation should be shared, if any, with the elders of the new congregation.



Taking Brothers to Court

22. At 1 Corinthians 6:1-8, the apostle Paul gave strong counsel that Christians should not take other Christians before secular courts to settle personal disputes that should be settled with the help of the congregation elders.​—w97 3/15 pp. 21-22; w86 11/15 p. 20; g83 2/8 pp. 13-15; w73 11/15 pp. 703-704.
  If an individual ignores God’s Word on this matter, it may affect his congregation privileges.

  There is no difference between taking an individual brother or sister to court and taking to court a corporation whose owners are all Jehovah’s Witnesses. The spirit of 1 Corinthians 6:1-8 would be violated by relying on the secular courts to settle business disputes among corporations that are made up entirely of brothers.


23. However, there are legal matters over which the congregation does not have authority and which may therefore be taken to a secular court for judgment without violating the principle or the spirit of 1 Corinthians 6:1-8. These include:
  Getting a divorce decree, child custody and support, alimony.

  Obtaining insurance compensation. If a person suffers loss or is injured in or by an automobile owned by a spiritual brother, it might be necessary legally to sue the brother in order to obtain compensation from the brother’s insurer.

  Being listed among creditors in bankruptcy procedures.

  Probating wills.

  Certain countersuits. For example, if a worldly creditor sues a brother, it might be necessary for the brother, for his own protection, to file a countersuit even though spiritual brothers may be included in the action.

  If a brother takes legal action against another baptized Witness, it would not be a violation of 1 Corinthians 6:1-8 for the one being sued to defend himself or to countersue. This is true whether the matter was first taken before the elders or not.





When Disasters Occur

See January 6, 2012, letter to all bodies of elders regarding disaster preparedness and response.
24. When the local congregation is affected by a disaster, elders should assist the publishers in the following ways:
  Quickly make assessment of the immediate needs of the brothers and sisters. Group overseers can take the lead to locate each family in their field service group and inquire of their well-being. They will next want to communicate their findings to the coordinator or another elder, if he is not available, even if all is well.

  Take care of the immediate needs by arranging for medical treatment and supplies, such as water, food, and shelter. (John 13:35; Gal. 6:10) If advance warning of a disaster is given, as with some major storms, elders should ensure that everyone is in a safe location and if time permits, should obtain and distribute supplies that may be needed.

  Give spiritual and emotional support to the congregation, and resume congregation meetings as quickly as possible.​—km 1/07 p. 4; g96 6/22 p. 17.

  In addition to the immediate physical needs of the brothers, is there property damage? Is damage to Kingdom Halls and individual homes major or minor? (For example, major would be roof destroyed, several feet of water in home; minor would be missing shingles on roof, windows broken, and so forth.) To gather the necessary information, responsible elders in the area may help in assessing the damage. Once this information is gathered, the coordinator or another elder may inform the circuit overseer of the damage and the health condition of the brothers and sisters in the congregation.

  When the circuit overseer has received the report from the elders, he will promptly call the branch office. The branch office will determine whether there is a need for further assistance.

  Other assistance may be provided, such as checking to see what government aid may be available.​—w66 2/1 pp. 95-96.


25. If the disaster occurs in another area, elders can take the lead in assisting by doing the following:
  Remember the brothers and sisters in your prayers.​—2 Cor. 1:8-11.

  If you wish to provide monetary assistance, you may send your donations to the worldwide work in the land in which you live, either through the congregation or directly. In this way, “the faithful and discreet slave,” through the organizational arrangements set in place by the Governing Body, cares for the needs of the worldwide brotherhood in an orderly manner.​—Matt. 24:45-47; 1 Cor. 14:33, 40; km 1/05 “Question Box.”

  Do not send materials or supplies to the disaster area unless specifically requested by the brothers in charge. This will assure an orderly relief effort and the proper distribution of goods.

  Please do not telephone the branch office just for information, as this can tie up phone lines that are needed to handle incoming calls from the disaster area.


26. Following a disaster, the publishers can make good use of opportunities to comfort others spiritually and, to the extent possible, to help in practical ways according to the need. Aiding the brothers in these ways takes time and effort. However, love for the whole association of brothers will prompt us to do what we can to help those in need.​—2 Cor. 8:1-12.




