
Chapter Two
How Elders Work Together as a Body

Demonstrate that you accept Jesus as Head of the congregation
Have productive elders’ meetings
Be well-organized to care for the congregation’s needs
Pursue peace with one another as spiritual men





1. Jehovah has appointed Jesus Christ as Head of the Christian congregation. (Eph. 1:22, 23) Revelation 1:20 depicts Jesus as holding the anointed elders in his right hand, thus, by extension, indicating that he controls all bodies of elders for the purpose of accomplishing Jehovah’s will. (re pp. 28-9, 136) Accepting Jesus as Head of the congregation promotes cooperation and unity on the body. You demonstrate submission to Christ’s headship when you do the following:
  Let the Bible be your guide in making decisions.​—John 7:16-18.

  Obey direction coming from agencies used by “the faithful and discreet slave,” including Branch Committees, traveling overseers, and others appointed by the Governing Body to take the lead.​—Matt. 24:45-47; Heb. 13:17.

  Avoid imposing personal viewpoints and opinions or arbitrary rules on the congregation or the body of elders.​—1 Cor. 4:6.

  Listen carefully to the expressions of fellow elders.​—Rom. 12:10b; Jas. 1:19.

  Deal in a kind and loving manner with each individual in the congregation, including fellow elders, not lording it over them.​—Matt. 11:28-30; John 21:15-17; 1 Pet. 5:1-3, 5.

  Pray when a discussion of the body of elders seems to falter.​—Jas. 1:5.





Elders’ Meetings

2. The body of elders is a Scriptural entity. (Acts 14:23; 20:17; Titus 1:5; compare 1 Cor. 12:19, 20) When the body of elders discusses a matter, Christ, by means of the holy spirit, can influence any elder to make an expression that results in a wise decision, one that may not have been reached if the elders had been consulted individually.​—Acts 15:6-21.
3. When to hold elders’ meetings: Normally the body of elders holds four meetings a year. In addition to the two meetings held in conjunction with the visits of the circuit overseer, they should schedule another meeting about three months after each visit. The body of elders can arrange other meetings any time that circumstances necessitate. Limit additional meetings to their purpose and objectives. Endeavor to keep comments succinct and relevant to the matter under consideration. Unnecessary meetings, or unduly lengthy meetings, consume valuable time that the elders can better spend with their families, in the ministry, and in shepherding. (Matt. 24:14; 1 Tim. 3:4; 1 Pet. 5:2) Before compiling an agenda, the coordinator of the body of elders should contact the other elders individually for their input to determine what matters they would like to discuss. The circuit overseer compiles the agenda for the meeting held during his visit. In addition to points he himself puts on the agenda, the circuit overseer should contact the coordinator for any input from the body of elders. Meetings should normally not exceed two hours in length.
4. While it is not wrong for an elder to contact the branch office if he feels the need, it is generally best to discuss matters as a body first. Then, if necessary, write to the branch office. If there is a truly urgent matter requiring assistance from the branch office, it is best for two elders to call together to explain the situation and to make a note of the direction given.
5. Suggested matters to include on the agenda for elders’ meetings: Spiritual matters should be of principal concern. (Phil. 1:9-11) Elders can obtain appropriate ideas regarding matters to discuss by considering the counsel found in the letters to Timothy and Titus and in such passages as Acts 20:17-35 and 1 Peter 5:1-11. If necessary, elders can allow time on the agenda for matters of a mechanical, nonspiritual nature. These items would include problems that an individual elder, the Congregation Service Committee, or the operating committee cannot resolve separately. The coordinator of the body of elders should give a copy of the agenda to each elder far enough in advance of the meeting to allow time to do research and to give prayerful thought to what will be discussed.​—Prov. 21:5.
6. The coordinator should set the pace of the discussion by sticking to the agenda as much as possible and by keeping the main points to the fore. By concluding each matter before opening another, he can ensure that the meeting flows smoothly. The secretary or another designated elder should take notes of the decisions and indicate who will follow through and the time schedule for completion. In some cases the coordinator may ask the elder recommending an item for the agenda to take the lead in presenting it for discussion.
7. Elders’ meetings will be more productive if brothers speak up, using “freeness of speech.” (1 Tim. 3:13) The coordinator should avoid dominating the discussion, being careful as to when and how he expresses himself. There should be no wrath or debates evident in elders’ meetings. (1 Tim. 2:8) Speak on the points under discussion only when you have something meaningful to add.​—Prov. 10:19.
8. It should be possible for bodies of elders to be unanimous in most of their decisions. (Acts 15:25) The body of elders should always base their decisions on Bible principles and written direction from “the faithful and discreet slave.” (Matt. 24:45) In cases that do not involve specific Bible laws or where there is no direction from the faithful slave, the body of elders must exercise their collective judgment and conscience. First, have the best interests of the entire congregation in mind, and second, consider what may spiritually assist any individual involved.
9. During the discussion, no one should insist on his personal viewpoint. If a decision is not unanimous, the minority should give willing support to the final decision. If in the opinion of the minority a Bible-based decision still has not been reached, the minority should continue to cooperate with the rest of the body and bring the matter to the attention of the circuit overseer during his regular visit. If the matter is urgent, write to the branch office.



How the Body of Elders Is Organized

10. The body should be well-organized to care for the needs of the congregation. All the elders should know their respective responsibilities. Just as individual members of the human body carry out certain functions without direct participation by other body members, individual elders have certain latitude to make decisions so as to carry out their respective responsibilities. (1 Cor. 12:12-31) Certain essential assignments in each congregation are outlined below.



Coordinator of the Body of Elders

11. The coordinator should be, if possible, one who has loyally served with the organization for many years. He must be less than 80 years of age. The congregation should respect him for his hard work in the ministry and for his efforts as a shepherd in behalf of the congregation. (Acts 20:24, 31) He should be a good organizer and care for his responsibilities in real earnest. (Rom. 12:8) He should possess genuine humility and appreciate his fellow elders and the value of a multitude of counselors. (Prov. 15:22; Phil. 2:3, 4; Jas. 4:10) He should care about people, loving them and being interested in their spiritual welfare. (John 13:34, 35; 15:13; 1 Pet. 5:2, 3) He should have the respect and cooperation of the congregation and his fellow elders on the body. He must be a spiritual man and should be approachable.
12. The coordinator’s duties include the following:
  Serves as chairman of meetings of the body of elders.

  He or another elder contacts the group overseers to determine the situation of each household when a disaster occurs. (km 2/97 p. 7) Notifies circuit overseer of results when compiled.

  Directly oversees the attendant, sound, and stage departments. Another elder may assist.

  Receives congregation mail, and passes it along to the secretary for circulation and filing.

  Compiles Scriptural and practical agendas outlining points for discussion at regular elders’ meetings throughout the year.

  Distinguishes between items that individual elders can handle and those needing attention by the entire body of elders, so as to avoid unnecessarily taking the time of the entire body.​—w96 1/15 p. 18 pars. 13-14.

  Makes sure that there is appropriate follow-through on decisions made by elders.

  Assigns Service Meeting parts. He may ask other elders to assist.

  Supervises the assigning of approved conductors and readers for the Congregation Bible Study.

  Arranges for public Bible discourses. Another elder or a well-qualified ministerial servant may assist.

  Approves all announcements made to the congregation, especially those of a judicial nature.

  Takes the lead in caring for details in preparation for the circuit overseer’s visit.

  Serves as chairman of the Congregation Service Committee when considering regular or auxiliary pioneer applications, unassigned territory applications, or similar matters as required by the branch office.

  Calls a meeting of the body of elders when judicial matters arise if he is present when a matter comes to light.

  Arranges for two elders (a member of the Congregation Service Committee and usually the group overseer) to meet with each person desiring to become a new publisher.

  Along with the service overseer, determines whether it is advisable for another publisher to conduct a Bible study with the child of a Christian parent.​—km 11/03 p. 3.

  Arranges for elders to review questions with baptismal candidates. If the assigned elder needs to take someone along when meeting with a sister, another elder should be used. However, if needed, a capable ministerial servant may accompany the assigned elder to review the questions in “Part I​—Elementary Bible Teachings” and “Part III—​Jehovah’s Arrangement of Things.” If the congregation has very few elders, capable ministerial servants who have demonstrated good judgment and discernment may be assigned to review the questions in “Part I​—Elementary Bible Teachings” and “Part III—​Jehovah’s Arrangement of Things.” If the assigned ministerial servant needs to take someone along when meeting with a sister, another capable ministerial servant should be used. In all cases, only elders should be assigned to consider “Part II​—Jehovah’s Righteous Requirements.”

  Arranges for two elders, one of them being the individual’s group overseer, to meet with each baptized publisher one year following baptism to provide encouragement and helpful suggestions.

  Arranges for quarterly audit of congregation accounts.

  Authorizes payment of all normal operating expenses of the congregation.

  Approves the items placed on the congregation information board.​—km 1/89 p. 7.


13. When needed, at the conclusion of his regular visit, the circuit overseer will submit a recommendation to the branch office for appointment of the coordinator of the body of elders. If a temporary adjustment is made apart from the circuit overseer’s visit, the body of elders should immediately notify the branch office in a letter, signed by the Congregation Service Committee, explaining the reason for the change. A Coordinator of the Body of Elders/​Secretary Change of Address (S-29) form should accompany the letter. See July 13, 2014, letter to all bodies of elders regarding the appointment and deletion of elders and ministerial servants.
14. If the coordinator will be away for a time, the body of elders should select one from among their number to act as a replacement during the absence. Mail and correspondence will be handled by the replacement during the time of absence.



Congregation Secretary

15. The body of elders selects the secretary and notifies the branch office by means of the Coordinator of the Body of Elders/​Secretary Change of Address (S-29) form. The secretary should have good organizational ability and be known as one who does not procrastinate. (Rom. 12:11) He should have the ability to write in a way that is clear and understandable. If necessary, the body of elders may select an elder to assist him or a capable ministerial servant to assist in caring for some routine matters.
16. The secretary’s duties include the following:
  Maintains the congregation records, including correspondence from the branch office, in an orderly way.

  Keeps congregation records, including Congregation’s Publisher Record (S-21) cards, in an accessible but secure place (at the Kingdom Hall if possible) for use by any elder when the need arises. Although the secretary is primarily responsible for the organization of the congregation’s file, each elder may be provided with a key to the file. Every elder should have access to the Congregation’s Publisher Record cards, letters from the branch office, and other common records. Only elders directly handling a matter should open and view sealed confidential judicial records.​—This bullet point reflects updates provided in the January 6, 2017, letter to all bodies of elders with regard to keys to the congregation file.

  Files sealed envelopes containing confidential records on disciplinary cases, including reports made by the judicial committees. Information concerning an individual accused of child molestation, proved or otherwise, should be placed in congregation’s confidential file and marked “Do Not Destroy” and kept indefinitely.

  Directly oversees those caring for accounts.

  Circulates among the elders photocopies of all letters from the branch office and traveling overseers, and files the originals for reference.

  Keeps records concerning Kingdom Hall ownership, loans, insurance, deeds, and other matters.

  Keeps a list of business items that elders or the congregation must handle in the future, such as utility bills, tax matters, and government items, and checks to be certain these are cared for on time.

  Notifies coordinator when a publisher has been baptized one year.

  Oversees district convention matters.

  Along with service overseer, takes the lead in organizing efforts to care for inactive ones.​—See 4:12, 15.

  Compiles field service reports. Keeps Congregation’s Publisher Record cards up-to-date. Promptly informs group overseers regarding publishers in their group who did not report time for the month.

  Transmits monthly reports promptly; sends communications prepared by other brothers as needed.

  Keeps body of elders informed of any problems that the pioneers are experiencing. With service overseer, reviews the activity of regular pioneers near midpoint of service year so that any having difficulty meeting the hour requirement can be given assistance.

  Promptly sends Congregation’s Publisher Record card and a letter of introduction signed by the Congregation Service Committee to the congregation to which a publisher moves, without waiting for a formal request from the new congregation. If necessary, initiates correspondence requesting such when a publisher moves into his congregation.​—See January 6, 2017, letter to all bodies of elders regarding letters of introduction.

  Ensures that there is an adequate supply of Report of Meeting Attendance (S-3) forms for use by the attendants.





Service Overseer

17. The service overseer takes a keen interest in the publishers’ share in the ministry and their effectiveness. He is enthusiastic about the ministry and motivates others to have a full share. He is skillful in various aspects of the work, capable of training others, and alert to do so.
18. The service overseer’s duties include the following:
  Schedules regular visits to all field service groups so that once each month he visits a different group. (In smaller congregations with few groups, he may arrange to visit each one twice during the year.) During his visit, he conducts meetings for field service, works with the group in the field ministry from house to house, and helps publishers with their return visits and Bible studies. Reviews Congregation’s Publisher Record (S-21) cards with the group overseer, and checks the arrangements for field service.

  Takes the lead, working with the body of elders, in arranging meetings for field service at convenient times and locations during the day and in the evenings. Arranges for someone to conduct meetings for service, as needed. Organizes witnessing on holidays and during special campaigns.

  If congregation territory is large enough, promotes and monitors the working of personal territories.​—km 12/06 p. 8; od pp. 103-104; km 6/81 p. 3.

  Shows genuine interest in the Bible study activity, helping the publishers to conduct effective studies and to direct interest to the organization.

  Directly oversees the work of brothers assigned to handle literature, magazines, and territory. Ensures that there will be sufficient literature for upcoming campaigns. Makes sure there is always a supply of Field Service Reports (S-4), House-to-House Records (S-8), and so forth.​—km 7/92 p. 3; km 4/87 p. 4; km 4/86 p. 3.

  Verifies with literature servant quantities of literature to be requested from the branch office.

  Reviews the territory file once a year, making a list of houses where it is not advisable to call. Under his direction, elders will determine whether these householders would accept visits from Jehovah’s Witnesses. Elders should adhere to recent direction from the branch office in contacting such ones.

  Presents recommendations to the Congregation Service Committee regarding adjustments of publishers assigned to field service groups.

  He and the coordinator of the body of elders determine together if it is advisable for a publisher to conduct a Bible study with the child of a Christian parent.​—km 11/03 p. 3.

  Along with secretary reviews the activity of the regular pioneers near the midpoint of the service year so that any having difficulty meeting the hour requirement can be given assistance.

  Along with the secretary, takes the lead in coordinating efforts to care for inactive ones.​—See 4:12, 15.





Congregation Service Committee

19. The Congregation Service Committee works under the direction of the body of elders and consists of the coordinator, the secretary, and the service overseer. This committee can make certain minor decisions that are in harmony with the judgment of the entire body. However, these brothers do not function apart from the body, and their opinions do not carry more weight than those of the other elders.
20. If unusual factors are involved or if the Congregation Service Committee is unsure of the thinking of the body, the entire body of elders should discuss matters and make a decision.
21. The duties of the Congregation Service Committee involve the following:​—See May 15, 2017, letter to all bodies of elders regarding regular pioneers.
  Approves use of the Kingdom Hall for weddings and funerals.​—km 11/08 p. 3; od pp. 42, 122.

  Assigns publishers to field service groups after consulting with group overseers involved.

  Signs correspondence regarding appointment or deletion of elders, ministerial servants, and pioneers.

  Signs letters of introduction to the elders of a publisher’s new congregation.

  Processes applications for auxiliary and regular pioneer work, for Bethel service, and for other special service privileges.

  Approves publishers who have special needs for accommodations for a district convention.​—km 12/07 p. 3, par. 6.

  Writes the branch office when a publisher plans to move and wishes to obtain information regarding congregations having a need for assistance.​—od pp. 111-112.

  Determines whether to destroy records concerning a person reinstated five years if the judicial committee is unavailable or unqualified. May designate other elders to handle this.

  A member of the service committee is included in the meeting with each Bible student desirous of becoming an unbaptized publisher.​—w88 11/15 p. 17.

  A member of the service committee gives direction on conducting a study with an inactive brother or sister who needs temporary spiritual help.​—See 4:15; od pp. 85-86.

  If a member of the service committee is absent, another elder may substitute.





Group Overseer

22. The group overseer is responsible to assist all in his assigned group to make spiritual advancement. (1 Tim. 4:15) He should be an alert, caring shepherd and a zealous evangelizer. The entire body of elders chooses group overseers. In view of the importance of this assignment, the body of elders should select those elders most qualified to fulfill all the aspects of this assignment.
23. The responsibilities include the following:
  Takes an active interest in the spirituality of each person in the field service group. Takes note of who is missing during congregation meetings, seeks to determine the reason, and provides needed assistance. Along with his assistant (or another elder or qualified ministerial servant), periodically arranges to visit all in his group to provide encouragement and counsel, concentrating on those who are weak, irregular in meeting attendance or field activity, ill, depressed, or inactive.​—See February 2, 2014, letter to all bodies of elders regarding shepherding.

  Assists and trains ministerial servants in the group to reach out and qualify for congregation responsibilities. It is best that another elder accompany him when visiting someone in the group having serious problems. However, he may select a qualified ministerial servant to accompany him when visiting publishers to offer encouragement, which will allow the overseer to observe how the servant reasons on matters. The overseer can ask the ministerial servant in advance to be prepared to share a scripture or a thought from a publication, relate an encouraging experience, or offer prayer. Afterward, the overseer reviews with the ministerial servant the reasons the call was handled the way it was.

  Assists each one in the group to have a regular, meaningful, and joyful share in the ministry. If possible, is present for meetings for field service on weekends to take the lead. If he cannot be present, makes sure his group will be cared for, either by his assistant or by another qualified publisher. Periodically reviews with his assistant the record cards of those in his group to determine their strengths and weaknesses in the ministry. (If the assistant is not an elder or a ministerial servant, then the overseer orally shares information with him, noting areas of concern.) Regularly arranges to work in the ministry with each one to provide encouragement and training in all aspects of the work. Assists in the collection of monthly field service reports. Endeavors promptly to obtain late reports for the secretary. Promptly provides assistance if any have not participated for an entire month.





Watchtower Study Conductor

24. Since The Watchtower is the principal means by which the faithful and discreet slave dispenses spiritual food, the conductor chosen by the body of elders should be one of the best teachers on the body. (Jas. 3:1) He should also be one who has “great freeness of speech.”​—1 Tim. 3:13.
25. The following will help the conductor to carry out this assignment in a way that will enable the congregation to receive the most benefit from the lesson.​—w03 9/1 pp. 21-22.
  Presents brief, well-prepared opening remarks for one to one and a half minutes. Highlights the theme and theme scripture, and tries to stimulate interest in the lesson. May do this by calling attention to the subheadings, by mentioning questions in the teaching box, or by raising two or three rhetorical questions answered by the lesson. Demonstrates warmth and enthusiasm.

  Does not comment excessively. Avoids any tendency to summarize or enhance comments from the audience. If the audience fails to comment on an important point, perhaps asking a specific auxiliary question will stimulate the thinking of the audience and prompt an appropriate comment. Should not ask additional questions unnecessarily, as this tends to stifle commenting.

  Concentrates on the theme and main points, and highlights the practical value of the lesson rather than focusing on details. Since much research has been done in producing the lesson, he avoids bringing into the discussion extensive outside theocratic or secular material from personal research.

  Highlights artwork and teaching boxes in the lesson.

  Focuses on the Bible. Encourages the audience to comment on the scriptures in the lesson. Has the designated scriptures read and commented on. However, the paragraphs should be read uninterrupted.​—See May 14, 2017, letter to all bodies of elders regarding the public reading of study material at congregation meetings.

  Encourages as many as possible to participate. Tactfully trains the audience that first answer should be a direct answer to the printed question. After that, audience may comment on cited scriptures, supporting arguments, practical application of the material, and so forth. Encourages individuals to comment in their own words. Calls on only one person at a time. Does not scold the audience if answers are not forthcoming.

  Considers the review box with the congregation.

  Keeps concluding remarks under one and a half minutes.

  Limits the study to no more than 60 minutes, excluding the songs and closing prayer.





Theocratic Ministry School Overseer

26. Since the Theocratic Ministry School trains publishers to present the Kingdom message in a clear and effective way, the body of elders should select a good teacher for this assignment. The body should also choose the auxiliary counselor and any counselors for secondary schools. In congregations that have few elders, qualified ministerial servants may be used as counselors for secondary schools. Instructions regarding the school are found in the book Benefit From Theocratic Ministry School Education and the current schedule.



Pursue Peace With One Another as Spiritual Men

27. Each body of elders is made up of imperfect men with different backgrounds and personalities. If these factors are allowed to cause strained relations, the free flow of Jehovah’s spirit can be restricted and the congregation may be adversely affected. (Jas. 3:16, 18) You must therefore work hard to pursue peace with your fellow elders. (Rom. 12:18; 14:19; 1 Pet. 3:11) The Hebrew word translated “peace” includes the idea of friendship. (it-2 p. 591) Thus, elders should cultivate and maintain friendships with one another, not merely tolerate one another.
28. By pursuing peace, you demonstrate that you are a spiritual man. A spiritual man displays self-sacrificing love and other aspects of the fruitage of God’s spirit, such as peace, long-suffering, kindness, mildness, and self-control. (Gal. 5:22, 23) You can demonstrate love by not finding fault with your fellow elders but by accepting their limitations along with their excelling qualities. “Love . . . does not get puffed up, . . . does not look for its own interests, does not become provoked. It does not keep account of the injury. . . . It bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things.” (1 Cor. 13:4-7; Matt. 7:1-5) At the same time, you should not hold back from giving fellow elders and their families counsel when needed.​—Ps. 141:5; Prov. 27:5.
29. A spiritual man takes the lead in showing honor to his fellow elders. (Rom. 12:10) One way you can do this is by keeping communication open and free, especially if there are differences in background. Younger elders should be respectful of older, more experienced elders on the body and demonstrate patience. (Lev. 19:32) Older elders will not be quick to take offense when younger elders give suggestions or offer counsel.​—Job 32:4-6; Eccl. 7:9; Joel 2:28; 1 Pet. 5:5.
30. A spiritual man develops “the mind of Christ.” (1 Cor. 2:16) Jesus was humble even though he was the greatest man who ever lived. (John 13:5, 12-17; Phil. 2:5-8) Humility will enable you to accept counsel. (Prov. 12:15) Even if you feel the counsel was not entirely justified, try to learn from it. (Prov. 17:10) Seek to imitate Jesus when you feel you are being mistreated. “When [Jesus] was being reviled, he did not go reviling in return. When he was suffering, he did not go threatening, but kept on committing himself to the one who judges righteously.” (1 Pet. 2:23) Remember that the peace and well-being of the congregation is more important than personal interests.​—Rom. 15:1-3; 1 Cor. 10:23, 24.




