
Chapter Ten
Matters Related to Disfellowshipped and Disassociated Ones

Make yearly visits on those who qualify
Permit them to obtain personal literature at the Kingdom Hall
Assist those having undue association with disfellowshipped or disassociated relatives





1. Once a year the body of elders reviews a list of those in the congregation territory who are disfellowshipped or disassociated. They will call on each one they select in order to see if he wants to return. (w91 4/15 pp. 22-23) Calls should not be made on those who are active apostates, on those who are trying to lead others into sin, or on those who have made it known that they want nothing to do with God’s people. The body will assign two elders to make each call, preferably elders familiar with the case. During a brief visit, the elders may kindly explain what the individual can do to return. In some cases there may be good reason for a follow-up visit. They will report the results to the Congregation Service Committee, and the body will be informed at the next meeting of the elders. See February 28, 2017, letter to all bodies of elders.
2. If the elders learn that a disfellowshipped or disassociated person has moved, they should not send his Congregation’s Publisher Record (S-21) cards or the confidential file to the congregation where he lives or attends meetings. Since he cannot share in the ministry, the congregation that took disfellowshipping action or acknowledged the disassociation should retain the cards. However, a brief letter should be sent to the body of elders in whose territory he lives to inform them that a disfellowshipped or disassociated person lives in their territory and to provide his address. This will enable the local elders to follow through and make yearly visits on this one if he qualifies. Generally, there would be no need for the letter to include specific information on the details of the judicial case. However, if the elders are aware of a situation that would disqualify him from yearly visits or there is reason for the elders in the new congregation to be especially on guard, this can be explained in the letter.​—See August 1, 2016, letter to all bodies of elders.
3. If someone gives evidence of repentance and a desire to be reinstated by changing his course or asks about reinstatement, the authorized elders may speak with him and kindly explain what he needs to do in order to be reinstated.
4. Disfellowshipped and disassociated ones may obtain a personal copy of the magazines and other literature at the magazine and literature counters at the Kingdom Hall. Our Kingdom Ministry is not distributed to such ones. If someone is an active apostate and known to misuse our literature to oppose the organization, the local elders may decide not to make literature available to him.
5. Disfellowshipped and disassociated ones are generally expected to make their own arrangements for transportation to and from congregation meetings. However, in some instances a disfellowshipped or disassociated individual who is making a determined effort to regain a right standing with Jehovah may be in a situation that prevents him from obtaining transportation. It may be that he has no car and that family members or others are not able to help him. Perhaps he cannot afford public transportation, or it is not available in his area. It may be that the distance involved, personal safety, or severe weather make it inadvisable to walk. In cases of such desperate need, the elders can determine whether some assistance may be provided. (w81 9/15 p. 18 par. 14) Such assistance would be viewed as similar to public transportation in that there should be no fraternizing or conversing with the disfellowshipped or disassociated person. (2 John 10, 11) The elders should monitor the situation to make sure that any arrangements made are not abused.
6. If members of the congregation are known to have undue association with disfellowshipped or disassociated relatives who are not in the household, elders should counsel and reason with those members of the congregation from the Scriptures. Review with them information from the “God’s Love” book, pages 207-208; The Watchtower of April 15, 1988, pages 26-30; or the article “Display Christian Loyalty When a Relative Is Disfellowshipped” in the August 2002 Our Kingdom Ministry. If it is clear that a Christian is violating the spirit of the disfellowshipping decree in this regard and does not respond to counsel, it may be that he would not qualify for congregation privileges, which require one to be exemplary. He would not be dealt with judicially unless there is persistent spiritual association or he openly criticizes the disfellowshipping decision.




