
Chapter Eleven
Reinstatement Committee Procedure

Allow sufficient time for a wrongdoer to prove his repentance
Be especially cautious if the individual:
  Was deceptive
  Secretly practiced sin over an extended period of time
  Was reproved or disfellowshipped previously
  Conspired to put away his marriage mate




When a Plea for Reinstatement Is Received

1. The final decision to reinstate a disfellowshipped person is always made by a judicial committee of the congregation that took the disfellowshipping action. If possible, the elders in that congregation who served on the judicial committee should be used for the reinstatement committee. Even if the committee feels that it is much too soon to consider reinstatement, two members of the committee should acknowledge receipt of the request and briefly inform the disfellowshipped one that more time must pass. Written requests for reinstatement should be responded to promptly.
2. After offering prayer without the disfellowshipped person present, the committee will invite him into the room. The committee should endeavor to put the disfellowshipped one at ease, commending him for his progress and desire to be reinstated. The chairman invites the disfellowshipped one to make a personal statement. The committee should seek to determine his conduct since the time of disfellowshipping and ascertain his attitude. The disfellowshipped person is then excused from the room while the committee deliberates.
3. The committee should be careful to allow sufficient time, perhaps many months, a year, or even longer, for the disfellowshipped person to prove that his profession of repentance is genuine. (od p. 156; it-2 p. 771) The committee should be especially cautious in some cases. For instance, the wrongdoer may have been deceptive, may have secretly practiced wrongdoing over a long period of time, or may have been repeatedly dealt with judicially in the past for the same or other wrongdoing. Quickly reinstating such a person may embolden others to commit serious sin, as they may feel that little or no discipline will be administered. Where there is evidence of conspiracy between individuals to put away their mates and marry each other, considerable time should elapse for them to prove their repentance and gain reinstatement.​—w83 3/15 p. 29.
4. The reinstatement committee needs to be balanced. Genuine repentance and a turning away from the wrong course​—not the attitude of others or merely the time elapsed—​are the chief determining factors in deciding when a person may be reinstated.​—1 Cor. 5:1, 11-13; 2 Cor. 2:6, 7.
5. The committee should consider the overall pattern of the wrongdoer’s life. Does it now show that he is repentant? If so, elders should guard against going to extremes by exacting a point-by-point admission of sins that may not have been clearly proved.
6. If it is determined that the individual should not be reinstated, the committee should explain their reasons and what they expect the individual to do in the future to qualify for reinstatement. After he is dismissed, the committee will conclude with prayer.
7. If the disfellowshipped person has moved, a local judicial committee will hear his request for reinstatement where he is now attending meetings. If those elders believe he should be reinstated, they will give the judicial committee of the congregation that disfellowshipped the person their recommendation. They should not let the disfellowshipped one know their recommendation; if the other committee does not agree, knowing that would only cause him frustration. The committee should merely tell him that they must correspond with the elders where he was disfellowshipped and that he will be informed of the decision in due course.
8. The local judicial committee should not pressure the original committee to reinstate the person. The elders on the original committee may be aware of important factors not apparent to others, so it is usually best to respect their judgment. Likewise, the original committee should carefully consider the recommendation of the other committee. Sufficient time may have passed, and the individual may have made drastic changes that the elders on the original committee have not observed. They should keep in mind that the elders making the recommendation have met the individual and have had opportunity to observe his conduct.
9. If the two congregations are reasonably close to each other, the committee of the congregation that took the disfellowshipping action should promptly arrange to meet with the disfellowshipped individual after receiving a positive recommendation from the committee of the congregation where he made his plea for reinstatement.
10. If the elders on the committee of the congregation that took the disfellowshipping action disagree with the recommendation to reinstate, they should clearly explain their reasons to the other committee.



If the Decision Is to Reinstate

11. If he is being reinstated, the disfellowshipped person can be invited back into the room and informed. At that time Scriptural encouragement and counsel should be given to help him to continue to make spiritual progress. Until the reinstatement is announced, he should continue to conduct himself as a disfellowshipped one. The committee concludes with prayer with the individual present. The committee should make sure the branch office is properly informed of the reinstatement.
12. In all cases of reinstatement, judicial restrictions should be imposed to help the person see the need for continuing to make ‘straight paths for his feet’ and out of consideration for the congregation’s conscience. (Heb. 12:13) The privilege of sharing in the field service is restored when the individual is reinstated. Other privileges, such as commenting at meetings, giving Theocratic Ministry School talks, can be restored progressively when it is determined that the individual has progressed spiritually to the point that he is qualified and when it is judged by the committee that the extending of such privileges will not be offensive to the congregation. It may be discouraging to the repentant wrongdoer if restrictions are imposed for a prolonged period of time. Therefore, when informing a repentant wrongdoer of restrictions, it would be helpful for the elders to inform him of the date for the next meeting when his progress will be reviewed. The committee may also arrange for a Bible study to be conducted, if needed, which would be reported as field service. It would be an exceptional case when many months have passed and restrictions have not been lifted.​—See 7:19.
13. Reinstatement is announced in the congregation where that person was disfellowshipped as well as in the congregation where he now attends. The coordinator of the body of elders should approve the announcement before an elder reads it to the congregation. The announcement should read as follows: “[Name of person] is reinstated as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.” Judicial restrictions should not be announced. The committee where he attends will supervise the gradual removal of restrictions.​—See January 6, 2017, letter to all bodies of elders for direction on filing confidential material.
14. A committee will deal with a disassociated person similarly if he requests reinstatement.
15. When a person is reinstated, he will still need much spiritual assistance. The committee should continue to monitor the person’s spiritual progress.




