
Chapter One
Shepherd the Flock of God

A good shepherd will strive to imitate Jehovah and his Son as shepherds by loving the sheep in the following areas:
Feeding the sheep
Leading the sheep
Protecting the sheep





1. Jehovah has entrusted elders with the responsibility to care for his precious sheep that he purchased with the blood of his Son. (Acts 20:28) This is a serious responsibility, but through holy spirit, elders can properly care for the sheep. Not only has Jehovah provided his own example as the Supreme Overseer but he has also sent to the earth his own Son, “the fine shepherd,” to leave “a model” for us. (John 10:11; 1 Pet. 2:21, 25) God’s written Word is “beneficial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight, for disciplining in righteousness.” (2 Tim. 3:16) In addition, he gives timely direction through “the faithful and discreet slave.” (Matt. 24:45) This publication has been prepared to help elders to “shepherd the flock of God.”​—1 Pet. 5:2.
2. “Shepherd the Flock of God” has been designed as a handbook for elders to supply vital information that will help them care for congregation matters. This publication is divided into chapters, each pertaining to a particular aspect of your work. Each chapter is numbered, and each paragraph within the chapter is also numbered. Therefore, paragraphs are referred to by chapter and paragraph number. For example, chapter 5, paragraph 10, would be written as “5:10.” All cross-references are by chapter-paragraph notation. Because of efforts to simplify this publication, it does not cover every aspect of our work as elders. At times you may need to consult other publications and letters to the body of elders for detailed information. Be alert to future direction and adjustments so as to stay up-to-date on theocratic direction.
3. As an elder, your ultimate objective is to imitate the Supreme Overseer, Jehovah, and his Son in the way you treat the sheep. (Eph. 5:1) Jehovah sets the example for overseers as a God of love and as the perfect Judge in that he is just at all times and in all of his ways.



Our Loving Overseer

4. Jehovah’s love for us is expressed in action. He took the initiative to send his Son to die in our behalf. (John 3:16) He has given us knowledge of the truth and the privilege of being associated with the visible part of his universal organization. (John 6:44; Rev. 7:9, 10) Because of God’s love, we enjoy food, clothing, life, a measure of health, and innumerable other blessings. God lovingly considers our limitations. (Ps. 103:14) How many are the expressions of love Jehovah has showered down on us, yet none of us deserve his love! Jehovah’s example teaches us how to demonstrate love to others, especially those in the congregation.​—1 John 4:19.
5. Our loving Supreme Overseer has also been a Guardian and Protector of his people both physically and spiritually. (Ps. 145:20; Prov. 18:10) Elders should also be guardians and protectors of his people. The basic idea inherent in the Greek word for overseer is protective care. Elders strive to be alert to the needs of individual publishers and families, stepping forward to assist in practical ways when there is a need. (Isa. 32:1, 2) When we imitate Jehovah, the flock in our care is helped to feel secure and content.​—1 Thess. 2:7, 8.



A Lover of Justice and a God of Mercy

6. Jehovah’s justice and mercy became evident in the way he handled the rebellion in Eden. Justice prevailed in the judgment he pronounced upon those three unrepentant rebels against his sovereignty. Yet, mercy was also demonstrated when he foretold a deliverer for the unborn offspring of Adam and Eve. (Gen. 3:15) In justice Jehovah has allowed mankind to suffer the due recompense for sin. (Deut. 32:4, 5) But in mercy he has made provision for their redemption and has given them hope of everlasting life. The ransom provision itself satisfies justice​—a perfect life for a perfect life. (1 Tim. 2:6) What mercy that provision reflects! It is undeserved kindness to those in desperate need.​—John 1:17; Eph. 1:7.
7. Jehovah shows himself to be just and merciful with groups of people as well as with individuals. David was worthy of death because of his sin with Bath-sheba, but God extended him great mercy because of his sincere repentance and heartfelt remorse over his conduct. (2 Sam. 12:13; Ps. 51:4, 17) Jehovah extended to natural Israel the opportunity to supply the members of the bride of Christ. But when the required number failed to respond, Jehovah mercifully extended the invitation to the Samaritans and then to people of the nations.​—Acts 8:14; 10:45; 15:14; Rom. 11:25.
8. Although elders today cannot read the heart, they must be both just and merciful in their dealings with others. In giving counsel and in judging, elders should hold to God’s standard with everyone. What Jehovah expects of elders is revealed at Deuteronomy 1:16, 17; Micah 6:8; and Matthew 5:7. The elders’ love for impartiality, justice, and mercy will assist them in keeping the congregation clean and strengthening the faith of the flock.
9. To be an effective elder, you must care for Jehovah’s precious sheep in the same way that he does​—with loving-kindness, impartiality, and merciful judgment. Jehovah’s people and, more important, Jehovah and his Son greatly appreciate your diligent efforts in behalf of the congregation. We pray for Jehovah’s blessing to “be with the spirit you show.”​—2 Tim. 4:22.




