Conduct Bible Studies in the Live Forever Book
1 Referring to the Live Forever book, one woman exclaimed: “Next to the Bible itself, I have found this book to be the most accurate, inspiring, and motivating piece of literature I have ever read!” All of us agree that this book is one of the finest ever published to help people understand the Bible and especially to motivate them to become active praisers of Jehovah.
2 In 1982, the year the Live Forever book was released, 613,007 publishers were conducting 344,493 Bible studies in the United States. At present, 904,963 publishers conduct 585,441 Bible studies. To date, 62 million copies of the Live Forever book have been printed in 115 languages. What an impact this book is having on our worldwide work!
3 Set Goals: This outstanding growth is the result of Jehovah’s blessing and his people’s eagerness to assist sincere ones with the Bible’s lifesaving message. (Rom. 10:13-15; 1 Tim. 2:4) We recognize the urgency of the times and the need for diligence in proclaiming God’s Kingdom.
4 While the organization is moving forward, how are we doing individually? Are we determined to have a full share in the vital disciple-​making work? To accomplish this, we should set personal goals. Can we be more diligent in following up interest? Why not set a goal of starting a new Bible study during the month of February?
5 Who Can Conduct a Bible Study?: Many publishers from a variety of backgrounds have had the joy of conducting a Bible study in the Live Forever book. The simplicity of its style makes conducting easier, enabling even newer publishers to have a share in this important work. In addition, many of us have studied it personally, so we are familiar with its contents. One publisher who had conducted no Bible studies before using the Live Forever book wrote in appreciation: “I have three studies and a fourth one ready to start. I cannot say thank you enough for making Bible studies easy to conduct.”
6 Young ones, too, are having an active share in the Bible study work by using the Live Forever book. One young brother leaves the book on his desk at school. This has paved the way for good discussions and several Bible studies. Some youngsters have used the direct approach by asking parents they meet in the door-​to-​door ministry for permission to have a Bible study with their children. Our children are never too young to talk about Jehovah’s promise of eternal life on a paradise earth.
7 Whether young or old, one of the greatest joys anyone can have in the ministry is that of conducting a home Bible study. So let each of us pray for Jehovah’s help and seize every opportunity to declare our hope publicly. Use the Live Forever book to help others to learn how they can have a share in praising our God, Jehovah.​—Ps. 148:12, 13.

