Cooperating With Our Congregation Book Study Conductor
1 The Congregation Book Study plays a vital role in the development of our abilities as ministers of the good news. The groups are purposely kept small to encourage a warm, familylike atmosphere for study of the Bible and one of the Society’s publications. These smaller units also provide ideal conditions for training us to be more effective in the field ministry. Personal encouragement and attention are readily available to individuals through the book study arrangement. How can we cooperate fully with the conductor and benefit from this fine provision?
2 A Zealous Share in the Field Ministry: One of the most important responsibilities of the book study conductor is to help every member of the group to have a zealous share in the ministry. In this regard, the Our Ministry book reminds us on page 44 that “the regularity, zeal and enthusiasm that he shows for the field activity will be reflected in the publishers.” At times the conductor will work in the service with members of his own family, but he will also be happy to accompany others in various features of the ministry as his circumstances permit. Can you regularly support meetings for field service? Your doing so will be very much appreciated by your book study conductor and other publishers.
3 Meetings for field service are arranged at convenient locations so that all may have a zealous share in the preaching work. While giving consideration to local conditions, each group will want to get an early start in the ministry. Many publishers and pioneers have fine success when they continue in the ministry past the noon hour on the weekend.
4 Would you like to have assistance in some feature of the ministry? Perhaps your book study conductor can arrange for a capable publisher in the group to work with you. At the end of the month, be sure to turn in your field service report promptly. Both the book study conductor and the secretary will appreciate your cooperation in this important area as well.​—Compare Luke 16:10.
5 When the Service Overseer Visits the Group: The service overseer usually visits one book study group each month in order to encourage greater and more meaningful activity in the field ministry. Pay close attention to the 15-​minute talk he delivers at the conclusion of the book study, as it will provide specific counsel that will help the group to improve in various features of the preaching work. The service overseer is also eager to work with different members of the book study on the weekend. Be sure to take advantage of this special provision so that you can benefit from his experience and ability in the field.
6 Our personal example of cooperation and our willingness to assist less experienced ones will help create a warm, friendly atmosphere at the Congregation Book Study as we “work what is good toward all, but especially toward those related to us in the faith.”​—Gal. 6:10.

