Service Meetings for February
Week Starting February 1
Song 171
10 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Feature magazine presentation based on current issues.
20 min: “Cooperating With Our Congregation Book Study Conductor.” Questions and answers.
15 min: “Simple and Effective Presentations.” Discuss with audience. When considering paragraph 3, have a demonstration showing how a publisher interests a householder in the Live Forever book. Householder should show obvious interest. When discussing paragraph 5, demonstrate how publisher uses a tract to continue the discussion where householder is only mildly interested.
Song 215 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting February 8
Song 126
10 min: Local announcements. Discuss talking points from the current magazines. Encourage all to share in field service this weekend.
20 min: “Conduct Bible Studies in the Live Forever Book.” Question-​and-​answer discussion. After consideration of paragraph 6, demonstrate how a young person could offer and start a Bible study using the Live Forever book. Relate any local experiences of young ones who have been able to start studies.
15 min: “Not Peddlers of God’s Word.” Talk by presiding overseer or other elder based on pages 26-9 of December 1, 1992, Watchtower. Warmly commend brothers for their share in supporting the Society’s worldwide work as well as the local congregation. Mention may also be made of what the congregation is doing in support of the Society Kingdom Hall Fund and any local building projects that may be under way at present.
Song 53 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting February 15
Song 143
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Relate Society’s expressions of appreciation for donations sent, and commend congregation for loyal support of local congregation needs. Encourage participation in weekend field activity, and outline any special field service arrangements for the holiday on February 22.
20 min: “Teaching . . . the Things I Have Commanded You.” Question-​and-​answer consideration with audience. When discussing paragraphs 4 and 5, give other examples of texts and publications that fit local circumstances. Have a well-​prepared demonstration showing how a transition can be made from your introductory discussion to one of the tracts. Consider one or two paragraphs of the tract as time permits. Encourage all to persevere in trying to start new Bible studies.
15 min: “Blood,” Reasoning book, pages 72-4. Use a return visit setting where householder asks the questions that appear in material in boldfaced type. Publisher’s responses should be based on Reasoning book comments.
Song 181 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting February 22
Song 150
10 min: Local announcements. Theocratic News.
20 min: “Showing Appreciation for the Ransom.” Talk by elder.
15 min: Local needs or positive talk based on the information in October 1, 1992, Watchtower article “Learn Obedience by Accepting Discipline.” Show how all of Jehovah’s servants​—both young and old—​receive discipline, and discuss benefits that come from viewing obedience positively.
Song 211 and concluding prayer.

