Showing Appreciation for the Ransom
1 The desire to show appreciation for a friend or a relative who has died is common to all cultures. This desire can be especially strong when the loved one died in the course of saving the lives of others. All who share the hope of everlasting life have the greatest reasons to show appreciation for the ransom by attending the Memorial of Christ’s death on April 6.​—2 Cor. 5:14; 1 John 2:2.
2 Appreciate Jehovah’s Love: How fitting it is that we show our deepest appreciation for our greatest Benefactor, Jehovah God, who provided the ransom! (1 John 4:9, 10) The depth of Jehovah’s love is manifest in the unique gift he supplied as our ransom, not just one of the millions of righteous angels, but his only-​begotten, most beloved Son. (Prov. 8:22, 30) This Son who knows Jehovah best, Jesus Christ, reminded us: “God loved the world so much that he gave his only-​begotten Son, in order that everyone exercising faith in him might not be destroyed but have everlasting life.”​—John 3:16.
3 Appreciate Jesus Christ’s Love: Likewise, it is fitting that we show deep appreciation for Jesus Christ, who gave his soul as a ransom for many. (Matt. 20:28) His love is manifest in his willingly submitting to Jehovah’s will for him in connection with the ransom. Consider how he gave up his favorable circumstances in association with his Father and myriads of righteous angels in order to be our ransom. Neither the challenge of living among and being subject to sinful humans nor the knowledge that providing the ransom called for his death deterred him. Rather, he “took a slave’s form and came to be in the likeness of men. More than that, . . . he humbled himself and became obedient as far as death, yes, death on a torture stake.”​—Phil. 2:5-8.
4 How Do We Show Appreciation for the Ransom?: Our appreciation for the ransom must go beyond a mere thank-​you. We need to learn about God’s provision for salvation through Jesus Christ. (John 17:3) Then we must exercise faith in the ransom. (Acts 3:19) In turn, we must be motivated to give ourselves to Jehovah God in dedication and be baptized. (Matt. 16:24) As we live up to our dedication, we should buy out every opportunity to tell others about the wonderful ransom provision for salvation.​—Rom. 10:10.
5 It is not beyond the capability of any one of us to meet these requirements. Micah 6:8 assures us: “And what is Jehovah asking back from you but to exercise justice and to love kindness and to be modest in walking with your God?” Similarly, David said to Jehovah: “Everything is from you, and out of your own hand we have given to you.”​—1 Chron. 29:14.
6 To deepen our appreciation for Jehovah’s marvelous provision, why not read and discuss chapters 112 to 126 in the Greatest Man book as a family before the Memorial date? In this way, all of us can prepare ourselves mentally to show appreciation for the ransom at the Memorial celebration that will be held on April 6, 1993.

