“Teaching . . . the Things I Have Commanded You”
1 Making disciples involves teaching. Before an individual can become a disciple of Christ, he must be taught “to observe all the things” Jesus commanded. (Matt. 28:19, 20) The best way to accomplish this is through a home Bible study.
2 Bible studies are not always easy to start. If you are having difficulty in finding a Bible study, do not be discouraged. Success in starting Bible studies requires determination and a sincere desire to impart the truth to others.​—Gal. 6:9.
3 Developing Interest: Your initial discussion may produce only limited interest. Depending on the circumstances, a tract, a brochure, or the magazines may be left with the householder. You may be able to use one of these to start a home Bible study. If the householder shows further interest in the message, he may be directed to another appropriate publication on a later visit.
4 Preparation is the key to success. Why not select ahead of time a Scripture text that is quoted in the tract, brochure, or magazine you plan to use on your return visit? In that way you will be able to link comments from the publication with your discussion. You may even be able to read one or two paragraphs directly from the publication.
5 You might say this:
▪ “We have been sharing some information about a remarkable prophecy that is undergoing fulfillment right now.” Read Matthew 24:3, then tie in the picture and the comments on page 24 of the “Look!” brochure. A similar approach may be used when presenting the tract Will This World Survive?
6 Once genuine interest has been discerned, it should be followed up promptly. Try to return within a week so that the last conversation will still be fresh in the householder’s mind. Each time you call, consider a few paragraphs from the publication that you left. Then, at an appropriate time, you can introduce the Live Forever book, continuing the same procedure.
7 Today there is still much work to do in the great harvest foretold by Jesus. (Matt. 9:37, 38) As we continue to teach honesthearted ones, we have Jesus’ strengthening assurance that he is ‘with us all the days until the conclusion of the system of things.’

