“The Truth Will Set You Free”
I WAS a drug addict. For almost 20 years I lived a nightmare. It all started very innocently, without my realizing what was really happening.
I was 18 years old at the time. Here, in Argentina, I had recently received my diploma as a teacher. At the insistence of my mother, who without a doubt wanted the best for me, I began to study biochemistry.
But I would have preferred to stay at home with my mother, learn to cook, sew, and take care of a home. I was timid, withdrawn, pensive, quiet​—an introvert and a homebody. I lacked the boldness and push that this worldly system considers so necessary.
It was at this time that I began to gain a little weight. I am only a little over four feet (1.3 m) tall and, like all young girls conscious of their silhouette, I could not stand to see myself even a little bit overweight.
After talking over the problem with my mother, we decided that I should go to a doctor. We went to an endocrinologist, one who specializes in metabolism and nutrition. He put me on a diet, gave me something for the thyroid and some pills to kill the appetite. I felt great and soon lost those unwanted pounds!
Hooked on Drugs
I also was hooked, for those pills were amphetamines. Amphetamines and their components are the basis of pills for reducing and for keeping students awake while they are preparing for exams and need more time for study. These products give one a sensation of great brilliance. They produce a feeling of euphoria, confidence in oneself and literally push one to move, to act, to think fast, to surpass everyone else. They are also addictive.
From there I went on to Actemin, a stronger drug that also contains amphetamines. After studying for an exam I was completely worn out physically and mentally. My body and my brain were desperately asking for rest to recuperate, at least 10 days of rest and sleep, but it was impossible to stop. My other subjects, my study, my work as a professor’s helper​—none of these could be interrupted just because I had taken an exam. So I took larger and larger doses of drugs.
I kept falling into a whirlpool of my own destruction. I would have liked to quit, but I simply could not. That would have meant that I would have to give up my career, retire right at the peak of my life and then sleep the rest of my life! That is how I felt. How could I say to my mother, who had such high hopes for me, “Mama, I can’t continue studying. I need a rest for I don’t know how long”?
Family Tragedies
I married and had two children. All the while I continued taking drugs. My second son became ill. He had a strange disease that the doctors diagnosed doubtfully as encephalitis, and, as a result, he did not grow intellectually as he should have. I do not know if my taking those drugs was responsible. I was in despair that my son would not have a place in a society of the strong and powerful ones of this present world.
By then I needed the drugs just to be able to get up in the morning and face the reality of my life​—my home, my sons, my husband. My life was completely disorganized. So many problems! I became completely depressed and anxiety seized me, especially because of my sick son. My husband and I did not get along at all. Twice I was hospitalized in a psychiatric sanatorium.
There I was introduced to barbiturates, substances for sleeping pills. Ah, sleep and forget everything! When I came out of the sanatoriums, in order to face the hard reality of life, I began to take both amphetamines and barbiturates. I finally had to put my son in an institution for the mentally deficient. There he ended his short existence at the age of 11 years. I felt as if my heart would break, so much pain and suffering.
My husband and I had separated and sold our house. I used my share to maintain my drug addiction. I left my remaining son with relatives, since I did not work and what I received from my husband was insufficient to maintain the two of us. Being separated from my son for long years caused me even more pain and suffering.
Trying to find a solution to the problems in my life, I traveled to Mar del Plata, where I got a job in a fish factory. What I earned there only paid for a room shared with other girls and a miserable existence. I also studied in the laboratory. All the while I was very anxious to see my son from time to time. How empty and sad my life was! I finished the laboratory course, thinking that with a diploma I would be able to get a better paying job and be reunited with my son. What a disappointment! In the professional field there is even more competition, and it is more difficult to find a job. For everything the recommendation of influential people is needed, and I did not know anybody.
With the money that I was now receiving from an inheritance, I began to pay for a piece of land. In my desperation I traveled to see my son and asked him if, since it was summer, he would be willing to live temporarily with me in a tent on the lot that I was buying. We both had suffered very much by being separated. He accepted, he being only 15 years old at the time. Thus it was that toward the end of 1975 we were living together in a tent.
Prayer for Help
I remember well that it was the night of December 31 in the midst of all the noise of New Year’s Eve that I prayed. I earnestly begged God, whom I did not even know yet, never, please, never again separate me from my son.
I, of course, continued the drugs. If not, my brain would not function. I now needed not only to continue living for my son’s sake, but also to plan for the future. The money was going rapidly. Properly administered, it would have been enough for us, but I had to maintain my drug habit.
Soon the thought of killing myself and my son began to go through my mind.
A few days later one of Jehovah’s Witnesses came by our tent and left us several copies of the Watchtower magazine. After reading a few articles, I told my son: “This is what I have been looking for all my life!” A few days later the Witness returned and kindly invited us to lunch at her house where she talked to us about the Kingdom. I felt like someone who had traveled on a storm-tossed sea and finally landed on a warm and quiet beach. To see my dead son again! Oh, would that be too much to hope for?​—John 5:28, 29.
As soon as I heard that wonderful message, I felt in my heart that my taking drugs could not please such a loving God. Besides, why keep taking them since I now had within me another force, a powerful motivator, this marvelous hope? It happily urged me on to keep on living and change my life.
Victory over Drugs!
Of course, it was not easy, not after saturating the body for almost 20 years with drugs and making it function only with their help. After hearing that lifegiving message, I did stop immediately, from one day to another. But my body demanded the drugs. I was determined, however, to face life with my son, to organize our disorganized existence. Jehovah gave me the strength to do it. His truth was setting me free!​—John 8:32.
The Witness who studied the Bible with us offered to share with us her home, where we would be more comfortable, and finally we accepted. At her side I learned the basic principles of daily home and family care, since she too had children. I am deeply grateful to her for everything.
Both my son and I struggled tenaciously, working hard, and now with a good administration and the help and blessing of Jehovah we succeeded in putting up our own modest home, which represents more than we ever dreamed that we would have.
Now another serious problem showed up. When I gave up taking drugs, I weighed only 106 pounds (48 kg) and in less than a year went up to 165 pounds (75 kg). This was another hard test for me; I could not stand to see myself in that condition.
What to do about my weight? The problem worried me. I did not want to take even an aspirin, much less any of the other drugs that I used to take in the past. I diligently searched in all the publications of Jehovah’s Witnesses for information on my problem. I found some simple but very effective rules that gave me wonderful results. After almost two years of hard fighting and exercising self-control, I finally came down to my former weight. This too, was not easy. But I felt better physically, mentally, and spiritually.
At times when I felt that my strength was weakening, I would pray for God’s help and I received it. I have proved the truthfulness of the words at 1 John 3:22: “Whatever we ask we receive from him, because we are observing his commandments and are doing the things that are pleasing in his eyes.”
Both my son and I are now dedicated and baptized Christians, and I am a full-time preacher of God’s kingdom. It’s my way of thanking Him for all of his undeserved kindnesses.​—Contributed.

